

THE NEW FIELD
Jfar pastoral $ Agricultural pursuits,
BEING A DESCRIPTION
OF THE
PROVINCE OF SOUTHLAND,
NEW ZEALAND,
WITH MAP.
THE PRIZE PAMPHLET
(PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY),
To which are appended Extracts from “ A Visit to hie
Eastern District or Southland,” published in
“ The Southland Times .”
G. STREET, 30, CORNHILL, LONDON, E.C.
1867.
Price Sixpence.
[all rights reserved.]


ADVERTISEMENTS.
BANK OF NEW ZEALAND,
Incorporated by Act of General Assembly, 29th July, 1861.
Bankers to the General Government of New Zealand, the Provincial Governments of
Auckland, Canterbury, Otago, &c., &c.
PAID-UP CAPITAL, £500,000-RESERVE FUND, £150,000.
DIRECTORS.
JAMES WILLIAMSON, Esq., President.
Samuel Browning, Esq. I Richard Ridings, Esq. I George B. Owen, Esq.
Thos. Henderson, Esq., M.G.A. | Thomas Russell, Esq. | C. J. Stone, Esq.
LONDON BOARD.
F. Larkworthy, Esq. I William Smellie Grahame, Esq.
J. Logan Campbell, Esq. | Robert Porter, Esq.
William Bodtcher, Esq.
INSPECTOR. GENERAL MANAGER.
David L. Murdoch, Esq. Alexander Kennedy, Esq.
LONDON OFFICE, 50, OLD BROAD STREET, CITY.
F. Larsworthy, Esq., Managing Director. Henry B. Macnab, Esq., Accountant.
LONDON BANKERS—the national provincial bank of England.
HEAD OFFICE. AUCKLAND.
Branches and Agencies at Blenheim, Christchurch, Dunedin, Invercargill, Kaiapoi, Lyttelton,
Napier, Nelson, Newcastle. New Plymouth, Oamaru, Picton, Russell (Bay of Islands), Timaru,
Tokomairiro, Wanganui, Wellington, Hokitika, Greymouth, Brighton, Charleston, Okarito, Ross,
Stafford Town, West Port, Waimea, Dunstan, Dunstan Creek, Lawrence, Macrae’s Flat, Manuherikia,
Mount Ida, Queenstown, Waikouaiti, Wetherstone.
Foreign Agents—hi Melbourne, Sydney, the Inland Towns of Australia, India, Ceylon, Mauritius,
China, and Singapore —The Oriental Bank Corporation. In Geelong —The Bank of Victoria. In
Adelaide —The National Bank of Australasia, the Bank of Adelaide. In Tasmania —The Bank of Van
Diemen’s Land. In California—The Californian Banking Company, the Bank of British Columbia.
In Mexico, Peru, and the United States of Colombia— The London Bank of Mexico and South
America. In New York —The English and American Bank Limited, Messrs. Morgan, Dabney and Co.
Agents in Great Britain and Ireland- —The National Bank of Liverpool, the Bank of Liverpool,
the Union Bank of Manchester, the Gloucestershire Banking Company, Messrs. Gurneys and
Birkbecks, Norwich. In Scotland —The Commercial Bank of Scotland, the National Bank of
Scotland, the City of Glasgow Bank, the Bank of Scotland, the British Linen Company Bank, the
North of Scotland Banking Company. In Ireland The Provincial Bank of Ireland, the National
Bank, the Northern Banking Company, the Ulster Banking Company, the Union Bank of Ireland.
THE BANK OF NEW ZEALAND, LONDON,
Grants Drafts on any of the above-named Branches and Agencies. Receives Deposits of £5O and
upwards, for long or short periods, at favourable Rates of Interest, which are regulated by the amount
and the length of time for which the Deposit is made. Opens Current Accounts for the convenience
of its New r Zealand constituents. Negotiates and Collects Bills payable in any part of the Colony.
Makes Advances against produce shipped, on receipt of Bills of Lading, Policy of Insurance, and
Invoices. Undertakes the Agency of Persons connected with the Colonies; and receives for safe
custody Colonial Securities, Shares, &c., drawing Interest and Dividends on the same as they fall due.
Undertakes all other descriptions of New Zealand Banking and Monetary Business, and affords every
facility to persons in their transactions with the Colon}’.
London, July 1867.
NEW ZEALAND LOAN AND MERCANTILE AGENCY COMPANY LIMITED.
CAPITAL
£500,000.
Home Directors.
Philip Vanderbyl, Esq., M.P.
Emanuel Boutcher, Esq.,
William Smellie Grahame, Esq.
Falconer Larkworthy, Esq.
Robert Porter, Esq.
Colonial Directors. x
Thomas Henderson, Esq., M.G.A. \ g §
George Burgoyne Owen, Esq. I -g W ® §
Thomas Russell, Esq. f g £■«
James Williamson, Esq., M.G.A. j q£°ssj
Robert Waterston, Esq. o
David Limond Murdoch, Esq.
BANKERS —The National Bank; The Consolidated Bank Limited; The Bank oe New Zealand.
Investments on Mortgage paying 7 per cent. —This Company receives money in London for invest-
ment on Mortgages of Freehold Properties in New Zealand. These investments are effected to pay
Seven per cent, interest to the Lenders, which is paid half-yearly in London, the Investors having the
security of the land or household property on which their money is advanced, in addition to the
guarantee of the Company for both principal and interest.
Debentures.— The Directors continue to Issue Debentures for long or short periods, the rate of
interest for 12 months being 6 per cent., and for five or seven years 7 per cent., payable in London
half-yearly by Coupons issued with the Bonds. The rates for other periods are specially arranged.
The Debentures are amply secured upon the unpaid Capital (which at present exceeds £400,000), and
the freehold and other securities upon which the Company’s funds have been advanced. Further, the
Company’s borrowing powers are limited by its Articles to the amount of its Capital unpaid for the
time being.
3/f l^.?i )ln P Bn y’ s Prospectus contains full information concerning this and other business.
No. 50, Old Broad Street, London, E.C., July 1867. W. J. STEELE, Secretary.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
THE PAMMi ROUTE
NIW ZEALAND,
TASMANIA,
J^ISTJD
AUSTRALIA,
Is the most pleasant and expeditions means of communication
with those Colonies.
The following Full-powered SCREW STEAMERS perform the
service across the Pacific, and are fitted with every modern appliance for
the comfort and safety of Passengers, and carry experienced Surgeons :
The MAT AURA, 1,786 Tons Register.
KAIKOURA
1,501
RUAHINE, 1,503
RAKAIA, 1,456
The Passengers leave Southampton for Colon by the Royal Mail Steamer
the 2nd of each Month, cross the Isthmus by rail in Three hours, from shore
to shore, and embark without delay in the Bay of Panama, on board the
Panama, New Zealand, and Australian Royal MaU Company’s Steamer for
Wellington, arriving there on the 21st.
PASSAGE ACROSS THE PACIFIC, 27 DAYS.
AVERAGE SPEED, TEN KNOTS PER HOUR.
For particulars apply at the Offices of either Company,
41 or 55, MOORGATE STREET, E.C.
By order, JAMES WORLEY, Secretary,


ADVERTISEMENTS.
CLAYTON, SHUTTLEWORTH, & Co
Engineers, Manufacturers of Portable and Fixed Steam Engines,
Machinery for Pumping, Hoisting, Grinding, Sawing, &c., Engines
for Steam Cultivation, Self-moving Engines for common Hoads, and
Agricultural purposes generally.
STAMP END WORKS, LINCOLN,
78, LOMBARD STREET, LONDON.
AT THE
GREAT TRIENNIAL TRIALS
STEAM ENGINES' & THRASHING MACHINES,
CONDUCTED BY THE
ilonal Agricultural of dnglanb,
BURY ST. EDMUNDS, JULY 1867,
C. S. & Co. were awarded
THE FIRST PRIZE for Single Cylinder Portable Steam Engine,
THE FIRST PRIZE for Double Cylinder Portable Steam Engine,
THE FIRST PRIZE for Fixed Steam Engine,
Being every First Prize offered by the Society for
Steam Engines;
Also for their Double Blast Finishing Thrashing Machine
THE £l5 PRIZE,
THE SOCIETY’S LARGE SILVER MEDAL.
DESCRIPTIVE, ILLUSTRATED, AND PRICED CATALOGUES,
FREE PER POST.
The best Steam Thrashing Machinery made.


PUDDINGS $c PASTRX [
«a~UeM 1
I '
If Hot | N03^ r^!: Norfolk
i 1 WITHOUT . «BREAD WITHOUT *»»■ MW { I
| L Tea Cakes J Dumplings ?
|K “ a f ° W
A . - ' $
IpyWIGK^FUpITOE-^^lf
] and gives the most BRILLIANT and \
j POLISH to all articles of Furniture, with very little labour. toKa i
j [|j^pg^ Sold in B ° ttles 6tl - and^ ls - each, nearly TWICE THE USUAL SIZE|
ADVERTISEMENTS.
IRON ROOFS, SHEDS, HOUSES, CHURCHES.
TUPPER & CO.’S CORRUGATED GALVANIZED IRON,
For Roofing, Patent Tiles, Houses, Churches, Schools, &c., packed for Shipment, also
Gutters, Pipes, Ridging, Pails, Tubing, Wire, Nails, Screws, &c.—all Galvanized.
TUPPER & Co. furnish designs and estimates free of charge. They supply,
properly packed for Shipment, with all necessary drawings and instructions for erection
abroad, every description of Iron Roofing, Iron Sheds, Stores, Houses, Churches, &c.;
these are temporarily erected at the Iron Roofing Works, in London, where they can
be inspected prior to shipment.
TUPPER & Co.’s brands of Galvanized Corrugated Iron and their Patent Tiles
are well known in the Australian, Cape, East and West Indian, and most Foreign
Markets, as the best and cheapest.
All materials are guaranteed to be of the best quality.
For Prices, Drawings, and Catalogues, apply at 61a, Moorgate Street, London, E.C.,
or Berkley Street, Birmingham.
*** Tapper $ Co.'s Process of Galvanizing prevents Past,
OFFICES—6Ia, MOORGATE STREET, LONDON.


I ®
■IIISI
ADVEKTISEMENTS.
NOTICE TO COLONISTS AND EMIGRANTS.
MONNERY & Co,
CABIN FURNITURE MAKERS,
CLOTHIERS & GENERAL OUTFITTERS,
165, FENCHURCH ST., LONDON,
Supply Outfits for all Classes at wholesale Prices.
Drawers in Two
Parts.
Rabins JJitfed and Juths an INifs
Cabin Furniture,
Sea Chests,
W Overland Trunks,
Sea Beds,
5
s
Ph Blankets,
§ Sheets,
Counterpanes,
o
Life Belts,
in
s
g Cabin Filters,
rt
Towels,
o
W
m Iron Bedsteads,
Tents,
&c., &c.
Hosiery,
B
Gloves, wj
CO
Cravats, >
® tj
<J W
Shirts, “ h
B 4 W
<1 g
Waterproofs, g S
o
Flannel Shirts, §
<S H
0
Tweed Suits, t! h
g <4
" W
Serge do., 3 05
ST f 8
S, **
Leather Gaiters,
S'
V' w
Carpet and a
p
Leather Bags, »
o
&c., &c. S’
>53
CD
CD
Passengers’ Baggage Warehoused Free of Charge, and carefully Shipped if required,
Portable Furniture for Home and Colonial Use.
Illustrated Catalogues and Emigrants’ Guide to Out
at Sea, free or by post for one stamp.
All Goods Delivered Free on Board Ship.
Washstand.
MONNERY & Co., 165, FENCHURCH ST., LONDON


*
.
.
.


\
" ""T — 1 — 1 c "—^^
£ D I S T R I *
~^ r -l 1 1 S A * 0
~. „■. \ »
SOUTHERN PORTION ~^~H^
L "e™ND™
£ ' ■ I
—■ 1 1 n
\ S \m L ~ fef Ua /7<? |/7/ >rz n3 it± ns. ne m \rj$ [79
G. Street', GO CorrihoU/ X C


THE NEW FIELD
Jfor pastoral ft SUjrinrliitral pursuits,
BEING A DESCRIPTION
OF THE
PROVINCE OF SOITIICAM).
NEW ZEALAND,
WITH MAP.
THE PRIZE PAMPHLET
(PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY),
lo which are appended Extracts from “A Visit to the
Eastern District of Southland,” published in
“ The Southland Times."
G. STREET, 30, CORN HILL, LONDON, E.C,
1867.
Price Sixpence.
[all rights reserved.]




PREFACE.
A Premium of Fifty Pounds was awarded to the writer of the
following Essay, which was selected for the prize by a Committee
appointed at a Public Meeting of the inhabitants of Invercargill,
the capital of Southland.
It is republished, together with some extracts from a series of
letters, describing more fully the progress of Agriculture in the
Eastern districts of the Province, which recently appeared in the
Southland Times newspaper, in the hope that the information
thus afforded, and the facts now made known, will be of essential
use to those who are seeking a sphere where honest labour is
liberally rewarded.
London, 1867.


■
■;
■
■
-


CONTENTS.
Introductory .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. 7
Section I. —Some description of the Colony of New Zealand as a whole,
and as compared with other Emigration fields .. ~ .. ~ 8
Section lI.—A more particular description of the Province of Southland,
and comparison of its capabilities and peculiarities with those of the
other New Zealand Provinces .. .. .. .. 10
(1.) Natural Features .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ 10
(2.) Climate .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 11
(3.) Soil 12
(4.) Natural Vegetation ~ .. ~ ~ ~ ~ 13
(5.) Pastoral Capabilities .. ~ ~ ~ .. .. 14
(6.) Agricultural Capabilities ~ ~ .. .. .. 16
(7.) Other Natural Resources .. .. .. .. 16
Comparison with other Provinces .. .. .. .. 17
Section lII.—An Account of the Work of Settlement as carried on in
Southland .. .. .. ~ ~ .. .. .. .. 21
Sketch of the History of Settlement .. .. .. .. 21
Financial Difficulties .. ~ .. .. .. ~ .. 22
(1.) Government Public Works .. .. .. .. .. 23
Roads .. .. ~ ~ .. .. ~ .. 23
Buildings ~ ~ .. .. .. .. .. 25
Wharfs 25
(2.) The Work of Pastoral Settlement .. .. .. .. 26
(3.) Laying down of large tracts in English grass by Associations
of Home Capitalists,. .. .. ~ .. .. .. 27
(4".) Ordinary Agricultural Settlement ~ ~ ~ .. 29
Surface sowing with Grass .. .. .. .. .. 29
Size and description of Farms and Buildings .. ~ 30
Cattle, and system of Hundreds .. .. .. ~ 30
Illustrative case of Settlement .. .. ~ .. 31
Result of seven years’ work .. .. ~ ~ ~ 34
Causes of the failure, or only partial success of many ~ 34


Section* IV.—An Opinion as to the class of Settlers likely to succeed in
Southland, with some general advice calculated to contribute to their
success .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 36
Classes of persons who may safely come to Southland ~ ~ 36
Those who should not come .. .. .. .. .. .. 36
Advice to those who have resolved to set out for Southland ~ 37
The Voyage .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. 38
Arrival in the Colony .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. 38
Rate of Wages,. .. .. .. .. .. ~ 39
Prices Current for Produce, Ac. .. .. .. .. ... 40
Census Returns .. .. .. .. .. .. 41
Statistics from Official Records .. .. .. .. .. .. 42
Observations on the Climate .. .. .. .. 51
Extracts from Land Regulations .. .. .. .. .. .. 52


INTRODUCTORY.
Therk are probably few of the more intelligent and energetic
Inhabitants of the British Islands, depending for a livelihood on
their own exertions, who have not at some time in their lives had
the subject of Emigration in their thoughts.
Much has been written to supply the demand for information
naturally arising from this state of things, and this publication is
a contribution in the same direction, having for its subject the
“ Province of Southland, New Zealand.’’
The intending emigrant from Great Britain has a wide field
open to him, and if prudent and reflective, he can hardly fail to
find some difficulty in choosing amongst so many countries ready
to welcome him, and each so highly recommended by its friends.
The work of colonization does not constitute an easy and
pleasant escape from the toils and struggles of life in old coun-
tries ; the career of a colonist has doubtless many attractive
aspects, but works that dwell wholly or mainly on these, the
prudent will regard with suspicion. It is the wish of the pro-
moters of this Prize Essay that it should be free from such a fault
and if, in consequence, the prospects of a settler in Southland, as
described in it, seem to be less alluring than those held out by
other Colonies, this should in justice be set down to the candour
and fulness of the description, rather than to the disadvantage of
the Province.
It is not contended that the Province of Southland, New Zealand,
is the best possible place to which every emigrant can go, as every
emigration field has its peculiar advantages or disadvantages, on
account of which it will be sought or avoided, as the case may be,
by certain classes of emigrants. It is, however, the design of this
essay to endeavour to show that to a large class in the British
Islands who seek a new home, this country offers a combination of
advantages that few if any others can equal.


In pursuance of this design, we shall now proceed to give
THE PIIIZE PAMPHLET.
Section I. Some description of the Colony cf New Zealand , as
a ivhole, and as compared with other emigration fields.
New Zealand consists mainly of two islands, about twelve hundred
miles east of Australia, in latitude corresponding to the southern
part of that continent, and to Tasmania. They are elongated in
form, stretching in a direction nearly north and south, with an
extreme length of about eight hundred miles, and an average
width of about a hundred and fifty. They are estimated to com-
prise a territory rather larger than Great Britain and Ireland.
In all the resources of material wealth, whether pastoral, agri-
cultural, mineral, or mercantile, this Colony, in proportion to its
extent, is second to no country in the world; for an evenly
balanced combination of them all, it may be doubted if any country
equals it.
North America is no doubt a country of immense natural wealth,
and from a variety of causes will continue to attract a large pro-
portion of European emigrants; yet, the severity of its climate,
Avith respect both to heat and cold, places it at much disadvantage
as compared with New Zealand. Not only is the American climate
less healthy and agreeable, but from its sudden extremes, especially
in the northern parts, it greatly circumscribes the time in which,
agricultural operations can be performed, and so both impairs their
efficiency and adds to their expense ; the severity of the Avinter,
moreover, necessitates the housing and housefeeding of stock for
nearly half the year. In Ncav Zealand, agricultural labour is
never stopped by season, and stock is maintained on the pas-
tures all the year round, even in the extreme south.
Australia is also an emigration held of great attractions, the
climate is more equable than the American, at least the cold in
Avinter is less severe, and the pastoral and mineral rcsourses are
immense. It too has adA’antages to offer that will command for
it a large floAv of immigration ; it is an arid country hoAvever,
its rivers as a rule are but chains of Avaterholes half the year, and
the destructive droughts to Avhich it is liable, render the results
of agricultural and pastoral operations very uncertain


New Zealand with at least equal natural resources in propor-
tion, and a summer heat less scorching, is a country of rivers
and perennial streams, everywhere well watered.
The pretensions of South Africa may be dismissed with less
ceremony:—a country of droughts and deserts, swarming with
deadly snakes and Kaffir hordes, not to speak of insect pests
innumerable, can have no formidable attractions for those who
Avish to form for themselves a quiet and pleasant home ; New
Zealand has neither beasts of prey nor snakes of any kind, nor
insects so noxious as the English wasp. There is a handful of
Maoris who have made enough noise of late, they are but a hand-
ful, and rapidly ceasing to be that; moreover, it is only in the
North Island that they cause trouble, the inhabitants of the
Southern Provinces are no more endangered by them than the
people of Scotland are.
Attention has of late years been turned to Monte Video and
other South American States, and they no doubt offer some
plausible attractions for the more adventurous. The mere fact,
however, of their being essentially foreign countries, inhabited
by a mixed race of Spanish, Portuguese, Negroes and Indians,
of strange language, customs and religion, and having unsettled
governments, will at once dispose of their claims to be considered
desirable places of settlement for families of British emigrants.
To such New Zealand is a country eminently home-like ,
whether as respects size, climate, natural features, inhabitants,
or political institutions.
Its productions for export are as yet chiefly gold and wool;
to these sources of wealth as being the most profitable, most
of the available capital and labour has hitherto been turned, and
in consequence such commodities as flour, bacon and butter are
still largely imported, though they are articles the Colony is
eminently fitted to produce profitably. Its soil is as variable in
quality as that of other countries, but is certainly equal as a
whole to that of Great Britain. Coal, iron, copper and other
minerals have been discovered to abound; its Gold-diggings
have already been alluded to as providing a valuable export,
and their importance as furnishing a local market for the agri-
cultural and other productions of the Colony can hardly be over-
rated. Forests of valuable timber are scattered over its surface
from North to South. It has many safe and commodious harbours


favouring the development of commerce, and from which almost
any point in the interior can he reached in two days, even by the
existing primitive modes of conveyance, and in this compares
favourably with either America, Africa, or Australia, in which the
emigrant has usually tedious and expensive land journeys to make
ere he can reach the districts in the interior available for settle-
ment.
Section 11. A more particular description of the Province of
Southland , and comparison of its capabilities and peculiarities with
those of the other New Zealand Provinces.
Southland comprises an extensive and fertile district in the
extreme south of New Zealand. Originally included in the
Province of Otago, it was politically separated from it about five
years ago, and has since enjoyed the advantages of local self-
government. From north to south it extends to an average
length of nearly seventy miles, with a breadth of nearly sixty,
having an area of considerably over two millions of acres, —this
exclusive of Stewart’s Island, which lies immediately adjacent,
and is politically incorporated with the Province, and adds to
its area some half million of acres, but being mountainous and
heavily wooded, has not as yet become of much economic im-
portance.
The description of this Province involves such a variety of
topics, that it will be convenient to treat the subject under the
following several heads :
(1.) Natural Features. —These are of every variety, moun-
tain, plain, river and forest. In the North the Eyre mountains,
and in the north-west the Takitimos, stand prominent, their
summits peaked and rugged and usually white with snow, forming
objects grand and picturesque enough to satisfy the most
exacting lovers of romantic scenery. South of these, and occu-
pying the central parts of the Province, are three ranges of hills of
moderate elevation, —the Wairaki to the west, the Taringatura
in the middle, and the Hokanui to the east, the last running some-
what further south than the others. These hills are, for the most
part, open and grassed to their tops, and constitute a large propor-
tion of the valuable sheep runs of the Province.
South of these to the sea, and stretching entirely across the
Province is a tract of country, in the main, level, and including


on the western side the Waiau, Otautau, and Oreti plains ; the
eastern half, though still, on the whole, level, is broken up into
low rounded ridges everywhere penetrated by streams or brooks,
and terminating at the eastern boundary in the Mataura plain.
Akin in character to this tract of country, though detached from
it, are two extensive and valuable plains,—the Waimea, to the
north-east, and the Five Rivers plain, to the north. The south-
west corner is occupied by the Longwood Hills, a rounded range
of considerable elevation, covered with forest, and found to yield
gold in payable quantities. The Province is watered by four
important rivers,—the Waiau on the western, the Mataura on the
eastern boundary, and the Aparima and Oreti between—all with
numberless tributary streams of every size. Wood, as well as
water, is abundantly disseminated all over the Province in three
extensive forests and numerous smaller tracts of varying size,
down to mere clumps of trees ; the north-east districts being most
sparingly supplied. The coast line is mainly low and sandy, with
few indentations, the most important of these being the Bluff
Harbour, available for largest ships. There are also the Aparima
and New River estuaries, which, however, being bar harbours, can
only be entered by the smaller class of vessels ; the Mataura River,
too, is navigable for coasters for a few miles from its mouth.
(2.) Climate forms one of the most important points in the
description of any country, —that of Southland possesses to the
full the characteristic absence of either extreme heat in summer or
cold in winter, which is common to all New Zealand, an important
element of excellence in which it surpasses even the British
Islands, with the additional advantage of being entirely free from
the fogs and cloudy dulness of which foreigners complain so
much in Britain. Southland, from its geographical position, is,
of course, the coldest of the New Zealand provinces, but the
difference is by no means so great as might have been expected
from the difference in latitude, and, as a rule, the cold of the south
of New Zealand would be less objectionable to an emigrant from
Great Britain than the heat of the north would be. In fact, the
winter cold of Southland is not greater than that of the south of
England; even in the coldest season the temperature rarely falls
to more than four or five degrees below the freezing point, and
still more rarely does the frost last till midday. The climate
of Southland is spoken of as cold because the other Australian
colonies are generally warmer than Britain, and, relative to them,
Southland is cold—as wet, because Australia is an arid country,
and, relative to it, all New Zealand is wet —as boisterous, because


the opinions of strangers are founded chiefly on their experience
of Invercargill, which, from its peculiar geographical position, is
much exposed to strong south-west winds, A few miles inland
these winds are not felt in any degree beyond what is common to
most countries. The amount of rain, too, is much affected by
locality—especially proximity to the coast. No pastoral or agri-
cultural settler complains of too much rain. More frost and less
rain in winter might be pleasanter, but when a dry, frosty season
occurs, then the settlers complain because the pastures suffer.
Unfavourable seasons for the farmer occur in Southland as else-
where. If the summers are not so forcing as those of Australia,
the droughts of that country are unknown, as are, to a great
extent, the caterpillars and other insect pests of Tasmania and the
warmer parts of New Zealand. If Invercargill is subject to bois-
terous winds, it is free from scarlet-fever and similar scourges of
most colonial towns. Published records of the weather for the
last seven years exist, and are of undoubted meteorological interest;
but as the observations on which they are founded, made by
Mr. Marten, of Ryal Bush, have been confined to one locality,
they cannot, in regard to the climate of the Province generally, be
held as more than a pretty close approximation : so far as they go,
however, they confirm the foregoing statements founded on ordi-
nary observation.
(3.) Soil. —This is, on the whole, remarkably uniform in
character and quality, consisting on the plains and low ridges,
almost invariably, of a loamy, clay subsoil, light red in colour,
with, in some places, a tinge of yellow, free from stones, and
covered on the surface with a layer of dark vegetable mould,
averaging about nine inches in depth. This subsoil is tolerably
porous, and, overlying a bed of gravel, allows the escape of surface
water with more or less freedom in proportion to its depth. This
varies, but seldom exceeds fifteen or twenty feet; the average on
the low ridges is probably about six feet, and on the dry plains it
is often much less. Ordinarily, draining is not needed, and in the
few cases where drains are considered necessary, they are found to
draw far. Swampy, waterbound hollows, of course, require outlets
for the surface water; these, however, by the superior depth and
richness of their soil, amply repay the cost of ditching them; they
then answer to the rich “ meadows” of England, and “ haughs” of
Scotland.
The tract of country to the north-east of the Longwood Hills,
comprising the Oreti and Otautau flats, though containing a large


amount of sound valuable land, is on the whole wet, and broken up
by numberless swamps and swampy watercourses; considerable
breadths of it too are liable to occasional overflow by the rivers.
The undulating country from the Mataura plain westwards to the
Oreti river, though much intersected by swampy watercourses, is
generally sound and dry and not liable to any serious overflow.
The Waiau, Mataura, Waimea, and Five River Plains are generally
dry and unbroken, so much so that a plough might be driven for
miles on any of them without impediment more serious than the
tufts of natural grass.
The hills constitute dry and healthy sheep runs, on which stock
thrive and multiply, but they do not afford any great breadth of
soil adapted to agricultural purposes, though in abundance for all
the requirements of pastoral pursuits present or future.
Limestone occurs in many parts of the Province, and the soil
generally seems to be fairly supplied with the ingredient. The
belt of undulating country between the Aparima River and the
Longwood Hills has limestone cropping out in many places, and
that district is in point of soil one of the richest in the Province.
In other smaller tracts, too numerous to be particularised, this
mineral is found, always manifesting its characteristic effects in the
superior luxuriance and sweetness of the natural grasses and other
vegetation.
The comparative richness of the soil is best demonstrated by the
crops it will bear, but before taking up the subject of the agricul-
tural capabilities some notice should be taken of —
(4.) The Natural Vegetation. —This consists mainly either
of forest or grass. The former occupies about a fifth of the area
of the Province (exclusive of Stewart’s Island), and is so well
scattered over it in tracts of varying size, that there are few spots
more than ten miles from an abundant supply of timber. Though
called “bush” in the colony, these are true forests, full of the
largest trees. They are evergreen, and though consisting of trees
entirely different from those of Britain, they look exactly as forests
of mixed British timber do, the trees and shrubs being quite as
varied and beautiful in form and colour. While the appearance
of the woods will hardly disappoint the new comer, that of the
natural grasses will often do so. By grass, the majority of emi-
grants from Britain understand only the cultivated grass they have
been used to see in the fields at home, and are often disappointed


to find that instead of verdant hills and flowery meadows, what
seems at first sight a boundless waste of long, coarse, whitey-brown,
over-ripe hay, commonly growing into great tufts which stock evi-
dently do not care to eat. On closer inspection, however, short
and succulent grass is to be found growing in greater or less pro-
fusion between the tufts of coarser and more conspicuous “ tussac,”
though at best these pastures are naturally much inferior to artifi-
cial ones of cultivated and selected grasses, and are more akin to
what is found on English commons or Highland sheep-walks.
Though the appearance described is the prevailing one, especially
on the moister soils, on the drier ones a finer white “ tussac ” pre-
vails, and in some of the best grassed districts, the soft green
grasses, mixed with short fern, appear more thickly and more pro-
minently. Intermixed in some districts more or less profusely
with the long grass, and greatly relieving its otherwise monotonous
appearance, are green bunches of the New Zealand flax, with its
long, sword-like leaves growing to the height of from four to eight
feet, and, when luxuriant, invariably indicating good soil. Fern
does not prevail in the south as it does in the north of New
Zealand, though there are a few limited districts in which it
entirely occupies the surface.
(5.) Pastoral Capabilities. —However uninviting the natu-
ral grasses may appear on a cursory view, horses, cattle, and sheep
thrive and fatten upon them to the full as tv ell, if plenty of scope be
given, as they do upon artificial pastures at home. Sheep, indeed,
do not continue to thrive if confined entirely to the plains and low
ridges ; the sheep runs consequently are found on the hills, or partly
on such of the drier plains as have easy access to hills, on which
stock can find shelter and greater variety of food. The stock-carry-
ing capacity of the natural herbage is of course variable ; there are
patches of limited extent in the best districts, which it is believed
will maintain a sheep to the acre throughout the year :itis a first
class run, however, that will maintain a sheep to every two acres of
its total area, and on average runs it is not safe to stock up to more
than a sheep to every three acres. It must be borne in mind,
however, that this is for the whole year through, and makes allow-
ance for bad seasons, the summer grazing capacity of the runs is
at least two or three times as great as this. The part of the pro-
vince leased for purely pastoral purposes is estimated to contain
1,200,000 acres, and would therefore maintain 400,000 sheep, the
wool of which would be worth nearly £IOO,OOO per annum, irre-
spective of the value of surplus stock for food or tallow. In
addition to this country, within the political boundaries of the pro-


vince, there are tracts adjacent to but beyond those boundaries,
which, however, find their natural outlet and source of supply
through the Province, and which are capable of maintaining pro-
bably 200,000 sheep.
(6.) Agricultural Capabilities. —These undoubtedly form
the most important of the natural resources of Southland, the pro-
portion of available agricultural land is unusually large, and the
quality is uniformly good to a degree equally unusual. The actual
acreage fit for the plough is of course to some extent a matter of
estimate, it probably exceeds a million of acres, and is certainly
not less than seven hundred and fifty thousand. A very consider-
able proportion of this is, as yet, included in the districts leased for
pastoral purposes, though open to any purchaser, the runholders’
right to occupy the land ceasing on its being purchased and fenced
by another party.* Upon this land when properly worked any crop
ordinarily cultivated in Britain can be raised and brought to full
maturity as certainly as it can in that country. Oats, root crops,
grass and clover grow with a luxuriance which only the best dis-
tricts in Britain can equal; heavy crops of a good serviceable
wheat can be raised, equal in quality to the average production of
Scotland and the North of England, but somewhat softer than the
hard wheats of South Australia and other warm dry climates;
barley has been only sparingly tried, as yet, being a crop unsuited
to roughly tilled or recently broken up land, enough has been
tried, however, to show that this crop may be grown with entire
success. Grass succeeds to perfection after the land has been
thoroughly cultivated by from two to three season’s cropping;
upon newly broken up land unless well fallowed and tilled and
slightly top dressed, it takes possession of the ground more slowly
and the natural vegetation is apt to spring up again ; when pro-
perly treated, however, grass grows luxuriantly and certainly,
forming within a reasonable time as close a sward as is to be
found on the best British pastures. As respects the yield per acre of
the various crops, every farmer knows that this is greatly affected
by the kind and amount of cultivation the land receives, and in
a new country where labour is expensive and much has to be done,
it rarely gets anything like justice : enough has been done, how-
ever, to prove conclusively that the average agricultural land of the
Province, with proper cultivation but without manure, will produce
in an ordinary season, thirty-five bushels wheat, or forty-five of
oats per acre. The actual average of a second and third crop of
oats under the rough treatment usually given is probably about
* The runholder contributing to the expense of mutual fence.


thirty-five bushels; the first crop being put in hurriedly is seldom
heavy. It must be observed, however, that these statements are
made of the average soil, and not of picked spots, as is often done
in setting forth the richness of the soil of new countries ; it would
be entirely within the limits of truth to say, that fifty bushels of
wheat and sixty of oats per acre have frequently been got in South-
land, and that there are probably at least a hundred thousand acres
in the Province capable of bearing such crops without manure.
Moreover, when, for any reason, a field that has borne oats, has
been left untouched for a year, a fair crop, self-sown, is usually
got, and a slight stirring with a grubber is all that is needed to
raise a good crop, though of course not equal to one properly
cultivated ; and the same may be said of potatoes, for which the
soil of Southland is so well suited, that it may be called
characteristically a potato soil, by which practical farmers at a
distance will better understand its nature and texture than a
page of description would enable them to do. An ordinary crop
of potatoes, on open land, is about five tons, seven is frequently
got, and in good bush land under the stimulus of the ashes of
the burnt timber, as much as ten. Other root crops in proportion ;
half hundredweight turnips, and similar vegetable monsters can be
shown in Southland as frequently as they can be anywhere else.
The grazing capabilities of the cultivated grass lands is a matter
that cannot well be so definitely stated, so many contingent ele-
ments come into the calculation, as age of pasture, season of the
year, breed of sheep, &c. Statements of the number of sheep per
acre that any piece of land can carry, will always be received with
caution by the experienced ; it is the fact, however, that for some
months, in the best of the season, as many as ten sheep per acre
have been kept in good condition on land hardly above the average
quality; but this must be regarded as the extreme, and by no
means ordinarily to be reckoned on. A properly cultivated pasture
more than two years old, with some help of turnips and hay during
the winter months, will certainly maintain five to six Leicester
sheep per acre ; with no such winter provision, more than three
or four cannot, as a rule, be kept.
(7.) Other Naturae Resources. —So far as has yet been
discovered, Southland cannot claim to be especially rich as a
Mineral district. Stewart’s Island, indeed, from its conformation
and other circumstances, may yet be expected to yield stores of
mineral wealth ; the Longwood Hills are even now being success-
fully worked for gold, and may yet yield it abundantly. Lime-
stone is plentiful; and coal is found cropping out on the surface.


and may therefore be supposed to exist in quantity beneath it.
Whether or not Southland, within its own boundaries, ultimately
turns out rich in minerals, it is at all events surrounded by rich
mineral districts. Lake Wakatip Gold-diggings—where extensive
and valuable quartz reefs are now being discovered—lie imme-
diately to the north, and find their natural outlet through the
Province. And it is bounded by the West Coast range of mount-
ains, which, wherever properly tried, have given palpable indica-
tions of the presence of some one or other of the important
minerals.
In writing of the natural vegetation of the Province, its forests
were alluded to in general terms; these, however, contain various
sorts of trees so valuable for their timber as to form an important
source of wealth, and to call for some special notice here. The
trees occurring abundantly, and that are at the same time valuable
otherwise than for fuel, are Mai, Rimu, Kahikatea (known in the
south of New Zealand as black, red and white pine), and Totara.
Other kinds of useful timber occur, but more sparingly. Black
pine is the least abundant of the four varieties named: it is a
brittle wood, but easily worked, and resists decay well; it is
chiefly used for fence posts and piles. Red and white pines
occur most abundantly; the former has little resemblance to the
American red pine—its timber is more like the English elm ; it is
a strong, durable timber, and next to the Kauri of the north, the
most useful timber for building purposes in the Colony. It is
much used, also, for fence rails, as though it does not resist decay
quite so well as the black pine or totara, it is much stronger.
White pine is also largely used in house-building, and has some
recommendations, but is not so strong and durable as red pine.
Totara is not quite so abundant: it is a generally useful wood for
country purposes, as it is believed to be as durable in the ground
as black pine, and splits better; it is much used for slabs, posts
and shingles. The abundance and general diffusion over the
Province of so many varieties of useful timber is of incalculable
advantage in the work of settlement; —whether for house-building,
fencing, or fuel, the settler has but to go into some neighbouring
bush and supply himself to his liking.
Before proceeding further it may be well to notice shortly some
of the characteristic features of the other provinces of New
Zealand, with a view to comparison with those of Southland.
Each province being independently engaged and interested in the
settlement of its own territory, a certain amount of rivalry is


naturally engendered, which, though it contain no element of un-
friendliness, has undeniably at times led to depreciatory misrepre-
sentations of certain provinces by some of the partisans of others.
From this, perhaps, no province has suffered more than Southland,
its climate, its harbours, its mud, its financial troubles, have always
secured for it the sympathies of its neighbours, and have some-
times given occasion for representations so contrary to fact that
they evidently proceeded from partial if not total ignorance of the
subject, though not the less injurious on that account. It may be
safely said the main elements of material wealth and comfort are
so evenly distributed over the whole of New Zealand that the
ultimate superiority of any one portion of it will depend almost
entirely on the industry, energy, economy, and good sense of its
people. A disposition to attribute too much to a country and too
little to its inhabitants is an error more or less prevalent every-
where—perhaps nowhere more than in the Australian colonies,
where the wealth so rapidly created by gold and wool has had a
tendency to induce wasteful and extravagant habits, as well as a
disposition to he dissatisfied with the ordinary fruits of stead)*
industry and thrift. In this matter the inhabitants of Australia
and New Zealand have much to learn from the American people,
to whose personal qualities—for which they are noted—the mar-
vellous material prosperity of their country is in great part due.
Auckland, the most northerly province, has an advantage in
point of climate generally conceded to the whole of the North
Island, though not a few people prefer the cold breezes of the
south. It has another advantage in its great facilities for water
communication, by means both of its irregular and deeply indented
coast line, and its navigable rivers and estuaries. It is a province
favourable to detached settlements; its good land does not occur
in extensive tracts in one locality, but scattered in the shape of
fertile valleys or flats all over its area, alternating with poor hilly
or mountainous regions. To the emigrant of small capital (one or
two hundred pounds), hardy, industrious, and frugal, but not trained
to systematic farming, nor ambitious to engage in it, Auckland
offers certain solid advantages, in cheaper land, a climate so genial
that clothing and shelter cost little, so forcing that a little good
land produces a great deal, and that quickly and certainly. There
a man of the right stamp, on a judiciously selected piece of land,
may start and get through (though with a pinch) with little more
than an axe and a spade, a year’s provisions, seed, and a few spare
pounds, which a man with a family could hardly do in the south.
On the other hand, a man entirely without capital has little chance


in Auckland at present, while a man of considerable capital,
especially if he be a practical farmer as well, will hesitate before
embarking his capital in a province where the country has been so
much neglected for the sake of the town.
Taranaki, “ the garden of New Zealand,” seems unfortunately
also to he the garden of the Maori race ; it certainly is their
stronghold, and great though its natural advantages are, most
men of a non-combative disposition will, for the present, turn their
steps elsewhere.
Hawke’s Bay, with some districts in Auckland province imme-
diately north of it, contains the only localities suitable for pastoral
purposes left unoccupied in the Colony. To those who are spe-
cially adventurous, this district offers some inducements.
Wellington has not been blessed with much “ constitutional
government,” and is in consequence almost the only important
province which has escaped financial troubles. It has also got its
chief town made the colonial seat of Government, and the port of
call for the Panama steamers, which can hardly fail sooner or later
to tell upon its commercial position. The northern parts of the
Province contain some of the finest districts in the Colony. This
Province has not of late years held out many inducements to agri-
cultural settlers; and though blocks of land are from time to time
opened up for sale, the best portions are usually picked up by
those on the spot, and are only to be had by new-comers second
hand, and at enhanced prices, unless in the more remote outlying-
districts most ‘difficult of access, and exposed to a disagreeable
degree of insecurity from Maori annoyance.
Nelson and Marlborough, are sheep Provinces, —such agri-
cultural land as they have has long ago been bought up—and
they hardly even profess to offer inducements to the ordinary
emigrant.
Canterbury is a province of different stamp, one of the
largest in point of area, it has hitherto taken the lead as a
pastoral and agricultural province. Its pastoral position is pro-
bably unassailable, though its shelterless plains are subject to
their own disadvantages, and as capital has been more largely
directed to pastoral investments there, and its runs are more fully
stocked than those of Southland, it is probable that better chances
of profitable pastoral investment are to be found in the latter
province. To those who wish to invest in land, the price of two
b 2


pounds per acre is a certain disadvantage ; that good agricultural
land in Canterbury is intrinsically worth two pounds per acre can
be easily shown, because such land anywhere in New Zealand is
intrinsically worth from two to four pounds per acre if it will carry
good English grass ; but that the land in Canterbury is worth more
than equally good, or better land elsewhere in New Zealand, will
hardly be asserted even by Canterbury people. As shown by the
crops it will bear, the land of Southland is at least as good as that
of Canterbury—and if the climate of the former province is
slightly colder and wetter, it is the better adapted to maintain a
good permanent pasture of English grass, the ultimate standard
of value of all New Zealand land. Not only is the price of land
in Canterbury double that in Southland, but the system of free
selection so long pursued in the former province has permitted the
best and most accessible lands to be so picked out that an immi-
grant desiring to purchase a few hundred acres on whicli to settle,
finds that if he is determined on having land of the only quality
that will secure his success, he must go so far back that his success
is greatly impeded. The Avant of timber too, on the agricultural
plains, whether for shelter, fuel, fencing or building, is a draAvback
more serious than inexperienced settlers might be ready to suppose.
Otago has been till lately the great gold province, though uoav
overshadowed by the Hokitika and other West Coast diggings—it
offers land at one pound per acre—but only Avithin certain blocks
from time to time declared into hundreds, the best selections in
Avhich are usually taken up at once, moreover its best and most
accessible lands haA'e been picked up, and the neAv comer must go
far back. In point of climate it is not superior to Southland, for
though its north-eastern districts are someAvhat Avarmer, they are
also so much drier that it has been practically demonstrated that
English grass does not succeed so Avell as in Southland. For
groAving Avheat and other grain there is no district in the colony
superior to the country about Oamaru, but the best lands there are
already in private hands.
To Recapitulate. —Southland is free from the Maori difficulty
of the north, and in its large area of good level accessible agricul-
tural land, easily cleared and broken up in quantity, and its climate
like that of Britain with Avell defined seasons, it offers on the
Avhole a better field for the practical farmer of some capital in-
tending to pursue the occupation in a systematic manner than any
province north of Canterbury does. As compared Avith that pro-
vince, it offers land of as good quality at Half the price, in position


more easily accessible, and with the advantage of an abundant
supply of timber for all purposes, so conveniently diffused that a
settler may select his farm on a hush frontage, and may plant his
homestead in a sheltered nook as prettily as his taste dictates ; he
may have the timber for his house sawn, and his fencing stuff split
on his own property ; and on a cold or stormy winter’s night he
may luxuriate before a roaring fire Avithout grudging every log he
lays on it.
As compared Avith either Canterbury or Otago, Southland offers
abundance of fine land Avithin tAventy miles of its chief toAvn and
port, and the choicest selections Avithin forty. The neAv settler is
not confined as in Otago to limited and distant blocks, but may go
to any part of the Province, and select as he pleases upon all the
land still in the hands of the GoA'ernment. In short, it may be
fearlessly asserted that Southland offers to the industrious practical
farmer Avith a feAV hundred pounds of capital, a better selection of
good land, easily accessible, Avith abundance of Avood, Avater, and
shelter, at a moderate price, than he will find elseAvhere in Ncav
Zealand ; its land regulations are of the simplest character, a man
may apply for his land one day and OAvn it the next, Avhile the
security of his life and property is as complete as in his native
country. (For Land Regulations see Appendix.)
Section 111. An Account of the Work of Settlement as carried
on in Southland.
This part of the subject naturally calls for a sketch of the history
of settlement.
About twenty-five years ago a Avhaling station was established
at the mouth of the Aparima, or Jacob’s River. The natives—
noAv all but extinct in the South—were then more numerous, and
some trade Avith Sydney Avas carried on. But the interior of the
country continued unknoAvn, and nothing Avas done toAvards its de-
A elopment for fifteen years, till some of the more adA r enturous of the
Otago settlers began to penetrate into Avhat is noAV Southland in
search of sheep runs, its splendid pastoral capabilities having at-
tracted the attention of occasional travellers or explorers for some
time previously. The pastoral settlement of the Province, there-
fore, dates but ten years back; Avithin the next three years all the
best of the country Avas taken up. These pioneers of settlement
had much to contend Avith ; a Avild, unexplored country, intersected
by rapid dangerous rivers and swampy streams, Avith impassable


swamps and tangled trackless forests barring access from the coast.
Their stock had generally to be imported from Australia, subject
to the risks and losses of a long sea voyage, and still more hazard-
ous land journey. The difficulty of getting provisions to the more
inaccessible stations was in those days often extreme, the squatter
having in some cases to carry his flour, sugar and tea on his own
shoulders for forty or fifty miles. No doubt many of these men
have done well and realised a competence, but it has been at the
cost of risks and hardships very different from the popular ideas
on the subject in many quarters, and which proved them possessed
of an amount of enterprise and hardihood, entitling them to all
the success the most fortunate of them have achieved.
In 1857 the site of Invercargill was laid off, and a few houses
began to spring up; hundreds were proclaimed, land sold at ten
shillings per acre, and agricultural settlement commmenced. The
settlers complained that the Otago Government diverted the
Southland land revenue to the improvement of Dunedin and
neighbourhood; an agitation for separation sprang up, which
might have come to nothing but for the able and determined
leadership of Dr. Menzies, who headed the movement, and, in
1861, gained separation, and was thereupon elected superintendent
of the new Province. About the end of 1862 the Wakatip Gold-
diggings were discovered, and occasioned a trading, building, and
speculating mania in the Province, but chiefly in Invercargill,
which grew almost instantaneously into a large town. Building
allotments were dealt in at fabulous prices, a heavy expenditure
for establishments and public works was forced upon the Govern-
ment, and the natural consequence soon followed; —the Govern-
ment became embarrassed, traders, contractors, and speculators
failed on all sides, and after some three years’ excitement and
collapse, the affairs of the Province have returned to that sound
and healthy, though quiet state, which forms the only basis for
permanent prosperity. Industrious bond fide settlers have now a
fair chance.
In this connection some notice of the financial difficulties of the
Province is naturally called for. It may be said, first, that this is
a matter strictly political, and not affecting, except in the most in-
direct manner, the private property of settlers. The public debt
of Southland is now a matter between the creditors and the Gene-
ral Government. Were there no assets against the debt, or no
fund from which the interest could be paid except the Customs’
Revenue, the state of the case would have been very different, be-


cause if the public property and revenue failed to meet the public
debts, there would be at least the danger of special taxation to
make up the deficiency. The public debt of Southland is as
nearly as may be, £500,000.* Against this there is the railway
property, an account of which will be given presently, and which
is fairly worth half this sum. There are, further, considerably up-
wards of a million acres of land, which, if put up at 10s. per acre
would be sold within three months, and would, even at that low
price pay all the debts, leaving the railway property, as well as
Customs’ Revenue, entirely free.
We must now, however, proceed to what is more properly the
subject of this section, and which naturally resolves itself into the
consideration of these four classes of operations, viz. :
(1.) Government Public Works.
(2.) The Work of Pastoral Settlement.
(3.) The operations of Associations of Home Capitalists.
(4.) Ordinary Agricultural Settlement.
(1.) Government Public Works. —ln a new country these
are of great importance. Works that at home would be done by
road or bridge trusts, county boards, or public companies, must, in
the early days of a colony, be done by the local government, which
is the only medium for associated enterprise possible at such a time.
The first attention of the Government of a new country is neces-
sarily directed to the opening up of it by roads and bridges. This is
a work in itself immense, and all that can be aimed at for a long
time is to explore and mark out lines of main road, having regard
to river fords and leading ridges of dry land, so as to avoid the
necessity for expensive bridges, or swamp crossings. When such
bridges, culverts, and crossings as cannot be dispensed with are
made, the track, which is often on the line of an old bridle path,
becomes a “ dray track.” Of such tracks there are probably about
five hundred miles in Southland, penetrating it to its remotest
limits. There are three principal lines corresponding in the main
with the courses of the Mataura, Oreti, and Aparima rivers, with
another shorter one to the Waiau, and numerous cross and subor-
dinate ones. These tracks are good, and easily passable for from
six to eight months in the year; during the winter they are not
expected to be good, but are even then practicable for a bullock
team.
* Since reduced by £lOO,OOO.


Of regularly formed and metalled road there is no great length,
the principal being from the Bluff to Invercargill, eighteen miles,
mostly metalled or gravelled. The North Road from Invercargill
has been substantially made for five miles from that town. The
North Hoad from Biverton had its more difficult parts substan-
tially made and gravelled, and the traffic on it being moderate, it
is the best up country road in the Province. The East Road from
Invercargill to the Mataura has had much done to it, but the
heavy traffic cuts it up greatly, and though it is passed over with
loaded drays even in the winter, the performance of this is a work
well calculated to astonish new-comers.
There can be no doubt that the state of some of its roads in
winter has been a fruitful cause of reproach to Southland ;in
reference to this it may be observed, as has been already stated,
that it is only during the four or five months of winter that they
are bad; at other times they are in such order that one good horse
can draw a ton anywhere on any of the main lines of road for sixty
or seventy miles from Invercargill or Riverton. And in this
Southland enjoys a notable advantage over Otago, and indeed
most of the other provinces ; that is, extensive agricultural tracts
are accessible from its seaport towns by roads, the worst gradient
on which is a rarely occurring gentle incline of not over fifty or
sixty feet. This is an advantage which those accustomed to cart
over the hilly roads of some other provinces will appreciate highly.
Country settlers in Southland soon learn to do the bulk of their
carting when the roads are good, and for the rest a bullock team
will do an exceptional load when the roads are at their worst.
Whereas a hilly road is never good, double strength must be
wasted on the level parts to enable the team to surmount the
“ pinches.” It may be observed further that the great and sudden
increase of traffic on these roads at the time the Wakatip diggings
were opened up three years ago did much to destroy them, and the
subsequent public depression has hitherto prevented much being
done towards their repair. A commencement has now been made,
however, permanent arrangements for maintaining the roads are
in contemplation, and there is every reason to expect that no future
winter will witness such roads as the last three have. The main
bridges have been substantially made, and only require ordinary
repair ; and all that is wanted to remove every ground for reasonable
complaint of these roads, is the substantial making of them over
certain swampy or much used parts, amounting in the aggregate
to not more probably than ten or fifteen miles. For many years
to come the formation of long stretches of metalled road would be


but a waste of the public money; and indeed it may be ques-
tioned whether the modern railway system will not to a great
extent supersede the system of expensive roads for heavy traffic,
carried out in old countries when no better was known. This has
been largely the case in America ; and in Southland the sound-
ness of the principle lias been Avisely recognised in the construc-
tion at an early period of its history of lines of railway, Avhich, as
the most important public Avork, Ave shall noAV notice shortly.
The Southland railways are but the initiation of a system. The
principal one, from Bluff Harbour to Invercargill, is eighteen miles
long, and connects the chief toAvn of the Province Avith its only
harbour for large ships. When completed, it Avill facilitate the
trade of the Province and districts adjoining it, not only cheapen-
ing the cost of imported goods, but stimulating production in the
Province, by opening the Avay to foreign and steady markets at
rates for transport that Avill make competition in them possible.
This railway is a single line, light, but other Aviso of the ordinary
construction ; it is noAV on the eve of completion, and Avill probably
soon be opened for traffic. The Oreti Railway being in fact a
continuance of the Bluff line to Winton, fifteen miles north of
Invercargill, through one of the most extensive and A’aluable
country districts, is constructed Avith Avooden rails, and has been
completed for about half its distance, and Avell advanced to com-
pletion OA r er the other half. This rather unusual mode of con-
struction has been resorted to temporarily for the sake of economy.
The part completed has been Avorked for about a year, and though
certainly inferior to an iron line and open to seA’eral objections, it
has been found to answer its temporary purpose; and Avhat is
more, though but a small section has been opened, leading, so to
speak, “ noAvhere,” it has been found to pay its expenses; proving
almost to demonstration that Avere the Avhole line once fairly
opened, it not only pay Avorking expenses and maintenance,
but soon create such a traffic for itself, by stimulating the develop-
ment of the country, as would yield a surplus equal to a fair rate
of interest on its cost. The construction of this part of the line
has been suspended on account of financial difficulties, but the
success of the portion that has been opened is such as to ensure
that means Avill be found to complete it at an early date, probably
Avith iron rails. Little space can be spared to describe the other
public Avorks—as wharfs, jetties, public buildings, &c.; it is
enough that these are fully in advance of existing requirements,
as are the means of postal and telegraphic communication, both
foreign and inland.


(2.) The Work of Pastoral Settlement. —So far as the
taking up of new country is concerned this may be said to be com-
pleted. The pastoral area of the Province is divided into forty-
two runs, varying in size from about 25,000 to 60,000 acres each.
Few are of the larger size, the greater number contain about
30,000 acres; in several cases, however, two or three adjacent
runs are in the hands of one holder, and worked as one station, the
largest of this kind being estimated to comprise nearly 200,000
acres. These runs are held on lease from the Crown, and have
mostly seven or eight years of the original term unexpired.
Hitherto the rent has been nominal, but a recently passed Land
Act imposed a rent of twopence per acre, adding, as an equivalent,
ten years to the leases. The sheep on these runs are of merino
breed, originally imported from Australia, and number now about
260,000, being little more than half what the country is estimated
to carry; moreover many, if not all, of these runs are capable of
great improvement by burning off rough and scrubby vegetation,
and sowing English grass and clover on the surface. It is only
on a certain kind of surface indeed that this will succeed to any
extent, but few runs are without more or less of such country.
Both pasture and working expenses would be greatly economised
by fencing, which in fact will become almost a necessity as the
runs get stocked up. A good sheep-proof wire fence can be
erected in most situations for from £BO to £lOO per mile, or even
less in some cases, and as fencing is only required on mutual
boundaries, the expense to each proprietor would not exceed £5O per
mile, so that, making allowance for the numerous natural boundaries,
each run of average size might be completely fenced for pro-
bably less than £l,OOO, which with another £l,OOO spent in sub-
division fences, would yield a return of not less than 20 per cent,
in economy of pasture and working expenses. A further develop-
ment of the capabilities of the runs will, no doubt, in time take
place by the purchase and cultivation for English grass of such of
the land on each run as can profitably be treated in this way. It
will therefore he evident that although there is no longer any un-
'occupied country to take up, there is still ample room for the in-
vestment of capital, and the exercise of skill and judgment in
pastoral pursuits in Southland. There are always some run holders
willing to sell out at a fair price; the lease, with improvements,
consisting of dwelling-house, woolshed, yards, &c., has usually
sold at about 2s. per acre on the whole area of the run. The
price of stock fluctuates more, but a good mixed flock, with a
large proportion of ewes, on a run half stocked, is worth nearly


20s. per head all round. The profits arising from wool and
increase of stock, less working expenses, might be shown, on paper,
to be very handsome, but in practice they are by no means un-
reasonably large; they depend much on the management and on
the judgment with which the investment was originally made, the
return on outlaid capital probably averages 15 per cent., in some
cases it might be 20 per cent., in others less than nothing. It must
be observed, however, that this is a safe class of investment, yield-
ing an immediate return, and depending on a steady market, and
that if the runholder and his family live on the station, and are
disposed to be content with necessary comforts, such a return may
be expected almost clear of the maintenance of the family, import-
ant advantages which few business investments at home combine.
Another important class of operations almost peculiar to South-
land, in respect of the extensive and systematic manner in which
they are carried on, is—
(3.) The laying of large tracts of land down in grass by associa-
tions of home capitalists. Upwards of 100,000 acres of the best
agricultural land in the Province has been purchased with this
view, and already considerable progress has been made with the
work. The principal operations as yet have been carried on in the
Oteramika district, fifteen miles east of Invercargill, and on the
Mataura Plain ; it is intended also to begin shortly on a large tract
close to the southern slopes of the Hokanui Hills. This class of
work was first commenced on the property of the “ New Zealand
Association ” of Glasgow (in the Colony, Holmes & Co.), at Seaward
Downs, about eight years ago, under the direction of Mr. John
Morton, now of Wallacetown ; and though the work has not con-
tinued to be carried on largely there, so satisfied were some of the
partners of that association of the ultimate profit of such under-
takings, that they have promoted the formation of other companies,
by which a large amount of capital has been invested in the Pro-
vince, which is much indebted to Mr. James Morton of Glasgow,
one of the most prominent and energetic of these capitalists.
There are now five steam ploughs more or less constantly at work ;
already five thousand acres have been broken up and partly laid
down in grass or other crops. At the present rate of progress, ten
thousand acres per annum would be cultivated and sown down;
and as it is the wish of the promoters of the undertaking that more
should be done, there is reason to expect that in ten years, if not
less, a hundred thousand acres will be converted into pasture
capable of maintaining from three to four Leicester sheep per acre.
The question arises, Will it pay ? Public opinion on the point in


the Province may be pretty accurately indicated thus:—People
who know that there is a large amount of money being sunk, but
who know little else about the subject, unhesitatingly declare that
the shareholders will never get a quarter per cent. Farmers who
are practically acquainted ivith such operations, but not on this
scale, acknowledge that an acre of grass that will maintain from
three to four sheep all the year over must be worth something per
annum , and that therefore these undertakings may pay in time.
Those who base their opinion on a knowledge of the subject, per-
sonal observation of the operations and the results of them, and
judicious calculation, see that it is merely a question of cost per
acre versus amount of sheep pasturage per acre. Even if the cost
were £lO per acre (and once the various stations are fairly estab-
lished it need not be more than £6 or £7), the land in that state
would be worth nearly £1 per acre rent, or 10 per cent, on the
outlay,—a good return for a landed investment, and this inde-
pendently of the profit from the stock, which should be much
larger than that from the land, but which contains too many con-
tingent elements to allow of any reliable calculation of it. No
doubt large agricultural companies have seldom come to any good,
but pastoral associations have been successful; and so long as these
companies confine themselves mainly to pastoral operations, and
act cautiously and judiciously, their success is as well assured as
that of any enterprise subject to the ordinary casualties of human
affairs. As regards the actual achieved results of the operations
of these companies, it must be premised that the proper cultivating
and raising of English grass on wild land is not the ivork of a day;
indeed, the economical success of the operation depends on sufficient
time being allowed for the natural turf to rot thoroughly after it has
once been turned over. Less than a year will not suffice for this, and
two would not be more than enoiigh. No doubt the process may
be hastened by repeated ploughing and harrowing, and by the
application of lime or guano, and it is simply a question of com-
parative cost; on the one hand, of the interest on capital lying
unproductive in the price of the land and cost of one ploughing and
harrowing ; and on the other, of the operations and applications
necessary to expedite the work. The fields laid down in grass at
Seaward Downs four or five years ago have abundantly answered
expectations, and though the other companies are comparatively
but of yesterday, some grass has already been tried, chiefly at
Morton Mains, Oteramika, and the result, when it teas possible to
give the land anything like justice, has astonished the most sceptical,
the sole of grass being quite equal to what any practical farmer
would expect grass of its age to be on the average soils of England
or Scotland; and the land at Morton Mains is by no means the


best land in the Province for the purpose, or equal to other tracts
in the possession of the same companies.
(4.) We must now pass on to the consideration of the ordinary
operations of the agricultural settlers of the Province.
However important in a purely material point of view the
other interests we have been alluding to may be, this, though last
noticed, must be regarded as the most important, inasmuch as it
will hardly be questioned that the true test of the prosperity and
greatness of any country is to be found in the maintenance and
increase of a human population, within its own borders, in a state
of generally diffused comfort and happiness; and that the true
basis and strength of such a population is that element of it which
derives its support from the soil.
It may be estimated that there are from six to eight hundred
settlers in Southland, meaning thereby men owning and cultivating
farms ; there are very few tenant farmers. It is probable that the
average amount of land owned by each is about one hundred acres;
few own more than five hundred or less than sixty acres, the most
common size of farms being one hundred and twenty acres. There
are a few gentlemen owning and residing upon properties of from
one to four thousand acres, who may be called freehold pastoral
settlers, they are necessarily men of considerable capital, and are
to be found chiefly in the Aparima District on the fertile belt of
limestone country already alluded to, lying between that river and
the Longwood Hills; a large portion of this district admits of easy
improvement by burning off fern and scrub, and surface sowing
with grasses and clover, an operation Avhich on suitable land has
been found to answer admirably, and to produce at a trifling
expense pasture but little inferior to the best cultivated fields of
other districts. The stranger must not, however, be deceived by
this seeming facility of getting English grass ; it has been written
of in connection with other provinces in a way that might lead him
to suppose that nothing was more common in them than land of
this kind, whereas, while tracts and patches of it are to be ftnmd
all over the Colony, it is but a very small proportion of the land in
any province of New Zealand, or anywhere else, that will yield a
profitable result from such treatment. This property of taking
grass readily lies less in any intrinsic value of the soil than in its
lightness and sweetness, such soils are almost invariably therefore
either volcanic, or largely impregnated with lime.


Bush falling and burning will give splendid grass anywhere, but
that is quite a different and more expensive process.
To return, however, to the ordinary agricultural settlers, as we
have said, the most common size of their farms is one hundred and
twenty acres or thereby, almost invariably these farms have bush
frontage, i. e., they consist mainly of open land in front ot and
including a portion of forest, the settlers thereby enjoying the
advantages of shelter, and a convenient supply of timber. Their
houses and farm-steadings, as may be supposed, are of every
variety of construction, from substantial frame and weatherboard
houses to fern-tree “ whares ” and milking sheds of the airiest
character. The abundance and variety of materials close at hand
are such, that if a settler’s home is not comfortable, though it may
be rough, it is his own faiilt. As the great majority of them have
only been three, or at the most, four years on their farms, the
average amount of land brought under cultivation by each will
hardly exceed fifteen acres, many have much more, but many also
have less. The crops almost invariably first cultivated are oats and
potatoes; wheat and turnips requiring more careful preparation of
the soil, are seldom attempted till the second year, if even then.
Nearly every settler has a few head of cattle ; they run upon the
open land of the Hundred, i. e., all the unfenced land of the par-
ticular district he is located in. Regulations are enforced prevent-
ing any one settler running more cattle than the extent of his farm
fairly entitles him to in justice to the rest, and none but settlers in
a Hundred are allowed to run cattle on it. Sheep or other small
cattle are usually not allowed on the Hundreds, as their presence
would entail a much more expensive style of fencing. As a rule the
cattle get neither shelter nor attendance; when first placed on a
new run they require watching for a week or two, but soon get
used to it, and seldom wander far . Where milking cows arc
kept, a milking shed is usually erected, but of the roughest kind.
Unless in exceptional cases where the settler happens to be located
near an unusual abundance of natural feed, or has fields laid down
in English grass, it is not found profitable to dairy beyond Avhat
suffices for family requirements. The natural vegetation, well
eaten down, as it usually is, though abundantly sufficient for the
breeding and rearing of stock, will not enable a cow both to rear
her calf well and give a surplus of milk sufficient to make a syste-
matic dairy pay. The calves are accordingly generally allowed
to run with the cows during the day, and shut up during the
night, the cow being milked in the morning only. The cattle are


of no breed in particular, or rather of that breed locally known as
“ colonial.” Some pure stock has been imported, however,
chiefly Ayrshire, Polled, and Durham Breeds. The first named
is found to suit best for the rough pastures of the runs; however
the famous shorthorns may be found to do when plenty of artificial
food can be provided for them. The polled Aberdeen and Galloway
cattle also do well. Further and more exact information as to
the work of Agricultural settlement, in regard to capital required,
return that may be expected, mode of operations, treatment of
land, &c., &c., can probably be more clearly conveyed by illustra-
tion than by bare statements, however full. We shall therefore
take an imaginary case of a settler, supposed to have the personal
qualities and the knowledge of the work necessary to success, and
observe his proceedings from the commencement. He has, let us
say, a clear capital of £SOO to start upon, which he knows will go
down prematurely if he does not take care of it; he will therefore
avoid the common error of buying too much land. He will select
not more than one hundred and twenty acres (the land is generally
laid off in sixty or one hundred and twenty acre sections), with
bush frontage, and combining as many of the advantages of good
soil, situation, exposure, &c., &c., as he can find ; this will take
not less than £l2O capital, and before going further he will do
well to consider how he means to apportion the rest. £BO will
hardly suffice for eighteen months’ provisions for himself and
family, and whether he invests a part of the amount in stock in
the meantime or not, he will require all this or more before he can
have any return from his land. His team, implements and
buildings, on the most economical scale, will take £BO more, £l6O
he will put in cattle, and he will have but £6O left for seed, labour,
help, and sundries. Having selected his land, he will proceed to
erect a house for his family, and stockyard for his cattle, and
in this will employ two or three pounds of his labour fund in pro-
curing the assistance of a “ mate ” as a man working alone can-
not advantageously execute such work, and as our settler may be
a good farmer but a bad bushman, he will see to it that his mate
is experienced in that craft; his house he will make 20 feet by 10,
sides 6 feet high of slabs split in the bush out of a totara if he can
find a good one conveniently, if not a red pine will do very well;
roof of shingles which he can also split for himself; thatch, some-
times used, makes a very dangerous roof where wood fires are
burned; fire place and chimney at one end, also of slabs, floor,
and partition of the same materials; nails, windows, and some
sawn timber for roof and doors he will buy, costing say £5. By
lining the ceiling with stout calico, and stuffing all the chinks


between the slabs with clay, he may have a house as snug and
comfortable as could be wished, its construction if done with care
will take him and his man a month. He will now get his family
up and then erect a stockyard for his cattle, and milking shed if
he means to have some cows, this will take fully another week’s
work or two. Before parting with his man he will do well to
“ tussac ” a few acres : — i.e., chip off with an adze the bunches of
flax and coarse grass growing on the land, and clear oft the
remains of the half-burned trees and roots the piece he means first
to break up will contain if it be close to the bush, as it ought to
be. If he gets five acres so cleared within the week he will have
done well. He will now part with his man and get his cattle and
team; for his money (£160) he should get two good milking cows,
ten good two-year-old heifers, two growing steers and a bull. For
his team a pair of harness bullocks will suit better than horses, as
they are steadier for breaking up, less liable to accident, and will
cost him little or nothing for food, plough and harrows will cost him
£ls; cart and harness he will dispense with, using instead a sledge
of his own construction. His cattle and bullocks will have to be
well watched for a week or two, very soon they will cease to give
him trouble. He will now set to breaking up, and as his bullocks
are supposed to find food for themselves, unless the natural food is
unusually abundant in the neighbourhood, they can only work eight
hours every alternate day. This does not matter, however, as he
will find they can plough more in one day than he can clear in the
next, and the advantage of starting with a few acres cleared will
become apparent. He will be able thus to get two acres per week
broken up, and if he has commenced operations early in summer,
may get twenty acres broken up before the winter sets in ; grass
will by that time be getting scarce, and the bullocks in need of a
spell, he will therefore stop ploughing, and set to providing posts
and rails for his fencing. The whole work of providing materials
for a two-rail fence, hauling and erecting them, and cutting a ditch
3by by 1, with a three-sod bank, is equal to not less than four
months’ work of a man for a field of twenty acres. For the falling,
cross-cutting, and splitting of his posts and rails he will find it of
advantage again to get a mate, indeed the whole work could be
more economically done by two men, but he cannot afford it unless
he and a neighbour can arrange mutually to assist each other. By
the time his field is fenced he will find the spring coming on, and
no time to be lost in getting it harrowed, and the second ploughing
commenced. As he must get on more quickly with this, he will
have to buy a little oaten hay for his bullocks, and keep them
working five days in the week. Two or three acres he will sow


with oats for hay for his team and milking cows, twelve soon after
for an oat crop, three next in potatoes, and then two in turnips, for
which last he will do well to provide 5 cwt. of guano, which will
cost £5. This, his first crop, fairly in, he may find a little time to
break up a few acres more, but as he cannot yet afford to employ
much labour, and the tending and harvesting of his crops will
absorb most of his time, if he gets a new ten-acre field broken up
and fenced by the following spring he will have done well. As for
his crops—from his three acres of oaten hay he may expect five
tons; the twelve acres in oats should yield three hundred and fifty
bushels; the three acres potatoes ten tons ; the two acres turnips
twenty tons. These crops, it will be observed, are not heavy, but
being' the first crop, more cannot be depended on, and unless the
land has been six months fallowed and twice ploughed, even this
will not be got, but if the next season be at all favourable, he may
expect nearly double the amount for the second crop. Markets for
arable produce are always uncertain in a colony, but he may fairly
calculate on realising £SO from what of his crop he can spare for
sale; taking the present market rates, the amount of crop above
specified would bring £2OO, if all disposed of. It will be evident,
therefore, that we do not calculate rashly. In any case he will get
enough out of his crops to maintain himself and family for another
year, as he will have his own produce—potatoes, milk, butter, and
cheese, eggs* oatmeal, vegetables, and may soon have pork, and if
one of his steers is old enough, beef 'as well, so that he will only
have flour and groceries to buy. For his next crops he will sow five
acres winter wheat where his potatoes and turnips were, and if he
give 10 cwt. guano he will be more sure of a good crop. During
the winter the erection of a barn, thrashing his oats, and fencing
his new field, will give him ample employment. In the spring he
may find it advisable to substitute a pair of horses for the bullocks,
as he has food for them, and they will get through more work, and
so economise his time. He will repeat a crop of oats on the twelve
acres under that crop the first season, on the new field he will have
turnips and potatoes as before, and the remainder in oats. His
heifers will calve this spring, and be broken in to milk, but he will
let the calves have most of the milk. By the following autumn —
if our settler is hardworking, careful , and not specially unfortunate
—he tvill be fairly established, and almost independent; he tvill have
nothing to buy but his clothing and groceries, his crops tvill enable
him now to employ a man constantly, and his progress will be greatly
accelerated. Grass fields for his dairy stock he will now aim at;
he will have sown grass seed in spring with the wheat, and after
the second crop of oats is off, he will plough that land up and sow


it with grass, so that by the third spring he will have twenty acres
of good pasture, and with the aid of a few acres in green crop, he
will be in a position to start a regular dairy—the produce of
Avhich, from his twelve cows, should give a gross return of £l5O
(at present prices of dairy produce they would yield £300 ),
In three years more he should have his whole farm fenced,
and under crop. His crops should enable him to buy sheep, by
the time he has ninety acres in grass, in two years more; if not,
he can sell his young cattle, and buy sheep. He may thus, at the
end of seven years, have a free farm of his own, with good house,
garden and orchard —ninety acres of it in pasture and thirty
under crop; upon this he could maintain twenty dairy cows and
three hundred lony-woolled sheep , besides a score of pigs ; his dairy
and sheep would yield £250 a-year; his surplus crops, pigs, and
young stock would pay expenses and maintain his famity. His pro-
perty and stock would he worth £3,000, with neither debt nor rent
upon his head; he could give his family a good education, and a
fair start in life. Can a farmer icith £SOO make it into £3,000 in
seven years in the old country, besides maintaining his family com-
fortably in the mean time ? He must be very clever or very lucky
if he does. To do it in Southland, he need be neither very
CLEVER NOR LUCKY, BUT HE MUST BE SOBER, INDUSTRIOUS,
HARDY, SENSIBLE, ECONOMICAL, AND A PRACTICAL FARMER,
AND HIS WIFE, IF HE HAS ONE, MUST BE LIKE-MINDED. He
need not depend on luck, but on the blessing of providence,
which rarely withholds success from those who really deserve it.
If there is a chance of his being less successful than this, there is
at least an equal chance of his being more successful, as few who
are qualified to speak on the subject will say that the calculations
we have made, represent it too favourably. It may be asked,
Have all who settled in Southland been as successful as this ? Cer-
tainly not, nor a fourth of them ; for this many good reasons may
be given, most of them have not had time yet, many had not sufr
ficient capital to begin with, many have been wanting in the per-
sonal qualities requisite to success, some commenced to farm know-
ing nothing about it, many have been imprudent and thoughtless,
and perhaps nothing has been a more general hindrance than this,
such people begin by buying too much land, then they will fence
too much, put up an expensive house, get horses and break up too
much, till suddenly they find their money done, and they must
borrow at 12£ per cent, with a £lO lawyer’s bill to pay; too much
cultivation being attempted, ;it is not half done and the crop is
poor ; and as thoughtless people are sure to be unfortunate, the
markets are bad, and they cannot hold on for better, so they find


fault with the country and the climate, and those who made repre-
sentations which induced them to come to such a place. But on
the other hand many have been as successful as this, for the length
of time they have been settled: such are the good farmers of the
Province, all they do is thoroughly done, the state of their lands,
crops, stock, teams, is remarked by all who have an eye for such
things ; they are not to be heard complaining of the country, or the
climate, or the markets, though they may occasionally bestow a
hearty malediction on the state of the roads, to the repair of which
they would gladly contribute, if only other people would join fairly.
These men are not to be found riding about the country on horse-
back,, drinking at every public house, or lounging half tipsy about
the town; on the contrary , they mind their business and it minds
them. The further question may be asked, Is the way we have in-
dicated the only way of settling successfully in Southland with
£500? We firmly believe that something like it is the only safe
plan, and the one most likely to ensure success. If a man of this
capital buys more land or cultivates more, he has to depend en-
tirely on a first crop, which is always an uncertain one, and in a
colonial market for grain which is equally uncertain. As for in-
vesting entirely in stock, if a man does not buy land he must pay
for the grazing of his stock, and the capital supposed is too small to
yield a livelihood to a family from such an investment of it, unless
he takes other employment, and regards his investment simply as
such. Again, it may be asked, Can a man not become a settler in
Southland with less than £500? Certainly he can, if of the right
stamp. Many of the most successful settlers landed in the Pro-
vince without capital, but they had to w r ork for money and save it
till they had enough to buy land, and a team and implements ; and
afterwards partly working for themselves, partly for others, they
ere long became independent. Such are the men who take ditch-
ing and fencing contracts, doing the work of two men on day’s
wages, working for weeks at a time up to the knees in water and
mud, earning fifteen shillings per day. A man new to the colony,
who has not at least £4OO, will get on faster in the end, if he in-
vests his money and works and saves till he has this amount, or at
least till he has gained experience enough to make less do. A
man who knows nothing, or only imagines he knows something
about practical farming, or about the colony, whatever be his capi-
tal, had better defer his operations till he has learned something,
or he runs a fair chance of finding himself penniless in a few' years.
A man wdio is a practical farmer, and has more than £SOO, will of
course get on so much the better and easier, provided he acts upon
the principle we have indicated. However large a man’s capital,
c 2


if he goes to work too extensively and rashly, he will find himself
in difficulties ere he knows well what he is about.
Section IV. An opinion as to the class of Settlers likely to
succeed in Southland, with some general advice calculated to con-
tribute to their success.
In the last section we have almost unavoidably anticipated much
that might more fitly have been found in this one, and those who
carefully consider the statements made in it, can hardly fail to find
out whether they are suited for Southland. We may, however,
recapitulate shortly, and say that the following classes may safely
come:—
(1.) Such as have £5,000 and a fair amount of shrewdness and
knowledge of the world, whatever be their occupation.
(2.) Practical farmers, with energy and good sense, and £5OO
or upwards.
(3.) Men who are strong and hardy, familiar with all kinds of
farm work, and willing to work as servants, whatever be their
capital, or though they have none.
Any of these three classes can hardly fail greatly to improve
their circumstances by emigrating to Southland.
Men with or without capital, ivho are strong and robust, resolved
to learn farming, and willing to endure much discomfort and per-
haps some privation; also men accustomed to out-door labour,
though not to farm work, will probably do well ultimately, though
their success will be less assured, and harder to win.
Though such tradesmen as carpenters, smiths, saddlers, shoe-
makers, and the like, as well as shopmen and storemen, will usually
find employment at high wages, the field for them is more limited,
and there is consequently more uncertainty about their success.
For engineers, masons, moulders, and the like, there is at present
no opening whatever. The same may be said of clerks and that
nondescript class of people with small capital and large families,
fit for nothing in particular, who never could do any good at home,
and emigrate with vague notions of “commencing business” or
“ setting up a store,” and with anything but vague notions of their


own importance. This class, as well as loafers generally, will do
well to keep clear of Southland ; it is too wet and stormy for them,
too cold, too muddy, the land too poor, the Province not go-ahead
enough ; in fact, it is not a good enough country for them , and if
they came they would only write home lies to “ the newspapers ”
about it.
There now remains to us but to offer some advice and warning
to those who have resolved to set out for Soutland. The chief
points of warning needed are, to take care of their money , and not
to bring much luggage nor any merchandise with them. A man
with small capital —by which we mean anything under £looo—
find £2O an important sum in the second year of his colonial
career. As to luggage, if a man has to buy at home, and means
to farm here, he may as well bring a thoroughly good strong
plough (not too heavy) of the kind he has been accustomed to,
and a pair of harrows, also back bands, plough chains, and swing
trees, with a few simple tools, and some plain cooking utensils.
He will hardly land these things cheaper in the Colony than he
could buy them there, but he may have them of better quality.
He should bring a supply of strong useful clothing, with little of
the cotton and none of the linen element in it, in quantity accord-
ing to his capital; also a few pairs substantial but not heavy
watertight boots. As for anything else, he will find the money it
would cost more \iseful when he arrives, and greatly less trouble-
some ; such things as carts, cooking stoves, hand flour-mills, and
machines in general, the emigrant should carefully eschew. If he
be a man with a few thousand pounds and a family, he will do
well to bring a few of the more useful and portable articles of fur-
niture, as chairs, table, chest of drawers, couch, carpets, chiffonier,
iron bedstead, hair mattresses, bedding, crockery, and kitchen
utensils ; harness and saddlery also may not come amiss, but any-
thing in the dog-cart or carriage way will be found unsuitable, as
well as cumbrous furniture, such as side-boards, wardrobes, &c.
We must repeat, however, that if a man has to buy at home what
he brings out, he can hardly err in bringing too little, and is very
likely to err in bringing too much. On the other hand, a man
who has to sell off his farming implements, or his furniture, may
err in selling too much ; if he be a man of small capital he will
turn all he can into money, except the articles we have already
indicated, that is to say, plough and harrows, tools and cooking
utensils; of furniture, excepting bedding, and perhaps a bit of old
carpet, he will bring none. Such a man, having over £I,OOO
clear, will do Avell to retain all his farm implements and furniture


that are really good and useful, taking with him such things as
are likely to be immediately wanted, leaving the rest to be sent
after him when he has ascertained what he really does want.
As to advice for the voyage, the sensible emigrant will need
little ; he ivill avoid drinking and quarrelling, he will he careful of
ivhat he sags, he will be friendly with all and intimate with none of
his fellow passengers. He will take the best ship he can get, the
size is of no importance comparatively; let him take care she is
bound direct for his destination, or that he has a written under-
taking by the shipping agents to forward him, his family, and
luggage, free of cost, by first steamer.
On arrival in the colony it will be doubly incumbent on the
emigrant to take care of his money, for he will find it not to go halt
so far as it did at home; what a boy would be glad to do for
sixpence there, he will hardly get a man to do for two shillings
here, and will not get a boy to do it at all. Travelling expenses
are very high, house rent and food are not extravagantly so. He
will, if he has a family, rent as small a house as will at all accom-
modate them, and get his luggage moved to it, if he be a man of
capital he will look about him for a little, and not be in a hurry to
sink his money in the first investment of a tempting appearance
that is presented to his notice. He can soon ascertain at the Land
Office the most likely districts for him to find land to his mind;
he will visit them, and in doing so, if he make good use of his
eyes and ears, he will soon find out more than could be conveyed
to him by pages of advice and instructions.
If he be a man of small capital he should at once seek for
employment in the country, and if a competent ploughman he will
have no difficulty in finding it. Such a man cannot afford to make
mistakes, let him therefore lodge his money in a bank at interest
for six months, his wages will maintain himself and family and he
will gain experience that will be invaluable to him when he begins
on his own farm.
Little more need be attempted in the way of advice, let a man
be resolute and persevering, patient and cautious, not easily
daunted or disappointed, and however hard his early struggles
may be, under the blessing of Providence he will ere long find the
country to be a good country, worthy to be the home of a race as
stout and honest as the one from which he is sprung.


Rate of Wages as in April, 1866.
Carpenters, smiths, and similar tradesmen, 10s. to 12s. per day.
Ploughmen (with board and lodging) 255. to 30s. per week.
Labourers, ditchers, fencers, &c., Bs. to 10s. per day.
Shepherds (with board and lodging), £6O to £BO per annum.
Domestic female servants, £25 to £4O per annum.
Married couples (with board and lodging), £7O to £BO per
annum.
Men on day wages work eight hours per day, and find them-
selves. Ploughmen and labourers are scarce at present, and the
rate of wages quoted, though current, is above the average, which
is 20s. to 255. per week for ploughmen, and Bs. per day for
labourers. No class is in greater demand or more highly paid in
proportion than female domestic servants —the rate quoted is not
above the average.
Prices for Agricultural Labour by Contract.
Ditching, sd. to 6d. per cubic yard. (Thus, a ditch 4 feet wide
at top, 2 feet at bottom, and 3 feet deep, at 6d., would be 11s. per
chain).
Fencing. —Post and two-rail fence, and ditch and 1 by 3,
with three-sod bank, including all labour, except hauling the
materials out of the bush, is done at from 18s. to 225. per chain.
Fence posts and rails, 20s. per hundred.
Slabs, £d. per square foot.
Ploughing —One furrow (contractor finding everything), 20s.
to 225. 6d. per acre.
Clearing Open Land for Plough, 20s. per acre.


Bush Falling is never done in quantity—rates, therefore, are
nominal.
Cutting Firewood, 6s. to 10s. per cord.
Sawing, 10s. to 12s. per hundred feet super.
Prices Current for Produce, &c.
Flour 20s. to 255. per 100 lbs.
Oatmeal 4d. to 6d. per lb.
Beef 7d
1 u * 11
Mutton
Butter 2s. 6d. „
Cheese
Eggs
Is. 6d. to 3s. per dozen.
Groceries. —Tea and sugar about home rates; other articles
about 25 per cent, higher.
Invercargill, Southland, 1866.


APPENDIX.
The following Statistical Returns, compiled from authentic
Records in the Survey Department, showing the area of Purchased
Land, Reserves, Bush, &c., in the different parts of the Province,
with a list of the Runs, showing name of Licensee, area of Run,
&c., the amount of Land sold under the various Waste Land Acts,
the value of Imports, Exports, the Territorial, Ordinary, and Cus-
toms Revenue of Southland since 1861, have been kindly furnished
by the Chief Surveyor, John H. Baker, Esq,
The rate of Wages, Prices Current, &c,, have been compiled
from the latest current rates ; the Meteorological Observations
taken from Mr. C. Marten’s valuable returns, were observed at
Ryal Bush, situated about nine miles north of Invercargill,
CENSUS OF NEW ZEALAND.
EUROPEAN POPULATION (exclusive of Military and
their Families) as at \st December, 1864.
Males.
Females. Total 1864. Total 1861. Total 1851.
65,452 .. 171,931 .. 98,915 .. 26,707
106,479
Total Native Population not over 40,000; — all but extinct
in the South.
POPULATION OF SOUTHLAND at same Dates.
Males. Females. Total 1864. Total 1861. Total 1851.
4,806 .. 3,279 .. 8,085 .. 1,820 .. Nil.


CULTIVATED LAND in European Possession in New Zealand.
1864.
Wheat.
Barley.
Oats.
Potatoes.
Garden
Sown or Or-
Grass. Maize. chard.
Other
Crops.
Fenced.
Total
under
Crop.
25,513 .
. 4,890 . .
50,719 ..
11,100 .
. 271,610 .. 976 .. 8,565
.. 8,154
.. 1,070,203 ..
381,527
1861.
29,528 .
. 3,457 ..
15,872 ..
7,251 .
,. 157,989 .. 769 .. 5,861
IN SOUTHLAND.
.. 5,749
.. 409,467 ..
226,478
352 .
32 ..
5,613 ..
878 ,
.. 2,149.. 10 .. 269
.. 196
70,341 ..
9,549
LIVE STOCK in
Possession of Europeans in New Zealand.
Year
Horses.
Mules and
Asses. Cattle. Sheep,
Goats.
Pigs.
Poultry.
1864 ..
. . 49,401
.. 339
.. 249,021 .. 4,945,473 ..
12,013
.. 60,898 ..
376,699
1861 ..
.. 28,265
.. 153
.. 193,134 .. 2,760,163 ..
12,170
.. 43,016 ..
235,532
IN SOUTHLAND.
1864 ..
.. 2,579
•. 3
13,230 235,036 ..
234
.. 1,072 ..
18,649


RETURN shoiving the Area of Land escheated from the Crown , up
available for depasturing Stock in each Hundred ( the greater part
to 31s£ July, 1866, the Area
of which is also available for
Settlement J, the Area of Government Reserves, Sf
c.
-
Hundred*.
Area of Sold
Land.
Area reserved for
Townships,
Roads. Gravel,
Bush, Educational,
and other
Reserves.
Available for
Depasturing
Stock.
Area of Bush.
Area of Swamps
and
Unavailable
Land.
Total Area of
Hundreds.
A.
R.
V.
A.
R. P.
A.
R. P.
A.
R.
p.
A.
H.
p.
A.
R. P.
Invercargill ....
50,152
0
4
11,017
3 39
5,902
3 33
19,200
0
0
3,000
0
0
89,272
3 36
Jacob’s River ..
44,318
3
38
7,475
2 39
19,877
0 39
18,043
0
0
2,500
0
0
92,214
3 36
New River ....
36,643
3
28
4,898
1 19
24,048
0 6
10,250
0
0
8,500
0
0
84,340
1 13
Cambelltown....
7,206
3
29
7,750
1 21
7,203
0 7
7,350
0
0
31,000
0
0
60,510
1 17
Oteramika
35,428
3
16
7,325
2 28
8,064
0 27
15,240
0
0
25,600
0
0
91,658
2 31
Mataura
9,817
2
19
2,367
3 39
, ,
, #
12,185
% 18
Aparima
12,505
3
1
7,591
3 2
12,478
2 27
12,000
0
0
2,000
0
0
46,576
0 30
Mabel
19,497
0
21
4,026
2 36
4,266
1 37
660
0
0
28,450
1 14
Whiton
16,416
3
21
5,479
1 5
11,097
3 35
7,500
0
0
2,500
0
0
41,994
0 21
Lothian
20,825
1
12
617
0 29
4,426
0 2
26,868
2 3
Waianewa
30,825
2
1
200
0 0
13,042
1 39
14,500
0
0
3,000
0
0
61,568
0 0
22,972
0
g
4,624
3 20
23,237
1 0
1 000
o
0
51,834
0 2S
Forest Hill ....
'487
0
0
128
1 2
35,765
0 12
24,000
0
0
17,000
0
0
77,380
1 14
Oreti
6,390
2
6
1,029
0 13
48,024
0 0
700
0
0
12,100
0
0
68,243
2 19
Total ....
312,488
2
4
64,633
1 12
217,433
1 24
129,443
0
0
108,200
0
0
832,098
1 0
Chief Surveyor's Office, Southland, August 25fh,
1866.


THIS RETURN shores the different Districts into tvhtch the Country, under Depasturing Licenses, is
subdivided, the Area of Land purchased from the Croivn up to the 31s£ July, 1866, the Area
under License, the Area of Bush Land.
District.
Area of Land
purchased.
Area under License
not purchased.
Area of Town-
ships.
Area of Bush-
land not pur-
chased.
Area of peat,
bogs, barren
mountains,
rivers, &c.
Total Area of
District.
A. R. P.
A. R. P.
A.
A.
A.
A.
Hokanui
37,255 0 0
264,210 0 0
1,000
13,265
2,500
318,230
Taringatura
11,583 3 12
158,586 0 28
..
1,480
5,000
176,650
Eyre
42,640 0 0
173,510 0 0
850
16,560
33,000
265,560
Waiau
29,551 0 0
28,574 0 0
990
15,665
500
75,280
"Wairio
9,980 0 0
51,620 0 0
..
4,600
200
66,400
Wairaki
5,520 0 0
115,380 0 0
• •
4,000
400
125,300
Centre Hill
100 0 0
74,400 0 0
• •
3,500
600
78,600
Takitimo
5,660 0 0
139,610 0 0
1,000
17,200
55, 0 00
218,470
Longwood
50 0 0
6,910 0 0
540
110,620
••
117,120
Total
142,339 3 12
1,011,800 0 28
4,380
186,890
| 97,200
1,442,610
Chief Surveyor’s Office, Southland, August 25th,
1866.


No. of
Run.
Name of Licensee.
Area of
Run.
Area of Purchased
Land.
112
David M‘Kellar
46,250
10,321
116
William Hill
26,000
1,810
119a
George Gunn
25,000
3,013
1196
J. R. Davies
22,750
• •
136
D. M‘Callum
18,800
7,010
146
C. Cowan
22,500
5,573
148
Hugh M‘Lean
56,185
1,388
195a
1955
207
Peter M‘Kellar
26,980
16,000
25,000
1,879
David M iveiiar
Peter M‘Kellar
4,101
1,850
207a
A. M‘Neil
6,500
250
329
A. M‘Neil
9,500
• •
LIST OF DEPASTURING LICENSES in the Province
of Southland, showing the Total Area of each Pun and
the Area of Purchased Land up to the 31s/ July } 1865.
HOKANUI
DISTRICT,
TARINGATURA
DISTRICT.
Henderson Law
Wm. Jamieson
16,120
1,600
135 a
5,350
Wm. Jamieson
22,800
12,800
23,500
24,600
65,000
1506
J. W. Raymond
J. W. Raymond
Henderson Law
Messrs. Holmes & Barnhill
9,803 3 12


No. of
Hun,
Name of Licensee.
Area of
Run.
Area of Purchased
Land.
190
F. Wentworth
47,650
48.000
29.000
43.000
25,600
191
191 ext.
F. Wentworth ]
Do.
13,570
191 ext.
214
Do, )
J. Rogers
1,170
302
F. Wentworth
300
352
J. Howell )
24,000*
22,500
352«rL
394
Do. )
A. M‘Neil
• :. i
2,000 Bush
not under license
WAIAU DISTRICT.
156“ 2
J. S. Manning
JO
rf-
o
o
156 61
Messrs. Conner, Austin and
11,200
. . . 8,200
. 19,000
10,320
4,311
156 62
J. Mitchell .
165
Messrs. Cuthhertson, Bros.
7,595
7,325 Bush
not under license
WAIRIO DISTRICT.
133
• *W. Martin
8,700
2,410
142
Matthew Scott
2,000
200
143
F. S. B. Holt
24,000
2,980
153
G. Howell
26,900
4,390
WAIRAKI DISTRICT.
143“
143 b
Messrs. Reinecker & Hunter
Do
11,400
11,600
1,420
640
156 al
A. M. (dark
15.000
58.000
24,900
1,280
187
W. Stevens )
2,180
l&lext.
208
Do. »
C. Basstian
*• Available Area of Runs held under Waste Land Act, 1856.
WAIRAKI DISTRICT.
143“
Messrs. Reinecker & Hunter
11,400
1,420
143 b
Do
11,600
640
156 al
A. M. Clark
15,000
1,280
187
ISlext.
208
W. Stevens )
Do. )
C. Basstian
58,000
24,900
2,180
EYRE DISTRICT.


CENTRE HILL
DISTRICT
No. of
Run.
Area of
Area of Purchased
Name of Licensee.
Land.
188 J. C. Wilson
198 C. Basstian .
39,500
35,000
TAKITIMO
DISTRICT.
25,200
10,000
40,000
1660
Messrs. Rattray & Tolmie ~
J. S. Brown
Messrs. Brown & Stewart ~
Messrs. Butler, Boyes and
Poynter
M. Holmes
1,170
21,270
16,000
7,800
2,520
300 i
G. Printz.
1,000
Messrs. Menzies & Dundas
W. Cameron
15,000*
5,000*
5,000*
W. Aylmer
LONGWOOD
DISTRICT,
393 H. Hirst
395 Thos. Newton,
2,960
3,000*
Available Area of Runs held under Waste Land Act,
Chief Surveyor's Office,
Soijxhi-ani>, Auyust 2 5th, 1866.


I
A. R. P. A. R. P.
•, • -i. J :
. ■■ ( ■
Area of Land Purchased —
In the Hundreds i 312,488 2 4
„ Districts 142,339 3 12
1 454,828 1 iti
Area of Saleable Land
I
(estimated) —
I
Open Land, in the Hundreds 257 ’ 792 0 0 |
Bush, in the Hundreds .. 30 ’ 000 0 0
Open Land, in the Districts 440,000 0 0 j
Bush, in the Districts .... 10,000 0 0
1 737,792 0 0
Reserves 68,913 1 12
Land fit for Depasturing
only I 531,441 2 12
Area of Bush Land i 276,333 0 0
Peat, Bogs, and barren
Mountains 205,400 0 0
Area of Stewart’s Island .. | 500,935 0 0
GENERAL LAND STATISTICS IN THE PROVINCE
OF SOUTHLAND.
Total Area of
Province
2,775,643 1 0
Chief Surveyor's
Office,
Southland
August
2 sth, 1866.


i
Area of Land Purchased. Town Land. Country Land.
A. R. P. A. R. P.
Prior to Separation from Otago .. 229 2 17 139,700 1 10
Under the “ Otago Waste Lands
Act, 1856” 251 3 23 157,979 3 24
Under the “Southland Waste Lands
Act, 1863 ” 0 1 0 358 1 21
Under the “ Southland Waste Lands
Act, 1865,” up to 31st July, 1866 0 2 0 156,789 3 1
Total.. 482 1 0 454,828 1 16
Chief Surveyor’s Office,
RETURN showing the Area of Land purchased in Southland
prior to the separation of Southland from the Province of
Otago, the amount of Land sold in the Province of South-
land under the “ Otago Waste Lands Act, 1856/' the
amount of Land purchased under the “ Southland Waste
Lands Act, 1863/' and the amount of Land purchased
up to the 31s£ July, 1866, under the “ Southland Waste
Lands Act, 1865.”
Southland, August 25th, 1866.


GENERAL STATISTICS OF SOUTHLAND.
Compiled from the New Zealand Statistics published by the General Government.
Year.
Total Value
of Imports.
Total Value
of Exports.
Customs’
Revenue.
Territorial
Revenue.
Ordinary
Revenue.
Total
Revenue.
Remarks.
1861
1862
1863
1864....
1865
1866
71,657
260,139
866,726
505,757
1 1,656
94,570
8,548
20,097
91,698
101,362
113,606
94,240
5,433
11,958
64,399
46,644
26,052
18,141
20,160
54,691
50,254
69,488
2,271
142,909
591
2,992
16,432
10,247
5,201
6,244
26,184
69,641
135,085
126,379
33,524
167,294
Six months
only.
Amount of Gold exported during the six
OZS. DWTS.
months ending 30th June, 1866 ....
1599 17
Duty" ....
£200 6 11
Chief Surveyor's
Office, August 1st, 1866.


The following particulars embody the
more
important points in the
result of Mr
Marten’s Observations for six years
: —
0) '
u
.
o
O
u
V
n
si
! t>o
1
oS
2
2
! -s
a
to
•
« <u
s-<
O
.
u o
o
o
C*
CO
°
to
ci
a
a
QJ
K*
s g
o
CO -rH
s
0)
H
a>
fl O
g 00
H *
- o
s-l
<0
o
o
*0
jo
rO
fi
fc*
c
O
{£
O
a
o
£
5
a
V
a?
o
>> °
CO
>■»
jH
tc
w
is
Q
P
.
fl
fl
fl
1864
82
17
51.
5
0
43
3
165
176
25
58.7
1863
90
17
51.1
11
1
55
1
168
168
29
58.4
1862
87
9
51.6
27
0
70
16
239
113
13
38.2
1861
95
20
55.1
60
18
34
0
315
41
9
19.3
1860
91
14
53.8
30
1
21
5
288
70
8
|
33.6
1859
98
12
58.4
43
8
33
6
1
265
95
9
30.
Mean of Six )
Years .... \
'
52.6
29
5
42
5 I
240
110
15
39.7
North-westerly and westerly winds are most
prevalent,
south-
THE CLIMATE OF SOUTHLAND.
easterly being next in that respect


LAND REGULATIONS.
Selection of Clauses from the “ Waste Lands Act 1865.”
XII. A book to be called the “ Application Book ” shall be
kept open during office hours at the Land Office in "which the
name of every person desiring to make any application to the
Board shall be written in order by himself or any person duly
authorised on his behalf And the Commissioners shall during
the sittings of the Board consider and determine all applications
in the order in which they shall appear in the application hook
Provided that if any person shall not appear himself or by some
person duly authorised on his behalf before the Board when
called in his turn his application shall be dismissed until his name
shall appear again in the hook in order.
XIII. The Board shall keep true and detailed minutes of all
applications made to the Board and all decisions thereon and
generally of all the proceedings of the Board and such minutes
shall be signed by all the Commissioners present at any meeting
and such minutes shall be open to the inspection of all persons
desiring to inspect the same at all reasonable hours on payment of
the sum of two shillings and sixpence for every such inspection.
XIX. The sites of towns shall he determined by the Superin-
tendent upon the recommendation of the Provincial Council and
shall he notified by proclamation in the Government Gazette of the
Province.
XX. Town lands shall be sold by public auction in sections the
size and upset price of which shall be determined by the Superin-
tendent and the Provincial Council and having been so determined
for each town severally shall not again be altered.
XXL The time and place of every auction sale shall be fixed by
the Superintendent and shall be notified in the Provincial Gazette
and one or more newspapers of the Province at least thirty days
before such sale shall take place.


XXII. No such notification of any sale of town lands shall oe
published until a map of the town signed by the Chief Surveyor
shall have been laid open for public inspection in the Land Office
and such map shall set forth accurately delineated all the town
sections numbered consecutively so far as laid out showing the
sections to be submitted for sale and the public reserves in connec-
tion with them.
XXVI. All lands not included in any of the foregoing regula-
tions shall be open for sale as rural land at the fixed price of
twenty shillings per acre Provided always that if at any time the
Superintehdent and Provincial Council of the said Province shall
recommend the Governor to raise such price then it shall be
lawful for the Governor in Council if he shall see fit to raise such
price in accordance with such recommendation Provided also
that in the event of two or more applications for the purchase of
the same land being made on the same day then such land shall
be put up to public auction at an upset price of the same amount
as the fixed price for the time being Provided also that if
where two or more applications are made on the same day for the
same land any such applications shall refer to only part of the
land applied for in another application then the auction to be held
shall take place in respect of such part only of the land as shall
be included in two or more applications so made on the same day.
XXX. Every section of rural land shall be in one block and
except as hereinafter provided of a rectangular form and if
bounded by a frontage line shall be of a depth of half a mile (or
forty chains) from such frontage line And the term “ frontage
line ” shall be taken to mean the boundary of a road river or
public reserve or any stream or water course which shall have
been declared by notification in the Provincial Gazette to consti-
tute a frontage for the purpose of selection.
XXXII. In sections of lands not adjacent to or bounded by
a frontage line all the sides may be equal but one side may not
be less than one-third of the other and such section shall not
be less than half a mile distant from a frontage line.
XXXVII. The rights of pasturage on Waste Lands of the
Crown in any Hundred and the apportionment of the same shall be
exercised and enjoyed exclusively by the persons being occupiers
of land purchased from the Crown within the limits of such
Hundred who shall take out a depasturing license as hereinafter


provided The term “occupier” shall include the owner of the
land if he shall he in occupation by his servant or agent.
XXXVIII. A depasturing license shall be granted by the
Board to every such occupier who shall apply for the same to the
Board on or before the first day of January in each year provided
that he shall have deposited with the Board a return of the
number of acres occupied by him as aforesaid.
XLIII. It shall be lawful for the Wardens at any time within
two calendar months after their election to compute the quantity
of cattle capable of being depastured on the Waste Lands of the
Crown within the Hundred and to apportion the number of great
cattle and small cattle which may be depastured for the then
current year by each person holding such license as aforesaid and
the regulations so to be made shall be agreed to by a majority of
the Wardens and a copy of the same under their hands shall as
soon as conveniently may he be furnished to the Board for publi-
cation in the Provincial Gazette.
XLIV. In case the Wardens shall neglect to make such regu-
lations within the period aforesaid all the powers hereinbefore
given to such Wardens shall be held and exercised by the Board.
XLVIII. For the purpose of providing the means for carrying
into effect all or any of the powers hereby given to the Wardens
of any such Hundred and defraying the expenses incident thereto
in the erection and maintenance of pounds the construction of any
bridges roads or fences the appointment of rangers or other officers
or otherwise it shall be lawdul for such Wardens if they shall
deem it expedient so to do to levy and raise for the then current
year for and in respect of all cattle depastured on the Waste Lands
of the Crown within the Hundred an assessment not exceeding—
For every head of great cattle .... Five Shillings
For every head of small cattle .... One Shilling
to be paid by the person depasturing such cattle at the time and
in manner to be appointed by the Wardens imposing any such
assessment.
THE EXD.


A VISIT
TO THE
EASTERN DISTRICT OF SOUTHLAND.
The Extracts are from a series of letters published in “ The
Southland Times,” of the 18th of January , 1867, and will be
read with interest, both from the recent date of the information,
and the admirable manner in which it is imparted.


A VISIT TO THE
EASTERN DISTRICT OF SOUTHLAND.
Letiek No. I.
The agricultural interest of this Province has not up to the pre-
sent time commanded that consideration which its importance
demands, and but few of your town readers at all realise the mag-
nitude of the agricultural operations that are going on in the
Eastern District. I had heard that there were great works going
on, but I had no conception that they even approximated to the
extent I have seen. In a series of letters I hope to be enabled to
give a fair, though imperfect, impression of what I have seen and
learned, and I think it will tend to sweep away the cobwebs from
the eyes of many who think there is no future prosperity, no open-
ing for capital, or inducement for its investment in Southland.
Arrived at the Waihopai Hotel, I found a number of settlers
waiting the arrival of the town party. It appeared that a meeting
to promote the Invercargill Spring Races was to take place.
Robert Hamilton, Esq., Morton Mains, took the chair. He
briefly stated the object of the meeting; a draft programme was
read by the Secretary, and discussed clause by clause, and at
length unanimously adopted, and ordered to be advertised.
The meeting having terminated, and after partaking of refresh-
ment, the road was again faced. A few miles further on we came
to the snug homestead of Mr. Swale, M.P.C., but as by this time
it became dark, I could not inspect the crops or describe the cha-
racter of the farms. The whole party, upon invitation, spent the
evening there, and it was not till daylight we sighted the fence of
the Company’s chief station, the residence of Mr. Robert Hamilton,
manager of Morton Mains, Flemington, Woodlands, and Wai-
mumu stations.


Morton Mains demands first consideration. To do anything
like justice in describing this valuable estate, considerable space
will be required. The homestead is beautifully situated on a
choice site, having a belt of bush in the rear that shelters the
buildings from the south-west winds. The Waihopai floats past it
on the south side, and the Mataura on the north. The view from
Kent Hill is magnificent. If you look round you see what can
only be described as a gigantic amphitheatre, embracing a wide
expanse of fertile lands, hills, valleys, and wavy plains. Starting
from the Toi Tois, there is a chain of mountains reaching with
scarcely a break to beyond Stewart’s Island. In the back ground
rises the Dtago mountain ranges, and Hokanuis ; and if you look
in the direction of the west, the snow tipped Takatimos rear their
majestic heads, and give the finishing touch to the view. To look
lower, the scene is mellowed but beautiful. As far as the eye can
reach the plains are undulating, just sufficient in extent to make
hilly slopes, narrow valleys, and rippling streams. This view
strongly reminded me of the famed Wimmira plains of Victoria.
There is but little timber to be seen, but that little is light belts of
bush so well placed that it adds to the beauty of the view, and al-
most gives birth to the idea that they are not of nature grown, but
planted by the artistic hand of man. Fresh vegetation covers, as
with a carpet, nearly all that the eye can grasp, upon which horses
are frolicking, cattle browsing, lambs bleating, and sheep luxuriat-
ing ; and, to complete the scene, the bold outlines of the monster
steam ploughs, with their comical appurtenances, throwing forth
the gushing steam, and wafting afar, the hissing shout “ at work.”
While upon this subject, I must ask my readers to trot with me,
in imagination, over about five miles of a snake-like winding road,
fenced in on both sides with almost a garden fence the whole dis-
tance ; and sniff the odour of the clover, the rye, and the other old
“ familiar friends,” which in our earlier days were our first delight.
They are all here, grass like that we played hide and seek in, the
flowers we used to patronise, and many things that call back happy
remembrances long forgotten, pleasures that are for ever gone.
This accomplished, there is another panorama to be viewed quite
equal to the last. From the top of a high hill, termed the Bight
Hill, from its position as overlooking the chief portion of Morton
Mains, and the break in the chain of hills that divides them from
the Mataura Plains with their magnificent ever-flowing river, you
can see nearly all described; there is the river with its high banks
on the north side, and gigantic plains on the other, while the
Otago mountain Range appears to have doubled bulk since you
first made its acquaintance on Kent Hill; again from this spot


there can be seen some of the extensive operations of Messrs.
Douglass, Alclerson, Hunter, &c., and others, on the banks
of the Mataura, and by casting the eye in one direction down-
ward, there are waving wheat fields, shepherds’ houses, and a
steam saw mill; in another, fields of English grass of wonderful
growth, and in bloom, giving the whole scene a mellowed and
almost poetic complexion.
To return to Kent Hill, the spot from which I departed, and
glance at the group of buildings which constitute the homestead.
The most prominent is the residence of Mr. Hamilton ; it is a
massive, handsome building, two stories high, containing ten
rooms, and in the front there is a broad and high verandah, and
the whole is surrounded by a well stocked and tastefully laid out
garden. The next object that more especially calls for remark is
a row of buildings comprising store, accountant’s office, and last,
though not least, a schoolhouse. The latter is deserving of marked
attention. It is a very substantial structure, twenty-four feet long
by sixteen feet wide, and eleven feet high. It is weather-boarded
outside, and inside it is close lined with planed native cedar. The
school is under the charge of a young gentleman, Mr. Andrew
Fleming, a student from the Glasgow University. There are
twenty-six children under instruction. I had the opportunity of
being present during an examination, and do not hesitate in
affirming that the scholars acquitted themselves well, and reflected
much credit on the ability and attention of the teacher. This
institution owes its existence to the liberality of Mr. Hamilton,
who continues to almost entirely support it. Besides paying the
teacher a yearly salary, he in every way treats him as one of the
family. Such liberality cannot be too highly commended. If a
few more country gentlemen were to follow so praiseworthy an
example, the vexed question of Education would soon be settled
without legislative interference. Further on is large and
comfortable single men’s dwelling, which is followed by, at short
distances from each other, four neat and well built cottages, which
are appropriated to family men, and in the rear are extensive
piggeries, blacksmiths’ shops, carpenters’ shop and cottages.
There is also two extensive stables in this line which with another
a short distance away give accommodation to over fifty horses.
Almost opposite the spot from which I took the view is a very
neat and substantial six-roomed cottage in which Mr. Mitchell,
the sub-manager, resides. In the paddock in front is a large
strong built warehouse of two stories ; it is eighty-four feet high
and sixty-four feet long. It is so arranged that drays can be taken


into it, and the loading drawn up to the upper story by block and
tackle ropes that drop through a trap-door sufficiently large to
admit of all description of packages. Further south, in the
lambing paddock, is a good two-storied house of considerable
extent, appropriated to the chief shepherd, and a long range of
admirably planned and constructed sheep sheds ; in addition to
this there are at the Bight out-station a large men’s dwelling, two
cottages, and at other out-stations, six more, of a similar character
to those before described. In this sketch I have confined myself
to a rough statement of the buildings, which are all of a superior
character to those generally erected.
In my next I shall enter upon the (ask of endeavouring to give
an account of the varied implements, the saw-mills, the quantity
of ground under cultivation, the nature of the growing crops, the
result (an approximation) of the produce already gathered, the
cost of labour, &c. I may, however, state at once that Morton
Mains Station comprises four thousand acres; that all has been
fenced and ploughed, and the major part placed under crop, and
all done in the brief period of three years—in short, the station
has only been that time occupied.
No. 11.
It is very many years since the idea of extensively sowing
English grasses was first mooted in Victoria. The land reformer
who opposed the squatting system which gave the pastoral tenant
a small principality at a nominal rent, argued with energy and
ability, that by adopting a methodic system of cultivating English
and other grasses on pastoral land, the productiveness of the land
would be increased tenfold, and prove a preventive to scab, and
the other diseases that afflict stock that are kept for a length of
time on virgin pasture. Long and angry was this discussion, and
no practical advantages arose from it—the squatter who held his
one or two hundred thousand acres of Crown lands at a “ pepper-
corn’’rental, affirmed that no description of grass growing culti-
vation could improve the land to an extent that would enable him
to breed and rear sheep on a lesser area than from three to six
acres per head. While on the other hand it was strongly main-


Under. Grass—English rye, clover, &c.. . 2,500
Oats, wheat, and barley, under crop .... 800
Turnips 100
Potatoes and other vegetables 20
Land being sown and occupied for other
purposes 580
Total number of acres 4,000
tained that even rough cultivation would so improve the land that
the carrying capabilities of every run so cultivated would be at
least doubled. Notwithstanding that this subject was long a topic
for discussion no practical solution of the problem was ever given.
It was reserved for Southland to settle the question. From tvhat
I have seen in the Eastern District there cannot be a shadow of a
doubt that every acre of tvhat is called pastoral land may by energy
and enterprise in a very short time be made to yield returns five
times as great as is now popularly believed a fair estimate of their
productiveness—that land which is now rated at three acres to the
sheep will carry from two to three sheep to the acre.
The result of my inquiries upon this subject, and personal in-
spection of the cultivation of grasses at Morton mains, supplies
ample evidence of the soundness of the opinion above expressed.
I have said before that this station consists of a four thousand acre
block, and is cleared, ploughed, and almost all under cultivation. It
will now be my endeavour to explain the nature of the cultivation
and other matters appertaining to the working of this model farm.
In the first place, the land is divided into eighteen paddocks, all
sheep proof, fenced with strong sawn timber and wire. The divi-
sions of the four thousand acre block may be classed as follows:
The growth of the English grasses is wonderful, especially when
it is remembered that a very large portion is a first year’s crop. I
went through field after field, and even where the sheep had been
long feeding it was knee deep and close grown, presenting a
healthy and luxuriant appearance almost unknown in the colonies.
The wheat and oats are of remarkable growth, and promise a
heavy harvest. It is estimated that the land laid down in English
grasses will sustain and fatten three sheep to the acre. This
estimate is no assertion, but the result of a careful calculation of
the number of sheep depastured upon a given number of acres
during the year. Here then is evidence that small stations well
worked will pay the workers and contribute much more largely to


Stock.—Sheep
. 15,000
Cattle, about
150
Working Bullocks in constant use . .
50
Horses for farm use, 40 pair
80
Horses, hacks
30
Pigs, fine bred, about
60
the progress of a country than large and uncultivated runs. It is
not only the increased number of sheep that can be depastured on
a given area of land that is laid down in English grass, but the
increase of the quantity of wool that each sheep gives. For in-
stance the sheep (Leicester and Lincoln’s) that were shorn from
this station cut the large average of seven and a-half pounds per
head, some of the ram fleeces weighing from sixteen to seventeen
pounds. These sheep are especially worthy of mention. I saw a
flock of about four thousand Leicester and Lincoln’s, chiefly lambs,
of the very finest description I have seen in any of the colonies;
beautiful in symmetry, gigantic in growth, and healthy in appear-
ance, they look perfect models —such as may be seen in print
representations but seldom met with as living and moving animals.
I understand that these flocks are the offspring of imported
stock, some of the parent rams having cost as much as £95
each, and the whole flock averaged £35 per head. The im-
portance to the Province of such importations cannot be over-
estimated. The system of breeding such a class of sheep, and the
cultivation of English grass if generally adopted, cannot fail to
double the quantity of wool that is now exported, and materially
advance the prosperity of every class of the community. The fol-
lowing figures will convey some idea of the magnitude of the
operations :
In addition to the above, there are 20 waggon horses constantly
on the road, carting provisions from Invercargill. The number of
persons engaged on the stations, including women, is nearly 200.
There are three gigantic steam ploughs, of from eighteen to
twenty-four horse-power, each capable of ploughing from nine to
ten acres of new land per day, with harrows, grubbers, &c.
There is also a portable steam thrashing and mowing machine, two
steam saw-mills, blacksmiths’ forge, tools, &c., carpenters’ ditto,
and other mechanical appliances required to keep the works going
on without interruption. The amount of food consumed is im-
mense, as may be imagined from the fact that thirteen heavy
bullocks are slaughtered fortnightly for the station’s use. The
expenditure is necessarily large, as will be seen from the following


June
0
July
7
August *
3,261 2
5
September
9
October
2,935 16
9
November
3,852 13
10
statement, which is authentic. It is for the six months com-
mencing Ist April, and ending 30th November, viz.: —
£18,878 13 4
The above figures represent the expenditure on the various sta-
tions, vi/., Morton Mains, Flemington, and Woodlands. Theamount
of cultivation already done on the two latter stations sink into insig-
nificance when compared with the former, but now active exertions
are being made to place them in an equal state of advancement to
that of Morton Mains. The whole of the land comprised in these
blocks is now being turned up, and thirteen steam ploughs are
expected immediately, upon the arrival of which operations will be
commenced at Waimumu Station (30,000 acres), the whole of
which is to be laid down in English grasses. As in my next I
purpose to give a sketch of these and other stations—referring to
the magnificent flour mill in course of erection at Woodlands, the
steam saw-mill with its mile and a-half tramway, and other in-
stances of enterprise displayed on other stations of the Company I
have visited—the present remarks must suffice for the present.
One thing, however, should be mentioned —the extent of the work
under progress is great beyond description. The amount of British
capital invested is enormous ; and as evidence of the faith the far-
seeing capitalists of the home country have in the results of prac-
tical farming in Southland, the capital is to be considerably aug-
mented, and the Companies’ operations greatly extended. During
the coming year, the expenditure of the amalgamated Companies
(upon which subject I shall hereafter write) will be far in excess
of the present, and should encourage the people of Invercargill to
foster that faith in the future that those who have invested their
tens of thousands, and those who, by indomitable perseverance, in
the short period of three years, made a gigantic waste a fertile
field, have displayed.


No. 11l
Leaving Morton Mains, I proceeded towards the celebrated
Mataura Plains. The country is picturesque, and extremely rich
in herbage. A short distance on I came upon the station under
the management of Mr. Findlay. It is well positioned; and,
although the cultivated land is not anything like so large as at the
station I had left, a good deal has been done, and work was being
carried on with spirit. Here I had an opportunity of closely
watching the working of the steam plough. This was the first
opportunity I had of so doing, the one at Morton Mains not being
at work, owing to the long steel-wire rope which attaches the
engine to the ploughs having broken, and the neAv one not arrived.
This wonderful piece of machinery presented a most extraordinary
appearance. To attempt a readable description would be only to
expose the deficiencies of my mechanical education. I shall there-
fore content myself by simply sketching what I saw, in as few
words as possible. As you approach, you see the bold outline of
an immense steam engine, puffing and snorting, while at a con-
siderable distance on each side is an immense four-furrow plough,
that is attached to the engine by a strong steel-wire rope, 1,200
yards long. The block intended to be worked is marked out, and
what is termed anchors placed at each corner, round which the
rope passes, and thus the ploughs are pulled up and down, by the
rope worked by the engine, one plough going up and the other-
going down simultaneously; these anchors, or two of them, are
easily moved from place to place as required until the block is
completed, when, with the aid of a powerful team of bullocks, the
engine is moved to the next block, and operations again com-
menced. It is astonishing with what rapidity the work proceeds.
The furrows are deep and straight. It is amusing to see the line
of monster agricultural implements emigrating from place to place
—first comes a long team of eight, ten, or twelve bullocks, then
follows the “ iron snorter,” puffing and screeching, to which is
attached the diminutive dwelling of the engine driver and his
assistant, then comes a miscellaneous collection of the other im-
plements employed, and a sledge upon which is another diminutive
house occupied by others of the workmen, whose duty it is to be
near the machinery during the working season. It is deemed
desirable that this arrangement should be carried out, inasmuch as
the ground being turned up by the steam plough is generally at a
considerable distance from a station, and in order to start actual


Laid down in English grass, clover, rye, &c.
1,200
1,100
Wheat and barley
300
Garden, &c
4
Total number of acres in cultivation
2,604
work at a very early hour, the engine fires are not entirely extin-
guished during the night. This cavalcade, when in motion, has a
most comical, but pleasing appearance.
To turn again towards the Mataura. A little further on I
sighted the station of Messrs. Hall. It is prettily situated under
the lee of a romantic belt of bush, with a northern view, similar to
that previously described. The soil is excellent, the vegetation
luxuriant, and the stock healthy: no extensive agricultural opera-
tions are being carried on. The quantity of land that the station
contains I did not ascertain, having ridden through without halting.
A short distance further on, I reached the fine table land that
skirts the borders of the justly famed Mataura plains. 1* rom the
bank opposite the Eadendale Homestead (Douglass and Alderson),
the residence of Mr. William Gall, the manager, the view is truly
grand. To look east, the plain with its numberless paddocks and
fine cultivation extends to the Bight, and is lost to sight, while to
the west its clear outline is visible to the slopes of the Hokanuies.
This station is one of the best, if not the best, known as the
Company’s. It contains 12,000 acres, a large portion is under
cultivation, all fenced in and divided into fifteen paddocks. There
are gumtree groves running parallel with the road to Mataura
Estate. The English grass and clover fields on this station are
specially worthy of notice. One field that was being mowed was
considerably more than knee deep, and as thick as it is possible to
imagine. It was estimated that it was cutting over four tons to
the acre. As an instance of the value of cultivation for pastoral
purposes, I may state that £3,000 was last year received as rent for
depasturing sheep not attached to this station. I here are buildings
of every class required for properly carrying on the extensive
operations of the farm, including a large well stocked garden.
There is fruit and vegetables of almost every name and description
in great abundance. Here I had the pleasure of, for the first time
in Southland, enjoying a feast of large and delicious strawberries.
The following is the division of the land under actual cultivation,
but in addition to this a large quantity more is being turned up:


.. 3,200
Oats , T
500
Wheat, rye, fcc.. . , T
40
Blue gmn groves
10
—■—^
Total number of acres under cultivation
Broken up for grass
.. 3,350
600
The next station I reached was the Mataura Estate (Holmes &
C 0.,) under the management of Mr. Macaulay. This is an exten-
sive and valuable station, containing 25,500 acres of rich pastoral
land. From the verandah the view is extensive. The plain can
be traced at a glance to the foot of the Hokanuies, the squatting
station of Messrs. Hill and Wentworth, and an indistinct outline
of the Waimumu plains, said to be quite equal, if not superior, to
those of the Mataura. Starting from that point, and scanning the
Otago Range, the clearings of Messrs. Turnbull, Mr. Bennett (late
Richardson), Messrs. Douglass and Blyth, Dr. Menzies, and a
solitary tent on what was once the hope of Southland—the Mataura
gold workings—can be seen. The north banks of the river and
the land in that locality is rich, and especially adaptable for settle-
ment. It is to be hoped that ere long all this country will be
divided into 4,000 or 5,000 acre farms, for actual cultivation. 4he
Mataura Estate has not been much improved, the native grass
naving, as yet, proved sufficient for the subsistence of 11,500 sheep,
he number of the stock now depastured there. In this place I may
say a few words with reference to Seaward Downs (Holmes and Co.)
I had not the time to visit this station, but the following statement
as to its progress may be deemed accurate. The station comprises
17,000 acres of first-class land. The extent of cultivation is not
equal to other farms I have visited, but extensive work is now
going on, and it is expected that the bounds of cultivation will be
considerably enlarged during the next few months. This station
contains 17,000 acres of land ; 800 acres are laid down in English
grass, and about 250 in oats, &c., &c.; the ploughing of fresh land
is being energetically carried on. The next station I have to refer
to, is one of considerable magnitude —the Oteramaki station. On
this station great improvements have been made; the buildings
are of a most substantial description, and signs bt energy are
everywhere seen. The following is a statement ot the land under
cultivation;—


Stock. —Sheep
3,400
Cattle
300
Horses, pigs, &c
50
Total number of stock
3,750
This will finish my report of the distant stations, I have yet,
however, to give some account of my homeward bound trip—
Flemington, Woodlands, &c.—and a synopsis of the whole inform-
ation I have collected.
No. IV.
Homeward hound. With reluctance I turned my back upon
the fertile and flourishing district in which I had seen more signs
of progress and hope for Southland than in my most sanguine
imaginings I had ever pictured. I repeat I turned my back with
reluctance, feeling that I had left much unseen that I could have
desired to have seen, and many acquaintances whom I could have
wished to have longer remained with —acquaintances from whose
conversation I gathered much practical information, combined
with an unrestrained hospitality which we town folk seldom enjoy.
Still necessity has no law, and necessity called me away. The
first station I halted at on leaving Morton Mains was the Fleming-
ton Estate, an adjunct to Morton Mains. It would be only a repe-
tition of former descriptions to minutely review what I saw;
suffice it to say, that the sub-manager’s house (Mr. Napier), with
its tastefully laid out garden, and numerous out-buildings, was such
as many home country squires might envy. In every direction the
same energy and skill that characterised the other of the Com-
pany’s clearings was conspicuous—all seemed as active as busy
bees, and as earnest in their. work as men could be. A few
miles on I drew rein at Woodlands. Here again the power
of energy and capital was plainly manifest; cultivation of every
description abounded, but the short time I had to spare was
chiefly devoted to the inspection of a new and gigantic flour
mill that is in the course of erection. This building is being
constructed of wood, and the timbers used are of a size and strength
that is seldom met with; the machinery is of a most massive de-
scription, combining strength with the most recent improvements
that mechanical ingenuity has devised. With my usual inquisi-


tiveness, 1 wanted to know where such splendid timber was
obtained —that the engine and iron-work were Glasgow make
could be seen at a glance—when I was immediately invited to trot
over a mile and a half of a tramway that ran through a beautiful
belt of bush, that brought us to a grove of splendid, timber,
close to which was a powerful steam saw-mill. Some fine trees
had been fallen, and some splendid boards were being cut. Ihe
tramway especially attracted my attention. It is well constructed,
and I understand that its cost was only £125 per mile. It would
be folly to argue that such a tramway would be adequate to the
requirements of public traffic, but I am bold enough to state that a
double line of a much more substantial description could be con-
structed for little more than £4OO per mile. If such a line was
made to the Mataura, great benefits would arise. Invercargill
would become the business place of a vast number of settlers who
now are compelled to take their produce to Dunedin. There is no
question that Southland for its size is progressing more steadily
than any other Province in New Zealand, despite the drawbacks
that have arisen. There is one other station that I called at which
demands notice. It is that of Mr. T. Hamilton of the Long Bush.
This is a private farm, cultivated on the same principle as the
Company’s. There is English grass, clover, &c., on a small scale,
like to what I have mentioned before. There is, however, a new
feature; this is a cheese-making establishment, I may state
that what I tasted Avas of a very superior quality. This must finish
my description of the places I have visited.
No. V.
HaA'ing described the character of the country I haA'e A r isited,
and the operations that arc being carried on in the way of improA e-
ments, I shall endeavour to shoAV more fully the effect the New
Zealand and Australian Land Company Avill have on the future of
Southland. The purchased land already held by the Company
amounts to 123,000 acres, the larger portion of Avhich will be un-
der cultiA'ation during this year. This Association comprises all
the Stations knoAvn as the Company’s. It is a Scotch Association
that oAves its existence to the enterprise and energy of Mr.
James Morton, GlasgOAV. This gentleman, some four years since,
having formed a high estimate of the capability of Southland as an
agricultural country, determined to inA est a large amount, and in-
duced others to do likewise. Thus the various stations that I have


termed the Company’s, although not held by one Company, were
owned by parties who were all more or less associated in the colo-
nising enterprise. The Association of which I now speak, is an
amalgamation of the whole with greatly increased capital. Its
shareholders are among the -wealthiest men in Glasgow. I take
the following extract from a prospectus that was drawn up for pri-
vate circulation. “ The property consists of about 170,000 acres
of freehold land, in the Provinces of Otago and Southland, now
being rapidly enclosed and improved.” It further states that it is
believed that before this year expires that there will be from 20,000
to 30,000 acres fenced in, and in course of being laid down in
English grasses. From my previous letters it will be seen that
this was a very moderate estimate, nearly three-fourths of that
quantity being already under cultivation in Southland alone, and
I am imformed that extensive operations are being carried on in
the Company’s station in the district of Oamaru, Otago province.
The capital of the Company is £2,000,000, divided into 20,000
shares of £lOO each, and no allotment for a less sum than £5,000
of shares was permitted. This large sum has been raised without
the stock having been placed in the market. The Company’s
operations, though not confined to Southland, what may be termed
its permanent estate is chiefly in this Province, and the success
that has attended the wool-growing experiment of sheep farms of
limited extent highly cultivated has been of a character so satis-
factory, that much larger operations are contemplated. In fact,
from the progress that has been made by the Company during the
last three years, it is not unreasonable to anticipate that in the
course of two years more, the amalgamated Association will have
200,000 acres under crop. The system of farming adopted must
eventuate in the prosperity of this Province. It is not to the actual
operations of the Company itself that I look for so desirable a
result. The example it sets, the proof it supplies that well worked
blocks of moderate size are more profitable to the owner than
large uncultivated runs, will hasten the time when all the land of
the Province will be increased in value, when the stock now
depastured will be increased tenfold, and, as far as wool is con-
cerned, each sheep double its quantity.
The main object of the Association is the growth of superior
wool, but its operations are not confined to that. The growth of
grass seed, barley for malting purposes, brewing, &c., is on an
extensive scale carried out. In addition to the magnificent flour-
mill now approaching completion at Woodlands, a large and sub-
stantial malting establishment, and a brewery are to be erected in


Invercargill, the machinery for which I believe is now on the way
from home. The samples of barley that have been sent from
Southland to England and Scotland, have been pronounced by the
most competent judges to be of a very superior description—the
exact thing for malting. After careful deliberation the home
directors of the Company have arrived at the conclusion that
Southland has within its grasp the malt market of all the Aus-
tralias. The importation of malt from Great Britain to the Aus-
tralian colonies is estimated at 2,000,000 bushels per year, and it
is believed that with proper appliances this Province can supply
a better article at a much smaller cost. From a document I have
read containing the opinion of competent men upon this question,
it is plainly demonstrated that Southland can successfully compete
with the world in the production of this grain, and that for the
Australian market it is especially adapted. The cost of air-tight
cases, and the risks of a long sea voyage are so great, that malting
in Southland must, if extensively carried on with adequate appli-
ances, speedily supersede British importations. To accomplish
this, much capital, energy and skill will be required, and these the
Company is able and determined to supply. This cannot fail to
prove beneficial to Invercargill, and to the Province generally.
I think that the confidence the capitalist and practical men of
the home country have evinced in the capabilities of this Province
should give spirit to those who have an interest here to push
forward the particular enterprises they are engaged in. The fixed
impression in my mind, from what I have seen during my trip is,
that Southland is unsurpassed, if not superior, to any other portion
of New Zealand as a field for enterprise and industry. The
clearings I have inspected give ample evidence that moderate sized
farms, say from 1,000 to 5,000 acres, if properly cultivated, on the
system of uniting pastoral with agricultural working—the laying
down the pastoral sections with English grasses, and carrying on
agricultural operations in accordance with British methods—is
adopted, profitable employment for thousands will be found for the
labourer, and considerable benefit to the capitalists secured. It is
patent that if by cultivation an acre of land can be made to carry
three sheep, and that at a nominal cost, and grain of a superior
quality can be grown at a lesser rate in this Province than in any
of the Australias, that Southland does in a measure possess ad-
vantages for settlement in excess of any others that I have visited,
and I have visited most of the Australian colonics. The advantages
she offers may be summed up as great fertility of soil, open country,
plenty of water, great natural drainage, and an excellent climate.


The only drawback to progress is the want of roads. As this
subject will require considerable space, I shall make it the subject
of my final letter.
No. VI.
In previous letters I think that from facts and figures it has
been shown that this Province contains land of the highest value,
and is capable of maintaining a large population. Still I cannot
close my eyes to the evidence Avhich everywhere presented itself,
that unless facilities for interior communication can be given, the
progress that might be made will for a long period be procrasti-
nated. It is stated as an acknowledged fact that the difference
between good and bad roads is simply the difference between profit
and loss. I can now thoroughly realise this. Many farms I visited
were leaving to rot produce much wanted in town, and that -would
even be profitable as exports, if facilities for cheap transit were
afforded. Wherever I went there was the same complaint, the
want of roads. All cultivators, both large and small, were highly
eulogistic as to the capabilities of the country, and all unanimous
in their opinion as to the necessity of increased facilities for the
transit of the articles they can produce to a sea-port, and declared
this to be the only drawback to steady and certain prosperity.
The great question to my mind is, How are these facilities to be
secured ? It is evident that little can be expected to be done by
the Government, and it is equally evident that unless something is
done the Province will retrograde instead of advance. The diffi-
culties that cluster round the Province are great, and lam aware
that the General Government will not help it out of the mire ; still
it is, I am convinced, able to extricate itself, and that speedily, if
allowed to do so. I cannot too strongly urge upon the Provincial
Council to take up this subject, and grapple with it in a spirit of
determination to do something. To talk of expensive railways at
the present time would be folly; but I could not but feel in
travelling over the beautiful country I have traversed that no part
of the world presented greater facilities for light railways or tram-
ways, or even road making. If I can judge from the tone and con-
versation of the settlers of the eastern district, they would unite to
construct a fair road themselves, provided some assistance was
afforded by the Government, even if the objectionable system of


tolls had to he adopted. So anxious are they for roads or tram-
ways, that I believe if a lease for a given number of years was
offered them, they would unite to a man and co-operate in con-
structing a good line for traffic from Invercargill to the Mataura.
In fact, I feel confidence that there are parties now ready to form
a double line of tramway the distance I have mentioned if the
slightest inducement was offered, not with the object of making a
profit out of it, but simply to aid them in their colonising enter-
prises.
I would urge the Council to deliberate upon the practicability of
a scheme- whereby companies might be formed and tramways con-
structed. Such a scheme it appears to me more than feasible, and
if adopted would in a few years extricate Southland from all its
difficulties, render it prosperous, and make it the garden of New
Zealand. Suppose, for instance, that one-half the width of the
present main roads were offered to be placed at the disposal of a
company, with a lease for a given number of years, upon condition
that it constructed a substantial double line of tramway, what would
be the effect upon the Province ? It would not interfere with ordi-
nary road traffic, as fortunately our main lines are wide enough for
both roads and tramways, the land would immediately increase in
value, cultivation would be multiplied, and prosperity ensured.
Surely even the General Government could not object to this; it
would double the value of its mortgage, and ensure the speedy
payment of the debt. 1 throw this out as a suggestion, leaving all
to take it for what it is worth, but I do trust that the Council will
not dissolve without adopting some scheme for inland communica-
tion. The dottings of my “ visit to the Eastern District ” are
ended.


5 • “■ ■■
.. .
■
■
.
■
.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
NEW ZEALAND INSURANCE
COMPANY,
Incorporated by Act of General Assembly at Auckland 1859.
CAPITAL £250,000, Unlimited Liability.
Underwrite through the medium of their London Agents,
Merchandise, Passengers’ Baggage, Freight, &c.,
TO ALL THE
NEW ZEALAND & AUSTRALIAN PORTS,
INDIA, CHINA, CEYLON, SINGAPORE, & CAPE OF
GOOD HOPE,
At the usual Bates of Premium.
By Insuring with this Company Claims may he settled and paid
either in London or at the different Ports of Australia and New
Zealand, at the Insurer’s option. This will he found an immense
advantage to Passengers insuring their Baggage, Passage-
money, &c., as they will he enabled, immediately on landing, to
settle their claims in the Colony, instead of having to refer them
to England, and await a settlement thereof occupying at the least
some six or eight months.
For further particulars apply to the Company’s Agents,
BOWLEY AND BRISTOW,
74, CORN HILL, E.C.
Sjcnt for Jlouthtaiul—
WILLIAM RUSSELL, Esq., Invercargill.


A '~lk
| \
I LISTS ON APPLICATION, i
• •
: :
• •
ADVERTISEMENTS.
THE
BRABY’S
XTAU&S EOOFIHO ZINC,
In Sheet 8 feet by feet.
Estimates given for Roofs or Buildings complete.
PERPOBATED -A.3ST3D SHEET ZHSTC.
CORRUGATED GALVANISED IRON,
BEST QUALITY ONLY, AND AT THE LOWEST PRICE,
Buckets, Wire Netting, Hoofing Felt, &c.
PRICES AND PATTERNS, POST FREE, ON APPLICATION.
FRED. BRABY & Co., Limited,
Panufactmtm and Pcrrhants,
FITZROY WORKS, BOSTON ROAD, LONDON.
IRON CISTERNS.
F. BRABY & Co.,
Having laid down extensive and improved Machinery in their new range
of Buildings, IDA WHARF, DEPTFORD, are now prepared
to supply
WROUGHT IRON TANKS, BLACK, GALVANISED OR PAINTED,
Of superior quality, at reduced prices, and at very short notice,
All Orders should be addressed to
F. BRABY & CO., LIMITED,
FITZROY WORKS, EUSTON ROAD, LONDON,
Or through Colonial Merchants.


ADVERTISEMENTS. VU
COLONIAL BOOKS, PAMPHLETS, MAPS, &c,
SOLD I!Y
G. STREET, 30, CORNHILL, LONDON.
POST FREE.
S. d.
“ New Zealand Handbook, or Guide to tlie ‘ Britain of the South’ 1 2
“ Canterbury ” (with Map) 0 7
“ Otago, Descriptive Sketch of” 1 2
“Voices from New Zealand” 0 7
“ Hints to Sheep Farmers in New Zealand” 0 9
“ New Zealand, as it was and is” 1 2
“ Memories of New Zealand Life” (Hoddek) 3 10
“ Queensland,” by G. Wight 3 4
“Northern Territory of South Australia” 1 2
“ South Australia,” by F. Sinnett 0 8
“ Handbook to City of Adelaide” 1 7
“ Western Australia” 0 7
“ The Great Australian Colonies: their Capabilities and Advantages ........ 0 5
“Natal: a Practical Guide Book” (Prize Essay) 0 7
“Settlers’ Guide to the Cape and Natal” 3 10
“Labour and its Wages,” with Map of the World 0 7
“ Brazil, its Cities and Provinces,” by W. Scully 8 0
“ The States of the River Plate,” by Wilfrid Latham 5 6
“Cotton Fields of Paraguay and Corriento” 3 8
“Republic of Uruguay” (Government Pamphlet) 1 1
“ Out at Sea, or the Emigrant Afloat” 0 3
Maps of New Zealand, at 7d., 2s. Bd., and 3s. Bd., 9 4
„ Queensland 7d. and 3 8
„ South Australia 7 0
Colonial Summary Newspapers, &c., received for Sale by each Mail.
NSW ZEALAND EXAMINEE,
A MONTHLY JOURNAL
OF COMMERCIAL AND GENERAL INFORMATION RESPECTING
NEW ZEALAND.
And entirely devoted to the interests of this important Colony, “ the Britain of the
South” and the “Land of Promise” for British capital and skill. Special Corres-
pondents have been appointed in all the Provinces, who forward the latest and most,
reliable intelligence. The State of the Markets—Progress of each Province—
Prospects of Emigration—in short, everything that in any way, directly or indirectly,
affects New Zealand, is to be found in the columns of the
NEW ZEALAND EXAMINER.
fS T 1Y E E T 9 ©
“INDIAN & COLONIAL MERCANTILE DIRECTORY,”
1867-8.
FOURTH YEAR OF ISSUE.
This excellent Annual offers to the Manufacturers of England a reliable and
valuable guide to the European Merchants of India, China, Japan, and the Eastern
Seas, Australia, New Zealand, British Columbia, the West Indies, and all the Colonies
and English Settlements. The contents have been most carefully revised (locally) at
great expense, so that it cannot but prove a trustworthy book of continual reference.
Tariffs, Trade Returns and other useful information to Merchants will be added.
Q. STREET, 30, Cornhill, London, E.C.


EDINBURGH ....
ABERDEEN ....
CUPAR, FIFE....
DUNDEE
STIRLING
ADVERTISEMENTS.
THE OTAGO & SOUTHLAND INVESTMENT
COMPANY LIMITED, NEW ZEALAND,
Incorporated under “The Companies Act 1862.”
Capital, £500,000, in 50,000 Shares of £lO each.
FIRST ISSUE, 25,000 SHARES.
DXREOTORS.
G. H. Donaldson, Esq.
S. B. Edenborough, Esq.
A. L. Elder, Esq.
J. Harbottle, Esq.
A. Morrison, Esq.
J. R. Morrison, Esq.
J. D. Thomson, Esq.
AUDITORS.
J. Sawyer, Esq
C. H. Robinson, Esq.
BANKBRS-
The Imperial Bank Limited, for London.
„ National Bank of Scotland, for London and Scotland.
» Bank of Scotland, j for Scotland.
„ British Linen Company Bank, j J
AGENTS FOR SCOTLAND.
COMMITTEE XlsT OTAGO.
The Manager (A. W. Morris, Esq.), and two others.
Bankers —The Bank of Otago Limited.
This Company is prepared to receive LOANS on DEBENTURES, in Suras of
£lOO and upwards, for Three, Four, Five, Six, or Seven Years, bearing Interest at.the
rate of Six per Cent, per Annum, payable by Coupons at the Bankers of the Company
in London, on Ist January and Ist July. These Loans are amply secured by the
uncalled Capital of the Company, as well as by First Mortgages on Land and House
Property in New Zealand, which are carefully selected by the Local Committee in
Dunedin.
Also, as Agents to make Investments and to effect Loans upon Mortgages approved
by the Local Committee in New Zealand on the most favourable terms, Interest being
paid Half-Yearly in London.
The Company also makes advances in New Zealand on the Stations and Stocks of
Runholders, and receives consignments of Wool and other produce for sale in London.
Money received on Deposit for shorter periods, at rates to be agreed on.
Application to be made at the Offices, 5, Adams Court, Old Broad Street,
London, E.C.
By order of the Board,
ALEX. GRACE, Secretary.


s y j S \\ o
3 17~
j /COY&C?\ j
S jj
s outf^rs ;
" / sA g
g / W LONDON. ' \ a
1 i^5fr' 1
ADVERTISEMENTS.
AUSTRALIAN AND NEW ZEALAND
OUTFITS.
OUTFITTERS TO MOST OF THE FIRST NEW ZEALAND
COLONISTS.
Inform intending Emigrants to Netv Zealand and the Australian Colonies
that their General Outfitting Stock is always on view, they now having
had many years’ experience in the Trade, are thoroughly acquainted with.
and keep every article necessary for a Settler s Outfit.
Priced Lists of Outfits forwarded by post to any part of the Country.
SHIP FURNITURE, BEDDING, & MESS UTENSILS
FOR CABIN OR STEERAGE PASSENGERS.
CABINS FITTED AND BAGGAGE SHIPPED.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
NEW ZEALAND.
THE PASSENGERS’ LINE.
SHAW, SAYILL & Co.,
34., LEADENHALL STREET, LONDON.
FIRST-CLASS CLIPPER PACKETS,
Sailing regularly at short intervals for
WELLINGTON
NELSON
AUCKLAND
TARANAKI
HAWKES BAY
CANTERBURY
OTAGO
SOUTHLAND.
This Line, which now embraces the old original one of Messrs.
Willis and Co., was established in 1858, to meet the rapidly increasing
requirements of New Zealand by the organisation of a Service specially
adapted for the safe and comfortable conveyance of PASSENGERS and
FAMILIES. Upwards of 600 First-Class Ships have already been
’despatched by it, conveying to the Colony many thousands of Persons
without a single serious accident or mishap.
The advantages offered by the PASSENGERS’ LINE in regard to
COMFORT, ECONOMY, and DESPATCH, cannot, perhaps, be
more satisfactorily shown than by the simple statement of the fact that
three-fourths of the whole of the New Zealand Traffic has gradually been
attracted to it; and that almost all old Colonists returning there proceed
in these vessels.
All Particulars as to the FREE GRANTS and ASSISTED
PASSAGES, and how to obtain them, together with full information on
all questions relating to Ships, Rates of Passage, Freight and Insurance,
Shipment of Luggage, Remittances, &c., &c., may always be obtained by
writing to SHAW, SAYILL & Co.
