

Meridian,
i
i
n
I r i
(Written by request for the
Children of Mr. Robert
Anderson, of Lithgow,
who was one of the forty
children saved from the
wreck )
Mrs. M. Walters Moore.


w -


Wreck of the “IVJeridian.”
An old dame, whose hair was bleached by
length of years, and whose deep lines in her
face tell of the many sorrows she has passed
through, sat in an armchair by a blazing wood
fire in a cosy room of her Mountain home. She
was in deep thought; her mind had gone back
to scenes in her life which occurred nearly fifty
years ago, and could never be effaced from her
memory. Generations have come and gone,
yet she is left to tell the tale, and now she is
listening to the tramp of many young feet upon
the dusty, thirsty road, for the long drought
had caused it to send forth its metallic sound,
which helped to quicken her dull hearing and
inform her that the expected audience was ap-
proaching.
Going to the door, she welcomed a group of
young people, Australian born, the men and
women of the future.
“I’m Hilda Anderson, ” said a tail girl of
fourteen summers, “ and this is my brother,
Scott ; here is Dorothy, mother’s youngest
child, and the others are close behind, and will
be here immediately. I hastened on, fearing


you might think we were not coming ; father
said he would like us all to hear of the ship-
wreck from you, as he was too young to
remember the many incidents you can speak
of, so we have walked up fit>m the valley
through the beautiful moonlight listen to
your account of that terrible wreck which has
caused in father’s life so much sorrow.”
Thus it was that the old lady was induced to
commence the recital of one of the saddest ship-
wrecks which have occurred during the last
century. By this time the other members of
the family had assembled, and were eager
listeners to the story.
“ Yes, I will give you a short account (only
just the fringe) of tha*: woeful occurrence, and
I know you will be interested in it, because
some of your ancestors suffered through it It
caused the death of your grandmother and
much grief and suffering to your great grand-
mother. But I must first tell you that there
are many sad passages in the narrative that
will harrow up painful feelings, so should I
occasionally break down, you must bear with
me. I must be as brief as possible, as the moon
will be hidden behind the ‘ Tarna ’ ere you can
retrace your steps to the valley.
It is my fervent desire that you dear child-
ren should learn a lesson from what I am about
to tell. It will at least show you how wonder-
ful are the ways of Providence, and how Q-od’s
hand can be traced all through that calamitous
time, in the preservation of those whom it was
His will to spare, and one reason why you
should be attentive is that every incident here
narrated is strictly true. I shall begin from
the day we set sail.
The passengers were requested to be on


board the “ Meridian,” at the docks in London,
on Friday, the 4th of June, 1853. My husband
and I were there early in the day, so that we
should not miss the kind friends who were
coming to see ns off. We found my brother
and sister and several friends, who remained
with us some time, and were interested in
watching the passengers come on board. We
noticed three or four Frenchmen, then several
Germans, and then we were glad to see a
Scotch family crossing the gangway.
The first person was a tall, fine-looking man,
leading two little boys by the hand. The two
latter, who wore Scotch caps, were followed by
two youths wearing kilts. The Scotch dress is
so picturesque and attractive that we at once
became interested. Now, the tall gentleman
was your grandfather, and the two little boys
were your Uncles Alric and Patric, and the
youths who followed were your Uncle James
and your father. Then followed the two
young ladies, who had just left school. These
were your Aunts Fanny and lobby. Then came
Isabella, the nurse, carrying the baby, a big,
fat child, who was your Uncle Walter; then,
following Isabella, came your grandmoiher,
accompanied by her mother, who was Mrs.
Robertson, your great grandma, a dear and
most intelligent little lady, with pretty, dainty
features, and who was as good as she looked.
She came and sat by me, and entered into
conversation, and we were not only charmed
with her pretty Scotch accent, but also with
her kind, simple personality, and from that
moment we became fast friends; so you see,
dear children, it was on the 4th of June, 1853,
that we made your father’s acquaintance and
also your family’s
V - _■>


You already know that the ‘ Meridian ’ was
the name of the vessel which was wrecked, and
she was considered (at the time o-f which I
speak) the most beautiful barque tha o ever left
the port of London. She was onhy 570 tons
burden, but her strength and build were
thought incomparable—at least her commander,
Captain Herniman, thought so, for he was
exceedingly fond of her, and was wont to boast
of her great sailing capabilities. She had only
made one voyage before, which was to Moreton
Bay, and that was the quickest passage on
record. Hence her reputation as a fast sailer.
Now, you must know in those days there was
a heavy premium given to convey mails from
London to Sydney. The owners of the
‘ Meridian ’ were desirous of getting this pre-
mium, but they were disappointed, as a more
favoured ship was to leave the port of London
a few days earlier. This arrangement was an-
noying to the owners and captain of the
* Meridian,’ so they determined to make all
speed, crowd on as much sail as possible, and
try to arrive in Sydney first, just to prove the
superiority of their ship. The sequel will
prove this truth,
“Though man proposes, God disposes.”
So it was on Friday (‘that unlucky day’),
4th of June, 1853, that we bade our relatives
and friends adieu and set sail for Sydney. The
number of souls on board that ill-fated vessel
amounted to one hundred and five, among
whom were forty children.
Now you beys and girls will learn what
dreadful hardships they had to encounter, and
how God preserved those forty children (as if
by a miracle) from a lingering death of star-


vation, for they were fourteen days on a
desert island, and nearly all that time without
food.
There was mfich discomfort on board in con-
sequence of a heavy cargo and her carrying
of so much canvas, but there was also some
merrymaking and fun among the younger
passengers, that is, after they had recovered
from sea-sickness. One facetious young man,
who was witty and good natured, amused
himself one night by writing on our cabin
doors, giving to each an appropriate name ; for
instance, over your grandfather’s cabin was
written ‘ Edinburgh Castle,’ because he had
come from Edinburgh. Over another was
written ‘ The Lovers’ Retreat,’ and another
was named ‘ Fagon’s Cave,’ and so on through-
out the row of cabins. This caused some
amusement at the time.
At the beginning of the voyage the children
did not like the bustle and confusion, which
usually takes place when a ship first puts to
sea ; they were discontented, and often would
cry, as the rocking motion of the vessel would
make them seasick, but the unpleasantness
was soon over, and then the days glided
pleasantly enough.
The boys made friends with the sailors, who
used to teach them the names of the ropes and
the different things belonging to the ship.
The girls would read and work, and sometimes
sing, and every Sunday, when the weather
would permit, there was church service on the
poop, and a reverend gentleman would give an
address, and sometimes on Sunday afternoons
there would be Sunday school for the little
•ones.
Now, my young friends must not imagine


that a sailing vessel of fifty years ago was as
comfortable, convenient or luxurious as the
ordinary ocean steamer of to-day, such as you
see at the Circular Quay when you go to
Sydney. Oh, dear no. A long voyage in
those daya was wearisome indeed, with little
change or excitement on board, unless an
island was sighted, a shark caught, or another
ship seen and spoken with, as was once the
case, when the whole ship’s company seemed in
a state of the most pleasurable excitement.
At an early hour in the morning we sighted
a ship far on before us. Our captain took up
his glass to have a look at the stranger, and
presently exclaimed, 1 It is the Gipsy Queen,
that left London a week before us. Put on all
sail, my men, and we will soon overtake her,
and show them on board what the Meridian
can do.’
There was indeed wild excitement on our
ship that day, and the strangers on board the
other vessel seemed to participate in it, for at
noon, when we met them, they raised such a
hearty cheer as sent a thrill of delight through
everyone, and our captain’s exultation knew
no bounds, for he positively sailed right round
the other ship just to show them what his
vessel could do. Then with three more cheers
we sailed away, leaving the ‘ Gipsy Queen ’ far
behind us : but ere parting, our captain shouted
through the speaking trumpet (ironically):
“ Report us when you get to Sydney,” little
thinking, poor man, that the ‘ Gipsy Queen ’
would really have to report us, and give the first
intimation to the Sydney people that something
had happened to us and our ship, the
1 Meridian,’
Now, it occasionally happened that we had


some unpleasantness on board. The doctor was
a drunkard, and often caused, an uproar. One
day he behaved so badly that he was ordered to
be “ put in irons,” but was begged off by his
wife, who generously pleaded for him. Then
there was another man, one of the cooks. He
used to curse and swear so dreadfully that it
was shocking to hear him. If a passenger
went to him and humbly requested him to
cook some little dainty she had made up for a
sick child or husband, he would fly at her with
an oath, and wind, up his sentences by saying,
“ May the devil fetch me away flying if I do,
unless you give me some grog.”
Grog seemed his only god,—but “devil”
was always in his mouth. He was well paid
for his services, and the passengers thought it
was not right to be always “ tipping ” him for
doing bis duty, and then you know, people do
not like to pay for incivility, and so we became
accustomed to his almost prophetic wish—
“ May the devil fetch me away flying if I do,
unless you will give me some grog.” Yf'u will
hear presently how his evil wish was fulfilled,
and how on the night of the wreck he was
really taken away, cook-house and all, and
never seen anymore.
Then, there was one very discontented
person on board who always used to complain
that the meat was not good enough for him,
and one day in his ill-humour be took a large
piece of beef in his hand and went straight up
to the captain, and in a very rude manner said
“ Such meat as this is not fit to eat.” The
captain replied that it was the same meat as
the other passengers had, and no one had com-
plained of it but he. The man forthwith
throw the meat into the sea, saying as he


did 30, “It is only fit for the sharks.” This
rude and wasteful act so annoyed the captain
that he turned round and said with some
warmth.
“ Ah, my fine fellow, you may he glad of
that before the voyage is over.”
And, oh ! how often after that we thought
of our captain’s words when we realised
what had before been taught is in theory that
“ Wilful waste makes woeful want.”
Then, there was also on board a powerful-
looking sailor, named George, who often used
to swear and swagger about the deck. He was
one of those brutish-looking men that women
and children instinctively dread ; it is certain I
did, as I felt he had a dislike or antipathy to
my husband My fear afterwards proved well
founded. No doubt this unsympathising sailor
thought it beneath the dignity of a man to be
affected by sea-sickness, and so he always made
a rude remark when passing my prostrate
husband which was extremely annoying. You
will hear about this man George by and bye.
I must here tell you of another grief which
troubled some of the passengers of the
“ Meridian.” The four French gentlemen on
board, being Roman Catholics, thought it no
harm to play cards all day on the Sabbath, and
many of the mothers murmured and thought
if such desecration of the Lord’s Day were
continued, the voyage could not prove a
prosperous one.
And, again ; there was another circumstance
which must have awakened God’s anger, for
He never allows the cruel to go unpunished.
I dare say you know that on the broad ocean
there are numbers of large albatross and other
great birds which hover round ships to pick up


the food which is thrown overboard. The
albatross are magnificent birds, some of them
so large that they measure from the tip of one
wing to the other eight or ten feet.
Two or three days before the wreck, some
men and boys, having nothing else to do, were
desirous of catching some of these birds (not to
eat) but for the sake of their webbed feet, which
make fine tobacco pouches, and in their
anxiety to procure them, they did not wait till
the poor birds were dead but cut off the feet
while the creatures still lived. I heard one of
the sailors say (and he was a rough man too,
but had a gentle heart) that “ no good will
come of this voyage after such cruelty,”
Be assured, dear children, that those who
are cruel to the least of God’s creatures will be
sure to feel His anger, for our Heavenly Father
does not let a sparrow fall unnoticed.
Thus we went on from day to day, and up to
that time, the voyage was considered tolerably
pleasant.
However, as we began to round the Cape of
Good Hope, every thing seemed to change ; the
weather became rough, the wind boisterous,
and heavy squalls were so frequent that it made
all uncomfortable. It was about this time I heard
the captain’s little daughter (whose name was
Patience) say to her father, “ Papa, I don’t
like the ship now, she rolls so that I can’t
walk. Do you think she will be wrecked ?”
“ Wrecked !” exclaimed he, indignantly,
“ did you ever hear of anything happening to
any of my ships ? Why, I never had an
accident in my life, and have been in command
eighteen years,” and he went on smiling at
her, “ and then you know it is not likely any-


thing will happen to the “ Meridian.” No,,
no ; she is the finest barque that ever left port,
a new ship, with masts of teak and a regular
clipper too; so dismiss such thoughts from
your little head and go to play with Hope
Guyton.”
So Patience went to Hops, and these two-
children were afterwards joined by Justice (the
doctor’s little boy), and as I saw the three
children with such prophetic names standing
together, I could not help thinking that
Patience, Hope, and Justice were not on board
that ship without signification.
Well, my dear Scot, the memorable night
came at last, and as I sit looking at your J ‘ace,
it brings back to my mind that of your father’s
on the 24th August, 1853. You are so like
what he was then, only a few years older; and
in Hilda’s face, I see that of her Aunt Libby,
who was about her age then.
The weather had been most tempestuous
the whole previous day. Our beautiful
“ Meridian ” bad been tossed upon the waves,
which seemed mountains high; we would
descend into valleys of the deep and up
again, until many of us were so sick and ill
that our only comfort was in bed. Most of the
children were in bed before six o’clock, and at
twenty minutes to seven, the chief officer said
to the second mate :
“ There is an awful squall coming from the
south,” as he saw a black cloud in that
quarter. (That black cloud proved to be the
Island of Amsterdam, into which we were fast
running.)
At that time the sea was raging
and washing over the decks. The mate had


gone into his cabin to look after his clothes.
The captain was at his tea, thinking no doubt
that his officers were at their duty, but it is
believed that no one was then on deck but the
man at the wheel. Mothers were busily en-
gaged putting their little ones to bed, and not
a soul on board dreamt what a fearful calamity
was about to befall them.
Oh ! I never shall forget the rolling, rocking
motion of the ship as she got in the breakers.
The raging sea now struck her, and she began
to roll and toss and tremble ; and now another
and another sea stmck her, and she shivered
from stem to stern as if a large sea monster
had taken hold of her in his jaw and was
shaking her piecemeal.
I cannot tell you indeed, no one could
describe the awful terror and confusion which
followed after the vessel struck. After the
first wail and terrible shriek had subsided,
there was no exciting lamentations, but a
heart-rending, smothered agony which soon
settled down into a mute despair, for the
continual bumping of the ship upon the rocks
told too clearly she was on a reef.
Now, a huge rock had appeared through the
ship s side into my cabin, and the sea began to
pour in by tons weight and every cabin to the
leeward fell in. Ours was on that side, and,
being in bed at the time, I was up to the neck
in water, and was extricated by my husband
and the ship’s carpenter with great difficulty,
and it was not till they had dragged me over
the table and had got clear from the shattered
fragment of what had been a moment before
our snug little cabin, that my breath returned ;
and then I began to realise what it all meant.
In looking round, I saw a picture of a terror-


•stricken group —fathers and mothers holding
on to the ship’s beams with one hand, while
with the other they held up their half-naked
little ones, waiting with calmness for the last
moment. Not one person expected to live the
night through.
There was one lamp in the ’tween decks
which threw a shadowy glimmer around as it
was tossed about until it was nearly extin-
guished. Ever and anon, as the vessel con-
tinued bumping upon the rocks, tearing out
her beams and shattering the glass and
crockery into fragments, could be seen even in
this semi-darkn6ss the pale faces of the
children, gazing with intense dismay upon
their agonised parents, whose hope was
gone.
Just at this time a pair of young arms were
clasping me round the neck, and some one was
weeping bitterly. I could hardly see who it
was, but knew her sweet voice. It was your
Aunt Libby, who had come to tell me her
Grandma had passed away (but the dear old
lady had only fainted, and lived many years
after, as you know.)
Two hours passed thus, and the thundering
of the breakers became deafening ; yet, as they
receded, occasionally could be heard a voice in
prayer, or some one calling out for assistance.
There was one voice which said “ Will some
one come to help me ? I am jambed in here;
oh ! I have been a wicked wretch, but don’t
let me die thus.” The cargo had shifted, and
jambed a lady in between two pianos. No one
could get at her’, but as the vessel broke up,
she contrived to extricate herself.
Again there was another awful shivering of
the wreck, and soon after came a terror-


stricken man carrying a candle which he
sheltered with his hat. The little light which
it gave showed that his face was as pale as
death. He came to tell us that the cook and
his “ cook-house ” had been washed into the
sea. Oh, how the sailor’s voice trembled as
he said, “ The cook has clean gone, house and
all.”
You see, dear children, the evil one got him
at last. Although that wicked man had shut
himself in his galley he could not hide away
from the enemy whom he worshipped. The
man with the light disappeared and for a long
time no human voice was heard, only the
roaring of the sea and the splitting up of our
ocean home.
The carpenter w r as standing near me, holding
on to the beam above his head. He had
been in continual prayer until the late inter-
ruption, and he now commenced again. Ido
not remember all his words, but they were
something like these:
“ My God, my God, O Thou who canst still
the waters, look down upon me and these Thine
erring children in pity and mercy, and let us
not be cut off in our sins ; but do Thou stretch
forth a helping hand and save us from this
frightful death, and if Thou, great and
mighty God, will but spare our lives a little
longer, we vow to devote the remainder to Thee
and Thy cause, to forsake sin and live wholly
unto Th'>e.”
I am sure God heard that prayer, foi after it
was uttered, Mi.. Tulloch, the second mate, and
Mr. Worthington, the third officer, came to us
and said, “ The mast has fallen towards the
rocks and if the wreck will only hold out
until morning, there is yet hope.” But a few r


minutes later, the same men cried out that
the vessel was beginning to break up amid-
ships and that we must all remove to the other
part of her.
Now commenced a scene of great excitement,
and a rush for dear life. The ladder-like steps
by which we had to ascend had shifted their
position, and now hung by one side only, and
it was up this side we had to climb, while the
other side hung in air. It was bad enough for
the men, most of whom had on boots, but for
your dear grandma and her mother and myself
and others, who had been in bed and now
only in our nightgowns, made heavy by being
saturated with salt water, it was a more diffi-
cult performance.
However, God gave us strength for the day.
I must here tell you that several men held on
to the top of the ladder while w r e mounted.
They were Mr. Tulloch, the second officer, and
Mr. Worthing; on, the third mate ; and a sea-
man, named Snow, whose cool judgment can-
not be too highly praised. Through the aid
of these three brave men we found a safer
place; and with shivering limbs and bleeding
feet, amidst the noise of the elements we made
our way over the broken timbers into the
-cuddy.
As the last person entered that place the
ship broke in half. By this time it must have
been midnight, and darkness reigned supreme.
The scene which presented itself, in this the
only part of our once noble ship, was truly
terrible. Women and children, and also men,
appeared to have become paralyzed with fear.
One looked into their faces and could not re-
cognise them. Most of them were silently
supplicating our Heavenly Father, and I should


think many persons prayed that night who
probably had never prayed before.
About this time, some composite candles
were discovered in the stewards’ pantry. These
were passed round to several persons; two
were given to my husband, one of which he
lighted ; the other he put into his pocket for
future use.
In a corner of the saloon, several foreign
gentlemen were grouped, one confessing his
oins to another; he confessei having com-
mitted an awful deed before he left his home.
It appeared that at one time he had lost his
property by gambling, and he knew he should
have more when a certain relative died ; so to
■obtain it, he hastened that relative’s death and
got the property. Now that he was every
moment expecting to meet his victim face to
face, his conscience smote him, and caused him
to confess his sins to his friend. I have often
hoped that he repented, but as he did not
■come to Sydney with us, I have lost sight of
him and am not able to judge whether his
maturer years have been any improvement on
his early days. 1 heard, however, some years
ago that he was a solitary wanderer in the
South Sea Islands, without home and friend-
less, and now in all probability the feathery
leaves of the cocoa-nut wave over his grave.
We had already been nine hours holding on
to the wreck, waiting for daylight to reveal our
position. Alas! what a position! But you
will ask where was the poor captain all this
time ? Could not he do something ? Ah, no ;
he had not been seen since the ship struck,
when he rushed to the wheel exclaiming, “ Oh,
my poor Meridian I” and was never seen


again. A Swiss gentleman is supposed (o have
been washed off the deck at the same time.
How we waited and prayed through these
long dreary hours, wondering what the light
would bring! and just as morn was breaking,
we saw the high cliffs of Amsterdam Island
rising in a perpendicular wall of three or four
hundred feet in height; at the same time we
heard loud shouts from the shore. It was the
voices of those poor sailors who had clung to
the mast throughout the night, and when it
fell the men had bfen thrown off upon the
rocks. They were now shouting to ascertain
if any of the passengers yet remained alive on
the wreck.
We heard the joyous sound through the
continual noise of the bursting waves and
resolved to answer it, and with one breath set
up such a cry the like of which, I think, was
never heard before. Their answer came back
more joyously, for they were happy to learn
that all had not perished.
And now that daylight had come, our
business was to try and get away trom our
shattered barque as quickly as possible. The
only means of communication from the
wreck to the shore was cross the fallen
mast. One sailor had with great difficulty
taken over two children, but I was the first
woman who crossed the dancing bridge, and
can well remember to have bade my
husband farewell, for we never expected to
meet again. Others, too, took passionate
farewells of one another. There were
tenderly-nurtured females clinging to each
other and crying in the bitterness of
despair, for few among those timid girls and
delicate women could face the appalling


sight, which the fallen mast presented,,
without the most terror.
The third mate took my hand to help me
over the broken spars which everywhere
lay about. He said “The waves have
receded and will be back again in a minute.
You are now alone upon the mast, and must
fly.” You will not wonder that I hesitated
when beholding the black rocks, which
seemed so far ahead, and then the mast by
which they were to be reached; the tos-
sing sea below and the mountains of white
breakers behind, which made the stoutest
heart quake. But it was for life or death,
and when Mr. Worthington said again
(imperatively this time') “You must fly,” I
can remember nothing more until the sailor
Snow received me on the rocks with shouts
of praise and commendation that I had
crossed in safety.
I do not attribute this to my own
strength, coolness or courage; it always
seems, when looking back to that time, that
it was the hand of the Lord or the spirit of
my mother which helped me over. I can
never remember my bare feet touching that
mast; it was as if wings were given for the
time. Many of those that followed were
washed into the sea and rescued with great
difficult}', and among them was your dear
aunt Frances. Oh, how we should rejoice
that God has spared her so long. You see.
He knows His own, and that she is always
working in this cause, and may she long be
spared to continue it.
The rocks or boulders on which we
alighted were, some of them, as large as
Coerwull Academy, and after breathlessly


climbing one of them to avoid the relentless
waves, which chased each other in quick
succession, the first object I saw was
“ Bessie,” a poor trembling pig that had
been washed up alive, and beside her lay
“Black Jack,” the captain's black boy;
poor fellow, he was dreadfully cut and
bleeding, and tears were running down his
handsome face. I said, “Poor Jack, are you
hurt ?” but at that time he thought not of
his wounds. All he could sob out was,
“My massa, my poor massa.” In the
hollow of the rocks a little further on sat
Hope Guyton, nursing her baby sister, who
was only a month old. I was glad to make
this hollow my creep-hole and hide away,
as the rough rocks had ribboned my drip-
ping night clothes.
Soon after the sailor Snow brought Mrs.
Guyton to her children. I could not recog-
nise her, she was so changed by the terrors
of the night. We saw from our peep-hole
the passengers still escaping and being
fished out of the sea, and the bales of rich
cargo bursting open on the rocks, and by
and bye. a Mr. Taylor approached us,
having his arms laden with men’s new
trousers. He said a bale had just split up
at his feet and that they belonged to his
sex, but he supposed we would not mind
putting them on, and at once threw several
pairs down the hole. We chose the most
suitable for each.
Mrs. Herniman, the captain’s widow, by
this time had joined ns, and she also put on
a pair, and found them very comfortable.
It must have been ab( ut ten o'clock in the
morning before all the saved assembled on


the rocks, and what a pitiable sight it was
to see men, women and children just as they
had left their beds shivering with cold, for
it was so intense that we expected every
moment to perish from it.
But God who does not try us more than
we can bear, mercifully sent high and dry
upon the rocks several hales of red woollen
serge shirts, such as the gold-diggers of that
time used to wear. Several of these were
given to each person, and all were soon
equipped in those red shirts, which made us
look like soldiers. The men had been
searching among the wreckage hoping to
find something eatable, but all that could be
saved was one bag of biscuits, saturated
with salt water ; a few tins of herrings and
a cask of spirits of wine, which most of the
sailors drank until some of them were quite
intoxicated and rolled about the rocks like
madmen. For such self-indulgence many
had cause to grieve long afterwards, as they
were maimed and wounded. The drinking
■of such stuff only inflamed those men’s
wounds.
As night approached, I saw Mr, Guyton
leaving the wreck with two bottles of wine
hung from his neck with string. He made
his way to our creep-hole, then placed the
bottles of wine in a hole at feet, saying
as he did so, “We must be careful with it
as it might help to keep a little life in some
of us before long, and you being here will
mark the spot where it is put,” little dream-
that the eyes of a“Fagon” had already
noted the spot. As night came on we
longed for food, or even a drink of water.
No one had tasted anything since the day


before, but then no one knew where to get
fresh water. The men had been collecting
piles of wood from the broken cases and
tried to light a fire, at a place some dis-
tance from where the women sat, but we
could see them as the flames leaped up,
giving the reflection of their faces and the
brightness of the red shirts (which made a
romantic but melancholy picture.)
The breakers were still roaring and roll-
ing in furiously, occasionally covering us
with white foam. From sheer exhaustion
and weariness, I fell asleep, lying with my
right ear upon the rocks. I cannot tell you
how long sleep lasted. When awakened,
your grandmother had got hold of one arm,
Mrs. Guyton the other, and Mrs. Herniman
was pushing a man off my head, at the
same time calling out that “ Fagon ” had
thrown himself across my head to reach
over to get the wine at our feet, and he
succeeded. The night was dark, no one
could see. It wa« my struggling body
which caused Mrs. Herniman to feel for my
head, when she caught hold of the man. He
was known as the only thief on board,
whictx was the cause of h ; s cabin being
named, “Fagon’s Cave,” and he was the
first of the passengers who died after
arriving in Sydney.
We had been forty-eight hours upon these
rocks. Our ship had gone to the bottom
with £25,000, and the sea was fast en-
croaching upon us. Fortunately Mr. Hen-
derson had found a water keg and with
others discovered water pouring down the
cliffs. Mr. Taylor picked up some beer
bottles and cleverly broke one to form a


■tumbler, which did not answer as well as a
whole bottle, and wo all got a delicious
drink. After that a few sardine tins were
picked up; they were opened, the fish eaten
by the fortunate searcher and afterwards the
tins were used as drinking cups.
The next great anxiety was the thought
of getting away from this wretched spot.
Men were collecting the ropes which were
rapidly being washed away, while other
men went round to try and find some way
by which they could ascend the perpendicu-
lar face of the cliff. It was a place some-
thing like the Grap, at the South Head, only
it was one hundred and forty feet higher
Monsieur Rebullet, a French gentleman
who had travelled much over the Swiss
mountains, said he would make the at-
tempt. Rolling long ropes around his body
he made a sling with his bandana and began
the ascent.
Now, to make you understand how Mon-
sieur Rebullet climbed the dizzy height by
the aid of his silk pocket-handkerchief, I
will try to describe the kind of handkerchie
the bandana is. It is made of the stronges
silk, and about three feet square and of al
the colours in the rainbow. The silk easily
adhered to the rugged rocks. Now, just
think with what anxiety and excitement we
watched Mons. Rebullet throw his silken
sling from one projecting crag to another
with all the cunning of a Swiss mountaineer
and pull himself up, until he was lost in the
distance, when he would unfurl his bandana
and wave it to us below like a flag, which
gave the idea of a little bird shaking its
brilliant plumage.


When he reached the top of the cliff the
bright bandana was still the signal of his
position to those who were following below.
When Rebullet reached a spot which was
more suitable to climb, he lowered the ropes,,
having tied the ends to rocks above. Mr,
Scottock was the next to ascend, which he
did by the aid of Rebullet’s rope, alse
taking more with him, which he also tied to
a rock on the top. When they had three
ropes, the centre one was tied round each
person’s waist in turn and gently pulled by
those above. These were the only means
by which we could ascend that terrible wall
of over three hundred feet. Many received
wounds and hurts which they have carried
to their graves.
I well remember when my turn came to-
ascend. A kind sailor named Nelson (a
memorable name indeed) —the great hero
himself could not have been more heroic
than was this Nelson—after my husband
and I took farewell of each other, tied the
rope round my waist and placing a rope in
each hand bade me keep my feet flat
against the face of the rock and pull myself
up by the ropes in my hands, while those
on top gently pulled the rope fastened
round my waist. Oh, how well I remember
the painful emotion that passed through me
as I began the ascent, yet felt sure that God
who had brought us through so much
suffering would not now forsake us knowing,
it is written that—
“As thy day is, so shall thy strength
beA It was so now, I never lost conscious-
ness. I can even now remember the en-
couraging cheers of my husband, Nelson,.


and others as I began the ascent, and after-
wai’ds when all sound had died away and I
hung suspended in the air, for a few
minutes a feeling came over me that I
was the only being left in the world. Oh,
it was terrible, that loneliness, and soon
after a large bird flew out from a fissure in
the rock. This startled me into a rapid
movement, and on an on I went again, until
I saw the hands of the men stretch over the
top of the cliff to drag me over the ledge of
rock.
There were strong men Avho had gone up
before me who were still lying unconscious.
I was placed down beside them, and a French-
man brought a bottle of water and poured some
down my throat; he was extremely kind and
polite. He then went to help the next climber,
who was Miss M‘Kenzie ; then the next one was
Mr. Armstrong, who had one of his arms
broken, when the mast fell. Then followed
my husband. As we recovered the fatigue of
climbing, we got up and looked about for some
minutes. It seemed as if I had awakened from
a dream which was anything but pleasant;
such a strange place was this arid and desert
Island of Amsterdam, with its three tiers of
rocky snow-capped mountains rising one above
another.
No vegetation was to be seen, except a
species of reed, resembling the bamboo, and it is
supposed no human foot had ever trodden there
before. It was the winter season, and in-
tensely cold. Fortunately, there was now
plenty of water. We could scoop it into the
hollow of our hands, and drink it from them.
We were all very cold and famished with
hunger, and would have been glad of the


■smallest piece of the meat which that man
threw overboard to the sharks. It was at this
time that one of the sailors said he was sure
there were wild hogs on the island. Hardly
had the words escaped him, when he drew
some matches from his pocket and set fire to
the tall reeds. In less than a minute (the wind
being boisterous) we were surrounded by
flames, and bad again to run for our lives.
“Fly, fly to the brook,” said the thoughtless
man who had done the mischief, and as quick
as thought we turned and fled to the water-
course. In our flight we were overtaken by
the darkness of the night, for in that part of
the world night seemed to come on so rapidly
that it was like a dark veil thrown suddenly
over the land, and we could not see the deep
watercourse, which ran foaming from the
snow-covered mountains, until we were precipi-
tated into it.
Fortunately, we alighted on a broad flat
rock, wide enough to hold us. There w T ere four
of us in that position all night. Mr. Arm-
strong, who had his arm broken; Miss
M‘Kenzie, whom my husband saved from .the
fire by dragging after himself; and I, with a
broken knee and lame foot. We dared not
move for fear of the flames on one side, the
wild hogs on the other, and the gurgling water
at our feet. Ah! how we mourned our un-
happy fate, and in the agony of the time
poured forth imprecations on the head of that
foolish man who had caused so much more
misery.
Now we know that what he did was right;
for the very circumstance of his tiring the reeds
proved our salvation. At the time the sailor
struck the match he said, “I hope some lucky


skipper out at sea will see the flames of the
smoke,” and it was as he wished. The smoke
was seen many days after. Well, after a ter-
rible night of cold and suspense, the day broke
as suddenly as the night before had come on ;
and when the sun rose he revealed to us again
the three tiers of mountains rising one above
the other in snowy grandeur.
At the top of each mountain is a crater, the
island being of volcanic origin; and at one
time it had b«en in a state of fusion, which
could be seen by its porous rocks. These vol-
canoes are supposed by many to have been long
exhausted ; even Humboldt thought so.
When we got out of the brook and rejoined
our fellow-sufferers, we could scarcely recog-
nise them. They were so begrimed with
smoke, and had each passed a night similarly
to ourselves, but they were in the better spirits,
at the prospect of getting something to eat. A
hatful of charred birds as small as sparrows,
which had nests in the reeds, had been picked
up, and when a leg came as my share I
thought it a delicious morsel, hunger being
the only sauce. That day, Bessie, the live
pig, was hauled up the cliff, also a dead one
and a painted hip-bath, which was filled with
water, and the dead pig placed in it, and some
of the reeds lighted and put underneath, to
make the water in this strange saucepan boil.
This you may imagine took a long time, aye,
many, many hours to accomplish.
The hungry people could scarcely wait until
the pork was ready ; some of them went over
to the boiling pig and helped themselves from
the bath to boiling liquor, and drank it as they
would tea, although it was only flavoured with
the white paint from the bath. However, in


the evening, the meat was cut up, the pieces
were handed round by the long bristles, be-
cause naturally we had neither knives nor
plates, and were only too thankful to get the
pork any way. Little Patience Herniman said
to her mother, “ Mamma, how are we to eat
this meat without plates or forks ? Are we to
hold it by the long hairs ?”
There is one circumstance which caused me
to have a vivid remembrance of the day on
which the pig was cooked. While lying down
behind a rock, concealed by tall reeds, with
Miss M‘Kenzie seated near me in such a way
as to thoroughly hide me from observation, she
whispered, “ George H. is staggering up to
where we are; he looks so fierce that I feel
afraid of him; he is quite drunk. What can
he be about with that pistol for ?” He had a
pistol in his hand, and as he approached he
asked her where some person was whom he
swore he was going to shoot. He did not
mention the name, but described the person.
I had a presentiment of evil, and knew the
man was describing my husband, who was with
many others helping to cook the pig by keep-
ing up the fire. George H. had scarcely
turned his back when we spread the alarm.
Miss M‘Kenzie fled one way, I another, and
we were just in time to warn my husband as
the drunken ruffian staggered up to where he
was. Others came to our assistance, and this
savage man was cowed.
None of the children could fancy that strange
island; it was such a wild place. Little Charlie
Henderson said to his mother, “Mamma, it
this place Sydney, because if it is, I don’t like
Sydney ?”
This night the men tried to erect a tent


with one of the large sails, found upon the
rocks and hauled up the cliff and dried. We
were all hoping to be under cover, as the poor
little children suffered intensely from the bitter
cold. The wind was too tempestuous, and it
fell as soon as it was up. However, the sail
had spread out in its fall, and most of the
sufferers crept beneath it, and so again we laid
down on the bare rocks, the sharp points of
which pierced our flesh and poisoned it
wherever they touched it.
The next day our only food consisted of the
crumb of a little mouldy biscuit that had been
soaked with salt water. During this day, to
my great joy I heard that one woman had
found a needle sticking in her dress, and an-
other, who had been fortunate enough to be
dressed on the night of the wreck, had dis-
covered a reel of cotton in the pocket of hers.
These I borrowed, and made a skirt out of two
red shirts, and now with one red shirt and the
red skirt I was completely dressed, and must
have looked like a big Eed Hiding Hood. It
gave some pleasure to be able to move about
the Island, when before I was only too glad to
get out of sight.
I used to go to the edge of the cliff and gaze
out upon the Indian Ocean, sometimes watching
the huge whales as they rose in the sea spout-
ing up water which resembled grotesque foun-
tains. I would often gaze and gaze, trying to
look far beyond the horizon into the homes of
those dear friends in Old England, and wonder
if they would ever know our bleaching bones
were scattered over that island, for now
nothing but starvation stared us in the face.
The little dead pig had been consumed by one
hundred and five mouths. The live one had


■wandered away, and could not be found. It
was hoped that her expected litter would pro-
vide food for a few days, but that hope was
blighted by her disappearance.
There is no doubt that “ Bessie ” was saved
by a wise Providence that so few of us have
faith in. It must have been her progeny
which had overrun the island with pigs, as was
reported in a Sydney newspaper a few years
ago, when the French took possession of the
iiland. The few provisions that had been
saved and placed high on the rocks, to be
hauled up the cliffs in the morning, had all
been washed away. The men all worked until
exhausted to collect what they could, when
darkness overtook them. In the morning
nothing was left of the rich cargo or of the
beautiful “ Meridian ” or her captain. All
had gone down, even (it was reported) the
twenty-five thousand sovereigns which were
coming to the Sydney banks in boxes had dis-
appeared.
We were in this miserable situation, and the
expression of mute despair had settled on every
countenance. Hope seemed gone for ever,
when, amidst the silence of that sad group,
there arose a voice which seemed to electrify
everyone. It was a woman’s voice which
shrieked out the words,
“ A ship ! a ship!”
Some thought she had gone mad, but it was
not so; it was only the reaction from despair to
joy. The little speck she saw on the horizon
awakened new hope in that mother’s breast.
It told her that the children then clinging round
her would not perish on that lone island. It
told us that God had heard our prayers. The
news spread like wild-fire. Every man, woman


and child took off the red shirts and waved
them in the air to attract the notice of tho
stranger. By and bye the ship neared the
island ; every breath was suspended.
“See, see!” they cried, “she waves her
flag ; she dips her ensign ; thank God, thank
God, we are at least seen.” The vessel proved
to be a whaler, the “ Monmouth ” from the
United States of America, and commanded by
Captain Ludlow. His whaling season had not
yet commenced; he was sailing round the
island and saw the smoke from the burning
reeds, which still smouldered round the cliffs,
and thinking the volcanoes had broken out he
put in nearer to ascertain if this were the case.
As he placed the glass to his eye, he was seen
to turn pale, and then heard to exclaim,
“My God, my God, it is a wreck. Our
whaling season must now be over, and we must
try to save those poor soldiers.” The red shirts
he mistook for soldiers’ coats. When we saw
he answered our signals nothing could express
our thankfulness, nor words convey the solem-
nity with which we sang, “Praise God, from
Whom all blessings flow.”
But hope thus implanted was doomed to a
long deferment. A. gale sprang up, and the
ship had to be put off the island. All that
day, and the next, and the next passed, and
Captain Ludlow could scarcely hold his own,,
much less help us. Every hour we became
fainter and weaker. We would strain our eyes
watching over the sea to try to catch a
glimpse of the returning vessel. We thought
she had left us to die there, uncared for and
alone.
But no ; on Wednesday, the 81st of August,
we again saw far out upon the still foaming


waves (not a ship), but a little whale boat, at
the head of which sat the captain of the
whaler. He waved a flag, and told us by every
sign in bis power that it was impossible for
him to approach those high cliffs, and indicated
that the other side of the island was the only
possible way of embarking. He, then, at the
risk of his own life and the safety of his boat’s
crew, returned to the other side of the island.
He there landed one of his sailors, telling him
to “ go and meet those poor soldiers, and say I
will not forsake them.”
The promptitude and practical sympathy
which Captain Ludlow displayed does him
honour, and all must feel that such a man is
an honour to any nation. You can well
imagine we were not in a very fit state to take
a journey of twelve miles ; but excitement lent
strength to our sinking limbs, aud we started
off in different parties, traversing those rugged
rocks and mountains. So dangerous was the
way that one false step would have been certain
destruction. We thought to have reached the
ship that night, but, oh ! how bitter was the
disappointment.
Darkness overtook us, and we were glad to
crouch by any rock to protect us from the
pitiless rain, which was so bitterly cold that we
had to put our fingers in our mouths to keep
them from freezing. The next day we started
off again, and were joined by Isabella carrying
big baby Walter on her back. I fancy I cna
see the brave girl now, and note the care she
took of her charge, and how quickly she
pacified him when he cried in his baby fashion
for a “ piece.”
Once when the way had become unusually
dangerous, we had to leap wide chasms, fling-


ing ourselves over the edge of the cliff, only
bolding on by a handful of reeds. At one
place the gap was too wide for anything but a
bird to cross, so we had to make a detour in
land to where the chasm narrowed enough to
enable us to leap across. Isabella, with your
uncle on her back, took the first leap, and on
and on she went, soon joining the party ahead
of us. Soon afterwards Mr. Lytwick overtook
us, and proposed that my husband should be
one of the pioneers, and of course, it would
have seemed almost like mutiny to have re-
fused.
So Mrs. Herniman, Patience and I were
often far behind, as we could not get on so
fast as those who were not wounded. There
was, of course, no beaten track. We had to
fight our way through the tall reeds, and would
often sink to the earth from exhaustion and
fatigue, and pray to God to send death to re-
lieve us from our sufferings. Sometimes we
took it in turn to cheer each other. Poor Mrs.
Herniman’s grief at the loss of her husband
was very heavy, and dear little Patience was so
faint at the want of food that she once said,
“ Oh, mamma, if we could only have a piece
of that meat, which that man threw overboard
to the sharks, how nicely we should get on, or
if papa had only been spared to us, we could
have borne all then.”
Thus we went on, one minute fainting, the
next buoyed up with hope, trusting in God’s
infinite justice and mercy. We patiently toiled
on in this weary journey four days. Once the
way became unusually dangerous. We had to
■climb rocks, and then descend in a black,
rocky valley, and finally lost the way.
We laid down to die, our cut feet, which


were bleeding, making it too painful to go on.
We had lain there some time when a kind
sailor came along, carrying two children on
his back. He toH us not to give up yet, for ia
another half-hour we should be in sight of the
ship. He also gave us a drink of water from a
bottle he had slung round his neck. Thus re-
freshed we went on again, but it was a long,
long half hour. We had not proceeded far
when we met my husband, who had become
anxious about us and bad returned to seek us.
When first we caught sight of him, we saw he
was ravenously devouring something which
proved to be the candle be had put into his
pocket the night of the wreck.
It was the thirteenth day after the wreck
that we arrived on the other side of the island,
but no ship was yet there. She had again
been blown away to sea. However, on this
side of the island, to our great joy, we dis-
covered a wild sort of cabbage, which grew on
stalks about six feet high. These were soon
cut down, and (you may easily imagine)
eagerly devoured. But here we suffered ter-
ribly from want of water. There were a few
stunted trees, under which we sought shelter.
About evening time there was a whisper
going round among the passengers that some
sailor had said our next business would be to
cast lots. Mothers began to tremble, as they
knew the children would be the first to be
sacrificed. One mother begged me to take her
little girl and hide her under my body as I lay
under the trees, and poor little Carrie ! she was
only three years old, hut she seemed to under-
stand all about it. Her mother, Mrs. Hender-
son, had several other children to look after-
It was a fearful thought, and added consider-


ably to the distress of the mothers, but the
Lord, in His merciful providence, ordained it
otherwise.
The next morning, the fifth of September,
broke upon us, bright and clear, and the sea
was as calm as a mill-pond. Never was known
such a calm in that place before. There out
in the offing lay the good bargue “ Mon-
mouth, ’’ about three miles from the shore-
The boats were soon lowered, and all eyes
eagerly watched their coming.
When the noble-hearted Captain Ludlow,,
who had risked his own life and ship, and the
lives of his crew, to come to our rescue,,
jumped ashore, and heard from the men who
went to meet him that they were not soldiers
whom he had come to save but so many
women and children who had been exposed, to
heartrending dangers, he wept,—yea, wept big
tears of sympathy for the sufferers. He shook
eachwoman by the hand while the tears were
streaming down his honest face, and in choking
accents said we were welcome to everything on
board his ship. He also said, he too had
a wife and children and could feel as a hus-
band and parent.
He soon broke away from us, saying, “ No
time must be lost,” as he had sailed round that
coast for many years, and never saw the sea so
calm as then. He ordered the women and'
children who could not walk to be carried to
the boats ; and so they were, and ere nightfall
the whole of the shipwrecked people (except
two) were on board the good ship “ Mon-
mouth.”
When Captain Ludlow first landed on the
island, we were told he brought biscuits and
some uncooked fat pork ashore, but I don’t


think the women or children got any of it. All
I remember having seen was a piece of un-
cooked fat pork, which a man had seized, and
was eating with great avidity; and in his
anxiety to get bis mouthful he dropped a large
piece, which was observed by a young girl, who
hastened to pick it up. In the generosity of
her dear, kind nature, she offered some of it to me ;
but I was too faint to touch it. Years after-
wards, when she had become a lady in good
circumstances, and we were chatting about the
past, I mentioned about the piece of pork; she
said, “ That piece of pork was the sweetest
piece of meat I had ever tasted.”
Now, I want you to guess who that lady
was? You can’t. Well, I will tell you; she
was no other than your dear, beautiful Aunt
Libbie, who now, 1 am sure, has found a place
in Heaven, for she was so good, pure and true,
with such a pretty face, that she was named on
board the “ The Meridian ” “ The Pride or the
Barque.”
When all had boarded the good ship “ Mon-
mouth,” the most cordial and humane reception
was given to every one. The captain’s kind-
ness knew no bounds ; he even gave up his
own berth and state room for the acommoda-
tion of some of the ladies. It was so small
that only a few could occupy it. The captain
made his bed on the pantry floor; he had all
the casks, which had been previously made
ready to receive the oil from the whales, knocked
into pieces to make room for the people he had
so nobly saved.
I must here tell you that a whaler is differ-
ently-fitted up to a passenger ship ; it has not
he accommodation, but Captain Ludlow did
his best to make up for deficiencies. He also


«ent a boat’s crew of his strong sailors, who
cheerfully undertook the task, to go over the
island to carry the poor man whose foot was
wounded, and to also get a little child that was
lost. Captain Ludlow repeatedly said he would
never put to sea until, dead or alive, we were
all on board his ship. The officers and crew of
the “ Monmouth " were equally kind.
Now, you will not wonder that I love the
Americans, after such generous treatment.
They were kind and gentle to us all, quite un-
like what we have heard of “ the rough tars,”
and we learnt to love them, if for no other
cause. It would be ungrateful not to do so,
for the sake of Captain Ludlow. Indeed, I can
never think of his kindness without a big lump
coming into my throat, and tears streaming
from my eyes, and with feelings of the deepest
gratitude.
Oh ! how well I can remember our first
■Sunday service on board that dear old “ Mon-
mouth.” The large and beautiful American
flag, with its stars and stripes, was spread over
the binnacle of the ship, and the Bible and
'Church Service placed upon it. All the sailors
and passengers, with their hats off, assembled
round. The tall captain stood erect, with one
hand upon the flag and in the other he held
his hat. There was a solemnity in the expres-
sion of his noble features that must have im-
pressed every one who beheld him. Mr. Luck-
wich (as formerly) read the church service, and
everyone’s heart seemed to be full of thankful-
ness to Almighty God and to this man, the
captain whom he had sent to succour us.
As Captain Ludlow looked upon his fellow
creatures who then surrounded him, —men,
women and children, reduced in a moment from


affluence to the direst poverty,—he must have
felt a solemn satisfaction that he was the in-
strument God had chosen to rescue so many
young people from an awful death. Never
forget, dear children, that your own father was
one of these youths whom Captain Ludlow
saved.
There was an address, which followed the
prayers, given by one of the passengers, which
was no doubt intended to reprove and warn
the listeners, but the tone, the attitude and the
expressions used were so un-Christlike that it
had quite the contrary effect. It was as if the
speaker hated the sinner instead of the sin, and
the words wounded those who were already
bruised. You know our blessed Lord’s admon-
itions were giveji in such a kind and per-
suasive tone that the most hardened sinner
was led to repentance. But on this occasion
cruel reproaches and threatenings were hurled
down upon the offenders’ heads which seemed
to strike them as if by a thunderbolt. There
were no kind lb s uttering blessing and
encouragement which said, “ Go, my children,
and sin no more ” ; but a wrathful spirit was
engendered, which closed the hearts of those
who (had gentler words been used) might, at
that softening time, have been brought in peni-
tence to the foot of the Cross.
Alas ! alas ! how many a lost sheep at that
time might have been brought into the fold
had there been but one gentle shepherd
to lead them in.
On the passage to Sydney, a lady who was-
much beloved by her husband and family
died; also the little baby, and their bodies
were lowered into the sea. That was asa
day on board, and it caused grief to the whol


■ship’s company, as she was much respected.
Can you tell me who that was? Well, she was
your father’s dear mother, and your grand-
mother. Only think how she must have
suffered, when it took her seven days to walk
across that terrible island, a distance of only
twelve miles, which you boys can do in less
than one day.
Many others have passed away since, and of
the one hundred and five but a few of the
adults are left to tell the tale. I am happy to
cell you that many of those children who are
living now have become good and useful men
and women, and must ever feel grateful to the
noble self-sacrificing American, Captain Lud-
low. If time would permit I could tell you
more, having Jonly given you, as I said, the
fringe of some of the events which I experi-
enced, and without any exaggeration, for I can-
not find words to express the awfulness of the
situation of those sad fourteen days and nights.
I have often thought that had each survivor
written his or her experiences on that miserable
island, what a volume of wretchedness it would
have described.
You will see, dear children, what lessons
may be learnt from the incidents here narrated.
Firstly, there is the boasting language of our
poor Captain ; see how his high-fiown words
were brought to nought. Then there was that
man the cook, who used to swear so wickedly.
Can any of you doubt that that he was taken
to where he so often wished to go ? I do not
but firmly believe that on that fearful night,
when the noise of the elements roared the
loudest, when our ship shivered from stem to
stern, amidst the thundering and fury of
the waves the devil’s agent was there seeking


his prey. Then there was the man who waste-
fully threw away good food, for “ Wilful waste
makes woeful want,” It was so in his case.
Oh! how he suffered from an unappeased
appetite. He would tear the reeds with his
teeth and chew them hoping to find sustenance
hut could not.
I have now only to entreat you and all
young people to take a lesson from what I have
been telling you, and be warned in time. Never
swear nor tell lies, nor be cruel to any of God’s
creatures; for the birds of the air belong ta
Him, and above all, never desecrate the Lord’s
Day, but try to forsake every sin and live for
something beyond this world, to be followers of
the Lord Jesus Christ Then will your fives be
happy and prosperous, and when death shall
come you will be able to meet it without regret.
I must not close this narrative without tell-
ing you how Captain Ludlow was rewarded for
his generous and noble conduct, which will
prove to you that kindness and unselfishness
are always appreciated In the first place,
after he had landed all the shipwrecked people,
and again put to sea, we heard that he had met
with remarkable success, and was returning
home a prosperous man, when he would be put
in possession of the various marks of public
gratitude subscribed in his favour in the
different colonies.
I heard that when our late good Queen
Victoria heard how bravely Captain Ludlow
had under such difficulties rescued over one
hundred of her subjects, she sent him £3OO,
and the Royal Humane Society in England
presented him with a gold medal, whilst the
generous merchants in Sydney also subscribed
£ 150 and a gold medal, and the kind people of


Mauritius presented him with a similar sum.
So you see that Providence crowned with an
especial mark of favour the noble and generous
sacrifice Captain Ludlow made in our behalf.
I used to think it was unkind of those people
who were always saying, “ Well, it is all for
the best,” and “ Everything is for the best,”
and “ All things work together for good,” and
so on, and it has taken many years to bring
my mind down to feel that so much suffering was
for our good. But now that years of reflection
have come, and I look back upon those days of
sorrow and humiliation, I feel they were sent
to teach us humility, for is it not a Divine law
that we should all, like our dear Master, Jesus
Christ, be made perfect through suffering ?
If these sorrows have not perfected us, they
may at least have one wholesome effect, that of
teaching us to sympathise and be compassionate
with those who may have to endure the same.
I think it taught many to subdue partly, if not
wholly, some of their pride and worldliness, if
they would only honestly confess it.
Before that calamity happened some of the
passengers were very proud, and kept aloof
from those whom they thought their inferiors
in social position, and one day their pride was
deservedly reproved by some one writing on
their cabin door, “ Dignity Cottage.”
The admonition was not thrown away, and
many and many a time after the wreck how
glad they were to receive the smallest service
from the hands of the roughest sailor, when
but a few weeks before they would have shrunk
from those hands with feelings of repugnance.
I assure you, dear children, that it is scenes
such as I have endeavoured to describe that bring
the conceited minds to view their own littleness


It was decided by Captain Ludlow that he
would take the shipwrecked sufferers to Mauri-
tius ; as he had not sufficient food on board the
Monmouth to supply so many starved people as
far as Sydney ; and thus it happened that we
were nearly four weeks on board the dear old
Monmouth, dear to us all, for was she not a
home for the destitute and a shelter to the
homeless ? Although we have many a time
since been pained by hearing her sneeringly
called “an old tub,” did she not prove
better to- us than our grand clipper ? We got
plenty of good food on board, for there was no
stint of anything Captain Ludlow had ; his only
anxiety was that in our ravenous state we
should eat too much at first, and so become ill.
We can well remember his kindly face, with
such fatherly anxiety depicted on it, when he
saw in our hands the two sweet potatoes given
us as the first food on board, and fancy we hear
him say : “Now, you must have nothing more
than those two potatoes for some time to come;
we must begin to feed you little by little, or
you will become ill, and I want to land you all
safe and well.” Ah, those sweet potatoes were
sweeter than the sweetest mouthful tasted
since.
There was abundance of rice, salt beef, pork,
yams, and biscuits and treacle, which made up
the dietary scale, but the manner of serving
was quite in picnic style, the deck being our
only table, and buckets took the place of dishes ;
meat, rice, yams, treacle and tea were all served
in them; the crown of many a man’s cap served
him instead of a plate, and our drinking cups
were made from the skin of the uncooked yams.
Before the wreck how dreadfully shocked we
should have been at such domestic arrangement,


but we thought nothing of it at this time, and
now we can look back on those scenes with
something like shuddering amusement, although
with great thankfulness.
While waiting “ on and off ” the Island of
Amsterdam for the return of the boat’s crew,
some of the whalers went out fishing in one of
the whale boats, and procured a number of
fish ; among them were several porpoise (which
they had harpooned). These were afterwards
in various ways cooked, and made excellent
food, but there was not the least taste of fish.
It seemed to me more like eating venison than
fish. And so you see instead of proceeding on
our journey to Sydney we were‘ k being taken
many miles back over the Indian Ocean, and
although many strange scenes occurred on
board the American whalex', nothing in parti-
cular happened to mar the general happiness of
the ship’s company. As we neared the Isle of
France, many of the feminine gender began to
grow fidgety about their personal appearance.
Captain Ludlow, ever thoughtful, had a sail
hung in one corner of the ship as a place
especially set apart where the young ladies used
to go and make their toilets ; and by'the aid of
needles and cotton provided lay Captain Ludlow,
and with a great amount of ingenuity, we made
the red woollen shirts into dresses, which had
quite a fanciful effect, and many a grim joke
was passed upon our appearance.
The young girls used to hold long conversa-
tions in their little nook about landing in such
a state and looking such guys, too ! Oh, they
couldn’t do it! But when the time came they
had to do it.
We were now fast approaching the Isle of
France, and discovered that Mr. Worthington,


who, you know, was the third officer of the
Meridian, was a Creole of that Island. His
father was well known there, and many of his
friends were still living there. Worthington
was one of our bravest officer’s, the, first to help
the women and children, and at all times
showing coolness, prudence, and judgment
beyond his years. It was his voice which was
heard amid the roar of the breakers cheering
up the sinking and encouraging the faint-
hearted. He did duty for both captain and first
mate, and was foremost in every good work,
and well-deserved his gold medal. But strange
to relate, he has been wrecked three times,
and each time it has happened on his birthday.
At the time of our wreck he said, “ This is
my birthday, and I was wrecked once before
on my birthday.” We have since heard that
he has again been wrecked, and that was also
on his birthday. He was only a youth of
about 19 or 20, was well educated, and spoke
with great volubility; his eyes were large,
black, and sparkling, and ever seemed to be
asking questions and laughing at the answers
they gave. Indeed, he was quite a young hero
and much admired by the young ladies, and
now that all ceremony of class distinction was
removed by the calamity which made all equal,
he would come and talk freely to the young
ladies of his birthplace, about which we all
now felt a great interest. He would tell them
of his boyish pranks and how he could almost
have “jumped over Peter Bott with joy when
his father told him he should go to sea,” for
he had a great wish to see many countries.
He had seen many since then, but none were
like dear old Mauritius. “Is it anything like
Amsterdam ?” asked a little child who stood


near. “No,” he answered indignantly, for his
national pride was touched; “ nothing like
that beggarly hole, for Mauritius has mountains
as grand as any in the world. Only wait until
we come a little nearer, and I will point them
out.”
The weather was warm, the sea calm, and
the mildness of the air and the good food gave
some slight cheerfulness to our otherwise
aching hearts ; so that by the time we did ap-
proach the Island of Mauritius our spirits had
recovered somewhat of their old sprightliness ;
and we could enjoy the magnificent sight which
was presented to our view on entering the har-
bour of Port Louis.
Those towering mountains, those lofty hills r
covered with dense forests, three peaks which
assume the most fantastic shapes, together
with the luxuriant vegetation, formed a scene
of extreme loveliness. Oh ! such a contrast to
the barren desolation we had left.
“There! there !” cried Worthington. “You
can see the Peter Bott towering above the
other peaks.”
Yes, yes, all saw it; and someone exclaimed,
that the Peter Bott was very like a loaf of
sugar such as we see in the grocer’s shop
window's in London, and the mountain is
sometimes called “The Sugar Loaf.” The
next in height is Le Ponce, so called because
it resembles the shape of a thumb.
The island is situated off the east coast of
Africa, and is said to have been discovered by
the Portuguese in the sixteenth century, but
afterwards was taken possession of by the
Dutch, who named it Mauritius, after Maurice,
Prince of Orange. The Dutch abandoned it in
the year 1712, and then the Prench took


possession, and from thence it received the
name “Isle of France.” They continued to
hold it until 1810, and the name was not again
changed when ceded to the British Crown, but
has retained both Dutch and French appella-
tions, Mauritius and Isle of France. The
nearer we approached, the greater became the
excitement, until we at last entered the har-
bour and anchored off the Bell Buoy, and great
was the surprise of the pilot and health officer
when coming on board to find so many people
on such a small vessel, but our misfortune was
soon explained, and a deputation was then
formed by the elder gentlemen to petition the
Government to give us some place of shelter.
While they were away the “Bell Buoy” was
surrounded by many boats from the shore.
The boatmen all being East Indians were
eagerly inquiring all the news from Mr.
Worthington, who, like all well educated
Creoles, could speak Hindostanee and French
perfectly. The boats and boatmen had a re-
markably clean appearance, and although the
bo*atmen were constantly talking they were at
the same time sewing most industriously, some
making shirts, others sewing pyjamas, and
some embroidery, which they did most beauti-
fully.
From the Bell Buoy we had a good view of
fhe Signal Mountain, which is ascended by a
zig-zag path. A men is stationed there to sig-
nal the approach of ships. He lives in a little
kind of sentry box, which is chained to the
mountain ; many years ago, during a hurricane
season, a former box with a man in it W'as
blown into the sea. Many of the islands in
the harbotir were pointed out, amongst which
and most interesting to us was the Amber


Island, on which Virginia lost her life. Por-
tions of the wreck are said to be still in exist-
ence.
It is strange how many English people per-
sist in saying that the story of “ Paul and Vir-
ginia ”is a fiction ; while the Prench people,
especially French Creoles, believe most im-
plicitly iu the truth of it. But it seems a
tender point with them, for they say the
English would not doubt if an Englishman
instead of a French woman had written the
story. These were the expressions of a French
lady whom I afterwards became acquainted
with, and who wound up her subject by say-
ing with some warmth, “ The Englishman had
a head like vone pig,” from which I inferred
she meant that he was pig-headed.
After some hours’ absence the deputation re-
turned on board the whaler with beaming faces
and thankful hearts, saying, “ Tfiere was no
need to make a public appeal to the sympathies
of the Mauritians on our behalf, for the whole
city is already in tears.” Yes, these generous
people had only to hear the sad account, and
rose in a body to offer every aid and sympathy
in their power. The Government first, then all
the inhabitants —rich and poor, French and
English, American and Hindoo—united in one
common work of love and mercy. At one time
their sympathy rose to such a pitch as to
almost overwhelm us, for like our young Mr.
Worthington they are a warm-hearted, cordial,
hospitable and generous people. They now
tried to outdo each other in kindly feelings.
Merchants left their counting-houses, clerks
their desks, and shopkeepers the stores, to
hasten home and tell their wives and daughters
the sad story. They in their turn hurried rom


house to house getting clothes, followed by one,
two and sometimes three black servants carry-
ing a basket or box in which to put the things
collected for the naked. Theirs was practical
Christianity indeed.
High-born ladies set aside all ceremonious
stateliness in their desire to show the sympathy
of the woman to the woman, not as pompous
dames patronising poor dependents ; they went
as loving sisters of mercy, with gentle words
and pitying eyes, which were as acceptable as
their offerings.
The lazaret was given by the Government
for the accommodation of the shipwrecked, at
which place the ladies of the city visited.
Many of these dear mothers in Israel have long
since passed away to their Heavenly home, but
the memory of their womanly virtues, their
Christian charities, and sisterly love, will ever
remain as a memorial, and are an example to
those generations who follow them. Many a
Mary and Martha, a Lydia and Dorcas—ay,
and even a Deborah too, will be found anjong
the fair daughters of Mauritius. We speak
feelingly, as we lived many months among
them, having there met friends who knew us
in the old country, and we were often invited
to accompany them to different parts of the
island.
It is of some of these excursions that I intend
giving a slight sketch. And will therefore
rapidly pass over the excitement which our
arrival caused in the city of Port Louis; and
of the numerous interesting public meetings
which took place among the hospitable inhabit-
ants ; of their warm admiration of the conduct
of Captain Ludlow, and their substantial
acknowledgment of it; of the affecti-g meet-


ings which took place in the Chamber of Com-
merce, when the room was crowded to excess,
And when, at the latter part of the meeting,
the entrance of Captain Ludlow was perceived,
how the assembly rose en masse, and received
him with a spontaneous burst of applause. The
greatest monarch, or the bravest hero, had
never a warmer reception. But as I said
before, I will pass lightly over these pleasing
remembrances, and try to tell you of some of
the scenes which interested me while living
on that beautiful island, and will begin by
telling you of three of them which made the
most impression on my mind.
Ttie first was the ascent of Le Ponce moun-
tain ; the second a visit to Mount Choisy, a
sugar plantation, and the third when I wit-
nessed the “Yamsee.” Now you must know
that ttie “ Yamsee ” is an* annual religious
festival of the Mohammedans when the burial
of Mohammed takes place. The Indians have
several festivals of this sort, one of which the}'
•call “ Mohurrun.” The English call it
“ Hobson Jobson,” but the one of most im-
portance to Mohammedans is “ The Yamsee.”
Eew Europeans care to witness this festival a
second time, and the abominations which
accompany it will prove to you how much the
poor Indians are in need of missionaries to
teach them Christianity.
We had resided there about a month when
we received an invitation from one of the
French merchants of that city to accompany a
picnic party up Le Ponce mountain, and long
before gun fire (4 o’clock in the morning} we
heard a light rumble of carriage wheels over the
stony road of the causeway. The town andjthe
lazaret (which is the quarantine) is separated


by a causeway about a mile in length. By
“ gun fire ” we were comfortably seated in our
friend’s barouche (a beautiful importation from
France) and rolling over good macadamised
roads through the streets of the city, which
even at that early hour seemed alive with busy
people, chiefly the Indian part of the popula-
tion, half-naked men hastening to their various
employments, some to coal steamers or lump
vessels lying at various wharfs and quays around
the harbour; servants going to market, bearing
large baskets upon their heads, hurrying to
the bazaar to get the pick of the pretty fish
which are so very plentiful, and of all colors of
the rainbow; some clamorously choosing their
pork sausages, which they cooked with toma-
toes and capsicums, and which, together with
rice, make up a rich dish for breakfast. Other
were selecting the beautiful tropical fruits and
vegetables, such as tamarinds, artichokes, dates,
bananas, pineapples, mangoes, custard apples,
green bread, and many other kinds of veget-
ables. And oh, there was such a (latter,
clatter, in the Malabar tongue.
In less than an hour we arrived at the
foot of Le Ponce, and there found the party
waiting for us. We then commenced the
ascent on foot. The ladies were greatly in
the minority, as so many had declined the
invitation fearing the excessive heat and
fatigue of the ascent. But our early start
gave us an opportunity of arriving at the
shoulder of the mountain before the heat of
the day came on. The mountain roads were
good, and the gallantry of the French gentle-
men made the journey easy to us, as their
mountain staves were often used as a sort
of backboard for the ladies.


The gentleman on each side of a lady
would hold an end of the stave and thus
gently push her forward up the steepest
paths, making the journey comparatively
easy; and when at last we all rested near the
peak or shoulder, and began to look about us T
what a grand, glorious, and magnificent
scene presented itself! Nearly the whole
island seemed taken in, in that view. At
one glance you had its length, about 40 miles r
its breadth is about 30 miles
The weather was delightfully calm, as it
usually is there in November, and as far as
the eye could see the great Indian Ocean lay
calm as a mirror, with scarcely a ripple to
lave its shores. There was the beautiful
harbour filled with ships from every clime,
and there, too, the dear old “ Monmouth,”
still at anchor, appearing almost like a speck
in the distance. And there also, far below
us, was the busy city seeming now so quiet,
that but for the occasional murmur which
rose on the air, one would have imagined the
hour of siesta had already arrived. Then
it was so charming to look down the moun-
tain sides upon picturesque ravines, adorned
here and there with sparkling cascades
formed by little water courses, etc.; the
mountain streams which came running play-
full} down, and drippled overe moss-covered
rocks until meeting with other waters, ming-
led together to form the small rivers of the
island.
We were surrounded by dense forests of
luxuriant tropical vegetation, on which mer-
rily twittered and hopped from leaf to
branch the cunning little red-breasted “ car-
dinal,’’ who when caught and put into a cage.


will immediate ly fall down and feign death.
Here nature looked so peaceful that it seemed
indeed perfect rest to us, after the storms
we had encountered. There was the tall
peak of the Peter Bott towering up in all its
majesty, pointing as it were to that God who
made all things, giving a solemnity and quiet
charm to the loveliness of the scene which
reminded one of that “ peace which passeth
all understanding.”
The memory of that delightful spot has
become associated with that wonderful old
German lady, Madame Pfeiffer, who visited
Mauritius before she made her journey to
Madagascar. Refreshments of the most
tempting kinds were spread out by the In-
dians who attended the party. Amongst
the choice dishes, and the favorite too was a
buffalo’s hump (buffaloes were then imported
from Madagascar). After a hearty repast
called “ Tiffin,” the gentlemen started off to
climb some steep rocks to try and reach the
top of the ‘ Thumb,” while the ladies re-
mained to rest. They were, however, soon
interrupted by the approach of two old Mala-
bars, who were seen bowing to the ground in
the most graceful salams. They had toiled
over the mountain in search of wild pine-
apples that grow here to the most extraor-
dinary size, and with which they were heavily
laden, and offered one to us for fourpence.
It was so large that when cut up and the
skin removed the rounds covered a dinner
plate, and of a most delicious flavour, and
much better without the claret and sugar
with which the ladies covered their fruit.
Wine was offered to each of the Malabars,
and their eyes danced and sparkled at the


thought of getting it, but they were in a
great dilemma to know what to take it from,
as their religion forbade them drinking from
any utensil used by Christians. At length
after looking about some time, one of the
ladies hit upon a plan which finally succeeded
and caused some amusement also. Selecting
a leaf from a banana tree, she rolled it into
the shape of a funnel, and the man knelt and
placed the end in his mouth while she poured
the wine in at the open part, not allowing
the bottle to touch the leaf. After a day
ff quiet yet delightful enjoyment, we re-
traced our steps, and by sundown arrived at
a large mansion, situated at the foot of the
mountain, and where we for many weeks
were most hospitably entertained.
Ah ! how well I can remember the happy
faces, the kind and joyous hearts met beneath
that roof; alas! they have all gone now.
Since then a terrible pestilence visited this
beautiful isle, when cholera carried off thou-
sands of its population, when the beautiful
lofty saloons of this mansion became the scene
of sorrow, sickness, and death, when the pol-
ished oaken floors, the long corridor, and
marble vestibule resounded with the footsteps
of those who carried their sinking sick in at
one door, only to be borne out dead by an-
other.
Our next outing was when we visited the
sugar plantation of Mount Choisy. We had
been staying at the Consul’s house, on the
Moka Road, and started from there early in
the morning, and our first strange sight was
on going over the Chain Bridge, which had
only just been erected across the Grand River
and was at that time considered quite a


curiosity; but the only rarity to me was
seeing the river alive with numbers of In-
dians, who were standing in the water wash-
ing clothes. These were called the “ wash-
erer men,” and were washing away with great
energy, loudly clamouring and gesticulating
all the time, twirling and twisting the
clothes around and around above their
heads, then beating them against the stones
and rocks which jutted up in the river, quite
regardless of strings or buttons, which were
flying off in all directions.
The men would occasionally rest from
their labours, and would then exert their
lungs to a great extent, for, oh, dear, there
was such a clatter of wild sounds, and more
excitement than appeared necessary for the
occasion, but this was soon explained. They
had more washing to do than usual. This
was the last washing day for some time to
come, in consequence of it being “ Yamsee
Week,” and they were making all prepara-
tions for this religious festival, at which time
the Indian servants do not care to do work
of any kind. Here Indian women do not
assist in washing, their husbands consider it
a degradation to themselves to allow their
wives to either wash, iron, and say if the
wife takes care of me little ones and carry
the water for domestic use, she has done her
part. It appeared rather comical to us to
say “ our washerman” instead of our washer-
woman.
Indian women look remarkably graceful in
their Oriental dresses; they have such finely
shaped arms, which all who can possibly af-
ford cover with silver bracelets. Many of
them have most beautiful features also, and


would Jook very pretty if they did not dis-
figure their faces by inserting jewellery into
the flesh just below the eye, and the horrid
fashion of wearing a ring through the nose.
They have also a disagreeable habit of chew-
ing “ betel nut,” which gives them the ap-
pearance of ever spitting blood.
The Creole Indian women (those born
there) generally take the European style in
dress, which gives them quite a nondescript
appearance, and in their desire to look more
like the “ white ladies” they use a great
amount of violet po*wder. When passing
through “ Black Town” in the evening, you
would see them seated at their doors dressed
to the height of fashion, wearing a great
amount of finery, pink, blue, red or white
muslins, or sometimes silks, but you would
never see them with either stockings or shoes
on, and the least breath of wind will waft a
perfect cloud of powder from their faces.
But 1 am digressing again, and you are
anxious to hear of Mount Choisy. Well, the
day was delightful, although it was nearly
the middle of summer. The heat was not
excessive, being greatly modified by the re-
freshing breeze which came wafting over the
surrounding ocean. Two or three slight
showers which fell during the day cooled the
air and laid the dust, greatly adding to the
pleasure of the journey. After driving
through Port Louis we found the country
roads of a reddish colour, remarkably good,
and beautifully adorned on each side with
waving green trees, so that you could easily
have imagined being driven through some
lovely park. There were the tall palm trees,


mangoes, date, bananas, the feathery-leaved
cocoanut, the tall bamboos (such as you have
seen in Sydney Botanical Gardens), waving
gracefully from side to side, or meeting across
the road as if in friendly embrace, and occa-
sionally saluting the delighted travellers as
they journey along; then the little Indian
houses dotted here and there, seeming buried
in trees; then the Indian women in their pic-
turesque dresses, with the water jar poised
upon their heads, gracefully marching along
with the dignity of a queen —made up a pic-
ture, which to a stranger like myself, so
lately from London, appeared romantic and
striking in the highest degree.
We alighted at the Gate of Pauplemousse,
and there walked round those lovely botanical
gardens. There we saw almost every spe-
cies of tropical vegetation; the clove and nut-
meg trees were very handsome, and it was
here too I first saw the chameleon gliding
from leaf to leaf with great rapidity, then
hiding itself among the branches or roots of
the trees. There were several French ladies
and gentlemen in the garden—-no doubt a
picnic party, as one of the gentlemen seemed
to be amusing the others over a fire making
pancakes, and laughing heartily. We next
visited Paul and Virginia’s tombs, and wished
to carve our names on the stones, but could
not find an inch of space, for they were so
thickly covered with names by the hundreds
of visitors who had gone before us.
After a drive of about two hours, we knew
we were approaching a sugar plantation by
meeting several Chinese coming from the sta-
tion, heavily laden with mats of sugar, which


were suspended by strings attached to yokes
borne across their shoulders. Thus burden-
ed, they hurried along the road to Port Louis,
where many of them kept small lolly shops,
and they would sometimes work industriously
for years to acquire a little property, but
their love of gambling was so great that they
have often lost their all in one night.
Arriving at the plantation we were most
kindly received by the French superintendent
and his agreeable wife, neither of whom could
speak a word of English. It was a most in-
teresting sight to witness the process of sugar-
making. We saw the cane growing in the
fields, and the crushing and boiling; we
watched the black boys wading up to their
knees in vats of warm sugar or syrup and
saw them skimming off the scum, pouring it
into the next vat; then we were peeping into
the deep wells of black treacle, then we wit-
nessed the process of refining, and saw it
as white as snow. But unfortunately that
day the process was not in full working order,
as many of the black servants had already
gone to prepare for the coming “ Yamsee”;
yet the day wore on delightfully, each sight
proving we had yet something to learn, or
giving a practical lesson not to be obtained
from books.
When the long expected Yamsee week did
come, the aspect of all things seemed changed,
the streets of the city appeared a perfect
chaos, for confusion reigned supreme. Night
after night could be heard the rumble of the
Indian drums and the monotonous sound of
the tomtoms. The glaring light from their
many hundred lanterns and flaming torches


lighted up the hitherto dark streets (for the
town was not then lighted with the gas); wild
cries broke the usual stillness of night, for the
town had been extremely quiet after dark, as
the inhabitants usually went to bed, but this
was the exception.
Mohammed had to be buried again, and
the Indian inhabitants are supposed to be
present on that occasion. The grand burial
scene does not take place until the end of the
seventh day. I was very curious to see the
sight, and I will try to describe it to you.
The Mohammedans commence preparing for
this festival eight or nine months before it
comes off, and waste a great amount of money
and time in making mock temples, which
they call pagodas, to be carried along in the
processions. These pagodas have a frame-
work of cane, covered with tinsel paper, rib-
bon and silk of every colour, and when the
lighted candles are placed inside they have
a gay and effective appearance. Some are
said to cost as much as one hundred pounds
each, but they vary in size and design, ac-
cording to the worldly position of the caste
to which they belong. At the end of the
seventh day of the festival these beautiful
pagodas are destroyed by being thrown into
a deep hole which the poor benighted Indians
imagine is the grave of Mohammed.
These ignorant fanatics are mostly through-
out the whole time of the Yamsee in a state
of intoxication, from drinking a spirit dis-
tilled from rice called arrick, or they are
driven into a state of temporary madness
from excitement or opium, which they either
smoke or chew. They consider it quite a


mexit to be wounded or even killed during
the Yamsee, and many are found on the road-
side by the police, bleeding and nearly half-
dead from excessive fatigue or wounds re-
ceived in fighting.
It was arranged that we should meet our
friends at 10 o’clock at night, and accompany
them through the streets to witness the sight.
Accordingly at the appointed hour, together
with a large party, we set forth, and a short
walk found us within the city mingling with
the crowd, which was composed of people
from all nations—English, French, Ameri-
cans, Chinese, Parsees, Hindoos, Bengalese,
Abyssinians, negroes, and Creoles—all decked
out in their gayest finery.
The processions soon began to pass before
us. There were lame beggars, saucy jug-
glers and devotees, Lascars and Hindoos play-
ing thek discordant tomtoms, and there were
several men who had a large sharp-pointed
iron spike thrust through one cheek, and
brought out at the other. These, no doubt,
belonged to that caste who practised self-
torture. Then above all there was to be
seen the great “ Tiger,” which, by the way,
was not a tiger, but a man covered with a
painted skin. Then there were the costly
pagodas decorated with artificial flowers, be-
neath which the Mohammedan priests perfor-
med their incantations. Indeed, it is scarce-
ly possible to remember half that was to
seen on that wild night.
It was not long before shouts and yells
warned us of the approach of the largest pox - -
tion of the procession, and every moment the
noise and tumult increased. The crowd


pressed back and cried, “ They are coming,
they are coming,” and on came the excited
multitude. Hundreds of Hindoos, their
bodies painted different colors, and most
disgusting in appearance, passed before
us, some singing and yelling, others dancing
and waving naked swords above their heads
as if in mock battle; then came others of dif-
ferent castes playing trumpets and pipes of
all descriptions. Then followed large pago-
das, the gold and silver tinsel reflected by a
number of lighted candles. This was fol-
lowed by a vast crowd who carried smaller
temples, others followed bringing with them
long poles, at the top of which was a large
hand shaped out of tin to represent Moham-
med’s hand. Then came a shining temple
carried by four priests, who rested it at the
corner of the street, and went beneath to
mutter some prayers which seemed more like
imprecations.
Again that living mass passed on, and
others took their place bearing upon their
heads gaily painted lanterns, bringing harsher
music than before, such as songs, pipes, tim-
brels, and tomtoms. These were crying and
raving in the wildest Malabar manner. Now
the crowd gathered thicker and stronger;
every moment the music became harsher, the
fighting fiercer, and maddened with drink,
they threw their torches in the air, quite
heedless of the burns which they or their
neighbours might receive. That crowd was
succeeded by another, if possible, more fierce
than the last. Then our friends who un-
derstood the signs, called out, “ The tiger is
coming, and we must now all keep together


or we shall be carried off by the excited crowd
which always attends him, for he is considered
a great prophet and believes if he dies from
his over-exertion during this festival, he is
sure to go to heaven and sit beside Moham-
med.”
Well, on came the tiger walking upon
hands and feet, or as our boys say, “ on all
fours.” He was surrounded by an admiring
group of dancing girls, and in his mouth he
carried a torch lighted at each end, which
sent its flames far into the air, lighting up
his eyes with a fierce glare, making him look
a perfect savage; then there was an immense
tail fastened to the body which was held up
by three men, each of these tailbearers carry-
ing a torch in his mouth.
The tiger seemed perfectly indifferent to
fatigue, although he had already walked thus
through several streets. He had no sooner
come into view than the tumult seemed to
increase tenfold; the terrific yells jarred upon
the ear and the fierce cries struck me with
terror. The continued waving of the glitter-
ing swords, the dancing, shouting, tumbling,
and capering about, together with the increas-
ing wild notes of such discordant music, made
up a scene which is never to be forgotten.
As the vast crowd came down upon us,
thicker and faster every moment, there
seemed to be no escape, but to be jumbled,
tossed up and down, pushed hither and thi-
ther, until death itself should release us. We
of course were separated from our friends,
each carried away by the maddened crowd,
until at length a sudden break at a corner of
a street gave an opportunity to escape; when


away we fled, on and on, until we found our-
selves upon an open space (called the Champ
de Mars) at the foot of Le Ponce, and there
weary of uxie deafening noise, the whirl of ex-
citement, and exhausted with fatigue, we sat
down to rest, and while the calm morning air
fanned our heated temples, we pondered on
the scene which had so recently passed be-
fore us, and prayed that the time would soon
come when faithful preachers of the Gospel
would find favor in the sight of these poor
benighted fanatics.
As our eyes turned upwards, the moon (ob-
scured before) revealed to our gaze the lofty
peak of the Peter Bott, which now as ever
seemed pointing upwards and onwards to that
Heavenly Father who seeth all things, and
who will at His own good time raise up ear-
nest missionaries to accomplish the great
work of Christianising this dark-skinned race,
and they shall then lift a reproach from the
loveliest of the African isles. When the
Lord shall reign triumphant there, every bles-
sing will rest upon the hospitable inhabitants
of the Mauritius.
TO THE CHILDREN OF SUNDAY
SCHOOLS.
Now, my dear young friends, I want you to
do something which will help the missionaries
who often have very hard times. You can
all do that which will help them. Every
little girl and boy may do a little by saving
their pennies for the mission box; it will
only require a little self-denial on your part.
For instance, if you boys desire to buy a new
top or kite, or any other toys, or a girl wishes


for a new doll or another set of tea things,
they must first say to themselves, “ But there
is the mission box; if I spend this money how
can I give to the mission, for does not the
Bible tell us to “ cast our bread upon the
waters, for thou shall find it after many
days,” and my Sunday school teacher is al-
ways reminding me of the mission box, and
I must think of that first.” If every little
child were to give one penny to the mission
box every Sunday each child would be giv-
ing four shillings and fourpence in a year,
and if all the children in your Sunday school
and all the schools in Sydney gave that, what
a grand sum would come from our Sunday
schools for this most laudable purpose.
Now, dear children, I hope you will save
your pennies to aid the missionaries; then
God will be sure to help you in your time of
need, and that will be as casting your bread
upon the waters to find it after many days.
The following verses were written by Mrs.
Moore to the likeness of Captain Ludlow at
the time when the generous Sydney people
were raising subscriptions for him and his
officers, and also for some of the crew of the
“ Meridian.”
TO CAPTAIN ISAAC LUDLOW.
I have a picture in my room, whereon I
fondly love to gaze,
Although it brings back painful thoughts—
the memory of despairing days;
It is a face with noble brow, where stern
though kind expressions beam;
I gaze, and wonder how I’m here ! the past
seems like a fearful dream.


When fainting on a desert isle, had bid fare*
well to home and life,
And thought that, ere another day, my soul
would flee this world of strife,
There, where angry waves were dashing, and
our barque had strewn the shore,
There were mothers wildly pressing their
babes, expecting life was o’er.
Will time these scenes obliterate, or quit my
fancy ever?
O ! no, those haggard looks, those sighs, will
leave me—never ! never !
But God, in all His bounty, sent a helping
heart that braves—-
A gallant man, who struggled hard against
the mighty waves.
He saw our signal, ’twas enough, and instant
the command he gave,
And nobly worked with heart and hand to
save us from an early grave;
He saw the children sinking fast, and men
were crying out for bread;
He saw the women’s silent tears, but none
were like the tears he shed.
He wept —O! that was manly grief, bespoke
a sympathetic heart—
He thought not then of future gains, but
purely acts a Christian’s part:
Paternal and maternal hearts will beat for
him who cheered their grief;
And when they see their children smile, will
pray for him who brought relief.
Yes! Captain Ludlow, great and kind, when-
e’er he dies will leave behind
An honored name, with love combined, to be
exampled by mankind.




