

r~ -*■ y > /
L> Nr *S J Jrt*.
f y 7- ' u>
THE OPINION of the Honorable the Attorney-General,
for the guidance of his Colleagues, as to the submission,
during the forthcoming Session of Parliament, of the
entire Estimates for the financial year.
As it may be desirable on -grounds of public convenience to submit tbe
whole of the Estimates for the forthcoming year to Parliament, immediately
after tbe commencement of tbe Session, and as this Parliament will expire
by effluxion of time on tbe 2Stb day of December next, my colleagues are
anxious to be informed whether there is any constitutional incompetency in
the supplies for tbe financial year of 188 G being voted by the present
Parliament. My attention has been drawn to a correspondence, as to
tbe constitutional propriety of an expiring Parliament voting supplies
for a period wholly subsequent to the legal term of its own
which correspondence took place in July and September of 1880, between
Sir Henry Parkes and Mr. Alpheus Todd, of Canada, the author of
the well-known book on “ Parliamentary Government in England, its
origin, development, and practical operation.” I shall presently refer to
the correspondence, with the view of showing that the opinion then
expressed by Mr. Todd had no reference whatever to such a case as that
upon which my opinion is desired. I am not aware that there is any
impropriety or irregularity in the Parliament making full provision for the
public service for the forthcoming year, if the Ministers who submit the
Estimates of Expenditure command the confidence of Parliament, even though
Parliament may expire by effluxion of time before the commencement of the
year for which provision is made. I know of no authority which would
justify any view contrary to this. If a ministerial crisis has arisen which
compels a dissolution, until the result of that dissolution is ascertained
the right of Ministers to occupy their offices cannot be determined. And
it is, undoubtedly, the practice of Parliament to restrict the grant of
supplies under such circumstances to the necessary requirements of the
public service ; and this obviously because there is no certainty as to whether
Ministers command the confidence of the country. But, in the absence of
any doubt on the subject, it is, as it seems to me, a part of the responsibility
of Ministers and of the duty of Parliament to make the necessary provision
for the services of the ensuing year. And when it is considered that the
limitation of the grant of supplies to a brief period of the year for which
they are required is a fertile source of public inconvenience, I am dis-
posed to think that the more constitutional course is to vote the supplies
for the year. Unquestionably, the way to beneficial legislation is opened
and smoothed when no interruptions to public business from time to
time for the granting of supplies are occasioned. Nothing has been
more frequently complained of than a number of periodical Bills of
Supply ; and if even the Ministry which at the time of the expiry of Parlia-
ment occupied office was displaced, by failing to obtain in the new
Parliament the support which had enabled it to procure the supplies
in the old, the advantage of procuring those supplies would be that of
the new Parliament, and of the Ministry in which it placed its confi-
dence. For, if a supply (say) for a period of two or three months was
given, and the Ministry w'as changed by an appeal to the country,
the incoming G-overnment would have at once to take steps, pro-
bably, in a session devoted exclusively to that puropose, to procure the
necessary
*


necessary supplies for the remainder of the year; and thus the postpone-
ment to another Session of all legislative business might and probably
would be essential. It must be clearly borne in mind that a distinction
must be made between a Ministry possessing the confidence of Parliament
and one which has by advising a dissolution presumably lost it. In the
former case, the duty of the Ministry is to make all reasonable provision
for the public service, whether the offices of the Government are to be
administered by the members of the Administration or by anybody else.
In the latter—that is, the case of a Ministry rgainst which a hostile
vote has been carried —it becomes the duty of Parliament to limit, as
strictly as possible, the action of the Ministry until the voice of the people
can be heard. Holding these views, I not only see no impropriety in
the submission of the whole of the Estimates of Expenditure for the forth-
coming year to the present Parliament, but I think it is an advisable course
to pursue, —both iu the interests of the public, and, should the result of the
forthcoming election prove injurious to the Ministry, in the direct interests
of their successors. And now I turn to the correspondence to which I have
referred, and which was ordered by the Legislative Assembly to be printed on
the 9th March, 1881. In the first place, I may remark that lam
not at all disposed to accept, on questions of this kind, the opinion of
the Librarian of the Legislative Assembly of Canada as a final one. I
regard his book as one containing many inaccuracies, and I shall pre-
sently point out that the case submitted to him clearly illustrates this
fact. Before doing so, I may remark that the case was submitted
without anv clearness, and consequently the opinion of Mr. Todd was con-
fessedly based on a misconstruction. This will be manifest to anybody who
will refer to the third paragraph of the letter of Sir Henry Parkes, dated
the 14th July, 1880, which is in these words:—“ Parliament, after the third
Session, was prorogued yesterday. The annual Appropriation Acts for the
three years, ending on the 31st December next, have been passed and
assented to, respectively, on the 21st May, 1878, the 24th July, 1879, and
the 2nd July, 1880. Would it bo constitutionally competent for the present
House to vote the supplies for the financial year, 1881, commencing on the Ist
January, more than a month after it has itself ceased to exist ?” It will be scent
b y a note at the foot of the sheet published by the Assembly, that the author
of the letter himself points out that the sentence should have contained
after the word House, the words “ in another Session,” and for want of that
specific explanation Mr. Todd was led into an erroneous assumption that the
provision for the then and forthcoming financial year would be made in
the Session ending in July of that year. In other words, that in the Session
of the 2nd July. 1880, the House should be asked to vote the annual
Appropriation Acts for that year and for the forthcoming year. This
would have clearly been a constitutional impropriety; and, though the
note affixed to the Parliamentary paper intimates that it docs not affect
the question of principle, it is clear that it directly does that which it is
said not, to do. Mr. Todd’s opinion is given on the case submitted to him,
which case, as I have pointed out, was erroneously stated. Mr. Todd
goes on to declare that, when Parliament is about to be dissolved or to expire
under whatever circumstances, it is customary and proper to restrict the grant
of supplies. —that is the ordinary supplies for the support of the Govern-
ment,-to an amount sufficient t > defray the indispensable requirements of
the public service, until a new Parliament can be assembled, In support
of this position, he refers to no other authority than his own book on
Parliamentary Government, volume 2, page 4'Jt. On referring to his hook,
I perceive that the text in no way supports the specific opinion contained
in his letter. It will be seen that that page of his book is devoted to cir-
cumstances under which an appeal to the country has been determined
upon, in consequence of a ministerial crisis having arisen, in which, as
he properly points out, it is usual to limit the amount of supply to what
is neces&ary for the public service until the new Parliament is brought
together. The assertion contained iu his letter is not to be found in his
book.


book, and I need hardly say that no authority is given for any such
assertion ; the only authority given being one against even the withholding
of supplies, when a ministerial crisis had actually arisen, and when,
as he remarks in 18GS, this wholesome constitutional rule was departed
from. I would, moreover, again point out that his opinion was
solicited on a state of things in no degree resembling those which
now exist. I would also point out that, in his reference to the text
at page 404 of volume 2 of his book, he makes allusion to page 486 of
volume 1. It will be seen, by referring to this page, that he again only
questions there the propriety of a Ministry, when a crisis has arrived and a
dissolution has been determined upon, calling upon the House of Commons
to vote either the whole amount or all the details of the proposed Estimates,
and so committing the country to the financial policy of Ministers, whose
fate is about to be determined by an appeal to the country at a general
election. There is nothing there as to the course to be pursued by a
Ministry, presumably in possession of the confidence of the House, making
the necessary provision for the public service of the year following the
expiry of Parliament by etlluxion of time. Under these circumstances,
1 can see no constitutional impropriety, but, on the contrary, manifest
public advantage in the submission of the entire Estimates for the forth-
coming year to the present Parliament. It may be as well to refer to
the Parliamentary authorities, which have alone been quoted by Mr. Todd
in his book, at the foot of page 404, volume 2, for the purpose of showing
•that, in the debates in the House of Commons on the case to which he refers,
the fact of the adverse vote which the Government had sustained was the
sole ground on which the proposed course of restricting the supplies was
based. On June 4th, 1808, before the House went into Committee of Supply,
a question was put by Mr. Childers to the Chancellor of the Exchequer with
respect to the Estimates which were about to be submitted. The Govern-
ment had been defeated four or five weeks before upon a question which,
under ordinary circumstances, as was pointed out, would have been followed
tyy an immediate dissolution or the resignation of the Ministry. The
Government had been asked once or twice during the month which had
elapsed, as to whether they had arrived at a decision as to the time of the
new elections. Mr. Childers pointed out that it was the right of the House
to inquire how much supply the Government were about to ask from it;
and this, because, having experienced a hostile vote, it was in accordance with
precedent that neither the Government would ask the House to grant, nor
fhe House consent to give more supply than was necessary to cover the
period which would elapse until the earliest time when Parliament might
meet again. He referred to various precedents in support of his view.
Four ('ays aftciwards, Mr. Childers repeated his question as to the number
of months of the then financial year for which it was intended to take the
remaining votes in supply. The Chancellor of the Exchequer, in answer
to the inquiry, intimated that it was the duty of the Government to
propose to the House to vote the supplies for the whole of the year. In
answer to one of the precedents which had been referred to by Mr.
Childc s, as to what h:id taken place in 1841, the Chancellor of the
Exchequer pointed out that the precedent was inapplicable ; for there a
direct vote of want of cou idencc ha 1 been carried against the Ministry, which
specifically declared that their continuance in office was, under the circum-
stances, at variance with the spirit of the Constitution ; and he went on
to say that no such resolution, or anything approaching to it, had be. n
pas cd bv the present House of Commons, although the Government had
been defeated on a very important question of policy by a large majority.
It is unnecessary to go into all the ciicu nstances of the ease in connection
with the vote of confidence ; but it is sufficiently clear, as 1 have endeavoured
to point out. that the question of granting the supplies is affected oy
the Ministry possess]ng; or failing to command, the confidence of the House.
The question again arose in the House of Commons on the 15th June, and


** ■
«
■
4
i .
is to be found discussed at pages 1602-1609, vol. exon of “ Hansard,”
third series. I may refer only to the speech of Mr. Gladstone, who alludes
to the fact of an adverse vote bavin given against the Government
on a vital point as the foundation argument for restricting the
supplies. Having drawn attention to these authorities, I repeat, that I can
perceive no irregularity of a constitutional character in the Government
asking the House to give, and in the House granting, the full Estimates for
the year.
WILLIAM BEDE DALLEY,
Colonial Secretary’s Office, A.-G.
July 16th, 1885.
