





*
-


THE NATIVE TRIBES OF VICTORIA: THEIR LAN-
GUAGES AND CUSTOMS.
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
(Bead March 4, 1904.)
Synopsis. —Prefatory. Orthography. Dhauhurtwurru Language
and Vocabulary. Initiation Ceremonies. Folklore. Sociology.
The object of the present short paper is to supply some missing
links in the literature of the aborigines of Victoria. For a number
of years past I have devoted a portion of the leisure of a busy pro-
fessional man to taking special journeys among the remnants of
the Victorian tribes, for the purpose of adding to our knowledge
of their languages, ceremonies, sociology and customs generally.
When first entering upon this congenial task I found that little or
Reprinted from Proceedings American Philosophical Society, Pol. xliii, No. ijg.


nothing had been done to record and preserve the native languages
of Victoria, and also that the rites and customs of the people had
not received the attention which their importance deserved.
Perhaps it should be mentioned that in 1898 I contributed to the
Anthropological Society at Washington a paper dealing with the
initiation ceremonies and divisional systems of the Victorian abori-
gines. 1 In 1902 I read another paper on the aboriginal languages
of Victoria before the Royal Society of New South Wales.* On
the present occasion it is intended to supply further information
not included in my former memoirs. The whole of this article has
been prepared by me from notes written down by myself from the
lips of the aboriginal speakers. When the difficulties encountered
in obtaining such particulars from an uncultivated race are taken
into consideration, I feel sure that all necessary allowances will be
made for any imperfections of my work.
In all the aboriginal languages of Victoria the pronouns and
pronominal affixes have two forms in the first person of the dual
and plural—one of which includes, and the other excludes, the
party spoken to. Again, inflection for person and number is not
confined to the pronouns and verbs, but extends to many of the
nouns, prepositions, adverbs and interjections. I was the first
author to report, in any of the Australian languages, the important
grammatical forms referred to in this paragraph.*
The items of folklore show the proclivity of the native mind to
account for any specialties of animal structure, or remarkable for-
mations in hills, trees, lakes and the like. Under the head of
“ Sociology,” although the names of the phratries have been known
for some time, yet many new and important details have been
gathered and reported in this article.
The natives of the southwestern portion of Victoria have a habit
of distinguishing the neighboring tribes by means of the second
personal pronoun, “thou,” of their respective dialects. For exam-
ple, the Dhauhurtwurru are known as the Ngutuk people, the Bun-
gandity as the Nguro people, and so on. A more widely prevalent
practice is to name the dialect of a tribe by the lip, which is sym-
bolical of speech. For this purpose they suffix to the name of the
tribe the native word, wurru, lip; or its possessive form, wurrung,
1 American Anthropologist, Vol. xi, pp. 325-343, with map of Victoria.
2 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, Vol. xxxvi, pp. 71-106.
3 Ibid., Vol. xxxv, p. 127.


lip of (someone). In other districts the equivalent of our nega-
tive adverb, “No,” is used, with the suffix wurru, as, Woi-wurru,
meaning the No-lip, or Woi-speaking, people.
Orthography.
Eighteen letters of the English alphabet are sounded, comprising
thirteen consonants —b, d, g, h, k, 1, m, n, p, r, t, w, y—and five
vowels—a, e, i, o, u.
The system of orthoepy adopted is that recommended by the
Royal Geographical Society, London, but a few additional rules
of spelling have been introduced by me, to meet the requirements
of the Australian pronunciation.
As far as possible, vowels are unmarked, but in some instances
the long sound of a, e, o and u are indicated thus, a, e, .0, u. In
a few cases, to prevent ambiguity, the short sound of u has been
marked thus, u.
It is frequently difficult to distinguish between the short sound
of a and that of u. A thick sound of iis occasionally met with,
which closely resembles the short sound of u or a.
Gis hard in all cases. Galways commences a syllable or word.
Ng at the beginning of a wcrd or syllable has a peculiar nasal
sound, which can be obtained by adding together the two English
words “hangup,” making “hangup” ; then assume this divided
into two syllables, thus, “ ha-ngup.” By pronouncing this so that
the two syllables melt into each other, the ng of “ -ngup” will rep-
resent the aboriginal sound. At the end of a syllable, ng has the
sound of ng in “sing.”
At the beginning of a word or syllable, the sound of the Spanish
n is given by ny, but when terminating a word, the Spanish letter
is used.
Dh is pronounced nearly as th in “ that,” with a slight sound of
d preceding it. JVh has also nearly the sound of th in “that,” but
with an initial sound of the n.
A final h is guttural, resembling ch in the German word joch.
T is interchangeable with d, p with b, and g with k.
Ty and dy at the commencement of a word or syllable have
nearly the sound of j or ch, thus, tyu, in the name of Tyu-ron,
closely resembles chu or ju. But at the end of a word or syllable
ty or dy is sounded as one letter; thus, raty, the last syllable of


barraty, can be pronounced exactly by assuming e to be added to
the y, making it rat-ye. Then commence articulating the word,
including the y, but stopping short without sounding the added e.
The Dhauhurtwurru Grammar.
The Dhauhurtwurru language is spoken in the country about
Portland and Lake Condah, in the State of Victoria, but it is rep-
resentative of the native speech from the Glenelg to the Gellibrand
river, and reaching inland about fifty miles or more.
ARTICLES.
The place of the English article is supplied by the various forms
of the demonstratives, representing “this” and “that.”
NOUNS.
Nouns have number, gender and case.
Number. —Mar, a man. Marara, a couple of men. Maraban,
several men.
Gender. —Sex in the human family is distinguished by different
words, as, mar, a man; dhunnumbur, a woman. Wurran, a boy;
barraty, a girl.
Among animals gender is denoted by the addition of words sig-
nifying “male” and “female,” as, warrun mamung, a male bandi-
coot ; warrun ngerang, a female bandicoot. The females of certain
animals have a name which distinguishes them without stating the
sex, as, ngerangyer, a female dog; murrin, a female kangaroo. The
corresponding male names are gal and goran. Many of the male
animals likewise have a distinguishing name.
Case. —The cases are indicated by inflections, the following being
the principal:
Nominative: This case merely names the subject at rest, as, gal,
a dog; kunna, a yamstick; mar, a man; dher, a spear. Mutyir
or kurkin, a tomahawk.
Causative: This represents the subject acting, as, marra guramuk
burtan, a man an opossum killed; dhunnumburra gal yilpan, a
woman a dog flogged; galla guramuk bundan, a dog an opossum
bit.
Instrumental: This case takes the same affix as the causative, as,
marra kalngun maiangan dherra, a man my dog speared (or pierced)


with a spear. Sometimes the first affix is omitted in such a sentence
as this.
Genitive: A peculiarity of the genitive case, which I was the
first author to report in Australian languages, 1 is that the property
and the possessor each take an affix, but the former affix differs
from the latter—marngat lettalettimyung, a man’s boomerang;
dhunnumburngat kannanyung, a woman’s yamstick; wurranngat
kurkinyung, a boy’s tomahawk.
Every object or article over which ownership can be exerted is
subject to inflection 2 for person and number, as, kurkinngun, my
tomahawk ; kurkinngu, thy tomahawk; kurkinung, his tomahawk ;
and so on through the dual and plural, which also contain “ inclus-
ive” and “ exclusive” forms in the first person.
Accusative: This case is the same as the nominative.
The other cases will be passed over.
ADJECTIVES.
Adjectives follow the nouns which they qualify, and are subject
to similar declensions for number and case:
Nominative : Mar muryarrung, a man large. Gal lenggin, a dog
large. Dhunnumbur dhugai-muruk, a little woman.
It is not thought necessary to illustrate the other cases.
Comparison: Din ngutyung —dinnung ngummindyar, this is
good—that is bad. Din kurpung kurpung, this is the best.
In the declensions of all the cases of nouns, and of their qualify-
ing adjectives, there are modifications in the affixes, depending
upon the termination of the word declined. Sometimes 'the affix
of the noun is omitted, sometimes that of the adjective; this rather
being regulated by the euphony of the sentence.
PRONOUNS.
Pronouns are inflected for number, person and case, and contain
two forms of the first person of the dual and plural, marked
“inclusive’’ and “exclusive,” respectively.
1 “ The Gundungurra Language,” Proc, Amer. Philos. Soc., Philadelphia,
Vol. xl, p. 143.
2 “The Thoorga Language,” Queensland Geographical Journal, Vol. xvii,
P- 53-


The following is a full table of the nominative pronouns:
(ist Person I
Singular.... J2d “ T
(3 d “ 1
Ngutthuk
Thou Ngutuk
He Nung
f Ist p erson j We > inclusive Ngutthungul
jj ua j J I We, exclusive Ngutthungul!
i 2d “ You Ngutuwal
[3d “ They Dilakal
Ngutthungullin
f Ist person . I We * inclusive Ngutthungan
pi nral ( We, exclusive Ngutthungannin
2d “ You Ngutuwan
3d “ They Dilakanda
There is a sort of trial number, which is formed by the addition
of the word balinia to the plural, as, Ngutthangan balinia, we three,
and so on for the remaining numbers. lam inclined to believe,
however, that this added word merely serves the purpose of a
numeral, and is copied from the Wuddyawurru tribes on the east,
and the Tyattyalli on the north, among whom I reported a trial
number last year. 1
The following are examples in the singular number of the posses-
sive case
(Ist Person Mine
Singular.... J2d “ Thine
(3d “ His
Ngutthungat
Thine Ngutungat
His Nungat
And so on through the remaining numbers.
The full forms of the pronouns given above are mainly used in
replying to a question. In ordinary conversation the natives use
the pronominal affixes illustrated under the head of “ Verbs.”
The accusative pronouns, me, thee, him, etc., are not found
separately, like the nominative and possessive, but consist wholly
of the pronominal suffixes to verbs, nouns or other parts of speech,
as in the following example :
Ist Person (Someone) beats me Burtangun
2d “ “ beats thee Burtangu
3d “ “ beats him Burtanung
And so on through all the numbers. See also the example under
the heading “Prepositions.’’
Demonstratives: The demonstratives in this language, by the
1 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, Vol. xxxvi, pp. 77-86.


combination of simple root-words, can be made to indicate posi-
tion, distance, direction, number, person, movement, etc. Want
of space precludes more than this brief reference to them at present.
Interrogatives: Who, winya. What, nganya. How many,
nummia.
VERBS.
Verbs have the same numbers and persons as the pronouns, and
also the “ inclusive” and “exclusive” forms. The principal moods
are the indicative, imperative and conditional. Person and num-
ber are indicated by pronominal affixes to the root of the verb, as
in my Bungandity grammar. 1 In the following conjugation of the
verb, burte, “ to beat or kill,” the present tense is given in full,
but the singular number of the past and future is considered
sufficient,
Indicative Mood—Present Tense.
f Ist Person
■] 2d “
(3d “
Ist Person
' 2d “
.3d “
r
Ist Person
2d “
,3d “
I beat Burtu
Singular..
Thou beatest Burtangin
He beats Burta
j We, inch, beat Burtangul
( We, exch, beat Burtangul]
Burtangullin
You beat Burtawul
They beat Burtakal
j We, incl., beat Burtangan
( We, excl., beat Burtangam
Burtangannin
Plural.
You beat Burtawan
They beat Burtakanda
Past T'ense.
1 st Person I beat
Singular J 2 d “ Thou
(3d “ He be
Burtanu
• •••'•< 2d “ Thou beatest Burtanyin
He beat • Burtan
Future Tense.
( Ist Person I shall beat Burlugu
Singular .... J2d “ Thou shalt beat Burtuhu
(3d “ He shall beat Burtuk
He shall beat Burtuk
Imperative: Beat, Burte.
1 “ Language of the Bungandity Tribe, South Australia,” Journ. Roy. Soc.
N. S. Wales, Vol. xxxvii, pp. 59-75.


There are conditional, reflexive and reciprocal moods, similar in
principle to those shown in my Kamilaroi grammar. 1 There are
also modifications of the verbal suffixes of the past tense to indi-
cate the immediate past, the recent past, and the remote past.
Similar modifications exist for the proximate, or more or less dis-
tant future. There are likewise forms of the verb to express repeti-
tion or continuance of the act described, and many other complex-
ities, which need not be detailed in the present brief paper.
ADVERBS.
Following are a few examples in this part of speech :
Yes, ko. No, bangat. To-day, thinggatbe. Yesterday, ngagat.
To-morrow, tungatti. By and by, kalu. Recently, wuluba. Long
ago, mulkaiu. All the time (doing something), girtnabe. All the
time (resting), girtitbe. Where, wunda. Where art thou, wunda-
yin. Where are you two, wundawar. Where are you all, wunda-
wan.
PREPOSITIONS.
Here, dinnu. There, dinnunung. These, with numerous modi-
fications, are also used as demonstratives.
In front, gullingat. Behind, wurtgat. On the right, dumbitgat.
On the left, warumgat. Inside, gunni. Outside, gunna. Between,
bukkargat. This side, yukkai-gatthung. Other side, kunninung.
Down, wenyu. Up, gunnu. Underneath, wenyanu. Through,
yunyin.
Many prepositions admit of inflection for person and number, as
in my “Thurrawal Language”: 2
Singular . .
( ist Person
■< 2d “
Behind thee
Wurtganhun
Wurtganhu
(3d “
Behind him
Wurtganhung
And so on through the remaining numbers and persons.
NUMERALS.
One, kaiappa. Two, bulattya. Several, bortung.
1 Journ Anihrop. Inst., July-December, 1903.
2 Journ , Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, Vol. xxxv, p. 148.


about
This vocabulary contains al
words in the Dhauhurtwurru
noted down by myself from
camps.
The Family.
A man mar
Old man ngurram
Youth nguin-nguin-
Boy wurran
Elder brother wartai
Younger bro-
ther koko
Father pipai
Mother ngerang
Mother-in law nullinyur
A woman dhunnumbur
Old woman ngurramdyar
Girl barraty
Child (neuter) tukui
Elder sister kukkai
Younger sister kokodyar
The Human Body.
Head pim
Forehead mittin
Hair of head ngarat
Beard ngaraf
ngaran
Moustache munutyir
Eye mirng
Eyebrow tharruing mirng
Nose
Ear
kappung
wirng
Mouth
Lips
ngulang
wuru
Teeth
thungang
murtung
Mammae
Vocabulary.
language,
Umbilicus rikut
Abdomen thukung
Tongue thallan
Chin bulun
Back wirk
Arm wurk
Shoulder pakkuran
Elbow thalling
Hand marang
Knee purran
Foot thinnang
Blood kerik
Fat pippul
Bone bukkan
Penis wirrung
Scrotum burung
Vulva mulun
Urine kirng
Excrement gunang
Inanimate Nature.
Sun thirrung
Moon dhenget
Stars kukkadhing
Thunder murndal
Lightning murthung
Rain
Rainbow
Fog
Frost
Hail
Water
murriang
mikkur
puttirang
purrity
260 of the most commonly-used
every word having been
men and women in the native
Thigh wurkarriman
dharnt-burrut
wallat


Ground
A Stone
Sand
Light (of day,
etc.)
Darkness
Heat
Coldness
Camp
Camping place
Fire
Smoke
Food
Night
Dusk
Hill
Sandhill
Grass
Leaves of trees
Bird’s nest
miring
murrai
kulak
Honey
Path
neanan
burun
kallun
Shadow
bullabety
wurn
Tail of animal
Summer
Winter
limbity
wien
thueng
mutthal
dhinggatmirring
burun
burunggittian
kang
pangat
karriwan
dhirrang
wurnung
mirkinyung
wirraty
dha-urn
ngakuyung
wirranyung
kallun
pullapity
Mammals.
Native bear winggil
Dog gal
Wild dog burnang
Opossum guramuk
Kangaroo-rat barrut
Native cat kuppung
Bandicoot warrun
Water-rat murung
Porcupine willangalak
Kangaroo guran
Platypus ngullirtil
Flying squirrel wethity
Small squirrel ngundaty
Ringtail opos-
sum wiyan
Bat ngunni-ngun-
Birds.
Laughing jack-
ass gun it
Crow wang
Curlew wiruk
Plain turkey burriam
Native-compan-
ion kurun
Pelican kurtpirrap
Swan kunuwar
Wood-duck ngawurk
Quail ngaren
Eagle-hawk ngianggara
Emu kapirng
Common mag- ,
pie kirre
Black magpie munyukil
Black-duck dhurbang
Mopoke mumgaty
Bronze-wing
pigeon gure
Rosella parrot kurtkurty
Parrokeet yukuty
Kingfisher bunbungwarpit
Peewee thulirm
Plover pitthirrit
Corella kurogity
White cockatoo ngaiyuk
Woodpecker dinden
Mountain parrot kalingai
Small nightjar yerradhaher


Crane kukap
Black cockatoo willan
Fishes.
Black fish yim-yim
Trout dhurkurt
dhurkurt
Eel kuyang
Frog dhiamp
Reptiles.
Sleepy lizard yuruk
Carpet-snake kurang
Black-snake muwang
Tiger-snake wangaluk
Jew-lizard wirinyurn
Small lizard munni
Whip-snake kirdok
Invertebrates.
Locust billirt
Blow-fly wurul
Louse barum
Nit of louse lirt
Bulldog ant,
black wulakai
Bulldog ant,
red kumal
Centipede . thirrimbangarak
Jumper ant birpirk
Maggot thirtui
House fly minnik
Grasshopper nger-nger
Spider bun-bun
Mosquito murukar
March fly murun
Trees and Plants.
Ti-tree kurang
Wattle karrang
Pine murrung
Oak ngering
Cherry tree pallat
Red gum bial
White gum leng
Honeysuckle wirraty
Bullrushes burtity
Yam gerang
Broom bunung
Blackwood tree mutthang
Peppermint wurut
Stringybark marafi
Box tree karran
Ironbark yirip
Bush tree wirriks
Weapons, etc.
Tomahawk mutyir
Koolamin, wood bupir
Koolamin for
grubs yurom
Yamstick kunnak
Jagged spear dhuluwarn
Hunting spear der
Reed spear ngiren
Fishing spear 1 koyot
Spear lever ngarrung
Spear shield kirram
Waddy shield mulkar
Fighting club,
bent murduang
Hunting club bippin
Club, with knob munup
Mussel thalup Boomerang lettalettim
1 There is a bone spike, called killip , fastened to the striking end of the koyot
or fishing spear.


Plaything
(wooden) wity-wity
Net bag kurera
Canoe dhurung
Belt murum
Kilt burrandity
Adjectives.
Alive boandian
Dead kulpiran
Large muryarrung
Small gurnung
Long wurumbet
Short mulubet
Good ngutyung
Bad ngummindyar
Thirsty kurangan
Red gerrigerrigund-
White ngapgority
Black min
Quick wungura
Slow gurpippa
Blind kundity
Strong ngarakithung
Afraid kuninbity
Tired barbangan-
mirringa
Hot kallun
Cold . pullapety
Angry watthanlingan
Sleepy wandyangan
Greedy murkappu
Sick ngullarwano
Stinking wumbity
Pregnant karrawian
Verbs.
Die
Eat
kalpirmity
thakian
Drink
Sleep
Stand
Sit
Talk
Tell
Walk
Run
Bring
Take
Break
Strike
Arise
See
Hear
Listen
Give
Sing
Weep
Steal
Ask
Climb
Conceal
Jump
Laugh
Scratch
Send
Swim
Spit
Throw
Whistle
Vomit
Dance
Go
Come
Burn
Bite
thathin
yuin
kartan
nginggan
lakan
kuyin
yanmin
karkurtmin
wambake
wambaku
yenhin
burte
mirtako
nakin
wangin-mirri
wangity
woke
litbity
lumin
kurunmin
kuein
kurwurnin
yunbin
wurnbin
wiakan
wirrinity
yumbin
yawin
thukipin
yarndin
dhegirnin
kurnan
kurwin
yanmin
kaka
bawa
bundin
mirtan


Initiation Ceremonies of Victorian Tribes.
Under this heading it will be sufficient to mention that I have
elsewhere described some important ceremonies of initiation in
use among the native tribes of Victoria. I have given full details
of the Wonggumuk ceremony, which is in force over the central
and northern portions of that State. I have likewise reported the
Kannety initiation ceremony, practiced by the tribes inhabiting the
southwestern districts of Victoria. Other inaugural ceremonies
used in eastern Victoria and elsewhere are described by me in a
contribution to the Anthropological Society at Washington, already
referred to in this paper.
Folklore.
The following stories were told me by some old aboriginals of
the Hopkins and Eumeralla rivers in western Victoria, and as I
have never seen them in print, they are included in this paper. 1
Tyuron, the Eel Spearer. —Tyu-ron, a man of the Kappaty
phratry, was a notable ancestor of the plovers. He carried a
fish-spear on each shoulder when he went fishing, because he
was equally dexterous with both hands. He frequented swamps
and shallow streams where eels were plentiful, and never hunted
for any other kind of food. He was a very agile fellow, and kept
a sharp lookout along the margin of the water. When he saw
an eel, he struck at it with one of his spears, and threw it out on
the bank. He then ran along the edge of the water, and stood a
little while looking for his favorite fish. If none were visible, he
again ran on, and stood watching. He continued running up and
down the stream, or around the margin of the lagoon, until he
had caught as many eels as he required.
Tyuron used to paint his breast and the under sides of his arms
with pipe-clay, so that the eels would not readily observe him, and
sang at intervals, “Pittherit, pittherit.” This is why the plover
still carries the point of a fish-spear on either shoulder, and likes
to remain near water. He also continues his old habit of running
a little way and standing still, then running on again. And he
still sings his old song, from which he has received his onomato-
poeic name of pittherit.
Mitrkupang and Mount Shadwell. —Among the remote ancestors
1 See my Folklore of the Australian Aborigines (Sydney, 1899).


of the Girriwurru tribe there was a man of great stature, named
Murkupang, whose body was covered with hair. He dwelt in a
cave on the Hopkins river, in the vicinity of Maroona. His nul-
lanyurung, or mother-in-law, resided near him, and one day she
sent her two grandchildren to see Murkupang and ask him for some
food, because according to tribal custom she could not herself
approach her son-in-law. As he had not been successful in the
chase for a day or two, he killed the children and ate them.
Fearing the retribution of his mother-in-law’s friends, Murku-
pang left his habitation at dawn next morning and journeyed down
the Hopkins river to a place near Wickliffe, where he tried to
make a cave in a rock by pulling loose pieces off with his hands,
but he did not succeed. He next went on to Hexham, and saw
in the distance Mount Shadwell, with its rocky sides. He approached
it and saw a suitable cave in one side near the top. Being a great
conjurer or sorcerer, he commenced “bouncing” or scolding the
mountain, and commanded .the portion containing the cave to
come down nearer to the plain on which he was standing. He
stamped his feet and made passes or signs with his hands while he
sang a magical song, and presently a large piece of the mountain
containing the cave parted from the rest of the hill. 1 Murkupang
ran away across the plain, and shouted to the fragment of moun-
tain to follow him. After a while, when he thought he had reached
a good camping place, he turned round, stamping his feet and using
other menaces which caused the mountain fragment to stop. It
then settled down and became what is now known as Flat-top Hill.
Murkupang then selected a place sheltered from the weather by
an overhanging rock—a sort of cave—and made his camp there.
In a few days’ time his mother-in-law tracked him to this retreat.
She had with her two young fighting men of the Gurogity phratry,
who Were clever “doctors” and had some knowledge of magic.
While Murkupang was out hunting, these warriors hid themselves
near the cave entrance, one on each side. They covered their
bodies with stringybark, softened by beating, so that they could
roll it around their bodies. This was done to prevent Murkupang’s
dogs from scenting them. After a time the hunter returned, carry-
ing a large kangaroo which he had caught. As soon as he went
1 The natives point out a depression in one side ol Mount Shadwell from
which Fiat-top was disrupted.


into the cave, the warriors emerged from their hiding-place and
walked to the entrance, with their weapons ready for an attack.
When Murkupang saw them, he went through some very obscene
antics, 1 in the hope of throwing them off their guard, so that he
might get a chance to strike one or both of them, but all to no
purpose. The warriors divested themselves of their stringybark
coverings, with which they stopped up the mouth of the cave. A
fire was then applied to this inflammable material, which made a
great flame and suffocated Murkupang. His spirit flew out of the
cave and became a Mopoke, called by the natives mumguty, a bird
which goes about at night.
Sociology.
In a former article published in 1898, 2 I gave a short description
of the social organization of the tribes occupying the southwestern
districts of Victoria, but since then I have again visited the natives
of those localities and obtained further information which will now
be briefly stated.
If we assume an approximate line drawn on the map of Victoria
from Geelong via Castlemaine to Pyramid Hill; thence via Lake
Tyrrell to a point on the boundary between Victoria and South
Australia where the thirty-fifth parallel of latitude intersects it;
thence along that boundary southerly to the ocean; and thence by
the seacoast easterly to the point of commencement at Geelong.
Then the people composing all the tribes within the region thus
described are divided into two phratries, called respectively Guro-
gity and Gamaty, or dialectic variations of these names. But upon
making a closer examination of the constitution of these phratries,
we discover that the details of their composition among the tribes
iin the northern portion of the above region differ from those in
the southern or coastal portion. I will first deal with the tribes
occupying the country north of the main dividing range, where the
irules of intermarriage of the phratries and the descent of the pro-
geny are as under:
1 “ The Nguttan Initiation Ceremony,” Proc, Amer. Philos. Soc., Philadel-
phia, Vol. xxxvii, pp. 69-73.
2 “The Victorian Aborigines: Their Initiation Ceremonies and Divisional
American Anthropologist, Vo), xi, pp. 325-343, with map of Victoria.


Table No. 1.
Phratry, Husband. Wife. Son. Daughter,
A Gurogity Gamatygurk Gamaty Gamatygurk
B Gamaty Gurogitygurk Gurogity Gurogitygurk
All creation, animate and inanimate, is divided into Gamaty and
Gurogity. Attached to each of these phratries are groups of totems,
consisting of animals, plants, the heavenly bodies, the elements,
etc., lists of a number of which were given in my former treatise. 1 .
There is a further subdivision of each phratry into what may be
called clans or sections, with distinctive names, taken in some
instances from animals and in others from inanimate nature. Each
subdivision comprises a number of families bearing different totem
names. That is, all the totems of a phratry are apportioned among
the sections, some sections (or clans) possessing a certain aggregate
of totems and some another. Every individual of a tribe claims
some animal or inanimate object as his totem.
Again, each of these clans has its own spirit-land, called mi'-yur,
to which the shades of all its members depart after death. The
miyur of a clan is located in a certain fixed direction from the
present hunting grounds of the tribe, but the direction of the
miyur of each clan differs from that of the others. It may be situ-
ated far out in the desert country of the mallee-scnlbs, or away
towards the setting sun, or in the distant rocky mountains, or
elsewhere.
When a member of a clan dies and is buried, the body is laid
horizontally, face upwards, with the head placed towards the part
of the horizon which leads to the miyur or spirit-land of the clan
to which the deceased belongs. These miyurs are divided into the
same two phratries as the people of the tribe. The spirit of-a
Gurogity man or woman goes to a Gurogity miyur, and a Gamaty
spirit travels away to a Gamaty resting-place, conformably to the
spirit-home of his clan.
•Each spirit-land has its own description of water. For example,
in one miyur the water is gray, in another sparkling, in another
reedy, in another dark blue, in another reddish, and so on.
Between the main dividing range and the seacoast the phratry
1 American Anthropologist , Vol. xi, pp. 333-334.


names and their feminine equivalents are slightly different from
those just described, as shown in the following synopsis:
Table No. 2.
Phralry. - Father. Mother. Son. Daughter.
A Gurogity Kappatyar Kappaty Kappatyar
B Kappaty Gurogityar Gurogity Gurogityar
Everything in the universe is divided between these two phrat-
ries. Among the totems of Gurogity are included the following :
Dog, flying squirrel, small squirrel, pelican, eagle-hawk, white
cockatoo, tiger snake, red bulldog ant, red gum tree, oak tree,
bloodwood, broom, peppermint, ironbark.
The undermentioned are some of the totems of Kappaty : Native
cat, kangaroo, crow, swan, bat, crane, black cockatoo, whipsnake,
black bulldog ant, white gum tree, wattle tree, cherry tree, honey-
suckle, stringybark, tomahawk, reed spear, boomerang.
The totemic families belonging to Gurogity and Kappaty are
subdivided into clans or sections, somewhat similar to those in
use among the tribes already described, but not so numerous or
elaborate. They likewise have a spirit-home, which some of the
tribes call maioga and others inungo. Every individual, when
buried, is placed with the head pointing in that direction, and all
the spirits go away to the same resting-place. This is an island,
called by the white people Lady Julia Percy Island, situated off
the coast of Victoria; about halfway between Warrnambool and
Portland. On the shore of the mainland there are some rocks like
stepping-stones stretching out into the sea towards the island.
These rocks, some old black fellows told me, were purposely
placed in that position, in the far away past, by the spirits of clever
men, to enable their fellow-countrymen to reach their maiogo.
The spirit of a deceased person walks on the land to the shore and
springs out to a rock, then to another and another rock, and lastly
makes a final bound over the intervening sea and alights on Lady
Julia Percy Island, the native name of which is Denmar.




