

AUSTRALASIAN ASSOCIATION FOR THE
ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCE,
Hobart, 1892.
Section G-.
Anthropology.
10.—THE NAIR POLYANDRY AND THE DIERI
PIRAURU.
By LORIMER FISON, M.A., Fellow of Queen's College,
University of Melbourne.
Mr. J. F. M‘Lennan, who has a considerable number of
followers, treats marriage by capture as an actual system of
marriage among early tribes, and Polyandry as a large factor in
ancient society. The former of these has nothing really to
do with polyandry, but the two are so involved in Mr.
M‘Lennan's argument that it may be as well to clear it out
of our way. The practice of Exogamy, he says — i.e., the rule
forbidding marriage within certain limits—compelled men to
go outside their tribes for their wives; and, as “ the relations
of separate tribes in a rude state of society are uniformly, or
almost uniformly hostile,” the only way in which men could
get wives was by capturing them. Capture, therefore, was
“ the necessary preliminary to marriage.” Polyandry, Mr.
M‘Lennan says, arose from the practice of female infanticide,
“ which rendered women scarce.” These statements appear
to me to be altogether mistaken, for the followingreasons :
1. In the first place, exogamy doe£ not compel men to go
to hostile tribes for their wives. Savage people, as a general
rule, are made up of exogamous divisions, but the divisions
intermarry one with'another, and a man has no need to go to
an enemy’s camp for a wife. He will kill his enemy if he can,
and capture his wives, but he is not driven to the act by an
impossibility of getting a wife from among his own people.
2, In the second place, if Mr. M‘Lennan’s theory were
correct, each tribe would have to capture all the women of
the other, and its own women would have to be all captured


by the other tribe ; which, as Euklid says, is absurd. Never-
theless it is absolutely necessary to the theory, which is that
exogamy forbids marriage within the community, and that
the only way of getting a wife is by capture from another
community. If, therefore, any girls on either side are left
uncaptured, what is to be done with them ?
3. In the third place, as a matter of fact, savages do not
practise female infanticide—that is to say, they do not kill
female children rather than males. The Hindu, who has
succession through males, and who depends on his sons for
feeding him with sacrifices when he has taken up his abode
in the next world, and who has to give a dower with his
daughter, will kill a female infant rather than a male, if he
piactise infanticide at all; but not so the savage, whose
descent is through females, and who receives payment from
the young fellow who wants his daughter.
4. And, in the fourth place, no tribe on the face of the
earth ever had polyandry—or polygynia either—as its system
of marriage. Cases of polyandry are to be found in plenty
of tribes, and everybody knows that the other form of poly-
gamy plurality of wives—is frequent enough ; but as a
complete system of marriage , it is an arithmetical impossibility.
It requires a disparity in number between the sexes such as
never existed in any normal community. Polyandry, of
course, means that every woman has several husbands. 1
say “ every woman, because every woman must be reckoned.
Savage society has no old maids in it. Then if the average
number of husbands to each woman be the lowest possible to
constitute polyandry—that is two—the men must be twice as
numerous as the women, which again is absurd.
The same argument is fatal to the other form of polygamy
as a general system of marriage in any community. It is
only the powerful chiefs, and the men rich enough to buy,
who have a plurality of wives, and not more than one apiece
falls to the lot of the commoners. Everyone who has lived
among savage tribes will confirm this statement.
But further, the evidence for polyandry is not at all
satisfactory. Even the special case on which Mr. M‘Lennan
mainly relies that of the Nairs—can be shown to be not
polyandry at all, but group-marriage; and the main object of
this paper is to examine the so-called Nair polyandry in the
light of a precisely similar Australian example.
.The account of the Nair custom, as given by Mr.
M‘Lennan from various authorities, is that “ among the Nairs


it is the custom for one woman to have attached to her two
males, or four, or perhaps more, and that they cohabit
according to rules.” Each man, however, “ may be one in
several combinations of women—that is, he may have any
number of wives.”—(Studies in Ancient History, p. 100,
new edition, 1886.) Now let us turn to the Pirauru custom,
found among the Dieri of Cooper’s Creek, and see how it
looks beside that of the Nairs.
Among the Dieri every woman has a certain man who is
her special husband. He is her noa, and she is his noa.
But, in addition to him, she has a number of “accessory
husbands” (to use Mr. Howitt’s convenient term), and these
are called her Piraurus. They are pirauru to her, and she is
pirauru to them. They must always be of a division which
is marriageable to hers—that is to say, as in the case of the
Nairs, the selection is “ under certain restrictions as to caste.”
So far, we have a state of things which is shown by the
following diagram. To avoid crowding it, I give only two
“ accessory husbands,” but the woman may have more of
them. (M = male, E = female.)
M Noa T? / Pirauru M 2
1 M „ m 3
Here we have a woman, F 1? with her Noa, M j? and her
two Piraurus, M 2, M 3. This woman, then, has three men,
any one of whom may lawfully treat her as his wife. If her
Noa and her Piraurus are all in the camp together, the right
of the Noa overrides that of the Pirauru ; but if the Noa be
absent, or if he choose to make other arrangements, one
of the Piraurus can take her. This looks like polyandry,
pure and simple, and no one could blame an observer for so
recording it.
But now let us go a little further. M 2 and M s also have
Noas of their own, and each of these women may be Pirauru
to the other men. Our diagram now becomes enlarged, as
follows:
M Noa F J
xVij V ! \ Fg
m 2 F2 {fJ
m„ — f 3 {f.‘
Here we have a group of males cohabiting, under certain


PROCEEDINGS OF SECTION G.
ACTING GOYERNMENT PRINTER, TASMANIA.
definite regulations, with a group of females; and, since
each male and each female may have other Piraurus, each of
whom has his or her Noa, the group may extend to con-
siderable dimensions. This is precisely the Nair custom, and
it is not polyandry at all in Mr. M‘Len nan’s sense of the
terra. It is regulated Group-marriage. I say “regulated,”
because neither men nor women can choose their Piraurus at
their own will. They are allotted by the Council of Elders,
having regard to the regulations of the inter-marrying
divisions of the tribe, and to other circumstances which may
have to be taken into consideration.
I had better state, in conclusion, that this Pirauru custom is
not common to all the Australian tribes.
