









Printed for private circulation.
THE
BURNEY PAPERS.
Vol. V.
PART 1.
(Retrospect of British Policy from the period of the first
Establishment of Penang 17th July 1786-1839.)
Printed by order of the Vajiranana National Library.
BANGKOK
1914. V




Fort William the 22d June 1842
A
Retrospect
of
British Policy
in the Straits of Malacca, from the period of
the first Establishment of Penang (17 July 1786)
up to 1839, and combining Historical Details
respecting the Straits Settlements
and the neighbouring Native
States.
Introduction
Chapter I.
The following account was written by me several
years ago* and before I was aware of the nature of a
pamphlet which had been published by Mr. Ander*
•son b and which, from having been distributed at the
time and privately to a few individuals only, did not
become public until its republication in the Singapore
■Chronicle. My intentions appeared therefore to have
been somewhat anticipated. But on reflection it has
occurred to me that this account may prove accept-
able to the Supreme Government not only because I
‘liave treated the points it embraces in a different and
more- copious manner than Mr. Anderson has done,
but as I have been able to advance some new matter,
having an important bearing on the political relations
of Keddah and Siam. I have introduced, in chrono-
logical succession most or all of the occurrences during
the period alluded to which are of historical interest or
value. I trust also that I have succeeded in con-
densing tire subjects treated of as far as consistent with
(perspicuity.
a. A good deal lias since lieen added to it.
k Anderson's Malayan Peninsula.


Writers on 1 Keddah Affairs.
Nearly the whole of Mr. Anderson’s reasoning?
rest on the assumed position that Siam never possessed*
any right to control the Malacca Peninsula generally,,
and the state of Keddah particularly ; and that there
were no historical documents regarding the latter
which could be consulted. He observes that “he had
“ been unable to trace in a satisfactory way the history
“ of the Country of Keddah beyond the grandfather of
“ the present King,” and adds : “ The King,, who was
“ possessed of various historical records, lost them all
“ upon the Siamese invasion.” Yet with this acknow-
ledged paucity of information he describes the
Keddah race as having emigrated from Malacca,
and “ that it flourished under a race of Mahometan
“ Sovereigns for many centuries, and never was
“ under Siam, except as the transmitter of gold
“ and silver flowers.”’ I by no means wish it to be
inferred that I believe Mr. Anderson to have been
aware of the existence in Penang of any such histori-
cal record, but it has always appeared to me singular
that with his admitted knowledge of the Malayan
language, and after the daily intercourse he had with
the Rajah of Keddah and his Chiefs, he was not better-
informed on the subject, and of the real relations which
had existed betwixt Siam and Keddah during about
500 years.
With respect to the two first of that gentleman’s
positions above alluded to r it might probably not be
difficult to show that he has cited passages from authors
which go near to contradict, if not to invalidate them,
and in regard to the third position, I trust that the-
evidence which will be adduced in this paper will
show that he laid it down rather unadvisedly.
The Political calm which has, to the eastward, fol-
lowed the Burman War, and the definitive Treaty with
Siam, are favourable to taking a dispassionate view of
British and Indo-Chinese politics in connection with


'each other. I will confess that when the Siamese in-
vaded Keddah I was impressed in some measure with
the general feeling of sympathy for the Ex Rajah’s
misfortunes, although I trust that ray judgment has
not been thereby warped when the nature of his posi-
tion became a political question. I had the honour of
being for a considerable period employed by the
Penang Government in an endeavour to persuade the
Ex-Rajah to proceed to Malacca, and it is well known
to the Government how he was persuaded by others to
retract his promise made to me that he would go to
that settlement.
Although-thus employed in a negotiation highly
■disagreeable to the unfortunate Chief, and one in
which my personal feelings were superseded by con-
siderations of duty, I was yet enabled to continue on
the most friendly terms with him. During a con-
fidential conversation I had with him regarding the
'ancient condition of the Keddah country he produced
a written historical account of it, that one which Mr
Anderson has described as having been lost, and after
I had inspected it in his presence, he ordered his
secretary to make a copy of it for me, which copy 1
•soon after received from the Rajah. It is in the Ma-
layan language, and from it I have made those extracts
which bear on Keddah politics with relation to Siam.
Accounts of Keddah.
It appeared to me very strange at the time that
the Rajah was not aware of the obvious bearing of the
work in question on the value of his political rights.
But his conversation afterwards proved to me that if
he had ever read the book he must have forgotten
much of its contents. This history I have ever since
kept amongst my private papers, for as the Rajah had
irretrievably lost all hold on the Keddah country, and
all political negotiations regarding it with Siam had
long ceased, its production would not have altered mat-
ters in any way. Even had the case been otherwise, I


would not have betra} r ed the confidence placed in' me-
by the Rajah by using-the documents to Ins disadvan-
tage. It may be however remarked, that if the Rajah
did conceal his history from Mr. Anderson, he must
have been in some degree aware of the doubts which
several passages in it were calculated to create
respecting his claim to perfect independence.
It is rather singular that the Rajah or Cham
Phriya of Ligor had endeavoured to suppress the-
history. When in a visit to him he never mentioned
to me its existence, but I was confidentially informed,
by Siamese,- that he had obtained a copy when Ked-
dah was occupied by his troops-in 1821, and that he
had got it re-written, the new version being free from
all that part of the original which describes the 2d
Colony or race of Keddah as derived from a western
people. It could be no valid argument however
against the claims of Siam that she allowed
colonists to settle- in her territories. If this be true it
is just as well that he should consider the history r
ab origine, at least,, not absolutely,, although it really
be so, in favor of Siam, and that he will never found
arguments upon it. If he had produced it, however,
while negotiations were pending, it is to be inferred
that the cause of the Ex Rajah woukl have lost by it
in a great degree. In fact it quite nullifies his pre-
tensions to reign.
British Rights—Treaties.
The greatest inconvenience which arose from the
political discussion as to the Rajah of Keddah’s rights
was, that they seemed to involve to a certain extent
the nature of the British tenure of Penang and Pro-
vince Wellesley. But whatever opinions may have
been entertained on this point, and whatever doubts
may have been expressed regarding it, the whole have
been since fully set at rest, not only by the right to
occupancy allowed by the Siamese and admitted by
them without cavil or question in the Treaty of


Bankok, but by the subsidiary treaty founded on the
3rd clause of this original one, which finally fixed the
boundary of the British possessions on tire Peninsula
opposite to Penang (a).
Writers on Keddah.
The Supreme Government of British India has
from the first establishment of Penang’, invariably de-
clined interference in Keddah affairs on the ground of
the vassalage of the country to Siam, yet much has
been written (b) in the attempt to show that the
Keddah Dynasty was always and up to the time of
Siamese usurpation, as it was termed, independent of
Siam. It will be a source of gratification to me if I
have succeeded in adducing historical arguments
derived from unwilling witnesses in favor of the sound
views adopted by the Supreme Government in opposi.
tion to such arguments. The subject will be adverted
to hereafter ; meantime I shall only observe that the
opponents of these views seem to me to have been so
far misled by their feelings that they have almost
blended together two questions which ought to have
been kept quite distinct, the one, the actually existing
or previously existing relations between Siam and
Keddah, and the second the political expediency of
supporting or of not supporting Keddah against Siam
'without reference to such relations. The chief error
into which these writers have been betrayed has been
owing to the necessity which their individual
mode of proceeding imposed on them of making
out a case which should at the least have a semblance
to reality and serve for a season.
(a. ) If this treaty should ever therefore be abro-
gated by the contracting parties by mutual consent, or
by the British alone, the bearing of these treaties on the
tenure by which Penang and Province Wellesley are
held will require to be kept in view.
(b.) Prince of Wales Island Records —Mr.
Anderson’s Memoir.


Mr. Anderson sets out with an endeavour to pro-
mote two things—First, that when Pulo Penang was
settled by the British the Siamese claims were not
noticed, Secondly, that the cession of the Island was
made on the express condition that the British should
afford their protection to the Raja of Keddah against
Siam. I shall have occasion to enter more fully on
these points in the sequel. But it seems to me that
in order to avoid too frequent references the most
eligible plan will be to analize this writer’s statements
briefly and consecutively.
To the first of the above arguments it may be
replied that as the Siamese were not invited to be
parties to the Treaty cf Cession they could not have
known its purport. That they would not have become
parties to it as it stood, is plainly to be inferred from
the great displeasure they expressed at the cession
when it became known to them. Their fear of the
British power, and other views, even then deterred
them from the endeavour to drive out the British, and
their overtures on several occasions for establisning a
friendly intercourse with Penang still further veiled
their feelings.
There can be no doubt that Mr. Light made some
vague verbal promises of protection to the Rajah of
Keddah, and it is equally clear that he had no authority
for thus committing himself, while the Raja, by con-
cealing the truth, subjected himself to all the penalties
following his duplicity.
Penang Records. The subsequent conduct of the
Raja too, joined to his correspondence with the chief
authorities at Penang, sufficiently evinces that had the
protection he wanted been conceded by treaty his first
act would have been to have defied the Siamese, and
thereby to have brought on a war betwixt the British
and that nation.


The next argument adduced for the necessity of
supporting the Raja at the period alluded to is the
philanthropy of the measure. It is needless to insist
on the irrelevancy of mixing up such an argument
with a question of mere political right or expediency.
We are next told that the supplies of Penang would
be cut off. This evil would have been a partial and
short-lived one, and as has been proved since, would
have been obviated by the event then the most
dreaded, and which afterwards happened, the total
absorption of Keddah by Siam. The writer then
tries to show that by not snatching the Rajah out
of the hand of Siam piracy would increase. The
Keddah people were never really addicted to piracy,
as they have ever been more attached to agricultural
than to maritime pursuits. But as in the foregoing
case this argumont has been upset by subsequent
events.
From the time of Mr. Scott and Mr. Light up
to that of Mr. Anderson ( a ) the Siamese are repre-
sented as a powerful, a proud and presumptuous
people, ferocious, treacherous, ambitious. On these
and other terms of similar import changes have never
ceased to be rung, until those who used them began
to be tired of them, and to forget that there was a
possibility of their applicability being controverted,
and all this vituperation arose from the circumstance
that the Siamese laid claim to what they considered as
a rightful possession. In such a case these last
were better justified than the writers alluded to were
in their endeavours to impugn it with such weak
arguments as they used. At any rate the barbarity
of the Siamese nation was no reason why the British
should have gone to war with it, unless that barbarity
had been exerted against the settlement of Penang or
against the general tranquillity of India.
( a.) Prince of Wales Island Record


Not only has the power of the Siamese as a
nation been extravagantly extolled, but Mr. Ander-
son has compared his Siamese Majesty with “ the
ambitious ruler of France,” Napoleon. How are such
lavish encomiums to be reconciled with Mr. LighPs
own statement which has been reiterated up to the
period at which Mr. Anderson w*rote, that two com-
panies of sepoys and four six lb. field pieces, with a
supply of arms, would effectually defend Keddah
against the Siamese, because although a destructive
enemy they are not formidable in battle. What bathos
we have here—>a powerful and grasping nation yet
liable to be baffled and opposed by two hundred men.
It was also argued by the above writer that we
could not afford to lose the trade of Keddah and its
supplies, and that the eyes of the Malayan States were
on us. Now a country which like Keddah never had
a clear revenue exceeding perhaps one lac of rupees,
and the bulk of which was the fruit of oppression,
could not be one the possession of whose commerce
would be a sine qua non in mercantile policj 7 , and as
to the latter argument, although the good opinion or
respect of the Malayan tribes was desirable, it did not
follow that to secure this the British should become
their chivalric champions in the Straits.
It is further observed that it is doubtful whether
the Keddah Rajas transmitted the Boonga Mas to Siam
before the Portuguese conquered Malacca. The quot-
ations from the Keddah Histoiy will remove his doubt.
The next argument is from Vauttel, that provided a
a nation secures to itself its own sovereignty it must
be deemed independent. But as it can. be shown that
there was no sovereignty in this case, but that the
Government of Keddah was conferred on each succes-
sive Prince, including the present Ex Rajah Chau
Pangeram ( a )> by the Siamese Court, so the retention
( a.) Chau the Siamese Avord for “ Lord, ” equiva-
lent to the Malayan Tuankoo,


•of the power of creating a Governor or Ruler or of
exercising the authority of one, did not rest with the
'Keddah race or any individual of it.
After having before assured us that he could not
trace the Keddah history beyond the grandiather df
the Rajah (the Ex Raja) the author is yet undeterred
from stating as a further argument that history does
not record the concession of any thing further than
mere tribute by the Keddah Rajah to the Siamese( a )
It will be seen in the sequel that history does record
something more than this. On this point, continues
the author, (Japtain Light was best qualified to judge
because he obtained the grant. If this argument were
reversed it would be nearer tire truth.
That gentleman, intelligent as he was, had com-
mitted himself both with the Supreme Government
and the then Rajah of Keddah. He could not have
■expected that the latter should have made political
disclosures striking at the foundation of his own as-
sumed title to govern Keddah.
It comported best therefore with the position in
which he had placed himself that he should believe
what the Rajah told him, and declare that “ it did not
appear either by writing or tradition that Keddah was
ever governed by the Siamese laws or customs, and
that there would have been some remains had there
been any affinitj 7 between them, their respective langu
ages and letters.” The Keddah history “explains a few
■of these points, and my own researches into the re-
mains of antiquity in ancient Keddah will elucidate
■others.
Looking at the whole question as a matter of mere
speculation it did not necessarily follow, even allowing
the Siamese once swayed the Peninsula, that their
rights had never been impaired or shaken.
(a.) This fact is admitted by the Rajah of
Keddah’s letter to Mr. Bruce dated 23d April 1814) #


Chapter 2nd.
The Malayan Annals (a).
I shall now advert to such portions of these annals'
as tend to disclose the extent and nature of the-
Siamese influence in the Peninsula.
The annuls commence with a portion of the history
of Hindoostan which becomes insensibly blended with
the account of the Peninsula of Malacca. The anna-
list ( a ) describes the invasion of this country by Rajah
Saran of Aradam Nagara, who had previously been at
Gunga Nagara ( t> ) r and his arrival at Kla-ng Keo or
Kooee, which is expressly stated to be a Siamese
appellation. But as the Malayan letters express but
very imperfectly Siamese words and as this name so-
written would imply a Treasury, I prefer writing it
Kalang Keo, the Diamond river, which better accords
with the text.
The Prince of this territory,, by name Raja Chohan.
(which is a Siamese title), went out to oppose Suram
and as the annals record gave his orders in the Siamese
Unujuaye to call Suram to come and meet him.
Chohan’s troops were Siamese, while those of Suram
were Klings ( c ). Raja Chohan was defeated and his
. daughter 0 Nang Keo (Nang Keo *) the Siamese
Princess was captured.
Suram then advanced to Tamsack where his ex-
pedition terminated. This appears to have happen-
ed about the year A. D: 1130 and certainly before
(a) The “ Sala Sila peratoran Segula Raja Praya"
is the title of the book or chronological account of all
the Rajas (Malayan). My copy does not in matter
materially differ from the-translation of these annals by
Leyden, which last has been extensively used by several;
writers.
(b) Gunga Nugar.
(c) Natives of the Malabar coast.


1160, for it is related in the 3d Annal that Sang Nild
retamaa, grandson of Suram, subsequently known by
the title of Sri Turi Buhana, emigrated from Bentan
where he had settled, consequent on his marriage with
the daughter of the Queen of that place, and arriving
at Tanjong Bemban saw from the top of a rock the
white sands of Tarasak. 1 do not know if such sand
be now visible from the Sumatran shore. It is plain
however that the name Tamsack had been bestowed
on the place before the first recorded or traditionally
reported emigration from Sumatra. Suram then sailed
across to that place and formed a settlement. This
was in A. D. 1160. The natives of India were well
acquainted with the Eastward at this period, for their
intercourse with the Eastern Islands began about the .
beginning of the 2d century of our era( a ). Tamsak
seems to have been the ancient name of Ishore
embracing the extremity of the Peninsula and Sing-
hapura or Singapore, for in the same annal by Tamsak
is evidently meant “the Country” the title of Singa-
pura having been bestowed on the place first occupied
by the Rajah after a fanciful animal representing a
lion.(b) The difficulties which probably had hitherto
existed in forming a settlement at Singhapura, or on
the Peninsula, had been removed by the conquest and
settlement by Raja Suram of the territory of Raja
Chohan at Khlong Keo, which was most probably the
Johore River. The plain terms in which this unjust
invasion is recorded to have taken place, and this by
(a) Arabs visited the Eastern Islands in the 9th
century and an intercourse existed betwixt India and
China B. C. 126. In 800 B. C. China became an Empire
in 30” N. L SW. of Ligan. The religion introduced B.
C. 65. The Buddhist dispersion took place also about
the commencement of the 2d century A. D. The oldest
temple in Java bears date 1188 of Salivahana.
(b) Tamsak is a Tartar appellation and it seems
to be known and applied at the present day. I think the
word occurs in Captn. Burnes narrative “ Overland
Route.” It seems to have been a corruption of the
Damasoka Raja of India.


Malayan annalists too, leave little room to donbt that
Siam held at that period the supremacy over the
southern portion at least of the Peninsula, and inde-
pendent of other evidence would warrant the inference
that she embraced the whole under her sway, Mr,
Anderson has not been able to deny or to successfully
combat these inferences. Tamsak is a corruption of
Dhammasoka, the country ( a ) of a Raja of Hindostan,
and derived to the Siamese through their Bali and
other records obtained from Ceylon and other parts of
India. This I have ascertained by the perusal of a
History of that King written in the Siamese language
and which has been used by this man’s people to give
an air of antiquity to the annals of Ligor.
The present Governor of this Province, amongst
his other titles assumes that of Sri Dhammasoka Rat,
It is probable therefore that at the period alluded to,
just before the expulsion of Raja Chohan, the whole
Peninsula was denominated Tamasak or Tamasoka.
By omitting the aspirate and the vowel o, a common
practice amongst Malays in writing, the latter word
would become Tamsak ( b ). It is obvious also that this
name was applied to that portion of the Peninsula
visited by Suran before its invasion by him, and before
the Malayan race had ventured to settle on the Penin-
sula, at least the southern part of it.
Raja Suran commemorated his expedition by leav-
ing an inscription in the language of Hindostan on a
stone at Tamsak. He then returned to Bejanagar in
the Kling Country. There is an inscription on a stone
(a) Dammosaka Raja of Mangir. His son -went
to Orjui (sic) to make an Arakan(!) of his mother. He
afterwards visited Ceylon ( Maha Minda was his name),
in company with five Arabans in order to instruct the
people in religion. This was 236 years subsequent to
Buddha.
(b) Tarasak is also a Tartar title and I think
Captn. Burnes mentions it in his overland journey to
Europe.


or rode at Singapore which has baffled all attempts
which have hitherto been made to decipher it, but
from what I can learn, for I have not seen it, there is
little doubt that the character is rather Indian than
Indo-Chinese ( a ) and seems to partake of the nature
•of the characters of an inscription on stone found by
me in Province Wellesley. This latter has likewise
baffled the acuteness of the literate of Calcutta( b ). 1
strongly appr bend that both are obsolete characters
derived either from Ceylon or some parts of Hindostan.
It is not improbable that the Island of Singhapura
was part of Tamsak,
In the twelfth annal it is mentioned that an ex-
pedition which sailed under a son of Nizam U 1 Mnlie
-Akbar Shah Mani Firendan, King of Pahali( c ) in the
Kling(d) country was dispersed m its passage to
Malacca.
In the thirteenth annal we have Siam described
under the title of Sehore or Shuhre Nani(‘‘), which is
3iere stated to have had all the regions under the wind
( i. e., to the Southward of it ) dependent on it. Its
King Pho Boonyang attacked Malacca because it
would not own his allegiance. The Siamese army
came by way of Pahang, but it was defeated and
obliged to return home. The annalist therefore here
-admits the fact that the whole Peninsula was subject
to Siam when -Singhapura was settled by the intrud-
ing Malays.
(a}. I am convinced on late persona? inspection
that it is of Indian origin (1841).
(b) It has since been partly deciphered by the
late Mr. Frinsep.
(c) Palibothra.
(d) Kling. Kalingara. part of the Coromandel
<soast.
(e) The nine cities.


It does not appear that the coast of Malacca was
inhabited when the Singaporeans settled there. But
their occupation was viewed by the Siamese as an
invasion of their territory, and therefore resented
accordingly. It is probable that the attacks of, or
wars with, the Barmans prevented the Siamese from
effectually opposing the encroachers. They seem to-
have been gradually obliged to withdraw to the north-
ward. Pahang in Lat. about 8. 47 N. was one of the
Provinces which, according to the annalist, was under
the authority of Malacca, although it formerly belonged
to Siam. At this period it was called Pura and the
Raja, or the Government rather, was entitled Maha
Raja Danee Sura, who was of the Royal family of
Siam and of the Boon Yaang or Boonyahan
Dynasty^)*.
But the Malacca Rajas did not feel' secure in their
position, and we find accordingly that Sultan Mansur
Shah, the Raja of Malacca about A. D. 1876, wrote to-
the Emperor of Siam in these terms. “It is desirable
“ that wars should cease and that no mure blood
“ should be shed, and Boon yang phra Chau Lidiya is
“ to be dreaded in battle but there are hopes of his
“favour cmd forgiveness!'’ The Emperor took full
advantage of this humility by treating the ambassadors
who conveyed the letter to him as if they were, and
we may believe with truth, his liege subjects, for the
annalist acquaints us further that the* King of Siam
took both them and their followers on an expedition
against a neighbouring state and placed them in the-
van of the battle. The forlorn hope amongst bar-
barous nations receives generally a high mede of
honor, but the duty was here forcibly imposed.
(a). This title Boonyang does not occur on any list
of Siamese Kings I have seen. It is probably some cor-
ruption of another term. In iB6O, A. D., the Siamese
capital Ayoodia was built by the IGth King in succes-
sion.


Phra Chau Oodiya (the Mighty Lord of Oodh) ( a )
replied and vve may believe in that condescending and
protecting style which Siam has exercised in its
diplomatic intercourse with inferior and vassal states 5
and that she was justified in so doing is pretty evident
from the manner in which this reply was received by
Sultan Mansur Shah. The annalist has omitted the
full purport of the letter but it was addressed “ to the
<£ Amei of Malacca, who on hearing it read was highly
“ gratified and said, now my heart is at rest for my
“ enemy is converted into my friend,” and all who
were present admitted that it was a singular instance
of the favour of God towards him.
But we find that a good while after this happened,
and in the reign of Sultan Mahomed, the fear of Siam
had so far abated that the latter Raja sent an expedi-
tion against Calantan, then governed by a Prince, a
descendant of Raja Calantan and of Siamese lineage.
This Province, then under Siam, was reduced, and the
family of its Prince, Sultan Mansur Shah, were con-
veyed to Malacca.
It would seem, owing probably to the causes
before stated, [that Siam] had lost in a great degree
her influence over the Peninsula States, and that a
considerable period elapsed before she endeavoured in
earnest to regain them. Malacca, for the Siamese,
was an inconvenient place to attack, not only because
it required a land expedition after debarcation of
troops, but as we may readily admit from the imposing
position of a seaport of such resort as Malacca was in
those days and the facility with which the Rajas there
could obtain fire-arms and aid from shipping. It is
expressly stated by the annalist that the Siamese
were inferior to the Malacca men in the use of fire
arms.
13th Annal. The Siamese at length attacked
(a). The Siamese have adopted many Hindoo titles
and this amongst the rest.


Paliang but were defeated owing lo the aid afforded to
its chief from Malacca. Ligor was yet under the
Siamese sway, for it is related that the Rajah ot Ligor,
named Maha Raja Deman Sura, was ordered by the
King of Siam to attack Pahang.
The Siamese subdued Patana in this reign,
although its annals assert that its Prince, Okhoon
Phoon, afterwards lslamism and became
subject to Malacca
A. D. 1509. The advent of the Portuguese, which
took place during Sultan Mahomed’s life( a ), no doubt
gave to the Siamese a considerable advantage in
prosecuting their task of regaining the Peninsula, and
they have continued their endeavours up the present
day with various success. So long as the Treaty ot
Bangkok shall continue binding, their rule southward
will be marked by Patani, inclusive, on the east coast,
and Keddah, inclusive, on the west coast of the Penin-
sula, and there can scarcely remain a doubt that were
European influence to be withdrawn from the latter
coast, this last would speedily revert to the Siamese.
It would seem that the States on the Peninsula
northward of Juhore, the rallying point of the Malays
after their expulsion from Malacca, were either actu-
ally governed by Siamese Chiefs or were tributary to
Siam, and that those who were in the predicament of
tributaries found it advisable to conciliate the Rajah
of Johore by acknowledging themselves dependent
upon him. Also Gervaise says that in 1073 Sangora
(a state adjoining Ligor and south of it) rebelled
against Siam. Ualoong, a central province or dis-
trict now under Siam, is not mentioned in the Annals.
Salangore was not then in existence, Perak was
attacked and conquered by the Malacca forces and the
(a), He had lesigned his throne to Sultan Ahmed.


Rnjaih ( a ) of Keddah (probably 'Sultan Ma Alum
Shah ) went during Sultan Mahmud’s reign to obtain
the nobuts or drums of ceremony from tliat Prince,
who was then the head of the islands. No mention is
made of any country to the northward of Keddah.
Floris states that Patani was under Siam in 1603
A. D. and was tributary in 1703, In 17SG it was
again brought under perfect subjection by’them.
I now proceed to the notice of those portions of
the Keddah History termed Mavong Mahawangsa
which relate to the power exercised by its Rajas.
I shall not stop here to investigate the question
who Marang Mahawangsa was. From the name and
other circumstances .1 should incline to give him a
Hindoo origin, and to fix Ceylon as his birthplace.
Re this as it may he is described in the History
or Annal which goes by his name, as having reached
Keddah from Room, the latter term implying some
part of the Byzantine Empire. He came in the train
and as the chief follower of a Prince of Room [RumJ
who was proceeding to China to negotiate a marriage
with a princess of the Emperor of that country. The
fleet was dispersed and many ships were lost, if not all,
except the one in which was Marang Malta Wangsa,
and which reached the country now called Keddah.
The original name is not specially mentioned*
But this Chief’s party settled at Pulo Srai on the
Island of Srai, as the term implies, and Srai is the
name given by the Siamese to the whole country,
although amongst the Malays it is the Keddah moun-
tain and peak alone which retains the name.
This Peak, with a considerable tract around, is
the Pulo Srai above alluded to, only l ' it has ceased to
be an island.
(a). Phra Oong Maha Waugsa was the first Keddah
Rajah who was converted to Islamism. He then assumed
the title of Sultan Mahmud,


This colony, if a small body of men who seem to-
have arrived involuntarily may be so termed, found
tlie country inhabited bjr a race which they deemed
to be savage, but which reproach it does not appear to
have deserved, for it is stated that the Chief, Phra
Chahan, escorted a son of the Rajah Bodisat on a
colonizing expedition, and that he was the son of a
Malay man by one of the tribe in question, and had a
very handsome son. These aborigines, if not actually
off the Siamese stock, were followers at least of some
sect of Hindoos, or Budlhists. Their names declare
this fact. The new settlers were evidently Buddhists
also, and this no doubt rendered their position less-
dangerous than it would otherwise have been, and
hastened their amalgamation with the natives. We
find the following names in the Keddah History, which
are chiefly of Bali origin and known to the-
Siamese( a )*
The History is silent as to the period when tem-
ples were first erected in Keddah or Srai, but
my own researches have proved that the Siamese were
concerned in building them. I have also been able
must clearly to identify almost every spot, and parti-
cularly the most remarkable sites mentioned in the
history, the general authenticity of which I might per-
haps have else doubted.
Rajah Bodisat sent his eldest son towards Siam
Lanchang, when he settled near the mouth of a small
river, and built a fort and where he continued to rule,
having several dependent provinces also under him.
Unfortunately these provinces are not specified, so we
are left in the dark as to the true p >sition of the coun-
try thus occupied. It could hardly however have been
(a). Nang Sooam (dhamma) the wife of Plira
Chahaa Parap (Tharap) their son. Nang Meri the daugh-
ter o-f a i man of rank and wife to Plira Hajanuraks,-


Siam proper, for this last is watered by a large river.
But my object here is only to show bo what this
alleged emigration led ( a ). The second son took pos-
session of Perak, and Bodisat’s daughter, whose name
is not mentioned, formed a settlement at Patani, which
country continued long afterwards as we find from
PI oris to be governed by Queens, thus far corroborating
the Malayan account.
Bodisat died and was succeeded by his youngest
son who assumed the title of Sri Mahawangsa. About
the same time his elder brother Parap sent from Siam
to acquaint him that he had then a son seven years
old. Gifts were also sent. Sri Mahawangsa sent an
ambassador bearing a reply to his brother’s letter, also
presents of gold and silver flowers and spears, swords
and other arms inlaid with gold. The King of Siam
in return requested that similar gifts should be pre-
sented yearly to amuse his children.
This last assigned reason, or rather apology, for a
concession of inferiority, if not of vassalage by the
Keddah Rajah, is easily comprehended. It is only
surprising that the history now quoted from, has nob
long ago been weeded of every passage obnoxious to
Keddah independence, seeing that it was known for
several centuries omlty, if not in its written state, to
the Mahomedan Chiefs of Keddah, and that many
paragraphs in it show that the existing copies have
been made by Mussulman pens. One quotation will
(a). These colonies, if such they were, diverged
about the year xV. D. 1850, just about the period when
the Siamese capital Ayoodiya was built. If these migra-
tions had been stated to have gone forth from Ayoodiya
the case would have been clearer, yet the near coinci-
dence in the two periods is deserving of attention. If
Marong Mahawangsa, the immediate predecessor of
Bodisat, was a Buddhist, the latter would have had no
difficulty in settling in any part of Siam or placing co-
lonies in it. That he was an image worshipper is plain
from the acknowledgment of his successor.


suffice. “ The Queen Shureen went to repose in her
palace in the west, and the King of the World, seated
on his throne, gave audience on the edge of the
horizon.”
Maha Phrit Durj-a, the successor of Sri Maha-
wangsa, was an atrocious tyrant according to the
history, and was driven from the countiy.
The Ministers after this event, being at a loss
how to act as they had no master, sent to the King of
Siam to acquaint him with the predicament in which
the country had been placed—meantime they con-
tinued to “administer the Government.” The King of
Siam allowed the young son of Rajah Bersiyong to
govern Keddah. A good deal of mummery is here
introduced by the annalist to break the effect of this
exercise of His Siamese Majesty’s prerogative and
which it would be superfluous to detail.
It may as well be remarked that although much
may be inferred from this circumstance as to the pre-
vious political relations of Keddah, it is the first instance
actually noticed in the history of the direct assump-
tion of power by Siam to give away the government
of that country to any one it might choose to patronize.
The young Chief having been discovered by the quac-
kery alluded to, the King of Siam sent Kalahom
(this title is given to a Minister of State) who was
an old courtier, and who ruled the eastern provinces
on a mission to Keddah. His instructions were to
instal the young chief in the government, and to
make other amicable arrangements consistent with
this act.
If the power of making Princes or Governors to
rule over Keddah was then acceded to by Keddah,
and exercised by the Siamese, it follows almost as a
matter of course that the latter had the power to un-
make them when they fell off from their allegiance.
When Kalahom reached Keddah the young Rajah and
the four muntrees went out to meet him, and were


received by him outside of his encampment at Sungei
Sala with every mark of respect. The letter ot the
King of Siam was then read and (agreeably to it)
proclamation was made that the young chief had be-
come Raja under the title of Raja Phra Ong Maha
Photeesat. The Envoy returned to Siam five months
after this event. The Rajah of Keddah sent gold and
silver flowers by him to the great Raja of Siam in
token of his having been installed in the government
and of ever enduring amity.
After this period the King of Siam never omitted
to send ambassadors annually to Keddah (to demand
tribute it may be supposed) nor the Keddah Raja to
send in return gold and silver flowers as mark of
friendship ( or rather vassalage ).
Phra Ong Maha Wangsa, who succeeded his
father Photeesat in the government, was the first
Keddah Rajah who was converted to Islamism, and as
Keddah was then a place of considerable resort to
strangers we may suppose that the attachment to
Siam became every day weaker. This conversion
took place in the year of Hegira 879 or A. D. 1666,
according to the Achinese Annals, for I cannot here
follow the Keddah Annals, as they do not assign any
Rate.
The History, as might have been expected, gives
no account of the relations which existed betwixt
Keddah and Siam subsequent to the introduction ot
Islamism into the former. Indeed the whole of the
narrative after that time is only a meagre list of Rajas
without any record of their actions ( a ).
(a). It is stated in the Sigara Malayoo or Malayan
Armais that a Rajah of Keddah arrived at Malacca m
the reign of Sultan Mahomed to request to have the
■nobut. This must have been previous to the year
A. D. 1509, when the Portuguese had conquered Malacca.
The Keddah Annals are silent on this head, the Ked-


The most curious part of these annals is the
account of a Dynasty of Siamese Kings proceeding
from a western stock. The original Siamese stock
came from the north, and Siam became a nation as
early as A. D. 757 according to their .own chronicles,
afforded to us by M. De La Loubere. But their city of
Siam was not founded until A.D. 1351-2 or 1894 ot the
Buddhist era. Now Loubere also states expressly that
all the Siamese Kings were not of the Siamese race
and it is not improbable that they may have accepted
Buddhist emigrants from India for their rulers. The
era which I have assigned, A. D. 1340 (after collating
the Achinese, the Keddah and Malayan Annals) for
the first settlement of Keddah, so closely cori’esponds
with that of the building of Ayodhia, as thus described
by the impartial Loubere, that it is impossible to
withhold assent to the fidelity of the details of the
principal events in the Keddah History. The chrono-
logies however of Siamese Rulers given both by M. De
La Loubere and Mr. Crawfurd throw scarcely any light
on this subject. The first of these authors acquaints us
that the first King reigned in 960 of the Siamese era
or A. D. 419, and that there were successively fifty-
two kings on the throne up to 1894 of their era,
when the capital of Ayoodia was built. Some further
particulars on the subject will appear under the head
of Ligor.
The present Ex Rajah of Keddah undoubtedly
precipitated his fate by an unconciliating and uncom-
promising behaviour towards the Siamese, totally at
variance with his position. It was [to] the good
wishes of the Court of Bangkok that he had owed the
Government of Keddah.
dah people were not fully converted until A. D. 1612,
when according to the Achinese Annals Ishan Pahlaman
subdued Keddah and took Rajah Supaka a prisoner.
The Portuguese historian De Faria acquaints us ( vol, 3
p. 197) that Keddah was destroyed by the Portuguese
under James de Mendes Furtado in 1614.


Can his impudence then be palliated or his fate
be deeply sympathised with ? Whenever a dependent
province ot Siam denies its allegiance the latter nation
exerts its right to dispossess the local ruler, and
either to replace him by another of its own choice or
else where it has been merely tributary to annex the
refractory province more firmly to the Empire.
In the case of Keddah we find a list of Chau
Phiyas or Governors styled (by themselves only)
Eajas, nearly allied, if we believe [them], to the reign-
ing dynasty of Siam, speaking the Siamese language
(until the influx of Malays from Acheen, Menang Ka
bou and other Matyan States had introduced the
Malayan language and caused it nearly to supersede
in a great measure the Siamese tongue) bearing
Siamese titles, and enjoying Siamese dignities and
delegated authority, and until their conversion to
Mahomedanism, about 1464, zealous adherents to
Buddhism.


I now proceed to offer in addition to the foregoing
proofs and arguments such other facts as have been
elicited by me during my researches (on the spot) into
the antiquities of Keddah in former times. As it is
my intention to publish a separate account of the lat-
ter, I shall only here advert to the facts which bear on
the political question under discussion.
The first Rajah of Keddah Marrong Mahawangsa
did not certainly arrive there before the the year 1300,
but I have assigned 1340 as the probable period.
Now I trust it has been proved that the Siamese race
extended south to Johore or some place near the ex-
tremity of the Peninsula before A. D. 1160, while it is
obvious that since they were then powerful in this
Peninsula they had been a good while settled on it
before they were expelled in part by the transient ex-
pedition from India and by the Malays.
It has also been shown from the Keddah Annals
that the country was peopled and probably densely so
by a race of Buddhists who, under the name of Rakh-
shas or Raksasas, applied to them afterwards by the
Malays when they became Mahometans, were truly
Siamese.
The first mention of these inhabitants refers to
the period of Mahawangsa’s first arrival in Kedddah,
when “many of the Rakhshas came down to visit the
strangers and were greatly afraid.” That the chief of
these people was selected hij the Kedd,ah Raja “ to
escort his son to Siam” is an additional proof of the
former having been a Siamese.
The numerous Buddhist and Hindoo temples on
both banks of the Muda River and now in ruins, were
probably built by the aid of the Siamese, although
there are sufficient proofs extant, and which I shall
notice in another paper, that the Hindoos frequented
Pulo Nai or Keddah while these temples yet
remained entire, and that they erected temples


to Malta Deo and other Hindoo Gods. In a square
compartment formed in a square of granite which com-
posed part of the foundation of one of these temples,
1 discovered a thin plate of gold on which are the fol-
lowing words, written in old Siamese characters “ Ka
thani thong” which is apparently an enigmatical
phrase, for a Siamese priest who was present when it
was found could not explain it further than by render-
ing it literally thus— Ka (a particle used to signify
I—-he—it) make gold.
There are also several thin leaves of the same
metal containing Bali writing in. a character rather
obsolete but which the Siamese can read. The metal
or bronze images and ornaments found appear to have
been brought from Ceylon or seme part of continental
India, so that if Marrong Mahawangsa was not a
Buddhist priest himself he seems to have been soon
followed by many.
I have traced the ruins of upwards of 20 temples,
and in some of these I have found images, not onlv of
Buddha, but of other well known Hindoo Deities.
Amongst the many proofs existing that the
Siamese race peopled Keddah before the Malays reach-
ed it, it may be observed that there are descendants
called Sammans of the pure Siamese stock, and which
race has continued in Keddah during the whole period
of the Malayan rule, i.e., since the chiefs under Keddah
became Islamites.
People of this race are still numerous at the follow-
ing places in Keddah
Vat l.oohoh Wallei
Ooj >ng Simift
Padang Kharhae or Thong Khihae
Parian g Phteng
Lam men
Lainpam
beugka and Wat Pado and in Prov. Wellesle}' (500
persons). These people speak still the Siamese language
and are still attached to the religion of Buddha.


But the Siamese race must have extended to Ked-
dnh subsequent!} 7 to the annexation of Ligor, as before
noticed, to Siam, apparently about A. D. 758. In the
Annal recordincf that event Keddah is not mentioned
amongst the Provinces dependent on Ligor. Indeed
it was probably not then inhabited or in so trifling a
degree as not to have merited notice,
The Ex King himself bore the Siamese title cf
of Chau Pangerarn, and from the Uaduug Undang or
“ Malayan Laws and Customs ” of Keddah I extract
♦he following paragraph.
“ The-Raja of Keddah will thus address the Raja
of Ligor, Chow Phya Katana Songkram Rambhakdi
Sri Sultan Mahamad Rana Raja Budind Besaorin
Terina Wangsa Phya Srai Buree.
To
“Chow Phya Sri Thammasookkaraj Jatti Dejo jai
Mahai savariya apai phiriya Krom Bahu Chow Phya
Nal corn Sri Dhammaraj, ” which may be freely rendered
“ The Chau Phriya( a ) who is pure in mind, the chief in
battle, virtuous as Rama, the pre-eminent Sultan Mah-
mood Rana, the guardian Raja, resplendent and of
the illustrious lineage of ( Marrong Malta) Wangsa,
the Chan Phriya of the country of Chrai (or Keddah).
(a). Chau Phriya is a title given by the Siamese to
the Governor of a Privince of the EE or first rank
(.Moo-ung-ek). In the above title there is a strange mix-
ture of Hindoo, Mahometan and Siamese words.
' Thus all the objections of Mr Anderson and hi*
followers to the title of Governor as being given to the
last Keddah Chief are upset by an undoubted Keddab
document of long standing; the Raja of Keddah and the
Raja of Kigor were governors of equal rank, KK is not
a Siamese word. It is the Hindostanee yek (one) and
as the Hindoostani numeral is also applied to the suc-
ceeding classes of Provinces, the supposition therefore
before made that some of the Siamese Kings were
originally from India is rendered more probable.


To
Chau Phriya Sree Tam Sookrat (Damasoka the name
of the first alleged Prince of Ligor) of an illustrious
lineage, unconquerable in battle, glorious as the sun,
preternaturally endowed, the voice of Majesty and
Viee-gerent, the Chau Phriya of Ligor, renowned for
virtue. ” ( a )
In describing the polio} 7 which has hitherto been
observed to the eastward a few reflections still remain
to be offered, and it appears to me better to insert
them in this place, although they apply to different
periods, some ol which are recent, than to scatter them
throughout this narrative. The British alliance was
courted by most of the petty states on the Malayan
Peninsula, with the avowed intention of obtaining
shelter under her flag from the alleged ambitious as-
saults of Siam. Had therefore the desire of extending
the British Power in this quarter existed it might not
have been difficult of accomplishment even then. Now
the practicability of such an extension could not be
doubted. But a state of neutrality was essential to
the speedy growth of the colony, established as it was
on broad commercial principles; audit combined the
double advantage of embracing the trade of all
parties, and of reserving for emergencies the strength
of the state. It has been argued by the advocate*
for Malayan that were the British to
declare the independence of the Peninsula States not a
soldier of the Company w T ould be required to defend
them against the Siamese.
This appears to be a bold assumption and it in-
volves another, that no provision would be required
(a). The Rajah of Ligor said in Durbar to Mr.
Ibbetson where I was present, I am a great man here,
have sounding titles and am called Raja, hot at Court I
must grovel on rm knees and elbows like that man be-
fore you, pointing to his secretary.
Mr. Anderson and others.


against the wars of these States amongst themselves,
in which some one party might invite the Siamese
ito assist it. This actually happened in Perak at
the very time when the negotiations which esta-
blished its independence were hardly concluded,
several turbulent Chiefs having called on the Siamese
to assist them against their lawful Rajah. But, say the
advocates for an interfering policy, the British nation,
by declining to take the Malayan States under its
protection, removed thereby the natural outposts of
its Straits possessions. This is mere conjecture. All
that has been left undone amounts to no more than a
refusal to prop up a barrier chain composed of most
unequal links, and ready at all times to snap asunder
of itself. Such a declaration of the independence of
the Malayan States would in the early stages of British
occupancy in the Straits have probably led directly
to a war with Siam.—And now, although she might
not, from the insight she has got into our power, ven-
ture to go to war, she would feel that a blow was
aimed at her individually. It seems very doubtful
how far the British nation would be justified in any
dictation, which this would be, to Siam, and it so what
right would the former possess to repel or attack the
Siamese should they invade the emancipated stare*
without any strong provocation on the part of the
latter, or even after provocation.
It would besides be quite impossible to free these
states and at the same time to prevent them, in
the pride of anticipated support, giving umbrage to
Siam.
But the difficulty and expense which would un-
avoidably attend the supporting of weak allies would
assuredly not be repaid in commercial or other advan-
tages, It would be indispensable, both externally and
with reference to their individuality, that 11 1 ey r should
be subsidized. The Siamese could never be so far
driven off by offensive and defensive alliances betwixt


the British and the Malays as to prevent the former,
if so inclined and possessed of the power, from molest-
ing either, nor could such a hold be obtained of
that nation by these means as is now afforded by
their responsible proximity to a long line of British
Frontier. If the British are destined ever to war with
Siam it will be at a period ( and it is to be hoped far
in futurity) when she shall be led to aggression by an
exhibition of diminished British power, both maritime
and with reference to India generally.
But the advocates for war, for such those undoubt-
edly are who urged an armed support of the Malays
against Siam, however their reasons may be shrouded
in the deceitful garb of philanthropy, lose sight of the
fact that about one half of the whole population or
150,000 persons, have emigrated from the surrounding
regions, and enjoy at this moment protection under
the British dag in the Straits( a ) and that the most
fitting arguments against the emancipating or in plain
terms the subsidizing system are, that a large portion
of these Malays still vascillate between the enjoyment
of restrained freedom under the British rule with poli-
tical and social security, and the unrestrained life but
occasionally disturbed by invasion and oppression,
which they led in their native countries ; that the
benefits of British rule should long ere this have drawn
off a far larger portion than they have done of the
population of these countries ; that some of these states
have occasionally confederated with the Siamese
(a). Penang ... ... 38,000 Inhabitants
Province Wellesley ... 47,000
Singapore ... ... 30,000
Malacca and Narming 34.329
Total 149,329
The Malayan population of the whole Peninsula
exclusive of the British and Siamese possessions may be
estimated as follows.


against each other; and that their system of piracy
has been directed chiefly against the trade of British
posts at the very time they were accusing the British
of not supporting them, and when they were humbly
sueing for aid from the latter.
Since the Burmese war threw into the British
scale the Tenasserim Provinces, and Province Welles-
ley has been successful cultivated, the necessity
which before existed at Penang of relying on Keddah
for supplies of grain arid poultry &ca. has entirely
vanished, cattle being the only kind of supply not y T eb
raised in these settlements in sufficient number to meet
the consumption. The cause of cattle not being bred
here at .Penang to any great extent is that whatever
tne feelings of the Siamese may have been cattle have
always found their way into Province Wellesley,
Instead then of wasting British capital in giving
an undue importance to Malayan Chieftainships the
strength of the state is reserved for great emergencies.
Independent of every other consideration the
character of [the] Malayan population of the States
alluded to is so unstable that nothing certain could be
predicated of or built on it. Willingly bending his
Inhabitants
1 Perak 30,000
2 Salangore ... ... ... ... ... 2,000
3 Johore and its dependencies not including
islands but including Pahang (50,000) 50,000
4 Tringanoo ... ... ... ••• ... 30,000
5 Calantan Sri Meekims ... ... ... 40,000
Total 152,000
Malayan States under Siam :
Patani ... ... ... 70,000
Keddah ... 20.000
90,000
I have on revision been induced to assign a some-
what larger population to the Peninsula than that stated-
in my late dissertation.


neck beneath the yoke of slavery imposed on him by
his Lord or Chief, the Malay seems to cringe
before any other where a choice remains. But having
been trained to servitude he feels it when imposed on
him by a foreign nation chiefly, and in so far only,
as it insults his clannish principles. It is a curious
fact that the Siamese have constantly employed
Malays in fighting their battles against Malays, which
refinement the}’ effect partly by fear and partly by
retaining the families of the levies as hostages for their
fidelity.
It seems to have been considered by the Malays,
at the first establishment of the British in the Straits,
that the latter would as a matter of course shield them
against the ambition of Siam, and the delusion has
not to this day been quite dispelled, partly owing
to [the] silent moral check which the known power
of the British has given to the progress southward of
the Siamese, and partly to the constant outcry, aided
by the press, against the Government for not assisting
the Islams against the infidels, forgetting in this
war cry, that Christians are included by the intolerant
Hadgis and religionists in the anathema against the
Kafirs; and that the Hadgis, who form a large port-
ion of the Malayan population in every petty state,
have, amongst other acquirements derived from the
Haj, imbibed all the repulsive bigotry and intolerance
of Islamism. without its virtues. It would be satis-
factory to have it explained who should open his
purse in such a crusade.
Should the Siamese ever become so infatuated as
to ins It the British nation while in the zenith of its
power, the Malays would then be sure allies, and
might be made serviceable for all the purposes of
desultory warfare. Siam is eminently vulnerable by a
great naval power like the British. A slight effort in
conjunction with the Malays could cut off Lower Siam
southward of Chaiya ; Keddah, Boonga and J unkceylon


would surrendei to small detachments. A force from
Tenasserim could penetrate at any one of the passes
into the heart of Siam, in which an irregular body
of the disaffected, or of emigrant Peguers, might,
possibly be enrolled, while two men of war with
transports, and a steamer with a regiment of troops
might at once take possession of the capital.
The following opinion which experience has
taught me to entertain of the Siamese character may,
if correct, serve as a criterion to a certain extent of
the probable conduct of that people under any given
circumstances. They are proud, vain, ignorant and
vaunting. Jus', ly suspecting their own weakness and
therefore, constantly trying to conceal it by a shallow
show of strength. Less manly in their minds, and in
their outward bearing than the Burmese, but, com-
pensating for the deficiency by superior cunning.
They are more easily alarmed than the Burmese, yet
exhibit a bravery, the result chiefly of the terror in-
spired into them by a barbarous and rigorous discip-
line, and the force of habit; yet the} 7 do not want
physical courage in the main. Slaves to their super-
iors they become, when masters, harsh and cruel to
their inferiors. The crouching slave ot to-day may
become to-morrow the master over thousands, and the
most favoured man in power has always before his
mental eye, the rack, the sack and the executioner’s
sword. The Siamese are for an eastern people very
national. Indeed the Indo-Chinese nations in general
evince a degree of national feeling which it would he
in vain to seek for amongst the population of the
majority of the states of Hindoostan, and which has
kept them distinct from each other. The Burmese
and Siamese, hate each other most cordially. A re-
ciprocity of hatred also exists betwixt the Siamese and
their neighbours the Cambojans and Laos. Cochin
China and Siam are now contending for the mastery t
and the Chinese are only too distant, and their Emperor


is too well occupied in keeping his turbulent
subjects quiet, to admit of China entering the lists
against the whole of these nations.
The Siamese are practised dissemblers, and state
secrets are rarely disclosed where it dees not suit the
rulers that they should be so.
In private intercourse with each other the Siamese
are hospitable, jovial, joyous and inclined to exagger-
rated epithets of regard and sentimentalism. They
are not very fond of strangers but treat them politely
when not interfered with by Government officers. As
enemies, lik a all half polished people, they are ruthless
and devastating,—to conquer and to destroy being
almost synonymous terms in their war vocabulary, so
that a country seldom recovers itself after having been
subdued by them. In politics the Siamese are cau-
tious, cool and deliberative ; but although sometimes
ambitious beyond the bounds of reason, they rarely
allow themselves, either while under the immediate
excitement of real or supposed wrong, or when nouri-
shing the most deeply rooted hatred or prejudice, bo
hurry them into sudden, intemperate acts, however
ill-judged the result of their councils on the whole may
be regarding any given political measure.
Bub although thus slow to act, yet their per-
severance afterwards more than repays in face of an
enemy (within the line of Indo-Chinese civilization )
the mischief of delay.
It will be apparent from what has been noticed,
that there are no real grades of Siamese society.
Below the degrees of public office all are nearly
on an equality, excepting the priesthood, and thus
in one of the most arbitrary Governments in the
world any one may aspire to the highest offices of
the state —that precise condition of things at which
democracy aims, only arriving at it through another
channel. The literature of the Siamese, which is


from its western origin rather of a refined caste and
which is accessible to all—the religion which is based
on humane dogmas and is highly retributive —all serve
to render the Siamese a nation deserving to be studied.
Since Mr. Anderson wrote his pamphlet on the
Malayan Peninsula there have been several anonymous
supporters of his arguments who have addressed the
public through the Press. With these writers argu-
ments would be useless. But I cannot avoid com-
menting in this place on two works which have been
published respectively by Captain Begbie and Lieut.
Newbolt( a ).
The partisan like and dogmatical style of the
writers, who seern to have come to their task without
any personal knowledge of the subject to be discussed,
the sneering manner in which the existing British
politics are described, and numerous errors in matters
of fact which occur in their pages render them very
indifferent guides.
Captain Begbie’s work is professedly a compila-
tion, and he sets out with a claim to the merit of im-
partiality in what he himself states( b ).
(a) Captain Begbie’s Malayan Peninsula.
Lieut. Newbolt's Sketch of Moar &ca. pub-
lished in the Asiatic Researches, September 188 b.
(b) His impartiality he displays by taking solely
one side of the question of Straits policy, and Mr. Ander-
son for his guide in elucidating it. Thus in rapid
succession he has these expressions; “ The Raja of
Ligor is an imperious despot.' “ Mr. Anderson s lucid
argument bv which he proves that Iveddah was essential-
ly an independent state.’ “ The absurdity is apparent
enough of arguing from a peculiar idiomatical Malayan
expression meaning no moie than a unanimity of feeling,
namely that the countries of Keddah and Pulo I enang
shall he as one country, that the British were
bound at all hazards to fight for Keddah again. “Up
to the Treaty of Bangkok Siam never claimed Keddah aa
a Province and the country undoubtedly never was
Siamese.”


It is indeed a mere unmethodical compilation
from obsolete works, from Crawfurd’s Archipelago, Mr.
Anderson’s Malayan States and considerations on Ked-
dah Policy, my account of Penang and Province
Wellesley and such other works as may have fallen in
his way.
So closely has he copied Mr. Anderson’s writings
that he has not omitted any of his errors. He has
also so blended his own remarks with the statements
of the authors he has copied from, that a common
reader has no chance of being able to discriminate
betwixt what is original and what is borrowed. He
cannot even be complimented for any attempt at
classification.
Lieut. Newbolt chiefly confines himself to an
account of the district of Moar and some adjacent
places. It may here be remarked that he has copied
from Mr. Anderson his description of places on the
Malayan Coasts.
“ Captain Burney gives up Province Wellesley as
an integral portion of Keddah to Siam and consequently
declares it not to be a British possession.” How could
Province Wellesley be an integral portion of Keddah
when it had been separated from it for 24 years by a
distinct treaty and afterwards by a separate one with
special reference to its eastern boundary, and made
thereby an integral part of the settlement of Penang.
The most that could be predicated of the omission to
have Province Wellesly in the 10th article of the Treaty,
if omission it was or could be deemed to be, is that the
Siamese would be debarred trading with Province Welles-
ley, But the mooting such a point displays a literal or
logical spirit,
The policy of Siam is admired which employed
“ one of her tributaries, Ligor, to subject Keddah ” as
if Ligor had not for centuries been, as she now is to all
intents and purposes, an integral Siamese province.
Such views used to be the stumbling blocks of early
navigators. When they happened to touch at an Indo-
Chinese port and found the Chief exercising apparently
unchecked power, they set him down at once as a Rajah
or a King.


It would have saved much writing had all these
authors constructed maps, instead of little better than
meagre details of names.
The whole of the places described by them al-
ready exist in maps and most of them did exist before
they wrote ( a ).
The account of the last revolt in Keddah, when the
Wolf and Crocodile were stationed off the mouth of
Keddah River, is replete with errors.
'The “ Malayan fleet ” was a few small boats. The
“fleet sunk” about / piratical Siac boats which were
driven off “with damage.” “Tuanku Soliman the King's
brother, residing on the confines of Province Wellesley,
made a demonstration with three thousand men in
favour of Kudin,”
This force nnmbered 300 men For “from six to ten
thousand Malays and Siamese killed in Keddah ” read
2217.
Captain Begbie’s account of the Nannung War and
its causes is rather tedious, but I believe faithful. He
had recourse for the latter to the records supplied by
Mr Ibbetson.
The summary of the population of Johore and other
piratical states and islands is loosely given and probably
overstated.
ia) Map presented by the writer to the Court of
Directors in 1822.
NOTE.
The genealogies of Petty Chiefs and Panghulus
cannot excite any interest in the general reader, and
which occupy so large a portion of the work, excepting
perhaps that of the Johore State only which might have
been given, if at all. in a tabular form in a note.
Captain Begbie’s book might have been with equal
advantage to himself and his readers reduced to one
third of its present dimensions. He has pressed into his
service accounts centuries old, along with recent ones,
yet has contrived so to jumble them together that
nothing satisfactory can be obtained, except here and
there a few well authenticated facts, which have been
before known.
He in reality describes rather how things were than
how they are, leaving us to guess if the condition of the
countries described is not applicable to a period of two
centuries back instead of applying to the present day
Had he trusted more to himself, and been more brief and
methodical his work would have been much more useful
than it now is.


Lieut. Newbolt observes; “Quedah, Ligor, Pat an i,
Merdilo (Daloong), Junkceylon are considered in the
treaty concluded by Major Burney with Siam in 1820
as Provinces of that Empire, a concession to that
arrogant power scarcely just or polite.” Now Lieut.
Newbolt should have known that the whole of these
Provinces belong as much of right to Siam as Ireland or
Singapore does to the British, and that therefore
the supposed concession is absurd. Under the same
delusion he proceeds to say that the rightful Raja of
Patani is a prisoner in Siam, when everybody knows
that Patani never had a Rajah, but it has, ever since
it was under a female Government, centuries ago, been
divided amongst petty chiefs subordinate to Siam, and
its subjects. The Ex Rajah of Keddah has not “gone
NOTE.
It is high time that writers on Indo-Chinese coun-
tries should abandon the ambiguous and proteous like
terms commonly employed to impress the reader with
ideas which many of these writers themselves are too
indolent to elucidate by a diligent analysis of established
customs, of feelings and of the peculiar moral and
physical influences acting through a long course of ages.
It is easy, in order to account for unlooked for energy
of Government or apparent weakness, to ring unmeaning
changes on such terms as civilization and barbarism, and
despotism, ignorance, slavery, superstition, bigotry, in-
tolerance, demoralization, and many others applicable
in a thousand ways, and conveying no definite meaning.
But it is not so easy to describe laws and institutions,
whether written or merely sanctioned, or felt, and recog-
nised by long' use, the secret springs of action resting
on or arising from traditional feelings, habits and cus-
toms; the contempt fostered for their* nations, or the
national pride which is ever strongest amongst people
the least civilized, and which is a stronger bond of union
there, than amongst people further advanced, the quality
which the Eastern dispositions give birth to thus ending
in the same result, so far, as a democracy does, having
power as a bait, to all the pomp of ceremonies gilding
the most galling yoke ; the influence of popular feeling
and character on the governing, and the toleration of
the latter to the governed ; the social accessories obser-
vable in the rudest states of humanity ; the social com-
pacts existing independent of any governing power, and
the true extent and influence of the professed religion.


to Delhi” and he has not “ many friends there.” It
would require no less than British co-operation to per-
suade “the whole of the Malayan States to take up
arms against their haughty oppressor the Siamese,”
instead of little persuasion to do so as he states, being
a consummation which however it may suit the aspira-
tions of the pugnaciously disposed, Mr. Newbolt will
not [be] likely [to] see realized. Mr. Newbolt is a
strenuous advocate for the direct interference of the
British in supressing the feuds of the Native Chiefs
and for assuming a preponderating attitude in the
midst of them.
Our moral preponderance is sufficiently established
already, and if the Malays, at the extremity of the
Peninsula, seek British arbitration they will probably
receive it if it can be afforded under a practicable
form.
The balance of power amongst the Indo-Chinese
nations is not maintained, as in Europe, by the force
of opinion and international laws. Nature in her
physical or material capacity holds the scales.
NOTE.
whether glazing over the surface of life, or deeply
sinking into and enthralling the reason and imagination.
No nation ever existed, despotic or otherwise, which
did not improve in the course of ages on the original
social groundwork, slow in some instances, quick in
others, but still progressive to the point where decay
commenced. The inevitable social institutions of India
is an expression to be received with caution. However
slow the progress, do not fact> show that the Indian
mind is not what it was in the days of Alexander or
Auringzebe. There is an under mental current in life
which flows on so noiselessly that even those within its
influence are hardly aware of its effects ; feelings,
nay opinions, occupy unbetrayed the conscious minds
of millions for centuries, until the slow work of rea-
son is ripe, when touched suddenly by the electric
force of some master spirit, the whole expands in-
to a new existence, the old shell of prejudice and
of error being cast off without an effort. There
is no «uch thing in nature as a sudden and perfect


Mountains and deserts are the only obstacles to
national aggrandizement amongst nations all thirsty
for supremacy. Cochin China presses on Camboja
and Siam and but for such obstacles would probably
ere thio have swallowed up the nearest one of these;
and unless the power of the Chinese shall be inter-
posed may yet absorb that country. Siam bears hard
on the Laos race, and has in its turn probably
alone been saved from ultimate subjection to Ava
by the ranges of mountains and the jungles which
separate the two countries. Siam and Ava are perhaps
alone prevented by the powerful arm of the British
from being in perpetual collision.
But all these natural obstacles may at some future
time give way before some dominant power. The
Chinese are already stretching away behind these
secondary states and rolling on the scattered tribes of
Shans and others to the British frontier ; and unwar-
NOTE.
change in morals, politics and religion. Has Christian-
ity modelled all its votaries by one invariable mental or
social scale ? Has it even greatly changed the habits it
found existing? What dissimilar nations profess Is-
lamism. Habits and feeling, however originally strong,
are in the long run, more likely to react on religion and
politics than the latter are on the former.
There is as wide a difference betwixt the political
and social relations of what are classed as barbarous and
despotic Eastern Kingdoms as there is betwixt the
■wildest despotism of the East and the patriarchal and
enlightened yet absolute rule of Russia
Talk to a Burmese of his being a slave and he will
tell you that he is one of the warrior nation which gave
birth to an Alompra, the conqueror of Pegu. Tell a
Siamese that he is a mere tool and abject drudge of his
prince. He will answer that Siam is the circuit of the
gods, the country chosen of Buddha, the great, the in-
comparable region of Ayodia, the region coveted by
every neighbouring country.
Tell a Malay that his Chief is his Demi-God, how-
ever imperative and cruel he may be. He will reply
that it is the custom of Malays to honor their Chief and
obey them under all circumstances or as the Malayan


like as China is believed to be her very numbers
would render opposition to her systematic approach by
any Indo-Chinese people quite impossible. China has
also a marine—at least means lor transporting an array
by sea to Siam or to Rangoon. Could solid improve-
ment in navigation, architecture, in military tactics
and commercial policy gain a footing in China, it would
be impossible to assign limits to her empire. The drain
which would ensue when she should begin to throw oh
colonies would still further stimulate the principle of
population until at least the Chinese race had filled
all the space betwixt China and Hindoostan and until
perhaps it had come into direct collision with these
western regions.
Compared with any one of the Chief former or old
Governments of Hindoostan, the Indo-Chinese nations
must lose not only on the score of Physical resources
and strength, but of moral and social and commercial
capabilities.
China must rank at least above the very best
native Indian Governments and nations which have
existed since the palmy days of the Mogul Emperors,
NOTE.
Raja Tuam Bijata(a) observed when in the power of a
man whose wife he had dishonoured “He is a true
Malay and will do no treason to his Lord , that it is
further their duty to resignedly accept his death at his
hand and at his will, and that in compensation for all
this he is free to follow his own inclinations to rove as
a pirate, gamble away his wife and children, stake
his enemies and plant paddie wherever he pleases.
Say to the Chinese that he is the serf, the football
of his Emperor and Mandarins, and he will answer
that he is a son of the Celestial Empire, and that all
the unheaven born barbarous eyes of other countries
are Fangui or Foreign Devils, beneath his notice.
Pride is the instinct given to nations for self pre-
servation and a gift of heaven to make the human rac a ,
under every condition, content with its position, until
its day of enlightenment shall arrive. A slighter feel-
ing would not support them.


while the Indo-Chinese States can scarcely be placed
higher than as third or at least second rate in the scale.
The people of India within the Ganges have from
distant times been holding intercourse with or been
smarting under the swords of the hardier races of the
West, and have learned to estimate their real rank in
the list of nations with some degree of precision. On
the contrary (with one late exception, the effect of
the Burmese war) the Indo-Chinese people have been
all but secluded from intercourse with these more
energetic races, and even from the more warlike (as
regards them) races of India. Their knowledge of the
European character, has been chiefly derived from
casual intercourse with scattered traders to their ports,
who being in their power and depending for success on
holding up the palm branch under every kind of usage,
have been but weak supporters of national honour.
Education being, amongst the Indo-Chinese peo-
ple, confined to reading writing, and casting accounts,
hardly excepting from this statement the priests of
Buddha, and there being no popular works in the
various departments- of art and science, it follows that
wo subject conceives it either expedient or advan-
tageous to learn how he is governed. The governing
party stretches despotism as far as he finds it can be
carried without endangering his own position, while
he feels quite unchecked by any restraint such as that
which in European countries arises from the necessity
of consulting a standard, however fluctuating that may
be, of political morality.
A European power, when allied by treaty with an
Indo-Chinese one, however justly reciprocal the terms
of that treaty may seem, must yet be deemed to come
under serious disadvantages in the intercourse which
will ensue. The first enjoys only the advantages
which are open and specified, the other will be apt
to look upon it as merely giving him opportunity of


husbanding his strength until it shall come into play
with every chance of success. A breach of treaty in
the one would be felt as a national stigma and would
reverberate throughout the civilized world. The same
offence in the other would be looked on by the in-
dividual Government and its people as a master move
of over reaching policy, would be applauded by neigh-
bouring nations, and would probably in the civilized
world be attributed to insidious conduct on the part
of the other contracting party ; and where is an in-
ternational empire to be sought for.
The native Government builds all its hope of
advantage, whether these are to be peaceable and
mercantile, or warlike and aggressive, in the known
good faith of its alb 7 ’, while that ally finds his greatest
political virtues to be his most serious obstacles to
self defence. His opponent goes on from step to step,
warily avoiding to infringe on what is absolutely
prohibited, while he must wait patiently for some
positive infraction of terms before he can oppose force
to force or intimidation to ambition or treachery. He
may be as certain that this opponent will use to the
utmost, either secretly or openly, any power he may
have, when time shall prove, as that might, since the
world began, has ever been right, when kindred nations
have not compacted to modify that gr->at law of nature,
and to balance its energy when brought to bear on
their artificial state. Dominion is nature’s watchword
throughout all the gradations of existence up to man,
and this last, while he domineers unchecked but by
physical danger (to be avoided generally with ease)
over the inferior creation, is stimulated by the same
natural impulse where superior moral, mental and
physical energies, combined with accidental situations
will admit, to exert dominion over his fellows. Nature
has given the latter too the impulse of resistance, but
this can never equal in energy the dominant principle,
because each individual of the resisting mass feels that


his own mind is deeply imbued with it, and that the
struggle ever must be for might—the question ever,
who shall obey. It is this feeling which makes
excess of liberty speedily end in arbitrary rule.
Had the British not succeeded in Ava this last ques-
tion might, and no doubt would have arisen amongst
the Indo-Chinese, but first another would have
a chance of agitating the two principal ones, Ava
and Siam, whether they should not join against the
British. At any rate had Siam wished for peace
with Ava, she must have, in such an event, avoided
a friendly alliance with the British, and what a
great loss of moral power would failure have en-
tailed. Aurungzebe’s power sustained a shock from
his failure to subdue Arracan and Assam, but the
mightier the power the severer the political and
moral declension, the greater the dangers attending
on both. British prowess is already embodied in
song throughout the widely scattered tribes of indo-
China, and pregnant perhaps in this garb with
future events. The pillar of national vanity having
amongst them been shaken to the foundation, new
props may happily be sought for from more en-
lightened quarters.
A high road, if report speaks true, will ere long
be opened from the confines of India extra Gangem
to China, and by the Chinese themselves. Already
Burrnah deigns to bestow to the whole, whisperings
of a milder condition of humanity( a ).
Siam has a pretty extensive commerce with
Europeans, and with access to the products of
European labour may gradually imbibe a taste for
improved science and art, and China in the centie
of her vast and transmitted population has mani-
(a). Since the above was written the Burmese seem
to have forgotten some of the lessons so well taught
them.


fested occasional throes which would tempt us to
anticipate improvement there. The last war has no
doubt already enlightened the Burmese to a certain
extent. It has exhibited for their imitation civilized
warfare, which tights only with the Government of
an enemy and ravages not the fields nor sacks the
houses of the peaceful subject. It has shown to
them good faith in the conqueror’s humanity in
battle, and generosity after victory.
The Siamese, whether wisely or through fear it
matters not, standing aloof from the field of battle,
have maintained intact their extensive country, and
have gained strength in proportion as the British
have been successful. They have gained knowledge
too without dear bought experience and they profit
by it.
The contest with Ava has dispelled the mirage
which prevailed on the geography of that and the
neighbouring countries and has opened doors to the
resources of the Indo-Ohinese( a ) States.
And are Britons, strong as they may be in
arms, to disdain the lessons which even a barbarous
warfare is capable of giving. Had such vague
descriptions of the want of spirit and contemptible
capabilities which we find alleged by old writers
against the Burmese been credited to the fullest
extent, a severe lesson might have been read to the
British Generals not to despise an enemy, however
unworthy of his steel that foe may seem. And a
warlike nation could not be contemptible when it
required such a large force during two campaigns
(h). In my report on the Tenasserim Provinces at
the close of the Butman war 1 had occasion to mention
the caravans, one of which I t-aw from the Shan coun-
try. This prospect held out of intercourse being establi-
shed with the interior countries lias not been fully
realized.


of some of the best disciplined troops in the world to
teach her the wisdom of submission.
High and inborn courage may be wanting in an
but a rigorous despotism, such as that displayed
in a time of war by Ava, renders cowardice more dan-
gerous to its entertainers than the exposing of his
person in battle. To fly is certain death from his
Commander in the rear, to advance is having a chance
of surviving and of escaping in a general rout. Then
again, nature interposes for him, betwixt him and the
sterner enemy, her tangled shield of forests, rivers and
hills, to level artificial distinctions.
Had Ava lost Pegu her whole body politic would
have been permanently paralyzed. They did not be-
come a nation of any note until Alorapra opened a
passage for her to the sea and to the commerce of the
world. Like the Siamese race, she felt her insignific-
ance until that was accomplished. She has indeed lost
a few of her outfeelers, but t his perhaps has only con-
centrated her strength.
If the Siamese could ever have made, or shall
ever have the power to make, a successful aggression
on the power of the Burmese, it would have been, and
probably will be, by setting up a Peguan Prince and
ruling in his name over Pegu at last. They have
always kept a large body of Peguers at Siam, and
while the Ava war yet pended the Court of Bangkok
had recognised the claims (real or pretended it is
useless to enquire ) of a Peguer to the throne of Bagoo
or Pegu, intending to have set him up had their troops
got a footing in the Burmese territory. They had
luckily no opportunity of intermeddling and of thereby
establishing claims for a share not only in the ceded
territories but in the glory of the campaigns ; and no
doubt they would have assumed the right to the
largest share of the latter whether granted or not.
Tneir cupidity and caution, mere ignorance, being


carried too far, defeated all the grand schemes which
they meditated.
However favourably the generosity which gave
np Pegu for less valuable provinces may be received
by European nations, it cannot be doubted that its
retention would have been looked on by the Indo-
Chinese people as a thing of course, and as a proce-
dure no more betraying an uncalled for thirst for
acquisition than the retention of the Coast Provinces
does. It would seem a stretch of the reasoning
faculty could these nations appreciate such magnani-
mity or believe that the power which had grasped an
Empire had willingly, after a sacrifice of blood and
treasure, relinquished its hold.
But should either of the two Indo-Chinese powers
tying closest to the British possessions ever act so as
to make it necessary to assail their sea ports, the
terminations generalty of the vital arteries of these
fluvial countries, such posts would naturally and readily,
if subdued and retained, connect themselves with
those great mercantile zones with which the enter-
prize of the British nation has already nearly girded
the world, and which add elasticity and stability to its
rule.
Siam may not exactly perceive that with reference
to the native powers that were or that now exist in
Hindoostan she hardly merits being placed in the 2d
grade, or that amidst the Indo-Chinese her military pre-
tensions do not rank above those of her native neigh-
bours. Indeed it may be questioned if they do not fall
short of those advanced the Burmese, since the latter
nation has on more than one occasion overrun Siam,
whilst the Siamese have rarely, since they lost Tenas-
serim, ventured beyond a strict border warfare. But
Siam cannot fail through the veil of her self-love and the
mist of her prejudices to see that it would be aiming a
mortal blow at her independence were the British ever


to find it necessary for their security to support and
aid both, or one only of the nations alluded to, namely
the Burmese and Cochin-Chinese.
Her fears on the side of Ava are for the present in
abeyance, but she has on several occasions manifested
considerable uneasiness and suspicions regarding the
visits of the Cochin-Chinese vessels to Calcutta,
Penang and Singapore. About the time of the break-
ing- out of the Burmese war several Cochin-Chinese
Ambassadors to Ava visited Penang, and from the
minute enquiries which they made about Junkceylon
it was conjectured that their Government then enter-
tained some design against it. They might easily take
it by a coup de main. They have armed war square
rigged vessels and are better sailors than the Siamese,
who in realitjr are no sailors ; but that they could
afford to retain it is very doubtful unless they were
masters also of the Siamese ports on the east coast of
the Peninsula. Instructed as the Cochin Chinese have
been by the French in European military tactics, at
least to that extent to which their prejudices would
permit them to go, it does not however appear that
they have exhibited much improvement in their actual
movements in the field.
Had any commensurate improvement really been
made, Siam would have long since felt fatally the
effects of it. It is only surprising that nautically
superior as the Cochin Chinese are to the Siamese,
and with a population greatly, it is believed, exceeding
that of the latter, the former nation has never invaded
Lower Siam.
Here, if the Rajah of Ligor did not think it his
interest to join them, they would find all the conquered
Malayan States ready to embrace their cause, were
such an attempt to prove successful and which con-
sidering the almost constant state of hostility in
which these rival countries have been involved, is


neither improbable nor impracticable. The British
in the Straits of Malacca would then come into
immediate contact with a nation of a more bustling
and energetic character than the Siamese and certain-
ly with one which in the mass stands several steps
higher on the ladder of civilisation than the latter
have yet reached.
It has ever seemed to me that the Chau Phriya
or Siamese Governor of Ligor, who is by courtesy
designated Raja, would be glad of an opportunity
of shaking off his fetters and asserting independence.
The Court of Siam has evidently tried to guard against
such a contingency by retaining about it a number of
Chau Phriya’s relatives, and by keeping spies in the
shape of councillors about his person. His four
daughters Avere give to the Zennana of his king;
one of his sons is Governor of Keddah and another
of Daloong( a ).
It is not improbable that a party to the Treaty
of Bankok he had hoped that a war with the British
would have facilitated his views.
At present he might well pause before joining the
Cochin-Chinese in case they should invade Lower
Siam, since it would likely be only changing one hard
master for an equally hard one, perchance a harder.
The Chau Phriya is a very clever barbarian, a Mahomed
Ali in a small way, of persevering and unremitting
habits of business and therefore never pardoning re-
missness in others —a consummate dissembler but apt
to defeat his own purposes by carrying dissimulation too
far; of a most inquisitive disposition, and appreciat-
ing perhaps beyond any of his countrymen the advan-
tages of European science and art, yet restrained by
(a). 1841. The Raja has died since the above was
written and the jealousy of the Court of Bankok will
hedge in his successor so that he will be a mere execu-
tive officer.


by political trammels from following out the bent of
his mind ; cautious in his councils, decided in his
military operations, and brave agreeably to the Indo-
Chinese acceptation of that term, although wary in not
exposing his person in battle ; a most severe disciplin-
arian and relentless punisher.
To aid these qualities he possesses a very robust
constitution. When the Honble. Mr. Ibbetson visited
his camp in Keddah in 1831 an opportunity was given
to me of judging his capacity.
He was in his Durbar or Sala the whole day and
seldom retired to rest until past midnight, being
chiefly engaged in dictating to his secretaries, few of
whom could long support the constant labour they
were subjected to. His conversation was easy, ani-
mated and jocular though abrupt, and he displayed a
very capacious memory.
When the Chow Phriya dies or is deprived of his
Government (terms almost synonymous in Siam) (a), it
is highly improbable that any man of equal ability and
determination will be found who may succeed him.
None of his many sons evince more than very ordinary
abilities, although they have all the cunning which
the semi barbarians substitute for sound judgment.
They are amenable to the rod of correction like the
other subjects of Siam and it is inflicted in no very
decorous manner( b ). One of his sons, a youth of
upwards of 20, was smarting under the effects of this
domestic punishment when Mr. Ibbetson visited the
Haja’s camp, as before noticed. He is now governing
the Province of Daloong. Can any true feelings of
(a) This has actually happened since the above
was written. The Phriya was called to Bankok to give
an account of his government, was there detained two
years or longer, when he died from vexation of mind, it
is said. Perhaps there were other causes (1841),
(b) The nether extremity.


manhood have place when such a punishment is in-
flicted on the elite of the land. It is however pre-
tended by the sufferers that there is no disgrace
attached to a sound whipping. So may the chosen of
the land in some European countries have said of this
sort of patriarchal correction. The care which the
Chau Phriya took to conceal from us the punishment
his son had received by his orders disproves the asser-
tion. Ihe secret of the Chau Phriya’s aptitude for
business and decision of character, may perhaps be in
his being the son of the famous Chinese usurper of
Siam, Phriya Tak. When the latter was slain his
widow, a Siamese, who was then pregnant, was given
to the then Governor of Ligor, and on the death of the
latter the Chau Phriya succeeded to the Government.
It is not easy to discover what revenue he pays to
the Siamese Exchequer. It is not fixed. But in-
dependent of the boats which he is constantly building
and sending to Siam he occasionally transmits con-
siderable sums in cash and plate. To make the latter,
which is chiefly of silver and finished with gold flower-
ings, he retains a large establishment of goldsmiths
constantly in his service. The manufacture is called
Chartan and does credit to the Siamese workmen.
Chapter 3rd.
Srai 4
>or Keddah.
Sai J
This Province of Siam lies between the parallels
of 5.10 and 6.35 N. L. Its breadth varies from twenty
five to forty miles. It was originally peopled by the
Siamese race, and was then as it now is termed by
them Muang Sai or Srai. About the year A. D.
1342 ( a ) a colony arrived from the westward under a
(a). I have fixed this date after comparing together
the Keddah, the Achinese and Malayan Annals.
The Keddah Annals will be translated perhaps here-
after by me.


Chief named Marrong Maha Wangsa. The Keddah
Annals point out Room as the country from which
lie came, implying thereby some part of the Byzantine
Empire, and the object of the voyage is stated to have
been the forming of a matrimonial alliance betwixt
the son of the Rajah of Room and a daughter of the
Emperor of China. But the name of the Chief is
evidently a Hindoo or Buddhist one, and as he was an
idol-worshipper too, it will be more consistent with
probability if we assign Ceylon or some part of
Hindoostan as his birth place (a). The Mussulman
Annalist intentionally perhaps confounded the leader
of this colony with the ambassador sent (b) about A. D.
1290 by the King of Persia to China to solicit from
the Emperor Kublai a Princess as a wife.
Be this as it may the Keddah Annalist has
minutely described the voyage from Room and the
destruction on the Eastern Coasts of the Bay of
Bengal of all the vessels excepting one which com-
posed the fleet. In Marco Polo’s account of the Per-
sian Embassy just alluded to no such disaster is
mentioned.
I Marrong Maha Wangsa reached Pulo Srai
First Chief, in the vessel which escaped, which last was
moored near the Point of Pulo Srai. He then went on
shore with his wife and family(c), and built a small
town which “was secured by a wall and other defences.
He called the town Lancasuga”( (l ).
This Pulo Srai (or the Island Srai) is afterwards
described by the annalist as having many years subse-
quently to the settlement “ become attached to the
(a) Mahawansa is one of the titles of some early
Rajahs in Ceylon, and also of a Ceylonese Historical
work.
(b) Marco Polo
(c) It is not likely that any one but a colonist
would have brought his family with him.
(d) This terra is purely of Hindoo origin.


mainland ” and having then received the name of
Goonong Jerrie or the Keddah Peak, a conspicuous
mountain, and the present appearance of the country
surrounding it confirms the above account.
When Marrong Maha Wangsa had established
himself on shore many of the Rakhshas came down to
visit him.
These were the aborigines of the country of the
Siamese race, to whom their more polished visitors
applied a term implying contempt. But by the an-
nalist’s own showing those Rakhshas were sufficiently
civilised to amalgamate in some degree with the new
colonists. That these aborigines were Siamese is
proved, as I have before observed, by their names, and
by the fact that their descendants under the denomina-
tion of Samsams are found in considerable numbers at
the present day in Keddah and Province Wellesley.
These people speak the Siamese language and adhere
to the religion and customs of Siam. As Marrong
Maha Wangsa was a follower of some Hindoo system
of worship and the Siamese were Buddhists, the former
could have had little difficulty in conciliating the
natives, and he no doubt obtained permission from
the Chief “ of the Rakhsha ” as the annalist calls him,
to form a settlement in this part of the Siamese
Empire.
My own researches in Province Wellesley eluci-
date these remarks, for amidst the ruins of the ancient
temples there I have discovered in juxtaposition (in
one and the same temple) various images of some of
the principal Hindoo deities and of Buddha and also
writings and inscriptions in the Sanscrit and the
Siamese languages, and one in an obsolete character
supposed to be Pali or Bali (a).
(a) A facsimile of this inscription was forwarded
to the Asiatic Society of Calcutta and the late lamented
Mr. Prinsep, its secretary, acquainted me shortly before


It is obvious that the new settlers must have been
too few to have occupied the Srai country. Even had
the inhabitants been unable to expel them, the then
flourishing adjacent Siamese Province of Ligor could
have easily afforded the means for so doing.
Marrong Maha Wangsa established a trade with
the countries of Achi and Palo Percha (Achin) and
Golungee (Pegu) (») and his port became soon a great
trading mart. “In process of time, ” the annalist pro-
ceeds to state, the Sultan of Room recalled Maha
Wangsa, of whose existence he had been [made] aware
by the commander of one of his vessels who had met
with one of the Marrongs at Pegu. The Srai Chief
therefore returned home, leaving in his room a son who
married a princess. It does not appear who this lady
was, although it is probable she was either a Siamese
or a Peguer, as these natives were Buddhists, The new
n Chief assumed the title of Riia Marrong
The Second
Raja. Maha Bodisat. Marrong Maha Wangsa
took with him his old followers, but the children of
the latter remained behind. “ Before his departure
he assembled all the principal people who had arrived
with him, and it was there resolved that the Country
of Srai should be thence forward called Keddah, mean-
ing thereby Zameen Soram, because it had been
settled after many difficulties and dangers had been
surmounted.”
As this new name is of Persian or Arabic deriva-
tion it is most likely that it was bestowed when
Marrong’s descendants became Mussulmans than at
the period here stated. Raja Photeesat (b) had three
his death, that he had he thought succeeded in decipher-
ing it, and that it was in an almost obsolete character
formerly used in Upper Hindoostani.
(a) In the country itself the natives rail it Bagoo.
The Siamese term it Hangsawaddy - the goose or Hangs*
Country.
(b) " Bodhi Satraa.


sons and a daughter born to him at Palo Srai. When
they grew up the Raja determined to fulfil the desire
of his father that he should form establishments in
the neighbouring regions, which last were then in a
wild condition. He accordingly sent for Phrai Chee-
han, the Chief of the Rakhsiias. This man was the
sou of a Malay ( a ). He had a son named Parap, whose
mother was a Rakhsha. This lady was named Nang
Soothamune ( b ).
Photisat’s eldest son journeyed towards the north-
ward, ( c ) accompanied by the family just mentioned
and many Malayan followers with their attendants.
After a journey of two hundred days by easj 7
stages, and with numerous halts, the party reached the
mouth of a fine river which flowed through a rich coun-
try. The \ T oung chief here established himself and his
followers. This country is named Siam Lanchang( d ).
The Raja's second son went in a southerly direc-
tion until he came to a river which fell into the sea.
This country was named Neegri Perak or the silver
country, because, according to custom, a silver arrow
had previously been shot in the direction of the river.
Finally the Raja sent forth his daughter in quest
(a) The annalist does not condescend to inform us
who the Malays were, or whence they came. Cheehan
was doubtless the son of a native with an individual of
another tribe, whether Malayan or otherwise.
(b) These are partly Siamese and partly Bali names.
(c) It is “north-west ”in the MS. but as the sea
lies in this direction there is probably a clerical error.
(d) Lanchang lies in South Laos, a very impro-
bable direction for such a colony to take. But the
word Siam being prefixed it would seem to indicate
that this place was somewhere in Siam, and indeed in
subsequent parts of the annals the Colony is expressly
declared to have been established in “ Nigri tiga huah.”
The country is composed of three divisions or Siam
Upper, Central and Lower, while it is also expressly
stated that the elder brother alluded to was King
of Siam,


of a new country. She journeyed with numerous follow-
ers, and over mountains and plains towards the east.
She rode on an elephant, the name of which was Leila
Joharee. At length the colony reached the sea
shore( a ) and a fort was constructed at the embouchure
ot the river. Four ot the Keddah chiefs had escorted
the princess. They remained with her during a few
years and before they returned to Keddah the newly
settled country was called Patani, with reference to the
famous Lela Masari Kris which the princess had
brought with her (as an heirloom) ( b ).
Haja Photesat became old, and left the adminis-
tration of affairs to 'his Chiefs, he busying himself
with field sports. When he died his third son
111 acquainted his brothers and sister of the
Third Chief, event. He then took the title of Sri
Mahawangsa.
Soon after this assumption lie changed the seat
of the government from Lankasuga to Srokame ( c ).
The Haja had one only daughter by a Malayan woman
of rank. About the time of this removal to Srokam
the Raja received a letter from Siam intimating that
his elder brother, the King of that country, had a son
whose age was seven years. Accompanying the letter
were valuable gifts. Sri Mahawangsa replied to this
letter and sent it by a special messenger, who con-
veyed likewise presents of gold and silver flowers and
ornamented arms for his brother. “ The King of
Siam was much gratified with these presents and
requested through the messenger, that similar gifts
(a) The Gulf of Siam.
(b) The inference here is obscure.
(c) This place lies on the N. bank of the Muda
river, and there are still the remains of an extensive
fortification to be seen there. Part of the former
district of Srokam lies within Province Wellesley on
the opposite bank of the river and the name is still
retained.


might be annually sent( a ) to amuse his children.
The messenger also preferred a request of his master
that the King of Siam would protect Keddah from
danger.” To this his Majesty replied that as far as
regarded amicable relations Siam and Keddah were
one country ( b ). When the messenger returned to
Keddah Sri Mahawangsa ordained that in all future
time the relations existing with Siam should be upheld.
The son of Sri Mahawangsa became enamoured of
the daughter of Nang Maree, a Rahksha, who was an
inmate of the palace. The girl had a fair complexion
and lovely features ( c ). The youth married her with-
out the knowledge of his father, who soon after died
of vexation at the event, and of old age combined.
IV Sri Mahawangsa was succeeded by the son
Fourth Chief, above alluded to, who took the title of
Rajah Wong Maha Phrit Dooriya. This Chief became
tyrannical—as the annalist observes, a cannibal. His
subjects used on this account to prefer their complaints
to his second wife, who was the daughter of a Malay
and of a benevolent disposition.
This Chief was known to his subjects, as he now
is to the natives of Keddah and Province Wellesley,
by the sobriquet of Raja Borsiyong, the tusked Raja,
because some of his teeth were so long that they
(a) This claiming of tribute and marks of vas-
salage has been smoothed down by the Mussulman
annalist as much as possible, and this is rendered more
apparent by the puerile reason here assigned for send-
ing the annual revenue or compensation to Court
(b) This is quite a Malayan expression and may
mean much or nothing according to circumstances.
Here the context shows that it did mean a great deal,
and more even is admitted than might have been ex-
pected from a Mussulman author.
(c) Here the superiority in point of fairness of
the skin of the generality of the Indo-Chinese people
over other nations of India is admitted. r lhe Chief no
doubt wished a bright alliance for his daughter.


resembled the tusks of, or as the Malays believed,
really belonged to a Girgassee( a ). At length the
tyranny of this at the least moral monster became so
intolerable that he was expelled from Keddah by the
people.
The Chief men were, after this proceeding, at a
loss how to act. They accordingly sent to the King of
Siam to acquaint him with the state of affiirs(h). His
Majesty subsequently dispatched one of his courtiers
named Kalahom, who ruled the Provinces to the
eastward( c ) to Keddah to place the government in the
hands of a son of Raja Bersiyong. Kalahom was
interrupted in his progress near the confines of Ligor
by an army of the whole tribes inhabiting the sur-
rounding countries. This place was commanded by
Kalam Hetam, who informed Kalahom that the Ka~
langa people would not obey the Southern region
(Siam) and that the Kalama A. was on his march to
take possession of Keddah (d). Kalahom, by the aid
of the forces of Ligor and of those of five or six other
provinces, defeated the troops of Kalama Hetam, took
the latter prisoner and sent him to Siam. He then
(a) The Girgassee is the Rakhshee of Hindoo
mythology.
(h). It is clear from this that the direct inter-
ference of Siam as superior over Keddah had been free-
ly exercised before the period we are arrived at.
(c) It .is not clear whether the annalist here
means the Provinces eastward of the Siamese capital
or of Keddah. But as he elsewhere states “ Kalahom
speedily obtained assistance from ail the Rajas around
the country where he had his camp,” it is evident that
the Provinces alluded to lay on the Gulf of Siam, and
on the Peninsula. Kalama Hetam came from near the
country of Kalungee or Pegu. The Peguers had thus
■declared war against Siam and although the people of
Keddah had kept up a friendly intercourse with Pegu,
still it became one of the first objects of attack as a
conveniently out-lying Province of Siam.
(d) The inference is plain from the speech of
Kalama Hetam that the Kalungee people consi-
dered Keddah to be part of Siam. J'he text also
shows that the Peninsula was in Siamese possession.


pursued his march with one thousand men to Keddah.
He lost three or four hundred men in battle, the
enemy many thousands. It may be observed here
that the annalist makes no mention of firearms. Bombs
were the principal weapons used in the fight. Indeed
it appears from the Malayan annals that when the
Portuguese took Malacca the natives were ignorant of
the application of gunpowder to war and this was
about 150 years later than the period here described.
When Kalahom reached Sungei Sala( a ) he en-
camped at its mouth and then required the young
chief and his followers to come and visit him and
partake of field sports.
It happened that the youth was just then engaged
in digging the channel called Sungei Qualla Muda, in
order to form a direct communication betwixt Kota
Aur and the sea. This Kota Aur ( Bamboo Fort from
the prevalence here of Bamboos ) was Raja Bersiyong’s
Fort and before the channel was cut the river is
described as having winded in a very inconvenient
manner for navigation(b).
“ The young Chief and his followers were received
by Kalahom outside of the camp of the latter with all
due respect. The letter of the King of Siam was then
read (and agreeably to it) proclamation was made
There is a good deal of jumbling of name-? and titles
in the description of the Chiefs of the Forces and tribes
here opposed to Kalahom But the majority are of
the Buddhist or Siamese origin. The rest were wild
tribes nnder the designations of Saraang, Bila and
Sakai.
(a) A small stream near Keddah.
(b) The correctness of this account is amply veri-
fied by the present aspect of this new channel, and
the remains of the old one. The Muda River bounds
Province Wellesley on the north. Kota Aur can stiß
be traced by the remains of a mud wall.


that the King had exalted the young
. Raia ( a ) to the Government of Keddah and
Fifth Chief J v
had conferred on him the dignified title of
Raja Phraong Maha Photisat.”
V
Fifth Chief
Kalahom resided five months in Keddah, and then
left it on his return to Siam. “ He carried with him a
letter from the Raja together with gold and silver
flowers in acknowledgment that the Maha Raja Nagree
Siam had installed him in the government of Keddah.
The Raja also observed in his letter to the Emperor
that he had sent presents for his Brother the young
Prince. After this period the King of Siam never
omitted to send yearly to Keddah for, nor the Keddah
Rajah to return gold and silver flowers as tokens of
friendship.” ( b ).
The annalist observes in this place that in those
days trade had increased in the Port of Srai, and that
many strangers had settled there. The Fort of Kota
Aur was given over a« a residence to one of his Chiefs
and the Raja built a new Fort at Soongee Didd up at
the old mouth of the Muda River ( c ).
The Rajah had a son named Phra Ong Maha-
wangsa, to whom he made over his Government. The
Rnja’s advanced age urged him to this measure ( d ).
(a) Raja was a title d’etiquette which every petty
chief assumed amongst his own people.
(b) If the annals did not afford other positive
proof of the fact still this admission of the Mussulman
historian would have given good cause for inference that
the relation in which Keddah stood to Siam was far
more complete and close than he has represented it.
It is only to be admired that the admission was made at
all in the annals.
(c) Traces of it yet remain and the country
round bears marks of having been densely peopled
and of having been covered with Hindoo and Buddhist
temples.
(d) The Siamese consent is not mentioned, but
must be supposed to have been obtained.


VI
Sixth Chief
VI Phra Ong Malia Wangsa was the first
Sixth Chief Keddah Raja who was converted to Islam-
ism. “ He was in the habit of drinking ardent
spirits to excess to cure some disease with which he
was afflicted ( a ). Jars of spirit distilled from rice stood
always ready in the Palace. When he arose in the
morning, even before he had washed his face or eaten
betel he used to call for a cup of spirits. But neither
this habit nor the pleasures of the table, which he
took freely along with his Chiefs, ever led him to
become inebriated, and unconscious of what was pass-
ing around him. Phra Ong Maha Wangsa was con-
verted to the true faith by a celebrated theologian
named Sheik Abdullah, who arrived from Bagdad. ”
The annalist assigns no date to this event,
indeed the MS. is very deficient in dates. But in my
copy of the Achinese annals, Written in the Malayan
language, the time of Sheik Abdullah’s visit to Keddah
is stated to have been A. Hegira 879 or A. D. 1464 ( b ).
The Keddah annalist, unlike the more Explicit
Achinese one, tries to give a dignity to this event by
getting up a miracle to account for it. Abdullah by
his account was invisible on his arrival and the arch
enemy Ibles was his companion and tempter on the
occasion. “On Abdullah becoming visible Ibles
vanished and he enquired of the Raja if he had ever
heard of Islandsm, which had descended from God to
Mahomed. The Raja replied that he was an image
worshipper but he would be glad to be instructed”.
“ The first sign of the Rajah’s conversion (cj was
the order he gave to break all the spirit jars. Then
he directed that his people should burn and destroy all
(a) The Mussulman excuse when he runs counter
to the Koran.
(b) The Chief or Raja was contemporary with
Sultan Mahomed of Malacca.
(c) This conversion, however, was incomplete, and
was not perfected until 148 years afterwards.


tlie golden, silver and brazen images, as also those
made of pottery, with all their robes and decorations,
fhis was accordingly done. The Raja now assumed
the title of Sultan Ma Alum Shah
The annalist now confines his account to a meagre
list of the names of the Rajahs who he states followed
for a while the new convert in regular succession. It
is probable that the history of their lives may have
•existed in Keddah and may have been lost daring the
disturbances there. The remaining Chiefs or Rajahs
were:—
2. Sultan Ma Bilfuol Shah, son of the Alim
Shah—after him the descent was regular to( b )
•3. Sultan or Raja Mahmood Shah.
4. Sultan Muzzuffar Shah.
•5. Sultan Soliman Shah who died at Achin.
6. Sultan Raja Looden Shah of Nuza where
he died,
7. His son Sultan Mahiyedin Mansur Shah who
died at Sinna.
■B. Sultan Lea Oodin Makurrum Shah who died
at Purlis.
i). Sultan or Raja Kannaii or Kahaii governed a
few days.
10. Sultan Ata Allah Mahomed Shah or Murhom
Bukit Penang.
11. Sultan Mahomed diva Zein Aladin Ma Alum
Shah who died at Kayang,
12. Sultan Abdullah Mokurrum Shah or Mur-
koom Muda Bukit Pinang, A.D. 1778.
13. Sultan Abdullah (brother to the preceding
Raja.) He held the Regency for a short time.
(a). Every petty chieftain of the Malayan or other
race to the eastward of India took the title of Sultan on
•entering the pale of Mahometanism
(h). I his would imply that there are surae names
B«ft out.


14. Sultan Ahmed Tajudin, the present Ex Raja,
otherwise called Chaaee Pangheram, son of
Sultan Abdullah Mokwrrum Shah.
On the demise of the latter the chief authority
was disputed. Chau Ibrahim ( the Ex Raja's younger
brother ) was patronized by the Raja of Ligor, who
endeavoured to obtain the government for him from
the Emperor of Siam. But the latter espoused the
cause of the elder brother, who had proceeded to the
capital, Bankok, to prefer his suit in person, and
gave him the government of Keddah with the title
of Chaure Pangeram, literally “ Feudal Lord ” (»), a
compound of Siamese and Javanese. The fact of the
King of Keddah having proceeded to Siam on the
death of his father in order to do homage to the
Sovereign of that state, and to submit his right of
succession to the confirmation of that haughty Court
appeared to roe fatal to his claims of independence.
The line of conduct pursued by the British Govern-
ment for the last 20 or 30 years as well the enquiries
of two eminent Malayan Scholars, Lt. Col. Mclnnes
and Mr. Crawfurd, have unhappily placed beyond the
deliberations of this Board the question of the King
of Siam’s being the Lord Superior of the Raja of
Keddah( b ).
(a) Pangiran or Pangeran. The title of certain
feudal Chiefs in Java and the southern parts of Sumatra
(formerly under the dominion of Bantam) who in many
places are now independent Princes. It appears to be
also given to other persons of rank independent of
territory. ( Marsden’s Dictionary.)
(b) May 1837. As it is understood that the Ex-
Raja intends by the help of the movement party * in
Penang to petition the British Government for a resto-
ration to his supposed lost rights, it may be here men-
tioned, in addition to what I have already urged on the
subject, that when in 1818 an application was made to
him by the Honorable Colonel Bannerman, then Cover-
of Prince of Wales Island, for a small accession of
territory up to the Marbow River, he evaded the request
by openly stating in reply that “as Keddah belonged
to Siam he could not grant it.” This fact was not


Thus if the Annals are faithful there were six
Keddah Chiefs who were Buddhists and who governed
in succession, and fourteen who were Mussulmans.
Giving for each a period of about 20 years the total
period from Marrong Maha Wangsa, up to the expul-
sion of the present Ex-King, being about 479 years.
It would appear a very solid and satisfactory
argument, as likewise a sufficient moral, legal and
political reason for all that lias taken pkice since the
cession of Penang, including of course the Treaty of
Bangkok, that the Keddah Chief who made that ces-
sion designedly falsified to Captatin Light his posi-
tion with regard to Siam, by assuring the latter that
oriously known to the natives then, and is yet well
remembered by many who were present when the
Raja so committed himself. Mr. Phillips subsequently
acquainted him that the Siamese intended to attack
him. To this intimation he replied that he had indeed
neglected to send the usual tribute of gold and silver
flowers, although with the knowledge of the Raja of
Ligor. He had before confessed his tributary state in
a letter he had addressed to Mr. Bruce. On the same
grounds the Raja stopped an expedition which Colonel
Bannerman had fitted out for passing ( through a part
of Keddah ) to the Patani tin mines.
The Sultan Dhadin Makurrum Shah, uncle to the
Ex Raja, addressed a letter from Purlis to the Rouble.
Mr. Phillips stating “that the country of Keddah has
been feudally subject to the Empire of Siam from former
times down to those of ray grandfather, my father,
myself, and my nephew, Sultan Ahmed Tajoodin (the
Ex Raja). Whoever became Baja of Keddah all of
them had letters of appointment from the Emperor of
Siam. ”
In some respects it is unfortunate that the Ex
Raja had not at once been taken to Malacca from Bruas
( a ). Hig return to Penang and retention there until
again sent to Malacca, although it had the good effect
of showing to the Malays that the British Government
acted consistently and determinedly, yet gave a re-
newed life to feelings which were rapidly becoming
extinct.
It also gave the handle which has been used for
buoying up the Malays with the idea that on the in-
(a). This could not at the time be done.


any respect which lie showed to Siam was soleH owing
to a feeling of its power. The Chief and his Kling
and Malayan Councillors knew full well that had the
truth been told to Captain Light, and had that History
of Keddah which was then amongst the records of the
Raja (and of which his successor, the present Ex Raja,
gave me a copy ) been laid before him, that officer
could not with reference to the repeated and cautious
instructions he had received on this point from the
Supreme Government, have negotiated at all with any
Keddah authority for the cession of Penang. The then
Chief or Raja must have been thrown entirely out of
the question, and if any negotiation for the cession of
Penang had issued, that must have been made directly
with the Court of Bankok. That this plan would have
saved much political bickering and animosity, and
would have been easy of accomplishment, can scarcely
be doubted, because the Siamese cared little or nothing
stigation <*f the disaffected, a few interested persons
joined to the Ex Rajas's adherents, the British Govern-
ment will at once change a line of policy which it had
adhered to for fifty years, and which it is bound by
treaty still to adhere to, that it will either take Keddah
under its protection by wresting it from Siam, and thus
raising up an implacable enemy to be opposed perhaps
within the British line, or allow the Kx Rajah to attack
Keddah backed by half the population of the Penang
Station, and aided by Penang merchants with arms and
ammunition, thereby urging the Malays and Siamese to a
protracted contest, which would not only unsettle and
demoralize our own subjects, but convulse the whole Pen-
insula, would injure trade, and severely affect the revenue.
The progress towards settled habits, which is civilization,
would be arrested and thrown back indefinitely, much
blood would be shed, and at length the Siamese would
assuredly, if British troops did not oppose them, retain
the Keddah country, and the Malays would find their
last state worse than the first.
It is a suicidal act of the Penang settlers the
trying to send back the Malays to Keddah. One might
imagine that they were not sufficiently satisfied with the
diminution of their trade, but were aiming to undermine
the agricultural interests of the settlement by depriving
it of its labouring and now settled population: But
passion and party spirit are blind.


&bout Penang, which was all but a desert Island and
as they wore very anxious at the time to have some
■convenient European port, where they might quickly
procure arms and ammunition for their wars with the
Burmese ; and also as in this case the Keddah Chief
would have firmly adhered to his allegiance to Siam.
Vexed and incensed as the Siamese Court was at the,
by it, unauthorized cession of Penang, it still hailed
the occupation ©f the island by a Power which might
be useful both directly and indirectly—directly as
above noticed, and indirectly as it restrained the
Burmese in their progress south.
When it was subsequently discovered that at the
least Keddah was a vassal Province, although the full
extent of its dependency was still merely a surmise,
it was too late to remedy the error into which Captain
Light had been studiously betrayed by the Rajah.
Had the Siamese either at the period of the cession
or within a reasonable period afterwards openly
protested against it, the possession of the British
would have been still more anomalous than it was.
Happily the Siamese Emperor finding that he derived
temporary advantages from the vicinity of the new
settlement, connived at its occupation, denouncing
vengeance only against the Rajah of Keddah, and the
Court of Siam since that period has appeared to be
aware that this failure to protest publicly at first
against British occupation amounted to a tacit ac-
knowledgment of its assent thereto. Such at least was
the apparent feeling of the Court when the Treaty of
Bankok was negociated —occupancy being then ad-
mitted as a sufficient claim to possess, and here again
the same political foresight instigated them as at the
original cession, to gain a further bulwark against the
Burmese power at the slight cost of not advancing
•claims to Penang.
If the Rajah’s insincerity had been discovered at
the outset .he would probably have paid very dearly


for it, since lie would have likely been then left to
himself, and his double crime (of first denying his-
allegiance and then of offering part of Keddah province
to foreigners) would have sealed his fate at Bankok,
The English could have had no alternative supposing
they had not negotiated directly with Siam, betwixt
supporting per fas nefasque the Chief in his usurpa-
tion and thus giving the Siamese a just cause for
going to war, or of quitting the Coast altogether. If
this latter course had been adopted before even the
Rajah had fully committed himself to the English, still
he had otherwise paved the way to his own ruin by
intriguing with both the Dutch and the French. The
latter people were prepared to step in with invidious
aid. But they could not have stayed long while
England had fleets in the Indian Seas, and occupied,
as must have been the case, some other station in the
Straits. The fate of the Raja would only therefore
have been delayed, not averted. Most probably the
Malays would have been driven by Dutch rule to join
with the Siamese in expelling them from Keddah.
On a false plea therefore the Raja not only secured
that shelter from Siamese domination which he had
been willing to gain at any price, but he involved the
British, although unknowingly on their part, in his
attempt to throw off his just allegiance. He and his
advisers knew perfectly well that once fixed at Penang
the English could hardly retreat, and when he had got
them so fixed he got gradually rid of his apprehensions
of Siam and raised his demands on the British.
Afterwards feeling strongly Dutch promises, Barman
promises and piratical aid he tried to expel the British
from the Island, hoping to make a better bargain with
one of the powers for what was not his own to give.
The British were not, it may be supposed, after
this under any moral obligation to the Keddah
Rajah. If there could have existed any political
obligation, that must have been incurred by the sacri-


face of a portion of national credit and honor by
the abetting of the treason of the subject Chief.
Further if any tiling were wanting to bear out these
statements such would be found in the fact that the
Ex Raja had gone to Siam in person and obtained as a
favor from the Emperor the Government of Keddah in
life rent and dependent on his good behaviour, and
also in his avowal during Col. Bannerman’s Govern-
ment, made in open Durbar to Messrs. Cracraft and
Gaunter, the Government Agents, who were sent
to negotiate for a better northern boundary, that
Keddah belonged to Siam and that he could not treat,
it seems plain, politically considered, that by the first
of these acts, he for his own selfish ends broke off
the British connection and virtually nullified the
treaty made with Sir G. Leith for his own selfish ends,
because others of his family had prior and much better
claims than he to the Government, and in breach of
the Treaty,* because he thereby proved and admitted
his inability, as a subject of Siam, to fulfil the condi-
tions which his predecessor, on the false ground how-
ever of independence, had pledged himself to perform.
And if this reasoning be just it will follow, that
as the treaty of cession was made by a subject of Siam
without the participation or sanction of Siam, so it was
invalid from the beginning, and that the British rights
rest on occupancy, confirmed by the Treaty of Bankok,
and the subsidiary Treaty with the Rajah of Ligor
which settled boundaries,
The population of Keddah might about fifty years
ago have been from 80.000 to one hundred thousand per-
sons. But wars, emigration and misgovernrnent have
reduced the number to 20,000 (a). In 1786 Captain
Gloss estimated it at 40,000 persons on’y—a mistake.
The Malays did not begin to emigrate to Penang
''a). Making allowance for increase after emigra-
tion the case may stand thus (increase inclusive)


until long after. The Raja, to check the movement,
imposed a fine of one hundred dollars on each emigrat-
ing family. Since the final occupation of Keddah by
the Siamese the Court of Bankok has relied more on
its moral than its physical force to retain it in subjec-
tion. There have been seldom more than from two hun-
dred to three hundred Siamese troops in the country.
There can be little doubt that their rule has been much
overblamed and that whatever the relatives and
mercenary adherents of the Ex Raja may assert, the
Malays of Keddah are little disposed to see him again
amongst them.
This country has a few natural defences such as
mountains and jungles, but these are easily overcome
by the Siamese. It can hardly be said to have arti-
ficial ones, the Keddah Fort at the mouth of the river
is paltry in the extreme. The old brick walls are from
eight to ten feet high and enclose an area of about
eighty yards by fifty. A few large shot well directed
would crumble down any part of the wall in a few
minutes. Any force could penetrate from the sea by
the rivers to the central parts of the country. At
spring tides a vessel of 300 tons burden can enter the
Keddah river over the bar. Troops cannot easily reach
it from Ligor under a journey of seventeen days, but
they could reach it from Daloong in about 10 days.
The Raja of Ligor has been accused of misgovern-
ing Keddah. It should however be recollected that
so long as the Ex Raja and his friends have the means
to intrigue, as they have already so frequently done
with the Keddah inhabitants, to drive out the Siamese,
1. Emigrated to Penang .... 30,000
2. l)o. to Province Wellesley . 40,000
3. Remained in Keddah .... 20,000
90,000


the latter will be compelled to act the part of con-
querors as their only safe policy. These frequent
rebellions release the Siamese from any charge of
having broken their engagements.
Keddah was never a rich country. Its chief pro-
ducts were grain, cattle, tin and rattans. The Chiefs or
Rajahs increased their scanty legitimate revenues by
exactions of various kinds, and by a monopoly of
trade—consequently the bulk of the people were mere
slaves dependent on the will of their despotic rulers.
Forced services were perhaps one of the most grievous
impositions, the individual receiving no pay. The
service might be compounded for by a grain payment,
equivalent to about three rupees per head. The Raja
bought the grain from his subjects at his own price.
There was a house tax also paid partly in grain
and partly in cash, averaging about a rupee for each
domicile. The tax to support the Raja’s band and
drums of state was from one rupee up to two according
to the ability and wealth of the inmates. House
timber and thatching were supplied by the people to
the Chiefs. The Ryots were bound to supply gun-
powder of their own manufacture to the Chiefs. Betel
leaf [was] also supplied gratis. The Rajah’s elephants
were kept and fed at the ryots’ expense. Debtors
were dragged along with their families by the creditors
at once to their houses, and if unable to pay they were
kept as slaves and a fee of two dollars was paid to the
Raja. If any of the Raja’s slaves killed a ryot nothing
was said. If a ryot, on the contrary, killed one of the
Raja’s slaves, he and his family became slaves to the
Raja. Fines ware fertile sources of oppression. Per-
sons stealing the Raja’s cattle ware made slaves, as
were persons indebted to the Raja’s mercantile agent.
The ryots had to supply provisions to the Raja or any
of his officers and their followars who were attending
the mosque on particular occasions. Sireh or betel
growars paid a monthly tax of produce to the Chiefs,


The people had to perform warlike services by sea and
by land, both on account of the Rajah and as Siamese
subjects in the armies of Siam. On these occasions
each ryot had to carry ten guntongs of rice along with
him, and when that was expended the Raja supplied
provisions, but no pay. If any one resisted the order
to serve he was killed.
End of Part I.
(Signed) James Low.
Province Wellesley
20th April 1837.
N.B.—Several amendments and corrections of the
original have been now made by me.


Fort William 22d June 1842.
To the Honble S. G. Bonham Esquire
Governor of Prince of Wales Island
Singapore and Malacca.
Sir,
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of a
letter requiring for the Right Honble, the Governor
General in council a second copy of my Retrospect of
British Policy in the Straits of Malacca &ca.
I request now to forward to you another copy, and
at the same time to mention that I have availed myself
of this occasion and have brought up the narrative
to the present day.
In my reply to your letter respecting Twanku
Mahomed Saad, and also the Political Account I have
noticed the acts of that person subsequently as well as
previous to his expulsion from his usurped authority
and position in Keddah.
I should hope that the disputed point of the
entire political dependence of Keddah on Siam, on
which the whole of the Keddah question hinges, will
have been satisfactorily proved by the Malayan History
of Keddah alone, which I quoted largely in the Ist
part of my Political Account. Of this History there
are I believe only two copies extant, owing to the
disturbances in that country. The one is in the pos-
session of the Ex Rajah and the other is in my posses-
sion, having been given to me as I formerly stated
by the Ex Rajah himself.
This last fact is the best proof of the authenticity
of that History and of its being considered by the
parties the most interested in its tendency as the Ex-
positor of the Political Condition of Keddah.
I have &ca.
(Signed) James Low, Major.
Singapore,
26th April 184-2.


NOTE.
On pages 72, 73 and 74 originally appeared the
Contents of Part XL, but this index was found to be
very incomplete and these pages have consequently
been omitted. An Index to the whole publication
will be issued later on.


Part II.
A Retrospect of British Policy
in
The Straits of Malacca
from the period of the First Establishment
of Penang on the 17th of July 1786 up to
April 1842
Combining Historical Details Respecting the
Straits Settlements
and the
Neighbouring Native States.
By Major James Low
46th Regt. Madras N. I.
Chapter Ist.
In 1785 Captain James Scott of the country
Merchant Service suggested to the Supreme Govern-
ment the expediency of securing some favourable posi-
tion to the Eastward for the purpose of counteracting
the exclusive contract system of the Dutch, and giving
to the British trade a chance of participating in the
commerce of the Archipelago ( a ).
(a). In 1788 the Dutch sent all their disposable forces
to attack the Rajah of Rhio because he favoured all the
numerous British merchants who resorted to his port for
the purchase of pepper and gold dust. But they found it
no easy task to punish the Raja for “this great crime”.
After having blockaded the place for several months they
attempted to force their way into the river, but were repulsed
and forced to return to Malacca, with the loss of their
Commodore, a Civilian, and a ship of 500 tons burden,
which blew up, killing 500 men on board of her. Other
vessels were also damaged.
The Bugis Prahus under the command of Raja Haji,
who had settled at Rhio, having been joined by the Rajah of
Salengore went by sea and blockaded Malacca and forced the
Dutch within their lines, but fresh troops arrived in 1784
from Batavia who stormed the Raja’s compound, killed about
400 of the Rhio people, the remainder fled. The Dutch
then proceeded to Salengore which they found deserted,
'i'he Dutch had some time previously requested assistance
from the Rajas of Kedd.ih and Tringanoo. The former
excused himself on account of a war in Patani, the latter


But other advantages which will be noted here-
after were expected to be derived from the measure.
Mr. Scott proposed Salang (Junkceylon ) as a good
station, but this was impolitic. At this period the
Burmans held the Tenasserim Coast from Martaban to
Mergui. Thus the Siamese were shut out from the
coast and were forced to find an outlet through Junk
Ceylon. The exports of [ ? Siam ] were then about
5,000 piculs cf tin, some amber, wax and ivory.
But Mr. Scott advanced a very untenable reason
for occupying the territory of a country without the
permission of its governor. He observed that waste
countries are to them, the Indo-Chinese nations, of no
value, and as they have plenty [of] waste land and
jungle, as improvements do not enter into their calcu-
lations, they have no inducement therefore to dispute
possession. Now the fact is that these people are
most tenacious of territorial boundaries.
joined them. In 1784 the Dutch sent a ship to the Raja of
Keddah for a supply of rice and to deliver a letter to the
Raja. The officers who delivered the letter, peremptorily,
at the first audience, told the lung “to give him two young
women, and strange to say this demand was immediately
complied with,” through fear. In the same year the Raja
of Salengore sent a parly to Perak to massacre the Dutch
garrison, but the attempt did not fully succeed, only the
Commander and a sentinel having been wounded on the side
of the Dutch, the latter (the Dutch) having fled after an
engagement in which they killed some Bugis men and re-
treated to Malacca with the loss of all their stores and
ammunition. Soon after, the Dutch having established a
footing at Rhio, they built a fort there. This occupation was
felt as a bar to the English trade with the people from
Borneo, the Moluccas and Celebes, and even the Philippines,
since all these had then no established emporium to revert
to for the purpose. From May to October the passage from
the Coromandel t oast to Penang is made in ten days and
the return passage in about 15 days to 20 days in the same
season. From November to April the passage from Penang
to the Coromandel Coast takes about ten days and the re-
turn from any part of the Coast to the Northward of
Masulipatam is made in about the same time.


The Birds Nest Islands in the vicincity of Junk
Ceylon yielded about 16.000 Dollars worth of produce
and the tax was 5,000 Dollars. A rich pearl fishery
was worked about 1785 at Pulo Matra near Palo Tel-
libon by a Chulliah from the Gulf of Mawar, but was
given up owing to the oppression of the Native Chiefs.
1786. The Rija of’ Keddah wrote to the Govern-
or General in this year stating that he had conferred
the honorary title of Deva Raja on Captain LightC l ),
who had informed him that the English wished to
possess Penang,( f) ) adding that “he had directed that
“ the flag of the Honorable Company should be hoist-
“ ed on the Island in order that it might become a
“ trading port, and one where Ships of War might
“ obtain refreshments.”( c ) He conveyed also the Raja’s
sentiments regarding Siam, and he observed that he
understood that his alliance with the Company was to
prove also a shield to him against the attacks or de-
mands of that power. Captain Light undoubtedly
committed himself by unauthorizedly leading the Raja
then to consider that his alliance with the Company
was in some measure at least both offensive and de-
fensive.
(a) Captain Light was also complimented by the
Siamese King with the title of “ Phra. ”
(b) Penang, long before its cession to the British, was
famed for tin* quantities of fish in its vicinity. The fvdi-
eries attracted Malays from a distance. The inhabitants
about 1750 were pirates, and it is said amounted to 30( 0
people. There were therefore no antiquities to boast of
there. Fish are abundant enough now to confirm this
statement.
(c) The popular belief and [one] wh'ch has been
followed by Captain Begbie and Lieut, Newbold and the
authors of Gazettes is that Captain Light r .reived the Island
as a dower from the Raja when he bestowed his daughter
on the former in marriage. Such was not the fact, and
anyhow the ca e would have been a very improbable otic,
since the Keddah Raja was a Mussulman. Captain Light
was presented by the Raja with one of the female Maids
of Honor of his wife, Tong Dee, a Siamese by birth.


From many circumstances it should seem that the
Raja at first was eager for the alliance under almost any
form, as he felt that it would at least be a check on
the Siamese ( a ), and events confirm this judgment, for
up to the expulsion of the present Ex-Raja from Ked-
dah in 1829, the Siamese hail evidently found that al-
liance to be a restraint on their plans, and had the
Raja not presumed too far on its moial influence by
leaguing with the Burmese and giving unnecessary
umbrage in other matters to the latter nation since,
he might still have been in possession as Governor of
Keddah. It is even probable that had offence not
been given until the termination of the Burmese War
the impression made on the Siamese Court by this last
event would have caused it to pause before it directed
an invasion of Keddah.
In 1784/5 the Siamese sent an army of 15,000
and 150 Prahus and junks to attack Cambodia, but
were surprised and defeated, and only one third of the
number returned to Siam. Ava joined the Cochin-
French against Siam. A French Bishop went to Siam
to try and get up a rebellion there. In January 1820
the Burmans assembled 10,000 men at Kra in Bat:
9.40° North, and on the Bth February following it
attacked Salang (Junk Ceylon).
It is singular that the Burmese still tolerate a
French Bishop, with subordinates, in Siam, and it is a
favorable item in their character.
(a>. The Rajah probably thought that once in alliance
with the British every thing else he had in prospect would
follow, of course. He was aware of the loss which the trade
of Keddah would sustain by the cession of Keddah and
stipulated accordingly , although in the treaties which secured
to hint an equivalent for this loss, the footing on which it was
given is differently stated.
It was urged as a plea for occupation that a fleet cannot
leave the Coromandel Coast station and go to Bombay and
be again at its station before the beginning of April, so that
an enemy which may have rectified (? refitted) at Achin or
elsewhere to the eastward will have the bay free to them.


Original Propositions of the then Rajah of Keddah
made to the Supreme Government.
Ist.
The Company to guard
the seas and to be the en-
emy by sea of the Rajah’s
enemies.
2d.
The Company not to
stop any vessel or prah
bound to Keddah to trade.
Such may proceed either
to Penang or Keddah as
the traders please.
3d.
Opium, fin and rattans
to remain monopolies un-
less the Company agree
to pay an equivalent of
30,000 Drs., their average
value per annum, for the
abolition.
4th.
The Rajah will not be
liable for the debts of
his Chiefs or people to
the Honble. Company’s
Agent.
Reply.
This Government will
always keep an Armed
Vessel stationed to guard
the Island of Penang and
the adjacent Coast of Ked-
dah.
2d.
Agreed to
3d.
The Governor General
in Council on the part of
the English Company will
take care that the King
of Keddah shall not be a
sufferer by an English Set-
tlement being formed on
the Island of Penang.
4th.
The King ought to be
liable for the debts of his
relatives or officers and
the creditor of his subjects
should have power to seize
the persons and property
of debtors in Keddah


sth.
Any person in Keddah
becoming an enemy to the
Rajah to be considered al-
so as an enemy oi the
Company.
6th.
If an enemy comes to
attack us by land and we
receive assistance from the
Rouble Company of men,
arms or ammunition, the
expenses of these will be
defrayed by us.
sth.
The King’s enemies and
also capital offenders will
not be proti cted by the
Company.
6th.
Referred to the Rouble.
Court of Directors, along
with other requests which
cannot now be complied
with.
It will be seen below* that opium, tin and rattans
were the monopoly articles on which the Rajah antici-
pated loss, and valued these at thirty thousand dollars,
which was perhaps an exaggerated amount.
The reply of the Supreme Government to the 3d
proposition of the Keddah Rajah, namely that care
would be taken that he should not be a loser by the
English occupying Penang has by some writers been
unaccountably construed to include a guarantee of
protection to him against foreign aggression !
That such was not the construction put upon it
at the time, either by the Supreme Government or the
Rajah himself, is evident from the reply to the demand
for protection being in the negative.
But the internal trade and monopolies of Keddah
were only “considerably reduced” in value by the
cession, not annihilated , so that the equivalent given
to the Rajah for them, and which his successor enjoys
at this day, or may enjoy, was perhaps far beyond the
actual loss. The whole internal Revenue of Keddah in


its most prosperous time did not exceed one lac ot
rupees, ( a ) drawn from a population of about 150,000.
In several respects the Rajah w-as a manifest gainer—
in the outlet which Penang afforded for agricultural
produce, and stock for which he had no ready market
before. His external trade suffered indeed consider-
ably, but wdien it is considered that the British Gov-
ernment w'ere resolved to have a settlement to the east-
ward in the northern extremity of the Straits, the loss
to the trade of Keddah would have been inevitable,
should the new Settlement even have not been on any
part of the Keddah territory. The Dingdings, for in-
stance, could easily have been obtained from Perak.
The Keddah Rajahs, however, notwithstanding
the payment alluded to, had always their profits on
tin and rice exported, and of trade at their ports.
1786. At this period the Dutch influence extend-
ed from Point Rumania South up to 5° N : Lat: at the
Krean, the then boundary betwixt Perak and Keddah,
and had the British broken off negotiations with the
Rajah that influence would not only have soon per-
vaded Keddah, but the Rajah might have found that
he had, by calling the Dutch to his aid, exchanged
that protection which must to a certain extent have
followed an alliance with the British, for the subjec-
tion into which every Malayan State which had
courted Dutch favour has fallen. The French too
were at the period alluded to quite prepared to in-
trigue with the Keddah Rajah for the annoyance of
the English. Ava also, as will be afterwards adverted
to, had an eye on Keddah with the view of making
it a means of annoyance to the Siamese. Setting
therefore aside the political question of the mode in
which Penang was acquired, it may fairly be urged
that amidst so many conflicting and ambitious nations,
it was happy for Keddah that she allied herself with
(a). No doubt the revenue under proper manage-
ment might have been much increased.


Keddah Politics.
Political state
of Keddah.
* .tie—there appears
to he an omission
here.
Dutch influence
in Keddah.
the English, and that it would have been so had the
terms of that alliance been far less favorable to her.
But if there be such a thing as political necessity it
was felt then that such might perhaps alone have
justified the occupation of Penang.
It will have been seen that the reply of the
Supreme Government to the Rajah’s Sixth Proposition
was Dy no means of such a nature as to convince him
that the solicited protection against foreign enemies
would be afforded.
The Rajah after this reply could not fairly urge
any argument against the occupation of Penang.
It was about this period that Captain Light, who
had always waived, if he had not quite denied all
Siamese claims on Keddah, felt himself constrained
to confess thus far, that “ the Rajahs of Keddah had
“ ever acknowledged the Siamese as Lords Paramount.”
At the same time, having been called upon by the
Supreme Government to clearly ascertain that no
nation or power beyond Keddah* Kings came originally
from Menangkabow- in Sumatra, and always had
through fear paid homage to the rival nations of Ava
and Siam by sending gold and silver trees to each.
When Captain Light went to Keddah to finally
arrange about the cession, he found that a change had
taken place in the bearing of the Rajah, and that he
did not appear to be so satisfied regarding it as he
( Captain Light ) had expected.
This alteration he ascribed to the Dutch influence
which had extended so far as to bribe the Keddah
Ministers, and the known request of that nation to be
allowed to hoist its flag in Keddah. When a petty
Malayan Chief like the Keddah Rajah thus found his
friendship and alliance courted by the only three
European nations possessing powers on the Coast, at
any rate naval powers, and by Ava, the great rival of


Siam, it is not surpi’ising that lie should have increased
his demands. Captain Light described this Rajah
as having been a mere puppet in the hands of his
Chiefs. His father was that Mahomed Siva, when Mr.
Monckton from Bengal first visited Keddah on a
political Mission, and his mother was a slave girl. His
illegitimacy was against his accession to the Govern-
ment, and excited his uncles to dispute his claims.
They leagued with the Rajahs of Perak and
Salangore but were unsuccessful, probably through
the interference of the Siamese Emperor, who ever
gained in power by laying the weaker party under
obligations to him. Captain Light represents this
Prince as being weak, timid, avaricious and oppressive,
and devoid of faith : and that he would not scruple
perhaps to sacrifice Penang to Siamese intrigues.
The Rajah in fact was then under tire guidance
of a Chuliah( a ) or Coromandel! Coast man, bearing the
title of Dattoo Sri Raja, who was interested in having
the alliance cemented, but who with the charac-
teristic cunning and cupidity of his class endeavoured
to conclude a Jew’s bargain for his master and him-
self. On a previous occasion when his powers were
more stable and he did not anticipate the advantage
of having a place of refuge at hand when the evil day
should arrive, he scrupled not to cause the Rajah
to decline receiving a letter which Captain Forrest had
brought for him from the then Governor General, Mr.
Hastings. Malayan Princes are in general at this day
dependent on these Chuliahs or Jawi Pakans for advice
on affairs both of state and of commerce, and the
Rajah of Ligor even, has been long in the habit of
employing these people as under secretaries, but with-
out trusting them to any great extent.
(a). The Chuliahs are Coromandel men But most
of the people so called and residing at Malayan Courts
are the offspring of Coromandel men and Malayan
women, and are there called Jawi Pakans.


Before the final arrangements took effect the
Rajah asked Captain Light if, in the event of the
decision of the Home Government proving unfavor-
able, he would return to Bengal. To this politic
query the latter gentleman did not reply—for an
obvious enough reason. But the mere putting of the
question shows that the Rajah did not expect that
the British force would return whatever the result
might be.
Captain Light took possession of Penang on the
17th July 1786. The expedition landed at Point
Penaga. A spot of ground was cleared and a flag
staff* erected. On the 11th of August following a
party assembled consisting of the following gentlemen,
Captain Wall Honble. Company’s Ship Vansittart,
Captain Lewin H. C. S. Yalantyne with his passen-
gers, besides local government servants. The British
flag was then hoisted and the Island was finally and
formally taken possession of in the name of His
Majesty and for the use of the Honble. the East
India Company.
The point of land on which the town and suburbs
now stand was, together with the interior, then
covered with jungle.
sth Octr. 1786. Captain Light recommended
that a force should be sent to defend Keddah against
the Siamese and to consist of 3 Native Companies—
-50 Europeans, 50 Lascars, 1 Bombay cruiser and 2
Calivats. The Keddah Revenue was at this period
only 100,000 Rupees, so that the Rajah could not
have afforded to pay even a moiety of the expenses
of such protection.
The Lancavi Islands had been possessed for a
Settlement, but they are steep, rocky and moun-
tainous with little land available for cultivation.
Gunong Lava is in parts, it is said, covered with lava,
and hot springs abound, so that there was danger from


a volcano again bursting forth. The Islands are also
of doubtful salubrity. Besides they also appertain to
■Keddah. The Andaman Islands, although they had
been during seven years under the direction of able
men, did not exhibit at the end of that period any
thing like colonization, cultivation or commerce.
The climate is a deadly one. Penang had just
been occupied when the Dutch invested Salangore
with a large Marine force and compelled the Rajah to
sign an agreement that he would send all his tin to
Malacca.
Novr. 1786. About tills time the Siamese over-
ran the Patani Country which had refused to pay the
usual homage. The Keddah Rajah was at the same
time interdicted by the Siamese from sheltering Patani
refugees. Patani was at this period a much more
populous province than it is now. From frequent
rebellions of its people it has fully experienced the
weight of Siamese rule, and it perhaps does not now
contain more than 60,000 persons, or about a third of
its former population.
The Patani Malays are devoted Mahometans and
numbers yearly go on the pilgrimage to Mecca. The
natives do not fail to observe with foreigners, that
the Haj is a convenient cloak for a hypocrite—a re-
mark the truth of which is confirmed by the generally
lax character borne by the Hajis of the Peninsula ( a ).
Patani, it should seem, was early peopled by the
Siamese race. If the Keddah Annals are to be relied
on, it was settled by a colony from this latter country
under a princess, the daughter of Rajah Bodisat,
about the year A.D. 1350. This account is confirmed
in some measure by the writer Florid, who ob-
serves that Patani was governed by Queens, and was
(a). 1 have found them generally the most forward
in every political moment which has occurred in the
vicinity of Penang and in Piovince Wellesley.


conquered by Raja Api or the Black King of Siam in
A.D. 1603. The fact is curious as being rather an
uncommon one in the history of the Indo-Chinese
nations which reject almost invariably female domi-
nion and succession. Ava furnishes an exception or
two.
1786. The Rajah of Rhio during this year sup-
plicated the Supreme Government to assist him in
regaining his country from the Dutch, and to place
him and his people under the British flag. The Rajah
of Selangore also sent to make a similar tender.
TJxe Malayan Annals describe the conquest of the
Patani country by the Siamese during the reign of the
Sultan Mahomed of Malacca, or about A.D. 1460.
Before the year 1509, the period of the first advent of
the Portuguese at Malacca, it is stated that the Prince
who governed was named Raja Soliman or Moslem, and
that his capital was called Kotah Meligei.
The conqueror this time was Chow Sri Bangsa a
son of the King of Siam. The English had once a
factory at Patani which does not appear to have been
of much mercantile importance. It is a fruitful grain
country, abounds in cattle which it often supplies to
Penang, and contains inexhaustible Mines of tin( a ).
There are gold mines likewise in the hills which
separate it from Keddah and Perak on the West.
They are worked at present (1837) to a considerable
extent but the produce has not been ascertained.
1 found that the direct route to Patani from Pro-
vince Wellesley would be impracticable to a regular
force, which should not be preceded by a large body
of pioneers. Up to the mountains, within a day’s
(a). In 1833 I visited these mines and perhaps it
was the first time that they had been so [ visited ] by
any European, no one having ever before attempted to
penetrate into the interior.
J. L.


march of the tin mines of Krah in Patani, the com-
munication is entirely by water ( a ;, although in the
dry season a passage might be effected with difficulty
by cutting down the jungle or clearing the under-
wood. A branch of the Mudah River was ascended
by me with much difficulty in boats not carrying
more than half a coyan. In the season* the smallest
canoes only can ascend. The ascent in the rains is
attended with great danger owing to the rapidity of
the stream, its tortuous course and the impediments
of sunken trees and rocks.
1786. The Burmese who had been instigated by
the French and Cochin Chinese broke into Siam at
several places —one division of their forces entered
Upper Siam, and the other penetrated into the Lower
Provinces of Ligor, Chaiya, Choomphon, Daloong and
Banhae burning and destroying all before them and
murdering the unprepared inhabitants. But these
columns retreated suddenly without any assignable
cause.
The Siamese rallied and put to death a party of
2,000 Burmans who had occupied Ligor. The Siamese
Court then called to account the Rajahs of Keddah,
Pahang and Wingaunoo, for their not having aided
in repelling the Burmans from the dominions of their
Liege Lord. Scarcely had the year passed over before
Captain Light found it politic on the foregoing account
to fortify his position.
The Rajah of Keddah made a timely submission
to the Court of Bangkok, yet it can hardly be doubted
that he had only been making a trial how iar his new
alliance would restrain the Siamese. The experiment
however was kept in mind by the latter nation.
22 Jany. 1787. The Supreme Government now
acquainted Captain Light in the instructions sent to
(a). The stream for the most of the way is shallow
and narrow, admitting only canoes to pass.


him that a pecuniary compensation would be allowed
to the liajah of Keddah but that the latter must not
expect that the British Government would enter into
or become a party in his disputes with other Malayan
Princes, since such if given would involve the British
in disputes with the Burmese and Siamese. “ Assis-
tance should therefore be refused to either party and
the security of the Island be made the sole object, en-
deavouring to acquire the respect and secure the good
will of the neighbouring States.” Captain Light had
by the same authority been previously informed that
“ the countenance of the Company might be offered to
the Rajah of Keddah vrhere it would not compromise
the honor, credit or troops of the Company,” Bub
the Rajah of Keddah, repenting it should seem of his
negotiation with the British, represented his case to
the very enemy he had been constantly guarding
against, the King of Siam, and the latter would pro-
bably have leagued with [his] vassal to drive the
English out, had he not caught, as we believe, a
distant glimpse of British pow T er and felt that the
Burmans might coalesce. That the Siamese w r ere
aware even then of the strength of the British in a
degree at least, is evident from the request they made
at this time to Captain Light, that the English should
take possession of Mergui, a Province which had been
wrested from them by the Burmans. This would, had
it been effected, have covered a weak point of the
Siamese [ ? frontier, ] and they have since reaped the
full advantage they expected from this measure—and
much more, for their frontier up to Phra Song Choo
(a) is flanked by the friendly British Province of
Tenasserim. The treaty which ensued in the war be-
twixt the British wdth the Burmese has likewise
secured since that event to the Siamese a freedom
from Burmese inroad or invasion and promised to en-
sure the security of her frontier so long as that Treaty
(a), “The Three Pagodas.”


shall exist, Siam, therefore, not only without any
exertion of her own, but even in spite of a very sus-
picious policy on her part, towards the British during
that war, has gained an immense accession of force.
Relieved from the necessity of constant warfare and
expensive expeditions, her population has more time
to improve her numerous resources, financial and
political. Had it not been for this, to her, result of
the war —all unmerited as it was by her—-Siam would
probably ere now have been partitioned out betwixt
the Cochin Chinese and Burmese, her two natural
enemies, and to one of whom or both she will most
likely become in the end a prey. Her neighbours too
on the north, the Laos of Che-ung Mai and Lanchang,
are ever ready to assert independence. It is impossible
that the Court of Bankok should be blind to the nature
of her political position.
It will be apparent from what has been noticed
that there are no real grades of Siamese society. Below
ibe line of Public Office all are nearly on an equality_
and thus under one of the most despotic govern-
ments in the world every man may aspire to the
highest office of the State. The literature of the
Siamese, which is accessible to every rank, and their
religion which is based on humanity and is not devoid
of sublimity, serve to raise them above the medium
ranks of civilization ( a ).
1797.*' At the period of which we are treating
the British alliance was courted by most of the Malay-
an Peninsula States, the primary object being to
gain protection against the insidious, if not open aims,
of Siam. Had the extension of the British power
been then desirable a slight effort might have secured
it, but neither trade or concealed hostilities of the
Dutch (then very influential in the Straits) would
(a). r i he Asiatic Society of Calcutta did me the
honor to print two papers of mine in their .Researches,
one on the Government and the other on the Literature
of the Siamese.


[have] embarrassed or suspended the former, while
expensive civil and military establishments would have
swallowed up much more than the paltry revenues of
the subsidised States.
14 Octr. 1787. Among the rest Achin profierred
her alliance and friendship, and offered to discard the
French. But this alliance would have been accom-
panied then by inconveniences similar to those just
noticed.
The population of Achin was then estimated at
about 1,398,000 persons. The Malays have been
generally considered to entertain a particular dislike
of the French, although this is the nation which has
the least interference with them. In other parts of
the East the French are sometimes liked because
the} T mix more than other Europeans with the people.
The remark does not seen however to apply to Algiers.
Perhaps the French character has altered since they
were in the Straits. In a subsequent chapter I will
describe the British relations which existed with Achin.
The proposition which was made at this period by
Captain Light that protection should be publicly
promised to the Rajah of Keddah was not complied
with by the Supreme Government. Keddah then paid
to Siam the yearly tribute of gold and silver flowers,
besides feudal services, including supplies for troops,
and Captain Light was apprehensive that if the Rajah’s
wishes were not complied with he might call in the aid
of his Liege Lord (the Emperor of Siam )to expel the
British.
1788. The Supreme Government in this year
empowered Captain Light to arrange with the Rajah
for an annual payment to him of a sum not exceeding
10,000 Sp : Drs. # No direct protection was to be offer-
ed “ but such countenance as should not involve the
the Company in military operations against any Eas-
tern Prince, or compromise the honor or credit of the
Company.”


The Rajah of Keddah was called upon about this
time by the Siamese for a contingent of troops to aid
in attacking the Burmese at Pegue, and Keddah was
threatened with destruction in case of a refusal to
comply with the requisition. Compliance was indeed
a duty on the part of the province ( a ), and they applied
very modestly to Captain Light for 200 barrels of gun-
powder 2,000 muskets and 500 blunderbusses, offering
to pay for them, when it should suit him of course.
The request was denied.
I cannot help here noticing that at the period
alluded to, and up to one much later, the distresses
of Keddah did nob call to her rescue any of the kin-
dred tribes of the Straits. It was not until bigoted
Arabs, lying and cowardly Chuliahs and Hadjis, and
interested Chinese, backed by an ill informed and radi-
cal local press had sounded the tocsin of war. against
the infidel, that the right of Siam to interfere in Ked-
dah affairs was questioned.
1788. The Rajah of Tringanoo, a country lying
on the eastern coast of the Peninsula of Malacca,
solicited an alliance with the British. His envoys
offered to deliver 6,000 piculs of pepper yearly in ex-
change for opium at 25 piculs the chest, which might
have been equivalent then to perhaps 250 Dollars per
chest. The Rajah in reply was told by the Supreme
Government to submit quietly to the Dutch, and a
similar reply was given to the application of the Rajah
of Rhio.
The Malays were at this period bent on expelling
the Dutch from the Straits. The} 7 had eighty war
prahus in the Straits of Singapore and Lahore,
and another large ileet in the Straits of Dry on, but
single handed they could not cope with the Dutch, and
the British did not enter the lists on either side.
(a). Such feudal and other services, with supplies
for troops, being the great revenue paid to Siam by
Keddah.


1788. It may be deemed to be rather a singular
fact that the Siamese had never in any shape publicly
protested against the occupancy of Penang by the
English, but in the above year the French Padre at
Siam reported that they were much annoyed at the
i.cession and had willingly received an overture from the
Rajah of Keddah to obtain aid from them in an endea-
vour to expel the English. They? however, but long
subsquently to this period and during the Government
of Mr, Phillips, advanced a claim to the sum which
had been annually paid to the Rajah before his expul-
sion from Keddah.
The Rajah at this time ( 1788) too, and while
actually it should seem intriguing with the Siamese
for the purpose alluded to, proposed through his Minis-
ters to Captain Light that the British should attack
the Siamese Province of Ligor, while that people were
on a distant expedition. The proposition was at once
rejected. As a proof that whatever the Siamese might
have felt they were duly impressed with a sense of
British power, it may be remarked that in the same
year the Emperor of Siam sent a flowery and most
adulatory letter, couched in the most amicable style,
to the Superintendent of Penang,
It was perhaps however imprudent, under the
’then existing state of Indian politics, in Captain Light
to accept the honorary title of Sri Deva Rajah bestow-
on him by the then Emperor, since it might possibly
have been brought up afterwards as an acknowledg-
ment of Siamese supremacy, or considered or construed
as a pretty direct admission on the part of Siam that
the occupation of Penang by the British was not in-
consistent with her position in regard to Keddah. It
amounted at least to a tacit recognition of the occu-
pancy, and might have been fairly used afterwards as
an argument against any objections which the Siamese
might have chosen to urge on that point.


The Island had been ceded and taken final posses-
sion of, yet no compensation to the Rajah had yet been
been agreed on. The latter still hoping to overcome
the aversion of the British to forming an offensive and
defensive alliance with him, refused two offers made
to Idm by Captain Light, the one of 10,000 dollars for
seven or eight years, the other of 4,000 Spanish Dollars
for so long as the Company should retain possession of
Penang, and he continued deaf to the parrying, although
to a certain extent good argument, that the mere
fact of his being in alliance with the British would,
when publicly known, prove a safeguard to him
against his enemies. The Rajah nevertheless insisted
that Captain Light had promised him assistance in
arms and men. It is true that this gentleman did
on his own responsibility assert in a letter addressed
to the Rajah several years before ( sth October 1785 )
that he would assist him if distressed in his expected
troubles with the Siamese and Burmese, but the kind
of aid was not specified, and the coupling of the two
nations together shews plainly that he thereby meant
mediation. The Rajah finding that no direct aid
would be given to him hoped to stimulate the latter
(Captain Light) by courting the alliance of some
other but less scrupulous European power, and he
accordingly made separate overtures to the French
authorities at Pondicherry, and to the Dutch, it does
not appear, that the former met his advances with
alacrity, but the latter permitted them with avidity,
received the Rajah’s letter with great pomp, and no
doubt hoped by a grand stroke of policy to exclude the
British for ever from the Straits of Malacca.
A Dutch frigate was dispatched to Keddah, and
two other cruizers of the same nature actually an-
chored off Penang harbour, and there interfered with
the trade of the infant settlement.
The visit of the frigate was followed immediate-
ly by the Rajah laying an embargo on rice and


supplies exported to Penang. The experiment of the
Rajah did not change the resolution of the Superin-
tendent of Penang. The Dutch found most likely that
the benefits to be expected would be more than counter-
balanced by the trouble and expense of sustaining
the attacks of Siam on Keddah, and their visits
were no doubt marked b} T their usual grasping spirit,
for the Rajah removed the embargo, and broke off
negotiations with them. The Rajah had now in fact
thrown off the mask and Captain Light was obliged
to report that “ he had not sent for any money or
“ opium and was very much irritated against him for
“ not complying with his (the Rajah’s) demands. ’\ a )*
The position of the Rnjah was thus altered —he
had finally ceded the Island and allowed it to be
occupied, and he had placed himself in a hostile attitude
in respect to its occupiers on the ground that Captain
Light had not fulfilled his promises of assisting him
against the Siamese. But the Rnjah knew well that
such promises, vague as they must have been, had not
been ratified by the Supreme Government, or even
recognized by it, and it can scarcely be doubted that
he made an improvident cession, and then repenting
of it took hold of any plea for recovering lost ground.
His next attempt betrayed the rashness of the
Malay, and gave to the Engl s i a strong plea for
treating 1 him afterwards as a concealed enemy. This
o *
was the Malayan League.
11l December 1790 a Malayan fleet arrived at
Penang. It consisted of four hundred large and small
prahus carrying one hundred and twenty pieces of
Ordnance of from 6 to 12 lbs. calibre, besides small
arms, and the number of men was estimated at 8,000.
Besides this force there was one sent from Keddah by
land of nearly the same strength.
(a). Sangora was plundered during the year by the
Taloon fleet.


The fleet of p nil ms had been fitted out by the
Rajahs and Cliiefs of Tringanoo, ilambow,' Siac, kSooloo,
Lingin, Johore, Indragiri, Cota Carang and Siantan.
With this armament the Malays vainly imagined they
could expel both the English and Dutch from the
Straits, but it will be seen that Malayan prowess had
wofully degenerated since the era when the Portugu-
O •* o
ese held Malacca,
It does not appear from the records of Penang at
the period when these events took place, that the
Rajah of Keddah had summoned the forces described
to bis aid, but there can be little doubt that he did
so, and at any rate he took full advantage of their
presence.
When however the combined fl >tilla had been
beaten off from Perak in an attack they had made on
the Dutch Settlement there, and had been refused
permission by the Superintendent at Penang to pass
northward through the harbour, the Rajah of Keddali
sent an officer to the Commander, who was a Lanoon
man, with instructions to offer twenty thousand dollars
to him. if he would attack and destroy Penang during
the night. At the same time the Rajah pledged him-
self that should he prove unsuccessful, he would co-
operate with the fleet in besieging Penang. ( a )
It would appear that the offer was accepted, but
that the attack which was to have taken place on the
night of the 25th had been frustrated by a difference
of opinion as to the mode of it having arisen amongst
the Chiefs of the fleet. The latter now sailed to
Keddah and all communication with that port was cub
off and Mr. Scott, who was dispatched to Keddah to
gain intelligence, learned that the Malays avowed
their intention to destroy Penang.
(a). Eighteen large piratical prahus having large
guns and 8U boats came to Pulo Kra but were forced
off by a schooner.


Things continued in this state during nearly two
months, the Rajah evidently trusting to gain his
objects by intimidation, and Captain Light continuing
to express to the Supreme Government that he saw
no danger from the Company avowing him (the
Rajah ) to be under its protection. The Rajah also
seized about 30,000 Dollars worth of propertjr belong-
ing to merchants in Penang, and he asked of Captain
Light that ten thousand Dollars should be paid him
yearly by the Company, that the Company should
defend the sea coast at their own expense, and furnish
to him men and the munitions of war and the loan of
cash when required. The men and warlike stores
were to be paid for. Provisions, he conditioned, would
be supplied to Penang at a fair price. The Island ot
Penang at this times depended on Keddah chiefly for
supplies of cattle, rice and poultry. Considerable
distress therefore prevailed on account of the depriva-
tion alluded to. The Malays hovered about in prahus
carrying a six or nine lb. gun each, while the French
were suspected of aiming at the establishing a factory
in Keddah. Specie was exhausted and a war seemed
pending betwixt Britain and France. Such being, in
Captain Light’s opinion, a critical state of affairs, he
advanced ten thousand dollars to the Keddah Rajah,
which it will be seen, and as might have been expect-
ed, onty served to convince the latter that his plan of
intimidation was the one best calculated to gain his
object. The future existence therefore of the British
in the Straits was to depend not on the boasted and
long lauded generosity and friendship of the Raja,
which had been better expressed by the terms sordid,
mis-calculating self interest, but on sheer physical and
political strength.
The Supreme Government again acquainted Cap-
tain Light that if indeed, as he wished to make it
appear, it were absolutely necessary to concede to the
Rajah’s third demand even to the extent recommended


by Captain Light (namely reasonable assistance when
proper application should have been made and the
necessity of the case made apparent) in order to come
.to a final adjustment with him, then such an adjust-
ment cannot now be made, whatever be tlie conse-
quences.
‘Captain Light was authorized to offer 30,000
dollars per annum for so long as the English retained
possession of the Island. The Rajah's conduct did not
deserve the epithet bestowed on it by Captain Light
of perfidious because he (the Rajah ) had as yet been
a sufferer by the cession of the Island; and he
might have been strongly tempted from other quar-
ters to attempt its recovery. Captain Light was not
therefore to distress the Rajah by war or other-
wise.’
This human forbearance was however requited
by the Rajah in a manner which to some minds would
have furnished a plea for a less scrupulous behaviour
towards him.
On the 19th day of April 179.1 a fleet of twenty
Lanoon boats entered lire Pry, which is a deep creek
or Liver in Province Wellesley, lying on the mainland
nearly opposite to the town of Penang, The width of
the channel from the Island to the opposite beach is
about 2f miles. About 9 (/Clock of the same day the
Bindahara or General of Keddah joined with 90 boats,
while a land force was also collected. Entrenchments
(still visible) were immediately thrown up [on] Pry
point. On the 23rd. most of the merchant vessels
which were lying in Penang harbour set sail, and the
inhabitants asked leave to attack the enemy.
Captain Light, still following up his former
policy, sent 5,000 Spanish dollars to the Jveddah
General, intimating that it was part of the yearly
payment, but this offer produced no effect. The
enemy now intrigued with the Malays in Penang,


promising them their lives and a share of the plunder
if they would assist in its capture.
On the 9th the enemy sent a declaration of war,
in which it was stated that in regard [to] Keddah the
English had promised much but had performed noth-
ing. The head Malay was at the same time ordered to
drive the English out of Penang.
The strong arm now took [the] place of fruitless
negotiation. Captains Light and Glass fitted out
some gun boats to act along with three small vessels,
one of which was a Chinese.
At 4 O’Clock A.M. on the 12th Captain Glass
landed on the opposite coast (now Province Wellesley)
with one Company 6f Golundaze, two Companies of
Bengal Sepoys and twenty Europeans—and four gun-
boats kept close along the shore. The enemy were
taken by surprise and after some show of resistance
were driven out of their stockades. The vessels and
gun boats under Lieutts, Raban and Milne attacked
at daybreak the enemy’s fleet now mustering about
two hundred prahus, and after sustaining a heavy fire
for seme time, compelled it to retire out of sight to
the southward of the Island.
On the 14th the fleet again appeared. The gun-
boats and a punt, having an 18 lb. gun in its bow,
were again sent against the enemy who were beaten
off with great loss and followed up for four miles.
Thus the steady discipline of about four hundred troops
of all arms enabled them speedily to triumph over a
force estimated at betwixt eight thousand and ten thou-
sand men. The lesson has not been thrown away for
no expedition of the sort has since been got up by the
Malayan States, which have generally contented them-
selves by resisting the aggressions of the Dutch and this
with no despicable degree of vigour, and by encourag-
ing the growth of piracy. The late Naning war will
not be an exception, being a local defection merely, in


winch the nearest States hardly took any. and that
hut a feeble share. In the whole of this attack on
Penang only* four men were killed on the British side,
and twenty one were wounded.
Not withstanding the fact that the Rajah of Ked-
dah’s own orders for the attack was in the hands of the
•Superintendent, His Highness deemed it the only
course left to him to deny all participation in the
affair.
Yet Ids own prahus remained blocked up in the
Pry River as a proof of his insincerity! Captain Light
did not push matters to further extremity but tacitly
admitted the Raja’s plea in order that a final arrange-
ment might be more speedily effected.
But the Supreme Government having seen the
danger of allowing the Malays to rendezvous at Pry
“ prohibited the Rajah from building any Fort there,”
and it was thus the recollection of the annoyance
Penang had sustained, joined to the desire to render
that Island independent of Keddah for supplies,
which eventually led to the obtaining the Pry
District with some adjoining ones, as a cession from
the Rajah, and had the tract in question, now com-
prised in Province Wellesley, been properly settled
when it had been ceded the advantages now derived
from it might have been available to a considerable
extent twenty years ago, if not before. The Keddah
Rajah now asked an annual compensation of 10,000
Dollars, which the Supreme Government afterwards
complied with, at the same time declaring it to be the
ultimatum under any circumstances. But (5,000
Dollars were given in the first instance annually.
On the Ist May 1791 a Treaty ( a ) was concluded
(a). The Conditions were shortly these .
Articles Ist. The English to give the Rajah of Keddah
6,000 hollars yearly as long as they re-
tained Penang.


betwixt Captain Light on the part of the British and
the Rajah. As if to show the justness of the estimate
which had been formed of Keddah polities, the Rajah
in 1792 wantonly involved himself in a quarrel with
Siam, by aiding and countenancing an attack which
was made on the Siamese Provinces of Daloong and
Sangora by the Malay Sheikh Abdullah Sainat. This
man had collected 400 Hajis of Keddah, and 3,000
Pataui Malays and had plundered and destroyed
several villages in these districts, but the force was
surrounded and defeated by the troops of Siam. The
consequence of this quarrel was that the Island of
Penang lost the advantage for a while of the stipula-
tions of the 2d Article of the Treaty. Her position in
regard to the British, rather than the timely conces-
sions made by her, probably saved Keddah this time.
But the circumstance shows [toj what lengths the
Rajall would certainly have [gone] had the British
support against the Siamese power been guaranteed
to him.
The Siamese Court could not help feeling vexed
at the British to whose friendship for the Rajah it no
doubt attributed his perverseness.
By way of experimenting to what extent it might
retaliate, that Court sent an Embassy to Penang in
Art. 2d. Provisions for Penang and Ships of
War may be bought free of duty and
hindrance at Keddah
3d. Runaway slaves on both sides to be re-
stored.
4th. Debtors on both sides to be delivered up
to their creditors.
sth. No Europeans except British to be allow-
ed to settle in Keddah.
6th. Rebels and traitors of Keddah shall not
be protected at Penang or the country.
7th. Murderers on either side escaping, to be
returned by either party and given up.
Bth. Forgers of Chops also to be returned and
given up.
9th. Enemies of the English not to be supplied
by the Rajah with provisions.


this year to demand the aid of two vessels loaded with
rice to be used in the war then prosecuting bv it
against Ava. This modest request was refused, but
the merchants of the port were not prohibited from
exporting rice to Ava.
r. The Siamese were complimented with a present
of some iron and nails.
lire Home Government in the mean time had re-
solved that no offensive and defensive alliance should
he made with the Rajah of Keddah.
Affairs at Penang now advanced in a smoother
current. Captain Light died about the latter part of
1794 and was succeeded by Major Kyd temporarily.
Although the acts of Captain Light did not
[ • evince] apprehensive and forecasting views, there
can be no doubt that he was a man of sound sense and
judgment, and that he was cool, practical, moderate
and active. His choice ot Penang in preference to
the Andaman Islands, which had been strongly recom-
mended in other quarters for a settlement, evinces his
local knowledge and tact. The Andamans had been
placed, during seven successive years, under the direc-
tion of able men, and no expense had been spared to
strengthen them in their infancy, yet none of the
advantages expected from them had been realized, and
they were abandoned. Penang on the contrary, as
Singapore has since done, and as other positions for
entrepots of trade may perhaps yet do in the China
Beas and the Eastern Islands, rose rapidly and almost
of its own accord into importance^' l )- Mr. Manningtou
(a). During Captain Light's and successive govern-
ments numerous and conflicting opinions regarding the
best mode of disposing of land were acted on, the con-
sequence of which has been that with the partial
exception of Province Wellesley the present state of the
landed tenures is most perplexing. A regular system,
at least as regular as circumstances would admit of, has
keen rigidly followed, and it is to be hoped with equal


succeeded Major Kyd ( October 1791*), and soon after
(November 1795 ) Mr. Pigou took the place ot the
former ( a ).
We have now to notice an occurrence on which
the conduct of the Raja ot Keddah was such as to have
justified the British in not only withdrawing from him
their friendship but in holding possession ot the
Island without paying one dollar in compensation.
i In 1796 the French fleets were cruizing in the
Indian Seas. When the Raja of Keddah learned t hat
they were approaching the Straits, his hope revived of
making them his instruments for expelling the English.
So eager was he to effect his object that before he
could have arranged any thing with the French Ad-
miral he shut the Port of Keddah against Penang.
The Rajah was calmly remonstrated with regarding
this sudden breach of a treaty which had now existed
for five years. The Rajah replied that the terms
were too hard, but he would send a vakeel to explain
the 2d Article, and to arrange about a new treaty.
The Superintendent termed this conduct “Artillery,
yet if it be fairly viewed the epithet would seem to be
overstrained. The Rajah s former behavioui ought to
have made it plain that lie entered into the treaty be-
cause he could not well avoid doing so, after having in
advantage to the revenue and the general prospeiity.
Short tenures, modified tenures with arbitrary clauses,
leases of grants in perpetuity, have all been resorted to.
Major McDonald and others would have restricted the
descent of lands, belonging to Europeans, to their lineal
descendants and have debarred them the privilege of
leaving it by will. It does appear that whatever pros-
perity may now be apparent in the Island and Province
Wellesly lias been almost solely owing to the largest
portion of the lands having been in perpetuity
(a). It may seem strange that the relations be-
twixt the British and the Keddah country, bearing
reference to Siam, should be the most absorbing subjects
for chronology, with the exception of tr.da which this
paper does not embrace. Such is the fact.


a manner pledged himself to it; that he did so with
the full intention of breaking the treaty at the first
convenient occasion ; and that instead of being villain-
ous or treacherous, he had only done that which the
British Government might have expected of him, and
which in fact under similar circumstances any Native
Prince would be ever ready to do when he should
think he had made a bad bargain. The Raja certainly
merited the negative praise of having taken few pains
to conceal his enmity. Necessity, that arbiter to
whom nations as well as individuals must bow, ren-
dered it impossible with safety to the British who were
then fast gaining ascendancy in the Indian Ocean
to enter into territorial wars in support ot the Rajah
of Keddah, while the latter was not enlightened enough
[ ? to perceive] that an insecure and hasty league with
the French or Dutch would have hastened his ruin by
leaving him in the end in the bands of the enraged
♦Siamese or that the mere absence of the British would
have led to the same result, while the Dutch would
have occupied Keddah without remunerating him tor
it.
The Rajah’s pretensions now rose rapidly and a
faction in Penang, headed it should seem by two
English merchants (Messrs Roebuck and Young)
then intrigued with Keddah by reports of dark
designs.* .One of these last singularly enough, com-
bined with a circumstance which was found on enquiry
to be correct, that no two European gentlemen slept
iu one house.*
1797. In tlie midst of these reports the Khug
Minister arrived from Keddah bearing a letter from
the Rajah to the Superintendent which he was to
deliver on the following conditions only.
The principal servants of the Company were to go
down to receive it and it was to be carried on a silver
salver under an umbrella. The bearer of it was to


be conveyed in a carriage and the same honors were
required to be paid to him as the High Admiral of
Keddah was entitled to. The Arm 3 of the deputation
were not to be deposited as usual at the Custom House
but to be worn publicly.
Such novel demands were resisted. The Chuliah
or Khug would not disarm his party and it became
requisite to humble him by placing a guard boat
alongside of his prahu. This man then exhibited the
prominent trait of his tribe, abjectness following
arrogance. He carried the letter himself to the
Superintendent, his followers being unaccused.*
This mighty packet contained merely a request to
be paid an instalment of the compensation due to the
Raja. The payment was refused until the Rajah
should have adequately explained the cause of such
unusual behaviour in his deputies. Messrs. Roebuck
and Young meanwhile, being supported by the counte-
nance of Messrs. Lindsay, Scott and others, screened
from justice another Chuliah, who had defied Port
Regulations and who had been found intriguing at
Keddah. The example of insubordination being thus
set by the European settlers, it was speedily imitated
by the Chinese and other classes of natives in Penang,
while to crown all the harbour was infested by pirates.
I’lie Chinese are generally considered to be a peace-
able race in the countries to which they have emigrated,
yet several examples to the contrary are not wanting
in the History of European settlements to the East-
ward.
In their country they are notoriously prone to tur-
bulence and probably they have good cause to be so.
But they find such ample room in foreign colonies for
the exercise of their industrious habits that the more
congenial pursuit of gain serves greatly to check
ambitious impulse.


They are a time-serving people, and unlike the
Indo-Chinese tribes around them, they seem to/be
very deficient in imagination, and therefore less dis-
posed than these are to give way to theoretical politi-
cal impulses. Their understandings are pretty sure
guides to their true interests, and they perceive at a
•glance that the latter and any assumption of political
power in the countries where they have- settled are
things quite at variance with each other. But unwil-
ling as they may be to turn Rulers, where nothing
-could be obtained to be put in competition with
their mercantile gains, they do not seem at all
•averse to intrigue with one of two contending parties,
or even with both, so that whatever be the result
their interests may continue unaffected. It need not
be added that the real leaning in such a case will be
to the stronger party, although the weaker will be
■cajoled by promises and awed by supplies and arms,
the sale of which at high profits they can easily
effect. I have liad personal opportunities of knowing
this to be true. Keeping these traits in view as
checks to an over confidence in Chinese political
fidelity, it may be safely pronounced that as settlers
they are sometimes eminently valuable in new
countries on account of their unceasing and well
directed industry, their enterprise as traders, their
luxurious habits which swell the revenue by the
consumptioiTof taxable commodities, and lastly per-
haps because their physical powers of endurance ex-
ceed those possessed b} r the Malays and other Indo-
Chinese people.
sth Sept. 1799, The Rajah of Keddali died in
the summer of this year, and was succeeded by his
brother ( Chow Wang ) ( a ) of Curbs who, two years
subsequently, gave up the Government to his nephew
Chow Range ram ( b b
(a) A Siamese title signifying Lord of the Fort.
(b) The present Ex-Baja, who received the above
title bom the Emperor of Siam when the latter
bestowed on him the Government of Keddah.


The deceased Rajah’s conduct having been such
as to prevent the Superintendent sending him any
compensation for the two years preceding this period
up to 1800, the European Settlers at Penang had
exhibited much turbulence of character.
The Earl of Mornington in this year appointed
Sir George Leith to be Lieutenant Governor of
Penang and Mr. Phillips was nominated to be his
secretary. Mr. Dickens was appointed Judge.
Up to this period there seems to have been little
or no intercourse betwixt Penang and the Tenasserim
Coast. This last was then frequented by French
privateers and frigates for the purpose of refitting,
and not being there molested by British vessels of war
it was found convenient by the French Commanders
to carry in to that coast such English prizes as they
made in the Bay. Mergui, from its sheltered and
secluded harbour, was preferred to Tavoy River.
But the whole of that coast had, from time im-
memorial, been contended for by the Siamese and
Burmans, and the latter, although in possession, did
not feel quite secure in it. The Chief of Mergui was
not long in appreciating the true position of the
British, and very sagaciously tried to penetrate into
the Lieutenant Governor’s future views by speciously
offering to put the “ Company in possession of Ked-
dah and the Lancavy Islands if it was desired?”
The Burmans would long before this time have taken
both, had they been able, for themselves, and their
object was to have the British as allies against Siam.
This polite and rather absurd offer was of course
rejected.
In July 1800 Sir George Leith obtained from the
then Rajah of Keddah for the sum of two thousand
Spanish dollars a cession of a tract of land lying on
the continent opposite to Penang. It was taken pos-
session of, apd the British eolours were hoisted in it


■after a regular salute on the 17th July of the same
year and it received the name of Point Wellesley, which
was subsequently changed to Province Wellesley, both
names having been given in honour of the Marquess
Wellesley, The motives for this acquisition were
these. It strengthened the position of Penang on
its flanks, and gave the English the entire command
of the harbour. It also checked the resort of pirates
to the harbour, and prevented the coast being a
safe asylum to every offender wdio might escape from
Penang.
It held out the prospect, since realized, of render-
ing Penang independent of Keddah for supplies, and
it offered a place of refuge to any oppressed, races in
the vicinity.
As I have fully described the pi-esent condition
of this fertile tract of country in a late work( a ) it
would be unnecessary to enlarge further regarding
it in this place. But a few observations are required
regarding its boundaries.
The Honble. Colonel Bannerman when Governor,
and just before the Rajah was expelled from his coun-
try in 1821, sent to the latter to try and obtain an
advanced boundary up to the north bank of Marbow
River on the north, but without effect.
The Rouble. Mr. Fullerton, contemplating the
retention of Keddah by the Siamese, was of opinion
that an accession of territory as stated by Mr. Craw-
ford might be advantageous (up to the mountains)
by interposing a greater portion of hill and forest
between us and the Siamese. Great no doubt would
be the advantage of some extension. The experience
of twenty years however has shown that while our re-
lations with Siam continue as they are, extension
(a). A Dissertation on Penang and Province Wel-
lesley, Singapore and Malacca by Captain James Low.


would not be so advantageous as above stated. Tt
would onl} r remove the evils which exist, and which
would under any circumstances exist, to a greater dis-
tance. But to countervail this advantage, there would
be the positive mischiefs of a dispersing locomotive
population, requiring larger civil and judicial esta-
blishments and a wider frontier to look after. When
by the increase of population in Penang and Province
Wellesley a large of the inhabitants will be
prepared, if not forced, to emigrate to other countries
it will then become a matter for consideration whether
an accession of territory can be obtained. There can
be no doubt as to the tract which should be obtained.
The boundaries of the Province might then be as
follow, North and including Goonong Jerrie, and then
Past in a direct line to the Patani Pass, from the sea
South by the Korow River, or if not, by the Krean,
and from the sea by either of these rivers up to the
Patani Hills and on the East by the Patani Hills.
[ Four pages are here omitted as having no
reference to Siam.]
Sir George Leith entered into a new treaty with
the Haja, which the Supreme Government ratified
after remarking “ that it should have been submitted
in the first instance for approval.” An examination
of the articles will show that this animadversion was
well merited. *
All discussion having thus been brought to a
close, the affairs of the new settlement went on more
regularly and nothing of deep moment seems to have
occurred until the year 1810, when Lord Minto
reached Penang with part of the force destined to
capture -lava from the Dutch. This was the first time
* The articles of this treaty and Low’s comments
thereon.are here omitted.]


that the advantages of the new position became par-
ticularly apparent, not only as regarded supplies but
in respect to political and hostile movements in a
direction when we had any advanced posts at which
to rendezvous troops destined for an attack, or on
which such troops, unsuccessful, could easily fall
back. The expedition to China has since been the
second great event of the same kind to the further-
ance of which the Straits Settlements have greatly
aided.
The then Rajah of Keddah did not neglect the
opportunity thus offered to inflict on his Lordship a
very long recapitulation in writing of all his own
former demands, grievances, and alleged Siamese
oppressions.
He had in the preceding April addressed a long
letter of a similar nature to Mr. Bruce, in which lie
remarked that the “ Keddah Country being small and
situated in the vicinity of the extensive kingdom of
Siam it has been the custom from time immemorial to
send the tributary presents of golden and silver flowers
to Siam once in three years.”
The expedition to the Moluccas and Banda took
place at this time.
In January 1811 the Keddah Rajah was required
by the Siamese to furnish a contingent of one hundred
perfectly equipped and manned boats to assist them
against the Burmese. On this occasion lie addressed
the Government of Prince of Wales Island and
observed that “submission to the Siamese is the only
mode left to me for preserving peace.” He asked also
for an advance of 10,000 Spanish Dollars.
About the same period the Emperor of Ava wrote
to the Governor stating that in former times the
Rajahs of “Purlis and Keddah did homage to him by
presentation of gold and silver flowers and that these
countries were considered dependencies of Ava," and


he further requested that the English would assist the
Rajah of Keddah against the Siamese.
This claim on Keddah was evidently got up
through the instrumentality of the Rajah himself, and
it does not apppear to have had any foundation by
right or precedent, yet it is as well that it should
be recorded, for the Indo-Chinese nations never
absolutely forego claims which they have made, un-
less by treaty. The Rajah, finding that this ruse
failed, tried to work on the feelings and apprehensions
of the Governor of Penang by observing that the Siam-
ese are numerous and consider themselves superior
to every other people, should they even not attack
Penang.* Yet had Keddah been fairly absorbed
into the Siamese Empire at the period or soon after
the period at which the Rajah thus expressed himself,
the Province would no doubt have been distressed for
some ordinary supplies for a season or two, but it is
evident that the advantages of increase [of] popu-
lation and cultivation derived to Penang and Province
Wellesley by the subjugation of Keddah long after,
would have been in the case supposed, much earlier
realized.
It can scarcely be doubted also that the Siamese
would have behaved intemperately after their con-
quest, owing to the slight knowledge they then had
of British power, and that it would have been re-
quisite to have given them a wholesome practical
experience of its effects. Such a lesson might have
have been a bar to their progress southward. In 1812
Mr. Petrie was appointed Governor. On the 29th
July of the same year a great fire destroyed pro-
perty estimated at five lacs of dollars. In the
same month the naval station at Penang was broken
up.
In 1813 the Siamese obliged the Rajah of Keddah
to assist them in attacking Perak. This was an uu


provoked and unprincipled aggression, and the Perak
people have not forgiven the people of Keddah tiie
part they took in it, although the latter pretended
that their co-operation was compulsory. But where
plunder was to be had we may doubt of this modera-
tion of sentiment.
At this period the extension of the Siamese power
to the southward of Penang was considered by the
Supreme Government to be an evil, for it was re-
corded by the Governor General in Council that “ he
was by no means indifferent to the Welfare of the
territory of Keddah, and would perceive with great
regret their subjugation to the Siamese power. Bis
Excellency in Council is no less impressed with the
conviction of the undesirable consequences likely to
result from the extension of that power to the vicinity
of Malacca by the conquest of Perak. The King
of Keddah should not renounce his vassalage to
Siam. The British Government may mediate in
so far as no compromise of its character may be
made or any ambitious motive betrayed. The nature
and extent of the Rajah’s services to Siam may be
adjusted by British mediation.” Sir George Cooper
became Recorder in 1817.
The Perak Chiefs signify about this time j their j
desire to be free of Siamese interference.* The
population'of this territory was then estimated at
10,000 persons.
Colonel Bannerman was appointed Governor.
Colonel Farquhar proposed to settle the Cannion
Islands in the Straits.
After a long cessation of intercourse with Siam a
communication was at length opened* and the Siam-
ese Court professed its readiness to permit English
vessels to trade either at Bankok or Ligor.
Malacca was now transferred to the*Dutch under
the distinct intimation to them by Major Farquhar that


Naning was its only dependency. But soon after this
they forced the Rajahs of Rhio and Lingin to admit
their troops into the former settlement and to permit
their colours to fly at Lingin, Pahang and Johoro.
places where they were never before hoisted. They
landed 500 men at Rhio. The Rajah was forced to
surrender l/3rd of his revenue and to give up the
management of his trade into their hands. [ The
Latch ] thus virtually commanded the Straits.
From Avhat has just been quoted it does not ap-
pear very obvious on what defensible grounds a re-
quest of the Rajah of Keddah was granted by the
Penang authorities to the extent of supplying him 100
muskets and twenty barrels of gun powder to prose-
cute the attack on Perak. The Rajah of Perak, un-
conscious that any disposition to assist his enemies
existed at Penang, addressed the chief authority
there.* The letter upheld the chai’acter for ignorance
which [the] Perak people then had, and which still,
although less in degree, attaches itself to them. It
contained a request for two ships of war, and two
thousand Troops, one half to be Europeans !!
The Raja, a Chief of 20,000 subjects, described
himself as “he who holds the Royal Sword, and the
dragon stand and the shell fish which come out of the
sea which flowed from the Hill of Le Guntong.” He
offered also to sell the Dingding Islands for 2,000
Spanish dollars to any one or to let the Company have
them for nothing. The same offer was made to the
Envoy, Captain Low, [who] was deputed on a Political
Mission to Perak in 1827. These Islands have not
been inhabited since the Hutch left or were expelled
from Perak, and as the Rajah and his successors have
never ventured to occupy them, owing to their being-
infested by pirates, it is plain that it would be a most-
beneficial thing for Perak should any English station
be formed there, while gi eater security would be given
to the native trade in general.


The Raja likewise offered the monopoly of all
the tin and rattans in his country for a yearly
sum of 2,000 dollars, which supposing that he con-
sidered this a fair equivalent for the tax (of 6 drs.
per bhar generally ) on tin would admit of a year!y
produce of 333 Bhars only. Yet the mines of Perak
are very rich, almost inexhaustible.
Reverting to the Perak Rajah, he offered eleph-
ants in exchange for gun powder, the former to be
valued by the cubit, namely 60 dollars for one 6 feet
high or one long cubit, and a large one from 600 to
000 dollars.
These requests were not then attended to, but the
Supreme Government subsequently sanctioned the
occupation of the Dingding Islands, which however
never took place, nor does it appear why the intention
to do so was not followed up.
The Fort of Penang was in want of repair and
the sum of 50,000 drs. was estimated as the probable
cost of repairs.
By an inscription found on the Fort of Malacca
before it was demolished it appeared to have been
built in 1743. In the beginning of 1819 the Dutch
tried to establish a station on the Islands of Pankour
or Dingding where they once had settled, but they
were now unsuccessful.
The Dutch now prosecuted operations at Perak
and Salengore with the view to control these petty
States, pretending that the English were their staunch
friends. But on their failing to gain their ends the
offer of the Rajah of Perak to give up the Island of
Panic on r to the British was accepted conditionally , but
it was never occupied and continued annexed to Perak.
The Cholera raged in the Settlement of Prince of
Wales Island during about six weeks and the deaths
were computed at not less than 1500.


Bishop Middleton visited Penang, he being the
first Bishop.
In 1818 the Barmans attacked the Siamese depen-
dency of Junk Ceylon, from which they were shortly
after expelled with great slaughter. The Burmese
force ( if the account given to me by the Tavoy Chiefs
soon after the British conquest of Teuasserim be cor-
rect ) consisted of 10,000 men. The Siamese called on
Rajah of Keddah for his contingent of troops on this
occasion, and 100 boats manned by about 2,500 men
were supplied.
The Raja just before this happened bad been asked
by the Governor, the Honble. Colonel Bannerrnan, to
cede, for an adequate consideration, a small addition of
territory on the Coast and bounding Province Wel-
lesley,. in order to secure a better frontier. This re-
quest he refused although it would have strengthened
his position.
But although I cannot find the letter, it is not the
less notorious, that [he] assigned as his reason to the
deputation for non-compliance, that Keddah formed
part of Siam, Messrs. Cracroft and Gaunter were tire
persons sent to negotiate, and so offensive was the way
in which the reply was couched that they left Keddah
without waiting for the usual formalities or taking
leave of the Rajah. But when he was pressed, as
above noticed, by the Siamese, he expressed his fear to
the Penang Government, and the latter [ ? replied
that in case he found himself] in danger he would
find an asylum in Penang. But this Rajah ( the
present Ex-King) seems never to have acted on any
fixed plan, and at the very moment when only sub-
mission could have saved him his conduct was so
vascillating as to give umbrage to the Court of Siam.
There is every reason to suppose also that he entered
secretly into a confederacy headed by the Patani
Chiefs for the purpose of ravaging Lower Siam, while


the Siamese troops should be engaged at a distance
in operations against the Barmans, for about this
time the Raja advanced to the Me Nam or River of
Siam and the rivers of Ligor and Chainga. After
these movements the confederate troops would be
joined by the Burmese. The Cambojan added that
his own force (it was no doubt exaggerated ) would be
forty thousand men, besides Malayan Rajas, his rela-
tives and their followers. lie concluded by avowing
his inability to contend with Siam,
As this Chief’s wishes could not be acceded to. no
more was heard of his intentions. Mr. Phillips pro-
posed at this time a Political and Commercial Mission
to the Ports of the Burmese Empire.
Mr, Sartorious was deputed in this year to Achin
to report on affairs there. He died on his way back
of the deadly fever ot the Sumatra coast, deeply re-
gretted.
This Mission was undertaken with the view of
forming alliances of a commercial nature with the
petty Rajas on the east coast of Sumatra, and for the
suppression of piracy. The main objects however
failed, but as the Honble, Mr. Phillips expressed, not
from any deficiency in the means provided for the ac-
complishment of these objects, nor from any fault of
the gentlemen entrusted with the duty, . . *
At length, in January 1821, the Honble. the Go-
vernor of Penang acquainted the Raja of Keddah that
the Emperor of Siam was preparing to attack him with
6,000 ( a ; men and that [the] Burmans had declared
war with Siam. The Raja was aware of the intended
(a). From the Districts or Provinces of Ligor,
Daloong, Chaiya. and Sangor, the supplies received by
Penang from Keddah at this period were.—
1.000 Ooyans of faddy]
00.000 Fowls I Valued at 80.000 dollars.
20.000 Ducks J


attack for he readily replied by the subterfuge that
“ an epidemic had delayed the tender of the usual gold-
and silver flowers to- Siam,” although with the sanction
of the Raja of Ligor, and that the Siamese were glad
of any pretext to revenge themselves for the occupa-
tion of Penang by the English by attacking him. He
did not, notwithstanding all this, prepare for the im-
pending event by arming his subjects, and it is
probable that he deluded himself with the hope that
the Burmese would assist them, while the lattei', it may
be presumed, had only made promises with the view
of creating some diversion of the Siamese forces.
On the 12th November 1821 the Raja ot Ligor
’•burst into Keddah with a force of seven thousand men.
The Fort at the mouth of the Keddah River was taken
on the 18th after a feeble defence, in which the Raja
did not participate. He fled on an elephant accom-
panied by a part of his family, and a few adherents,
towards that part of the coast opposite to Penang.
The Raja of Rigor soon acquainted Mr, Phillips
with this event, and laid the blame on the Raja who
had, he stated, misgoverned Keddah and had been
contumacious, that he meditated flight to Siac, and
that as a subject [of the] Siamese Government he had
behaved in opposition to all former custom. He ob-
served that on a former occasion, when the Raja s
father had acted contumaciously, he had been forgiven,
because he had repented of his conduct, and had pre-
sented himself at Court, Those who know the charac-
ter of this Chief, now called the Ex-Raja, will be
ready to admit that he was just as likely as otherwise
to have doggedly and obstinately slighted the Court
of Bankok to his own ruin, although he had been
invested with his Government by the Emperor him-
self.
The Honble. the Governor, Mr. Phillips, dis-
patched a civil officer, Mr. Oracroft, to assure the Raja


that pending directions from the Supreme Government
an asylum was open to him at Penang, as also to his
dependents, should he choose to avail himself of it,
but under certain conditions. These terras were that
neither he or any of his followers should intrigue or
commit any political act ‘without the approval of the
British Government and that it would be exclusively
optional with the Government to regulate the number
of persons who should compose his family and. suite.
The Raja gladly accepted the offered protection,
subject to these conditions. Indeed, had he not done
so he must have fallen in a few days after the offer was
made into the hands of the Siamese.
The Ex-Rajah’s difficulty was afterwards displayed.
It is of some importance to note these conditions, tor
they were not only broken in defiance of the Govern-
ment by the Raja himself, but seem to have been
unaccountably forgotten when they might have been
brought forward as good grounds for circumscribing
the Raja’s limits, instead of resorting to the plea of
politic necessity, which last might have been kept in
reserve. No sooner did the Raja feel himself safe than
he wrote to the Governor claiming protection in all
his affairs. He was, it may be remarked, lodged in
the old Government House on the beach and was
guarded by nearly the whole of the local Corps of
Bengal Sepoys ( a )- This letter of the Raja was the
commencement of a series of written requests, de-
mands and petulant remonstrances or appeals ( re-
filed* too commonly in general terms) which have
been reiterated periodically up to the present day.
Mr. Phillips notwithstanding considerable opposition
in his Council decided on neutral measures as consis-
tent with the policy enjoined by the Supreme Govern-
ment, namely not to encourage the Keddah Raja to
(a). Being in command of this Corps I had daily
opportunities of studying the Raja's character.


attempt to release his country from its state of vas-
salage to Siam. On this occasion the term banditti
was by some applied to the Siamese troops, although
it was admitted that they had a right to enforce
obedience on the Baja.
Tiie Chow Phraya or Rajah of Ligor now addressed
the Honbie. the Governor by a letter in which he
stated that he in conformity with the Emperor’s order,
had assumed the Government of Keddah, as the Raja
had no confidence in Siam and had fled in the con-
sciousness of having committed many faults. “I have”
( observed the Ligorian ) “ sent troops in quest of him;
if it should be ascertained that the Raja of any country
Avhatever has received and harboured the Raja ( a ) of
Keddah, a large army will be sent to attack it and
carry the Raja away by all possible means. He is no
longer a Rajah or Governor and the Emperor will ap-
point a Siamese to be Raja of Keddah. If the Raja
flies to Penang let no one hold intercourse with him,
let him be seized by the Governor and delivered up to
me, for I am now at Keddah which is near to Penang
with a large force, and should my friend refuse to
deliver up the Raja to me, then friendly relations will
be broken and commercial intercourse will cease.” He
invited Mr. Phillips to go and settle matters amicably
at Keddah.
To this vaunting and insolent declaration a firm
reply was made which prevented a repetition of it, yet
had the British taken the vain-glorious but clever
semi-barbarian at his word, and forthwith marched a
force against him, he would have had ample cause to
repent of his temerity. The Governor calmly replied
that it was not customary for the British Government
to deny hospitality to an ally and friend, and that
confident in its own strength and power it never was
in the habit or receiving or using, in its correspon-
(a). Chow Phraya in the original, viz. “Governor.”


deuce with neighbouring States, any unavailing
threats or expressions.
This reply was objected to by the Council as not
being strong enough when opposed to direct declara-
tion of war, but it was certainly a dignified and per-
fectly effective one in the end.
The Rajah had been only a few days in Penang
when fifteen Siamese boats stealthity reached the
mouth of the Pry river in Province Wellesley. The
Ligorian, supposing that the fugitive Rajah was at
Kotah tip this river, thought to surprise him.
A Jemadar’s party, however, of Local Corps,
stationed at the Pry mouth turned out to oppose
their progress and the Armed Vessel Nautilus then
quietly led them out of the harbour and dismissed
them. Nearly at the same time a marauding party
of Siamese passed the northern boundary of the
Province and committed some irregularities, but a
Company of Sepoys under Captain Crook forced them
back without bloodshed. The Ligorian was warned
that such conduct by his people in future would be de-
cidedly noticed.
The Chow Phraya of Ligor, while the terror in-
spired by his sudden conquest was being spread among
the countries'to the southward, sent an expedition to
Perak ( a ), which made no resistance to his occupation
of it.
Mr. Timmerman Typen, one of the most enlight-
ened official men ever sent out by the Dutch Govern-
ment, obligingly offered to the Penang Government
every aid he could afford for checking Siamese ambi-
tion. No doubt, as Malacca was then a Dutch pos-
session, His Excellency did not view the approach of
(a). The Malayan State which is separated from
tie Tritish lenitory by the Kreun Liver.


the Siamese to his frontier as an event devoid of
danger to that Settlement. The tide of emigration
from Keddah new rolled rapidly into Province Welles-
ley and steps were immediately taken to locate the
refugees.
In 1821 (a) Mr. .Crawfurd was deputed by the
Right Honble. the Governor General to negociate with
Siam for certain commercial arrangements and collater-
ally to endeavour to effect the restoration of the Rajah
of Keddah to his Government. Mr. Phillips, on the
arrival of Mr. Crawfurd at Penang, recorded his opinion
of the advantages which would be gained by opening
the whole trade of the Peninsula; keeping the Siamese
at a proper distance and securing supplies from Keddah
for Penang, all of which advantages excepting the
second (if it really now be one of much moment) have
been gained since without Keddah being restored.
Mr/Phillips suggested the good which might be
derived by extending Province Wellesley to the limits
proposed by Colonel Bannerman.
I have already discussed this subject. With the
then scanty population of Province Wellesley, exten-
sion was not to be desired to any considerable degree,
yet looking to the present condition of the Province,
which I have elsewhere described at length, and to the
events which the future will inevitably call forth, it is
perhaps to be regretted that these proposed.* The
Siamese are so tenacious that it might be very
difficult, perhaps impossible, without giving a most
unequal return for it, to obtain now any further
cession of territory.
The Supreme Government in a dispatch to the
Penang Government pointed out the future policy to
be used towards the Siamese,
(a). In 1821 the Southern Hills of Penang were
cleared to a great extent and planted with f? coffee],
since then, the coffee not proving remunerative, spice
trees were substituted.


“The former instructions of this Government re-
%
garding the limited degree in which it appeared to be
desirable to interfere in favor of the Rajah of Keddah
whose dependence on Siam we have recognized, are con-
sidered to be still applicable to the present state of
affairs, and are to be a rule of conduct for the govern-
ment of Penang in any political transactions with
these States (Keddah and Siam)” and again, “the
Ex Rajah will have an Allowance (in place of the
gratuity) of 10,000 Spanish dollars.”
The uncle of the Ex-King, the Rajah of Purlis,
Sultan Sleadin Mokurrura Shah, instigated and deceiv-
ed, no doubt, if not forced by the Siamese addressed
a letter to the Governor of Penang* in which he
urged him to advise his nephew to return to Keddah,
alleging that the Siamese had forgiven his numerous
offences and that he himself (the Rajah of Purlis) was
in the mean time exercising the powers of the Keddah
Government. This last expression was alone sufficient
to excite strong suspicion of the intentions of the
Siamese, and the letter was therefore not attended to.
This suspicion was turned into certainty, for this same
Siamese Pageant soon after wrote to the Governor
requesting to have the rent of 10,000 dollars payable
,by the English for Penang. The Ligorian at the same
time wrote to back this demand, and forgetting that
he had before affirmed that a Siamese Governor
“ would be placed over Keddah ” he asserted that
the old Rajah of Purlis had been installed in the
Government. He added that having the Emperor’s
Orders to arrange every subject connected with
Keddah he could not, were he willing to, refrain from
this demand. About this time it was reported that
the Ligorian had prepared 7,000 men to attack Penang,
but the project, if ever it had been seriously en-
tertained, was abandoned. The demand was rejected.
The Rouble. Mr. Phillips, the Governor, now
gave a guarantee to the Ligorian that so long as the


Ex Raja of Keddah should continue at Penano 1 he
O
would not be permitted to wage war on the Siamese
nor stores be allowed to go to people fighting against
the Siamese in Keddah.
This promise afterwards became part of one of the
Articles in the Treaty of Bankok. If the Ex Rajah
had been personally enterprizing, this stipulation
might have been attended with vexatious or even
embarrassing results. Vexatious ones only have for-
tunately been experienced. Placed in security he
commenced intriguing with the Burmese, and finding
them willing auxiliaries, in professions at least, he
imagined that the knowledge of this fact would induce
the British Government to espouse his cause. The
Myoowoon at Tavoy had written to the Rajah to
dispatch envoys the Emperor to request of him
the assistance of a Burmese Army for the purpose of
recovering his (the Rajah’s) lost power. He added
that five thousand men could immediately march from
Tavoy. The Ex Rajah was dissuaded by his own
paity, it is supposed, from his rash determination to
enter will* plat. The circumstance is chiefiy deserv-
ing of notice here, as it fully discloses the ambitious
aims of the Court ot Ava at a time when there can be
hardly a doubt that it meditated that aggression on
the British Power which not long after led to the
Burmese War. The correspondence alluded to, if
known to the Siamese which it probably was(»), could
not tail to make the Ex Rajah’s case almost hopeless,
yet with the duplicity so congenial to his disposition,
the Ligorian soon atter told Captain Burney, who was
sent to confer with him at Keddah, that he was ready
to receive back the Ex Chief in a manner favorable to
him, and to take him to the Court of Bankok and at
the same time be engaged that no harm should befall
him. The Ex Rajah wisely perhaps distrusted and
(a). His previous intrigues with Ava were known
to that nation (the Siamese).


rejected this proposition and remained in Penang.
He could not fail to recollect that the Court of Bankok
never forgets disrespectful conduct shown towards it
by any of its Governors, Tributaries or subordinate
Chiefs. Much less perhaps could he expect it [to]
forgive his own conduct which was tinged with in-
gratitude. He could not have forgotten that upon the
decease of his father, the former Raja, his succession
had been disputed by [a] younger brother Bosnoo,
the latter having been taken to the Siamese Court and
presented to the Emperor by the Rajah of Sangora ;
that much blood had been shed on the occasion(a), and
that Tuankee Ibrahim, a Chief of Keddah, had also
gone to the Court to solicit the Government and had
been warmly seconded by the Rajah of Ligor. He
should have remembered that notwithstanding all his
intrigues the Emperor installed him in his father’s
dignities, but under a solemn pledge that he, the
Pangeram( b ), should bury all the animosity he might
feel against those who had disputed his claims, and he
must have remembered that he forfeited this pledge by
persecuting these his former opponents ; that he gave
much trouble in consequence to the Siamese, and final-
ly that by his cruel tyranny, folly and misrule he had
given to the Emperor abundant cause to regret his
selection of him to be the Chow Phraya Srai or Lord
Governor over Keddah. And it would have been well
had he considered that these his own acts and the
consenting to receive his power from the Siamese Court
were fatal to his own claims of independence.
When the Phrayr of Ligor heard that Mr. Craw-
furd was on his way to Siam he told Captain Burney
that “ the Governor of Penang would find that his best
course for negotiating with the Court of Siam would
(a) The Siamese alleged that the population of
Keddah had lost nearly 20,000 souls.
(b) ( how Pangeram—the title he received from
the Emperor of Siam when installed in the Keddah
Government.


be through him, as many of the offices at Court were
held by his relatives.”
This speech turned out to be vain boast, for the
negotiations which afterwards took place both by Mr.
Crawfurd and Captain Burney only rendered the Rajah
of Keddah’s cause more desperate. The truth was,
the Chow Phraya of Ligor knew well that the temper
of the Court was so adverse to the Raja’s claims, that
even without him these would be rejected. But he was
too practised a dissembler to let it appear that he
himself would use whatever influence he might pos-
sess, and much he undoubtedly had at Court, to thwart
the Rajah of Keddah’s views, and to get that country
into his own management and for the advantage of
his own family.
As commonly happens amongst the unthinking
part of a community the crimes and faults of an Ex
Chief are underlaid by a false compassion and it has
even been asked why the private character of a Native
Chief should be considered in negotiating with him.
It might not be difficult to show that negotiations with
Malayan or Indo-Chinese Princes, can only be entered
into with a full persuasion on their part of the super-
ior power of the British, accompanied by a deter-
mination to stand aloof from its direct effects by
exertion of cunning, while the British negotiator
cannot fail to be aware that independent of the
barbarism of the individual State, and its attendant
treachery and cruelty, the only security he has for
the performance of obligations must rest principally
upon the private character of the then Euler, and
that in despotic countries there is hardly room to
draw any distinction between the private and public
character of such Ruler. The Burmese and Siamese
are unwilling slaves of unflinching and hereditary de-
spotisms [which] are well planned, cautiously worked
according to the feelings, fears and superstitions of the
mass of the people, so as to just strike the line betwixt


discontent and rebellion, and they are in their way
effective for all the ends of Government except one,
the happiness, including full security of life and pro-
perty, of the subject, as opposed to the mere will of
the Ruler. The Malays on the other hand are willing
slaves under their own despotic Rajahs, and they
patiently if not unrepiningly endure every species of
tyranny and degradation from them, one half of which
oppressions only, were they inflicted upon them by an
European Government, would drive them into rebellion,
or cause them to emigrate. In fine no preconceived
opinions or knowledge of European policy will enable
us to gauge and analyse that of an Indo-Chinese re-
gion, where manners, feelings, hereditary disposition,
physical and moral, are all at variance with such know-
ledge, where these various wants, either real, or which
are the offspring of civilization, and which in colder
climes come under or exert but a feeble influence,
and where an apparently insuperable chasm is opposed
to the advance of humanizing arts and sciences, by the
absence of that same necessity.
On this date Mr. Phillips’ Minute was written
regarding the JSooloo Islands, quoting Sir Stamford
Raffles’ opinion that the ceded territory in Borneo
should be occupied.(a) The Rajah of Calantan a small
[Pdistrict] on the Gulf of Siam wrote about this time
to the Honble. Mr, Phillips the Governor stating
that as he could no longer endure the oppressions of
the Siamese he wished to give up his country to the
Governor of Bengal, and to receive in return one half
of the revenues.
But the Supreme Government declined interfering
with this State, because it was, like Keddah, tributary
to Siam. Were the revenue of Caiantan to be ana-
tysed it might perhaps appear that the Raja would
have made a good bargain had his offer been accepted,
(a) This proposition was owing to an attack made on
the Sea Flower by Pirates.


for it is greatly to be doubted if the whole of the
revenues would have defrayed one half of the expense
which the occupation, subsidiarily or otherwise, would
have entailed( a ).
About this period the Raja of Ligor acquainted
the Court of Bangkok that the English and Siamese
were at peace and that the Governor General of Bengal
had directed the Penang Government to recognise
Keddah as a tributary of Siam. Without doubt the
Siamese considered this a vital point gained. About
this period also a curious circumstance occurred at
Siam, which showed at least that the Siamese had
not as yet betrayed any want of confidence in their
hitherto vaunted importance. Two merchants, Messrs.
Storm and Smith, had, it seemed, presented a 'white
horse to the Emperor which was at the time accepted,
but shortly afterwards the animal was sent back to
them because astrologers had pronounced it an un-
lucky one, and as it was otherwise of little value.*
Feeling themselves, as they thought, insulted, they
very unwisely, inconsiderately, and it may be thought
culpably, killed the horse and threw it into the boat in
presence of the messengers (of some rank ) who had
brought it, and at a spot which was within the
precincts or purlieus of the Palace.
They were both soon seized, put in irons and in-
carcerated for several days, during which they were
inhumanly treated to the length it was alleged of being
partially scalped. There could, rightly considered,
have been no insult in royalty returning a horse so
circumstanced. On the other hand their asserted*
insult, which policy should have prevented, was a palp-
able one, not only to the Emperor but to the national
religion, which forbids the shedding of blood anywhere.
That the Siamese did not inflict the full penalty of the
(a) About this time piracies were reported to have
taken place in the vicinity of the Nicobars.


law on those gentlemen, which to a Siamese of the
highest rank would have been death, was owing to
the remonstrances of the British Etivoy and the mer-
chants, who represented that the parties were ignorant
of Siamese customs.
When the Ex Raja learned the unsuccessful result
as regarded himself of Mr. Orawfurd’s Mission, he inti-
mated that he would remove to Salengore, but the
Governor dissuaded him from this measure, which
however was left optional with the Raja. Shortly
afterwards an insurrection of the Malays of Purlis in
the Keddah [?district] having placed the former dis-
trict again in the hands of the Malays, the Ex Rajah
made a request that he might be allowed to go
there. In reply he was informed that he resided
under the British protection* to act in any manner in
hostility towards the Siamese ; that he might go to
Purlis, but if he did go he could never again be
recognised in any other light than as a private
individual.
The Supreme Government sanctioned this deci-
sion and directed that should the Ex Rajah persist in
his hostile schemes he would not be allowed “ to re-
turn, the British protection would be withdrawn from
him, and his allowance stopped and never be restored.”
The Ex Rajah was too pusillanimous to have headed
such an expedition himself. But he soon showed how
little he regarded the consequence [ofj his opposition as
above stated, by following up his original plans. Had
the Ex Rajah, by thus defying the British Govern-
ment, been removed at once to Malacca, much of the
evils which [were] caused from his attacks on Keddah
might have been prevented. Undoubtedly the for-
bearance shown towards him was more than is generally
awarded any where to persons in his political situation.
Yet have the newspapers and the press otherwise
teemed with invectives against what has been de-
signated the harsh treatment of the Ex Rajah.


But to have placed any dependence on the Ex
Rajah after the explicit declaration which follows and
which was repeated in June 1830, would have been to
say the least, only encouraging him in his proceedings.
In return for the communication made to him, as
above noticed, he declared he had suffered such ex-
ceeding disgrace that so long as he should live he
could not be at rest [but] must persist in his endea-
vours to obtain the means of requiting the deeds of the
Siamese, an evil race, having no regard for the servants
of God. No doubt the Rajah would have felt less had
‘Tslams” and not “Kafirs” invaded and taken
Keddah. That he has kept his word will appear
in the sequel.
In the same month of April Tuanku Abdullah,
one of the Rajah’s sons, attacked Keddah by land with
a force ot three thousand men, chiefly subjects of
the British Government. This ill-conducted enter-
prise was speedily baffled and defeated by a handful
of Siamese. Abdullah’s troops on this occasion plun-
dered both friends and foes ! The Ligorian remons-
trated, and at* that the Ex Rajah had also urged his
nephew Tuankee Din to invade Purlis ( a ). The reply
to this communication was to this effect that it would
be impossible “ to put a stop to the Ex Rajah’s pro-
ceedings unless the British Government were to use
measures equally severe with those employed by the
Siamese in like emergencies, and which it never can
or will do,” Such sentiments were not calculated to
remove the suspicions of the Siamese that the Penang
Authorities were encouraging the Ex King in his
attempts to molest them, and these sentiments certain-
ly deviated in a slight degree from those so repeatedly
(a ). The Siamese while remonstrating in such strains
were themselves at the very time harbouring a notorious
pirate Pakirsa ” who up to the present day ( 1836 ) has
been protected by them in spite of constant representations
to them by the local authority of Penang of his piracies and
murders.


expressed by the Supreme Government. The cause of
the discrepancy may be traced to the minority in the
Council on this subject, in which Mr. Phillips found
himself placed.
The Supreme Government, in alluding to a false
alarm which had been industriously fomented at Pen-
ang that the Siamese were coming to attack it, ob-
served that the former policy respecting Keddah
should be strictly adhered to, that the occurrence of a
state of hostility with the Siamese nation was to be
deprecated as an evil of very serious magnitude, which,
far from seeking by undertaking operations for the
restoration of the unfortunate King of Keddah, should
be averted by their exercise of every degree of temper,
address, forbearance and moderation compatible with
the honour and character of the British Government;
and perseverance in this line of policy was declared
to be not the less incumbent on the Penang Govern-
ment under very strong circumstances of aggression
and provocation. In subh extreme cases a blockade or
even punishment by landing a party of men might
be adopted.
The Burmese war was now close at hand and
however inveterate that people might be against the
Siamese there can be no doubt that the Court of Ava
made strong overtures to that of Bankok to bury their
mutual animosities for a while in oblivion, and to join
with it in arresting the growing power of the British,
The Siamese Court wisely avoided the tempting bait,
no doubt under the belief that a cautious neutrality
would extract benefit from both the belligerents. I of
course assume that the Siamese refusal to co-operate
had been given previous to the intrigues which the
Burmese again carried on with the Ex Rajah and
others, as now to be noticed.
The Court of Ava finding itself on the brink of
a war with the British employed the Myoowoon or
Governor of Tavoy as its secret agent in negotiating


a league in the Malayan Peninsula against the Siamese
Power. The Court hoped doubtless by this manoeuvre
to prevent the Siamese from joining the British in
attacking Ava, by rendering it necessary for them to
send their forces southward, and if possible to bring
the British and Siamese into collision, and thus
weaken the aggressive means of the former; or if
these objects should fail to gain the neutrality of the
Siamese by arousing their suspicions of the intentions
of the British towards them.
The Myoowoon accordingly wrote letters to the
old Raja of Purlis in Keldah, to the Ex Raja of
Keddah, and to the Rajahs of Perak, Salengore and
Patani, urging them to co-operate with the Burmese
against the Siamese for the purpose of re-instating
the Ex Rajah. The letters were accompanied by
presents of gold umbrellas and horse trappings.
In the letter to the Ex the Myoowoon
declared that* “ the Emperor of Ava would, when the
proposed scheme had been matured, restore him to his
Government, and take the other liberated States under
his protection.” The receipt at Court of a clock,
which the Ex Rajah had sent as a present, was also
acknowledged in this letter, and it was concluded in
these words how the King of Keddah with a candid
mind desires to become tributary to the golden
palace ; the great Emperor will therefore protect and
cherish him, his children and descendants to the
remotest degree.
It is doubtful if the Burmese Court intended
anything by these intrigues but merely to create a
diversion of the two powers alluded to, yet, had she
got possession of Junk Ceylon—the distance from
thence to the Keddah territory being only a day’s run
—no obstacle would have been opposed to the descent
on it. In such an event the Ex Rajah would have
joined the invaders with half the population of Penang
and Province Wellesley !!!


The Penang Government forwarded a copy of this
( the Emperor of Ava’s ) letter to the Ligorean, in the
hope that it would intimidate him into a recognition
of the Ex King’s claims. It may be fairly questioned
if this perhaps premature measure did not tend to
fully convince that Chief, that the British were
abetting the whole intrigue. It was also attended
with other evil consequences, for the Malyan States
who had been tampered with were thereby betrayed
to the Siamese, and marked accordingly for a full
measure of vengeance, when the opportunity should
arise. It also irritated the Siamese still more against
the Ex Rajah. The only good effect it could have had,
and probably really had, was to exasperate the Siamese
still more against their ancient enemies the Burmans,
thereby securing at least, although unconsciously to
the British Local Government at the time, their
neutrality in the approaching contest, but not their
co-operation.
So long as the Ex Rajah was living under British
protection there could have been no excuse for these
intrigues with Ava. The Supreme Government pro-
nounced them to be improper and unjustifiable. Had
not the Burmese War quickly interposed itself ( a ) the
vicinity of Penang might have been made the field of
a most barbarous contest betwixt two implacable races,
and in which neither the British nor the Malayas would
have found it an easy thing to have remained neutral.
CHAPTER II.
Achin.
[This chapter deals exclusively with Achin, and
has no connection with Siam. It is therefore
here omitted.]
(a). Tavoy fell ou the 9th September 1824, Mergui oa
the 6th October 1824.


CHAPTER III.
Burmese War.
and
Events connected with it.
In 1824 war was declared by the British against
Ava. Just before this happened several envoys from
the Myoowoon or Burman Governor of Tavoy reached
Penang under the pretext of negotiating some com-
mercial arrangements with the Government there.
That these men were also commissioned to tamper with
the Ex Rajah of Keddah and the Malayan Rajahs on
the Peninsula can hardly be questioned. But they
came rather too late and might have been detained
as prisoners. They were however sent back with a
convoy to Tavoy and it is believed that this treatment,
combined with what they had seen at a review of the
troops at Penang, hastened the delivering up of Tavoy
to the British detachment which went gainst it.
Burmese War.
The Supreme Government had directed the Local
Government at Penang to endeavour to obtain the
co-operation of the Siamese in the Burman War to
the extent of supplying elephants, draft cattle and
boats. A public envoy was therefore dispatched to
the Rajah of Ligor, the then Governor of the principal
southern provinces of Siam ( a ). He was however
after a tedious negotiation of three months compelled
to return without effecting the main object, although
an opportunity was afforded for explaining to the
Siamese the cause and probable results of the war.
(a). Report by Lieut. Low of bis Mission to the Rajah
of Ligor, dated Trang Ist August 1824.


It was found impossible to remove the suspicions,
which haunted the Siamese of the sincerity of the
British and which did not leave them till the war had
terminated.
The self-love of the Court of Bankok was piqued
at the confidence of success in the approaching war
manifested by the British Government, and that too
in a contest with a nation which had ever proved a
vigorous if not dreaded rival of the Siamese.
The Right Honorable the Governor General in
Council, when notifying to the Penang Government
that war had been declared against Ava, signified that
it was in contemplation to take possession of Junk
Ceylon, it being a Burman island. The mistake as
to the ownership of this island arose from the
repeated suggestions which had been made both by
Government servants and traders, of the advantage
which the British would derive by the acquisition of
this island, while at the same time the fact that it was
a Siamese possession was, it should seem, kept out of
view by the suggestors ( a ).
CHAPTER IV.
Mission to the Ligor Rajah
in 1824.
In September a letter reached the Prince of Wales
Island Government from Major Gumming, the Agent
at Rangoon of the Right Honble, the Governor
General, stating that it was wished that the co-
operation of a Siamese army should be obtained, as
numerous as they might be disposed to furnish, to
(a). The Honble. Mr. Phillips, ti. 3 Governor, was as-
sured by Lieut, Low, the envoy, that the latter was the fact
and [ ? the Governor ] immediately reported it to Bengal
and when the mission proceeded to Junk Ceylon [on] its
way to Phoonga that fact was fully confirmed.


join inf invading the Burmese territory but to be
subject to the general disposal of the British Com-
mander. Tenasserim, when taken, to be held by the
Siamese, but to be evacuated by them on the termina-
tion of the war. No dismemberment of the Burmese
Government to be stated as in contemplation.
Elephants and draft cattle would be, if possible,
obtained,
A letter was addressed to the Rajah of Ligor by
the Governor and soon after forwarded by me to him,
informing him that an English officer had been
deputed to him by the Governor of Penang, to make
some very important communications.
On reaching Keddah the Siamese Chief there was
apprized of the important subject to be communicated
by me to the Rajah of Ligor. He was presented with
a copy of my credentials and the original was shown
to him and he was requested to furnish a passport and
carriage to Ligor. He replied that compliance with
this last request was quite beyond his power, but
he would submit it for the Phraya’s (his father)
consideration.
A letter was immediately prepared and sent off
to Ligor, along with the dispatch of the Chief to
the Phraya informing him of my destination and
requesting a passport.
I then proceeded to Trang from which place
another letter was sent off to the Phraya, nearly to
the same purport as the first, stating that I should
await a reply there, but that it was indispensable that
he should afford me a personal conference with himself.
The interval was employed in an endeavour to ascertain
the actual extent, state and resources of the other
Siamese provinces lying north of Trang. We returned
to Trang on the 7th June and on the Bth a letter
from the Phraya was delivered to me by the senior
of four of his officers whom he had forwarded with it.


This letter stated that it had never been customary
for Furmys [sic. ? Farang] (Europeans) to travel
through the country and that he (the Phraya) wished
to conform to ancient usages, besides, when the
envoy’s two letters reached Ligor, and they arrived on
the same day, it happened that two Siamese officers
of high rank, Surasena and Phraya Ohaisong Kram
accompanied by forty Khoon Navy (inferior Navy )
had just entered Ligor from Bankok, commis-
sioned by the Mighty Emperor of Siam, who is
exalted like God above the prostrate heads of his
subjects, to assist the Phrajm, in governing his
provinces. As the envoy’s letters did not detail
particulars and as these are wanted by the Phraj T a in
the first instance, he has therefore deputed Chom Ram
Decha of Bankok, Khoon Akson, Nai Nieum, and Nai
Koong, three Ligor officers, to confer with the envoy
and hear what he has to communicate, also to obtain
a written explanation of particulars for himself.
When this has been done the Phraya, as he may find
it most convenient, “ will either x'eceive the envoy at
Ligor or meet him at Trang. There is a route through
the forest which conducts in four days to Ligor, so
that no delay will ensue. Let not the envoy feel
vexed, and he is entreated to continue at Trang.”
Dated 3d night of moon’s increase in the 7th month,
year Wok.
These officers exerted all their diplomatic facul-
ties (which are not marked with the effrontery and
want of tact observable amongst the Burmese) to
obtain from me all that their [? master] desired, but
the result of a five hours’ conference with them con-
vinced me that the Phraya would, if possible, waive a
personal conference. I therefore urged on the minds
of these men that, as the Governor of Penang had
deemed it requisite to depute an agent to their master,
he could not consistently with his professions refuse to
grant a conference, either at Trang or Ligor, which
places were equally convenient. But I added that if


they would give me a positive assurance ( in writing )
that the Mission would be afterwards allowed to
proceed to Ligor I would at once comply [with] the
Rajah’s wish to learn the intent of it, but that no-
thing satisfactory could result from a written corres-
pondence with the Phraya or from intangible conver-
sation with his agents. The officers then left me to
return to Ligor [carrying] a letter from me to the
Phraya, urging him to admit of the proposed con-
ference, regretting the delay which had taken place,
informing him that it would be improper to detail
except to himself all the affairs respecting which I
had been sent, and concluding by shortly hinting that
I had much to state about the Ava war and its pro-
bable consequences, also regarding Keddah affairs, the
Southern or Tenasserim Provinces [and] the
ment of Sepoys in them.
I remained ten days longer at Trang when, as no
reply from the Phraya had reached me, I prepared to
to depart.
In case, however, the Phraya might have trans-
mitted an erroneous account of the Mission to Bankok
I forwarded a letter to the Phfa Khlang or Minister at
the Siamese capital accompanied by literal translations
in the Siamese language of the Governor General’s pro-
clamation of war against the Ava State. A private
letter was also addressed by me to the Phraya of
Ligor, requesting him to forward the dispatch and
(in case he might have declined doing so) he was told
that a duplicate would be sent by the first opportunity
by sea to Siam. I likewise wrote to His Highness a
private letter, cautioning [him] against listening to
the reports brought to him by evil designing persons
from Penang, and informing him that the object with
which I had arrived in his country was of the most
amicable tendency, of which time would convince him-
As however His Highness had declined giving me an
audience I could not deli ver to him the presents I had


brought but I begged to present to him a map of
India and other Eastern Countries, on which 1 had
written down the names of the Chief regions and
places in the Siamese Character. The conduct of the
messenger who went to Penang was commented on
in the above letter, yet these very officers are always
sent to Penang in political negotiations. The letter
to the Phra Khlang contained a recapitulation of all
that had taken place since my appointment to the
Mission and [mentioned] that one of its principal
objects was to apprize the Court of Bankok of the
nature of the war with Ava. It was stated that I
could not possibly hold conferences with officers or
explain to them what I had been deputed to communi-
cate to the Phrya in person.
The substance of the letter of the secretary to
the Penang Government to me of the 9th July re-
garding the Burmese War and inviting the Siam-
ese to co-operate, was engrossed also in the letter
to the Phra Klang and he was told that 1 had
been obliged b} T the circumstances of the Phraya
declining to reply to ray letter or to grant me an
audience thus to correspond with him direct. Copies
of the proclamations of war against Ava were there-
fore now forwarded and I concluded by apprizing
the Minister that the Governor General entertain-
ed the most amicable feelings toward his Siam-
ese Majesty and deprecated whatever might have
the remotest tendenc}’ to interrupt their ex-
ercise.
The Mission accordingly left. Trang and returned
to Penang.
F i •om the feelings which appeared to me to actuate
the Siamese on this occasion, gathered more from
unguarded conversations than public discussions, I
had the honor to express to the Penang Government
my opinion that there were but slender hopes of
co-operation in the Burmese War, and that they would


in all probability await the issue, since should it prove
fortunate to our arms they would thereby gain both
in strength and confidence, and should we fail they
would not then be exposed to the sure and implacable
vengeance of the Ava Court for having joined us. I
further stated that it seemed to me even doubtful
whether this war would not serve to estrange the
Siamese from us to a greater distance than hitherto
and instil suspicions into their minds that it was only
a prelude to an attack on their country. With respect
to the Phraya of Ligor, my residence of three months
in his country, information obtained from his subjects,
and my own experience of his character, all went to
persuade me that he was an active and very ambitious
Prince, and a stern, relentless and rapacious master ;
that he was grasping at all the Governments of Lower
Siam and that there was little chance of his resigning
Keddah to the Ex Rajah. I expressed the hope that
the knowledge which had now been obtained of his
principles would serve in some degree to counter-
balance the otherwise unsatisfactory result of the
Mission.
When the Ligorian’s messengers returned to
him he was, it is reported, rather ashamed of himself,
and would have instantly gone down to Trang had
1 not left it.
'Phe instructions of the Penang Government were
carried into effect with the exception of the procuring
of boats. To have got any the sanction of the Court
of Bangkok would have been required, and this would
have caused a delay sufficient to have done away with
any expected benefit to have been derived by an
employment of them. But my enquiries on the
coast confirmed me in the belief that there were
no boats in the rivers there fit to go to sea, as
they had been built chiefly for river or coasting
services.


CHAPTER V.
War in Keddah and Tuanku Din’s
Proceedings.
In 1828 Tuanku long Puteh, the brother in law,
and Tuanku Din or Kudin, the nephew of the Ex
Rajah, settled themselves in Province Wellesley
without permission, and commenced intriguing with
the inhabitants, with the view of recovering Keddah.
The same reasons which prevented the Ex Rajah from
being sent to Malacca operated also in the Province,
and these obnoxious individuals were allowed to
remain unmolested.
In 1829 Kudin or Tuanku Din atacked Keddah
aided by certain otiier influential Malays and by ryots
of the Honble. Company, but he was driven back (a).
The Ex King had no sooner ascertained that the
Government declined arresting him than he exhibited
his contempt by settling himself in Province Wellesley
and gathering about him all his old adherents should
[sic. ? including] the Panghula Mullins the Haps and
Libies, the Panglimas and the Wans. All that could
be done was to keep a watch over his conduct. Having
ascertained on whom he could depend and his coffers
getting empty he returned to Penang and his pension
was restored to him without any acknowledgment by
him of his error or promises of amendment—a genero-
sity he scarcely deserved to have shown to him.
The Rajah of Ligor was apprized by the Local
Authority in Province Wellesley that [the] Ex Rajah
was meditating an attack on Keddah. But the Ligorian
neglected making the necessary dispositions for the
defence of Keddah.
(a). These men were Tuanku Jaffier and Tuanku
Dangang, sons of Tuanku Long Puteh, Panglima M.mvar,
(die Man, Panglima tain, Imam Sa nahan, (he Haji,
Panglima Hossain and Mini and Che Bhio, Awang Lalial
and Che Akil.


About this time a double commission was ap-
pointed (a) to try and persuade the Ex Rajah to
remove with his family to Malacca. He promised after
some time, to the first of these officers, that he would
go. How he changed his mind has been already shown.
He declared however that he would try to regain his
lost dominions.
Pirates becoming very numerous in the direction
of Keddah, the Honble. Mr. Ibbetson, Governor, directed
his agent (b), to proceed to that place and persuade the
Siamese to send out a fleet of boats to co-operate in
driving the pirates off. The Agent went in the South-
ampton Ship of War and having obtained the fleet of
Siamese boats proceeded with them to join the boats of
that ship. The search proved unsuccessful. The Com-
mander of the Siamese boats turned out to be the
notorious pirate, Pakirsa, who however, owing to his
situation, could not be noticed publicly and punished
as such, although he had been outlawed from Penang.
This man will be hereafter introduced, but the position
lie held exhibits the Siamese [ ? practice ] very clearly
which takes advantage of the services of energetic
characters like Pakirsa, although well aware that their
fidelity is not to be much depended [on J.
The Siamese continued in fancied security
because, although warned, they could not bring
themselves to believe that, with the will, the
British had not the power to prevent an invasion of
Keddah by the Ex Rajah or his adherents, especially
as the Rajah of Ligor was informed by the Penang
Government that means would be [taken] to prevent
the Ex King and his followers from disturbing the
territory of Siam by seizing and delivering up
to the Chief of Keddah any persons guilty of such
conduct.
(a). Messrs. Low and Nairne.
(h). Captain Low.


This promise was unfortunate in two respects
because it tended to prevent the Siamese adopting
vigorous measures for defence, and because it neither
was or perhaps could have been fulfilled to the letter,
for at the same time nearly the Superintendent of
Province Wellesley was informed that the exercise of
actual force against the Ex Rajah and his adherents
might, in in case of bloodshed, be productive of
very serious consequences to those employed. The
interference of the Court of Judicature, or rather the
Records in the politics of Keddah will explain the
case. But force was afterwards employed, as will
be seen.
Tuanku Soliman, a younger brother of the Ex
Rajah of Keddah, who was allowed by the Siamese to
live at Kota, a place close on the eastern boundary of
Province Wellesley and situated on the Pry ( a ) River
began to excite the ryots of the Pry district to
disaffection, and he had the audacity to send one or
two [of] his agents, who in concert with certain low
hangers-on about the Court of Judicature, proceeded
secretly to measure out what they called the boundary
of the Province, cutting off from the latter a large
tract of country which had been under English rule
since the cession, and of which for thirty years the
British had held undisputed possession, and over
which the Court of Judicature had ever exercised
immediate jurisdiction. The ryots hoped that they
might thus escape payment of quit rents for land, and
their example was rapidly acting on the rest of the
inhabitants. As regards the latter, the feeling was
not thoroughly exhibited, and as respects the former,
the tendency to rebel would have perhaps been
surmounted had they been permitted to listen to
reason. But unfortunately their case was taken up
(a). Pry so named because the winds of its month
are supposed to be baffling, or because it has a very winding
course. The name will admit of either interpretation.


with the usual precipitancy of ignorance and cupidity
by persons in Penang, including pettyfogging and
other agents in the Courts, native merchants and
Hajis. The radical press also teemed with gross abuse
of the local authority in the Province Wellesley, which
although too contemptible to be noticed by him had the
bad effect of urging them to overt acts.
It might surprize a settler of land revenue
in Hindostan to be told that the various classes
of the native population enjoying British protection
at their own seeking (for they were emigrants )
should for the most part pay only a nominal
quit rent, not exceeding in a large section of them
17 per cent, [ sic ?7 J scarcely on the average
exceeding 5 per cent, and never as yet exceeding
10 per cent the gross value—to help to defray the
expenses of protection. The mischief arising from
Tuanku Soli man’s abetted movement continued for
three years to retard the land settlement.
There is not, it may safely be asserted, a peasantry
in India, perhaps not in Europe, so comfortable
according to its own ideas of comfort as that of this
settlement of Penang.
It is probable that the Raja of Ligor had favoured
Tuanku Soliman hoping that he might establish him
as a spy on the frontier of the English territory, for on
being apprized of the conduct of that Chief the Raja
replied in a very evasive manner, not seeming to be
aware that the Ex Rajah and his adherents were
playing a double game, endeavouring on the one hand
to detach Tuanku Solimam from the Siamese interests
so as to have his co-operation against Keddah, and
on the other hand to make him the unconscious agent
in bringing on a misunderstanding betwixt the
British and Siamese.
Tuanku Soliman was professing to Captain Low,
Superintendent of Province Wellesley, in the mean
while, that although living in the Siamese territory


his heart was devoted to the British. But when he
visited him at Kota to endeavour to bring the Tuanku
to a better mind his behaviour was so wanting in the
usual forms of Malayan etiquette, and his conversation
was so suspiciously evasive, that no doubt could
remain of his estrangement from his professsions.
Soon after, the constable of Pry district with a
part} T of police and three Sepoys was proceeding to issue
some Government orders there. Their path lay in one
spot through jungle. It was narrow and the party was
carefully proceeding in single file when it was waylaid
by a body of Malays. The constable and 3 Sepoys
and several peons were killed, and the remainder, who
were in the rear, consisting of ryots, fled back.
A party of Sepoys had been stationed on the Pry
River on the requisition of the Resident Councillor for
the protection of the district. Party spirit ran high
in favour of the Malays and rebellion in the eyes of
their advocates seemed now almost a virtue. The
Coroner of Penang, instead of holding an inquest on
the bodies of the murdered men and issuing his
warrants for apprehending the murderers, sided, it is
to be hoped through ignorance, with the faction which
absurdly pretended to doubt the extent of the jurisdic-
tion (thirty years having elapsed without such a doubt
having ever been mooted) and thus left Soliman to act
as he might choose. The military force which was
stationed on the Pry River was without the knowledge
or sanction of the Resident Councillor suddenly re-
moved by military authority before he could reverse
such a strange procedure. A requisition arrived for
more troops to carry on the Nanning War, and none
could be spared for Province Wellesley. As Superin-
tendent of the Province and deeming that delay to
punish such a rebellious movement would tend to a
more serious revolt, Captain Low assembled all the
disposable armed peons and about 100 Malays on
whom reliance could be placed, and drove the insur-
gents from their position in the Upper part of the


Pry District in a thick jungle, and here having
stockaded a post in its vicinity the spirit of opposition
was checked.
The ring leaders of the movement fled to Tuanku
Soliman’s Head Quai-ters at Kota, but many of the
ryots who had been at first- induced to join them
returned to their homes. The jungle was now quickly
cleared away up to the frontier by a body of new
and quiet settlers in room of the banditti who had
harboured in it.
Tuanku Soliman was now unmasked and his fate
was sealed. He had chosen to offend the power to
which alone in adverse circumstances he must have
looked for protection. If he sided with the Malays
and was unsuccessful where could he retreat to ?
It is usual for the Malayan petty traders of
Penang and Province Wellesley to visit the birds nest
islands about the beginning of the year. Their boats
are always well armed as a defence against pirates and
consequently no suspicion arises on that point. The
Ex Rajah and his adherents took advantage of the
yearly fleet to fit out an expedition against Keddah.
It may be safely affirmed that the Government and its
officers were the only parties interested, except a few
Chinese in preventing this attack, one which no doubt
contravened in some measure the Treaty of Bangkok.
The good people of Penang seemed to have forgotten
their frequent panics on reported Siamese invasions of
that island, which had on one occasion urged a large
party, with Mr Secretary John Anderson at their
head, to send their property into the Fort for safety.
The Chinese, who in many respects occupy the
same position in the Straits that the Jews do
in Europe were staunch abettors of the attempt.
Valuable as these settlers are in the countries to the
eastward it should not be forgotten that they are
mercenary strangers and intensely selfish, fond of


intrigue and almost secure in its exercise from the veil
which their secret associations cast over them, ready
but concealed abettors of every political strife which is
likely to be followed by pecuniary advantage to
themselves, and less interested in the stability of the
Government under whose protection they may happen
during their migration to be living than almost any
other class of natives because they enjoy both tolera-
tion and immunities in all the countries to the eastward
not accorded to the proper subjects of those countries,
thus making it easy for them to change their residence
and without sacrificing much.
On the present occasion the Chinese were divided
in their politics, just as their own interests pointed :
the Hajis, who form a numerous portion of the
population, preached a crusade against the infidel
Siamese, and did more mischief than all other classes
combined. The eastern Hajis are rather a disreputable
set generally considered, miserably ignorant when
they embark for the Holy Kaliah and Haji Asenat.
The short collision they afterwards sustain there with
the world only serves to teach them the art of
overreaching their neighbours. The white frock and
turban which they are then privileged to wear, while
it renders their faults and views more glaring still,
helps to make it difficult to assail them amongst a
bigoted people. Under the mask of religion they are,
with but few exceptions, ever ready to range themselves
in the ranks against the Kafir. Whether they honor
the British by applying to them this epithet amongst
themselves may not be a doubtful question. But as
the latter are not idolaters they are in some measure
exempted from the anathemas pronounced by the Koran
against image worshippers. The mental political
superiority of Europeans too has a potent effect in mo-
difying the feelings with which the unfaithful of the
Far Bast are viewed by Mahometans. Hatred the} 7
may and often do entertain for their British rulers,
but contempt they cannot really fee! if they would.


The boats alluded to slipped away by degrees
from Penang and Province Wellesley and were
concealed near the Boonting Island. When all were
ready Tuanku Mahomed escaped in a dark night in
a skiff and joined them. Betwixt two and three
thousand men are supposed to have gone by land but
as they crossed the frontier of the Province in small
parties under cover of the night ( and slunk back in
the same way to their homes ) the number could not
be exactly ascertained, Eighty Bengal men who had
formerly been Sepoys also joined Kudin. A very
few only of these ever returned.
When the fleet entered the Keddah river the
Siamese Chief, a son of the Rajah of Ligor, was panic
struck. He had not a hundred Siamese to defend the
Fort. The Malays he could not trust and as Kudin
had dressed out many of his men in old jackets of
Sepoys (the Sepoys always sell their old jackets hez*e )
the Chief believed that the Penang Government had
sent a force with him. Nuther and Ahmed wore
uniforms of British form. The Siamese gave the
enemy one discharge of all the guns on the water
face, perhaps a dozen of large calibre, and then
evacuated the place. But Kudin’s men were so close
cn them that thirty were made prisoners and the Chief
received a wound after no Spartan fashion. The
prisoners were kept for some time, and then most
cruelly tortured and butchered in cold blood.
The Keddah Fort, if it deserves the name, is
an oblong square of about*—yards by fifty. The wall
is of brick and about eleven feet high on an average.
It has no regular ditch, the river washes a small latus
( sic ) on its south side, a narrow creek runs along the
east face, leaving a path betwixt it and the wall. The
other three sides are protected by mud swamps and man-
groves. Altogether it is a most untenable place for a
single day or even hour against a regular force, and
less defensible than a well constructed stockade; which
sort of work the Indo-Chinese had better adhere to if


they should contemplate ever provoking Europeans to
a contest with them.
The Raja received a present of muskets and amu-
nition. The native officers of the escort at his request
put the Sepoys through the manual and platoon exer-
cises, and although he did not say much at the time
the impression made on his mind was such that he
afterwards procured some old disbanded soldiers to in-
struct his men in drill, but it should seem with little
success.
When the Resident left this fortified camp the
Ligonan attended him with a large retinue of spears-
men and swordsmen to the bank of the Keddah river.
The conveyances were handsome litters and carried by
means of poles on men’s shoulders.
The Ligorian’s age at the time of this visit was
fifty or nearly so. He is however a stout man and
not decapitated (sic), which is an event which may
happen, [ ? though ] he may govern for many years
longer.
CHAPTER VI.
Affairs of Perak South of Penang.
In 1825 Mr. Anderson was deputed by the Penang
Government to the State of Perak to negotiate for the
evacuation of that State by the Salengore Rajah’s
troops. The latter had been sent there by the Rajah
[to] insure some pecuniar}’ claims. The mission was
successful. Salengore is a much smaller state than
Perak but its people are bolder than those of Perak.
In 182(3 it was found that the Raja or Phraya of
Ligor had sent a party of troops into the Perak State,
thereby committing a breach of the obligations im-
posed upon him by Treaty. He was accordingly warn-
ed that his conduct would render it impossible for the
Penang Government to preserve relations of amity


with him, however anxious it might be to do so,
unless he adhered to his engagements.
v Adverting to the instructions I had the honor to
receive when dispatched to Perak I will merely relate
as briefly as possible the general results of the Mission.
The Raja of Perak did not require to be convinced
that it would be necessary for him to adopt a firmness
and decision of conduct so as to free himself from the
influence of the Ligor Chief and the Salangore Rajah,
and to assert that independence which had been
guaranteed to him by the treaty alluded to. But
situated as he was in the midst both of open and
concealed enemies, he distinctly required that British
interposition should be vouchsafed until he could
render his position secure.
He was averse to the measure of trans-
mitting the gold and silver flowers hitherto so perti-
naciously demanded from him by the Siamese Court
or of paying tribute or bondage in any shape to it and
he observed that Perak had always been independent
previous to the late interference of the Ligor and
Salengore Rajahs. He had indeed been twice induced,
through fear of threatened invasion, to send golden
flowers to Bankok.
The Rajah desired it might be understood as his
firm resolve that no communication or intercourse, not
purely commercial, should take place or exist betwixt
his country and Siam or Salengore.
The Rajah expressed himself very grateful for the
care which had been taken of his interests by the
Penang Government. He said that the Siamese were
utterly faithless and that he hoped a party of Sepoys
would be left with him to protect him from their
intrigues. This of course could not be complied with.
He then expressed his wish that ] would at least
guarantee the preferred aid in case of necessity, by a
formal agreement, since in this event the Siamese


would be cautious of breaking with the British. The
same was desired with reference to Salengore. This
guarantee could not be avoided from the following
considerations. The Ligorians had openly infringed a
solemn Treaty, had usurped the power and authority
of the Raja, had corrupted and gained over many of
his officers and had placed him in personal danger.
The Rajah then delivered to me a letter to the
Governor of Penang, the substance of which might be
communicated to the Ligorian, expressive of his desire
to keep himself independent of Siam and other States.
When it was considered that several of the Rajah’s own
Ministers were intriguing with the Siamese and that
these men must according to usage become parties to
any Treaty which I might have to enter into, the
negotiations appeared likely to terminate unfavorably.
It was quite obvious that engagements which should
be [entered into] under such circumstances could not
be relied on, however well disposed the Raja might be.
These considerations, to which the Rajah was painfully
alive, roused into some degree of activity his faculties,
which had been nearly subdued by the domineering
conduct of the Siamese. He earnestly prayed that I
would not leave him a prey to Siamese rapacity,
but that I would remain for a few weeks until
he had, as suggested to him me, remodelled his
Government, and rid himself of the disaffected by
expelling 'them from office.
I did not hesitate to prolong my stay since it was
apparent that had I gone away before he had esta-
blished his authority, he might have been led to
distrust the offers of assistance made to him through
me, and to throw himself into the exclusive power of
the Ligor Chief, who could then have easily destroyed
the Rajah and have placed the Rajah Muda, a creature
of the Siamese, in the Government of Perak.
The Raja now issued a proclamation to his sub-
jects, warning them against intriguing with the
Ligorians or Salengorians. r lhe chief men in the


country were summoned to his presence along with the
Rajah Muda or Heir Apparent, who in the hope
perhaps of a quicker succession to power than the age
and the constitution of the Rajah warranted, had
taken the oath of allegiance to the Siamese. So
perplexed, however, Rajah find himself when
affairs came to a crisis that he made a formal tender
to me of his country for the British. He was promptly
told that his independence alone was desired or con-
templated by the British. When all the Chiefs had
assembled at Allahan, the Rajah ordered them to
proceed to the Balei or Hall of Audience. I went
there at the Rajah’s request accompanied by Captain
Elwan of the Bombay Naval Service, and Mr, Frith,
Assistant Surgeon on the Bombay Establishment, who
did me the favour to remain with me at Allahan to
witness what should take place. The proclamation
before alluded to was again read before [the] assembly,
also the list of new Ministers and officers, and to each
of these last classes the oath of allegiance was ten-
dered separately.
The Rajah Muda having committed treason by
siding with the Siamese against his country had his
claim to the succession formally annulled, and a nearer
relative of the Rajah was declared Heir Apparent.
These important measures were happily effected
without resistance on the part of Raja Muda and his
adherents.
The change was made so quickly that no time was
left to them to organise means of annoyance.
Means were then taken by the Raja for seizing
several persons holding small commands on the sea
coast and who had declined obejdng his summons.
These officers were known to have aided and abetted
the pirates who were daily molesting the native
traders to Penang.
The oath of allegiance having been administered
to the new Chiefs, the Raja directed his engagement


with me to be read aloud. It was then signed and
sealed, when the assembly broke up under a salute
of eleven guns, intended, the Raja said, for the Mission.
I therefore returned it with three volleys of musketry
from the detachment of troops.
The Raja promised to protect traders, to discount-
enance slavery, and to promote agriculture and general
education amongst his subjects.
The Raja of Ligor disclaimed having broken the
Treaty, but the Mission had the means of proving his
want of faith beyond a doubt. The conduct of his
troops in Perak, who tied on learning of our ap-
proach is just what we might have looked for from
any demi-civilised people.
They obliged the Raja to supply them gratis with
rations and whatever else they coveted, they forcibly
seized the produce of gardens, levied contributions at
pleasure on the impoverished peasantry, and abducted
and seized on women and conveyed them from their
families. The Raja stated that within a very few
months the expense and loss incurred by the country,
owing to Siamese occupancy, amounted to about half a
lac of rupees.
The Raja of Ligor’s letters and those written by
his orders to the Raja of Perak are useful instances of
Siamese diplomacy.
Several- arrangements were made with the Raja
for facilitating the mercantile and friendly intercourse
betwixt Penang and Perak by land and water, and for
the dispersion of pirates.
The Pankour or Dinding Islands lying off the
Perak coast are well known to be the private haunts of
piratical boats which annually sweep the coast up to
Junk Ceylon.
The Raja entirely of his free will executed a deed
assigning over these Islands to the E. I. Company.


This I could 01113 7 accept conditionally, observing to
the Raja that I would submit his offer for the con-
sideration of the Penang Government.
The direct control, which owing to the Mission
the Perak Raja obtained over the sea coast soon
enabled him to drive out those officers who had leagued
with the pirates. But it was not until their head
quarters at Ivorow had been destroyed that the native
petty traders were relieved from their tears.
Having made, as directed, every requisite enquiry
regarding the piracies which had been committed
in our neighbourhood, 1 felt authorized in reporting
[to] the Prince of Wales Island Government that the
nature of the Perak and other adjacent coasts was such
that no piratical prahus or boats could be pursued,
with hopes of success, unless by others similarly con-
structed and well manned. With such boats, well
armed and defended by bulwarks and netting, it seem-
ed to me that the pirates might be decoyed and over-
taken. Subsequent to my return from Perak in
January 1827 I was directed by the Prince of Wales
Island Government to attack the pirates who had
established their Head Quarters at the Korow River
about thirty miles to the southward of the Island.
It becomes requisite to introduce the subject in this
place because the result showed that the Raja of Ligor
not only slighted the obligations of treaties, but
actually upheld, within the Perak territory, a noto-
rious piratical Chief called Nakodah Oodin.
1 was not aware of this circumstance until the
papers of the latter fell into my hand subsequent
to the attack, and I had examined individuals who
had been carried off from Penang and enslaved
by him.
To such a pitch of audacity had Oodin’s gang
arrived that it had become a regular trade to carry off
British subjects from Penang and Province Wellesley


to Korow. Notices were then conveyed to their re-
latives, who fearful for their safety, rarely returned to
acquaint the police, but secretly redeemed them at the
average rate of twenty dollars for each person. Pirat-
ed property was regularly sold them and a good deal
was there found and traced by me on the spot.
The Baja of Ligor had hoped that as Korow was
a place too notorious to be frequented by the Perak or
Penang people, his underhand design in that quarter
would escape detection. When, however, his motives
were exposed he acted the bold part and even ventured
to assert that Korow formed a part of his dependency
of Keddah.
The Perak Chief or Penghula of Korow had seve-
ral years before the period here adverted to been at-
tacked by the noted pirate Tuanku Long put* a Sea-
man, who sett led himself there. But about the time
when the Siamese invaded Keddah the equally cele-
brated pirate Oodin expelled him and occupied the
position. He was then found by the Ligor Phraya to
be a very convenient person to assist him in annoying
his neighbours and this convenience was mutual.
The Phraya had never before publicly acknow-
ledged Oodin as a servant of his, well knowing that
he would, in so doing, be required by the Penang
Government to explain his reasons for forcibly retain-
ing possession of a district of Perak and for abetting
piracies of the most atrocious description.
The Phraya took no notice of the exposure until
about three months after it happened, and then all on
a sudden he adopted a very unadvised step in claiming
the territory so nefariously seized. His Councils must
have been of the most imbecile and despicable descrip-
tion, since they exposed his duplicity so very soon
after he had signed a solemn treaty to refrain from
interfering in Perak affairs. But it is just as well that
lie has afforded us the means of appreciating the
Siamese political character.


The PI i ray a was soon informed that “the Krean
River and not Korow is the boundary betwixt Perak
and Keddah ’’ and Captain Burne} 7 , in whose chart
( a ) of that part of the coast these rivers are so laid
down, and who was with the Phraya when he accused
the English of infringing his boundary by attacking
Korow, informed him but when too late to save his
honor, that he was wrong, and then referring to what
Mr. Light had reported and to the chart which Mr
Lindsay had made of the neighbouring coast, soon after
our first occupation of Penang, assured him that “ the
river Krean and not Korow was always and must now
be considered the true boundary betwixt Keddah and
Perak.” The Raja was not however prevented from
insisting on his unwarrantable claims. His Highness
therefore sank still deeper in his own toils, and
was at length effectually silencfed by the production of
a letter of his own addressed in 1822 by him to the
then Governor of Penang, the Honble. Mr. Phillips,
describing Nakodah Oodin ( his subsequent protege )
as a notorious pirate and requesting that he might be
seized.
At the period when these occurrences happened
‘the British troops were actively engaged in pro-
secuting the war in Avca. That persevering people
the Burmans had not yet been humbled, and the
Siamese throughout the contest had assumed a suspi-
cious position of neutral it}' which left them the optiom
after the issue, to side with the stronger party. Had
ou.r success been only partial the Siamese Court would
probably have adopted a haughty line of policy which
would have been the result of contempt for our power.
The measures therefore so promptly adopted by
the Penang Government embraced the present
exigenc3 r , and provided for the future. They were in
accordance with the views which were entertained by
the Supreme Government, the checking of the Siamese
(a). Dated 10th April 1825.


iii their habitual encroachment on the Malayan States
of the Peninsula and the upholding the Malayan
States in their independence, as the surest pledges for
the security of the native trade in the Straits. Had
the Penang Government not acted in so decisive a
manner the whole Peninsula except Malacca might at
this moment have been under Siamese sway.
Since the Mission left Perak that State and other
territories to the southward of it have enjoyed unin-
terrupted quiet and the Siamese appear aware of the
necessity of setting bounds to their ambition for the
present at least if nob for the future. Any general
system of interference on the part of the British with
the native States to the eastward would prove unpro-
fitable and uncalled for. But particular interference
may perhaps occasionally become indispensable and
perhaps unavoidable as in the present case, where it
counteracted the projects of the Raja of Ligor, secured
the independence of the Perak Chief and fulfilled the
most urgent article of the Treaty of Bangkok (the
14th ) the stipulations of which were made to prevent
anjr interference of the Siamese with that country.
To anticipate is often both more politic and safe than
to await an issue which shall surely demand a desper-
ate remedy. In so far as pirates are concerned we
ought never to be at a loss how to : act. They are
common enemies and as such ought to be run down
wherever they shelter themselves, provided the State
under which they seek refuge declines or is unable to
drive them out.
The rivers on the coast require some protecting
iState to save them from pirates in concert with the
native princes and we are bound by the Dutch Treaty
of 17 March 1824 to co-operate with them in destroy-
ing pirates. This work could not have been com-
menced at a better place than Korow, which for so
long a period has been full of pirates, [an 1J which is
only thirty miles from Penang.


The Honble„ the Court of Directors have enjoined
that piracy should be eradicated in concert with native
States, but alone if they should scheme* in so laudable
a measure.
Military Expedition and Political Mission
to Perak in 1826.
Shortly before the invasion of Keddah by the
Siamese the troops of the latter nation had overawed
the State of Perak, but had afterwards retired. In
1826, however, the Raja of Ligor conceived the scheme
of endeavouring to forestall the 14th article of the
Treaty of Bankok by sending a large party of Siamese
under friendly pretences to Perak. Having corrupted
the chief men in this country the Raja became a mere
cypher and his independence seemed on the point of
being lost, for it was believed that fear would make
him consent to acknowledge vassalage to the Court of
Siam. His critical position having been with difficulty
made known to the Penang Government, it determined
to render the above quoted article of the Treaty
effective if possible and accordingly deputed to that
Malayan State a political agent who should at the
same time act as Commandant of a military force.
The Antelope of Bombay, cruizer, Captain Elwan, and
the Hon. Company’s cruizer Zephyr were directed to
accompany him and be guided by his orders. A
detachment of the Local Corps composed the above
military force. A gun boat was also attached to the
cruizers.
The expedition or mission reached the Perak
River and the Antelope worked her way into it with
considerable difficulty. She was perhaps the first
English vessel of war which had ever ascended it.
After proceeding about 10 miles up the stream a rapid
forced her Commander to cast anchor. The detach-
ment of troops commanded by Captain Low as before
noticed and accompanied by Lieut. Elwan, Commander
of the cruizer and Dr. Frith pushed up the river in


boats. The Siamese troops which were encamped
on the north bank of the river tied speedily towards
the frontier, without standing- the attack, and when
the detachment reached Allahan, the residence of
the Raja ( a ), His Highness [was] found deserted
by many of his influential Chiefs and overjoyed at the
prospect of being delivered from Siamese thraldom.
The real condition of the Raja had not been
known to the Government, so that Captain Low’s in-
structions hardly embraced the existing affairs. Keep-
ing however in view the recent Treaty with Siam, the
mischiefs likely to arise from tacitly allowing a breach
of it, and the desire before expressed by the Supreme
Government to throw obstacles in the way of Siamese
aggrandisement to tiie Southward, and being aware
also that did the Mission immediately return the Raja
would succumb of necessity to Siamese dictation he
took on himself, heavy as it afterwards appeared* to
be, the responsibility of instantly adopting the only
course which in his opinion could secure His Highness’s
independence.
His Highness was recommended to remodel his
Government. To this end the influential men, includ-
ing the disaffected Chiefs, were summoned by him to
his presence. The whole of them arrived in a few
days, when a solemn oath of allegiance was tendered
to them by their priest in presence of the Raja and the
Mission. A new arrangement of officers took place.
The disaffected Raja Muda was displaced, and in the
course of a month the independence of Rerak was
secured to the mortification of the Ligorian, who had
tried to persuade the Penang Government, through
Captain Burney the agent of the Right Honorable the
Governor General then with the Ligorian at Keddah,
that the Keddah Rajah was desirous of his protection !
(a). In 40.LJ N. L., 101°.10 long., ami two days’ pul-
ling from the vessel.


It was afterwards a source of much regret to Captain
'Low to find that Captain Burney had taken this
erroneous view of Perak affairs in his communications
to Government, one which was not however allowed
by the Supreme Government to have any weight, in
the face of the Raja’s declarations to the contrary.
Since the above period up to the present time the
Siamese have not attempted to gain a footing in Perak.
Some time before this expulsion of the Siamese from
Perak the Rajah of Salangore, a small Malayan State
adjoining the former, with 40 boats and 800 men, had
driven the Siamese out of Perak, which they had
usurped, and had occupied part of its territory on the
South, Mr. Anderson was deputed to Perak and Sa-
lengore to adjust matters and the result was that the
Salengorians evacuated Perak and the southern bound-
ary of Perak was fixed on the River Birnam. Treaties
were also entered into with these Rajas respective!}'.
The Raja of Perak delivered to me a paper on my
departure which proved to be a formal cession of the
Binding and* Pankour Islands near the mouth of Perak
River to the British. These islands had been long
before offered and accepted, but they were neVer
occupied.
CHAPTER VII.
[First part omitted as previously done,
or not bearing directly on Siamese
affairs.]
Pirates, Muda River.
The
Honorable J. W. Salrnond, Esqre.
Resident Councillor,
Sir,
I have the honor to report to you for the informa-
tion of the Honble. the Governor, that the notorious


pirate, Pakirsa, has again visited the Muda River, and
has forcibly seized and detained a girl named Menap,
who had crossed with her family to the opposite or
Siamese side of the Muda River on a temporary visit
to some of her relatives. The girl has been by Pakirsa
given over to the Siamese Chief at the Muda, who
refuses on my requisition here on the spot to give her
back until he reports to Keddah, because as he says
Pakirsa is the servant of the Siamese Governor of
Keddah. It would hence appear that the Siamese
have not paid the slightest attention to the late remon-
strances of the Honble. the Governor regarding this
noted pirate, who is now under Siamese protection and
shelters himself from blame under their name, I can-
not allow myself to think that such behaviour on their
part is not cognizable, with reference to the Treaty of
Bangkok. The Siamese Chief of Keddah may have
become careless on finding that the numerous remon-
strances which have been made on this subject have
been hitherto evaded without any penalty having been
incurred. 1 beg to quote one of the first remonstrances
I believe which was made, and to express my
impression that the threats it contained were not
enforced as the Siamese prevented their being put
into execution by ( apparent ) acquiescence for the
time.
The Honble. Mr. Phillips thus addressed the
Siamese Chief at Keddah regarding a piracy of Pakirsa;
“ If therefore the Siamese Chiefs cannot or will not
administer justice in the Keddah Country so as to
punish pirates and wicked men domiciled within its
boundaries, who injure and oppress British subjects
and others, the Governor of Prince of Wales Island
must and will take on himself to do so. He therefore
demands, on behalf of the British Government, that
the Siamese Chiefs shall inflict exemplary punishment
upon Pakirsa and his nephew Hamid and not suffer
pirates to reside under their jurisdiction or in any
dependency of Keddah to which they [lay] claim, else


all intercourse will be put a stop to, and the Governor
will adopt measures accordingly.”
The Siamese replied that they would seize Pakirsa
and punish him for his murder of Sibbee Ghanney and
Bawasa.
In conclusion I beg to remark that the murderers
and robbers who have fled from justice here are now-
followers of Pakirsa at Ean, a village betwixt [the]
Muda and Keddah rivers.
I have &ca.
( Signed ) James Low.
Province Wellesley
25th July 1836.
[ A number of other docunents appear with the above,
but have been omitted as being unnecessary, or on account of
having been sent previously,]
CHAPTER VIII.
[Omitted as dealing only with Malacca].
CHAPTER IX.
An Account of the War betwixt the Malays
and Siamese In 1838,
Commonly called the War
of
Tuanku Mahomed Saad.
The last attack by the Malays in Keddah beam
very general resemblance to that by Kudin. I would
not have detailed these wars at such length as I have
done, had I not felt assured that it was the best mode
of displaying the character and resources of the con-
tending parties.


In 1836 the Ex Raja of Keddah left Malacca and
proceeded to Bruas, which is a small river in the
Perak country. As the Treaty of Bankok had provided
against such a movement, the Ex Raja gave out before
he left Malacca that he intended,* The Raja Muda or
Heir Apparent of Perak, instead of declining particip-
ation, as he should have done with reference to the
Treaty just mentioned, went accompanied by a fleet of
boats and visited this rather untoward guest, and
although the latter had, while in power in Keddah,
leagued with the Siamese against Perak, still the Raja
Muda appeared inclined to espouse his cause.
As the independence ot Perak, which had been
secured by the expedition and Mission of 1826 and
by the subsequent Treaty of Bankok, could only be
permanently maintained by the strict neutrality of
that State as regarded the affairs of Keddah, the
Honble. the Governor, Mr. Murchison, directed Cap-
tain Low to meet the Raja Muda on the Perak Fron-
tier, and after that officer had stongly exposed to him
the dangerous position into which he had foolishly
cast himself, he consented to return to the seat of the
Perak Government.
The Ex Raja settled himself and his adherents on
the banks of the Bruas River in Perak, and then be-
gan a systematic course of intrigue with his old friends
in Penang and Province Wellesley exactly in the same
manner and obviously tending to the same results as
his intrigues in the former war.
About this time Mat Ali, one of the Ex Raja’s
adherents who had been pirating along the Keddah
coast for some time before, and had been distinguished
by the Ex Raja with the title of Sri Kirniajaya (a),
made a sudden descent on, and took possession of the
Pulo Lancavi, which are rocky and, with slight excep-
tions, barren islands lying off the Keddah coast and
under the Siamese jurisdiction. Here he continued
(a). This title appertained to his father who was Gov-
ernor of the Lancavys under the Malayan rule.


until the middle of April employing himself in press-
ing into the Raja’s service, as he called it, all the Ma-
layan boats he could command; many of these were
trading boats from Penang. Those which were sus-
pected to belong to persons well affected towards the
the Siamese were taken and plundered.
The Honble. the Governor of the Straits sent to
inform Mat Ali that if he did not forthwith remove to
a distance force would be used to drive him away.
Agreeably to the instructions of the Government
Captain McCrae proceeded to Bruas with H. M. sloop
of war Zebra in order to persuade or to oblige, if per-
suasion should not suffice, the Ex Raja to return to
Malacca.
On the 19th April Captain McCrae took five of
his boats well manned and armed up the Bruas River
to the Ex Raja’s residence. He was found in a house
defended by a slight stockade and surrounded by some
hundreds of Malays armed with spears, krises and arms
of all kinds. Every possible argument was used by
Captain McCrae to induce the Ex Raja to go to Malac-
ca, but this old Chief, who had ever been noted for
obstinacy when it was most to his disadvantage,
doggedly replied that he had made up his mind to go
to Keddah, that it was beneath his dignity to be so
removed, and that he might be taken but not alive.
During this conversation it would appear from all
accounts that Captain McCrae had in a persuasive
manner, but which was doubtless considered as a much
too familiar one, put his hand on the Ex Rajah’s
shoulder. Krises all around were instantly half drawn
from their scabbards, but luckily a motion of the Ex
Raja’s hand checked the murderers’ impulse. Captain
McCrae, finding all his arguments rejected, told the
Ex Raja that as he had requested it, he would give
him the ensuing night for deliberation and return in
the morning. The interview of the 20th when Captain
McCrae proceeded in his gig was equall}’ unsatisfac


tory. On returning down the river, the rest of the
boats were met coming up. The Ex Rajah’s Chief,
who had followed in a boat, was sent back to say that
upon his, Captain McCrae’s, coining within sight of
the village and Ex Raja’s brig ( then ly'ing at anchor
close to his house ) he would fire a blank cartridge,
when, if a white flag should appear on the brig he
would consider it as a signal that he, the Ex Raja, in-
tended to submit.
It is probable that both the Ex Raja and his
adherents did not believe that force would be used to
get him out, for if they did they would undoubtedly
have taken the easy precaution of impeding the
narrow stream, or creek, by felling trees across it, and
then annoying the boats by firing at them out of the
thick jungle which here reaches the water edge on
the banks and meets overhead.
Having thus met his boats Captain McCrae again
ascended until within about a hundred yards of the
Ex Raja’s house. No white flag appeared and the
blank cartridge was returned by a shot from the brig.
Soon after this the boats kept advancing when they
were met with a fire from the stockade, and a line
of about three hundred Malays. The brig was soon
swept clear by the grape of the boats and the guns
were than turned towards the people on shore, aided
by the fire of a party of marines. The engagement
lasted about half an hour, when the Malays disap-
peared and the Ex Raja came out of the jungle, where
be had concealed himself with his family, and giving
himself up, embarked on the brig. The loss on the
part of the Malays was considerable although not ascer-
tained. In the boats one man was killed on the spot,
one wds mortally wounded, two most severely, and
one slight!}" wounded.
The brig was towed to Penang to be fitted with
sails and then conveyed the Ex Raja to his former
quarters at Malacca, Tuanku Abdulla, the eldest sou


of the Ex Raja, took an active part in this affair, and
received a slight wound in his foot. Kuntii Mohatned
Ali, a man who had fled for rebellion and murder
from Province Wellesley in 1831, was also con-
spicuous. The separate men who had collected round
the Ex Raja had expected to reap a rich harvest of
plunder under the cloak of zeal for his cause, and it is
probable that they would have resisted the boats of the
frigate even had the Ex Raja forbidden them. But
the removal of the Ex Raja to Malacca did not damp
the ardor of his adherents who kept up a constant
correspondence with him. Active and secret prepara-
tions were made by those both in Penang and Province
Wellesley for an attack on Keddah and although these
preparations were known to be in progress long before
the outbreak, still, as no ostensible illegal acts were
committed such could not be easily prevented. In
the mean time Wan Mat (or Mahomed Ali ) con-
tinued to increase his fleet of boats and to plunder
every boat he met with whose owners could in
any way be considered as belonging to or connected
with the Siamese, even although they were British
subjects. It was now that the editors of the Penang
Gazette ( a ) recommenced that reckless system of
mendacity and low bred and violent scurrility which
it had persevered in through Kudin's war and up to
the present hour. Their sole aim, as if actuated by
the bloodthirsty revenge of the savage, has been to
urge two demibarbarous races to an exterminating
contest, and it may be safely affirmed that much of the
blood which has been shed in the provinces of Keddah,
Sangora and Ghana, may be laid to their charge.
Blinded by passion, hating the government and its
(a). Nothing more clearly. proves that fact that a
newspaper is the bane, the deadly nightshade, of a small
colony, than the result which has followed the editing of this
Gazette, It is only surprising that the community can sub-
mit to be insulted by an editorial oligarchy notoriously
known to be composed of some of the least respectable
portion of its members. It is impossible to fix with legal
certainty upon any one as the editor.


officers, and vaunting themselves as champions of
right against might, thej* have materially if not chief-
ly been the means of goading on the infuriated Malays
to their own [ ? undoing], as is usual with agitators.
Vilifications of the executive authorities were unspar-
ingly asserted to nullify every precautionary or pre-
ventive measure taken by them to arrest the hostile
movement.
If the names of those vain because ignorant self-
elected redressers of wrongs, real or imagined, were
made known, they would doubtless excite a smile of
pity or contempt.
The mercantile portion of the Penang community
( if not the latter generally) lives in a political horizon
which is confined to a small circumference by the
selfish interest of the hour. It is not many years ago
since they used to tremble at the thoughts of the
Siamese attacking Penang and it might not be difficult
again to put them into a similar panic. One might
have thought that peace would have been the watch-
word of the Straits merchant. But here they do not
see where their true interest lies, and unhappily the
native merchants at least, who are mostly temporary
residents, [and] care little either about the internal
welfare of the settlement or its external politics, make
money in any way that offers itself to them.
At one time we hear of nothing but ferocious,
blood-thirsty and treacherous Malays, but the wind of
profit shifting, the ear is saluted with the twaddle of
poor oppressed ryots, unfortunate, helpless, ignorant
Malays and so forth.
The contents of the Gazette were dispatched
weekly to the Malayan Chiefs in Keddah, and as
several influential gentlemen of this Island (not
Government officers) kept up a correspondence with
these men, and they heard themselves applauded by
every class of natives, these last were inclined to


believe that their cause was secretly approved of by the
British authorities—nor could after Proclamation do
away with this belief, more particularly as the law has
not attached specific penalties to the political offences
therein denounced.
The Siamese had been frequently warned to be on
their guard against the Malays. But six years having
elapsed since the attack of Kudin the Governor of
Keddah paid no attention to the advice given to him
by Captain Low. Instead of sending to Ligor for a
reinforcement of troops, he relied on the small dis-
persed Siamese parties he had in Keddah, not exceed-
ing 300 men in all, vainly confiding in those Malays
who had sworn fidelity to the Government of Siam for
assistance incase of an attack. A general laxity in
fact prevailed in the local Government. The garrison
of Keddah consisted of about 800 men only, and fell
therefore easily before the invaders.
In 1828 Tuanku Moharaed Saad, son of Tuanku
I)aad, who was half brother to the Ex Rajah’s father,
and Wan Mahomed ( or Mat Ally ) acting in concert
with the Ex Raja’s adherents, circulated a paper
throughout Province Wellesley inviting the ryots to
take up arms against the Siamese. The appeal was
effectual, and although every endeavour by proclama-
tion and otherwise was made to prevent a movement,
still the people flocked to join the standard of the
insurgents at the Muda [and] Marbow Rivers. A
partial reaction took place in May (1838) but Tuanku
Mahomed Saad Puteh, a brother of Tuanku Mahomed
Saad, still kept his footing at Kota on the Fry River,
and became the centre of the insurgents in that part
of Keddah.
The Siamese now felt the evil they had brought
on themselves by allowing the separate characters who
had fled from justice in Penang, to harbour on their
boundary at Muda River. It was deserved because


they had neglected the remonstrances made to them
on this point.
Tuanku Mahomed Saad, with about seven or eight
hundred men, now possesed himself of the whole
frontier line on the Siamese side of the British Terri-
tory, and prepared to penetrate to the heart of Keddah
by an attack from seaward. Tuanku Mahomed Saad
and Wan Mat Ali arrived with a fleet of boats at the
Marbow. The Siamese sent a force to oppose them,
which was driven back with loss.
About this period, Wan Mat Ali had full posses-
sion of the Lancavy Islands. It is however probable
that the attack upon Keddah would have been delayed
if the Raja of Ligor had been at Ligor, instead of
Bangkok.
Tuanku Mahomed Saad attacked the Keddah Fort
by sea on the 3rd August but was beaten back. Next
day the force under Tuanku Mahomed Taip (or Payeh)
approached on the land side. ( a ) The port at this
(a). Tuanku Mahomed Saad went with five hundred
men as his escort under Che Teh to negotiate in the first
instance with the Sangorean. In this way he waited forty
days and and returned unsuccessful to Keddah.
Tuanku Mahomed Taip then took the command of the
Malayan forces and advanced to the frontier of Piioong Po or
Tong Po, where, after much delay and very little fighting he
pushed on towards the sea port of Sangora. The Sango-
rians gradually falling back as lie advanced another force
under Wan Ha and Wan Mat pulaw was detached to sup-
port the detachment employed in the Siamese district of
Ghana, and there to form a junction with the disaffected
Patau people. It was intended that after having accomplish-
ed these objects this force should embark at the mouth of the
Patau river in boats and proceed by sea to assist Taip’s
army in reducing Sangora. This detachment was successful
excepting in the last mentioned attempt, but it did not get
any accession ofiPatan men as these people were afraid to join.
Meanwhile Tuanku Mahomed Taip’s force had invested
Sangora at the distance of six or seven miles from its walls.
But the Sangorians and Chinese made their position rather
uneasy by frequently assaulting it, nor could they gain an inch
of ground beyond their line of stockades,
Tuanku Mahomed Taip was about this time obliged to


time had a garrison of seventy Siamese troops only
and three hundred Malays. The latter did not at
first show any sign of defection nor until assailed by
the strongest possible motives for it. Unfortunately
the families of those auxiliaries were residing at
Thubang Ratan, a little way up the river, where they
fell into the hands of Taip. As the latter approached
the fort he placed all these people in front of his
advanced party, so as to expose them to the shot of the
garrison. By this means and before the Malays had
become aware of this detestable and inhuman measure,
three of the old men and to* women had been killed,
and many wounded. When the Malays became aware
of it they left the fort and joined Tuanku Mahomed
return to Keddah to detail a supply of ammunition.
The force from Ghana under Echee having joined Taip’s
at Sangora, the whole now consisted of about 4,500 men.
Still they were ultimately, after months of futile warfare,
compelled to break up and retreat precipitately, owing to the
Siamese army of Ligor having intercepted this retreat on
Keddah.
I have entered above into the details of the Malayan
campaigns as these may serve to show up and refute the gross
misrepresentations which, for party purposes, the Penang
Gazette has indulged in when adverting to Keddah affairs.
The Chiefs in Keddah, congratulating themselves on the
expected speedy fall of Sangora, being quite unaware that
the Ligurian’s troops had already crossed the Keddah frontier,
dispatched Seyd Hoassein with three hundred men to
augment the Sangorian’s army. But he had only reached the
distance of a march from the Ganoo, close to Keddah fort,
when he encountered the Siamese advance of one thousand
strong.
After a short resistance he and Wan Soo Haphim, an
inferior Chief, with thirty men were killed and the party was
dispersed.
The Siamese immediately attacked Aler Ganoo, the
central post in Keddah which, lying on the north bank of the
river, commands the chief communication with the interior.
This post was carried after a contest ol six hours. The loss
of this occasion was considerable on both sides.
The Chiefs Tuanku Mahomed Saat, Tuanku Abdulla,
Tuanku Tumamee and 'Tuanku Taip Puteh retreated and
shut themselves up with a few men in the Keddah Fort,
The Siamese advancediand carried the intrenchment of Sungei
Bharu and soon after became masters of the fort.


Taip. The Siamese left the fort during the ensuing
night, retreating in the direction of Purlis. The
Malays then took quiet possession. Chawsing, the
Siamese Governor, pushed into Sattool and from thence
to Daloong (the Bandelon of the maps). He however
established a small party of about 250 Siamese and
also 200 Malays who had not joined the insurgents.
Near the north boundary of Keddah, by concealing
themselves in the jungles, these men were able to
sally forth occasionally and to annoy the force under
Wan Wait Tap, consisting of about 500 men, which
had been sent to keep them in check.
The Mala} T an insurgents had been led to believe
that the Siamese were much stronger here than they
were ; the Siamese officers too did not scruple to keep
up the deception, and when brought by the Ligorian’s
agents to confer with the Honble. the Governor,
Mr. Bonham, they boldly affirmed that the Siamese
force in the vicinity of Trauy* was not under six
thousand strong and they could only account for their
inactivity by the evasion that they were waiting for
the arrival of the Raja of Ligor before attempting to
to retake Keddah.
The population of the Province of Keddah when
the Fort fell may be rated at about twenty thousand
persons ( a ) of all ages, but of this the insurgents
drew betwixt four and five thousand fighthing men,
and the Siamese betwixt two and three hundred.
To these first were added the contingent from Penang
and Province Wellesley so that the rebel force con-
sisted of seven thousand men at the outset, but of this
army there were eight hundred men employed in the
carriage of stores and otherwise as coolies and servants.
Perak sent five boats.
(a), This rate is the highest assigned by my native
informants. lam however inclined to rate the population
there at 10,000 only.


This force was disposed of as follows :
Keddah Fort under Tuanku Mahomed
Saad ... ... ... ... 400
Alar Gano Tuanku Mahomed Taip
Puteh ... ... ... 200
Purlis 150 Wan Mat Ally and Fleet . . 350
(Purlis and Trang were taken pos-
session of ten days after Keddah Fort
had fallen.)
Sattool Taip and Lungoo-Wan Keip
(or Mat Taip or Payeip) ... ... 500
Scattered parties at Muda River,
&ca., &ca. ... .. ... 300
Total troops in Keddah ... 1,750
Puteh also Panglima Behar and Tuan-
ku Jaffar Sangora Detachment ... 3,000
Ghana (Akil Echi) Do. ... 700
Patain Do. ... ... 550
Watching the Ligorian at Jangam
close ftol the Keddah frontier ... 1,000
5,250
Total ... 7,000
Perak contingent sent by Panglima
Bukit Gantang to Keddah 100 men in five
boats under Rajah Saman and Mat Tuanku
Bar and—
Do. sent to Patan from Perak 300
under Tuanku Muda Mer, father-in-law of the
Qrang Raja Besar Patain insurgents—Not
ascertained.
The grand total of the insurgent forces
would, including those of Patan and Perak
perhaps be about ... ... ... 10,000


The Siamese force which re-took Keddah con-
sisted of—
f The advance under Chow
Advance | Phiom Malak which took
i
■<{ [blank] consisted of 500
men, was at the frontier
[ with 1000 men ... 1,500
1,500
beyond Pho on
the East frontier never
Reserve en B*B ed 3,500
Do. of Bankok
1 troops at Sangora never
emplo3 r ed are rated at... 0,000
Total Siamese Force 11,000
About this period the Malays were or pretended
to be buoyed up by the hope that the Court of Siam
would allow the Malayan Government of Keddah to be
restored upon payment of an annual tribute. If in
earnest in this hope they adopted the very line of
conduct best calculated to dissipate it, by sending
emissaries to invite Patan people to rebellion against
Siam and the arraying of a large force on the Force*
of Sangora.
The Raja of Sangora had to gain time by pretend-
ing to intercede with the Chief of Siam for the Ex
Raja’s restoration.
The Raja of Sangora when he found that his own
province was thus unexpectedly invaded by the in-
surgents, endeavoured to gain time by encouraging
overtures from the Malays and holding out some vague
hopes of the nature alluded to. He
expected too, that by so doing the Malayan Chiefs
would fall into his power while thrown off their
guard.


But the Raja had reason to repent of his stratagem
( a ) for the Malayan Chiefs sent a party with the
intention of negotiating, and when they at length
discovered that they had little or no chance of succeed-
ing in this way they took advantage of their position
to attack Sangora.
It is highly improbable that the Siamese will ever
relinquish their sovereignty over Keddah unless com-
pelled [to] it by superior force. Should the Court of
Bankok ever be induced to deviate from the line of
policy it has so tenaciously preserved for the past
eighteen years it hardly can be doubted that it will
never while so doing place any bar in the way to an
after resumption of its delegated authority, when
jealousy of its neighbours, or cupidity may impel it.
Had the Malays confined their operations to Keddah
the Siamese might not have laid much stress on these,
however mischievous the result.
If that proud Court should retrace [its] policy so
far as to restore the Ex Raja or some one of his family
to the Government of Keddah it would certainly not
be out of any regard for either, and the insult put
upon the Siamese by the presumptuous invasion of
their integral Province of Sangora and also of Ghana
and Patan will not, it may be believed, be soon for-
gotten. Neither will the atrocities committed by
Tuanku Mahomed Saad on the Siamese prisoners be
left unrequited at some future period, while the rash
intermeddling of the Perak Malays in the contest may
help to increase their implacability.
The Siamese have not as yet remonstrated on this
invasion of Lower Siam by the Malays of Penang. It
must be, however, a sore subject with them.
Had the Malays confined their operations to
Keddah the indignation of the Siamese Court would
not have been by any means excessive.
(a). It is believed that the Rajah of Sangora did
submit that case to Siam but not as the Malays desired.


Keddah has been nearly ruined by these invasions
which she has sustained, and the frequent drains cnher
population which have succeeded them. For Siam,
therefore, her deepest policy and the one she is likely
to adopt would be to restore the Malayan rule until
time as that population should have returned or
have been recruited and the resources of the country,
so injured by the late ravages, should have been reesta-
blished, and then suddenly to resume the direct
•control, on one of the numerous pleas or pretences
which it would take care to have ever ready at hand,
or b} r taking-advantage of one of the many openings
which Malayan ignorance and presumption could not fail
to afford in course of time, so that the last condition of
'the Malays would be worse than the first unless indeed,
■and this seems to be very improbable, it should league
with them against the British. If Keddah should be
restored in concert with the British Government the
latter can only mediate for the best conditions which
a tributary can make with its real superior and
master.
Were the above not the policy which should
actuate the Siamese, it can hardly however be expected
-that while the British hold their Straits possession the
Court of Bankok will feel disposed to treat with the
Malays singly. A guarantee would doubtless be
'required or asked of the former foi the performance bj'
the Malays of such conditions as might be stipulated
for, while the Keddah Malays might expect a similar
guarantee for their being allowed to retain peaceable
.possession of that country.
Were such to be acceded it might be doubtful
if the British Government would not at some future
period be obliged to take a more direct interest,
and interfere more openly in Siamese affairs, as
regarded Keddah, than had ever before been forced
on it by circumstances or at least might be con-
venient.


It is not easy for any one who has studied' the-
Malayan character to help entertaining the belief that
no dependence can be put on it for the preservation of
the external peace of that province were it returned to
the Malays. Even admitting that Keddah, if returned)
to the Ex Rajah's family, might not involve itself with
the Siamese, yet what security could be given for ite
internal peace. The Ex Raja must probably pay the
debt of nature. His eldest son, Abdulla, is weak and
addicted to opium, and the other base, although less-
weak, would still be the tool were he to succeed, in the-
hands of his Chiefs.
The other branches-of that family are numerous,
and they mostly all [have] been educated in dissipated,,
if not piratical haßits.
When these jealous or ambitious schemes should
have distracted Keddah it might be no easy matter to
prevent their giving umbrage in a thousand ways to
the Siamese nation, which would still closely hem
them in upon the north and east. The Malays of [theJ
present Malayan States are lit for little else than
plunder. Fond too of strong, yefe shortened excite-
ment, they are too often the children ot caprice and
passion ; devoid of steady purposes and of confidence
Further Abstract Account of the Keddah War.
Trmnku Mahomed Saat being’ induced to believe that
he might be able to persuade the Siamese to let the Ex Raja
return to Keddah went with Che Teh to negotiate with the
Sangora Raja.
He had five hundred men with him. On reaching the
frontier of that Province he sent on Che Teh to prepare for
bis reception, but the former was not permitted to pass
beyond Mam Nae. Tuanku Mahomed Saad remained forty
days at Jamgarn in that province in fruitless attempts to
gain his point. Raja Sai and Blat Chai, who came on the
part of the Sangora Chief, were too practised diplomatists
not to take advantage of the disregard which tlie Malays
showed for a time to gain so valuable an accessory to the
ulterior operations of the Ligorians.
Tuanku Mahomed Saad therefore returned to Keddah
and Tuanku Mahomed Taip advanced from that place to the
Sangora frontier at Phoong-Pho with a force of three thou


in themselves, the general mass of the people is ever
apt to become a ready but temporary instrument or
tool in the hands of some reckless plotter or frenzied
fanatic.
It is to be feared too, if we may judge from
experience, that any quarrel which the Malays might
get up with the Siamese or vice verm would find
plenty of supporters, as they have ever found, in the
Straits Settlements on the Malayan side—who would
rejoice to see a break betwixt the Siamese and English.
The Court of Bankok, should it yield so far as to
recall the Ex Rajah, might as a matter of right claim
the ten thousand dollars per annum now paid to him
by the British Government, by virtue of the original
Malayan treaty, the Siamese being de jure the rulers
of Keddah.
Their right to Keddah has been recognised by the
English Government and it is based on a supremacy
o
exerted over that country before Keddah was taken
completely under direct management by the Siamese.
Snbsennently to the Ex Raja’s expulsion the sura
alluded to was paid to the Ex Raja ( then Raja)
by the British Government, without alluding to or
acknowledging his relations with Siam. For as 1 have
before noticed, when the Treaty just alluded to was
made the then Raja studiously kept the fact out of
sight or rather denied it. But the Treaty of Bankok
tacitly admits the light of the British to hold Renang
and its dependency on the opposite coast, and this with-
out any advertence to the treaty of Sir George Leith.
sand Malays (a). The Sangora force soon after arrived
at Sidda, hast or [a] short way from Phoong-Pho, where
the Chiefs of the two parties reciprocated civilities and had
several conferences, which ended in mutual distrust. Phang-
linia Berar was then in charge of the advance. The Sangora
troops were nearly equal in numerical strength to the Malays.
Pa). These remained in Keddah, Tnanku Mahomed Saad,
Tuauku Abdulla, Mahomed Taip and Tnanku Mahomed Sinawi.


Both Mr. Crawford and Capt.
Burney continually avoided
mooting this subject being
aware that the Siamese had
claimed Penang once as a
dependency of Siam.
But the case would be now altered. The Keddah
tribute would virtually be paid by the British Govern-
ment either directly or indirectly. The Ex Raja, if so
reinstated could have no legal claim to such tribute,
for this was stipulated for when he professed himself
independent of Siam and was given under the belief
that he was so, by the British Government, when Sir
George Leith made the Treaty with him. But that
Treaty has been annulled by the Treaty of Bankok, in
as much as the latter recognised the right of the
Emperor of Siam to possess Keddah, and if this be the
case, and the Siamese do not give up that right, then
the British Government could not negotiate directly
with the Ex Raja, or any other Malayan [or] other
Chief who might be placed in authority in Keddah by
the firman of the Court of Bankok,
. ]t is not easy to foretell what stress
ird and Capt. J
iiiy avoided that haughty Court, notwithstanding all
bject b ® ,n 9 lessons it has had, might put at
Siamese had . ° r
once as a some future day on the fact of tribute or
am * quit rent, being paid in the manner alluded
to. This would not certainly (with reference merely
to the relative strength of the British and Siamese), be
a matter of much moment, and the Treaty of Bankok
and subsequent agreement with the Raja of Ligor
which is based on that Treaty, may be thought suffi-
cient acknowledgment of the right of the British to
But as about one hundred Patau men, whose fidelity could
not be depended upon, were against the number, the Sangora
Commanders prepared to retreat. It appears that on the
insurrection breaking out in Keddah the Pa tan Chiefs sub-
ject to and holding offices of Siam, were called to Sangora,
which gave the old and disaffected Chiefs an opportunity of
which several availed themselves of aiding the Keddah rebels.
Rajah Muda and Me Kong joined the Siamese with one
thousand men, but the latter soon deserted and left these
Chiefs behind them.
The two hostile forces now stockaded themselves
opposite each other and made warlike demonstrations for
several days.
The Siamese at length, under their General Chom


possess Penang and Province Wellesley. But the
Siamese, although they may appear to moderate their
pretensions, may not be supposed on that account to
have altogether abandoned them.
It can scarcely be expected that the Malays and
Siamese will ever be friends at heart. Religion, were
there nothing else, will always be a stumbling block in
the way of this unless, which is highly improbable,
the Siamese should become Mussulman. The feeling
of the Siamese towards the Malays is one of mixed
distrust and contempt, while the feelings of the latter
towards the former are chiefly’ t hose of fear and hatred,
tempered with a distrust of themselves.
The whole history of Keddah since the British
occupation of Penang sufficiently proves these posi-
tions, and points moreover to the fact that to bring on
a war betwixt the British and the Siamese was always
a primary object with its rulers and perhaps nothing
but the reiterated injunctions of the Siamese Govern-
ment to the former Straits Government, averted that
event.
It might not be difficult to anticipate the results
to the Settlement of Prince of Wales Island which
might or would be induced by the restoration of the
Malayan rule in Keddah. It can be hardly doubted
that the former would lose a portion of its population,
Soorin, attacked the Malays wlio where them headed by
Panglima Besar. But the Patan troops declining to tight
with vigor the Siamese were forced back. The Malays lost
nine men killed and had five wounded by one account but by
another account, which seems most correct, 17 Malays were
killed and ten wounded, and three Siamese were killed.
The Malays at this juncture had been reinforced by the
parties which were in the rear under Tuanku Mahomed Taip,
Tuanku Mahomed daffer and Tuanku Mahomed Sriva,
amounting to two thousand one hundred men, so that the
united force was about 3,000 Malays of Keddah and a few
irregulars of Patau, of little account.
When the Siamese were retreating they fell into an
ambush laid by the Malays by which they lost thirty men,


not merely Malayan, the worst part of which might
well be spared, but Chinese, the most industrious
class and the best payers of revenue. The population
of the Settlement is yet far from having reached to
the point when a drain to it would be advantageous, on
the contrary it could well admit a large access to its
numbers. A diminution therefore of the population
would likely affect to a certain degree the prosperity
of the colony and the revenue of the State.
The trade of Keddah was never deserving of
mention after the cession of Penang, and it is not likely
to be ever revived to such an extent as to render it an
object to the merchant. The trade of that country,
which was never much, has centred in Penang ever
since the act of cession and will there continue to
centre. The concentrated and protected population too
of a British Settlement is much more to gain a
taste for, and to consume more British manufactures
than one which is dispersed over a wide space, which
looks not beyond securing the barest supply of food
and clothing and whose slavish subjection to despotic
rule blocks up every avenue to improvement in taste,
arts or morals.
The present population raises supplies for the
station and shipping and renders them independent of
the neighbouring petty States.
A reduction in the quantity and enhanced price of
such supplies might be expected to follow a diminution
Chom Soorin stockaded himself at Langavi where he
continued twenty days, contesting the advance of the Malayan
force. At the end of that time Raja Tai arrived with a force
of three thousand Patan men and informed the Malayan
Chiefs that the Raja of Sangora desired to negotiate. Chom
Soorin being thus relieved instantly retreated, leaving Sai in
charge of the stockade.
The Malayan Chiefs now detached a force to the Siamese
district of Chana in order to co-operate with a detachment
which had been sent there from Keddah a month previous
under the command of one of their Chiefs in order to gain
further delay.


in the number of the working classes, and the deficiency
would require to be drawn from Keddah, thus render-
ing Penang again in a measure dependent as in former
times on that country, supposing always that the
latter had recovered herself, and making it liable to
have its supplies cut off by any disturbance there, or
political misunderstandings elsewhere.
It would be strange if the Malays should not
have been improved by their long residence under
British rule. Any advantages therefore which superior
civilisation may have conferred would be lost, and the
Malay would revert to his former lawless condition,
and Penang would be infested with a roving, vagrant
population, vacillating between it and Keddah, Thus
it would have to begin its education anew, while crime
would have increased.
Keddah too would be a convenient asylum for
desperate men, and for the piratical boats which come
up the Straits in search of bird nests.
It seems very probable if not certain that the
Court of Bankok considers that [the] British Govern-
ment is more inclined to favour the Malays than Siam.
It could hardly fail to be of this opinion when pressed
on its notice by the Straits Journals, which find their
way to Siam and are read to the Courtiers or explained
to them by others.
Raja Sai now opened a negotiation with Tnanku Maho-
med Taip with the view of further delaying his advance, but
the latter only took so far the advantage of it as to endeavour
to surprise the Siamese garrison. He accordingly sent Haji
Tomalli with a flag of truce and three hundred men on
pretence of holding a conference with Raja Sai. Much rain
fell which defeated the plot this time. But soon after the
Ligurian sent a second time. This excited Sai’s suspicions
who threatened to stab Haji Tomalli, The latter arose from
the conference and striking down with his elbow Mekan
Sibber, a man of influence with Sai's party, departed quickly
from the stockade.
Raja Sai fled on the ensuing night to Bindong Dilong
and joined Tuvins’ force. The Malayas pursued in two


The Siamese have not yet been able through the
despotic atmosphere which envelopes them to foresee
any just conception of the licence or liberty of the
subject as opposed to the wishes of his Government-
It is to be feared therefore, that the licence of the
press may be confounded, in the untaught mind of the
Siamese politicians, with the spirit of the counsels of
the British Government in India.
Were an) 7 proposition for the restoration of the Ex
Raja to be made to it, therefore, by the British
Government that suspiciotis and wary Court might
expect concessions [ in ] return.
It is well known that any concessions which have
been yielded to the British by that Court have been
granted with an ill dissembled reluctance, while the
Americans, who have had no difficulties arising from
proximity of territorial boundaries to contend with ?
have been enabled to conclude a mercantile treaty on
more favourable terms than those which have been
conceded to the British nation.
The Court of Bankok it may by supposed will not
readily forego the advantages it derives from the
Treaty of 1826.
parties, which seems to have been their usual order of march
or pursuit. Each was a considerable way apart. The first
consisting of 1,500 men was led by Tuanku Mahomed diva,
Tuanku Jafter, and the second of similar strength by Tuanku
Mahomed Taip. The first column reached Pri, while Raja
Sai retreated on Tha Ta abat, a ferry on a river of that
name.
The Malays pushed on to Oampong Nior where they
destroyed a small brick Buddhist temple. In this they found
some small gold and silver images and the model of a ship
in silver, but all of little value
At Pangla the Malays were arrested in their march for
six weeks by the Siamese, but there was little or no fighting
and only casualities by death on the Malayan side. The
Malayan troops then broke ground and tried to out flank the
Siamese position. But the latter gave ground.
At Tha Too Oobat the Siamese army made a stand.
Tuanku Mahomed Taip obliged them to take up a position


The times have so altered since then that much
which the Treaty contains could be now spared. Were
the Ex Raja to be restored by the Siamese the
obligations of the Treaty as regards that Chief would
probably cease.
It is these obligations alone which cause the
•distractions in Keddah to be at all felt in Penang, as
they have been by creating opposition in the minds of
the people.
But even if the Treaty just spoken of did not
exist still there would be difficulty in securing the
public peace arising from other sources.
There is international law to be considered. For
if armies of three or four thousand men or upwards
should periodically march from the British territory to
invade the Siamese Provinces, the right of retaliation
could hardly be denied to the Siamese. Fear with
them might for a time prevent open war betwixt them
and the British but they would nevertheless annoy
the trader to these parts and bring on a restless posi-
tion of affairs along the extensive mutual frontiers.
The Siamese have regained Keddah and if they
hold it, it will* we may believe be retained as a
point of honor. The Malays will doubtless con-
tinue to make periodical attacks on that country.
on the south bank of the river. Here after skirmishing for
some days the Siamese again retreated. The Malays losi
three men only, at this ferry ; the ardour of both parties
therefore could not have been great. Their great champion
in all these affairs was Tuanku Snad who was subsequently
killed in Keddah and but for whose prowess there would have
been no fighting by the Malays except in self defence.
Tha Too Oobat is the chief ford or ferry on the route
betwixt Sangora and Keddah. In the dry season the river
is fordable to foot passengers, boats of about four coy ans
burden can pass up to Kapanu
The Siamese having retreated ithe Malays descended
along the banks of the river Too Obat. Tuanku Mahomed
Taip took the north and Panglirna Pro re and To Druman
the south bank. Tuanku Mahomed Iriva brought up the


and if tlie Siamese do nob either keep a strong gar-
rison there, which it is rather doubtful if they will,
or colonize it by several thousand of their own race,-
which they perhaps cannot do without a sacrifice-
incommensurate with the hoped for advantage, they
will be liable to reverses such as they have hitherto-
experienced. If Siam is determined to prevent them,
then the Malays can never be strong enough to per-
manently regain Keddah. Their Chiefs too by their
impolitic harshness towards the Malays who followed
them in their late enterprise have in a great measure
quenched the zeal of the latter, and might not find so
many flock to aid them again in attacking the Siamese.
They still give out however that they intend again
attacking Keddah and that they are remaining in
Perak for the purpose. If the Perak people were not
justly suspected of pusillanimity they might be incited
to hostility against the Siamese in Keddah and thus a
double war would ensue which would only end by
extending the Siamese possessions to the north bound-
ary of Salengore. This small chieftainship would
soon fall also, and leave the Siamese contiguous with
the Malacca territory on the northern boundary of the
country.
The Perak Raja or his chief men rather, since
they are the real soldiers of authority, has or have
committed* the country with the Siamese, for in the
rear. Tiie Siamese having reformed at a- place called Ban*
Kachai, Tnanku Mahomed Taip followed and had an affair
with the- former in which lie lost twelve men, while the
Siamese had only three wounded. The Samese finally fell
hack to Pukit Arrak Gajar, a hill lying about several miles-
from Sangora The Malayan force was now about 1,500
able bodied men But ammunition began to fail the troops
and this compelled Tnanku Mahomed Taip to return to
Keddali for a supply, but he did not return.
The Malays now established a line of nine stockades
stretching from near the shore of Me Nam Nor on their left,
to Bukit Arrak Gajar. Beyond this Panglima Echee, who*
had arrived from Ghana, entrenched his Malays consisting of
],200 men. This investing did not embrace operations by
water which their means did not admit of.


first instance as before noticed, the Chief on the coast,
Panglima Paukit Gantong sent five armed boats to
join Tuanku Mahomed Saad an Keddah. These boats
were placed in charge of Raja Soman Mat To 800 and
Che Meen and the Tuanku Mahomed Maider Mer,
the father in law of the Orang Raja Besar, one of the
Ministers of Perak, marched into the Patan country
and joined the insurgents, who were under the com-
mand of Wan Saliak and Wan Mat Malow.
The Siamese are highly offended at the asylum
which the rebel chiefs have formed in Penang for their
persons and for the plunder of Keddah, and it can
hardly be denied that when this fact is added to those
facts just related and advertence is had to the Treaty
of Bangkok they have good reasons for being so. They
have, too, manifested a coldness since the recovery of
Keddah quite the reverse of that displayed after the
discomfiture of Kudin in 1831, and I feel persuaded
that nothing can prevent them taking speedy veng-
eance on the Perak Country but the fear of offending
the British Government, which they consider to be on
the side of the Malays. The Siamese could take
Perak at any time with one thousand men, or even
much fewer, for they can always rely on internal
treachery there as in former days.
These stockades or rather breastworks were about five to
eight feet high and composed of felled fruit and other tiees and
materials of demolished houses. The arrangement was thus—
-1 Panglima Besar
2 Tuanku daffer
3 Tuanku Syad
4 Tuanku Syed
5 Tuanku Mahomed Taip.
fi Paglima Proree
7 To Lela
8 Panglima Take
9 Panglima Echee
Siamese Entrenchments.
Chinese ... ... ... 500
Patan, Malays and Siamese 2,000
i
2,500


Arms.
At the beginning of the war
the insurgents had about GOO
muskets, latterly they had
about 1,200 besides.
The chief, if not the only palpable advantage, to
counterbalance the disadvantage of the measure which
the British could gain from the restoration of the Ex
Raja’s family would probably be the getting rid of the
obligations contained in the 13th article of the Treaty
of Bangkok. Were it not for these, the distractions
in Keddah would hardly be felt in Penang. It would
indeed be most desirable that the public peace in the
vicinity of this trading position should be preserved,
but the difficulty of finding sufficient security for this
would be considerable.
If the obligations alluded to could be got rid of in
any way, leaving the Malays and Siamese to settle
their own disputes as they best might, there would
still remain the perplexing task of preventing British
subjects engaging in the wars or politics of Keddah
and Siam and so leading to misunderstandings with
the latter.
Keddah has now again reverted to the Siamese
rule, but if the Emperor does not encourage a Siamese
population which perhaps cannot be spared from Siam,
or does not keep an adequate military lorce in the
country, a matter involving some but no great expense,
it hardly can be doubted that the Malays will make
periodical plundering attacks on Keddah. That thev
will ever hold permanent possession of that tract by
The Chinese of Sandora having formed counter works
sent a party and manfully stormed the entrenchments of
Pangliiua Poosee in the left of the line with five hundred
men. They had hut few muskets and they advanced with
their long pikes or Tat in hand covered by high moveable
shields or screens of plank. They here drove back the Malays
with some loss, lint the latter regained the position soon
after. They had arrived in toj es by the Me
gof the war Mam Nae from Sangora. These * returned and
d about goo remained entrenched opposite to the Malayan
r they had line. The Malays here stood on the defensive
>s. and repulsed several other attempts to break their
line. So close did the Chinese (who were about 500 men)
approach, that they actually spiked some of the Malayan wall
pieces. During those and other minor affairs the Chinese
lost t’.iiity n on and the Malays about a hundred.


force of arms in face of the power of Siam seems to he
impossible. It is even to be supposed that the Malays
of Penang will not be so eager to enter into the views
of their chiefs, who can only have, if any, a moral
authority over them, because they have been greatly
distressed by the extreme severities practised towards
them by their chiefs.
But to return to the operations in Sangora, the
whole column (if such term can be applied to a rabble
Malayan army ) pursued the Sangoriahs to Tharam,
where they had stockaded themselves, and having
driven them out of that place, they pushed onwards to
Ta Oobat where the Sangorians kept them at bay for
a month.
The Siamese force was here joined by a Patan one
of 1000 men under Raja Sai but it was still forced* to
Nam Noe. The party under Wan Tha and Wan Mat
Pulowe now marched to Ghana, the villages of which
they first plundered and next the town which lies on the
Ghana river, about a tide up from the sea. The Chinese
and Siamese inhabitants fled to Sangora, and the Bud-
dhist priests took refuge in the hills. The Malays
The Malays had no cannon and the Sangorians only
fired occasionally from three gnus of different calibre,
Tnanku Iriva’s party suffered most. The Malays kept on
the defensive during the whole of his siege, when their only
chance of success, if indeed they had even a chance, depended
on the most prompt and forward movements. But the
mass of the Malays desired plunder without having to
fight for it, and finding that none was likely to be had on
such terms they were only kept in the ranks by a dread of
the cruelty of their chiefs. Their chiefs claimed the lion’s
share of plunder, leaving little or nothing to their humble
followers.
The Malayan force during its route through the Sangora
country sacked and burned down the villages and destroyed
the temples. Tuanku Mahomed Taip destroyed about thirty
of the latter and promised the plunder of the two great
pagodas of Anak Oaja to his men, but they could not be
reached but through the Sangorian lines. Very little plunder
was obtained. Several large idols formed of tin were melted
down and carried off. Some buried property belonging to a
Chinese at Wat Mai Nor, the extreme left of the position


having sacked and burnt the town and pagodas (about
ten in number ) left the vicinity ; the images which
they found in the temples and carried off were formed of
tin —these the} 7 melted down into bars. Thence they
proceeded to Ootah Bharoo and finally reached Kwalla
Buka the mouth of the Patau River. Here the leaders
hoped to be able to get boats to convey their force to
the attack of Sangora, in which expectation they were
disappointed.
Tuanku Mahomed Taip’s force of 4,200 men ad-
vanced and invested the town of Sangora, which is a
thriving mercantile Siamese port peopled chiefly by
Chinese. This town being open to the sea the Malays
could only partial!} 7 invest it. For this purpose they
built [?]eleven small stockades within a mile of the
town, which they vainly hoped to plunder. After they
had been about months in this inactive state, the
Sangorians, who had purposely abstained from inter-
rupting their invaders until they should have been
better prepared, went out against them with a force of
five hundred Chinese and two thousand Siamese and
Malays and drove the enemy from their vaunted fron-
tier with considerable loss.
The Malays lost about 150 men during the whole
operations in the Sangora country. The loss on the
Siamese side was probably less, although the Malays
rated it, as might be expected, very high.
was got by Tuanku Mahomed Taip, the eyes of a large image
of Buddha which sat between a tree directing, as the Malays
affirm, to the spot. Thus then, deprecating as he does, idol
worship and disbelieving as he does, or avers, the agency of
idols, the Malay here snperstitiously gives them credit for
intrusion. Some Musselmans believe that such idols are
animated by devils to deceive mankind. The above statement
was taken from the mouth of a Malay who was present
Amongst other things the Malays carried off thirty elephants
from the Sangora Province and sent two hundred Siamese
prisoners to Keddah besides women and children. The
former were massacred in cold blood, the two latter were
carried away as slaves by the Chiefs.


Tuankn Mahomed Taip Puteh, and Syed Hoosseiu
left the camp on a visit to Keddah to attend a festival,
leaving Tuankn Mahomed Iriva in command. All this
time it should seem that these chiefs had no correct
intelligence of the movements of the Raja of Ligor.
That wily chief saw his advantage, for by this mad
expedition to Sangora the Malays had left Keddah
with a slender force for its defence, and had exposed
the Sangora one to have its retreat cut off.
Before either force therefore was aware of it the
Sangorian* troops were pouring into Keddah.
Byed Hossein was on his march back to Sangora
with a party of 300 men when he encountered, most
unexpected!}-, the Siamese advance at a place a day’s
march east of Alor Gaud. That Chief and an inferior
one named Wan Soo Hashim with thirt} 7 Malays were
killed and the rest fled.
The Siamese immediately attacked Alor Gaud on
the Keddah river, which from its favourable and com-
manding position on the river is deemed the next post
to that Fort in consequence, and after a contest of
about six hours, got. possession of it.
The walls of Sandora, which are made of brick and are
12'feet high, were within view of some parts of the Malayan
line. Thirty elephants were taken by the Malays. Tuankn
Mahomed Iriva’s column suffered most.
The Raja of Rangorn had now fully accomplished his
part of the manoeuvres for the recovery of Keddah. lie had
found that the Malays were not even eager to light and that
the bulk were only kept together by fear of their overbearing
chiefs. It is reported that the latter urged them on not only
with the lash but steel. The Malays sent about 200 Siamese
prisoners to Keddah,
The Raja of Ligor sent a party to create an alarm in
the rear of the Malayan line, and it immediately proceeded
towards Keddah, leaving all confusion and dismay within
their lines. Having thus fully completed his arrangements
the vaunting Malays found that Keddah had been almost
regained from Tuankn Mahomed Saad and that a body of
2,000 Siamese was on their line of retreat. All was now
confusion and rout, each chief trying to escape as he best
could, so that after losing a number of men in the retreat the


The Siamese now pressed on Towards the Fort
into which had gone the chiefs, Tttanku Mahomed
Saat Abdullah, Tttanku Mahomed Tinnawi and Tuankti
Mahomed Taip Puteh. The day after they had so
shut themselves up the Siamese attacked the breast-
work at the watering place at Soongie Bharoo and
carried it, and Panghula Setam, who defended it, fell
back to the Fort. By this blow the Malays were
deprived of fresh water, as the wells within the Fort
are very brackish and the river is here mixed with
salt water, while a salt marsh and mangroves extend
around.
The facility with which the Siamese gained all
these advantages supplies the best possible commen-
tary on [the] alleged ability of the Malays to contend
with Siam.
The Siamese next advanced to Kotah Janah, an
earthen breastwork within a few hundred yards of the
Fort. The Malayan Chiefs had by this time ordered
all the women, old men and children to fly to Penang,
which they did in small boats and by land. But many
whole force dwindled down to a few hundred men who got
into Keddah ; the rest fled into Penang and Province
Wellesley.
Each returned by Ghana and reached Province
Wellesley.
Ghana Patan.
Ghana is a Siamese District adjoining on the south the
province of Sangora. The population may be about five,
thousand persons scattered about in hamlets. The Chief
resides at Ghandong, where there are about a dozen houses,
which is distant about one tide from the sea. In the first
instance the Chiefs Echi and Akil went from Keddah to
Ghana with 180 picked men, and attacking the small
villages or hamlets in detail soon forced the inhabitants to
retreat to Sangora. The houses were burned down and the
pagodas of Nawa Cheng and Takoa Thap were destroyed in
a fit of religious zeal.
At Chindong the Siamese Chief with a few followers
made a show of resistance for the sake of escaping in the
night which he effected.
The Malays had been here about a month when they
were joined by seven hundred more men from the Keddah
force under Che Mini and *


were so weak by the cruel detention they had met
with, and the scarcity of proper food that they died by
the way. The Siamese had previously proclaimed that
these people would be protected, and doubtless had
they been left to their own choice they might have
remained. But humanity made no part of Mahomed
Saat’s policy. His object was not the happiness of
these poor people but to leave to the Siamese a
*
depopulated country.
Tuanku Mahomed Abdullah and the other Chiefs
allowed their men to disperse, and sending a sampan
or canoe with two fishermen in it out of the river,
which easily evaded the frigate, thej r got into it at a
neighbouring creek, and soon after reached Purlis.
It was now resolved to make one more attempt to
regain the Fort. Intelligence was therefore quickly
sent to the Sangora force to return to Alor Ganoo.
It should seem that the Patan column had dis-
persed even although it had been reinforced by 300
Perak Malays under To Muda Mer, the father in law
of the Orang Kya Besar, a Minister ot the Perak State.
The latter by this act, and by having also allowed
•Jaffer, a desperate character, to join Tuanku Mahomed
Saad with five boats at Keddah, has, it is to be feared,
given to the Siamese the means it they choose to avail
themselves ot it of again asserting their influence in
Perak.
The Sangora column ot (J.OOO men, before it had
well entered Keddah had melted away to a few
hundred men. This party marched to Jiram, a place
lying betwixt Keddah and Purlis, where it was soon
after joined by the detachment under Tuanku
Mahomed Saad .and Man Ally who brought up that
portion of the Malayan force which had been left to
protect Keddah and keep the Siamese parties at Sangora
in check. The force was thus now again increased to
100 U men. It quickly advanced on Alor Ganoo, where


Mat All did no* fight
much as his object was to
let Tuanku Mahomed Saad
get time to cscapo. He kept
therefore af a little dis-
tance gradually drawing off
the Siamese.
it was foolishly divided into two parties. Mali cured
Ally with his men invested that post on the north
bank, while Tuanku Mahomed Saad, seconded by
Tuanku Mahomed Taipand Tuanku Mahomed Sinnawi
and Panglima Pooree and Tuanku Dieva with his men
occupied posts on the opposite bank of the Keddah
river.
The Siamese speedily attacked both columns con-
secutively but chiefly the latter position, and forcer!
the Malays of both to disperse, the Chiefs flying in the
direction of Province Wellesley.
i*o* fight The next clay the Siamese continued
ect was to a tfc ao k on Mat Ali first, which was
>med Saad
». He kept defended- ur>til night by that Chief, as he
httie dis- wag „ ot aW are of what had taken place on
drawing off
the opposite bank of the river. He their
retreated during the night en route to Purlis, a
district of Keddah, north of the Fort. In his progress
he devastated the face of the country, forced the un-
happy population out of their houses and then burned
them to- the ground, and this before time had been
given them to save all their property, and then ordered
them- to leave Keddah and proceed to Penang.
The same scenes were repeated at Purlis, which
was reduced to ashes. Thus the people who were
living quietly and who were ready and willing to sub-
mit to the Siamese rule werd cruelly driven from
their houses and exposed, not only to a further loss of
property, but of life, in effecting or trying to effect a
journey or passage to Penang. It imiy here be asked
[whether] the Siamese in their utmost wantonness
ever visited these unfortunate people with a severer
infliction. Certainly not. It seems that many of
these oppressed people have tied to Batter Bhara as
well as to Penang.
Tuanku Abdullah was now conveyed from a con-
cealed creek called Qualla Pooryah beyond the
blockading vessels and placed in safety in the Lancavy


Tuanku Mahomed Saad
was believed to have got
10,000 dollars in goods and
cash.
• Sic. ? when th
v ere forced by.
Islands. He delivered himself up to the Honble. Mr.
Bonham soon after.
iomed saad It believed that much plunder was
n° goods and conveyed in this Chief’s vessels besides
captive Siamese women and children.
The country now remained fully in the possesion of
the Siamese.
The Malayan Chiefs fled to Perak and other distant
places.
Thus after all the silly vaunting of the Ex Raja’s
Chiefs, and the echoing to it of their allies in Penang,
the Malays may be said to have scarcely made a single
stand after the Siamese entered Keddah, and to have
scarcely exhibited any pugnacious symptoms except-
'!/ ing on occasions were* they for the Siamese*. By
their own admission they had eight thousand men in
all under arms, yet they have allowed a thousand
Siamese to drive them like a flock of sheep out of
Keddah. This would not probably have been the
case had not plunder been the only object of the
Malayan invasion of Keddah. Pro patria mori was
the boast of the Chiefs at the outset, the cover to
cowardice and every atrocity in the end.
Tuanku Mahomed Saad, when he fled from Alor
Canoo, occupied the north frontier of Province
Wellesley for about a fortnight and until the Siamese
approached. Here he seized the cattle which the
emigrants were bringing from Keddah, and although
he had levied a duty on them at Keddah he forced
them again to give up 20 per cent of the cattle, which
he immediately sold to people of Penang. He also
seized all the arms belonging to these refugees. He
ended by flying to Perak with his plunder.
Tuanku Mahomed Saad during this rebellion put
several hundred prisoners to death in cold blood and
in some Instances in the most inhuman modes, and he
cut off, on slight suspicions, the heads of many of his


• Sir.
• blank.
* There appears to
he an omission
here.
The cries of these wretch-
ed men, mixed with the yells
of the demoniacal Malays
were distinctly, as Captain
Warren assured me, heard on
board his vessel.
own people, besides being the cause of 2,000 Malays
having been killed in the contest. He has since
CJ
given out that he has repented of his behaviour to his
followers and that he will adopt a mild line of conduct
in future expeditions. So fickle is the Malay that he
may probably forget his present disgust should the
standard of rebellion be again hoisted in Keddah.
The atrocities which the veracious Penang Gazette
proclaimed had been committed by the Siamese on the
Malays during the war, have [ been ] full} 7 and
satisfactorily refuted by evidence before the Grand
Jury at Penang, not that such a Jury had any right to
enter into such a subject, but it was as well it did to
satisfy the public for and other* evidence. But the
cry of the * was intended to distract the public
mind from the true track and to drown the voices which
were ready to denounce the villanies and atrocious acts
of the Malayan Chiefs in Keddah, not only towards
their prisoners but towards their own people. The
Chief Tuanku Mahomed Saat killed in cold blood the
following prisoners—
Blat Chi, a Siamese Chief of Sangora, who, fell
by accident into his hands* of Patau Yukkabat the late
iese wretch- giamese Chief officer at Muda River and
cai Malays his two young children. These children
as captain were about six or seven years old ; they
ne, heard on . , , . . ...
[camej to visit me and behaved with
great propriety. They had previously forced him to
become by the usual rites a Mussulman and put him
as driver of a gang of ironed Siamese prisoners, who
were working on the road near the Keddah Fort.
The whole of tin’s gang of 120 Siamese were put
to death at the same time and the cries and noise
attendant on this most savage massacre was heard, I
have been informed by an officer of His Majesty’s Ship
Hyacinth, on board of that vessel.
Khoon Seet, another Siamese Chief of Trang ( a
place which, although never a part of Keddah, the


Malays took) and many inferior Siamese prisoners
who were captured at various times at Trang, Sangora,
Ghana and Patan, were all inhumanly slaughtered in
cold blood.
A Bengal man named Hassan Ally, formerly a
Sepoy in the Penang Local Corps, having foolishly
joined the Malays, was latterly accused, falsely it is
said, of some treasonable intent, and when the Siamese
were approaching the Fort, Tuanku Mahomed Saad
called him and said that as his heart was false it should
be exposed. They ripped him down from hence to
the abdomen and then threw him out behind the Port
where he lay in torture until death relieved him in
about eight hours after.
Malayan Statements
Malays Killed.
At Qualla Hilda ... ... ... ... 1
~ Marbow ... ... ... ... 5
~ Keddah ... ... ... 75
„ Purlis ... ... ... ... 7
„ Sattool ... ... ... ... 160
dangam ... ... ... ... 40
„ Sangora 180
~ Patau ... ... ... ... 120
~ Margano and other places ... ... GO
Desultory—vizt.—Deaths at sea. in camp
&ca. Including women and children ... 200
Total 958
Malayan Accounts of Siamese losses.
At Muda River, Marbow and Keddah ... ... 197
„ Purlis 117
~ Sattool ... ... ... ... ... 250
r> Tnmg 55
„ Jangam no
~ Sangora ... ... ... ... 250
„ Patan ... ... ... ... ... ... 20
Prisoner* put to death in cold bkx-d ... ... 124
1023


It is satisfactory to reflect that during the whole
of this foolish, yet barbarous contest, the mass of
Malays did not exhibit any symptoms of discontent
towards the British Government, and it is creditable
to them when it is known that their chiefs had the
weekly aid, for more than a year, of the British Press,
towards exciting their minds to revolt against their
rulers. The Chiefs are hardly exceptions, for some of
them left their families in security under the British
flag at Penang, as did all the common men who
followed them from that Settlement. Indeed the
Malays were too well aware of the value of the only
asylum remaining to them from the ambition of the
Siamese, a people who in their sober periods they fear,
and who all confess they 7 can never hope to contend
with single handed. But whatever the result might
have been these ryots knew full well the incalculable
benefits such asylums as Penang and Province
Wellesley afford from the oppression of the Native
Rulers, and the latter district, containing nearly
50,000 persons, continued as quiet internally the
whole time as if no war had been going on. Nor did
that population require to be watched by one armed
policeman beyond the common and very moderate
complement. The guard of sepoys which was sent
occasionally to the north extremity at the Muda River
was intended to protect the population from lawless
gangs from beyond the boundary.
The Penang Press made several insane attempts
to instil into the mind of the Malays that the polic} r
of the English Government regarding Keddah would
justify discontent and even something more. And if
these failed of effect it argues that the mass of our
Malayan subjects are quite satisfied with their position
Of these men 538 are said to have hoen Siamese, the
rest Malays with 1 Bengalee, 2 Chinese.
It is probable that the Malays have exaggerated the
numbers included on the Siamese side.


find that the w 7 ar of Keddah was to them at first one of
pastime and plunder, however disagreeable it after-
wards became, and that not one tenth of the whole
had any other or ulterior object than plunder.
[ The remaining portion of this chapter deals
almost exclusively with piracy, and lias therefore
been omitted. It contains an account of the
expedition organised by the Rouble. Mr. Bonham
and Captain Chadds, R. N. ]
CHAPTER X.
Condition of Keddah.
The war at Keddah which had terminated so
much to the disadvantage of the Mala} 7 s left that
country, as might have been anticipated, in a state ot
great disorder, and as its population has since then
been much reduced by immigration to Penang and
Province Wellesley, the formerly cultivated tracts
have, in many places, reverted to jungle.
The Court of Bankok considered it expedient to
place the Keddah Malayan Chief, Tuanku Anoon, who
had adhered to its interests during the war, in
authority in Keddah, and gave to him as his co-adjutor
Tuanku Hossain, a merchant of Penang and a con-
nexion of the Ex Raja. But it was found and con-
fessed by the Malays who remained in Keddah that
the rule of these men was more severe and exacting
than that even of the Siamese, so that but very few ot
the Malays who had fairly settled under British rule
returned to Keddah although invited to do so by
flattering promises.
The Chow 7 Phriya of Ligor w 7 as recalled to Siam
(and as has been reported) on some charges preferre 1
against him by the Siamese Governor of Sangora, one
of which it has been hinted was that he was over
attached to the English,


This Chief who was one of the ablest men Siam
has ever been possessed [of] died at Bankok, and was
succeeded by one of his sons.
When Tuanku Mahomed Saad had lost Keddah
he took refuge with a few armed boats in a winding
narrow creek in the Perak Country, which com-
municated with the Krean River near to its mouth
and opposite to the English territory. He was leaving
this position with an intention of flying to Sumatra
when he was seized by a gunboat sent for the purpose
by the chief authority at Penang, and he was subse-
quently sent up before the Court of Judicature there
to be tried for piracy. The case was however thrown
out on the plea of “no Jurisdiction” and because it
was considered by the Court that this man had been
lawfully fighting to regain from the Siamese a country
(Keddah) to which the latter nation had no right. So
that this tree hooter who had taken care to fill his
purse with the plunder both of friends and foes while
he held sway in Keddah, and who had robbed the
native traders of Penang, not only before and during
that period but after he had been expelled and his
power had ceased, was sent out of H. M.’s Court of
Justice as an injured man and a martyr to English
policy ? He was however forthwith sent up to Calcutta
b}’ order of the Supreme Government and after
strenuous opposition from the Court of Judicature
there, no doubt the result of want of due information
as to the merits of the case, and torrents of invective
from the equally misinformed periodicals, he was con-
veyed up the country and placed in safe custody.
At Penang, party spirit ran so high that the
affairs of Keddah had no chance at any time, far less
then, of being calmly discussed.
For some years the state of the land revenue of
the Straits Settlement had come under the review of
the Supreme Government, and a Legislative Act had
been passed regarding it.


It would require a space much larger than the
limits of this memoir can spare for an elucidation of
this important subject. However it is understood that
arrangements are now in progress for a final settle-
ment of landed interests, which will give to the
occupiers a permanent interest in the soil. At the
beginning of this paper reference has been given to
the various documents regarding it.
The Honble. the Governor, Mr. Bonham, had been
for some time endeavouring to soften the feelings of
the Court of Siam towards the Ex Raja of Keddah.
Accordingly the younger son of that Chief, Tuanku
Daee, was dispatched by his father to the Court,
bearing letters from his father and from Mr. Bonham.
The time seemed propitious for such an intercession,
for since the Burmese war the Siamese had been
greatly enlightened as to the extent of the British
power and had been manifest gainers by the Treaty
which followed that war. They had therefore, one
may feel assured, every disposition to hold fast the
Treaty of Bankok, Lastly, the British operations in
China and the success with which these had been
•crowned had not, we may believe, been lost on Siam.
Tuanku Daee was favourably received at Court
and the Ex Rajah has been allowed by it to return to
Keddah.
That Court addressed a letter to the Honble, Mr.
Bonham for the information of the Right Honble,
The Governor General of British India, of which the
following is a summary—
1. The Court enters into a long detail of the
events which led to the expulsion of the Chow Phriya
or Governor of Keddah, commonly called the Ex Raja
by the English, and also of the events subsequently to
the period of his expulsion, in order fully to develop
the real situation of that Chief with relation to
Siam.


The principal points insisted on under this head
are—
1. That the Chow Phriya withheld the gold and
silver flowers, as marks of vassalage, which had always
been paid before that time.
2. That he added to this disrespectful conduct a
disobedience of the orders he received from the Court.
3. That he had invited His Majesty of Ava to
invade the lower Provinces of Siam and offered to co-
operate with the Keddah people against him.
4. That the Chow Phriya and his people refused
to assist as in duty bound, they being lieges of Siam,
the troops of the Emperor of Siam in repelling the
expected invasion.
5. That this contumacy and rebellious behaviour
of Keddah was at the time highly detrimental to the
interest of the Siamese because the ports of Keddah
lie along the western sea and are therefore exposed
to Burmese hostile fleets, while the unfettered posses-
sion of them by Siam enables her to build and fit out
fleets of armed boats and prahus for the defence of her
lower provinces.
fl. That the Chow Phriya’s sons and adherents
had thrice invaded Keddah after he had fled from it.
7. That he had intrigued with the Rajahs of
Perak and Salangore to invade Keddah.
8. That he had never ceased to try all he could
to expel the Siamese from Keddah and this notwith-
standing the pledge given to the Ligor Raja of Keddah
by Captain Burney who was sent by the Penang
Government to treat with his Highness there that the
Chow Phriya would not be allowed to molest Keddah.
9. That the Emperor was of opinion that since
the religion, the laws and the customs of the Siamese
[and the Malays] are quite distinct from each other.


it would be needless to expect that they would live
peaceably together. Like oil and water they refused
to mix.
Therefore His Majesty had resolved to govern
Keddah in future by means of such Malayan Chiefs
as might be found trustworthy and that with this
object he had directed that this country should be
divided into three Governments.
That as the Chow Phriya had supplicated at Court
for forgiveness of all his past errors and rebellions, and
had sent his son to prove at the royal feet his
contrition and to express his desire to be hence
forward an obedient servant to His Majesty, the latter
had, on the representation of his Council, graciously
permitted the Chow Phriya to go and reside at
Keddah.
Finally that as the 13th Article of the Treaty of
Bankok would, in the event of the Chow Phriya
returning to Keddah, be rendered useless, His Majesty
desired that it might be expunged.
The whole of this lengthy document betrays a
determination in the Court of Bankok to hold fast its
supremacy over the country of Keddah, and the right
to treat it as one of the Lower Provinces of Siam.
The Ex Raja is merely styled Chow Phriya, which
is equivalent to “ Governor ” and which is a title
chiefly appertaining to a Governor of the first grade (a).
The Emperor here makes no promises. The Ex
Raja is allowed to go and reside in Keddah, and when
he shall have shown his obedience by proceeding there,
the office of Governor will doubtless be bestowed upon
him. His Majesty of Siam, if we may judge from the
(a). In a paper on the Government of Siam, pub-
lished in the Transactions of the Calcutta Asiatic Society
(for 1836) I have [described] the various functionaries of
the Empire,


general tenor of the document before us, makes the
continuance of the Ex Raja or any of his family in
authority in Keddah, to depend on his or their own
conduct and continued fealty to Siam.
The Ex Raja will make a bad exchange of the
security and independence he now enjoys under
British rule for a distracted and subservient sway in
Keddah. Should he however go there he will find him-
self placed in the same position with relation to Siam
which he held when he left it, with this difference as
to power only ( and it is a considerable one ) that
instead of his having the Government of the whole
country his share will not much exceed one-fourth
part of it.( a ) He will have to transmit annually to
the Court of Bankok, through Ligor, the gold and
silver flowers with their accompaniments, in acknow-
ledgment of his direct dependence on Siam, such being
required from all Governors of frontier provinces.
This mark of subjection costs but a small sum.
The real revenue payable to Siam consists in the
obligation, which has been imposed on the Governors
of Keddah from time immemorial, and which will not
be dispensed with we may believe hereafter, of supply-
ing boats, men, munitions of war and rice for Siamese
armaments, and in the performance of other feudal
services in times of peace.
It was the enforcement of these services which
formerly induced the Ex Raja to revolt from Siam.
(a). The Ex Raja will have the government of the
coast stretching from the River Muda to Purlis, which may
form an oblong square of 35 miles by * and which embraces
the River Ligor [and] Fort of Keddah. She will hr
subject to Ligor.
Tuauku Diva will be Lieut. Governor of the adjoining
district of Suttool and will be [subject to] Sangom.
Tuanku Anoin will have the upper country consisting <>f --t
parishes, and will be under Ligor,
r J'be Raja of Sangora will settle the boundaries of
these divisions.


The present policy of Siam is the best which she
could have adopted tor her own future interests.
Keddah may gradually recover itself to a moderate
extent, and the Court will always be able, without the
trouble of direct interference in its internal affairs, to
control its resources and apply them to the advantage
of Siam.
Perhaps too that Court may contemplate the
possibility of the British giving up the Tenasserim
Coast at some future time and thus leaving them
again in contiguity with Ava throughout a long line
of frontier.
Siam possesses [an] unbroken line of seacoast
from the southern boundary of Province Wellesley at
the River Muda, together with all the islands, in-
cluding Junkcejdon, which lie along that coast. It can
be no matter for surprize therefore, that the Siamese
Court is so jealously tenacious of its authority over
that tract, as all its previous acts have shown, and the
document now \ before ] us shows it to be. The
value of Keddah to the Siamese in their wars with
Ava was fully appreciated and proved by them about
twenty years ago when the Burmese had seized on
Junk Ceylon and had fortified a position at the
mouth of the Trang River, close upon the northern
boundary of Keddah, and which river is a Siamese
territory.
It may be true that the Treaty of Ava and the
occupation by the British of the Tenasserim Coast have
arrested or barred any hosile attempts of the Burmese
on the Siamese frontier there, but the Siamese have no
pledge that the British may not at some future period
change their policy in this direction, and they will act
upon the belief that such a change is probable.
Independent however of these views and motives,
leading to a cautious policy on their part, the Siamese
are doubtless very desirous of holding firm possession
of the outlets which the Keddah rivers afford for the


produce of the interior, and rdso [it ] is to be
apprehended that the class which could best be spared,
the worthless one, will prefer the productive fields of
Province Wellesley and Penang to depredating
amongst the impoverished inhabitants of Keddah.
The old Panghuloos districts may, or some of them
may, again try their fortunes under their old master in
Keddah. But most of their men are at this moment
substantial landed proprietors under the British Flag
and should they return to Keddah they will probably
leave portions of their families behind them, unless
indeed they should be so improvident to as sell their
estates, which last is a contingency which, as I have
heard, some speculators have been long calculating
upon, while loud in their cry for their restoration to
the Ex Raja
The Ex Raja is now far advanced in life. His
eldest son, Abdullah, has but a slender capacity and
his brother Tuanku Daee, although more prudent,
would it is to be suspected become an easy tool in the
hands of his officers should he succeed to his father.
If the four Maknyan Chiefs, including the Ex Raja,
who are now to be placed by the Court of Bankok in
charge of distinct Divisions of the Keddah Country,
shall remain at peace amongst themselves it will be
more than past experience of the Malayan character
might warrant us in predicting.
( Signed ) JAMES LOW,
Major.
Singapore
2Gth April 1842.








