

"BULLETIN” PAMPHLETS.-No. 11.
The Suffield Case.
THE EVIDENCE
At the Police Court and at the Trial,
WITH
A Plan of the Scene of the Alleged Outrage,
AND
A COMMENTARY
ON THE
Methods and Manoeuvres
OK
BOTANY BAY JUSTICE.
By A. G. STEPHENS.
Sixty-four Pages.
Proceeds Devoted to the Fund for Bringing the Case to an
Of>en Public Enquiry.
Price SIXPENCE.


SOUTH WALES Department of Justice having failed to
-Ll print for public information the papers laid before Parliament in
the notorious Suffield case, The Bulletin issues in the public
interest the evidence taken at the police-court and at the trial ; supple-
mented with a plan of the scene of the alleged outrage, and a commen-
tary on the salient points of the case.
After payment of the expenses incurred in production, any
proceeds from the sale of this pamphlet will be devoted to the fund
established for bringing Suffield’s case to open public enquiry, or
otherwise for Suffield’s benefit, as circumstances may make desirable.
The Bulletin does not know Suffield ; and has never seen him—
nor, so far as it is aware, has any member of its staff. The Bulletin’s
sole concern with Suffield is that he is a citizen who has been, and is,
unjustly imprisoned—because he did not receive a fair trial, and his
guilt was never conclusively established.
The Bulletin does not know whether Suffield is innocent or
guilty ; but it knows he was never proven guilty ; that the jury’s verdict
against him was given on evidence ludicrously insufficient and contradic-
tory, under circumstances calculated to arouse serious doubts, of which
the accused person should have the benefit; and that Suffield’s persistent
demands for an enquiry into his case have been callously refused regard-
less of the facts and of the evidence, and in the teeth of the law.
The object of this publication is to stimulate every individual
reader to do whatever lies in his power to compel N.S.W. Department of
Justice—repeated appeals having proved useless—to permit a public
enquiry into Suffield’s case, under section 383 of the Criminal Law
Amendment Act. That compulsion can be exercised in a constitutional
way, through every elector’s Parliamentary representatives ; by the resolu-
tions of public meetings ; and through the public press.


Suffield’s business is every man’s business. What is his case to-
day may be the case of any man in N.S. Wales to-morrow. Such
a charge is frequently made, without cause, by malicious or hys-
terical females; and it is a charge peculiarly difficult to disprove.
Consequently, when any man in the community can be sent to gaol for 10
years, upon the uncorroborated evidence of one witness, in defiance of an
alibi sworn by two persons, and of numberless contradictions and impro-
babilities, the liberty of every man in the community is in danger. If
not for public reasons, and for the sake of a fellow-citizen, then for private
reasons and for his own sake, every man who reads these lines should
exert himself in his sphere, and to the extent of his power, to bring
Suffield’s case to an open enquiry.
Australians are frequently charged with apathy in relation to
questions of public principle, questions which do not touch the pocket or
stomach; and sometimes, unfortunately, the charge is true. We are often
content to declaim idly against official tyranny or corruption, without
doing one tittle to remove it; and reformers pause disheartened on the
threshold of better things. Passive sympathy is of little use when there
is room for active support. Therefore, The Bulletin exhorts all to whom
this pamphlet may come, to do a little actively for its object, if that
object be approved.
The newspapers of Australasia are particularly requested to give
their powerful aid, and to quote freely from this pamphlet and com-
ment freely upon its contents, in order that as much light as possible
may be shed upon the case. And The Bulletin invites every medical
man and every lawyer in Australasia to scrutinise the evidence, and
to publicly comment upon it, and to write and tell The Bulletin
whether he would or would not in such a case consider the guilt of
the accused person proved.
Suffield does not wish to be released from prison unless his
character is cleared. He has several times declined release under cir-
cumstances which would perpetuate the stigma on his name. On the other
hand, the Department of Justice, which is evidently eager to release him,
seems to dread above all things lest his case be brought out into the
light of honest day. Yet, if Suffield be indeed guilty, the Department
has nothing to dread. Does it dread lest he be proven innocent'? Does
it dread the exposure of barbarous maladministration to the public gaze ?
Office of The Bulletin, Sydney , Australia,
10th November , 1897.






The Suffield Case.
Thomas Suffield was born in Yorkshire, England, about 1858. his
youth his family was well-to-do, and he was brought up in comfort and received
an excellent education. It is stated that he has a wife and child in England
in good circumstances ; that his father having been ruined by speculation
Suffield was left dependent on his wife, and quarrels followed , and that■ jeinj
taxed with living on her bounty, he separated from lier and came toAustial a
some time in the eighties. For a while he resided at Maitland, N.S.W., wheie
he was caretaker of the local cricket-ground He came to Lambton a suburb
of Newcastle, with a survey party, which broke-up owing him some £5O or
£6O for wages.
At the time of the remarkable occurrences to be related, Mid way an
athletic, well-looking fellow, 32 years of age, liked and esteemed by aU wl o
knew him. He was employed in driving a pumping-engine at the Emub
colliery, managed by Thomas Croudace ; and he boarded with James barren,
gardener to Croudace.
On 21st December, 1890, Thomas Suffield is alleged to have criminally
assaulted Ann Chambers, a female servant at Croudace s.
The inmates of Croudace’s house were then Mr. and Mrs. Croudace ;
their son Frank and daughter Ethel ; Mrs Bellairs (cook) ; Ann Chambers
(housemaid) ; and Minnie Warren, aged 14, daughter of the gardener.
The . inmates of Warren's house were Mr. and Mrs. Warren ; their
daughter Annie, aged 16 ; three younger children ; and Suffield. Anot ®
boarder, Robert Murphy, who usually shared Suffie.d s room, was temporan y
absent.
The Scene of the Alleged Assault. — See Plan.
Near the scene of the alleged assault, the road from Charleston to Lamb-
ton winds in the shape of an irregular GO Croudace’s house
lies in the left-hand curve of the C/3 298 yards back from the road The
house is 1508 yards from the main road from Wallsend to Lambton. On tins
piece of road there were only two other residences. One was a cottage
737 yards from Lambton road occupied by a working-man named Bed oid
.and his family. The other was Warren’s cottage, situated, between Bedford s
and Croudace’s, 73 yards back from the road. Warren s c ° tta S® was ,1
yards from Croudace’s gate. The Lambton colliery pit, where Sufheld woiked,
lay in the right-hand curve of the C/3, nearer Lambton ; 400 yards from
Warren’s house, and about the same distance from Bedford s.
* These figures are those ascertained at a survey specially made are very vaiiueand
fied and licensed surveyor. The distances given at the police-court and the 0 C ourt would
unsatisfactory For example Croudace
the outrage to'okplacelnd back again.” That is, it would be 060 yards,f™» to the
is about 50 or 60 chains” (1100 or 1320 yards) “ from my gate.


The road from Lambton to Croudace’s goes for some distance steeply up-
hill. It is an ordinary bush road, for the most part, with a two-rail fence on
•each side, passing through rough and rocky country —uncleared and thickly
timbered.
Ann Chambers Goes Out.
At a quarter to eleven in the morning of Sunday, 21st Dec. , 1890, the
housemaid, Ann Chambers, passed out of Croudace’s residence. She was
years of age, and is described as being of medium height for a woman, strongly-
built and well-nourished, but of a rather coarse, strumous constitution, with
dull eyes and sallow complexion. Her intelligence seems to have been
sluggish, and she had the docility of disposition implied in the phrase “no will
of her own.” Of characteristic feminine type, in fact—affectionate, some-
what sheepish, and attractive to many domineering males. Her reputation was
excellent.
Ann Chambers walked out of the grounds surrounding Croudace s house
and turned her face towards Lambton township. She was going to visit her
mother, a miner’s wife living at Hamilton, another of the network of suburban
townships surrounding Newcastle. It is reached by tram from Lambton. inn
Chambers’s family were English, and had been about two and a-lialf years in
Australia. She had been employed at Croudace’s for 17 weeks.
A few yards down the road, Ann Chambers turned into a by-path which
passed Warren’s cottage, and shortened the distance to Lambton. As the
was walking by the cottage she looked up and saw upon the verandah, some
distance away, the gardener’s wife and eldest daughter, and Suffield. She
did not stop, but walked quickly on to catch the tram. She did not know
Suffield, had never spoken to him., and that was the second time she had seen
him.
What Took Place at the Gardener’s.
Suffield had his dinner, and in the afternoon went for a walk in Lambton.
He returned shortly before 8 o’clock, had his tea, changed his walking-clothes
to white moleskin trousers and blue shirt, and lay down in his bedroom before
going on a sixteen-hour shift at the pit. The gardener went to bed at 8.30. At
9.30 their usual bed-time, his wife bathed two younger children, a girl of six
and a boy of two years, and the little boy went into Suffield s room to say good-
night. Suffield was lying on his bed, reading by candlelight, and the boy re-
mained about ten minutes playing with him. An elder sister then went to the
door and called the boy to go to bed, fond he came soon afterwards. It was then
nearly ten o’clock.
The gardener’s wife and daughter stayed up till a quarter to 12, reading.
Suffield had a bad cold, and they heard him coughing at intervals. At 20
minutes to 11, the wife, thinking he was asleep, went to call him to go to the
nit as she frequently did by his desire at various times, since he had no stated
hour of departure. His door was open, and he was still reading, so she did not
disturb him Just before going to bed she went to call him again. He was
sound asleep, and she had to knock several times before he woke and thanked
her. Shortly after 12 Suffield went to his work at the pit, and did not return
till just before tea-time on the same day (Monday).
There was a large window in Suffield’s room, but the lower sash was kept
closed because a snake had got into the room a short time previously ; and, as
one of the pulley-cords was broken, this sash could not be raised without a con-
siderable grating noise—easily audible in the next room where the gardener s
wife and daughter sat. Further, Suffield’s boots were not m his room, and he
could not leave the room by the door without being seen.


At Ten O’Clock in the Evening.
Nevertheless, Ann Chambers declared that at about 10 o’clock she was
criminally assaulted, in front of Croudace’s house, by Thomas Suftield, the man
whom she had twice seen, had never spoken to, and who, according to the sworn
testimony of two witnesses, was at that time lying on his bed with his boots oft,
nearly half-a-mile away.
Ann Chambers stated that she saw her mother, returned to Lambton,
and walked thence to Croudace’s. When she reached Croudace’s gate she saw
Suftield sitting upon it. He said “ Good-night.” She did not reply, but passed
through the small gate adjoining, and walked briskly towards the house. W hen
she had gone to a spot about 220 yards from the gate, and about 78 yards from
the house, he knocked her down and violently assaulted her.*
This was between 10 o’clock and 10 minutes past 10. Ann Chambers-
screamed, and Mr. Croudace, who had just got into bed, heard her, and imme-
diately put his head out of the window' to listen. His bedroom-windows were
always left open, unless it was a wet night. He heard a second scream, and at
once coo-eed clearly and loudly. The young woman screamed again, and Mr.
Croudace coo-eed once more, shouted “I am coming,” put on his trousers and
slippers, and rushed down stairs. His son, Frank, had also heard the scream-
ing, and came down with him. They ran across the grass-plot which extended
tor 72 yards in front of the house, vaulted the low picket-fence, and found
Ann Chambers lying crouched up a few feet away, much frightened and upset,,
but quite conscious and able to answer questions intelligently.
The Croudaces asked her what was the matter. She replied, “ Oh, that
bull ! ” —saying nothing of the assault by Suftield. The bull in question was
one owned by Croudace, which at night usually camped in front of the house,
and was occasionally vicious. When the Croudaces came on the scene, it was
standing from 30 to 40 yards away. (This bull afterwards attacked an elderly
lady, throwing her down, and breaking several of her ribs. She brought an
action for damages against Croudace, which was settled ; and Croudace then
had the bull shot).
“ Oh, That Bull ! ”
The Croudaces took for granted that Ann Chambers had been attacked
by the bull, and assisted her into the house. She fainted on the way in, and
the Croudaces applied restoratives, while Frank Croudace went for Dr. Staple-
ton, of Lambton. He came about 11 o’clock, and found that Ann Chambers
had recovered from her faint, but appeared upset. He examined and treated
her on the supposition —whicli she did nothing to alter —that she had been
attacked by the bull ; found her injuries apparently slight—chiefly shock—and
left, not intending to pay a second visit.
During the night fever supervened, with some delirium ; and early next
morning Ann Chambers told Miss Croudace, who was attending her, that the
bull had not touched her, but that a man who was sitting on the gate threw a
stone which hit her on the back of the neck. She did not say who the man
was, and apparently she did not say she had been assaulted in any other way.
Fibst, a Bull; then, a Man; then “That Man Suffield!”
It is not in evidence that the police were at once informed of this state-
ment, if at all. Dr. Stapleton was again sent for during the morning, and
made a more particular examination, but could not find proof that Ann Cham-
bers had been assaulted by a man. Yet Ann Chambers adhered to the story of
* Since 1890, a cottaare has been built at Croudace’s main pates ; it is occupied by May Stewart
and her husband (formerly groom at Croudace’s) and family. Jn 1890 the space within the picket-
fence round Croudace’s house was laid out in grass, with an occasional bed of flowers, and shrubs here
and there. These shrubs did not then obstruct the view from the upper windows of the space of
ground between the picket-fence and the main gates : but some of them have since grown considerably.


the man, and during the morning she told her fellow-servant, May Stewart,
that she thought the man was Mr. Suflield (so May Stewart says ; Ann Cham-
bers declares she said it was Mr. Suflield).
Mrs. Chambers was informed of the matter on Monday morning, and
came later in the day to see her daughter, who said Sufheld had assaulted her
Mrs Chambers made a complaint to the police about a quarter to four o c o
in the afternoon and Sergeant Salter came up from Lambton to see Ann Cham-
berswho told him she had no doubt her assailant wa. Suflield. Salter arrested
Suflield about nine o’clock in the evening, at Warren a house, and locked him
ud The next day (Tuesday) he was brought up at the polico-court and re-
manded for a week. Bail was refused. At the second hearing Ann Chambers
swore positively that Suflield had assaulted her, though the evidence of
Mrs Warren and her daughter amounted to a direct ahbi. Ann Chambers s
statement was entirely uncorroborated ; it was in some respects obviously erro-
neous and in others inconsistent ; and a large body of testimony proved that
Suffieid was a most unlikely person to commit such a.crime. A
of the case seemed to show that prosecutrix had made a inis ak v nevertheless
Suflield was committed for trial. Bail was again refused, and Suflield went to
Ld Throughout the proceedings the police magistrate who heardhe case
seemed to be biassed against him ; and local opinion at Lambton held (and
holds still) that Suffieid was very harshly treated.
Enter Judge Windeyer in His Favourite Role.
f t " “
advocate than a? a judge, emphasising every point favor
<Miftipld and slurring or opposing many points winch could tell m Ins tavor. Ine
left a “ im P reSS Ti f h ?
made ‘ a good witness,’ as the lawyers say; was plainly dressed, and looked
modest and attractive. A feminine observer noticed that m court she ™
and had taken the flowers from her hat ; and that after the trial the flowers
were replaced. Who suggested this piece of strategy (
Suflield. on the other hand, made a bad impression. Anxiety and con-
finement in gaol had shaken his nerves ; and he disclaimed guilt in a rhetorical
manlier which looked affected and false. The complainant had preposeewed
the iurv in her favor; Suflield prejudiced them against himself. Judge
Windeyer said after the trial that he had watched Suflield closely, and his de-
meanour was the demeanour of a guilty man. Judge Windeyer had great
• • i * ~ or-»rl enmpfimPS IIP STUGSSPCI Tightly 111 SUCh lUftttGTS , 601X16
Suffield’s personal friends
attvibiited his changed manner to severe anxiety while awaiting Ins trial for a
capital offence, and to the natural effect of imprisonment for three months upon
aSletic man accustomed to a free life and hard physical labour every day.
• “Ten Years Penal Servitude!”
had
X t Erie",
sssaffissi
theOTy Cte insteS“of e holfi!g the'balanceTirly" and allowing the jury to judge
d e fects he frequently ufed the force of his influence and the force of hm
ously partial to the woman.


In dealing with Suffield’s jury, Judge Windeyer had a comparatively
easy task, for bis foot was on his native heath. For many years Judges
Windeyer resided between Maitland and Newcastle ; he was on friendly terms-
with the Croudaces; and the influence he derived from living in the district came
to aid his judicial influence with a Maitland jury. Suffield was charged with
rape and with attempted rape. If the evidence proved anything at
all it proved rape ; but the jury, with an apparent instinct that
nothing was proven, compounded, with their scruples and salved their con-
sciences by bringing in a verdict on the minor charge. Said one of the
jurymen afterwards to James Warren : “I am sorry we gave that verdict, but
the judge forced us to do it.” And, having got the desired verdict, Judge
Windeyer sentenced Suffield with characteristic zest to ten years penal servitude.
The Beauties of a Botany Bay Bureaucracy.
Then began a curious struggle between public opinion and the N.S.W-.
Department of Justice. The residents of Lainbton and of the Newcastle dis-
trict generally had never been convinced of Suffield’s guilt, and on the day when
the prison gates closed on him after the trial an agitation commenced for further
inquiry into his case. That agitation has been continued intermittently from
that day to this, beating vainly against the stolid prejudices of the Department
of Justice. For New South Wales, originally a convict colony, still retains many
of the mulish and barbarous methods of the convict system of administration.
In New South Wales, once a man is convicted —rightly or wrongly—the bureau-
cracy pigeon-holes him and puts him away. That -man is done with. The
amour propre of the courts, of the police, of the self-satisfied Department, closes
their ears and eyes and noses to the foulest injustice. To suggest that—even
inadvertently—an injustice has been perpetrated is to reflect upon them. There-
fore, they all fight like devils, tooth and nail and claw, to keep the man in the-
pigeon-hole, the case from the light of day.
Six thousand residents of the Newcastle district petitioned for enquiry
into Suffield’s case, but the Department of Justice took no heed. Four affida-
vits, containing much new evidence throwing light upon the case, were sworn
by James Warren, Lydia Warren, Annie Warren, and Robert Murphy
(Suffield’s room-mate.) They were buried along with Suffield in his pigeon-hole,
and the Department of Justice took no heed. Suffield’s demeanour and conduct
in gaol forcibly impressed magistrates, members of Parliament, and a Governor
of the province, who all made representations suggesting his possible innocence
to the Department of Justice —and the Department took no heed. Suffield him-
self has never ceased fighting—not for release: he does not desire release unless
he is proved innocent—but for a fresh enquiry into his case, before a judge who
is not biased and a jury which is not servile. And the Department of Justice,
hard as the nether millstone, has continuously sheltered itself behind prejudices
and precedents, and taken no heed.
The callous torpor of the Department of Justice is the more astounding
because Parliament has provided an express means of dealing with such cases as
Suffield’s. Section 383 of N.S. W. Criminal Law Amendment Act declares that
whenever after the conviction of a prisoner any doubt ok question arises as to
his guilt or any mitigating circumstance in the case or any portion of the
evidence therein , it shall be lawful for any justice, by direction of the Governor
—on the petition of the prisoner , or some person on his behalf , representing
such doubt or question—or by direction of a judge of the tuoreme Court, of his
oivn motion—to summon and examine on oath all persons likely to give
ate'i-al information on the matter suggested.” In Suftield’s case these condi-
tions are all present. There is doubt or question as to his guilt; there is doubt
or question as to much of the evidence ; (5000 residents of the Newcastle dis-


trict have petitioned for examination into his case ; many members of Parlia-
ment —including those representing the Lambton and neighboring districts
express grave apprehensions that he has been unjustly convicted. The Depart-
ment of Justice is not asked to set Suffield free—it is only asked to permit
enquiry into his case. It refuses, absolutely and obstinately, to permit enquiry.
Suffield is in his pigeon-hole, neatly strangled with red tape, and there he may
rot.
Suffield’s Statement of His Struggles.
Here is a part of Suffield’s statement of his own efforts since his trial.
He was convicted on Bth April, 1891. Until Oetober, 1891, he states that he
was not aware that, being under “ separate treatment,” he could do anything for
himself.
In October (or about), ’9l, I made a lengthy statement to the Comptroller, asking
to be allowed to lay my case before the Minister. In three days I got a point-blank
refusal, the Comptroller telling me he saw no reason for allowing me to do so : that the
evidence I adduced was not fresh evidence, since it was available at the time of trial.
[The statement that “fresh evidence ” is necessary before a case can be
re-opened is an official fiction. All that the Act requires (see extract above) is
a petition from the prisoner, or made on his behalf, based on “any doubt or
question ” arising as to his guilt, or any mitigating circumstance, or any portion
of the evidence. But the bureaucracy has invented a gloss to slay the merciful
hope given by legislative enactment.]
From then to April, ’92, I made repeated applications to the governor of the gaol,
and to Mr. Graham, the visiting magistrate.
In April, ’92 (about 11th), I saw Lord Jersey, Mr. Graham actually bringing me
before his Lordship in these expressions : “ Your Excellency, this is an absolutely
innocent man, and every word he says is the truth : that is, to the best of my belief.”
I do not wish to compromise Mr. Graham, who was so good to me ; so I have never
referred to these strong expressions of his and do not wish to. But Earl Jersey
repeated them.*
In June, ’92, by order of Minister O’Connor, I again made a lengthy statement,
corroborating every paragraph of it by lengthy references, &c. 1 think it was January ,
1893, before this was answered. Or, rather, it was never answered. For Mr. Slattery,
during his interregnum (Mr. O’Connor having resigned) replied: “In answer to the
petition for a remission of sentence, the Minister sees no grounds,” &c. I never dreamt
of a petition for remission, and in every statement I have addressed to authorities I
have always specially stated that I did not wish for any remission, but for an act
of justice, which was cried for by the whole facts of my case. If I ever asked for
remission I challenge the Minister to show such a request on any paper of mine. I
never stooped to it. ,
From June, ’92, to January, ’93, I saw the visiting justice, the gaol authorities,
the clergyman, and the Bishop of Bathurst, each of whom made statements as follows.
The visiting justice, who told me each time I came before him that he thought I
would have been a free man before this, told the governor to make enquiries at head
office as to my papers. The governor (Mr. Stace) did so ; no reply.
The clergyman, Eev. H. C. Ylndm, wrote three or four times to the
begging that something might be done in the matter, and declaring his firm and abso-
lute conviction of my perfect innocence.
The Bishop of Bathurst himself wrote to the Minister, bringing it under his
knowledge.
Mr. Yindin got answers to say “the matter was under consideration”; “the
matter was under consideration.” (The gaol authorities, to repeated applications, got
110 an Tho r Bishop got an answer to say “ the papers were before Dr. Manning for his
Teport on them.”
During all this time I saw the Comptroller once of iny own accord, and twice at
his request. He told me the delay was not occasioned by him.
•Mvistrate J. B. Graham was called upon by the Minister to report regarding: Suffield s
Statement that he had expressed a strong belief in Suffield’s innocence, and said that he had not
«ucb, nor did he express it. What he said was that there had been created a doubt in his mind.


In the meantime, between April, ’92, and January, ’93, what were my rriends
doing outside? Were they not, too, making repeated applications?
I have had to trust entirely to memory in every statement I have made, nor
have I told of one-half the applications I myself made between April, ’92, and January
*93—none of which received any answer, as far as I can remember.
After narrating requests (refused) to be permitted the services of an
agent outside, Suffield goes on to say :
I have made whilst here, acting on Mr. Graham’s advice, all sorts of advances to
the Minister.
I then heard the Minister was coming here. The regulations allowing any
prisoner to see a Minister of the Crown, I put down my name to see him. Here, I
thought, was a golden chance. Just before this, I had received a communication from
him to this effect:—“The Minister cannot reopen the case unless the prisoner can
produce evidence not previously given before a court, tending to show a reasonable
doubt as to his guilt. But the Minister was very much impressed with the reiterated
statements of the prisoner as to his innocence.”
[Note the relentless tenacity of the official fiction as to “evidence not
previously given before a court.” Yet there was fresh evidence in the
Minister’s hands in the four important affidavits by James Warren, Lydia
Warren, Annie Warren, and Robert Murphy, previously referred to. Those
affidavits were buried along with Suffield in his pigeon-hole, and the Depart-
ment of Justice, beyond an acknowledgment of receipt, has made not a sign
regarding them to this day. What powerful influences must be at work to
keep Suffield’s case away from the light of enquiry !]
You may imagine, after so important an admission—for would he have been
impressed by my statements if they were nob based on solid ground?—how my heart
beat at the thought of seeing him.
Well, he came ; he saw warders who wanted to transfer to other gaols; he never
said whether he would see me or not, but simply went away without ever seeing the
man about whose guilt he was by his admission more than doubtful, who was undergoing
moral murder and unspeakable misery, and whom it was his highest duty, as the earthly
Minister of Justice, which is Divine, to protect, help, and consider. For, for whom is
the Minister of Justice elected, if not for the utterly helpless? My heart felt broken.
Before Parliament—the Apparently Suppressed Papers.
From time to time the Suffield case has been referred to in Parliament,
and on each occasion independent men who knew the circumstances of his trial
have expressed strong doubt as to his guilt. But the Department of Justice,
apparently fortified by some tremendous unseen influence, has steadily
refused to take the easy course presented to it by law, and permit an enquiry
into the facts before a justice. With difficulty was it forced to lay on the table
of the Legislative Assembly a portion of the papers relating to the case. The
Parliamentary request for these papers—the whole of the papers —was made on
23rd September, 1896 ; and, though they could apparently have been produced
next day, it was not until 4th November, 1896—after repeated press references
to the matter —that the Justice Department produced some of them, without a
word to indicate that any were missing. Among the missing papers were :
1. The four fresh affidavits by James Warren, Lydia Warren, Annie
Warren, and Robert Murphy, previously referred to.
5. Report by Judge Windeyer on the whole case, in answer to the public
aquation, in which—being unable in any other way to reconcile the evidence
with the verdict, or to disprove the alibi sioorn in favour of Suffield-he sug-
gested that one of the 'witnesses to the alibi, a woman seven years older than
Sufield, and mother of five children, of whom the eldest was 16 years old at the
time of the trial, was on terms of intimacy with Sufield, and had influenced
her daughter’s evidence —thereby defaming a teaman's character without nor oof,
in Judge Windeyer’s own peculiar way.
3. Letter from W. Edmunds, the barrister who defended Sufield, traversing
the whole case.


4. All Suffield’s statements in the case, particularly a statement of sup-
pressed evidence which he supplied in answer to a request from the Department of
Justice.*
The Extraordinary Mr. Brennan.
With these and some other exceptions the papers in the case seemed
fairly complete. Throughout the whole of them the anxiety of some of the
police to keep Suffield in gaol seemed most remarkably evident. One officer in
particular, Superintendent Brennan, of Newcastle, reports time after time in the
strongest and, occasionally, what appear to be the most unwarranted terms.
Writing on 7th July, 1892, he expresses himself as “convinced the verdict
of the jury was a righteous one, and that the offender Suffield was abso-
lutely guilty of the charge, and that, too, in an aggravated form.”
After apparently endorsing the unjiroved charge above referred-to as
uttered by Judge Windeyer, he goes on to say that “ these parties, with their
friends and two solicitors, did all that was possible to prejudice the case and
get the offender off, but they happily failed, and under the circumstances it
would be a serious reflection on the administration of justice if by any chance
the offender were to escape.” Again, when, in August, 1895, a Lambton
public meeting asked for a remission of Suffield’s sentence, Inspector Brennan
sent in a report vehemently opposing release. Again, in November,
1895, Brennan, asked to report upon some of Suffield’s pleas, did so
in a manner quite devoid of the judicial spirit which should charac-
terise the official utterances of a high police-officer. And, although the
Department of Justice persistently refused to hold an enquiry at which
evidence pro and con could have been taken in the light of day, it seems
to have accepted the unproven allegations of Judge Windeyer and
Inspector Brennan against Suffield’s witnesses, and to have given weight
to them as if they had been shown incontrovertible at the trial. For, how else
is it possible to account for the Department’s pig-headed refusal to permit
reconsideration of Suffield’s case 1
Wanted, a Prosecutrix—l6,ooo Miles Away.
One circumstance connected with the case upon which light was thrown
in Parliament merits special attention—the sudden and remarkable, disappear-
ance of the family of Ann Chambers, the prosecutrix, and of Ann Chambers
herself. The Chambers family came to Australia in May, 1888. They seem to
have been thoroughly decent people. Chambers was a comparatively young
man, a miner, who is said to have undergone hardships in England, and to have
brought his wife and her daughter to Australia in the hope of better for-
tune. They were m very poor circumstances ; and it goes without say-
ing that a poor working miner does not emigrate to Australia on
impulse, or without being influenced by very solid reasons. Ann Chambers,
the daughter, had left an admirer behind her, and there was some talk of her
returning to marry him when he could afford it, or of his coming out to her.
But during their residence in Australia, until the very last moment, Chambers
and his wife, at all events, seem to have given no reason for doubt that they
had come here after much consideration, and had come here for life.
Yet twelve months after the trial—the traditional decent interval—
Mrs. Chambers and her daughter returned to England ; and precisely
twelve months later—after another decent interval—Chambers followed
them. Public interest in the Suffield case in the district where he lived
had flagged a little by then, weary of beating against the obstacles raised
by the Department of Justice ; but for twelve months at least after the
•The Department of Justice included among the papers laid on the table its own lengthy reply
to one of Suffield's statements, and apparently—with characteristic impartiality—suppressed that
statement.


trial the case was still commonly spoken of, and warm agitation was still pro-
ceeding. When Andrew Kelly, M.L.A., was collecting the four vanished
affidavits ; when William Dent, formerly Mayor of Lambton, came to Sydney
to stir up Parliament; when public meetings were being held at various places,,
and various members of Parliament were urging the Department to re-open the
case, it might well have seemed that the Department would eventually be forced
to do so, and that at an enquiry not presided over by Judge Windeyer some re-
markable developments might take place. And it was near this apparent crisis
in the proceedings that Ann Chambers—the prosecutrix and sole witness for the
prosecution —left for England with her mother.
Police Misstatements Refuted.
The police statement (by Superintendent Brennan) is that after Suffield's
conviction—
Mrs. Chambers was subjected to continual annoyance by Suffield’s sympathisers, of
which she made frequent reports to me.*
An agitation was started by persons who knew nothing of the circumstances, to>
secure Suffield’s release, and representations were made to the then Minister of Justice to
secure that end. After the lapse of some time, the Minister decided that, as there were
no new facts submitted, there were no grounds to warrant a fresh enquiry under the 383rd
section of the Criminal Law Act. Hence the agitation ceased. Miss Chambers, during
the whole time, remained in the Newcastle district, so that she could be available if re-
quired, and it was not until several months after the Minister had decided against a further
enquiry that she, accompanied by her mother, returned to England.
There is no fault to find with this statement, except that the italicised
passages—the vital passages — are untrue. The agitation has not ceased yet. It
was so far from ceasing in April, 1892, that three years later, in August, 1895,
six thousand persons petitioned the Department of Justice on behalf of Suffield.
Further, it was only three days after the Minister for Justice had given
his decision, and not “several months after,” that Ann Chambers and her mother
set out for England. The police statement goes on to say that an English friend
of Ann Chambers sent the money for her passage about the beginning of 1892.
On 4th April, 1892, Chambers sold his furniture to defray his wife’s passage.
On 19th April they left Sydney for England. And it was only three days
previously, on 16th April, 1892, that .Justice-Minister O Connor issued his
minute! declining to re-open the case, the first minute recorded among the
papers laid on the Assembly table.
The police report (Superintendent Brennan’s report) goes on—
For months after the trial Miss Chambers was annoyed hy paper reports, and
being pointed at as Annie Chambers, the prosecutrix in the Suffield case, and her
parents determined, if possible, to leave the colony, but for want of means could not
do so.
But would it not have sufficed to leave the district ? Would it not have
sufficed to go to another province ? Why should the Chambers family, who
had taken so much pains to come to Australia, take so much pains to leave
it, and drag all the way back to England and the cheerless prospect they had
left ? What could England hold for them—returning to it as poor ak they had
left it 1 Ex hypothesi, their consciences were clear ; they had done no wrong ;
groundless scandal was bound to die, or it could have been avoided by going
elsewhere in Australia. Yet mother and daughter— the sole witness for the
prosecution, supposing suspicion of guilt shoidd hereafter he thrown on another
than Suffield —left Australia altogether, just about the time when the Minister
for Justice was expected to deal decisively one way or the other with the
* There was then frequent communication between Ann Chambers and Brennan —the officer who
seems to show in his reports such determined belief in Suffield’s guilt. Yet Brennan was in charge or
the district, and was stationed at Newcastle. Did Ann Chambers report direct to Brennan . Why did
she not report rather to the local officer at Hamilton, where her parents lived ?
f Given in full on pages x. and xi.


demand for an enquiry, after repeated and insistent agitation ; and a year
later the father followed them.
The Familiar Incapacity of Officialdom.
Perusal of the papers laid before Parliament amazes one—so incapable
seem highly-placed officials of forming an independent or intelligent opinion on
the evidence (Suffield is not to be condemned on Judge Windeyer’s slanderous-
conjectures). The only impartial and competent Ministerial paper in the collec-
tion is the following—apparently a clerk’s precis —submitted in 1893
Precis.—Case of Prisoner Thos. Suffield.
The only evidence available as to the identity of the perpetrator of the outrage
upon Ann Chambers is that of the prosecutrix herself. Some time prior to the occur-
ence Suffield was pointed out to her one night, in Lambton, by May Stuart, who says that
Suffield’s back was towards them, and that, therefore, prosecutrix could not have had a
good view of him. On the morning preceding the night on which the assault occurred,
prosecutrix, while on her way to Hamilton, saw a man whom she believed to be Suffield
standing on the verandah of Warren’s house, where he lodged. On the night of the out-
rage, when returning home to the Croudaces’house, she is accosted by a man and assaulted.
Her screams attract attention, and Mr. Croudace and his son, seeking to ascertain the
cause, find her lying on the ground. Mr. Croudace said she was evidently in great fear
and pain, that she was scarcely conscious of what she was saying. Mr. Franois Croudace
states she was very excited and in a great fright. Both state she cried out to take the
bull away. As both are carrying her in she faints away. Upon arrival at the house,
Miss Ethel Croudace says she was unconscious and wandering, and remained in that
state until morning, and in her delirium mistook Mr. Croudace for a Mr. Wilson. Dr.
Stapleton, upon visiting her that night, found her upset as if frightened, but not uncon-
scious or insensible, and quite capable of answering questions or recognising persons.
Prosecutrix herself says that, after the struggle and when her assailant had
forced her on the ground and overpowered her, she lost consciousness and remembered
nothing more till she found herself in bed.
Prosecutrix states the night was a moonlight night, slightly overcast, and James
Campbell bears her out in this, adding he eould recognise anyone within a close distance.
(Campbell seems to have passed prosecutrix on the road close by shortly before the
outrage.)
On the day following the assault prosecutrix makes the statement that she had not
been injured by a bull, but by a man, and asserts that Suffield is the culprit. It is upon
her statements alone that the evidence of identification rests.
She says she saw prisoner sitting on the gate, that she saw him follow her, and
that he was the man who assaulted her. She had never spoken to Suffield before, nor
he to her, but, having had a good opportunity of seeing him, had not the least doubt he
was the man. She could see him plainly. May Stuart (a fellow servant sleeping in the
same room) asserts that, during the night, prosecutrix madp no accusation, but, in tire
morning, said she thought it was Suffield who had assaulted her. Prosecutrix denied
having said ahe thought it was Suffield. She states she said it was Suffield, whereupon
Stuart replies, “You had better not say so because no one will believe you.” Prosecutrix
tells Sergeant Salter, her mother and others, that Suffield was her assailant, and that
she had no doubt about it.
J.C.S.S., Bth July, 1893.
Justice-Minister, O’Connor’s Minute.
This precis is inaccurate in details, and it does not sufficiently balance p<o
and con; but it leaves a fair impression of the salient points in the case, as they
present themselves to an unbiassed mind. The famous minute of Minister-for-
Justice R. E. O’Connor, a year earlier, does nothing of the sort—it is foolishly
inadequate. Yet it is largely upon this minute of Mr. O’Connor’s that subse-
quent .Justice-Ministers have relied in defence of a logically untenable position.
So much mischief may one man do, when a foolish theory of departmental con-
sistency tends to give his blunders eternal force !
Copy op Minute of Minister op Justice, Mr. R. E. O’Connor, on Papers re Case of
Prisoner Thomas Suffield.
A careful consideration of the depositions, notes of evidence and Judge’s report
convinced me that the prosecutrix was ravished by some man on the night of the 23rriF


December, 1890. The suggestion in the petition that the injuries she received on that
night were caused by the attack of a bull will not bear looking into. Setting aside tha
-extreme improbability of the chance attacks of a bull producing injuries of that descrip-
tion, it is plain that if that explanation of the injuries is adopted the story of the prose-
outrix as to the whole occurrence is a wicked fabrication. I see no reason whatever on
the evidence, nor is any reason suggested, which would cause me to doubt the honesty
and bona fides of her story. She may or may not be mistaken in identifying the prisoner
as the man who ravished her, but that she was ravished by some man, and that she
honestly believes that that man was the prisoner, I am convinced.
In my view of the case, therefore, the only question about which the jury could
•have hesitated was the identification of the prisoner. The sole evidence of identification
was that of the prosecutrix, without corroboration of any kind, but clear and positive.
The defence of an alibi was set up by the prisoner, and several witnesses gave evidence in
support of it. The jury, after careful consideration, disbelieved the defence, and believed
the prosecutrix. Under these circumstances, I am asked to direct an inquiry under Section
383 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act of 1883, upon the facts alleged in the declara-
tion herewith. It is altogether beyond my province to direct a re-hearing of evidence
already given. That evidence has already been decided upon by the jury. To review
their decision upon a new inquiry into the same evidence would be to make a private
Ministerial inquiry a court of appeal from the decision of a jury; a thing which the
Section never intended. It is only when some material fact or circumstance not before
the jury at the trial has been brought before the Minister, that the latter is justified in
directing an inquiry.
I may say at once that in this case I have been very favorably impressed with
the prisoner’s previous character ; the general estimation in which he has been held by
those who know him ; the entire absence of anything like concealment or shuffling at the
time of his arrest ; his frank, open manner all through in dealing with the police. Being
so impressed, and knowing that the conviction of this man rests upon the uncorroborated
evidence of one witness, I should have been glad to have had placed before me a new
fact bearing either upon the identification of the prisoner or the credibility of the prose-
cutrix upon which I could have granted an inquiry. But there are no such facts in these
declarations. They consist entirely of repetitions of evidence given at the trial, which,
as I have said, I cannot enter upon, or of gossip and hearsay and expression of a general
impression of the prisoner’s innocence.
I cannot act upon such declarations. The verdict of the jury, arrived at after a
careful hearing of evidence in open court, must stand unimpeaehed until some definite
statements of material facts, not under consideration at the trial, are brought before me.
I have expressed my views at some length, because i think it is important that the
petitioners should understand clearly the grounds upon which I decline to grant the
inquiry prayed for upon the material now before me.
Inform fully petitioner and Mr. Norton. E £ 0 , OON „ OE
By Way of Commentary.
By way of commentary upon this, it is pointed out—
1. The evidence that prosecutrix was ravished is that of one doctor only,
Harris, who first saw prosecutrix two days after the alleged rape. The only
proof adduced was a chafing of the labia, said to have persisted, and to
have been a certain indication of assault, two days after the alleged offence.
There was no microscopic evidence —no collateral proof was derived from
examination of the alleged assailant or his clothes. But every medical man—especi-
ally every medical man with gaol experience—will see at once that this, by itself, is no
proof of assault at all— not the slightest proof of assault. What is to prevent any wonmn, a
thousand miles from a male, fromcausing a “ chafing of the labia in a direct line with the
vagina ” in a dozen different tvays, and at a minute's notice ? Absolutely nothing ! And how
many woman do this—whether they have a two-days-old tale to support or not?
Hundreds —thousands ! Ask any gaol doctor. Possibly the newspaper reporter misre-
presented Dr. Harris, and he did not swear to sexual penetration—only to some penetra-
tion. In that case he was wise, for any woman witli a tale to bolster might have caused
an indubitable “chafing ” five minutes before Dr. Harris
saw her. But, good Galen ! what is that worth as evidence of assault by a man two
days previously ? Yet that is the evidence which the eager Judge Windeyer swallowed as
absolute proof, and which the obedient jury swallowed, and which the simple Justice-
Minister O’Connor swallowed ! And, mark this ! they swallowed it regardless of the fact
that Dr. Stapleton, who saw Ann Chambers one hour after the outrage — not two days
.after —and who closely examined her by himself the next morning—when the chafing was


only about twelve hours old—and again on the following day, with Dr. Harris — Djv
Stapleton would not swear to penetration—not to any penetration —he would not swear that
there had been any assault whatever. So there is a conflict of testimony between the two
doctors, and judge and jury and Minister have chosen to attach no weight to the evidence
of the doctor who saw Ann Chambers three times, and saw her first, and every weight to
the evidence —the medically quite-inconclusive evidence—of the doctor who saw her last,
and saw her only once ! Here the reader may apostrophise for himself the beautiful
common-sense of the system of justice in a modern and highly-civilised community—the
writer hasn’t time. It may be added that the writer, who has probably studied the
case as closely as anybody, has not been able to make up his mind whether Ann Chambers
was assaulted by a man or not, and the theoretical suppositions refer to what any woman
might have done in her case. But the writer’s mind is quite clear that, apart from Ann
Chambers’s own statement, there is no proof whatever that a man came within 50 miles
of assaulting her on that eventful Sunday evening.
2. Justice-Minister O’Connor says the suggestion that the bull did the mischief
won’t bear looking into. If Thomas Croudace’s evidence in cross-examination at the trial
was omitted from the copy of the Judge's notes laid before Minister O’Connor, as it seems
to have been omitted from the copy of the Judge's notes laid before the Legislative Assembly,
then there may be some excuse for Minister O’Connor. Here is the passage as reported
in the Newcastle Herald. Mark the admirable impartiality of the Judge—as dis-
played for the benefit of the local jury !
The Apparently Suppressed Evidence.
Thomas Croudace, Cross-examined by Mr. Edmunds :
“The bull had since attacked a married woman, and had broken some of her
ribs. The bull had since been destroyed.”
Bis Honor :
(“I think, Mr. Edmunds, that it is -6f no use trying to make out that the girl’s in-
juries were caused by the bull. The story of the girl is undoubted.”
Mr. Edmunds :
" I think, your Honor, that her statement about the bull is important, and I wish
to lay stress on the bull, as it will tend to show the state of mind the girl was in that
evening.”
His Honor :
“ Oh, of course, you are entitled to get out any evidence you please regarding her
mind. She, however, denies using the words.”
By Mr. Edmunds :
“Just before the bull horned the woman he had been ill-treated by four men.
When a bull became excited he usually tore up the ground, and knowing that, the grass
around the spot where the girl was found was carefully searched, but no trace of the
animal could be found. The spot where the girl was lying was about 70 or 80 yards from
the house, and was concealed by shrubs.” *
If Minister O'Connor had this evidence before him, he might have observed the
singular fact that the same bull to which Ann Suffield’s injuries were attributed had
afterwards attacked another woman, and had been shot for his offence. And if he had
enquired into this singular fact he might have ascertained that the injuries inflicted on
the second woman were by no means dissimilar from those inflicted on the first—taking
into consideration that Ann Chambers was knocked down at night, when the bull was
presumably unexcited, on grassed gravel; while Mrs. Cole was knocked down in daylight,
after the bull had been excited, on a hard road. Even if Minister O’Connor had not this
cross-examination evidence before him, the report on Mrs. Cole’s injuries by Dr. Nash,
handed in to Minister O’Connor’s Department in 1891, might have stimulated to
enquiry a man very anxious to do justice. But Minister O’Connor was so sure
the bull was not concerned that he does not seem to have given weight to Ann
Chambers’s own attribution of her condition to the bull, at the time when the
Croudaces picked her up, and when she was perfectly conscious ! Ann Chambers
attributed her injuries to the Bull; the Croudaces took for granted it was the Bull ; they
sent for Dr. Stapleton on the supposition that it was the Bull ; Dr. Stapleton oame,
found Ann Chambers out of her faint and perfectly conscious, treated her for Bull, and
went away still under the Bull impression ; and the Croudace household settled itself to
rest—still under the influence of Bull. For that night, at all events, it was Bull. As
* In 1890 “the spot’’ was doubtfully “concealed by shrulis” from Croudaee’s bedroom
window on the upper storey. The actual “spot” was open grass; and the shrulis, such as they
were, were in the grass and garden plot around the house, which plot was divided by a fence from the
spot.”


Hong as Ann Chambers was conscious, it teas Bull ; and only next morning, when she had
been “unconscious and wandering,” * did it turn out to be Man.
And Minister O’Connor is able to brush away this remarkable conduct on the part
of Ann Chambers quite easily, and to affirm decisively and dogmatically that “the
suggestion that the injuries she received on that night were caused by the attack of a
bull will not bear looking into.”
(Take in here another apostrophe to the supernatural wisdom of the Goddess of
Justice —Botany Bay variety.)
3. It does not follow that, if the bull caused her injuries, “the story of the
prosecutrix as to the whole occurrence is a wicked fabrication.” The Bull does not
exclude a previous Man.
The Fiction of Fresh Evidence.
4. Minister O’Connor is so sure what Section 383 of the C.L. Amendment Act
“intended ” that he disregards wholly what it says. In other words, he deliberately
nullifies an Act of Parliament, and bows down to an idol of his own creation —the Act
which Parliament ought, in his opinion, to have made. Minister O’Connor may be
right or wrong as to the hypothetical expediency of an enquiry such as_ Parliament has
authorised ; but it is his business to administer the law as he finds it, not to let his
personal views or prejudices over-rule the law. And the law says—let it be printed
again—that 11 whenever after the conviction of a prisoner ant doubt OB question arises
as to his guilt, or any mitigating circumstances in the case, or any portion of the
evidence therein, it shall he lawful for any justice, by direction of the Governor —on the
petition of the prisoner, or some person on his behalf, representing such doubt or question
—or by direction of a Judge of the Supreme Court, of his own motion—to summon and
examine on oath, all persons likely to give material information on the matter suggested.”
There is nothing said here of “material facts not under consideration at the
trial.” This demand for new evidence is a figment of Mr. O’Connor’s brain —the Act does
not require new evidence. Why should it ? The object of the section is to afford a means
of remedying any miscarriage of justice, or apparent miscarriage of justice ; for judges and
juries are human, and liable to err, and the section rightly leans to the side of mercy.
But there are hundreds of ways in which a miscarriage of justice may arrive. It
may arrive because some material evidence has not been presented to the jury—and this
is the way which Mr. O’Connor understands. But it may also arrive because the
evidence presented to the jury has been misunderstood, or has not been seen in its true
light, or because a biassed Judge has wheedled or bullied the jury into a verdict, or
because a wave of popular panic has prevented the jury from properly appreciating the
evidence ; or from dozens of other causes. The plain intention of the Act is to give
opportunity of reconsidering all possible cases in which justice may have miscarried.
What right has Mr. O’Connor to limit its operation to one case alone—the case in which
some material evidence has not been brought before the jury ? What excuse has he,
when the Act so plainly declares its intention ?
But, since Minister O’Connor insisted on fresh evidence, why did he not
read the affidavits of James Warren, Lydia Warren, Annie Warren, and Robert
Murphy? Were these affidavits suppressed from him? Had he read them he
would have found many things throwing fresh light on the case—for example, the sworn
statement of James Warren that a few. days previously he had seen prosecutrix being
hugged by another man, not Suffield.
And Minister O’Connor himself admitted that there is “ doubt or question ’’ as
to Suffield’s guilt. “I have been very favorably impressed,” he says, “with the
prisoner’s previous character ; the general estimation in which he has been held by
those who knew him ; the entire absence of anything like concealment or shuffling at
the time of his arrest; his frank, open manner all through in dealing with the police.
Being so impressed, and knowing that the conviction of this man rests upon the
uncorroborated testimony of one witness” —he flies in the face of the Act and refuses
enquiry ! Yet Minister O’Connor’s acumen and capacity are highly praised bv his
friends. Where are they shown in the Suffield case?
And Minister O’Connor might have added that the uncorroborated evidence of that
one witness was riddled with contradictions and absurdities; that it was opposed by a
double alibi, which could not be disproved at the trial, and stands unaffected by unproven
judicial slanders after the trial; and that in order not to believe the alibi you had to
* This is what the Judge's notes say. The newspaper report, presumably taken by a shorthand
writer, and therefore more likely to be verbally exact, says "partly unconscious and wandering.”
Headers who compare the two will notice many such discrepancies between the newspaper report and
the Judge’s notes. The latter have the appearance of having been very carefully revised ; and it is
singular in how many such cases of discrepancy the Judge’s version tells against Suffield.


believe that a mAn of high character and capacity, with every opportunity for the
indulgence of his passions, brutally assaulted under her employer’s windows, as her
employer was getting into bed, a servant-girl whom he had only once or twice seen, and
• had never spoken to —and then went calmly about his work without leaving one trace
of incriminating evidence !
Dr. Manning Theorises.
In spite of Minister O’Connor’s minute, an intermittent agitation was
kept up, and, in 1893, Dr. Manning, N.S.W. Inspector-General of the Insane,
was asked by the Justice Department to report on a theory that Ann Chambers
might, when she charged Suffield with assault, have been under a hallucination
caused by the shock of the bull’s attack. (It may be remarked that, though
the Department has always met protests with “ prave ’orts,” it has apparently
never been convinced of Suffield’s guilt, and has itself realised how insufficient
are Minister O’Connor’s reasons for failing to enquire into his case.) This
was Dr. Manning’s report :
Lunacy Department, Inspector-General’s Department,
Gladesville, 22nd July, 1893.
The question put to me by Mr. Heydon was—as I understand it—lf a woman
being made insensible and injured by an assault from a bull or other animal, such in-
jury involving the genital organs, might on recovering consciousness be under the impres-
sion that she had been indecently assaulted or raped by a man'? My answer was in the
affirmative, and I believe one or more such cases are on record. The case of Annie Cham-
bers—there being insensibility for some time, injury to the genitals, blood on the external
ones, and such turgescenoe as to cause uterine flow at a non-menstrual period with the
attendant irritation—is just such a case as such a mistaken impression might occur in, but
the evidence of Drs. John Harris and Stapleton, two men of more than average ability,
care and skill—perhaps the two best all-round medical practitioners in the Newcastle dis-
trict —renders it certain that in this case the injury was caused by a man, and that the
case was one of rape, partial or complete. *
The question raised by the Minister of Justice is whether the girl’s identification of
Suffield may not have been a mistake, and the result of hallucination or delusion
developed after or during recovery of consciousness. I think such quite possible. Not
that there was hallucination or delusion in the ordinary sense in whieh these terms are
used in psychological medicine, but that there was a mistake in identity developed, owing
to special circumstances, during the struggling return to complete consciousness and
memory. The loss of consciousness in this case was for a time complete, and there was
loss of memory and much subsequent mental fog. It was not due to a mere series of
fainting attacks, but apparently to concussion, in all probability caused by the back of
the head being sharply rapped against the hard ground duripg the assault. Such a blow,
sufficient to cause concussion, would leave little or no bruising, and the girl might not
remember it, or misplace the time of its occurrence. She speaks of a blow on the head
from a stone, “ strong enough to make me silly,” before the beginning of the struggle,
which is not probable. During the period of unconsciousness, more or less complete,
there was much mental confusion. She exclaims about the bull. She mistakes Mr. Crou-
dace for Henry Wilson, a young man she had seen earlier in the evening ; and afterwards
she, as I think, misplaces the time when the blow on the head was received ; and she for-
gets altogether having seen a man named Campbell, who states that he met her and she
turned and looked at him just before the assault.
It is quite possible that in struggling back to consciousness (the injury to genital
organs existing as above mentioned), and endeavoring to fix her assailant, the young men
she knew would be passed through her mind, and one so attractive as Suffield is described
tube, and concerning whom she had heard so much from the girls Warren and May
Stewart, would probably be included among the number, his attractions and the gossip
about him serving to make his a prominent impression, especially as she had seen him on
the day of the occurrence. The fact of his being taken to her bedside before she was quite
herself, though she was not asked to identify him at that time, might serve to fix the im-
pression.
The further question as to what extent under all the circumstances of the ease such
a mistake would be probable, I must answer by stating that having carefully considered
these, and read with great attention the girl’s evidence, I do not consider the mistake
very probable ; the girl’s memory of the immediate antecedent circumstances of the man


Bitting on thegate, and of the assault itself, described much in detail and with obvious truth
in the depositions at the police-court, render it probable that her memory was, at all
events in the main, re-established soon after the assault, and that in stating that Suffield
was her assailant she was probably right.
F. NORTON MANNING.
The Under-Secretary of Justice.
Submitted with reference to the Minister’s minute of the Bth inst. A. C. F.,
24/7/96.
By Way of Commentary.
It is pointed out by way of commentary that Dr. Manning has failed
to read or comprehend the evidence ; therefore his conclusion is worthless—
though the intelligence of the Justice Department has apparently accepted
it as gospel.
1. “The evidence of Drs. John Harris and Stapleton” does not
“render it certain that the injury was caused by a man.” Dr. Stapleton
expressly refused to swear that a man had anything to do with it ; and
Dr. Harris, who swore to penetration—on the strength of an examination
two days after the alleged assault—is quite unable to say whether the
penetration was caused by a man or—fifty things. Also, as already pointed
out, there was no microscopical or similar medically-corroborative evidence.
Consequently, Dr. Manning’s “certainty” is moonshine. Consequently, on
Dr. Manning’s own statement, the hallucination theory might stand.
2. Dr. Manning innocently accepts Ann Chambers’s statements, and
defies the evidence of the Croudaces and Dr. Stapleton. When the Croudaces
found her their evidence shows she was conscious, though she swore she
wasn’t. When Dr. Stapleton saw her he swears she was conscious, though
she swore she wasn’t. Why did she give the Croudaces the idea the bull
had attacked her ? Why did she allow Dr. Stapleton to believe the bull had
attacked her ? Why did she swear she remembered nothing from the time
of the alleged assault till next morning—when she consciously answered
the Croudaces, and was seen conscious by Dr. Stapleton ?
3. Dr. Manning naively notes Ann Chambers’s habit of “forgetting,”
but doesn’t draw the obvious inference. He considers that the girl’s memory
was “re-established soon after the assault.” Then why did she wait till
early next morning, when she was wandering, or had been wandering, to tell
the Croudaces and Dr. Stapleton that a man caused the assault ? Why did
she wait till later on in the morning to tell them it was Suffield ? Dr.
Manning beats uselessly round the bush. Why does he not beat in it—tell
the Justice Department that the sworn evidence of the Croudaces and Dr.
Stapleton proves Ann Chambers conscious on the Sunday night, after the
assault; that, nevertheless, she swears she was unconscious; and ask the
Department which side the lie was on ?
What Suffield Says Himself.
Suffield himself comments acutely on some salient points in the evidence
against him :
The Croudaces heard shrieks. Did no one else of all the household hear the
shrieks? There was no evidence of it. Who then sat up to let the girl in? The
household must have known she was out. Was she supposed to let herself in? Had
she, a servant of a respectable employer, carte blanche to stop out till the small
hours? Did Frank Croudace sit up to let her in? If he did not, who did? And
why didn’t the sitter-up (if there was one) first hear the shrieks?
Why did the prosecutrix pick upon me? Well, it was shown that I was about
the only man she knew in the neighborhood. She did not know me, but had seen
me and asked my name. Now, a man named Campbell swore that he passed prose-
cutrix on the road on the night in question, and, if my memory serves me, he said


that ‘‘she stopped, turned round, and had a good look at him.” Campbell is a man
about my own size, and has something of my appearance.* He used to wear a hat
like mine. If prosecutrix met him on that lonely road in the vicinity of the house
where she knew me to be living, and in the dim semi-darkness of a summer’s night,
don’t you think it probable she would conclude the passer-by to be Suffield 1 Campbell
stated in his evidence that he was walking fast.
I am certain prosecutrix mistook Campbell for me; and, thinking therefore that
I was alone on that road about the time of the occurrence, she felt safe afterwards
in swearing that I was her assaulter.
I was out on the Sunday. Was I watching all day the trams by which prose-
cutrix would return from Wallsend ? If I were not, how could I return home,
contemplating the execution of an outrage, changing my clothes with the object of
intercepting prosecutrix, and hitting the time of her return exactly, almost to a minute?
Do not forget, too, that I am supposed to hare directed my steps towards Croudace’s
house, instead of towards the bush road, where, were I a brute, I could have accom-
plished a cruel outrage at the danger of my own life; and all to procure a passing
pleasure which, to put it bluntly, I could have enjoyed with safety, security, and
reciprocity, any hour of my life, any evening, in Lambton or in Newcastle.
Suffield’s Previous Character.
Suffield here draws attention to the a priori unlikelihood of his com-
mitting the offence with which he was charged. But he does not show the
extraordinary unlikelihood.
Suffield’s known character is all against the supposition that he could
be guilty of the brutal outrage attributed to him. The Warrens, at whose
house he lived, said he was a thorough gentleman. John Chapman, store-
keeper and magistrate, with whom Suffield lived two years, called him
“trustworthy, honest, and good”—“a very high character ” —“a most moral
man.” R. M. Wray, the Maitland sheriff’s officer, after knowing Suffield
five years, gave him “a very high character,” as “a well-educated man of
good morals.” Percy Claye, West Maitland telegraph-master, also knew
Suffield five years, and considered him “a very sober young man, and a very
gentlemanly and agreeable companion.” Says Mr. Claye, “ I never heard him
say anything a child could not listen to ” —in five years’ acquaintance ; though
it is a matter of common knowledge that brutal passions frequently find vent
in brutal language.
Nor was this all : Frank Croudace, who, as assistant-manager of the
Lambton pit, was Suffield’s direct employer, knew him as “a respectable,
well-behaved young man ” —and showed appreciation of his character by
frequently walking in his company out of working though he was master
and Suffield was man. Charles Noble, overman in the colliery, “ had always
found Suffield to be a well-behaved, gentlemanly man.” James Campbell, a
Lambton resident, said Suffield “ bore an excellent character in the place. ”
Even the police were complimentary. Sergeant Salter thought Suffield
was “ a decent young man.” And against this chorus of praise there was not
one word of blame !
More : Suffield’s character in Australia was his character in England.
On March 29th, 1897, C. F. P. Edmundson, an old friend of Suffield’s, wrote
to The Bulletin as follows :
Ripon Rural District Council.
C. F. P. Edmundson, Council Offices, Ripon, Yorkshire,
Solicitor, Clerk. March 29th, 1897.
Dear Sir, — I have seen in the local press some verses (taken from The Bulletin)
said to have been written by Thomas Suffield, who is (so it is said) undergoing a
sentence of 10 years’ penal servitude for a (supposed) criminal assault on a servant-girl.
Some of Suffield’s old schoolfellows in Wensleydale (of whom I am one) are very anxious
to know the full particulars of this unfortunate affair, and also in what way they can
most effectually give him a helping hand.
•Superintendent Brennan denies the resemblance.


We knew Suffield for many years as a boy and man, and we know that ne ■**<>.,
perfectly incapable of such an act as that for which he was convicted, and nothing short
of the most convincing evidence will lead us to suppose that one who was always noted
for his chivalry and gentle behavior to women could in so short a period of time have so
degenerated as to be guilty of such a crime.
I thought poor Suffield was dead years ago, and it was quite a revelation to us to
find he was still living. A reply will greatly oblige.—Yours faithfully,
C. F. P. Edmundson.
And again, on 4th S<ptember, 1897, Mr. Edmundson writes :
Untwitle House, Masham, Yorkshire,
September 4th, 1897.
Dear Sir,— l am very much obliged to you for sending me the copies of The
Bum Etin containing the evidence given against Suffield, on his trial for criminally
assaulting Ann Chambers. Before knowing what the evidence was I felt very strongly
that Suffield oould not be guilty of such an offence, and now that I have had an
opportunity of seeing the evidence I am quite sure that he did not commit it.
I know nothing of your legal procedure in Australia, but in England—and 1
speak as a solicitor with over 20 years’ experience—such a charge, supported by such
evidence, would never have got to a jury at all, or if it did the Judge would very
promptly have quashed the prosecution.
Again thanking you very much for your courtesy—l am, dear sir, yours very
truly, C. F. P. Edmundson.
And it is alleged that this man of lifelong good character—this man
against whose reputation no one in a district where he had lived for years
could say a word—this man who never said anything a child could not listen
to —suddenly gave the lie to his whole previous history—deliberately put
himself on a level with the lowest scoundrels, and risked his neck to brutally
assault a servant-girl who was almost a complete stranger to him—whom lie
had seen once or twice and had never spoken to —under circumstances which
made identification and arrest absolutely certain !
The Utter Improbability of it.
Grant the impossible assumption that Suffield was such a phenomenal
hypocrite that for half a long lifetime he was able to conceal his brutal
instincts from his schoolfellows, his friends, his most intimate associates.
Or grant the improbable assumption that some unexplained, some extra-
ordinary gust of passion might temporarily overpower him and make him
turn his back on habits engendered by years of exemplary conduct. And even
then the crime attributed to him remains no less extraordinary. For Suffield,
as he himself points out, was at least a man of ordinary common-sense.
Why on earth should he set himself to accomplish a cruel outrage on a
stranger, at the danger of his life, “to procure a passing pleasure, which, to
put it bluntly, he could have enjoyed with safety, security, and reciprocity, any
hour of his life, any evening, in Lambton or in Newcastle ” —the one distant
15 minutes’ walk, the other reached by 15 minutes’ further ride in a tram 1*
Further, Suffield was a man of education ; and the effect of education
is to hinder brutal expression of the passions. He was a good-looking
fellow —a very attractive man to women—suppose such a man had wanted
Ann Chambers, was that the way he would have taken to get her ? Is it a
matter of experience that perpetrators of rapes are men of character, men
of education, good-looking, well-dressed men, with a spare pound in their
pockets ? No ; from the ranks of these come seducers, if you like ; but not
brutal outragers. And Suffield, in so assaulting a stranger, after waiting to
be identified, and then going to work as if nothing had happened, must have
known that he was risking his liberty and his life. Do such, men, then, take
such risks, in such circumstances, with such want of provocation —out of mere
naked brutality ? Is it a priori conceivable that Suffield should have committed
the crime laid at his door ?
* Judge Windeyer’s slander presses this argument at ill further. There are physiological limi's.


Some of Suffield’s Letters.
Here are some of Suffield’s letters, written from gaol to his friend,
Warren. They are left as he wrote them, trivialities and all.
Dear Warren,— Maitland Gaol, 27th January, 1891.
Many thanks for your two kind and cheering letters. I had no idea that a bill
was filed against me until I heard it from you. But of course, as you know, I never
expected anything else, indeed I prefer it to be so, Ido most earnestly hope that bail
may be allowed me, and I see no earthly reason why it should not. Ido not, if such be
the case, know who will be good enough to be my bondsmen ; but I feel pure that they
will not be wanting, amongst my many well-wishers and sympathisers in Lambton.
Will you thank W. Thomas for his very kind and sympathetic letter; it is beyond my
power to tell him how much it was appreciated. I also had during the week a kind and
hopeful note from Mr. Walker ;it is not among the least of my many sources of conso-
lation that, amidst all the hurry and worry of political life, he has been kind enough and
feeling enough to send me words of comfort and hope. I am longing with a longing
almost desperate for the day of deliverance to Come. No tongue can tell how awful
these stones and bars have become to me. Tell Thomas I will write again before the
week is over. Remember me to Bob when you see him, and give my love to all the chil-
dren, not omitting little Charley. lam glad to hear Mrs. Warren and yourself are well;
give Mrs. W. my many thanks for her letter. If any of you should by any chance be in
Newcastle, will you call at Lee’s the tailors (Hunter street), they have made a pair of
trousers for me, which they have had some time. Tell them to be good enough to take
care of them until I can call myself. Where is Cronan '! Ido hope that I shall hear
something in the course of this week, definite as to bail. I could surely be doing some-
thing, were I free, to unravel this dreadful mystery. Tell any of those who may be
writing to me, to refrain from saying anything of their opinion concerning the prosecution,
it can do no good, and might do harm. Thanks again, Jim, for all your staunch and
unflinching support. Love to all. — Tom Sufkiklp.
My dear Warren,— Maitland G/01, 25th March, 189'.
I was totally upset by a visit from Cronin last night. You will
remember that a fortnight ago, acting on the advice of Mr. Dent, in which he
assured me you entirely concurred, I wrote to Cronin informing him that Mr.
Thompson would for the future act with him in my case. If Mr. C. had any
objection, it was his peremptory duty to have at once apprised me. I received no acknow-
ledgement of my letter until last night, when he plainly tells me that you and Mrs. W.
have expressed the strongest repugnance to Mr. Thompson’s retention, so much so that
you are resolved, in that event, to limit your evidence. Mr. C. tells me that in adopting this
course, you are actuated first by a want of confidence in Mr. T., and secondly, by the duty
which you owe to your wife and children. Whether your duty to me interferes with your
duty to your family it is a matter for your own conscience to direct your course of action.
I shall be the last, even though my life and liberty depend on your action, to advise you
for one moment to act contrary to the interests of Mrs. W. and the children. But you
have this to consider : That I, a fellow-man, am standing with the contingency of an ad-
verse verdict before me, a verdict which presents three contingencies, one of which
becomes a certainty. They are—lst—The living grave of penal servitude; 2ndly—The cat;
and Srdly—The gallows. This is no romance, but a stern and awful reality. You, Mrs.
W., and your daughter know the falsity, the wantonness of the charge preferred against
me. And lam certain that whatever Mr. Cronin may tell me, you will continue, as I
have always found you to do, to act as becomes an honorable man. I utterly refuse to
believe that Mrs. Warren will do otherwise than act kind as she has ever been to me,
other than as a true and honorable woman. When my friends, who are the paymasters,
engaged Cronin in my defence, they did not do so with any view of promoting Cronin’s
interests; they pay him simply and solely to look after mine. And when,
with very grave reasons, they thought fit to import Mr. Thompson’s services,
what do they oare about any interests of Mr. Cronin’s? Their aim, without
the least regard to Cronin (beyond as a paid agent), is entirely and purely
to protect me from an awful and unmerited punishment. And I refuse to
believe that, in any interests of Cronin’s, you will act in any other manner than
will become you as an honest man. God knows, I have enough suspense and
worry without his little professional jealousy interfering. There is no time to spend on
such nonsense as this. Mr. Thompson acts with and in accordance with Cronin, because
it is my earnest wish that he should do so. Cronin left the interview unfinished. If Ido
not hear from him at once, I refuse to be left in uncertainty, and I shall take most


decisive steps ; I must do so. You will take this letter as in absolute confidence. —Tom
Suffiild.
From these letters no inference as to Suffield’s guilt or innocence is
drawn ; they are printed merely to let readers see better what manner of man he
is. And to the a priori improbabilities in favor of this man let there now be
added the a posteriori improbabilities which spring at once from consideration
of the evidence of his accuser, Ann Chambers.
The Discrepancy as to Time,
From Lambton to Croudace’s, according to the evidence of Ann
Chambers and of Croudace himself, is “about a mile.” * It is a rough road,
going for some distance steeply uphill; and on a warm December night, after
rain, a woman, encumbered by skirts, would take from 16 to 20 minutes to reach
Croudace’s gate. Consider now Ann Chambers’s evidence at the police court: —
I reached Lambton about 20 minutes to 10; I got out at the tram terminus at
Lambton and went to Julia Scott’s aunt, accompanied by Julia Scott, who was with me
from Wallsend. I only remained there for about five minutes. We came out; left for
Croudace’s; Julia Scott accompanied me as far as Croudace-street; she bade me good
night, and I went on by myself. Mr. Croud ace’s place from there (Croudace-street) is
about a mile.
Say five minutes to reach Julia Scott’s aunt, five minutes there ; five
minutes to Croudace-street, and 16 or 20 minutes home—and Ann Chambers
reached Croudace's gates at 10.10 p.m. to 10.15 p.m. But this evidence brought
the witness into direct conflict with all the other witnesses on her side. Said
Julia Scott, at the police court :
The tram reached Lambton about 20 minutes past 9 . . we were at Miss Scott’s
about 10 minutes, and then went to Croudace-street, where Ann Chambers left me.
Say five minutes to Julia Scott’s aunt, 10 minutes there, five minutes to
Croudace-street, and 16 to 20 minutes home —and Ann Chambers reached Croudace’s
gates at 9.55 to 10 o’clock.
James Campbell, at the police court:—
I passed Mr. Croudaoe’s place, going towards Lambton, at about 15 orlOminutes to
10. I met a female at the junction of New Lambton and main Charleston roads ; I was
ooming towards the town and the female was going towards Croudace’s ; no one was with
her ; she was going at a middling pace. ... I got to my place at 6 minutes to 10
by my time; I think I would cover the distance from where I met the girl to my
place in 5 minutes, and certainly under 10 minutes.
Campbell, of course, was a man, and walking downhill —therefore he
walked much faster than Ann Chambers. Say, roundly, he passed Croudace’s
at 9.45 ; met Ann Chambers 9.60 ; reached home 9.66. Then inn Chambers
reached Croudace’s at 9.55 p.m. So, if Julia Scott and James Campbell were to
be believed, Ann Chambers must have reached Croudace’s gates— not, as was
to be inferred from her own evidence, at 10.10 to 10.15 p.m. —but at about 9.66 to
10 p.m.
More, she came in conflict with the Croudaces’ evidence as to the
time of the assault. Thomas Croudace, J.P., said at the trial that he heard
Ann Chambers scream “ shortly after I went to bed at 10 o’clock ” —“ and as
I had just got into bed,” he said at the police-court. Frank Croudace, at the
police-court, heard the scream “ about 10 minutes past 10.” So the question
was— lf, as was to be inferred from her own evidence, Ann Chambers only
reached Croudace's gates at 10.10 to 10.15 p.m., ho'io did she manage to walk 220
yards, and be assaulted “ shortly after 10 o’clock,” 11 at about 10 minutes past 10?”
And, in the interval between the police-court hearing and the trial,
somebody noticed this awkward conundrum, and, apparently, Ann Chambers
* It is really 252 yards short of a mile, but seems farther owing to the roughness and steepness
Of muoh of the road.


altered her evidence to suit. At the trial, she brought her evidence into line
with Julia Scott’s, and swore that “It was about 20 minutes to 10 when I
parted with Julia.” And Ann Chambers was such a modest, prepossessing
witness, and Judge Windeyer was so confident that Suffield was guilty, that
nobody bothered to put two and two together and make five. So Suffield went
to gaol for ten years.
The Discrepancy as to the Blow on the Head.
Ethel Croudace swore that between 4.30 and 6 on Monday morning—the
day after the assault—Ann Chambers, when “quite sensible,” said that “a
man . . . . was sitting on the top gates, and threw a stone and hit me on
the back of the neck ” (Police-court evidence, repeated at trial, substituting
“ head ” for “ neck.”)
May Stewart swore that after breakfast on Monday morning, Ann
Chambers told her that a man .... hit her on the back of the head,
and she fell down ; hither with either a stick or stone, and she fell down.”
(Police-court evidence, repeated at trial.)
After these statements had been made, Ann Chambers was examined by
two doctors, who looked for the bruise made by the stick or stone, and failed to
find it. And at the police-court the blow was lighter, and the stone and the
stick—which would have left a mark—disappeared ; and Ann Chambers did
not fall down. She swore that she “ felt a blow on the back of the head, not
violent to make me pall, but strong enough to make me silly for the
minute.”
After Ann came Dr. Stapleton, who swore there was “no sign of an in-
jury to the back of the head,” and at the trial even “ the blow ” disappeared—
following after the stick or the stone, and the fall. At the trial Ann Chambers
swore “the accused came on to the grass following me, putting his hand to
the back of my head, but not violently.” (Judge’s notes.) And when she was
cross-examined on the matter all that Ann Chambers could say was that she
was “ confused in her recollections ” about the stone ; she “ might have told
Miss Croudace ” about the stone, but she “ didn’t think she told May Stewart.”
Anyhow, she was quite confident at the trial that there was no stone—which,
to be sure, tallied with the medical evidence.
Ann Chambers was from 15 to 20 minutes “ confused in her recollections”
about the time ; she was “ confused in her recollections ” about the stone ;
but she was quite positive it was Suffield who assaulted her—and Suffield went
to gaol for ten years.
The Discrepancy as to the Hairy Coat.
May Stewart swore at the police-court :
I think that she [Ann Chambers] afterwards said, “ Do you know who I think it
was, May ? I think it was Mr. Suffield ; she [said] she would know him by his coat, as he
had a rough one on ; she said it was a hairy one like Master Frank’s coat.
As it happened, Suffield had no “ hairy coat ” —his only coat was of
rough cloth or serge—and Ann Chambers swore at the police court: —
“I do not remember saying I would know him by his coat ... I won’t swear
that I did not say I could not ’’—apparently this “not” should be omitted—“recognise
the person who did it by his hairy coat; do not remember it if I did."
Ann Chambers did not remember the time she left Lambton ; she
did not remember telling Miss Croudace or May Stewart she was hit by
a stone; she did not remember saying she would know her assailant by his
hairy coat ; but she remembered quite clearly that it was Suffield who had
assaulted her—Suffield, whom she had only seen twice in her life, had never
spoken to, and whom she identified quite clearly on an overcast moonlight
night when it was occasionally raining.


The Discrepancy as to the Meeting with Campbell.
James Campbell swore that lie met Ann Chambers on the road between
Lambton and Croudace’s when she was going home—“ he looked at her, and she
looked at him.”
Ann Chambers swore, both at the police-court and the trial, that she
met “two or three boys and girls’'—saying nothing of meeting Campbell.
Yet, coming home at 10 o’clock at night, on a lonely, road, Ann
Chambers must have seen Campbell when she met him five minutes from
Croudace’s gates ; and very likely, as Campbell says, “she looked at him. A
nervous woman, in such circumstances, would look apprehensively at the men
she met ; and Ann Chambers was “rather afraid’ when she saw the man
sitting on the gates.
And if Ann Chambers forgot seeing Campbell, how did she so well re-
member seeing the man on the gates ? And if Ann Chambers found it quite
clear enough to see any person where I saw accused when he first addressed
me,” how was it she missed seeing Campbell ?
The Discrepancy as to Probabilities of Identification.
Ann Chambers had only seen Suffield twice—once on Warren s verandah
when she passed the cottage at a little distance on Sunday morning not
stopping, but walking hastily to the tram ; and once previously in Lambton.
When she saw Suffield on the verandah all she knew was that it was a ‘ man
. . . very like Mr. Suffield;” she “could >ot swear it was him.
Obviously, then, this sight of Suffield was of no assistance at all to Ann
Chambers in her identification of him as her assailant the same evening ; and
she had to rely upon her first sight of him. Thus it became important to show
that on that first occasion she saw him quite clearly, so as to put it beyond
peradventure that her positive identification at 10 o clock on a cloudy night
could not be an error. Uut May Stewart swore (police court evidence) .
“ I was down the street one night with Annie Chambers, in Lambton Isaw Mr.
Suffield ; this was about a month ago; it was a dark night. I think Mr. bufneld was
going up tlie street the same way as we were ; he overtook us and passed us; 1 think it
was in the middle of the street h e passed us. 1 knew Mr. Suffield well and recognised
him; I said to Annie ‘ That is Mr. Suffield, Annie Warren talks about; when 1 said
this accused was a good way off; a few yards off; about the distance bom here to the
court-house door [which would be] about 15 yards ; he was not close enough for a stranger
to recognise him ; it was a clear night with the electric light; there was an electric light
post near where he passed. Ido not think had accused been a stranger to me, 1 would
have recognised him 15 yards off. Annie said, ‘ls that he? ’ We lost sight of him aftei
that. lam quite certain Mr. Suffield passed Annie and myself in the middle of the street,
and that I did not see his face ;he had his bark turned to me ; just one person with him L
never heard Annie say that she saw his face or that she would like to have a look at him.
The electric light directed along the footpath. ... do not know the width of the
street, but Suffield passed us in the middle of the street, within about 2 yards of where
we were in the middle of the street, on the night referred to. I did not see him coming
up, but just when he passed I recognised it was Mr. Suffield ; about as far as from hole
to the fireplace (about 4 or 5 yards ; I showed Suffield to Annie.
Here, then, was precise evidence that the first time Ann Chambers saw
Suffield she only saw his back, some yards away ; while, of the second time, she
says herself that she “could not swear to him”—it was a man “ vmy like
him. And the detail in May Stewart’s evidence is convincing she is “ quite
certain” Suffield “overtook” them and “passed them. Obviously, if
Ann Chambers’ identification was to hold good, she would have to show things
differently. So at the police-court Ann Chambers swore Suffield did not pass
her, but was standing ; and that she “took particular notice of him. At the
trial, after hearing May Stewart’s evidence, Ann Chambers was still more
j.reeise, and swore Suffield “ was standing at Chadwick’s hotel corner.
Thus, according to her own statement, Ann Chambers only saw Suffield


twice before the assault— only once can, she swear she saw him —the other time
she only knows it was a man “very like him.” And, from seeing Suflield
once by night ; and that when she was walking in a street, and when her
companion, who pointed him out to her, swears flatly that she only saw his
back when passing, Ann Chambers is able positively to identify him as her
assailant at 10 o’clock on a cloudy night some weeks later, and to swear to
her identification through thick and thin ! And it was on the strength of
this very dubious evidence—absolutely uncorroborated, opposed by all the
probabilities, and by an alibi sworn by two persons, that Suflield went to gaol
for ten years, despite the grave divergence between the evidence of the two
doctors ; and upon this evidence the Department of Justice has kept him
there, persistently refusing the enquiry which the law allows when “ any doubt
or question arises" as to a prisoner’s guilt.
Lovely place, Botany Bay! beautiful thing, Botany Bay “justice”!
How do three-fourths of the whole male population keep out of gaol?
The Amazing Discrepancy as to the Bull.
When Ann Chambers had been brutally assaulted by an educated man
of high character and intelligence who was not acquainted with her, had
never spoken to her, and had only once seen her ; —who chose for the place
of his assault a spot under her employer’s open bedroom windows, where
her shrieks could be plainly heard, and assistance was certain to come to her
a t once — a nd who chose for the time of his assault 10 o’clock in the evening,
just when she was expected home, before her employer had got into bed—
although he could have waited for her at many convenient spots on the
bush road which she had just traversed; —who was so full of
sexual desire that he thus risked his liberty or life—after permitting the
woman to clearly identify him —although (as the Crown suggested) he had
a mistress, and although he could, have gratified his passions in Lambton or
Newcastle without risk and with comparative pleasure and reciprocity ; —and
who did all this, and walked or ran three-quarters of a mile in his bare feet
to do it, although two women swore he never left his room, and although
neither himself nor his suit of clothes was stained or injured, despite the fact
that he had a violent struggle on damp grass with a sturdy 22-year-old woman
whom he left bruised and bleeding terribly, with her clothes torn in a manner
which only great force could have accomplished ;
When all these remarkable things had taken place, and Mr. Croudace
and his son rushed downstairs and found Ann Chambers “ lying down
crouched up and partly on her side ; with her hair dishevelled, no hat on, and
seeming terribly afraid ; with her hands raised as if in fear, and terribly
shaky” ; then Croudace said, “ What is the matter, Annie ?” and the woman,
just freed from the grasp of a brutal assailant —who, at that moment, was a
few hundred yards away, fleeing for his life as fast as he ecu d consistently
with keeping his bare feet unscratched and unbruised, to show to the police
next day—naturally replied, “ Oh, that Suffield !”
No, she did not.
Then she replied, “ Oh, that man !”
No, she did not. She ieplied, “OH, THAT Bh LL !’
Croudace, J.P., swears it; his son swears it. They looked; and there
u-as the boll —“ about 30 yards from her, on the back road to the house,” says
Croudace, J.P.
This bull was short-horned ; and the plot of ground where Ann
Chambers lay was “its favorite camping-ground,” says the gardener at
Croudace’s. “ Five nights out of the seven it would camp there.” Croudace,
J.P., says “it was perfectly quiet unless ill-used.” Let us see.


Croudace, J.P., says he “heard that a boy named Kennedy was
injured by the bull after some boys had ill-used it. The gardener swears
the bull “ rushed him several times, and once nearly caught him ; sometimes
he had to go round the back way home ” —making a considerable detour —“ in
order to avoid it.” The gardener denies that he ill-used the bull. The
gardener also says the bull knocked a baby’s chair to pieces. Did the baby s
chair ill-use the bull ? And, singularly enough, while Suffield was waiting for
trial, the bull attacked Mrs. Cole, an elderly, grey-haired lady, as she was
coming home from church near by ; inflicted injuries bearing some resem-
blance to those inflicted on Ann Chambers, and probably would have killed
her had not a young man beaten it off with a paling —just as Croudace, J.P.,
and his son might have had to beat it off Ann Chambers with the sticks with
which (anticipating something of the kind ?) they provided themselves before
coming out. Next day the bull was shot by Croudaces orders —because Mrs.
Cole illused it ? Why does its owner shoot a “ perfectly quiet ” bull when an
elderly lady ill-uses it ?
The bull, then, was very likely to attack Ann Chambers ; she led the
Croudaces to believe it had attacked her ; and as they stood there, stick in
hand, and saw her condition, and saw the bull, they accepted her statement
without question. Consequently, Croudace, J.P., did not say, “Nonsense,
Annie; the bull is perfectly quiet ; it would not hurt you unless you
ill-used it.” He said, “Has the bull hurt you, Annie?” She replied,
“I am hurt all over.” Says Croudace, J.P., “My son and I then examined
her carefully about the back and shoulders, expecting to find the thrust of the
bull’s horns ” —all unconscious that the bull was grossly libelled, and that the
responsible ruffian in the bare feet was getting further and further away every
moment. Then Croudace said, “The bull has not horned you ; you are not
hurt, Annie ; do you think you can get up and walk ? ” They lifted her up to
walk her in, and she fainted on the way.
The Croudaces used stimulants and brought her out of her faint, and
still she said nothing of a man ; Frank Croudace went for Dr. Stapleton, who
came and found her “ not unconscious or insensible, and . . . capable
of answering questions put to her, and of recognising persons,” and
still she said nothing of a man ; and it was only between 4.30 and 6 o’clock
next morning chat she told Miss Croudace it was a man —and told no more—
didn’t say it was Suffield. Miss Croudace “asked her again if there was
anything else,” and she said “No;” and “she was quite sensible then,” says
Miss Croudace.
And it is on the evidence of such a prosecutrix that Suffield goes to gaol
for ten years —with a strong minute by Justice-Minister O’Connor to lock
his cell-door quite tight!
If the bull didn’t assault Ann Chambers under the circumstances he
ought to have—for during Sunday night, on her statement, half-a-dozen
respectable people gave him credit for assaulting her. Even next morning
word was sent to Mrs. Chambers that the bull had done some mischief,
and she testifies that she came into her daughter’s bedroom exclaiming,
“Oh, my dear girl, has the bull hurt you?” But by that time the dear
girl told a different yarn, and Mrs. Chambers went for the police.
But did Mr. Croudace, J.P., send for the police ? Did he also go away
to Newcastle on Monday morning, still under the impression that it was
the bull ; and was it only when Mrs Croudace drove in to him in the after-
noon that he learnt it was “that man Suffield”? Apparently the police only came
on Monday afternoon, when Mrs. Chambers made a report to Sergeant Salter
“about a quarter to four o’clock.” But Miss Croudace had known from
6 o’clock that morning that there was a man in it. Why did the Croudaces
not call in the police at once, seeing that the scoundrel might have been


employing the precious hours to flee out of reach of justice? Did they
also—knowing what Ann Chambers had told them the night before —did they
also scout the notion of a man? Did Mr. Croudace, J.P., from 6 a.m. to
3.45 p.m., wilfully leave his inoffensive bull under the scandalous imputation of
assaulting a modest and prepossessing young female ?
There seem to have been two alleged criminals concerned in this case
who haven’t had fair play. One is Suffield ; the other is the Bull.
The Astounding Discrepancy as to the Unconsciousness.
All the time the Croudaces were talking to her as she lay on the
ground on Sunday night, and all the time she was answering them, Ann
Chambers was unconscious. (So she says.) Vide Ann Chambers’s police-
court evidence.
I was lying on my back ; he was kneeling down in front of me. .. . . that
was all I recollect; I lost consciousness. The first person I recollect seeing was Miss
Ethel Croudace; this was the following day, on Monday.
When the Croudaces found Ann Chambers she was “lying down,
crouched up, and partly on her side.” She was left lying on her back. Do
unconscious persons crouch up and turn partly on their sides ?
She was unconscious when “ seeming terribly afraid do unconscious
people seem “ terribly afraid ? ” She was unconscious when “ her hands were
raised as if in fear, and terribly shaky do unconscious people raise their
hands as if in fear, and shake them terribly ?
She was unconscious when Croudace, J.P., asked her a distinct ques-
tion—“ What is the matter, Annie?” and got a distinct natural answer,
“ Oh, that bull!” She was unconscious when Croudace, J.P., asked her a
second distinct question—“ Has the bull hurt you ?” and got a second distinct,
natural, consecutive answer, “I’m hurt all over.” Do unconscious people,
then, talk, and answer questions, aild answer them sensibly and categorically ?
“ We lifted her to her feet,” said Croudace, J.P.—to her feet, not in our
arms —“ and supported ” —not carried —“ her through the fowlyard gate, from
which she was lying a few yards away ; I can scarcely suppose her conscious of
what she was saying”—no, not then —“at the time I said ‘lt is all right,
Annie, the master is with you ; ’ after going a few yards 1 felt her growing
heavier, and found she had fainted ” —then she had not fainted and was not
UNCONSCIOUS BEFORE.
Now comes son Croudace to corroborate his father. “She seemed
terribly frightened and excited ” —how can an unconscious person seem excited ?
. . “My father then asked her to get up and try to walk ; she said she
could not.” (Here is a third clear, consecutive answer to a distinct question.)
What does Croudace, J.P., mean by asking unconscious females to get up and
walk ? “We then assisted her to her feet”—although unconscious—“and after
going a few feet she fainted ” —although unconscious.
For, said Ann Chambers at the trial, describing the assault, “he
(Suffield) was then kneeling down in front of me, and Ido not recollect any-
thing AFTER THAT, AND I DO NOT RECOLLECT ANYTHING MORE TILL MONDAY
MORNING WHEN I FOUND MYSELF IN BED AT CrOUDACE’s HOUSE.” Yet Dr.
Stapleton, who saw her about 11 o’clock on the night of the alleged assault, said
“ she appeared upset ; she was not unconscious or insensible ; and, I believe,
was capable of answering questions put to her, and of recognising persons.”
Whom are you going to believe —Ann Chambers on the one hand, or the
Croudaces and Dr. Stapleton on the other ?
Any man of ordinary intelligence can make a hypothesis to fit the circum-
stances. Ann Chambers came home about 10 o’clock, and found a man sitting
on the gate. Possibly the man meddled with her to some extent—though not


very much, for he hadn’t time to meddle very much ; but if he did he meddled
near the gate—he wasn’t such a fool as to take her up close to Croudace’a
bedroom window when the household was just going to bed. Then Ann
Chambers—who had resisted the man very hard, but had been stunned
by the stone and frightened by the threats—went on to the house to
complain. As she came near the bull’s camping-ground, on the back road to
the house, she saw the bull—the evil-disposed bull with the bad reputation ;
and turned across to the front road to avoid him. The bull chased her, caught
her, and tumbled her over—just about 10 minutes past 10. She screamed ;
and Croudace heard her. As she lay on the ground the bull attacked her again,
and again she screamed—it sounded more faintly because she was on the ground
and the first shock had knocked the breath out of her. And probably the bull
gave her three or four more butts before Croudace came down with his stick.
But he didn’t horn her, for his horns were very short and straight—just little
pegs standing straight out from his head—and he couldn’t horn her unless
he attacked her sideways. And if he tore up the ground to any extent
it couldn’t be distinguished next morning, for the ground was gravelly ; and,
besides, the bull and other cattle were continually roaming over it.
In spite of the shock and fright, Ann Chambers, who was a strong girl
and not of delicate temperament, remained conscious as long as she was
lying down. It was nonsense for her to say otherwise. How on earth could
she conduct a conversation with the Croudaces if she wasn’t conscious 1 W hen
the Croudaces assisted Ann Chambers to her feet, the blood left her head, and
she fainted—naturally enough. But she was soon brought out of her faint, and
when Dr. Stapleton came he correctly says that he found her upset, but quite
conscious. And it is absurd for Ann Chambers to say she wasn’t. After
Dr. Stapleton went away, however, her temperature rose, a little fever set in,
and she grew lightheaded—again naturally enough, especially as the Croudaces
had given her brandy or whisky to bring her out of her faint. And, more or
less lightheaded she remained till the following morning, when —as she really
wasn’t very much hurt—her good constitution and healthy body put her all
right again, and she was able to converse quite cheerfully on things in
general.
Very likely, when Ann Chambers was lightheaded during the night,
die talked and muttered, and very likely she talked about the man. Of
course, she had meant to tell about the man all along ; but somehow
she had forgotten to mention the matter the night before. And when she grew
clearheaded, and Miss Croudace enquired about the man, of course she exposed
the villain at once. She didn’t expose his name—possibly because at that time
she hadn’t thought of his name, and later on, when
The hypothesis, which may be good or bad, stops here.
Bull versus Man.—The Medical Probabilities.
For purposes of medical comparison, here is a statement of injuries
inflicted by Croudace’s bull on Mrs. Cole, the elderly lady whom it attacked
one Sunday as she was coming home from church —while Suffield was awaiting
h s trial. The statement is by Dr. Nash, who attended Mrs. Cole :
Wai.lsknd, 14th January, 1891.
Thos. Walker, Esquire, M.L.A.
Sir, —At the request of Mr. Thos. Cronin, solr., and with the consent of my
patient, I send you particulars of injuries received by a woman under my care on the
13th day of December, 1891.
[Copy.]
“On outer aspect of left fore-arm near elbow, a wound of the skin 3in. long, un-
dermining of skin for some inches around, bruises of adjacent parts.
“ Bruise over centre of back of l ight upper-arm.


“Extensive bruise over right buttock ; superficial skin scraped off for 4in. long by
lin. broad.
“ Bruise on right labium inajus : bruise just outside left labium majus; small bruise
on inner aspect of left thigh adjacent to perineum ; bruise on perineum behind vaginal
orifice.
“2nd, 3rd, 4th, and sth ribs on left side, three inches from margin of breastbone,
on left side broken across inside the periosteum, ends of bone not separated.
“ Bruising over left ribs behind at the angles.”
With regards, yours faithfully,
JOHN B. NASH.
Compare now the medical evidence in the case of Ann Chambers :
Dr. Stapleton said :
In addition to the bruised right eye and scratch on left cheek, there was a bruise
on the shoulder above the left armpit; one on the back below the left shoulder-blade ;
a bruise on each hip, two bruises on the right region, a scratch on the left groin, a bruise
on the inside of left thigh on the upper part, two large bruises on the back of the right
thigh, a bruise above the left knee and one below the right knee. There was no wound
on any part of the body, and no sign of any injury on the back of the head. The lower
half of the inner surface of the mucous membrane of the labia majora had a red blush ;
I examined the hymen and found it to have a central opening; there was no mark of
injury on it; there was no wound in the vagina, and the blood came from the womb.
I cannot swear that penetration has taken place, and have not examined her so as to
know whether she has a virgin uterus ; I cannot swear that she has been carnally
known; she appeared to be very stiff; I have attended on her since; she has evidently
been subjected to violent treatment. I should have expected more tearing of the clothes
if a bull had done it; if the bull had made those marks it could have caused the injuries,
but it is highly improbable. If the bull had struck her in the stomach it would have
caused flooding.
Dr. John Harris said :
There was a blackening of the right eye and a scratch on the left cheek, a bruise
on the left shoulder, abrasions on the back of the chest, a bruising about both hips, and
a scratch or mark at the back of the waist running from each hip downwards, and
inwardly there was also a bruise on the-upper third of the inside of the left thigh,
and large bruises on the back of the right thigh, also a bruise on the right knee;
the external genitals were stained with blood in a partly dried condition ; the inside
of the labia was reddened and chafed; on the posterior parts there was a quantity
of dark blood oozing from the vagina ; the hymen was a circular one with central
opening, and, on digital examination, was freely dilatable, such as would allow of
complete intercourse with an adult male ; the hymen itself did not seem reddened or
inflamed; the Wood was derived from the uterus or womb, which appeared to be in
a virginal condition. Judging from the chafed appearance of the labia majora, I am
of opinion that intercourse had been at least attempted ; it could have been completed.
I have seen the stained clothing; it would be in accordance with the symptoms
described ; if the strings through the clothing were strong, a person dragging the
clothing downwards from behind would cause the marks described, the downward
mark described as extending from the hip downwards and inwards. The bruises about
the body have no particular distinctive marks, and might have been produced by a
bull, but the chafing of the genital organs could not, in my opinion, be thus produced.
I can swear that the parts are so dilatable that penetration would leave no mark,
and I am certain penetration has taken place; it might have taken place a month
ago, but the chafing of the labia majora, on which I found my opinion, was quite
recent; a bull knocking a girl down and throwing her about would not cause the
chafing described ; if a bull got his horn in the vagina, I would expect a lacerated or
ruptured vagina. If the girl had given consent to intercourse with a big man at the
gate outside, it might be possible for the chafing to take place as described.
As to the clothes, here is Sergeant Salter’s evidence :
I now produce these clothes —a jacket, which is torn, a skirt torn from the
band, a pair of drawers covered with blood-stains, and torn at the knees, a chemise,
with large stains of blood on the back, scarcely any on the front; I also produce a black
satin jacket with earthy stains upon it, a flannel petticoat with blood-stains upon it, and
a white petticoat with blood-stains upon it. ,
In Ann Chambers’s case there may have been a man as well as a bull
Point is : Are not her graver injuries at least as likely to have been inflicted
bv a bull as a man ? What sort of a man would it be who, in the course of


a struggle lasting little more th'in five minutes —from the time when
the Croudaces heard the screams to the time when they rushed downstairs—
could inflict injuries which would confine an able-bodied girl to bed for a
week, and to the houße for a fortnight ? What sort of an outrage would it be
that would fail to wound the hymen or vagina, and chafe the labia so slightly
that one doctor thought the chafing might be a morbid blush, yet so severely
shock the uterus that bleeding continued two days afterwards ? Are these
injuries probable concomitants of a sexual assault ? or do they not point rather
to the application of brute force with a violence not to be expected from the
most desperate ruffian—much less from a man of the character of Suffield, in
the circumstances in which Suffield was placed ?
The comparative gravity of the injuries inflicted upon Ann Chambers
and upon Mrs. Cole may be accounted for by circumstances. Had Ann Chambers
been an elderly, grey-haired lady, her ribs might have snapped too. Had the
bull not been excited before he met Mrs. Cole, she too might have got off with
bruises. Plainly Ann Chambers was struck with less violence, and her heavy
jacket may have prevented her skin from being torn as Mrs. Cole’s was. But
the similar character of the injuries to each suggests that they may have had
the same cause—acting with more or less violence. Had Ann Chambers ex-
hibited the distinct labial bruises noted in the case of Mrs. Cole, what
conclusive proofs of assault by a man those would have appeared to Judge
Windeyerand to the jury after hearing his summing up !
Dr. Harris thought the body-bruises might have been caused by a bull,
but the chafing was the work of a man. Quite possibly Dr. Harris was right in
both theories. Ann Chambers may have been assaulted by a man near the
gate, and as she approached the house—to give the alarm, of course—the bull
may have intercepted her. Dr. Stapleton “should have expected more tearing
of the clothes”—possibly from the bull’s horns. But, as pointed out, the bull
had no horns worth mentioning—and his small, perfectly-straight apologies for
horns issued from his head at right angles, and would not touch the object he
was striking unless he attacked sideways.
The bull’s own testimony in the matter is badly wanted—but the bull is
dead, and Ann Chambers has disappeared ; and much of the other evidence has
been knocked endways. Suffield’s innocence may be proven to the satisfaction
of a court of enquiry ; but the guilt of the real assailant —if there was an
assailant other than the bull—will probably never be proven.
The Prosecution’s Single Plea.
It must be plain to every reader that to condemn a man on the evidence
of one such witness, in the face of so many discrepancies and improbabilities, was
a monstrous and scandalous prostitution of the forms of justice. And for excuse,
the prosecution has only a single effective plea—the friendship between Suffield
and the Warren family, and between Suffield and Mrs. Warren. Even at the
trial, of course, it was plain that the essentially incredible story of the prosecu-
trix became absolutely worthless if the Warrens’ alibi held good. Consequently
counsel for the prosecution devoted himself to break down the alibi. The
singular injustice of the system which appoints clever and well-paid coun-
sel to prosecute an accused* man, and leaves the accused to his own
devices for a defence, was never better exemplified than in Suffiekl’s
case. Suffield was locked in gaol awaiting trial, subjected to harassing
anxiety, and to all the disturbing and enervating influences of confinement.
He was deprived of the opportunity of securing evidence on his own behalf, and
forced to rely wholly on the gratuitous efforts of his friends and the sympathis-
ing public. From the time of his arrest the prosecution was pushed forward
with what seemed extraordinary zeal. Even if Suffield’s committal
was justified, the refusal of bail was, under the circumstances, wholly un-
justifiable. Suffield went to gaol with the threat hanging over him that


“ Judge Windeyer would come to string him upas he strung the Mount Rennie
boys ” ; and, sure enough, Judge Windeyer did come. Over the whole of the
preliminaries of the Suffield trial, and over the trial itself, hangs a cloud of
sinister mystery which will doubtfully be dissipated even at an open-enquiry.
When the trial came on, Mr. C. G. Heydon was specially sent up from
Sydney to prosecute. He pressed the case against Suffield vigorously, and in
that he did his duty, and—according to legal custom—no more than his duty.
Nevertheless, that is a mistaken system by which the Department of Justice
sends counsel to prosecute a prisoner as a hound is put on the scent of a quarry.
However fair-minded he may be, a barrister in such circumstances can hardly
avoid feeling that it is his place to fight for the side which fees him ; and, by a
singular perversion of principles, that side is considered to be better served
when—-rightly or wrongly—the prima Jacie case of the police is established to
the satisfaction of a jury—as if it were the business of the community to secure
convictions, and not to secure justice ! Add to this the instinctive prepossession
of counsel, Judge and jury against a person who stands in the dock accused of
a villainous crime - simply because he is in the dock, and the crime is villainous;
add the desire to win, which every combat brings, and which, in a law-court,
resolves itself into a vehement zeal to beat the opposing counsel and secure the
verdict—because “every man is a sportsman”; and the array of influences
tending to prevent the most fair-minded of public prosecutors from giving due
weight to a prisoner's defence becomes formidable indeed.
Mrs. Warren and her daughter made it practically certain that Suffield
was in his bedroom all Sunday evening until a quarter to 12. Mr. Heydon
commented on the singular unanimity of their evidence. But they were
mother and daughter, together all the evening, observing the same set of cir-
cumstances at the same time, and it would have been much more singular if
their memories of what took place had failed to tally. It was sought to prove
that the statement as to the four knocks, made by both, cast doubt upon their
testimony ; for how, it was suggested, would the mother remember the pre-
cise number of knocks, and how would the daughter remember, if they had not
previously arranged their evidence ? And, to the male mind, such unanimity
on a point of detail does appear a little remarkable. But it is not at all remark-
able to th e female mind. Such little things are precisely the kind of things that
a woman remembers —just as she remembers what another woman was wearing
on a given occasion, years before, or at what age a child cut every tooth, or a
hundred apparent trifles which most men, if they ever notice, forget at once
because their minds are builtthat way. And, as each calling of Suffield necessitated
Mrs. Warren’s rising to knock at his door, both she and her daughter were
likely to remember exactly how many times she knocked. The writer is fre-
quently called by a woman at a specified hour, and it is common for him to hear
the remonstrance, “ Are you coming ? This is the third time I’ve called you ”
—or as the case might be. He, thinking of other things, did not know the
number of times he had been called ; but the woman’s mind had registered
them infallibly. And, for the sake of experiment, he this morning questioned
her:
“Are you sure you called me three times? ”
“Yes.”
“ I think it was only twice.”
“No, it was three times—l called you once just when the milk-boy came, and vou
didn’t answer ; and then I came and called you again after baby had her breakfast; and
then again when I brought the paper in ; and this is the fourth time.”*
Observe the verificatory detail—the milk-boy ; baby’s breakfast ; the
paper ! That is how a woman remembers, and those trifles are precisely what
she remembers—as prosecutor Heydon will find on experimenting for himself.
No ; the identity of the testimony of two women in the same place, at


the same fcime, under the same circumstances, is not at all surprising ; and
there remains only one pretext for disbelieving the Warrens’ conclusive aliU.
That pretext is the slander formulated by Judge Windeyer in so many
words ; and hinted to the jury'by the prosecution at the trial.
The only ground'for the slander is that when Suffield was being removed
to Maitland for trial, and was saying good-bye to his friends, he kissed Mrs.
Warren as she stood in the police-court yard. Suffield had been locked up for
a week ; he had seen the determined way in which Ann Chambers gave her
evidence, and he must have realised, despite his affirmations of innocence, how
serious was the charge, how grave his situation. Now he was going to Mait-
land gaol to be locked up for three months awaiting trial—thanks to the action
of the police magistrate in refusing bail.
In the police yard as Suffield stepped out of the lock-up were Mr. and
Mrs. Warren, Sergt. Salter, Superintendent Brennan, and others. Suffield
shook hands with Warren and others ; then he turned to Mrs. Warren, shook
hands with her also, and kissed her.
Now, Mr. Heydon, who pressed this against Suffield, is more or less a
man of the world. Does he think that a man who nourishes a guilty passion
for a woman usually selects, as an occasion to give evidence of it, a time and
place when her husband, several policemen, and others, are present looking on
with all their eyes ?
Why, there is no more circumspect behaviour on earth than that of a
man in such circumstances. Innocence is careless what it says or does ; but
guilt is always cautious. That is the common experience—why should Suffield
reverse it ?
Had evidence been brought that Suffield kissed Mrs. Warren in a corri-
dor or behind a door, or when he thought no witnesses were present, then
Judge Windeyer’s slander would have been less obviously foolish ; but what
pure-minded man would imagine for a moment that his action would be mis-
interpreted if, when about to go to gaol for three months to await his trial on a
disgraceful charge, he kissed the woman who knew him to be innocent, who
had been kind to him, in whose family he had lived—not secretly or privately,
but in open daylight, in a public place, in the presence of her husband and
half-a-dozen other witnesses ?
The judges of Marie Antoinette found a dirty motive in her affection for
the little child her son. There are men who would find a dirty motive in a
dewdrop.
And consider : Mrs. Warren was seven years older than Suffield, and
mother of five children. Apart from Judge Windeyer’s slander, there was not
a breath against her or her husband. They seem, indeed, most worthy, respect-
able people. James Warren is a gardener with the highest testimonials. He
was employed for years at Sydney Botanic Gardens ; for seven years with B on.
W. A. Long, at Warwick farm ; for a year with Mr. Robert Ritchie, at Bowral ;
for five years with Mr. Croudace, at Lambton ; and for five years with Mr,
Frank Witherspoon, at Newcastle. Mr. Ritchie says Mr. and Mrs. Warrentook
charge of his household during his family’s absence, and he found them “ both
thoroughly trustworthy, conscientious, obliging, industrious, and well-con-
ducted.” The other employers speak in similar language.
And it is this man and this woman whose lives have been embittered and
whose reputation has been attacked by the proofless, justiceless slander brewed
in secret by Judge Windeyer to defend his indefensible conduct in the Suffield
case !
The Inherent Absurdity of it All.
According to her own evidence, that of Julia Scott, and that of Janies
Campbell, Ann Chambers could not possibly have reached Croudace’s gates


mi , \ I LLiL &1. IIATk THE SL bFI ELL) CASE. —The measurements in yards are shown by figures, taken from Gate marked rv
« a f I. t egei , assault lies m the fork of the two roads in front of Mr. Croudace’s house, about where the top of the appears in the lettering
iQon '‘r .i-r tiu ? jL f :TlX 'lesires to know if it is true, as alleged, that a new garden fence has been erected in front of Mr. Croudace’s house since
, ana t “ V'u 1 S a 6 S /!, me ie,ght as , the ol(l one an<l the same distance from the house ? The figures of distances, of course, refer to the present-day fence.
Ine snort cut by which Ann Chambers travelled should be continued to the junction of the road shown as enclosing Lambton Park.


before 9.55 p.m. Considering that the man who was on the gate molested
her—and struck or did not strike her on the back of the head, according as
you believe one or other of her stories—she could not possibly have reached
the spot where she was assaulted before 10 p.m. Most probably it was a
little later ; but give her all the rope possible.
Thomas Croudace heard the first scream “as I had just got into bed
and he went to bed “about 10 o’clock, or a little before” (police-court
evidence). Frank Croudace heard the first scream “about ten minutes
past 10.”
When Thomas Croudace heard the first scream, he ‘ ‘ immediately put
his head out of the window to listen ” ; and he heard a second scream.
He “ immediately coo-eed clearly and loudly ; this was followed by a third cry,
fainter than the others ; I then coo-eed again, and shouted words to this effect,
‘Wait there, lam coming.’ I put on my trousers and slippers, and shouted
for my son Frank ... we rushed downstairs. ’
Now turn to Ann Chambers’s evidence at the trial. She describes how
she walked towards the house, the accused following her. She “shouted and
screamed out several times during the struggle ” ; “ and I struggled with him
a good while, and he tore my dress, and tried all in his power to throw me
down, and I struggled a long while before he did, ’ and so on.
The “struggle” must have taken place at or near the spot of actual
assault, and, according to Ann Chambers, it lasted “ a long while ” —naturally
enough, for she was a strong woman of 22, and could offer a stout resistance.
Thomas Croudace could not possibly have missed the girl’s first scream,
for he was wide awake, his windows were open, and had “just got into bed”
when he heard “ a scream.”
[The singular point whether Mr. Croudace and family went to bed
without leaving a light burning, or without anyone icaiting up fo' the girl ,
although they knew she was out and was expected home about 10 o'clock has never
been cleared up.]
Ann Chambers knew she was expected home ; she mxist have seen the
light in Croudace's bedroom when she reached the gates ; she was certain some of
the household were awake ; and she screamed “several times” during “the
long time ” that the struggle continued. And, of course, she would scream
at the beginning of the struggle, when the first violent hands were
laid on her.
Now, how did this extraordinary ruffian find tmie to assault her? Where
did he find the nerve? They were struggling “a long time,” and her first
scream had attracted Croudace’s attention; he had coo-eed “clearly and
loudly ” in answer to the second one ; it would not take him much more than five
minutes to get into his trousers and slippers, rush downstairs, and run 72 yards
across the garden ;— why, the Croudaces must have been on the spot of the assault
while the ruffian was still assaulting—before the “ long time ” had elapsed !
Or, take it another way, Ann Chambers’s “ long time ’ must have been
at least ten minutes from her first scream. It would take at least ten minutes
to wrestle a stout girl into “unconsciousness” —and the man merely wrestled.
But it could not have been ten minutes from the first scream before the
Croudaces were on the spot—unless there were long intervals between the
screams, which is not likely, when the girl knew assistance was within call.
There could not have been very long intervals between the screams ; for the
Croudaces had carried the girl in and Frank Croudace was down to Lambton to
Dr. Stapleton by about eleven.
Twist it any way you will, and find the time for the assault after the
screams, after the “long” struggle, after the girl became “unconscious”
(though the girl was never “unconscious”—ride the Croudaces’evidence).


Twist it any way you will, and find, the man who would cont inue such an
assault after his victim’s screams had been answered by a clear, loud coo-ee
from a bedroom window 78 yards away, and by a man shouting, “ Wait there, I
am coming 1 ’
And this man was Suffield, whose sanity is obvious, and whose good
character a dozen witnesses affirm.
This man was Suffield who (as the prosecution alleged) had a mistress,
yet had so much energy to spare for hanging himself ! who had women within
call at Lambton and Newcastle, yet brutally assaulted a stranger at the risk of
his life !
This man was Suffield, who coolly watched his victim along a long
and lonely bush road, and assaulted her by choice almost under her employer’s
bedroom window, whefc her employer was going to bed !
This man was Suffield, whose clean moleskin trousers and clean blue shirt
showed not one spot or stain, and whose face and hands and body showed not
one scratch or mark or bruise, after this “ long struggle ” on a drizzly night
with a sturdy 22-year-old woman, who was bruised all over and lay in bed for a
week, and “fought like a tigress for her honour's sake ” {vide Croudace’s police-
court evidence).
This man was Suffield, who risked his life under these circumstances
after sitting on the gate for his victim to identify him—on the gate, where he
could hear the bull laughing at him !
This man was Suffield, whom two women swear was all the time lying in
his bedroom, upwards of half-a-mile away.
/ This man was Suffield, who, after accomplishing this record outrage, in
this record time, in this record place, under these record circumstances, calmly
walked down Lambton pit and kept his Tangye pump going for 16 hours, and
then calmly walked home to tea to be arrested.
And on the strength of that yarn Suffield went to rot in gaol
for ten years ; on the strength of that the Botany Bay Department of Justice
refuses to permit the enquiry into his case which the law expressly
enjoins !
Recent Remarkable Proceedings of the Justice Department
It is not to be supposed that the ridiculous weakness of the case against
Suffield has escaped the Justice Department. Recently, at all events, that
Department has appeared quite willing to let Suffield out of gaol, if it could
only maintain its reputation for stupid consistency, and avoid the public
scandal of an enquiry which would prove it in the wrong. It looks, indeed,
as if the N.S.VY. Department of Alleged Justice has become convinced
that an enquiry cannot be much longer delayed unless it has a new
plea to fall back upon—such as the plea that' “Suffield has petitioned
(or has announced his intention of petitioning) for a remission of his
sentence ; and the Department is prepared to favorably consider the peti-
tion. As, therefore, he will be at liberty in a few weeks, there is no
necessity to incur the enormous expense [‘ enormous expense ' will be good] of
an enquiry.” In other words, “the man is practically out of gaol; why
bother further?” And the average M.L.A., only too glad of an excuse to be
friendly with the Government that dispenses loaves and fishes, will be only too
ready to accept the excuse for keeping quiet. But if one or two do protest
further, there is another possible answer : “ Innocent men do not petition to be
released ; they petition for an enquiry.” And, notwithstanding that this
answer is essentially fallacious, and that Suffield has grown grey in petitionin''*'
for an enquiry, many people will swallow the claptrap. Anything (as in the
Mount Rennie case) to avoid the judicial scandal, the light on the dark places
of Alleged Justice that an enquiry might bring.


Look at the facts At the beginning of August the Department
caused Suffield to be informed that his petition for release at the end
of the year would be favorably considered. Now, Suffield has all along
declined to petition for release. “I don’t want any special remission oj
sentence,” he says, “I am an irnocent man, and I want Justice I want
an euquiry into my case.” And he was true to himseK still. So he re-
plied that he would not petition for release— which, when you come to
think that the man has been six and a-half years in gaol, with the
system” of Botany Bay grinding the spirit out of him, argues some pluck.
Maybe it also argues some innocence? —would a consciously guilty man keep
up the fight so long, and refuse liberty when it was offered him ? But that is
by the way. Anyhow, Suffield refused to petition ; and, of course, the matter
dropped. The Department justly remarsed, “ Well, we’ve offered to do him a
good turn ;if he likes to be surly that’s his own look-out. ” No ; that is what the
averaqe Department would say; ihe remarkable Justice-Department did not say any-
thinq of the kind; and the matter did not drop. The Department wrote again : If
Suffield liked to change his mind at the end of the year, it would still
be pleased to favorably consider a petition for release !! ! Curious, very
Looks as if the Department were begging a favor from Suffield, not Suffield
from the Department. Do Justice-Departments, then, beg favors from guilty
prisoners ?—from men whom they think are guilty ?—from men
Anyhow, Suffield must have read the communication with mixed feelings
—astonishment, doubtless, the chief. And he did not reply. Probably he
considered that one word was as good as a thousand, and his silence was a
dignified rebuke. So this alleged villain, having refused two offers of liberty
because he did not want liberty, but justice—resolutely set himself to work
out his sentence. And the matter dropped in earnest. Did itj No tear !
The remarkable Justice-Department having twice a,s good as offered this guilty
felon liberty if he would petition, and the offer having been received once with a
negative, and once with a silence as'significant as a negative—the Department
tried a third time to get Nuffield to petition for release !! ! What is a Department
of Justice, that it should go out of its way to release abominable prisoners like
Suffield before they have served their regular sentence ?—prisoners who, as
Judge Windeyer said at Suffield’s trial, “escaped the capital charge” because
the jury gave him “the benefit of the doubt which existed as
to whether or not he had succeeded in his foul design on the girl who,
unfortunately, had been rendered unconscious by the brutal treatment”—
“ miscreants ” from whom “the strong arm of the law should be held out
to protect innocent girls”? What is a Department of Justice, that it should
try time after time, make effort after effort, to let such men petition for
release l—and why does it do it f— against the prisoner’s wish. Suffield has
himself stated the position very clearly. “There are but two issues in my
case ” he says ; “if I am guilty of outraging that girl, then I deserve that my
sentence should be served to the very last day; if lam innocent, then I
deserve the fullest reparation for the wrong done me by destroying the best
years of my life ; —there is no room for a mitigation, no room for a petition for
release.”
Enter Mr. Griffith, M.L.A., to Suffield in gaol on August 2nd. Mr.
Griffith is the Labor-member who was returned to Parliament largely because
he promised the Lambton voters to get an inquiry into Suffield’s case—and not
long ago he moved the adjournment of the Assembly to discuss the matter—
and it was discussed —and Mr. Griffith left the matter to the right-feeling of the
Government—and there the matter ended, till the Department permitted Mr.
Griffith to have a special interview with Suffield. And to what end ?To this,
apparently : that Mr. Griffith should break down Suffield’s refusal to petition !
Was ever such a thing heard of before ? Once—the Department had been
refused ; twice —it had been ignored ; the third time—well, what could be done


byword of mouth ? by Suffield’s parliamentary representative? by the man
who had advocated hw cause ? Did it strike Su Hi eld that this was queer-this
anxiety that lie should petition for release on the part of the Department
man h persistently refused his petitions for enquiry ? Suffield is an educated
™ n a o n ~ but e Mr me rHffiM ;he i 1,, J" nc 1 fc “ )n to c i istl l ' usfc Grecian gifts ? One does not
now , but Mr. Gnfhtli shook him, and the harassed wretch, unutterably
l° f • T ipnSOnme " t ’ was f “ r a moment led from his high ground of
punciple into a consideration of Ins personal sufferings. He promised—to
consider and give an answer in a week; and Mr. Griffith departed— to make
his report to the remarkable “Justice” Department?
ie , we . e k Passed, and, after consideration, Suffield for the third
tune refused to petition for reJease ; and thereupon the very peculiar
b lf the ™ atfc f r drop—because it had to. It was naturally** asked :
lat 18 th ® re behind these extraordinary proceedings of an alleged
°J , JUSICe ’ wh «n. dealing with an alleged brutal prisoner,
m d who e iT d have committed an abominable outrage on a woman,
and who only escaped hanging because the jury did not believe or did
not understand the evidence, and yet did not wish to offend the Judge, who
believed and did not understand the evidence ? The reply is that behind these
proceedings is the Botany Bay enpury) things up } hush
thmus up! for Gods sake don t let the public have a chance of learning
sent to e blundered grievously, and an innocent man has been
thesron, ff ™ P enal servitude? That , apparently, is what lies behind
the strong efforts of the Department of Alleged Justice to get Suffield to petition
nrisonir!!?t 1 " fe L ren I tlaU y acknowledge his official status as a
would abated lnf ® lentiall y a/mit that bis sentence was more or less just, since lie
would abandon his appeal for justice in order to sue for mercy.
that ft, lB S “ ffiel d S ulJ ty or innocent ? The writer does not know ; but lie holds
18 ai T 1 f l ?' m , ense of evidence to show that he has been condemned
wrongfully If lie be guilty, enquiry will surely set the matter at rest, and
convince thousands who now believe in his innocence. And if he be innocent
i.Wv iS 0 , Wd / epay b r I°, r H ,SS ° f his B nod lia,lie ’ the loss of his
Ne w \ nh W 1 P° r UCh f 1,18 hfe? Tt is Sfcill hoped that there exists in
New South Wales Parliament some man who will take hold of Suffield’s case
foi enquiry and press lfc to conclusion in defiance of pious Pharisees and
ice-blooded selfseekers, and m despite of the curious proceedings of the re-
markable Department of Alleged Justice.


Addendum
The medical ‘evidence in the Suftield case, and the comments of Mr.
O’Connor and Dr. Manning, have been submitted to a prominent Sydney
physician and surgeon, who has had a specially wide experience with female
patients, and who thus comments :
Mr. R. E. O’Connor’s minute says '. ‘‘Setting aside the extreme improbability of
the chance attack of a bull producing injuries of that description, it is plain that, if
that explanation of injuries is adopted, the story of the prosecutrix as to the whole
occurrence is a wretched fabrication. I see no reason whatever—on the evidence, nor
is any reason suggested—which would cause me to doubt the honesty and bona fld.cn of
her story. She may or may not have been mistaken in identifying the prisoner as the
man who ravished her, but that she was ravished by some man, and that she honestly
believes that that man was the prisoner, I am convinced.”
Here Mr. O'Connor lays down a hard-and-fast opinion as to the bona fides jf the
evidence given by the prosecutrix, and makes no allowance whatever for certain psycho-
logical conditions which may have biassed her evidence.
' Suffield, it is stated, was a man of good character, captivating manners, engaging
personal appearance,—so much so that even Mr. O’Connor admits, “ I have been very
favorably impressed,” &c. (See page xi.)
Taking such a man, who by his presence and manner could so favorably impress
individuals of both sexes—human fallibility, sexual influence, and hysterical conditions
must be considered—and having been carefully weighed, it would appear most probable
to a psychological student that this poor, dazed, and emotional girl, upon being
confronted with a man having all the ideal physical and manly qualities which
Suffield possessed, should at once have nominated him as the aggressor.
Well may Mr. O’Connor say in his minute, ‘‘The sole evidence of identification
was that of the prosecutrix, without corroboration of any kind, but clear and positive.”
This evidence was believed, notwithstanding that an alibi was set up by the prisoner,
and several witnesses gave evidence in support of it.
The girl sustained certain injuries which rendered her unconscious. These injuries
were such as to corroborate a suggestion that they were inflicted either by a bull or by
a brute below the level of a bull, m the latter case with the object of carnal intercourse.
Whatever injuries were inflicted might have been caused by either or both ; and it is a
remarkable coincidence that near the same place the same bull should have attacked
another woman in similar circumstances.
The position taken up by the Minister that no fresh evidence was forthcoming is
therefore untenable; as it is quite possible to produce evidence that, notwithstanding
the positiveness of the prosecutrix regarding Suffield, yet, under mental and hysterical
influences, she may have been mistaken.
I may here mention that it is now an unwritten law of the medical profession that
no member of that body should placp a female patient under an anaesthetic, so as to
render her unconscious, without having an independent witness present. Several leading
members of the medical profession have been subjected to legal proceedings in conse-
quence of certain erotic emotions produced thereby—and suggesting charges of
rape—while the patient was apparently otherwise unconscious, during operations on
the womb.
In the instance of Annie Chambers we have a somewhat parallel case : An injury
producing shock to the system, and a comatose or unconscious condition ; bruises in
parts suggestive of sexual emotions ; a recognition of the prisoner—who is thereupon
convicted “ itpon the sole evidence of the prosecutrix, without corroboration of any
kind.”
Surely this contention should satisfy any Minister for Justice as to the necessity
for re-opening the case, under section 383 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act ?
I have carefully read Dr. Manning’s statement, dated 22nd July, 1893, and I
concur with everything therein excepting the last paragraph, and I think every state-
ment except the last paragraph raises a reasonable doubt as to the assault being
committed by Suffield,
Assuming the girl to have suffered from concussion of the brain, there are well-
authenticated cases where such an injury has obliterated the memory of events
observed for some period before the injuries; or during the impaired condition
internal impressions of the brain may become so exaggerated as to be mistaken for
external impressions.


I am very pleased to notice that Dr. Manning qualifies his statement by
saying: “In stating that Suffield was her assailant she was probably right.’’ That
statement itself shows that a “ reasonable doubt ” occurred in Dr. Manning’s mind.
Dr. Nash’s parallel case, showing similar injuries inflicted by a bull on Mrs.
Cole, is very clear, and should be treated as fresh evidence in re-opening Suffield’s case.
I quite concur in the view that Dr. Stapleton’s evidence should be taken in
preference to that of Dr. Harris, he having seen and examined the patient so soon
after the injury. It is certainly to be regretted that no microscopioal examination
was made. Dr. Stapleton’s evidence seems to show more injuries than would have been
inflicted during an assault by a man, and I concur in the remark that if the bull had
only rudimentary horns some modifications of the injuries might take place.
Dr. Harris’s evidence closely concurs with that of Dr. Stapleton. I, however,
differ from him in his remark that “ the chafing of the labia could not be thus
produced.” Dr. Nash’s evidence (or letter) regarding the injuries to Mrs. Cole by the
same bull shows this to be a possibility ; and one can easily realise how a woman lying
prone or supine on the ground, with her clothing all huddled round her, might easily
receive such an injury from an infuriated bull.
I cannot find any record of a medioal examination of Suffield. Surely, if he used
such violence, he must have had some marks on his person ?
The Shadow of the Bars.
The following verses are from the pen of Thomas Suffleld. Wensleydale, it appears, is
Suffield’s English birthplace.
(The shadow of the bars upon
The cell-wall in the moonlight :
The shadows of the trees upon
The moonlit lawn at home.)
Oh ! Wensleydale ! dear Wensleydale !
What tho’ I be so far away,
And lonely pace a prison cell
To hold a deadly wrong at bay;
The moon she crosses, white and pure,
My narrow prison’s barred pale :
And she shall be a silver lure
To lead me back —to Wensleydale.
Fall, bolt and bar, Ring ! steel and stone!
At fall of night, and break of day,
This body is your lien alone ;
This heart unfettered flies away,
By glow and gleam, thro’ cloud and rain,
O’er wild and waste, o’er hill and vale,
O’er steep and strand, o’er sea and main,
My heart is back in Wensleydale.
Oh ! Wensleydale ! dear Wensleydale !
Not bolt nor bar can part us two;
Though cherished hopes lie deathly pale,
I still have left the past with you !
Once more, upon the wooded lawn,
I watch the flickering shadows fail;
Once more, upon the river borne,
I hear the bells of Wensleydale!
Once more, and thro’ this wicket gate
The well-known path be mine to-night,
Where the great beeches meet and mate,
Grim sentinels in black and white.
Here—resting on this uncouth seat —
I once was told the fondest tale !
Do Earth .and Heaven ever meet ?
I thought so once—in Wensleydale.
’Tis summer, and the thirsty mere
Hath deeply drained old Ure, I know,
For, falling over Mickley Weir,
His song is breaking faint and low.
Hack Falls far thunder trembles down ;
Bass-droning thro’ the listening vale,
The rock-stemmed river’s monotone,
The deep keynote of Wensleydale.
Hark ! perched on Mowbray’s ivied height,
A throstle, startled at the moon,
Wakes, half in fear, and half delight,
And lifteth such a wondrous tune !
His mate, deep ambush’d in the dene,
Takes up and fills the liquid tale ;
And sprites of silver, gray, and green
Chant echo all thro’ Wensleydale !
Harsh o’er the softer sounds of night
Old Ebor bays (the great blood-hound) ;
There starting, moonlit, dimly white,
Theold homeguardsits hallowed ground !
With twinkling lights the casements glow ;
Familiar voices faint and fail,
And music soft and laughter low
Thrill “ Home, sweet home ! ” in Wens-
leydale !
Pure lilt of love ? soft stray of bell!
Ah ! plaint of weir, and broken fall !
Sweet sounds, sweet prayers, and—sweetest
spell—
The hallowed homeliness of all.
Surely the night-wind, soft and shy,
Confessing all the sinless vale,
Must breathe a shrift in every sigh—
“ Hush, Wensleydale!’’ “Hush Wensley-
dale ! ”
Thomas Stjffield.


Tbe Scuffield Case. —The Evidence.
[Suffield was brought up at the Lambton Police Court on 23rd December,
1890, and remanded till 30th December, when the case was partly heard.
Next day the hearing terminated, and Suffield was committed for trial.
While he was awaiting trial, his friends procured a copy of the police-court
depositions from the Crown Law Office, and printed them as a pamphlet—
copies of which were sold at 6d. each to raise a fund for Suffield’s defence.
The following text is that of the pamphlet, checked by the original
depositions laid on N.S. W. Legislative Assembly table on 4th November, 1896,
with other papers in the case. The pamphlet is, in the main, a word for word
reproduction of the original, barring some errors of the press; but the com-
piler made occasional additions, as noted. On the pamphlet cover it is stated
that “The public and the press were not admitted ”to the police-court. “ The
editor of the Newcastle Herald wirbd to his worship, Mr. Perrot, respect-
fully requesting him to allow the representative of the paper to report the case,
but the request was refused.”
Throughout the proceedings Police-Inspector Brennan prosecuted for the
Crown, and Suffield was defended by Thos. Cronin, a Lambton solicitor. R
I. Perrot, Lambton police-magistrate (since dead), sat at both hearings.]
Police-Court Hearing Dec 23, 1890.
Sergeant Salter’s Evidence.
Geobge Salter on oath saith :—“ I am sergeant of police stationed at Lambton.
At about 9 o’clock last night,* in company with Constable Fahey, I arrested accused near
Mr. Crouaace’s house on suspicion of assaulting one Ann Chambers with intent to car-
nally know her, on the night of Sunday, 21st instant. In reply the accused ejaculated
4 My God ! ’ I then brought accused to the Lambton lock-up. Mr. Croudace’s house is
about a mile from Lambton, on the Charlestown road. Croudace is the manager of the
Lambton Coal Company. I have seen the female named in bed ; she is confined to her
bed in consequence of the alleged assault, and Dr. Stapleton is in attendance upon her.
I pray for a remand to Tuesday next.”
Suffield was then remanded to 30th December.
Monday, 22nd December, 1890.


Police Court Hearing.— Dec. 30, 1390.
Evidence for the Prosecution .
Serqeant Salter’s Evidence -
George Salter on oath saith : —“ I have heard the deposition jmt read and ifc is
correct. I have seen accused stnee in the Lambton police cell on Sunday, 27th instant •+
I then recharged him, saying : ‘ Thomas Suffield, I charge you with committing a rape
upon one Ann Chambers near Mr. Croudace’s residence, on the night of the 21st instant
that is December.’ Accused said, ‘ls that all? same as the other.’ I replied ‘You
were charged before with assaulting with intent. ’ Accused replied ‘lt will not make a
bit of difference to me, I will have to put up with it.’ Accused said, ‘ls that the result of
the medical examination ? ’ I replied ‘I am not at liberty to state.’
“I remember Monday afternoon, the 22nd inst., Mrs. Chambers made a report to
me about a quarter to 4 o clock ; in consequence of that I went to the residence of Mr
Croudace, where I saw Ann Chambers in bed.
If “ I asked her what was the matter with her. She said ‘ I have been assaulted
and knocked about. I said Do you know who assaulted you?’ She said ‘Yes
{ k T«l ffB Suffield who stays at Mr. Warren’s,'the gardener’s place.’’
I said When did you see him. She said ‘As I was returning home I saw
him sitting upon the gate in front of Mr. Croudace’s place.’ She said he said ‘ good
night to her. I said Did you reply to him?’ She said ‘ I passed on without answer-
ing. Shortly after making for home she said she felt a knock on the back of her head -
she said she made a run then towards Mr. Croudace’s house ; she then said ‘ shortly af’er-
wards a man -I asked her ‘What man ' She said ‘ Mr. Suffield, I knew him when he
came in front of me - caught hold of me, and told me to stop ’: she said ‘lf vou do not
et me go I will telll Air. Croudace ’; Suffield replied ‘ You can tell Mrs. Croudace if yon
like ; she said I had a struggle with him ’ ; she said ‘He caught hold of me and threw
me down and was pulling at my underclothing, and spread out my legs, and lay on top
of me. She did not describe anything that took place afterwards. I said to her Annie
have you any doubt on your mind as to the identity of the man?’ she said ‘I have
none. If
“Ann Chambers was then in bed ; her mother handed me some clothing in her
presence ; Ann Chambers said ‘ These are the clothes I wore on Sunday night.’ I now
produce those clothes—a jacket, which is torn, a skirt torn from the band, a pair of
drawers covered with blood-stains, and torn at the knees, a chemise, with large stains of
blood on the back, scarcely any on the front; I also produce a black satin jacket with
ea -l h ?, Sta J nS ''. pon ,fc ’ a .fl anne l petticoat with blood-stains upon it, and a white petticoat
with blood-stains upon it.
a m “ Af ter Retting these clothes I went to Mr. Warren’s place; after enquiring where
Suffield was, I spoke to Mrs. Warren ; afterwards I went into a room, saw accused there
he was in his bed room ; I said ‘good night, Tom’; he replied ‘good night, Sergeant’’
accused said Imsis a bad business ’; I replied ‘ What business ?’ he replied ‘ I was told’
about it ; I said Who tod you?’ accused said ‘Never mind’; shortly afterwards
accused said Mr. Warren told me about it, and that my name was mentioned ’ • he said
i ? 8 iJ e ™ at w e t,me ’ Warren thought I was in the pit, I was lying down
and told Mrs Warren to call me at a quarter to 12 ’; I said to him "Do you know th 4
girl Annie Chambers, he said I have seen her, I saw her pass down here on Sunday
morning ; I then said ‘ Have you any objection to come up with me to Mr. Croudace’s
to see the girl. he replied Certainly not ’; he accompanied me there ; afterwards I said
You generally take a turn down town on a Sunday night ’; he replied ‘Yes I was
down there about a quarter to B.’ ’
“ We then went up to Mr. Croudace’s place, saw the girl in accused’s presence • I
had no conversation with her in presence of accused ; I left Mr. Croudace’s, and outside
I arrested accused saying, ‘Thomas Suffield, I arrest you on suspicion of assaulting Annie
tThis is an error. It should be either Saturday, 27th, or Sunday, 28th.
«f The whole of this paragraph is hearsay-- I says ’ and “ she says "-and should not have be<.»
taken as evidence.


Chambers last night, at about 10 o’clock, with intent to carnally know her. In reply
accused said ‘My God!’ shortly afterwards he said, ‘Am I going to be arrested on the
mere word of a woman?' I said, ‘ You can see that the girl is not fit to be spoken to; he
said, ‘ She is all right, I can see how it is.'
“ I brought accused to his room and examined his clothes; this was a few minutes
past 9 o’clock on Monday night; it is a room about 12 feet square and is one of four rooms;
there is a window in accused’s room about 5 feet by 3 feet 6 ins., with 12 large panes of
glass ; the window could be lifted up or down ; any man could go through that window
with ease. I have seen the girl since; I saw her yesterday and the day before ; she was
in bed then : she could only walk with assistance. Three ivory buttons I produce were
handed to me by Dr. Stapleton; they correspond with the buttons on the torn jacket
produced, which shows three spaces where buttons had been.
Sergeant Salter Cross-Examined.
To Mr. Cronin :
“ Annie Chambers never mentioned any other man’s name as having any connec-
tion with this matter. I examined all Suffield’s clothes and all in Suflield s room ;he did
not make any objections to my doing so, I did not find any blood stains upon any part
of his clothes, nor were they torn. Accused was in his shirt sleeves at the time before
starting for Croudace’s. I said, ‘Put on the clothes you wore yesterday he put on
clothes. I did not find any marks upon accused ;if there were any marks on his face I
would have seen them when I brought him to the lockup. I asked Ann Chambers if she
had ever spoken to accused, she said, ‘ISTo! 5 She said there was a girl, named May
Stewart, who was always speaking of accused and who pointed accused out to her one
night, when accused was under a lamp. Xdo not know much about accused, I have seen
him occasionally ; X never heard a word against him before this ; since his arrest a good
many expressed an opinion that accused was a respectable young man. I took notice of
the rooms in Warren’s house. One door is nearly opposite the other; a person sitting m
a chair alongside the fireplace could, with both doors open, see anyone in Suffield s room,
that is if he was near the door. Accused had a similar coat on on Monday night to the
one he now wears, it is not a hairy coat.”
Ann Chambers's Evidence.
Ann Chambers on oath saith : “I am a single woman, 22 years ot age. I have
been in the employ of Mr. Croudaoe, who resides about a mile from Lambton, and I am
still in that employ. I have been 17 weeks in Mr. Croudace’s employment as house and
parlor maid ; my parents live at Hamilton. I remember Sunday week last, 21st Decem-
ber inst.; I left Mr. Croudace’s at a quarter to eleven that morning. I went to catch the
tram at Lambton ; I came by the gardener’s place, whose name is Warren; he is Mr.
Croudace’s gardener ; he lives about not quite a quarter of a mile away ; I saw Mrs. War-
ren standing on the verandah, also a man sitting on the verandah very like Mr. Suffield,
the accused before the court; I could not swear it was him on the verandah ; there was no
one with me.
“I went down to the tram, but as it had not arrived I went to a Mrs. Scott, who
lives close by ; I afterwards went to Hamilton by the 11.20 tram to my mother’s ; no one
with me. I left mother’s place by the 4.20 tram, I went to Wailsend ;no one went with
me. I expected to find Julia Scott at the terminus at Wailsend ; she was not there, but
a young man whom I knew, Henry Wilson, told me where she was ; that was about 5 p.m.
I went to Wilson’s mother’s house and saw the other Miss Scott there, Julia Scott’s
cousin ; I caught the Wailsend tram about 9 o’clock and returned to Lambton ; reached
Lambton about 20 minutes to 10 ; I got out at the tram terminus at Lambton and went
to Julia Scott’s aunt accompanied by Julia Scott, who was with me from Wailsend ; I
only remained there for about 5 minutes.
“ We came out, left for Croudace’s ; Julia Scott accompanied me as far as Croudace
street; she bade me ‘good night,’ and I went on by myself. Mr. Croudace’s place from
there (Croudace street) is about a mile; it was moonlight, but not bright enough
to see anyone. I kept the main road and went straight up; I met two or three
boys and girls on the road. I came near the gates and saw a man sitting on the top of
the big gates ; when first saw him I was rather afraid, but then I thought it was some-
one belonging to Croudace’s place, so I went through the little gates beside the big gates.
The man said, * Good night; ’ I saw the man plainly, it was Thomas Suffield, the accused.
I made no reply to him, but went on a little quicker than I had gone before; a little
distance further on I felt a blow on the back of the head, not violent to make me fall, but
strong enough to make me silly for the minute.


“ Before I had time to look round the accused came in front of me and took hold of
my shoulders with his two hands and said, ‘Stop.’ I swung myself round and got away
out from his hold ; I thought I had got away from him when he caught me by the arms in
front of me. I said, ‘lf you don’t let me go I shall tell Mr. Croudace.’ Accused said,
‘ Oh, you may tell Mrs. Croudace if you like.’ I then struggled to get away and shouted.
He then said, ‘lf you shout again I’ll hit you.’ He was trying to drag me down ;he had
hold of me round the waist, I screamed more than once; he got me down on my back and
tried to get my clothes up. I resisted him, he pinched me terribly about the legs. I
resisted accused with all my force ; I cannot remember anything after that; remember him
getting my clothes up and pulling at my drawers and chemise; I was lying on my back.
He was kneeling down in front of me, had my legs spread out and he was kneeling
betwi en them ; that was all I recollect. I lost consciousness.
“ The first person I recollect seeing was Miss Ethel Croudace ; this was the follow-
ing day, on Monday ; I do not know how I reached Mr. Croudace’s place ; I am positive
that the accused is the man who did this to me; I have been in bed since, attended by
Dr. Stapleton ; I have now to be assisted to walk. I wore my chemise outside of my
drawers, which were tied by a string drawn round the waist; I felt the string drawn
tight; that was in his pulling the drawers. The torn jacket produced is the one I had
on ; the skirt is also the one I had on, also the dark silk jacket; the flannel and white
petticoat were also worn at the time. The chemise produced is also the one worn by me
that night; the drawers produced are mine, and were worn as they are now in the
struggle, and the blood stains were caused by the struggle; I am quite sure it was the
actions of the accused that caused all those blood-stains on my clothing ; I feel pain from
the bruises and pain in the bottom of the stomach. Drs. Stapleton and Harris have
examined me, and I have been under their treatment since ; I had no previous acquaint-
ance with accused ; I gave no encouragement to accused or anyone else to do this ; I have
only been two years, last May, in the colony altogether.
“ I know a girl named May Stewart, in the employ of Mr. Croudace ; she has men-
tioned the accused’s name to me ; I was not far from the front gate of Mr. Croudace’s
place where the alleged offence was committed ; there are some bushes about that spot
where the offence was committed. The girl May Stewart pointed out accused to me
in Lambton some weeks ago ; I took particular notice of him that night; it was light
enough to see him clearly. I look at the plan produced ; the dot marked in ink is about
the position of the locality where the offence was committed. I got off the road with a
view to being heard more clearly at Croudace’s ; I screamed as loud as I could ; between
the spot where the offence was committed and Mr. Croudace’s house there were some
bushes.”
Ann Chambers Cross-Examined .
To Mr. Cronin .
“It was slight rain, occasionally bright at times; it was a moonlight night, but
not a bright night. I could not recognise anyone from the middle of the road ; I have
never spoken to accused before ; I went close by accused when he was pointed out to
me ; it is not a fact that May Stewart said, ‘ There is Mr. Suffield, walking in front;'
he had not his back turned, but was standing ; accused came behind ine, and partially
stunned me. I had a struggle with accused ; I recognised accused before he stunned me.
I passed close to him, he sitting on the gate and I passing through the side gate.”
[Questions by Mr. Cronin : “Do you know the nature of the charge you are bring-
ing against this young man ? ” Ann Chambers Yes.” Mr. Cronin :“ Do you know
that, if your statement is believed by a jury, that this young man will be ’’ His
Worship : “ I’ll not allow such questions. You can use your ingenuity at another court.”
Mr. Cronin : “ It’s a perfectly fair question. The accused must have fair play ; however,
I suppose I must abide by your ruling.”— Compiler.]
Annie Chambers continuing : “I told Miss Ethel Croudace it was a man, but I did
not tell his name; I told May Stewart it was Suffield ; I did not tell May Stewart that I
thought it was Mr. Suffield, but that it was Mr. Suffield. I do not remember saying 1
would know him by his coat; I said I would know him again ; do not remember saving
anybody else’s name in connection with it. I remember them speaking to me about" the
bull. I won’t swear that I did not say I could not* recognise the person who did it by his
hairy coat; do not remember it if I did. I tried to scratch the man; do not know
whether I did or not; when accused was pulling up my clothes I had no strength to
scratch him; I may have tried to scratch him ; I could do nothing, I was completely
overpowered.” J
[Question by Mr. Cronin : “ You say he held you by both hands all the time, and
that is why you did not scratch him. Now, explain how he could pull up your clothes
* Apparently this “ not” should be emitted.


and hold your hands with both his at the same time.” Mr. Cronin was pressing her
pretty closely with questions of this nature when the proseoutrix swooned. She soon
recovered, and His Worship would not allow Mr. Cronin to continue in this line of oross-
examination. The accused then said : “ There’s no justioe here,” whereupon His Worship
threatened to look up accused who replied, “ Too can look me up for 20 years, and I’ll
say the same.” — Compiles.]
Cross-examination continued t " I was not keeping oompany with a young man;
was not corresponding with a young man in Newcastle or elsewhere; I swear that posi-
tively ; I look at the photograph produced; it is the photo, of a young man named
M'Gee; he lives in Brown’s Buildings, County Durham, England; he is not in this
country. I had it in my drawer ; it has been taken out of my drawer without my know-
ledge, and I did not give it to May Stewart; it is stolen from me. Did not tell May
Stewart to hide that photo, or copybook, lest mother should see it; mother knows that
photo., and sees it as often as I do. I was not keeping company with a young man, a
blacksmith, in Newcastle; my father did not prohibit me speaking to him.”
To Inspector Brennan :
“ I told my mother the whole circumstances, and that it was Suffield ; my mother
does not know it was Suffield. May Stewart slept in the same room as I did.”
To His Worship:
“It was quite clear enough to see any person when I saw accused when he first
addressed me ; I have not the slightest doubt but that accused was the man who did it to
me, and sufficient time during the struggle to know acoused was the man who attacked
me. My clothes were dragged from the front when he attacked me; I also state lam sure
there were no stains on my clothes at the time accused assaulted me.”
[His Worship : “ Did you give any authority to take the photo from your drawer ?”
Annie Chambers : “No, I did not.” His Worship: “ Then the person who has it in his
possession is the thief?” Annie Chambers: ‘‘l suppose so.” His Worship : “ Sergt.
Salter, remember what lam saying.” Sergt. Salter: “Very well, your worship.” Mr
Cronin : “ That’s all right, we will shortly see who is the thief.” — Compiler.]
Dr. Stapleton’s Evidence.
Joseph Stapleton on oath saith : —” lam a duly qualified medical practitioner
and Government medical officer for Lambton. I know last witness, Ann Chambers ;
was called in to see her on Sunday night, 21st December, at about 11 o’clock. I was
called by Mr. Frank Croudace ; saw her at Mr. Croudace’s lying in bed ; she appeared
upset; she was not unconscious or insensible, and I believe was capable of answering
questions put to her and of recognising persons. I saw a bruise on her right eye, and a
scratch on her left cheek ; next morning as I did not intend to go back, but in response to
a call went back to see her the following morning.
“ From what 1 was told I made an examination of the body of Ann Chambers and
of the genital organs particularly ; in addition to the bruised right eye and scratch on
left cheek, there was a bruise on the shoulder above the left armpit; one on the back
below the left shoulder-blade; a bruise on each hip, two bruises on the right region, a
scratch on the left groin, a bruise on the inside of left thigh on the upper part, two large
bruises on the back of the right thigh, a bruise above the left knee and one below the
right knee. There was no wound on any part of the body, and no sign of any injury on
the back of the head. The lower half of the inner surface of the mucous membrane of
the labia majora had a red blush ; I examined the hymen and found it to have a central
opening ; there was no mark of injury on it; there was no wound in the vagina and the
blood came from the womb. I oannot swear that penetration has taken place and have
not examined her so as to know whether she has a virgin uterus; I cannot swear that she
has been carnally known ; she appeared to be very stiff; I have attended on her since; she
has evidently been subjected to violent treatment. I visited the spot where the alleged
offence took place, and the three buttons produced came from that spot; I handed them
to Sergeant Salter. I have seen the blood-stained clothing.
To Mr. Cronin—
“l should have expected more tearing of the clothes if a bull had done it”;
if the bull had made those marks it could have caused the injuries, but it is
highly improbable. If the bull had struck her in the stomaoh it would have caused
flooding. [“ The fright would also cause it.”— Compiler.]
Dr. Harris’s Evidence.
John Harris on oath saith : —“ lam a legally-qualified medioal practitioner and


Government medical officer for Newcastle. On Sunday* last, 23rd inst., at about 4 p.m.
in company with Dr. St ipleton. I examined Ann Chambers at the residence of Mr.
Croudace; there was a blackening of the right eye and a scratch on the left cheek, a
bruise in front of the left shoulder, abrasions on the back of the chest, a bruising about
both hips, and a scratch or mark at the back of the waist running from each hip down-
wards, and inwardly there was also a bruise on the upper third of the inside of the left
thigh, and large bruises on the back of the right thigh, also a bruise on the right knee ;
the external genitals were stained with blood in a partly dried condition ; the inside of
the labia were reddened and chafed ; on the posterior parts there was a quantity of dark
blood oozing from the vagina ; the hymen was a circular one with central opening, and,
on digital examination, was freely dilatable, such as would allow of complete intercourse
with an adult male ; the hymen itself did not Seem reddened or inflamed ; the blood was
derived from the uterus or womb, which appeared to be in a virginal condition. Judging
from the chafed appearance of the labia majora, I am of opinion that intercourse had
been at least attempted; it could have been completed. I have seen the stained clothing,
it would be in accordance with the symptoms described ; if the strings through the
clothing were strong, a person dragging the clothing downwards from behind would cause
the marks described, the downward mark described as extending from the hip downwards
and inwards.”
To Mr. Cronin—
“ The bruises about the body have no particular distinctive marks and
might have been produced by a bull, but the chafing of the genital organs could
not, in my opinion, be thus produced. I can swear that the parts are so dilatable
that penetration would leave no mark, and I am certain penetration has taken place; it
might have taken place a month ago, but the chafing of the labia majora, on which I
found my opinion, was quite recent; a bull knocking a girl down and throwing her about
would not cause the chafing described ; if a bull got his horn in the vagina, I would expect
a lacerated or ruptured vagina. If the girl had given consent to intercourse with a big
man at the gate outside, it might be possible for the chaffing to take place as described.”
[The bull could have caused the other injuries after she went inside the gate.”— Compiler.]
Mrs . Chambers’s Evidence.
Elizabeth Chambers on oath saich : —“I am the wife of Henry Chambers, miner,
and live at Hamilton ; the girl, z\nnie Chambers, is my daughter; she is a servant at
Mr. Croudace’s ; I remember last Monday week some persons telling me something, in
consequence of which I went to Mr. Croudace’s house on 22nd instant; saw my daughter
there ; she was upstairs in Led ; she was in a nervous state, appeared to te ill; I said
‘ Oh, my dear girl, has the lull hurt you ? ’ she commenced crying, and said ‘No, mother,
it was not the bull, it was a man ’; I said to her 4 Do you know the man, Annie? ’ she
said ‘Yes ’: I asked her what they called him she said ‘ A man that boards with the
gardener, named Suffield I said ‘What aid he do to you, my girl?’ she said ‘Oh,
mother, I don’t know, he has hurt me all over ; I don’t know any more after the man put
me down’; I then examined her and found her bruised all over; bruises inside her
thighs and outside, on her knees and on her shoulder ; I then got her clothes, which had
been taken off her, examined them, found blood on them, and handed them over to Ser-
geant Salter, and went down stairs and told Mr. Croudace about it; I saw Dr. Stapleton,
and then reported the matter to Sergeant Salter; I do not know accused, never saw him ;
know the likeness of photo, produced ; it is a man named William McGee, now in
England ; I knew she had this photo. ; I have been two years in the colony last May ;
she is my only child ; remember my daughter coming to see me on 21st instant; she had
no one with her when she came or when she left; she is 21 [22 years of age. Depositions.]
To Mb. Cronin :
“ My daughter has not been keeping company with anyone in Newcastle or else-
where.
To His Worship :
“My daughter did not keep any attachments she had formed from me, and what
she knew she told me.’’
Thomas Croudace’s Evidence.
Thomas Croudace on oath saith : —“I am a J.P., and manager of the Lambton
and Durham Collieries; my residence is situated at about a mile from Lambton town-
ship ; I produce a plan (Exhibit B) showing the position of my residence, and also the
•Should b« Tuesday, 23rd.


south-western part of the township; the plan was prepared under my directions and the
aotual measurements were taken by myself; the position of my gardener s cottage is here,
and is marked on the plan as ‘ Warren’s Cottage,’ Warren being the name of the gar-
dener ; I know a female named Ann Chambers, a housemaid in my employ, she has been
in my employ some months.
“I remember Sunday last, 21st instant; on Sunday night, about 10 o’clock, or a
little before, we had retired for the night, and, as I had just got into bed, I heard a
scream of fear and pain combined, as if from someone in distress ; my bedroom windows
are always open, unless it is a wet night; i immediately put my head out of the window
to listen, and thought that the sound emanated from one man kicking another on the
main road ; ( heard a second cry, not so strong as the first one ; 1 immediately coo-eed
clearly and loudly; this was followed by a third cry, fainter than the others; 1 then
coo-eed again, and shouted words to this effect, ‘ Wait there, I am coming ; I put on my
trousers and slippers, and shouted for my son Frank, saying, ‘Come on, Irank, there is
someone illusing the other.’
“ We rushed down stairs ; my son heard the cry, and was leaning over the balcony
by his window; we then rushed to the front door; we both provided ourselves with
sticks ; he led me by four or five yards down to the garden fence; he vaulted over the
fence, I did so afterwards ; I next heard him say ‘lt is Annie, pater ! ’ just a few yards
from where we jumped over; when I reached the girl, 1 said. ‘What is the matter,
Annie?’ she was lying down, crouched up, and partly on her side; her hair was dis-
hevelled ; no hat on, and seemed terribly afraid ; "her hands were raised as if in fear, and
terribly shaky ; her answer to my question was words to this effect : ‘ Oh, that bull,
sir ! ’ I then said ‘ Has the bull hurt you, Annie? ’ she said ‘ I am hurt all over,’ repeating
it two or three times.
“ I then looked up and saw the bull about 30 yards from her on the back road to the
house ; the bull was perfectly quiet, just standing on the road ; my son and I then
examined her carefully about the back and shoulders, expecting to find the thrust of the
bull’s horns ; I then said to her ‘ He has not horned you, you are not hurt, Annie, do you
think you can get up and walk, or try to walk ’; I don’t remember her answering ; we
then put our hands round her, and lifted her to her feet, and supported her through the
fowl-yard gate, from which she was lying a few yards away ; I can scarcely suppose
her conscious of what she was saying at the time. I said ‘lt is all right, Annie, tbe master
is with you’; after going a few felt her growing heavier and found she had
fainted.
“We then put our arms underneath her and carried her into the house; we then
laid her down in the passage at the front door or porch, it being the coolest place.
We applied cold water to wrists and hands, and cold water and sal volatile to her face.
She was perfectly unconscious ; she remained in that condition for fully 20 minutes or
more; we tried to get weak whisky and water into her mouth, but she seemed unable to
swallow it; ultimately she recovered a little, and cried most piteously for her mother.
She did not know me ; thought I was somebody else ; she said, ‘ls that Mr. Wilson 7
My daughter, Ethel, asked her if she knew her ; she said ‘ No.’ We put her to bed and
sent for Dr. Stapleton.
“I know accused, Suffield ; he has been in my employ ; he has worked a Tangye
engine down the pit; he has been several months in my employ ; he lodged with .James
Warren, my gardener, whose house is marked on the plan produced as \V arren s cottage*
It was expected that he would be at work at his engine long before 10 o’clock that night.
I know the cottage very well; I was shown the room accused occupies this morning ; 1
made a sketch of the house, which I produce. I examined the window of the room
accused occupied. I expected accused ought to have been driving his engine at 10 o clock
and during the night.
“On the following day I reported something to Mrs. Chambers, in consequence of
which she came to my place to see her daughter ; on the Tuesday following 1 saw her,
and particularly asked her to tell me all about it. She was in bed, and apparently con-
scious of what she was saying.
“ She said she was coming home on Sunday night, about five minutes to 10 ; that
Julia Scott had seen her up as far as Croudace-street. She said, just as she was approach-
ing the front gate, she saw a man sitting on the gate smoking, and thought it was Master
Frank (meaning my ton), but, as she came nearer, she saw it was not him ; she said, I
walked quickly through the gate, and shut it sharply after me; I was a bit frightened,
but pretended not to be ; the man said “Good night.” ’ I said to her, ‘ Did you answer
him, Annie, by saying “Good evening?’” She said ‘No. I never spoke.’ I said, Do
you know who the man was, Annie, that was sitting on the gate?’ She said ‘ Yes ;it
was Mr. Suffield, who lives with James Warren.’ She said, ‘I walked hurriedly on and
More hearsay evidence which should never have been admitted.


to when the man overtook me, and either got hold, or tried to get
hold of a parasol I had ; I told him to let it alone; he then got hold of my arms, and he
knocked me on the back of the head and hurt my head, got me down, and was on my skirt
which I tried to undo to slip away from him.’ I then said, ‘Why did you not scream’
Annie, or shout for help?' She said ‘1 did scream, but he said he would knock
senseless again, and I was frightened of him killing me.’ I then said to her ‘ Was it the
same man as was on the gate ? * She said, ‘1 am sure it was Mr. Suffield ; lam all right
now ; I could not remember things at first, but lam all right now.’ I then asked her if
she had given him any encouragement. She said ‘No, I was trying to get away as
quickly as I could. I then asked her if she had ever seen Mr. Suffield before? She said
Yes ; I have seen him in the township once; May pointed him out to me ; that was on
a Friday night. She further said, I saw him on Warren’s verandah that morning
when I was on my way to my home, at my mother’s.’ I asked her if she had any doubi
f^? he m f n eT-° T aUl , ted her L ? , She said that Bhe h * d none whatever.
She said, I tried to scratch him, but he got hold of my hands, and was that strong he
beat me down She said that, when he first got hold of her parasol, that she had said
SVSStfkS! BS&S !? “ *°’ lll C.oud.ce,'„d he said, •! don', SS
“ I examined the girl in presence of her mother on the Wednesday ; I saw several
maiks of bruises on her back and shoulders; on her hip bone there was a black blue
and abraded bruise as large as my hand, and on the inside of her thighs there were
bruises also and underneath ; and, trom what I saw, I am of opinion that the girl must
have fought like a tigress for her honor’s sake.
him ’+" Wh<>n 1 aSked heF if Bhe kneW the man ’ she Baid ‘ oh y es > 1 was face to face with
“ After putting the girl to bed, we went out again that night, and, close to the
spot where we found her, we picked up her parasol and hat, and a button. I look at the
photo, produced.
“Yesterday afternoon, Sergeant Salter and Mr. Cronin called at my office and
Mr. Cronin told me that there was something to divulge that would astonish me, saving
You have got hold of the wrong man ; that the other girl, May, had had given tohe?’
by Annies a photo, and letter which would expose the whole thing, and that they were
given to May to hide, so that Annie s father and mother should not see them ; the photo
is of a blacksmith in Newcastle. I told them that I must confess I had a mistake
When I got back to the Lake, on Saturday evening, where my family was staying over
the holidays, a Mrs. Beilis, the cook, came to me and said, ‘ May wants to speak to you ’
I said Very well,’ and went into the kitchen, when May Stewart told me that Annie
had given her a copybook, and photo., and letters on the Monday, which she said ‘l am
frightened to keep for her; that I was not to show them to her father and mother ’ ?
said T hen you give them to me May.’ She answered, ‘ They are not here, they are at
Lambton. I said, lam going to Lambton ; tell me where they are,’ but I forgot all
about them till Mr. Cronin called. ’ iorgoc an
Mr. Cronin, Sergt. Salter and myself, at my own residence in Lambton went
upstairs to the girls room and, after searching the right-hand drawer of a chest of
drawers there did not find anything; but found the photo., on seeing which Mr
Cronin said, That is the man! Found this photo, in the left-hand drawer ; searched
•other places, and found nothing but copies of letters written from her mother we
examined the other drawers but could not find anything more. In compliance with Mr
Cronin s request, I sent to Lake Macquarie for May Stewart, at 5 o’clock this morning
and had her a little after half-past 9. When I got home from bringing Annie
Chambers to the court-house I found May Stewart upstairs in a room, and said to her
I Wknt the copybook, photo and letters which you said you planted for Annie on
Monday last; she immediately opened the first drawer in the chest of drawers we had
examined previously saying, ‘Here is the copy-book, but the photo, is gone.’ I then
said, May where did you get that copy-book? ’ she said, ‘ Here.’ She said it was her
drawer, not Annie’s. I said, ‘ May, you are telling me a lie; Sergeant SalJr Mr
Cronin and myself were up in the room yesterday and looked in that drawer and the
copy book and photo, were not there, but in the drawer to the left, which is’ Annie’!
own drawer. ’ xxuu,e 8
[Mr. Cronin objected to a great deal of Mr. Croudace’s evidence as being mere hear
say evidence His worship overruled the objection.* Mr. Cronin then asked his worship
s£&3£^ h !&SS2Stf b * " ‘ he mar H‘ n °l 6 1,® depositions, nod this
To Mr. Cronin :
“ Mr - a,ld Mrs - Warren are respectable people as far as T Tho„„ 1....,
IT More hearsay evidence which should never have been admitted
i Hearsay attain. ‘Nevertheless Mr. Cronin was perfectly right.


things. Annie, not to my knowledge, has never mentioned anybody’s name in oonneotion
with the outrage ; it has never come to my knowledge that the bull has ohased ladies
before this. In lifting the window in Warren’s house in the room which accused ocpu-
pied I noticed a grating noise ; I noticed that anyone sitting in the opposite room could
not see in accused’s room unless near the door. T have a man named Charles Noble who
has charge of the pumping gear; if Noble had given aocused liberty to be away at any
time it would be all right, quite justifiable.”
To His Worship :
“ Since Ann Chambers has been living with me I have found her respeotable and
not given to loose ways, and a good housemaid.”
[By Mr. Cronin :
Q. —“If it was proved accused was in his room at a quarter to ten on Sunday
night, would it be possible for him to meet the girl near the house, commit the crime, and
be back again by ten o’clock? ” A.—“lt would have to be very sharp work and the girl
would have to meet him half-way. The distanoe from Warren’s house to the spot where
the outrage took place and back again would be about three-quarters of a mile.”—Com-
piler.]
Frank Croudace’s Evidence.
Francis Henry Croudaoe on oath saith :—“ I am son of the last witness and am
assistant manager of Lambton Colliery ; I know Ann Chambers, a servant at my father’s
house ; she was a servant there on Sunday, 21st inst. On that night about 10 minutes past
10 I was lying in bed when I heard a scream ; heard the dogs bark, followed by another
scream ; I listened and heard someone cooey, which was followed by another scream. I
got out of bed and went on the baloony on the east side and listened ; my father sang out
to me and asked me what that was ; I said I did not know ; he said ‘you had better go
down and see; ’we rushed down-stairs and ran across the garden and jumped the garden
fence; as soon as I got over the fence I saw something lying on the ground ; went over to it
and found it was Ann Chambers ; she was lying with her legs under her and partly resting
on one elbow ; she seemed terribly frightened and excited, and her first exclamation was,
* Oh, that bull.’ My father then asked her to get up and try to walk. She said she could
not. We then assisted her to her feet, and after going a few feet she fainted and we had
to oarry her to the poroh of the house. 'My mother and sister attended to her till she
came round, I then went for Dr. Stapleton. I know accused ;he has been in my father’s
employ 12 or 15 months; did not see him that night, he was supposed to be down at South
Pit pump.”
To Mr. Cronin :
“ I have known the aooused in and out of the pit; have had opportunities of seeing
him pretty often ; I have always looked upon him as a decent workman; have always
found him gentlemanly and quiet in his manners ; I have heard he is greatly esteemed and
respected by the people of the place.”
Ethel Croudace’s Evidence.
Ethel Mary Croudace on oath saith :—“ lam daughter of Mr. Thomas Crou-
dace, of Lambton ; I know Ann Chambers ; she has been a servant in my father’s house for
some time. She was there on Sunday morning 21st inst., I remember seeing her that night
between ten and half-past when father was carrying her up to the poroh ; she did not
appear to be conscious. Mother, father and myself attended to her ; I put water on her
forehead and brought her to, she was then placed in bed ; I assisted to do all that was
possible under the circumstances. I saw her on the Monday morning between half-past
four and six; I spoke to her. She was unconscious up to that time, in a state of delirium.
I asked her if the bull touched her, she said, ‘ No, Miss Ethel, he never touched me, but
it was a man, he was sitting on the top gates and threw a stone and hit me on the back of
the neck ’; that was all she said ; she did not say who the man was. I asked her again if
there was anything else ; she said ‘ No; ’ she was quite sensible then ; I know her mother
oameto see her; that was all that occurred on that occasion.”
Julia Scott’s Evidence.
Julia Soott on oath saith :—“lam a single woman and reside at Lambton with Mr.
Taylor ; my parents reside at Wallsend. Remember last Sunday week 21st; I went to
Wallsend on that day ; I know a female named Annie Chambers ; she is in the next
room; saw her in Wallsend that Sunday; returned to Lambton with her in the same
tram; it reaohed Lambton at about 20 minutes past 9. We then went to my aunt’s,


Miss Scott’s, near the tram line ; I went from there to Croudaoe-street mvself and Ann
Tavlor’s r - B; T± " Mr ' - She left h erself and I leinr ned to Mr
Z , R, at no man was leaving with her. After leaving the tram we were at
Miss Scott s about 10 minutes, and then went to Croudace-street, where she left me.”
James Campbell’s Evidence.
James Campbell on oath saith : —“I am an engine-driver and live at Lambton •
remember Sunday week last 2!st. That afternoon I went to Cardiff to fee myTarents
Mr d
Mr. Croudace s place. I remember meeting a female at the junction of New Lambton
and main Charlestown roads ; I was coming towards the town, and the female was going
towards Croudace s ; no one was with her ; she was going at a middling pace • it was un
ten lyw £“'fthink T *** “S- Wl ' et i 1 got to ,n y P lace at five Minutes to
en t>y my time, 1 think I would cover the distance from where I met the girl to mv place
in five minutes, and certainly under ten minutes. Ido not know Ann Chambers •' saw
dfstanoe/ bOBt ’’ moonhght but overoasfc ; could recognise anyone within ’close
To Mr. Cronin :
“I could see Mr. Croudace’s gates by looking off the road - saw no one
sitting on the gates; it rained whan I got home, slightly at first heavier after-
wards; if a man took me unawares I, perhaps, would not recognise him if I had only
seen him once before; as far as I know accused bears the character of a respectable
gate!” man ' 11 WAS ab ° Ut a quarter or ten minutes to ten when I passed Mr. Croudace’s
Suffield’s Statement.
I am as innocent and as incapable of committing the crime I am charged with as
any person in this court to-day. I have witnesses to call.” g with as
THE CASE FOR THE DEFENCE.
Mrs Warren's Evidence.
Lydia Warren on oath saith:—“lam wife of James Warren, gardener for Mr Crou-
hnn«’« o f n L H ln f bt ° n i R ® membe r last Sunday night week ; recollect accused coming into my
house on that night; he was a boarder with me ; he came in at about eight o’clock •we had
just got up from tea. He changed Ins clothes to go down to the pit, and came back and
asked me if he was asleep to give him a call. He then went and laid down on his bed /n
his pit shirt and trousers and no boots on ; then I heard no more of him till half past
nine. I went to put the children to lied at the usual hour every night, and bathed iihv
itt e boy and then bathed my little girl; while doing so my little bov went into Suffield’s
room to say good night, which hedoesevery night that Mr. Suffield is at home- between
Suffiehl’s r room "" to ** ™ y little girl went and took the little boy out o“
.‘l l^° k , cl,a . rge f he boy after I put the children to bed, and then sat reading
alongside the fireplace facing the door looking towards accused’s room ; saw all the door-
Mr y q mnJ'S? “ tbe d - 00r Was , °P e „ n - M y eirl told me that I ought to tell
Mr. huflacld the right time ; it was then 20 minutes to 11; the clock was in the room I
walked along the hall and passing by saw accused lying on his bed reading ; I went back
and read till a quarter to twelve. I then called Mr. Suffield and he was sound asleep I
called him four times before he woke up-from a quarter to ten to twenty minutes to
eleven, I know accused was in Ins room because I heard him coughing. From where!
was sitting to accused’s bed it was only a few yards ; could hear the slightest movement*
if made , I did not do so, only coughing. He said he would not go down the pit •it was
so hot, but if he was asleep to give him a call. ! ’ L ds
. roin what I have seen of the accused since he has been in my house, I know he is
a persect gentleman, and believe he is an educated gentleman. He is very fond of
children, and appeared to be kind to them, and they are fond of him ; if I thought he were
guilty of the crime with which lie is charged I would not take any interest "in him. I
have not the slightest doubt in my mind but that accused was in my house from eight
till a quarter to twelve. The bottom half of accused’s bedroom window was pulled down
and the top half was lowered to admit air ; oneof the pulleys of the window was broken’


then as now, in lifting the window as slowly.as possible it could not be done without it
creaking and making a noise ; I did not lift the window to see if it creaked ; I was pre-
sent when you (Mr. Cronin) lifted the window very slowly, it made a creaking noise
then; the lower part of the window has always been kept shut since a snake got through
the window.
“My husband saw accused in his pit clothes ; my husband then went to bed ; my
husband came home the next afternoon and asked what time the accused went to the pit,
I told him I could not say, as I left him in his room at a quarter to 12 and went to bed ;
accused’s pit clothes on a Sunday night are clean, and would not soi the bed if he lay
upon it; he had clean white trousers on and blue shirt. I heard my little boy and the
accused playing in the room, and he had my little boy sorearning at half-past nine o clock,
that is how I know he was there.”
To Inspector Brennan :
“ I went to bed that night at a quarter to 12, that is not my usual time to do so. I
was interested in a book called ‘ Coming Horne to Roost.’ I was reading in the
children’s room; I had a lamp on the mantelpiece, the door was open ; the door of
accused’s room was open ; I sat there till a quarter to 12 ; Iron hear when reading ; the
boy is two years old that went in to see Suffield ; the girl is 16 years of age. * ms '
band heard him say he was going to put on his pit clothes and going down the pit; niy
husband went to bed under the impression that accused was going to work. I stayed up
till 12, but not purposely to call accused ; I did not tell my husband that accused did not
godown to the pit to work, but my husband asked me and I told him he had not; if my
husband had not asked me I would not have told him.
“ He (Suffield) has not gone down to work on other Sunday nights previously and
gave no reason for it, but he gave a reason on this particular night; on the other two
occasions I did not remain reading till he went down to work ; I did not count the num-
ber of times I called accused on the other two occasions; I did on this occasion, and 1
called him four times ; I did not read in front of his door on the other two occasions. 1
saw accused again, to recognise him, at 20 minutes to 11; I did not see accused from half-
past 8 till 20 minutes to 11. The window in his room is a large one; the window is in
two halves; a person can go through it; saw Mr. Croudace going through it, so that a
person can go through it with ease ; there is a drop in the ground from the verandah in
front of the window. I’ll swear that the window was not raiseo, although 1 did not
see it.”
Annie Warren's Evidence,
Mary Annie Warren on oath saith :—“ lam the daughter of James Warren,
gardener for Mr. Croudace, at Lambton ; remember Sunday night week, accused coming
home at 8 o’olock ; he had his tea, and changed his clothes for the pit; he was talking to
dad on the back verandah ; he went inside then, he went into his bedroom. It was not
very long before I saw him again ; he came out into the kitchen and asked to be called if he
was asleep; I saw accused after that, it was after the children were bathed (half-past 9
is the usual time to put the children to bed); I was present and helped to put the children
to bed ; I saw one of the children, a boy, leave the room and go into Mr. Suffield s bed-
room ; he was in there a good long time ; it was more than five minutes, not more than
ten minutes; he was about ten minutes in accused’s room ; I went to accused s door to
get Charlie, the boy ; I saw accused playing with the child in the bedroom on the bed ;
Mr. Suffield had white moleskin trousers and blue shirt on, the same clothes he put on
after tea (his pit clothes).
“ When I went to the door I called the little boy; the boy did not come the moment
I called him ; he did not remain five minutes afterwards ; the children go to bed at half-
past 9 ; it was nearly 10 o’clock when the boy came out of Suffield s room ; it was half-
past 9 when the boy got undressed to have his bath, and he was a good while in Mr.
Suffield’s room before I took him out; Ido not recollect accused saying anything when
I went to his room for the boy ; I went to bed at a quarter to 12 on Sunday night; I was
reading in the interval between the time I put the boy to bed and went to bed myself;
my mother was with me; I was reading in the children’s bedroom; my mother was
seated by the fireplace, which is near the door ; the door of accused’s room is opposite ; I
could see it; Mr. Suffield’s bedroom door was open ; I did not see accused after 1 put the
ohildren to bed, but heard him coughing a lot of times; I am quite sure it was Mr.
Suffield ooughing ; I make no mistake about it.
“ I told my mother to tell Mr. Suffield what time it was; it was then 20 minutes to
II • the clock was in the room; mother went to call him ; it was 20 minutes to 11 when I
called my mother’s attention to the time ; no one called his attention to the time after
that • mother went to the door, knocked, and called him four times ; mother and I went


to bed after that; I noticed that the lower half of the window was down ; I noticed this
when I went to the door of the room for the little boy ; the other half of the window was
only down a little way. The lower half of the window is always kept down, as Mr.
Shorter killed a snake that came out of Suffield’s room ; I noticed that in lifting the win-
dow it makes a noise ; one of the pulleys is broken. Acoused has always been a nice man
while in our house. lam sixteen years old.”
To Inspector Brennan .
“ I did not go into Suffield’s room at all from the time he went into his room. His
bed is in the middle of the floor; it is a good sized room ; I could see the bed from the door
and see the window of the room from the door; the window is nob opposite the door.
The window is not in a direct line with the door. I saw the window when I went to the
door; I saw Suffield there, I did not speak to him; it was getting on for 10 when I
went for the little boy ; I do not know the time, I did not look at the clock then ; the clock
is usually kept in the bedroom :it is there now. I went to bed, my mother and self, at
quarter to 12; we usually go to bed at that time ;I do not know what time we went to bed
last Sunday night, but I took particular notice that we went to bed last Sunday week at
quarter to 12. I noticed particularly last Sunday night week that the window was down.
I took notice last Sunday night that the window was down. The window makes a noise
when lifted ; I always look into that room when passing. The cause of the window being
down is because a snake came in.’
“My father was present when we had tea; Mr. Suffield told dad he was going to
work then (when he had his tea) it was after that accused changed his clothes ; my father
then went to bed, Suffield went and lay down on the bed ; I do not know if he went to
bed. I did not see him going out after that. My mother was reading, she was sittine by
the fireplace right in front of accused’s room door, I was close alongside by her ; I was
sitting there last Sunday night. I swear that I have not had a conversation about this
case this morning or yesterday about what evidence I should give; my mother never told
me what evidence she had given yesterday ; I did not tell any person anything about it ;
no one asked me to come ; I am 16 next month ; my father did not speak to me about it.
Suffield did not have his boots on Sunday night week, he left them in the kitchen, I
carried them in Monday morning ; his pit boots were in a back room, I saw them there
after tea ; I had to pass them, that is why I noticed them.
“ Mother went to the door to call accused ; I do not know whether it was open or
shut; lam sure she called him four times. I’ll swear that mother did not tell me yester-
day or to-day that she had sworn here yesterday that she had called accused four times.
I swear still that Suffield’s bed was in the middle of the room. I know a girl named
Stuart, she is one of Mr. Croudace’s servants; I have had no conversation since last Sun-
day week. I have a sister who was a servant at Mr. Oroudaoe’s, but is not there now ;
she is 14 years old; she had no conversation with me about this case, neither my father or
mother have had a conversation with me since last Sunday week about this case.”
To Mr. CroHin :
“ I saw you some day last week at my father’s house ; you oalled me into a room s
my mother was present. You asked me some questions about this case ; I did nob tell
you all I knew at the time; I never heard you tell my mother that I would have to ootne
as a witness in this case ; do not recollect you saying to me that I would have come as a
witness ; I told you the greater part of what I have said to-day; I would sooner come
here to-day than stop away. The bed is in the middle of the room ; I mean by that, that
the head of the bed is up against the wall and the foot of the bed in the middle of the
room } the head of the bed is against the wall furthest from the door.”
James Warren’s Evidence.
Jambs Warrbn on oath saith ; —“ lam gardener for Mr. Oroudace; acoused is a
boarder at my house ; remember last Sunday night; I think it was a little before 8, he had
his tea; he changed his clothes after tea ; he took off his best olothes and put on his pit
clothes, white moleskin trousers ; I did not take notioe of the color of the shirt. I had
very little conversation with accused, and wished him ‘good night ’ and went to bed. I
had a conversation with him on the back verandah ; it was about half-past 8 when I went
to bed; Ido not know what passed between accused and I; I can swear positively
accused changed his clothes to his pit olothes; I know nothing of accused’s movements
after that. At night-time on the Monday night I told accused what I had heard ; I said
to him ‘ You are acoused of molesting Annie, up at Croudace’s.’ Acoused ridiculed the
idea and said, ‘ How easy is it for a man to get into trouble by a girl swearing his life
away ; I have never spoken to the girl.’ The police oame up then while I was speaking
to accused ; I was present when accused was taken up to Croudace’s ; accused went will-
ingly ; when Sergeant Salter asked him if he had any objections to go with him to Crou*


dace’s, accused replied, ‘ Certainly not, I have no objection whatever.’ I came down
with accused to the police court. ”
[Mr Cronin desired to ask a question re some hearsav statement, but his Worship
<,i»llo l “d Vh.quc.tiom Mr. C.o;m complained that H,. Wor.h.p allowed half-.-
mile of hearsay evidence yesterday by Mr. Croudace. - Compiler. J
To Inspector Brennan :
till Mon^»y e night U aKain^at n 7 o'’elook C ;°i’wa8 >l iiot l aware l till^o^o’ B clock t on >fonday’eveni^
“dz SSSVrtP ~Jo i
kss itzstts
there was any reason because she did not tell me about it before; I had no reason to as
SSS nia y 'be improper to tell
people he is innocent when I know nothing about it.
T ° business of mine or my wife or daughter to take notice of what hour
goingabout. Tknow Croudace’s bull; he is a
before, but did not; the first time I have spoken of it is here.
May Steivart s Evidence.
immmmmm
was not speaking to her on Monday morning.
“ I sDoke to her and she to me on the morning after the outrage, after breakfast, (
was when she spoke about the photo the gate there was Tman sitting on
do not know ; she aatd, As Iwm oomtng soreug * answere d him ; ’ she said she
the K»te "raking uJktoshow shewasnot frightened, and he hit her on the back of the
started to wa u er w j t h either a stick or stone, and she fell down ; that is
head and she | el a hfterwardßr d 8 said, ‘Do you know who I think it was, May ? I think
it waif Mr Suffield * she [said] she would know him by his coat, as he had a rough one on ;
it was Mr. sume , l j m Frank’s coat. I passed no remark at all. She did
she said it was a hairy one UK ftt Newcastle; she did not tell me who it was ; I
teli me once that she < V R rae tha( . he wrote t 0 her once, and that
think she said he WM» blftokßmitn. one d . q Lambton . Bhe did not go that
fat.wd“y'mght; it was raining. There was no mention about this young man building
a house, or working to get money to build a house. t ATr
“ I was down the street one night with Annie Chambers, m Lambton ; I»w “
Puffield • this was about a month ago; it was a dark night. I think “r. Suffield
going up the street the same way as we were; he overtook us and passed us, I think it


was in the middle of the street he passed 'us. I knew Mr. Suffield well and recognised
him ; I said to Annie That is Mr. Suffield, Annie, Warren talks about; ’ when I said
this accused was a good way off ; a few yards off ; about the distance from here to the
court-house door [which would be] about 15 yards ; he was not close enough for a stranger
to recognise him: it was a clear night with the electric light; there was an electric light
post near where he passed. Ido not think had accused been a stranger to me I would
have recognised him 15 yards off. Anniesaid, ‘ls that he?’ We lost sight of him after
that. I am quite certain Mr. Suffield passed Annie and myself in the middle of the
street, and that I did not see his face ; he had his back turned to me ; just one person
with him. I never heard Annie say that she saw his face or that she would like to havo
a look at him. The electric light directed along the footpath.”
To Inspector Brennan :
“ l am 17 years of age ; I just know accused by his coming up to Croudaoe’s house.
1 never did speak to him. I have never spoken to Annie more than once about accused r
she asked me to show him to her. She was downstairs in bed at the time when she spoke
to me about the photo, and letters. I saw her upstairs ;do not know how she got up-
stairs; the conversation took place downstairs while she was in bed ; she stated that she
had seen Suffield on Warren’s verandah on Sunday, the day before, when Annie said to
!? e « Mr. Suffield.’ I swear I did not say, ‘Oh, Annie, do not say it was
Suffield. bhe did not hand me the photo, and letters ; I only found them in the drawer •
1 read the letters; they were not love letters.
“ I have not seen Annie speaking to any jroung man in the district; do not know
the width of the street, but Suffield passed us m the middle of the street; within about
2 yards of where we were in the middle of the street, on the night referred to. I did not
see him coming up, but just when he passed I recognised it was Mr. Suffield • about as
far as from here to the fireplace (about 4or 5 yards); I showed Suffield to Annie. She
told me not to show the photo, and letters to anyone. I did afterwards tell Mrs Beilis
cook at Oroudace’s, and Mr. Oroudace. I told Minnie Warren that I had the letters and
showed them to her ; Minnie is daughter of James Warren. Know Annie Warren ■ she
used to talk a lot about accused ; she used to say he was a nice man ; she used to talk
about him every day when up at Croudace’s. Annie Warren is a witness in this case.”
To His Worship :
“ Annie Chambers told me, on the Sunday morning she went away, that she was
going to see her mother at Hamilton and then going to Wallsend in the afternoon ; that
she might be late and it was no use coming to meet her.”
To Mb. Cronin :
“Annie Chambers said she thought it was Suffield on Warren’s verandah she saw
on Sunday morning. Annie Chambers and I were on good terms together; she told me
sometimes to come on Sunday evenings to meet her [she told roe sometimes
used to come on Sunday evenings to meet her.— Depositions.] *
Sergeant Salter re-called.
George Salter re-called on oath saith : “ I remember Monday evening, 22nd inst.
calling at Mr. Warren’s house ; saw accused, Suffield, there ; had conversation with him’
which I have detailed in my evidence; he was in his bedroom ; Constable Fahey, accused’
and myself were in his room the whole time, no one else was there ; Warren was not in
the room ; I heard him give evidence to-day ; heard him swear that he was in the room
with me and heard me say, ‘Have you any objection to come up to Croudace’s.’ That
statement is not correct; he was not in the room ; he may have been in a passage on the
verandah ; he was not in the room ; none other than those mentioned were in the room at
the time. Constable Fahey was standing inside the door, and can prove the truth of
what I am saying.”
To Mr. Cronin :
“I was never in Warren’s parlor; it is oorrect that accused replied to me that he
had no objections whatever to accompany me to Croudace’s. I have not the slightest
doubt that Warren may have heard it, but he was not in the room.”
Suffield’s Statement .
[Accused then made the following statement“l stand here an innocent man and
Utterly incapable of committing such a crime. The whole trial has been a travesty upon
•There is a curious blank in the depositions here, which suggests a lot of things. Who use*
sometimes to come on Sunday evenings to meet Ann Chambers?—if the depositions are correct.


Justioe; you have been biased against me all through ; and, although I stand here A
prisoner, I wouldn’t change places with you.’’—Compiler.]
“The prisoner, Thomas Suffield, is committed to take his trial upon the charge that
he, said Thomas Suffield, on the 21st day of December, 1890, at Lambton, did, without
her consent, ravish and carnally know one Ann Chambers, at the Circuit Court, to oe
holden at Maitland, or at such court as the Attorney-General may direct, on a day to oe
hereafter named.
Lambton Police Court, 31st December, 1890. RQB PERROT, P.M.”
[N.B.— According to the Prosecutrix’s statement she was allowed to pass along a
lonely bush road for a mile, enter the gates, pass up Mr. Croudace’s private avenue tor a
distance of 240 yards, and within a stone’s throw of Mr. Croudace s bedroom window,
before being assaulted; when Mr. Croudace came upon the scene, she said, Ui
bull! ” The same bull knocked a woman down a few nights after at Dark Creek, mmct-
ing serious injuries, and the bull was then destroyed by Mr. Croudace s oic eis.
PILER.]
AT TN€ TRIAL.-APRIL 8, 1891.
[The following report of Suffield’s trial is taken from the Newcastle Morn-
ing Herald of the 9th April, 1891, and has been checked by the Judge’s notes.
The words in the report which are not contained in the Judge s notes are en-
closed in brackets, and the Judge’s substantial additions or alterations from the
report are printed in brackets in italics.]
Maitland Circuit Court. Second Day. Wednesday, April 8, 1891. The Lamb-
ton Rape Case. Before His Honor Mr. Justice Windeyer.
Thomas Suffield, aged 32, was charged with, that he did on the 21st of December
inst at Lambton, without her consent, ravish and carnally know Ann Chambers. A
second count with having Resulted the girl with intent to commit rape, was also preferred
against the accused, who pleaded “Not guilty.
Ten jurymen were ordered to stand aside by the Crown Prosecutor, and it was
noticeable that the accused did not challenge one. The accused was defended by Mr. W.
Edmunds, instructed by Mr. R. W. Thompson, M.P., and Mr. T. Cronin.
The greatest interest was taken in the case, the court-house being crowded all day,
while many Lambton residents were in attendance.
Ann Chambers's Evidence.
Ann Chambers stated that she was a single girl, and was employed by Mr. Thomas
Croudace [in the capacity of a general servant] [inDecember fast]. She was [2l] [2B] years
of age. [Croudace lives one mile from Lambton.] On Sunday the 21st December [l6JO],
she left Mr. Croudace’s residence at a quarter to eleven o’clock in the morning. She
took the tram for Hamilton, [and on going to Lambton she saw the accused
from the road]. [I walked a mile to the tram, passing Warren’s cottage; I saw
Mrs Warren on the verandah, and a man very like the prisoner, but I can’t swear that
it was the prisoner. I caught the tram at Lambton]. She also saw Mrs. Warren, and on
fretting to the tram terminus she called upon Mrs, Scott. She remained with her mother
until 25 minutes past 4 o’clock that afternoon, and then proceeded by the tram to Walls-
©nd for the purpose of visiting a friend named Julia Scott. She remained there until 9
p m., and returned to Lambton with [Miss Scott] [Mrs. Scott].'t' They called on the aunt
of the latter, and afterwards walked in the direction of Croudace’s places At Croudace
street they parted, Miss Scott going in another direction. Witness weftt up the line
towards her home, and while going along she met [several pedestrians] [two or three boys
* Mr. 0. G. Heydon. t Should be ‘ Miss Scott.’


and girls]. It was [then] about twenty minutes to 10 o’clock [when we parted] and she
had to go through the big gates, and up the drive, to get into the house. She saw the
accused sitting on the [big] gate, and as she passed through the small one he said to her
, G ° od She , m £ de no ?°? wer > and [walked briskly] [crossed over to go] to the
back of Mr. Croudace’s house. When crossing [a path], the accused came [up and caught
her by] [on to the grass following me, putting his hand to] the back of her hand* \headl
but not violently. She turned to see who it was, and he [came in front of me and took
hold of my shoulders and] said, “Stop” She answered, “If you do not let me go I
shall teH Mr Croudace. The accused replied, “ You can tell [him] [Mrs. Croudace] if
you like,’ and with that he put his hands round her waist, and tried to drag her down
[she struggled and did her best to escape, but he dragged her down. Witness then
described the disgusting scene, and said that while the accused was leaning over her she
became unconscious and did not remember anything till the next morning, when sl e
found herself] [and I struggled with him a good while, and he tore my dress and tried
all in his power to put me down, and I struggled a long while before he did and when he
got me down he dragged my clothes up in front and he was then kneeling down in front
of me, and Ido not recollect anything after that, and I do not re ollect anything more
till Monday morning, when I found myself] in bed at Croudace’s house. During the
struggle she would swear that she shouted and screamed out several times and the
accused said. If you shout again, I will hit you again.” He had not previously struck
her but had caught her by the shoulder, and held [her hand] [me]. She had a good opror-
tunity of seeing the accused, and had not the slightest doubt he was the man [who had
outraged her that night]. She had seen him before at Lambton while she was in com
pany with a fellow servant named [Annie] [Mary] Stewart. [He was standing at Chad-
wick s Hotel corner ; there is a bright light there. Mary Stuart poin’ed him out I kne w
hrs name on the Sunday night]. It was a moonlight night, but slightly clouded love ,
cast]. When witness regained consciousness on the following morning she fmade a 1
plaint to] [to/d] Miss Ethel Croudace, and had told her that a man luufinsulted her She
also [complained to] [told] May Stewart, who slept with her in the same room [who did
Ger ,nother was sent for, and witness also complained to her [and afterwards
Mr. Croudace came]. She found [marks of] blood upon her underclothing, and was in
pain when she regained her senses. [I had been poorly a fortnight before. I have never
spoken to prisoner before]. never
Ann Chambers Cross-examined.
By Mr. Edmunds :
[She had never given him any encouragement, and had never spoken to him ore
viously.l [I do not remember seeing Mr. Croudace on Sunday night.] She had no rejec-
tion of [ever] saying [to him] “ Oh, that bull ” ; [/ did not say it and ™
not remember anything that had occurred through the night, after being outriged She
would swear that no bull had [attacked] [touched] her and was sure Hint .1.1 I.OT V ° n ®
seen one. If she said, “ Oh, that bull,” [it must have been uttered in her delirium'a!she
cou d give no reason for such a statement.] [lcannot account for saying it; I can given!
explanation of complaining of being injured by the bull; if I spoke of a bull it muit have
been mere imagination ; I knew there were bulls and cows about; I heard the girl talk of a.
bull being down there; I did not see the bull at all that night ■ I saw that man 1
charged the accused with the offence, and was well aware that it was a capftal
punishable by death - she had made inquiries about the acoused because she had heard
[the girls speaking of him as a nice-looking young man ; Mr Croudace’s anie * *
the main road from Lambton and Charlestown; the accused struggled wfth her foAlong
way towards the house] [people talking of him; when the girl Mary Stuartpo iniedhimZ
having heard her and another girl (Miss Warren) talk of him before, I asked some auctions
about him; the prisoner is a single man as far as I know ■ the girls snake of hirnJiy 1
nice young man and nic evoking .] He did not throw a stone at her, and she did not thfnk
she toW anyone that he had done so ;to the best of her recollection she did not ?hink she
told her fellow-servants that the man who assaulted her had on a heavy coat- she said hi!
coat was rough, but not heavy? (The accused at this stage took off his colt and th!
witness, feeling it, said that she would call it a rough cloth. ) It had rained rhA’ * d - the
but not much, and the spot where the assault took place was near the Dicket fene ei V
there was some thick scrub; in conversation with the girl Stewart the latte!si!?d “
it was nob Mr. Suffield who did it, as I told James what von said Tk’
said that it could not have been the accused ” [because he went to work at 7 o’clock] Wit
ness on being pressed by counsel, said she could not remember say.ng th!t she Lew S
was the acoused, as he had a hairy coat like Master Frank. [ln the !i **
get away w.th all her power.] [I wrestled with all my ligti" aZI
Hand ’ is an error of reporter or compositor.


The girl [Stuart] [Annie Warren] was only at Croudaoe’s for a short time, and had left
before that day ; she, however, had a sister there.
[lt is a nearer way to go by Warren’s; I never went that way before, but our clocks
were slow; I had not got far when the prisoner came on me; the struggle terminated not very
far from the house; he did not throw a stone at me when sitting on the gate, or at any time ;
he hurt the back of my head, but not violently; I don’t remember telling Miss Croudace that
he threw a stone at me ; it is not correct if I did say it; I can’t remember saying it; he hit me
on the back of the neck, but not with a stone ; if I said it, it would be a mistake; I thought
the next morning that perhaps it was a stone, and I may have told Miss Croudace so ; I was
confused in my recollections next morning ; I don’t think I told May about the stone.]
[lt teas amongst the scrub he got me down, near the gate, near a fence, inside the outer
fence. —The witness describes by a plan that the scrub is between two roads leading to the back
and front of the house, and that she struggled up to there, and then went towards the front
from the back road, thinking they would hear her better .]
Sergeant Salter's Evidence.
Sergeant George Salter, stationed at Lambton, deposed that “he arrested the
accused on the 22nd December, at 9 o’olock in the evening ; he first saw him at 8 o’olock
at Warren’s house, and he was then in one of the back bedrooms; witness said, ‘Good
night, Tom,’ and the accused, after returning the salutation, said ‘This is a bad busi-
ness’; witness said, ‘What business?’ and he replied, ‘I was told about it’; witness
said, ‘ Who told you? ’ and he replied, ‘ Oh, never mind,’ and then added, ‘ Mr. Warren
told me that my name was mixed up in it ’; witness said to him, ‘ I saw her on Sunday
morning walking down the road ’; previous to that he said, * I was here all the time, but
Warren thought that I was in the pit. I asked Mrs. Warren to oall me at a quarter to 12
o’clock (midnight) ’; witness asked him if he had any objection to go up to Mr. Groudace’s
place and see the girl, and he replied ‘No, certainly not ’; they left to go to the house,
and shortly after leaving, witness said, ‘You generally take a turn round the town on a
Sunday night ’; and witness said, ‘Yes, I went down last night, about a quarter to 8’;
witness and the accused went in to see the girl, but she was apparently asleep ; soon after
that witness arrested the accused for assaulting Ann Chambers, and attempting to carn-
ally know her; the accused said, ‘Amlto be arrested on the mere word of a woman ? ’
witness then returned with him to his room in Warren’s, and after searching his clothes
took him to the lock-up; in the accused bedroom there was a window of about sft. by
3ft. 6in., with 12 panes of glass ; witness had previously had an interview with the girl,
and in consequence of what she said, he decided to arrest the aocused. (Witness pro-
duced a plan of Warren’s house, where the accused lived, and also the olothing worn by
the girl on the night in question ; the dress was torn at the waist, and stained with mud ;
the petticoats and underlinen were stained with blood, some of the garments being almost
covered with it.) On Saturday, the 27th of December, witness charged the accused with
having committed rape on Ann Chambers, and he said, ‘ Is that the same as before ? ’ and
witness explained that the former charge was one of intent; he said, 4 ls that the result
of the medioal examination ? ’ and witness deolined to tell him.
By Mr. Edmunds :
“Witness examined the spot on the ground pointed out by the girl, but could find
no trace of any man’s clothing ; he examined the room and the clothes of the accused, but
found nothing suspicious; witness had known by sight the accused for some time, and
thought he was a decent young man ; the accused willingly showed him all his clothing
and effects. [There were no tears on the prisoner’s clothes, and no marks or stains bearing
on this case. Warren's house is 30 or Ifi yards back from the road.]
Thomas Croudace’s Evidence.
Thomas Croudace, manager of the Lambton oolliery, stated that the girl (Ann
Chambers) was employed at his residence as a housemaid. His house was about one
mile from the Lambton township, and the plan produced had been drawn to scale by wit-
ness and his son. [Warren’s cottage is about 50 or 60 chains from my gate.] On the
Sunday evening, in question, shortly after he went to bed [at] [about] ten o’clock, he
heard a scream, as if someone was in [fear or] pain, and, on it being repeated a minute
[or afterwards, he got up and looked out in the direction [that the sound had come
from] [ towards the avenue]. Witness coo-eed and shouted out, “ Wait there, I am coming ! ”
Witness called his son, [who was also in bed, and they dressed and ran out of the house.]
[ 7 f r (> went down as soon a< we get our things on.] His son led him [by two or three
yards,] and reached the spot first.
They saw the girl lying on the ground [evidently in a great deal of pain, and


prostrated by fear. Her hair was dishevelled, and the clothes disarranged.] [outside the
garden fence, between the two roads, 35 feet from the little gate in the garden fence. The girl
was lying on the ground, resting on her arm and crouched up, giving the idea of fear, ivithout
her hat or parasol, which were lying 7 or 8 feet from her. She teas evidently in a
great deal of fear and pain ] Witness said, “What is the matter, Ann?” <vnd
she answered, “ Oh, the bull ! ” Witness said, “ Has the bull hurt you, Ann? ” and she
said, “ Oh, lam hurt all over.” Witness examined her shoulders and [back] and finding
nothing, he said, “I do not [think] [see] you are hurt [anywhere] Ann.” [See if you can
walk.] [Can’t you get up and walk ?] They then carried her through the small gate to
the house, and while going in witness found that she had fainted. The spot where she
was lying was in the garden, and witness pointed out the place on the plan.
[The girl was not insensible at first, as she spoke to him, but she was evidently in a
terrible state of fear.] [<S/re teas evidently in a state of fear and trepidation; she spoke
confusedly.] When witness went out he saw a bull standing about [3o] [4o] yards away, and
[on aspot]near theback [entrance] [road] to the [grounds] [house] [which the girl would have
to pass to reach the house] [and at a spot near which she would have passed coming up to
where she was.] The animal, which had short horns, was standing perfectly quiet. They
carried the girl into the house, and laid her down at the hall entrance. Mrs. and Miss
Croudace came down stairs, and used lavender water and restoratives ; but it was some
considerable time, fully 20 minutes or half-an-hour, before the girl regained consciousness.
She wandered a great deal in her mind, and mistook witness for someone else, as
she said, “ Oh, Mr. Wilson!” Witness said, “It is not Mr. Wilson, *nn ; it is your
master, and the others in the family.’’ The girl cried for her mother a good deal, and
previous to being brought round, witness had sent for a doctor, who arrived after the girl
had been put to bed. The accused worked at an underground pumping engine in the pit.
He boarded at Warren’s, and witness had examined the house. The window in the
accused’s room was quite large enough for a man to get out or in. [7 lived there once.]
One of witness’s daughters brought the accused’s mother, and in her presence
witness examined the girl. She was bruised all over the lower part of the body, one eye
was black, and she was marked on the back. From the bruises he saw he concluded that
she must have struggled very violently. The marks on the thighs were evidently caused by
great force.
Witness and his son picked up [the buttons] [a little ornament] produced where
they found the girl. He had had the bull since it was a calf. Once he heard that a
boy named Kennedy was injured by the bull, and on making enquiries he found that the
boys were in the habit of catching hold of its tail and chasing him round with sticks.
The bull was perfectly quiet unless he was ill-used. Ann Chambers was a very good
innocent girl, and bore an excellent character.
[By Mr. Edmunds :
“The bull had since attacked a married woman, and hai broke i some of her
ribs. The bull had since been destroyed.”
His Honor :
“ I think, Mr. Edmunds, that it is of no use trying to make out that the girl's in-
juries were caused by the bull. The story of the girl is undoubted.”
Mr. Edmunds :
*. “I think, your Honor, that her statement about the bull is important, and I wish
to lay stress on the bull, as it will tend to show the state of mind the girl was in that
evening.”
His Honor :
“ Oh, of course, you are entitled to get out any evidence you please regarding her
mind. She, however, denies using the words.”
By Mr. Edmunds :
“Just before the bull horned the woman he had been illtreated by four men.
When a bull became excited he usually tore up the ground, and knowing that, the grass
around the spot where the girl was found was carefully searched, but no trace of the
animal could be found. The spot where the girl was lying was about 70 or 80 yards from
the house, and was concealed by shrubs.”] If
Frank Croudace’s Evidence.
Francis Henry Croudace, a son of the last witness, stated that shortly after 10
o’clock on the night in question, while in bed, he heard a scream, and while wondering
This cross examination evidence is altogether omitted from the Judge's notes as laid on
the Legislative Assembly table. Why??!


what it was he heard a second one, [ followed by barking of dogs.] Hearing a “coo-ee,”
he got up and went to the [ end of the] balcony. His father called him, and [he] [we]
dressed [quickly] and went down. He [crossed the garden and] went orer the fence
[noticing the girl Ann Chambers lying on the ground resting on one elbow. She seemed
in a low state. At first, she said] [On getting over the fence I saw Ann Chambers lying on
the ground She was very excited, and appeared in a great fright. She was lying down
resting on one elbow. She exclaimed] “ Oh, that bull! ” Witness then corroborated his
father’s statement. [I went for the doctor.]
By Mr. Edmunds :
Witness had known Suffield for about twelve months, and had always considered
him to be a [well-mannered young man, who had received a good education] [ rtspectable,
well-behaved young mxn as far as I know.]
Ethel Croudace’s Evidence.
Ethel Mary Croudace, a daughter of Mr. Thomas Croudace, said that when the
girl was brought into the house [she] [we] attended her [all night] and assisted to put her to
bed. She was [partly] unconscious, and [was] wandering [in her mind.] [Towards 5
o’clock in the morning the girl seemed to get better. She told witness that it was a man who
had outraged her.] [Between 4 and 5 o'clock she became more rational. I was with her
then. She then made a statement to me as to how she had been maltreated by a man.]
By Mr. E jmunds :
[“The girl told witness that the man was sitting on the gates, and had thrown a
stone at her first. She mentioned no name.] [She mentioned no name to me. Sh- said
a man sitting on the gate threw a stone, and h t her on the back of the hexd.]
Dr. Harris’s Evidence.
Dr. John Harris, of Newcastle, stated that he examined the girl Ann Chambers
on the 23rd of December last; she had a scratch on the left cheek, and a black eye ; she bad
bruises on the shoulders, back, thighs, and- knee : there was an extensive bruise at the
back of the thigh, and blood was issuing from her person ; witness gave the usual evidence,
and said that he was confident that sexual intercourse had taken place. [There had been
penetration. I have no doubt at all that some foreign body entered the external genitals. A
shock sometimes brings on menstrual disorder or blood from the uterus.]
Dr. Stapleton’s Evidence.
Dr. .Joseph Stapleton, of Lambton, gave evidence, and said that he first saw the girl
on the Sunday evening. [She seemed as if she had been frightened.] He did not examine
the girl that night, but did afterwards by himself, and also with Dr. Harris. He heard
the evidence of Dr. Harris and did not agree with it entirely. The difference was that
he (the witness) could not swear to intercourse having taken place. The girl had besn
very violently treated. [I cannot sxvear to penetration. . ■ . I cannot swear it .{the
blush on the hymen) was a morbid condition, but I cannot swear it was produced by violence .]
Julia Scott’s Evidence.
Julia Scott, a domestic servant, living with Mrs. Taylor, stated that on the Sun-
day in question she went to her parents’ house in YVallsend ; she met Ann Chambers
there, and they returned to Larribton together in the tram, witness leaving her at
Croudace-street; she appeared in good health, and had nothing the matter with her.
James Campbell’s Evidence.
James Campbell, an engine-driver employed at Lambton, stated that on Sunday,
the 21st of December, he was returning home from Cardiff, and at about [lO to 10 or] a
quarter to 10 o’clock in the evening, while passing [near] the junction of the New Lamb-
ton-road, close to the residence of Mr. Croudace, he passed the girl Ann Chambers; he
looked at her and she looked at him, but they never spoke; witness knew Suffield well,
and never saw him about there that evening. He was a young man who bore an exc< 1-
lent character in the place. [I passed Croudace’s gate ; saw no one on the gate or about.]


Dr. Harris re-called.
Dr. Harris (re-called) said, that he had [l6] (15] years’ experience in the medical
profession, and had had more than an average number of female cases during that time.
He then gave expert evidence on the injuries he had seen on the girl, and further explained
his reasons for believing that intercourse had taken place. [ The chafing was only in a
line with the vagina—if morbid it would extend alt over the labia].
Mrs. Chambers’s Evidence.
Elizabeth Chambers, the mother of the prosecutrix, stated that, in consequence
of something she heard, she proceeded to Lambton on the Monday morning, and saw her
daughter. She was in bed, and told witness that a man had outraged her. (Witness was
prevented from telling the name, or detailing any of the conversation, as it took place
behind the accused’s back. His Honor looked up authorities, and ruled that the Crown
could not get out evidence as to name, but the other side could.) The witness, continuing,
said that her daughter [was in bed over a week and] was ill for a fortnight after the out-
rage. [/S/ie is 22.]
Accused’s Statement.
[This concluded the evidence, and as the defence intended to call witnesses, leave
was given for the accused to make a statement, his Honor stating that he must give only
facts, and not be interrupted by his attorney or counsel.
The accused : Your Honor and gentlemen of the jury, I have approached no task
in my life with more repugnance as I do this one, of having to stand here, an innocent
man, and refute such a fearful charge as that brought against me.
His Honor : You must state facts, and not make a speech.
The accused, continuing, said : I am as incapable of committing this orime as any
man in the court, but God knows that lam innocent in every way of this charge. lam
in a terrible position, gentlemen, but I ask you if the Crown has proved in the slightest
that I am the man harmed that girl. I can only say that I went to the pit after
twelve on that evening, and did not return until late the following night. When I did
get home, I was arrested, and, as God is my judge, I knew nothing of it, and was dumb-
founded. I refute the charge, and claim that lam an innocent man.]
[Accused: “ I spit upon the accusation. I have only one coat.]
Case for the Defence.
Mrs. Warren's Evidene.
Lydia Waeren, the wife of James Warren, gardener for Mr. Croudace, stated
that the accused boarded at her house, which was situated close to the residence of Mr.
Croudace. On the Sunday evening in question, the accused went to his room at half-past
8, or twenty minutes to 9 o’clock. At twenty minutes to 11 o’clock, he called out to her,
and he was lying on his bed reading. In the interval the children had seen him. One of
the little boys, named Charles, was bathed at half-past 9 o’clock, and when it was over ho
went straight to Suffield, and stayed with him for some time. At twenty minutes to 11
o’clock a girl, aged 16, named Mary Ann, spoke to the accused. Witness saw the accused
reading, and went to bed at a quarter to 12 o’clock. Before going she called him, as he
had to go to work. He did not answer, and on her knocking at the door [four times ] he
answered and said, “ Thank you,” [very much.] Witness then went to bed, and did not
see him again until [the next evening] [next night a little after seven.] Witness also washed
and cleaned all his clothes, and was sure that he had not a rough hairy coat in his
possession. [Before he dressed he was dressed as now. When he changed he had on white
moleskin trousers and a blue shirt.]
By the Crown Prosecutor :
Accused asked her about half-past 8 or 9 o’clock to call him, when she went to
bed, as he had to go to work. Witness had no special time to go to bed, and went late
•hat evening, because she had a book to finish before the next night, so that it could go


the ii ibra fy* [A { ILJfS 1 inished the h ™k.] She had six children, and looked after
them herself. At twenty minutes to 11 o’clock witness saw him lying on his bed, and
clock sh |f d l d n ° fc dl8 u Urb J h V n ’ Her daughter called her attention to the
clock, and that is why she remembered the time. Her little girl did not go to bed until
she went herself, and on that evening she was reading a Sunday-school book. They
ere sitting in the children s room, the door of which was exactly opposite that of the
accused s room. The door was open the whole time. Mr. Warren went to bed early.
he door of the accused s room was also open : and as there was a candle burning she
the ™rT h t lin ly,nf? ° n th ® bed reading. When she went to wake him she could see him
the whole time, and knocked [about] four times before he answered. [/ knocked more than
jour times . J
Br his Honor :
Suffield had boarded with her for four or five months.
By the Crown Prosecutor :
Two of witness’s little girls had worked at Croudace’s; the accused put on his pit-
clothes early m the evening, and it was after her husband went to bed that the accused
asked her to call him ; he was in the habit of putting on his pit-clothes early, but went to
work at all times, sometimes not until very late; witness had often called the accused
later than a quarter to 12 o clock, and had sometimes got up at 1 in the morning
to call him; her husband had taken a great interest in the case, and had subscribed to
the defence fund ; witness had heard that public meetings had been held, and subscrip-
tions raised for the defence of the accused. On the following evening the accused returned
home about 7or half-past; witness had always found him a respectable man, and had
viB!ted him in the lockup before the police-court case was over, and also when he left for
Maitland. LHe had kissed her on parting, but she did not kiss him.—Laughter in eourt.l
[/just said ‘ Good-bye ”to him ; I kissed him — no, he kissed m^.]
, . [His Honor : Silence, I say. People do not come here to be amused. This man is
being tried for his life.]
Re-examined by Mr. Edmunds :
, .. Witness had given the accused his clean pit-clothes that night, and was sure that
the little boy, aged two years, was with him until 10 o’clock.
James Warren's Evidence.
James Warren, a gardener in the employ of Mr. Croudace, stated that he had
been there for two years and four months. On the evening of Sunday, the 21st December
the accused returned home soon after 8 o’clock. [I saw him after tea.] He put on his
pit-clothes and white moleskin trousers, and then had a smoke with witness on the
verandah. Witness went to bed at about half-past 8 or a quarter to 9 o’clock, and did
not see the accused until the following evening. It was usual for accused to go to the
pit to pump the water at all times, and they frequently called him at all times. The
accused had lived in his house for about five months, and during that time witness had
always found him to be a thorough gentleman and a good fellow.
The witness was cross-examined by the Crown Prosecutor at length. He said that
he had often heard his wife calling the accused at all hours. Witness had taken an inte-
rest in the case, and had attended meetings.
The Crown Prosecutor :
“ Have you seen a pamphlet written about the case ? ”
Mr. Edmunds objected to the evidence, as the accused had been in gaol, and knew
nothing of the meetings or the pamphlet. Surely it could not be given as evidence against
the accused ?
His Honor :
“ It can be got out to show that the witness is interested, but of course it is no
evidence against the accused.”
Continuing to the Crown Prosecutor, the witness said that he had heard of the
pamphlet, but had never read it. [He knew the girl Stewart, and, when he heard from
her that the accused was blamed for the crime, witness said that it was impossible, as lie
(the accused) had gone to work that night at 10 o’clock, as witness fully believed.] [/
did not see May on the 22nd—the Monday. I first heard from Croudace at 2 p.m. on Mon-
day about the prisoner—not from May Stuart. Did not say to anyone that he could not le
yuilty , because he went to ivork at 7.] Witness told the accused on the Monday evening of
what he had heard, but did not have time to tell him all before the police arrived.


By Mr. Edmunds :
Suffield ridiculed the idea, and said something about how easy it was for a woman
to swear a man’s life away. Witness never believed the charge, and knew that Suffield
had never spoken to her.
Mary Ann Warren's Evidence.
Mart Ann Warren, daughter of the previous witness, stated that she was 16
years of age, On the Sunday night spoken of accused came in soon after eight, and did
not go out until very late. Witness heard him [ coughing ] in his bedroom at intervals, and
once she went in for her little brother, who was with the accused on his bed. [I did not
see him after that.] It was then [about] [ getting on for ] 10 o’clock. At 20 minutes to 11
o’clock witness told her mother tnat it was time to call the accused. She went out, but
said that he was awake in his room reading. They went to bed at a quarter to 12, and
her mother called Suffield four or five times before he answered. The accused had a
cold and he was coughing at intervals.
Witness was cross-examined at length, and said, on being pressed, that her mother
called the accused four times and knocked four times. Witness was reading a Sunday-
school book. Witness always went to bed with her mother. She was once working at
Mr. Croudace’s, and knew Mary Stewart and Ann Chambers. She had frequently
spoken to them about Suffield, and said he was a fine, handsome fellow. Witness, al-
though pressed at length, denied that she had ever conversed with her mother about the
case. She saw the accused being taken away by two policemen on the Monday, but she
never knew what the charge was until her mother told her two days afterwards.
May Stewart’s Evidence.
May Stewart, aged 17, deposed that she was a domestic servant at the house of
Mr. Croudace. She well remembered the night that Ann Chambers was assaulted. Tin
the morning after, Ann Chambers told witness that she believed that a man assaulted her.
She also said that he had struck her with a stone or a stick on the hand, # ] [Ann
chambers slept in the same room as me; she did not speak during the night of what
occurred. She told me on Monday morning she thought it was a man : that he had hit
her on the back of the head and that she fell down] and that he had on a rough hairy
coat, like Master Frank.
By the Crown Prosecutor :
The girl did say that she thought it was Suffield, and that he was sitting on the
gate smoking when she was coming home [and said “ Good-night ”]. Witness denied
that she had ever said to the girl “It could not have been Mr. Suffield, as ames says he
was at work [at 7 o’clock ”] or had told Mrs. Chambers that she thought that Suffield was
the man. [J did not say, “ Don’t say it was Suffield; as no one will believe you.” Jdid
not tell James Warren.]
[The Crown Prosecutor was proceeding to ask the witness about her evidence in the
police court with respect to a photograph, but his Honor said that such things were
apart from the case, and the examination was closed.]
Charles Noble’s Evidence.
Charles Noble, an overman in the Lambton pit, stated that Suffield, before he
was committed, drove a pump in the pit; he had each day, Sundays included, sufficient
time to keep his water out, and, as the work was very monotonous, he asked permission
to get off on Sundays, and witness granted it, provided he worked long enough after to
keep the water out; that was 16 hours ; witness had always found Suffield to be a well-
behaved, gentlemanly man.
Constable Fahey’s Evidence.
Constable D. Fahey, lockup-keeper at Lambton, stated that when Suffield was
locked up he had a severe cold, and coughed on the second and third night very often ;
witness did not notice it the firßt night.
Evidence to Suffield’s Character.
John T. Chapman, a storekeeper, stated that he was a storekeeper at Cessnoch, and
also a magistrate ; the accused had lived with him for two years, and had always proved
• “ Hand ” is probably a reporter’s or printer’s mistake for “ head."


'himself a trustworthy, honest, and good young fellow. Witness gave the accused a very
high character, and said that he had come forward to give evidence. The accused was a
most moral man.
K. M. Wray, Sheriff’s Officer at Maitland, who had known the accused for five
years, also gave him a high character, and said that he was a well-educated man of good
morals.
Percy Clay, Telegraph Master at West Maitland, said that he had known the
accused for nearly five years. He bad once been caretaker of the cricket ground, and
during that time had proved himself a very sober young man, and a very gentlemanly
and agreeable companion. [/ never heard him say anything that a child could not listen to.]
This closed the case for the defence.
Witnesses Re-called .
Ann Chambers (re-called) swore that when she told May Stewart that Suffield was
the man, she said, “You had better not say so, as no one will believe you.” May
Stewart then went in, and returned, and spoke again.
Mr. Edmunds submitted that it would be a separate conversation, and not relevant
at that stage.
His Honor upheld the point, and the witness stood down.
Sergeant Salter (re-called) said that when he went to Warren’s house, he went
with Constable Fahey into Suffield’s room, and did not go into the sitting-room at all,
as stated by Warren.
Constable Fahey (re-called) corroborated the evidence of his senior officer ; and
the case closed at half-past three o’clock.
Counsel for Defence.
[Mr. Edmunds addressed the jury at length, and in commencing said that surely it
must have been apparent to them that the Crown had exhibited an extraordinary amount
of zest in the case. His friend had cast imputations on Warren and his family, and in
examining the mother and the child he had attempted to show that there was collusion
going on. He dwelt at length upon the matter, and, while forgiving the Crown fpr
striving to bring a villain to justice, he thought that his learned friend, in his wisdom,
should have refrained from casting imputations on a respectable family. That the girl
was assaulted there was not much doubt; but he argued that in naming the accused the
girl had made a terrible mistake. He referred to all the points of the evidence at length,
and contended that the Warren family had proved a complete alibi. He dealt with the
discovery of the girl by Mr. Croudace and his son, and laid stress upon the remark of
the girl, “ The bull.” He argued that if she had known Suffield to be the man, his name
would be running through her mind, and she would have said his name out at once. There
was no charge in the world so easy to bring against a man as that of rape, and none so
hard to disprove. Counsel went on to criticise the evidence of the girl, who had said at
first “Oh, that bull,” and then had next day said that the man,.who wore a rough, hairy
coat, had struck her with a stick or stone. This latter statement was denied by the girl,
whose evidence showed that she, up to five hours after the event, had no idea how it had
happened, except it was by a bull.
After dealing at length with the evidence of the Warren family, he pointed out
that it was clearly shown that the accused had returned home at 8 o’clock, and had changed
his clothes ; that he had put on a blue jumper and a white pair of trousers ; and surely
the girl should have noticed that. The Warren family had seen the accused in his room,
and had spoken to him at intervals from 8 o’clock until a quarter to 12 ; and the outrage
on the girl occurred, at the latest, before 11 o’clock. He again referred to the Crown
Prosecutor, and said that the latter realised that the Warren family were certain of the
innocence of the accused, and so he tried to prove the case by hinting about the size of
the window in Suffield’s room as large enough to allow him to sneak out, commit the
terrible outrage, and sneak back again. The outrage, he pointed out, had happened
within a few yards of Croudace’s house, and the girl Chambers’s screams were heard,
and, therefore, no one would be such a fool as to sit smoking on a gate, and when the
girl came up, to follow her up the carriage drive and assault her. He alluded to the
excellent character of the accused, and a,sked for his acquittal, as there was not the
slightest doubt but that it was a case of mistaken identity.]
Counsel for the Rrosecutxon.
[The Crown Prosecutor addressed the jury briefly, and said that, as the prosecu-


tor for the Crown, he was used to be the chopping-block for counsel for a defence. He
maintained that his line of cross-examination was perfectly fair, as he had shown
some little discrepancies in the evidence for the defence, and that was not, of course,
liked by his learned friend. As the counsel for the prosecution, he had every right to-
test the credibility or the motive of any witness, and it was for the jury to say whether
or not he had succeeded. Counsel then detailed the circumstances of the case, and said
that it could not be doubted but that the girl, who was a hard-working, virtuous servant,
had been brutally assaulted and outraged by some man. The medical evidence showed
that she had been terribly injured, and that those injuries had been caused by a man.
They had, therefore, bo find who was the miscreant, and the girl swore that the man was
Suffield.
The counsel for the defence had endeavored to show that the girl was incapable
that night of identifying her assailant, but she saw him when his brutal propensities had'
not rendered her unconscious, and knew him. Only some time before she had seen him
under a gas-lamp in Lambton, and she knew him then, and he admitted it; so that, if she
could once correctly identify him, how much more capable was she of recognising him a
second time, when he was close to her and had hold of her. The time of the outrage was,
according to the evidence, about 10 o’clock, and the Warrens said that the accused was
in his room from 9 o’clock until nearly 12 o’clock. Until 10 o’clock they swore that a
two-year-old boy had been with him. Counsel then referred to the evidence of the
Warrens, and pointed to the strange circumstance that the mother and daughter delivered
precisely the same evidence, which was a peculiar circumstance. He asked them not ta
shrink from their duty, and, although it was a difficult case, yet they were supposed to
carefully weigh the evidence, and give a verdict fearlessly in accordance with it.]
The Judge’s Summing-Up.
[His Honor summed up strongly against the prisoner, and said that, next to the
crime of murder, the one which they were called upon to decide was the very wor3t in the
criminal code. One thing was certain, and that was, that a poor, innocent girl had been
brutally outraged, and it behoved the law to find out the dastard who had perpetrated it.
The accused, he would say for once, had been very ably defended, but he was sorry that the
counsel for the defence had marred his fine address by an attack upon the Crown Prose-
cutor, which he, (his Honor) considered unwarrantable. Still such cases were not decided
by addresses, however brilliant or otherwise, and it was for the jury to carefully weigh
the evidence. The girl had given her evidence modestly and straightforwardly, and the
simple question for the jury was, “Who was the man?” One man stood before them
accused by the girl herself, and if they found that the Crown had proved him to be the
right one, their duty was to find him guilty, if there was no reasonable doubt.
The girl, after being outraged, had been found by her employer, Mr. Croudace, and
his son, lying unconscious. They had been attracted by her screams, and when the girl,
according to her own story, became conscious, she told everyone round her that the
accused was the man. If the jury thought that the girl had made a mistake, then the
accused was free, as they must have no doubt in their minds before they convicted him
that he was the man who had committed the outrage. His Honor then gave a detailed
account of the girl’s evidence. She had seen accused first at Lambton, and knew him.
She identified him, and then, on returning home, she says, “I saw the accused sitting on
the gate.” She did not say she saw a man, but swore it was the accused : and he need
hardly say that there was a great difference between seeing a man for the first time, and
only knowing him by reputation, and meeting him a second time. The girls, as girls do,
ha,d often spoken of the accused as a fine, handsome young man, and therefore the girl
must have been inquisitive about him.
j The girl had no motive to tell an untruth, as she had been outraged, and therefore
the only question was, “ Was her evidence, and were her powers of identification to be
depended upon? ”It was clear that there was not the slightest reason for supposing that
the injuries had been caused in any other manner than by a man, and it was needless for
him to point out that the case of a bull having done such injury was not reasonable. His
Honor pointed out at length that the girl was positive in her identification, and then
went on to speak of the defence. He alluded to the high character borne by the accused,
and said that there was no doubt but that he was a general favourite. Still, as men of
the world, they must know that very often they found that men with the very best
characters for business, honesty, and morality, were often very bad when under sensual
excitement. He need hardly refer to the case of Colonel Baker, in which he, a man
respected and known all over England, had attempted to commit rape on a woman in a
railway carriage.
It was for them to consider all these things, and they must remember that the
cused was a popular man with the opposite sex, and perhaps, on meeting the girl at


the gate, he had made his advances, and, finding them repelled, he had the audacity to
think that he need only persevere to succeed. It was an inference to be drawn, and it
was for the jury to consider all such things as those. He had tried many cases of that
kind, he was sorry to say; and he had noticed that a good woman, when placed in the
box to give evidence of a rape or an assault, would give her evidence in a modest, straight-
forward way. After dealing further with the evidence of the Crown, his Honor said that
the jury would have to consider if the alibi defence set up was a good one. He could tell
them that in one case which he tried, in which ten men were charged with outraging a
woman, the whole of them set up an alibi, except one, and he said that he was fishing
miles away at the time. The husband, James Warren, said that when he told the
accused of the affair on the following night the accused said that he had on the following*
morning, while on the verandah, seen Ann Chambers going down the road. By that
statement he proved that the girl had properly identified him the first time; and as that
was the case, how could it be argued that she had failed in the second instance, when she
alleged that he was the man who outraged her ?
His Honor then referred to the evidence of the Warrens, and when explaining it,
he expressed himself strongly on several portions of it. He directed them to weigh that
evidence against the positive evidence of the girl, and dwelt on the minuteness with which
the mother and her daughter gave the same evidence about the brutal occurrences of one
night. He told them that if they had any reasonable doubt they must acquit the
prisoner, and then pointed out that there were two counts. The first was a capital
charge, and before they could brine: that against the accused they must be sure that the
girl had been actually outraged. If, however, they found that the accused was the man
who assaulted her, but he had not succeeded in committing actual rape, from whatever
cause, then he was guilty of the second count, which was assault with intent. After
dealing with the medical evidence, with a view of directing them as to whether or not
actual rape had been committed, he warned them to leave out of their minds all exterior
influences, especially any arising from the publication of pamphlets, or the holding of
meetings of sympathy. In concluding his summing-up, which all throughout was
strongly against the prisoner, his Honor directed them to fearlessly, and to the best of
their ability, weigh the evidence, and give their verdict accordingly.]
The Verdict and Sentence.
The jury retired at 6.45, and after an absence of three-quarters of an hour they
returned with a verdict of “ Guilty,” on the second count, [assault with intent to commit
a rape ] [the foreman, Mr. E. Capper, pronouncing it.]
[ln answer to the usual question, the prisoner said :—“I again say that I am inno-
cent, and if this moment were my last I should swear that I never laid a finger on that
girl. The jury have found me guilty of a crime which only a brute could be guilty of,
and now I will stand by and hear my sentence. I say it is a gross miscarriage of justice,
and I protest that my witnesses have not been believed.”]
[The prisoner, who had exhibited a cool manner all day, seemed calm and collected.]
[His Honor, in addressing him, said he concurred with the verdict of the jury, and
would look upon the prisoner as a guilty man. He had escaped the capital charge, as
the jury had given him the benefit of the doubt which existed as to whether or not he
had succeeded in his foul design on the girl who, unfortunately, had been rendered
unconscious by the brutal treatment. Continuing, his Honor said: “I have closely
•observed your manner all day, and have carefully noted your protestations of innocence.
I must tell you that I do not believe them, knowing as I do that the loudest protesta-
tions of innocence have come from guilty men. I have heard murderers, after being con-
victed, loudly proclaim their innocence, and petitions, signed by thousands, have been
sent in for their reprieve, but before their sentence was carried out they have confessed
their guilt.” After further addressing the accused, the learned Judge said that the
heaviest penalty he could inflict was fourteen years’ penal servitude. He thought that
the strong arm of the law should be held out to protect innocent girls from such mis-
creants as the prisoner, and he would therefore sentence the accused to 10 years’ penal
servitude.
The prisoner, as he disappeared, bade good-bye to several people, who answered,
* l Good-bye, Tom.”
• Should be “preceding."


The Suffield Case.— An Appeal.
rpHE evidence and commentary published in this pamphlet must have
' convinced every intelligent person that the Suffield case is empha-
tically a case for enquiry. N.S.W. Justice is not infallible. It
has made mistakes before; it may make them again. And Suffield was
tried by Judge AVindeyer. According to Judge and jury, Biittner was
rightly convicted on sufficient evidence, and he was within an ace of being
hanged when it was proved that he was absolutely innocent: on
the very day which had been appointed for his execution he
stepped * forth from the gaol a free man. According to Judge
and jury, Airs. Butler was a dishonored woman, yet it was after-
wards shown that she was the victim of wicked and systematic perjury.
There was the Mount Rennie case. There was the Quirindi case.
There have been a dozen similar cases in the last few years.
Spasmodic efforts have been made on Suffield’s behalf; but the public
soon forgets. It is desired to make the public remember. Suffield’s case
has been spasmodically talked about in Parliament; but most members of
Parliament are timid time-servers quaking for their seats—with the
courage to beard a Minister only when the local road-and-bridge vote
pushes them. It is desired to give them pluck enough to drag Suffield’s
case right out of its pigeon-hole into the light of day. To these ends it is
necessary that the facts be laid before the public and Parliament as forci-
bly as print and speech can do it—which ffieans money ; and that an
organised and continuous effort be made to get Suffield fair play at an
open enquiry—which means more money. The Bulletin starts a sub-
scription ; and will be glad to acknowledge further sums from men who
can put themselves in Suffield’s place after six and a-lialf years of prison,
and realise how they would feel had they been victims, as he may be a
victim, of what so far looks like a grave and cruel miscarriage of
Published by The Bulletin Newspaper Company, Limited, 214 George-street, Sydney,
New South Wales, and printed by John Sanoh ’ 3'4 Sydney.
justice.
SUBSCRIPTIONS RECEIVED TO NOVEMBER 10, 1807.
£ s.
d.
£
d.
The Bulletin Newspaper Co.,
Brought forward
20 18
6
Ltd.
10 10
0
D.W.C
1
0
0
Peter Anderson and Co.
(and £1
Charleston Miner
1
0
0
monthly, promised) ...
1 0
0
R. Park
5
0
A. Crawford ...
10
0
Subscribed at Coolgardie and
1 0
0
forwarded by Mr. G. H.
J. Martin
5
0
Kingswell (as per subjoined
Adelaide
10
0
list) :—Mr. Thomas, 10s. ; C.
Civil Servitude
2
6
Chilwer, 21s. ; J. E. Hard-
10
0
wick, 10s. 6d.; A Friend, 10s.;
A.B....
1 0
0
A Miner and J. Yonnor, 10s. ;
Postal Note ...
5
0
Three Sympathisers (Great
10
0
Hanover mine), 15s. ; A
2 0
0
Friend, 5s.; Coolg. Miner and
R.C....
5
0
Pioneer, 21s.
5
2
6
Connolly’s Camp
4 8
0
R.S. and R. ...
1
10
0
E. H. Cole
1 0
0
Native
5
0
“Rebel”
3
0
Peter Anderson & Co.
1
0
0
Dumas and Co.
5 15
0
D. Troy & Co.
4
Y
6
Tasmanian ...
5
0
,£20 18
0
,£44
8
6
