

\-'V!
A '•>
mv PBPQU'MT MPPTOM-
-llm ill jujj h i i ilia 0 ijiU IN ,
Its Cause and Its Cure.
THE FROZEN MEAT TRADE.—SUGGESTED EXPORT BONUS.
Address by the Hon.
Flht let
no HE Hon. W. Forrest, M.L.C., delivered an
address on the “ Present Depression of the
Colony, Its Cause, and Its Cure,” on Wednesday,
lyth July, in the council-room of the National
Association. The address was given under the
auspices of the Brisbane Chamber o Commerce,
and the attendance was very large, the room in
which the meeting was held being crowded.
Among those present were the Premier (Sir
Thos. M'llwraith), the Hons. 15. B. Forrest, J.
JE. M'Dougall, W. G. Power, F. T. Brentnall,
W. Pettigrew, J. C. Heussler, W. F.
Lambert, T. Macdonald-Paterson, P. Per-
kins, Messrs. Plunkett, Lovejoy, Phillips,
Dickson, Murray, Macfarlanc, It. H. Smith,
Cross, Watson, Corfield, Kingsbury, Midson,
Cameron, Callan, Leahy, Crornbie, Harding,
MM.L.A.
The Chairman, the Hon. 15. B. lorrest,
M.L.C., president of the Chamber of Commerce,
in opening Hie meeting, said he had taken on
himself the responsibility of inviting the
meeting to hear an address by the Hon. W.
Forrest on the present depression of the colony,
its cause and cure. The invitation was the
result of several conversations he had had with
Mr. W. Forrest on the subject. Ho offered no
apology for calling the meeting—(hear, hear)
for now was the time particularly when any-
body who had anything to say upon the subject
should be invited to say it. (Hear, hear.)
The invitation would not necessarily be
confined to Mr. W. lorrest; if there
was anybody else, either at the
meeting or hereafter, who thought he could
throw any light on the subject he, the
W. Forrest,
chairman, would be very glad to give him an
opportunity to voice his views. It was the
duty of every man in the community at the
present time to put his shoulder to the wheel
and give a lift to the colony in its present
straits. It was the duty of every one to try and
convert the resources of the colony into cash.
We had plenty of resources, but unfortunately
we had not got the means to turn them into
cash at the present moment. He had read a
recent interview in the Press with Mr. Forrest
with a deal of pleasure, and he ventured to say
his address would be one that would commend
itself to everybody.
MU. FOR BEST’S ADDRESS.
Mr. W. Forrest said: Mr. Chairman and
gentlemen of the Brisbane Chamber of Com-
merce, when I received your flattering invita-
tion to deliver an address I felt that such an
undertaking at the present moment would be
almost an impossibility owing to the multi-
tudinous and urgent calls of public and private
business. But the solicitude which 1 share
with you for the welfare of our common
country overweighed all other considerations.
I therefore cheerfully complied with your
request in the earnest hope that the words
which 1 shall speak, and which arc the result of
experience, careful investigation, and deliberate
reflection, may prove of service at this im-
portant juncture. It is universally acknow-
ledged that Queensland is richly endowed by
Nature. It contains an area of 428,000,000 of
acres, the greater portion of which is sur-
prisingly fertile.
qVeensi.anVs Pbodcvtivk Power.
To the agriculturist the soil readily and abun-
dantly yields its increase. I have seen exhibited
side by side at the Exhibition Buildings
in Brisbane products of the temperate and
the torrid zones grown here, which in quality


excelled any similar productions that have come
under my notice in the course of a world-wide
experience. As an illustration of the value of
its agricultural lands let us examine what
sugar has done. Up to the end of 181)1
the total value of sugar produced
amounted to £14,000,000. In 1801 we
produced sugar to the value of £05(1,000,
of which over two-thirds was exported. This
year it is estimated that we shall export sugar to
the value of over £1,*200,000, and this industry
is capable of almost infinite expansion. Again,
we have a vast area of magnificent pastoral
lands, on which are now being depastured
about 22,000,000 of sheep, over (1,000,000
of cattle, and about 500,000 horses, not
to speak of other stock. In 1891 we ex-
ported wool to the value of £3,500,000, and
live stock to the value of £808,000; while in
1890 wo sent across the border live stock
valued at £1,919,000. Further, the country
abounds in mineral wealth. We possess some
of the richest mines in the world. The value
of gold exported in 1891 amounted to nearly
£2,000,000. In a word we can produce in plenti-
ful abundance everything that man requires for
his use. Since 1807 our total exports amount to
£120,000,000, and yet our total population at
the present time is only about 420,000. Surely,
it will be said, this handful of people, the for-
tunate possessors of this magnificent estate and
these enormous riches, are enjoying every
advantage and comfort that wealth can give.
I ask you, is this the case ? For answer, take
a walk down Queen-street. Instead of cheerful
prosperity you will see care and anxiety; you
will also see financial institutions which
have suspended payment, and groups of
idle men at every street corner; or
go into the country, and you will
observe men in hundreds seeking, and seek-
ing in vain, for employment. There is not a
business man who does not complain bitterly
of the dulness of trade.
Causes of the Depuession.
Depression exists everywhere. What is
the cause of this deplorable condi-
tion of aflairs? “Is the Anglo-Saxon
played out?” If not it is obvious that,
unless what I have stated about the natural
riches of this colony is false, or unless its people
are idle, incapable, and thriftless, some evil in-
fluence has thwarted their efforts and paralysed
their powers. I will not admit for one moment
that the bulk of our population is either incapable
or thriftless, for my experience teaches me that
the contrary is the case. Our pastoral pioneers,
who subdued the wilderness and drew order
out of chaos, possessed the very highest
attributes—courage, endurance, self-denial,
skill, and foresight. Our planters are men of
a similiar type, and, as a rule, a more in-
dustrious body cannot be found than our
fanners and selectors. Well, having such
natural riches and such an intelligent, thrifty,
and industrious population we ought to be
highly prosperous. Why is the contrary the
case ?' Why are our banks closed; why is
business at a standstill, and why are numbers
of men idle? There is no effect without a
cause. Lot us find the cause. That is the first
step towards discovering a remedy. To my
mind the causes of the depression arc obvious :
It is partly attributable to the serious deprecia-
tion which has taken place in the value of our
staple productions—wool, sheep, and cattle,
but primarily it arises from years of
misgovernment. Let me here say that I shall
not attack any special Government nor
blame any special man or men, nor do I pro-
pose to make any political reference whatever,
unless the same be incidental or necessary to
sustain my premises. This is not a political
address. I reiterate, however, that the de-
pression is primarily due to misgovernment. It
is true that Governments cannot regulate the
price of wool, but were it not for misgovern-
ment we should have made such progress in
other directions as would have compensated for
its fall. This is a great producing
country. The total value of our pro-
ductions is the measure of our collective
wealth. It is clear, therefore, that the more
we produce the richer we become. It is equally
clear that the duty of the State is to en-
courage and foster production. lias this been
done ? For answer let me remind you of the
legislation which almost strangled the sugar
industry, and of the oppressive, harassing, and
generally antagonistic measures to which the
pastoral industry has been subjected. Let
me also remind you that when the pastoral
industry was flourishing business was
sound, labour plentiful, and wages high.
Euiioita of Govkknment.
Gentlemen, remember that what I am endea-
vouring to prove is that the existing depression
is primarily caused by misgovernment, and I
would ask you to keep this proposition in your
minds ; and I would also ask you to keep in
your minds the following facts and simple
though sound economic laws:—Wealth is pro-
duced by reproductive labour. Convertible
commodities arc the products of labour, and
money is their liquid equivalent. In brief,
capital is conserved labour. Capitalists are
the storehouses of Egypt—insurance funds
against famine. How much assistance did the
flood sufferers receive from the “vacant allot-
ment” reformer who rails against capital?
Let echo answer. Now this colony is
naturally rich. Its people arc not. Therefore,
the people must have been idle, or their labour
must have been misapplied. We shall shortly


bo leavin'.; tills room, and if instead of going
down the stairs we set the laws of gravitation
at defiance and walk out of the window we
shall cither be killed or badly injured. Now
economic laws are as inflexible as the laws of
gravitation. Had we obeyed the former I truly
think that Queensland to-day would have been
the most prosperous country in the world.
You are perhaps mentally asking what
has this to do with past misgovernraent.
If so, I reply by asserting that successive Go-
vernments have set economic laws at defiance.
Instead of encouraging the production of wealth
they have hampered, discouraged, and crippled
our greatest producing industries by legislative
enactments. They have borrowed recklessly
and spent much of the proceeds in works of a
non-productive character. Now the sum of our
wealth being the total value of our productions,
when a man is employed in work of a non-pro-
ductive nature he might as well be idle
so far as adding to the general wealth is
concerned. The State candle lias been burned
at both ends. We have had a crushing load of
debt imposed upon us, and much of the
borrowed money has been wasted, because
labour has been deflected and turned into use-
less channels, thereby diminishing our pro-
ducing powers. The evil does not end here.
The non-producing worker requires to be
clothed and fed, and this burden obviously falls
on the productive worker. The consequence is
that we are oppressed by taxation ; our capacity
to open up new channels for the profitable
employment of labour is thereby reduced,
and enterprise, if not killed, is
seriously crippled. Again, the State has been
the greatest employer of labour, and by reckless
borrowing and squandering it forced up the
price of labour loan unnatural height. The
true measure of a day’s wage is the value of
what a day’s work produces. When, there-
fore, the State forced wages beyond tiiat point
it struck a deathblow at our prosperity. Ex-
cessive wages are fatal to expansion. No
producing industry can stand the rates of wages
which have ruled here for years. This fact, I
think, is now universally recognised by the
workers themselves, and it would have been
found out long since but for the wanton expen-
diture of loan funds. Nearly all our troubles
have arisen from excessive borrowings and
unwise expenditure. The fictitious values and
spurious 'prosperity thereby created led to our
financial disasters. The undue forcing lip of
wages was a prime factor in our Labour troubles.
The shorter the hours and the higher the wages
the more unreasonable became the demands of
the workers for yet shorter hours and
higher wages. Self-preservation at last
compelled the employers to resist, and re-
sistance was followed by a series of .strikes.
Then came the beginning of the end. Volun-
tary idleness became enforced idleness, and
many workers—yes, and many good and hone d
workers, and that’s “ the pity o’t” —who prior
to the strike were engaged in well-paid occu-
pations are now begging, and begging in vain,
for leave to toil. No doubt these evils have
been intensified by unwise counsels. But I
have no desire to pursue that phase of the
question. The Labour troubles will gradually
cure themselves. Eor there are natural laws
which must be obeyed and natural forces which
cannot be defeated. Disobedience brings its
own punishment, and continued resistance
ends in destruction. To treat the question of
raisgovernmont exhaustively would require a
dozen addresses. But time will not permit me
to become analytical. I have, how'ever, in
general terms placed the leading features before
you, and I must leave you to work out the
details for yourselves. Take for instance the
question of public borrowing, and analyse
that. To assist you, just consider
the danger of individual borrowing. Unless
the individual borrower is a man pos-
sessing skill and knowledge, and who ex-
pends the money borrowed judiciously and re-
productively, he must inevitably come to grief.
•Were we not unwise, therefore, to grant such
unlimited borrowing powers to Governments,
seeing that the element of individual responsi-
bility is absent, and seeing ttiat no one is liable
for loss or waste ? Would it not have been
much wiser had we relied on private enterprise
to construct our railways and most of our other
public works ? Before leaving the subject,
however, let me explain that I have simply
used the words “ Government” for con-
venience. Governments are merely the outcome
of a system. It is the people who are to
blame. What can we expect if we return
men to Parliament of undisciplined minds, and
who neither possess political training nor
practical knowledge ? Can such conditions end
otherwise than in disaster ? If we sow the
wind we shall most assuredly reap the whirl-
wind. In any case a system which gives to
the idle, the worthless, the dissipated, and
thriftless the same political privileges that it
gives to the industrious, the capable, the sober-
minded, and the thrifty is rotten to the
very core, and the sooner we recognise this
the better. The remedy is obvious. Having
now given you in general terms what in my
opinion has caused the depression, I will pro-
ceed to point out the cure. After what I have
said about rnisgovernment you may perhaps
expect me to point out the remedy for that
aspect of the case. 1 do not, however, propose
to go beyond the suggestion contained in a
previous sentence, and will confine myself to
the economic as distinguished from the


political view of the mattel’. I have already
pointed out and said enough to prove
the vastness and richness of the public estate,
and I have stated directly and by implication
that the absence of prosperity is due to our
having failed to develop this magnificent and
truly valuable inheritance. For what is the
use or value of hidden or undeveloped wealth ?
Development ok Resouuces Necessary.
The point I wish to make is this : No matter
how vast an estate may be, or however valuable
the riches it may contain, it is utterly valueless
for the practical purposes of existence unless
and until developed. A moment’s considera-
tion of this proposition will expose the folly of
those claptrap orators who refuse to give away
what they are pleased to call the people’s heri-
tage to pay for railways. Man cannot
exist without food. Therefore, the primary
business of life is to get enough to
eat. Civilised man produces the necessaries
of life by cultivating the soil, or by producing
something which he can exchange for his
requirements. Now let me point out that a
man may produce in plentiful abundance a
valuable commodity other than food, and yet
he may.die of starvation unless he can ex-
change it for the necessaries of life. Do you
want an illustration ? Surround Mount Morgan
by a wall that will prevent ingress or egress,
and those inside the wall must inevitably starve.
The vastest stores of gold will not sustain
life. Or take a sheep station with say
half a million of sheep, but no other kind of
food or means of getting other food. The
course-of starvation in the latter case would
not bo so rapid as in the former, but it would
be just as certain; and supposing that some of
the people did survive, would they not in a
short time relapse into barbarism? The fact
is that exchange is the keynote, the very
foundation, the vital essence, of civilisation
and advancement. To its development we owe
the arts, the sciences, learning, in fact every-
thing that elevates man, and nearly everything
he requires for use and comfort. In an
earlier part of this address I stated that wealth
is produced by labour, and that money is the
equivalent of convertible commodities. If,
however, you will analyse what I have said
about exchanges you will perceive that we may
produce convertible commodities in unlimited
quantities and yet starve, or be as poor as
Lazarus, unless we can exchange them ; and
further that all things produced in excess of
consumption will be valueless unless we can
exchange them. It therefore follows that
development and expansion would be limited
to our capacity for consumption were
it not for exchanges. Hut these simple
truths were all ignored in the past,
and hence our present unenviable position.
To remedy past follies, to extricate this colony
from its present difficulties and place it on a
sure and safe foundation for the future, we
must pay our debts. There is only one way by
which this can be accomplished, and that is by
developing our resources. This entails finding
markets for our productions. How can
this be done ? '
Vai.uk ok the Canning Industry.
The following extract from a report by
the statistician of the Agricultural De-
partment at Washington almost ’ answers
this question. The report referred to
was on the canning industry of the United
States, but it touched on kindred subjects
“ The economic value of the industry can hardly
be over-estimated. With the railroad of parallel
growth and the more recently invented refrige-
rator car, the preservation of perishable pro-
ducts by canning is important as eliminating
the factor of distance between the place of pro-
duction and consumption, opening up at once
the resources of the most remote parts of the
country, and the markets not alone of this but
also of all countries. Thus, salmon caught at
Alaska, beef slaughtered in Chicago, tomatoes
canned in Maryland, and corn in Maine, arc
eatable in London, St. Petersburg, or Hong-
kong at any reasonable future time.” I do not
know the amount of Queensland’s private in-
debtedness, but it has a public debt of about
thirty-two million pounds. Now, our debts can
only be paid by disposing of our products, and
as some of our most valuable pro-
ductions are perishable they cannot
be placed on the world’s markets without
calling in the aid of science. The proper
application of cold air opens up avenues of
commerce undreamt of in the past, and
enables perishable productions such as meat,
butter, fish, and fruit to be safely delivered at
any point, however distant. My friend, your
chairman, when writing to invite me to deliver
an address made some complimentary re-
ferences to an interview which I some time ago
gave to a representative of the Brisbane
Courier, and which was reported in that
paper. Indeed he said the invitation
was suggested by reading it. At that interview
I confined myself to pointing out the great
benefit that would accrue to Queensland by
the exportation of meat and other products, and
I indicated where a ready and almost inex-
haustible market was to be found. Before I
finish, however, I shall go further and show you
the real obstacle that stands between us and that
market the obstacle which has blocked
the expansion of refrigerated exports in
the past, and which will do so
again in the future unless we take
effective steps to remedy the evil, but I propose
in the first place to read to you a few extracts


from the interview to which I have referred.
[Mr. Forrest then quoted the figures lie had
advanced in the interview (which appeared in
those columns) to show there was an outlet for
our products. He also read that portion which
explained his reasons for considering the
meat export question a national one.]
Tin; Smi’i'iN'i: Difficulty.
Now, gentlemen, the foregoing figures will
show you (1) that we have large numbers of stock
ready for freezing; and (2) that we have a
market waiting for them. Why, then, have we
not taken greater advantage of our opportuni-
ties? Because when freezing works were first
started freight was so high, and the cost of
treatment so heavy, that there was
little, if any, profit left to the grower.
However, freights were reduced, the
cost of treatment was also reduced, and more
freezing works were gradually erected. But
the refrigeration of vessels did not keep pace
with the erection of works, and at present the
available supply of properly fitted up ships is
insufficient to promptly and regularly carry
away the Australian and New Zealand meat.
We have had this practically illustrated at
our own doors. Why have the works on the
Brisbane River been suspended for months ?
Because ships could not be obtained to take
away the meat. The same'may bo said with
regard to the Townsville works. I am aware
that other reasons have been industriously cir-
culated, but they are not true. Doubtless the
silting of the Brisbane Biver prevented ships
from getting up for a few weeks But the
river was not obstructed until February last,
and has been navigable to the works since
March. In any case the silting of the river
did not prevent ships from getting to Towns-
ville, Rockhampton, Newcastle, Sydney, Mel-
bourne, and to certain ports in New Zealand.
Vet for the last six months all these places
have in a greater or lesser degree been in the
same plight as ourselves. When I was in
Melbourne in March last Messrs. Turnbull,
Hobson, and Co. had 12,000 carcasses of frozen
mutton, which they proposed placing on the
Melbourne market owing to want of tonnage.
For the same reason Messrs. Geddes and Co.,
of Sydney, had 35,000 frozen sheep in their
works for months. The Aberdeen works, on
the Hunter River, were in the same position.
A friend of mine, who is largely interested in
New Zealand freezing works, told me that his
company lost over .£-1000 through having to
suspend operations for want of ships, and I am
informed that some other works in that
colony were closed for a time, or ran at half
speed. Even the Rockhampton works have
not been regularly cleared, and this is the
strongest proof of my contention; for, seeing
that no meat was taken away for a long time
from Brisbane and 'i'ownsyille, there ought to
have been more tonnage available for Rock-
hampton. I did not get the information which
I have given you in this connection by hearsay.
I received it in each case from those who are
personally and largely interested. The
ignorance that prevails with regard to meat
freezing generally, and with respect to shipping
accommodation in particular, is not only
astonishing but alarming in view of the well-
intentioned but hopelessly ill-conceived and
impossible schemes and suggestions which are
constantly being brought forward; for, as
somebody—l think it was Goethe—wisely re-
marked, “ there is no quality so dangerous as
energetic ignorance.” The amount of arrant
nonsense which is written about the meat
export trade is simply astounding, and proves
that as a rule the authors have not even an
elementary notion of the difficulties which have
to be confronted. They write and otherwise
make propositions with all the self-confidence
of ignorance. Not one of them has sufficient
information to put his finger on the real diffi-
culty—namely, the want of properly fitted-out
ships. They subscribe remedies for an illness
without having diagnosed , the disease, and
without possessing the necessary knowledge to
make a reliable diagnosis. I wish to make it
quite clear that I am not referring either to the
Government proposals or to the proposals
made to the Premier by a deputation a tew
days ago. At the same time Ido not
agree with either, because I think they are
putting the cart before the horse.
Want ok Sr itarle Vessels,
What is first required, and urgently
required, is cheap, abundant, and regular
freight, whereas nothing was indicated
but a multiplication of freezing works.
I have shown that there is not sufficient
tonnage at present to regularly carry away our
frozen meat. The erection of fresh works will
but intensify the evil. Tiie first step towards
establishing an export trade in perishable com-
modities is to provide a certain supply of pro-
perly refrigerated vessels. We can levy assess-
ments on stockowners, but we cannot compel
shipowners to insulate their ships and fit them
up with refrigerating machinery. The Queens-
land Meat Export Company would now be
on the high road to success if the meat
had been regularly carried away. It was
true that the company-had to contend with
other and costly difficulties in the early days of
its career. Of these I will say nothing more
at present. They will be stated at the proper
time and in the’ proper place, and those who
propose to enter into the construction of refri-
gerating works may thereby gain some valuable
information. But just as the initial difficulties
were overcome the ships failed. Think of the


hjury done not only to the company but to
the colony by sucli failure. Men were idle.
Wouic rou tub UNKiiri.oVKu.
The company could have given many of them
employment. When fully occupied it expends
in wages in an I about the works nearly
£OO,OOO per annum. You can scarcely name
an industry that it does not indirectly
stimulate. The company during its en-
forced idleness could have treated large
numbers of cattle or sheep, and instead
of such slock being still here they would
have been exchanged for the sovereigns
of which we stand in such pressing need. We
should have had less stock, but exclusive of
external expenses we should have had about
£lOO,OOO more cash for use in the colony. Not
half of it would have gone into thestockowuera’
poedeets, but it would have been here all the
same, and it would have been profitably
employed, and in its turn would have become
productive, and thus the ball would have boon
kept rolling. We are in dire financial straits]
There is, however, a way out. Are we to
he prevented from using it for want of ships?
Are our vital interests to be thus in jeopardy ?
We must take prompt steps to secure a con-
stant supply of refrigerated ships. That is
the true way to develop the frozen meat and
butter industry. Give us the ships, and all
the rest will follow. Heretofore the excessive
cost or want of ships has been the great
impediment to development. Let us face the
facts. Any other course will be disastrous.
The exportation of meat will not stand higher
freights than we are now paying in Queensland.
There ,is no margin. If the exportation of
refrigerated productions is to succeed; if it
is to become the chief factor in restoring
prosperity, we must have not only regular
but cheap freight. I am assured by one
of the ablest and most experienced shipping
men that I know—a man with the whole of the
facts at his finger ends—that per lb. on
beef will pay ships well; and notwith-
standing the cost of fitting up the vessel, and
the space occupied by machinery, that it pays
much better than the highest wool freights.
But the ships require to be of a special type to
carry profitably ; huge wells, in fact, of shallow
draught and great carrying capacity. Now,
though the freight indicated will pay, it
requires an additional attraction to induce
shipowners to build and fit up the proper class
of vessels.
A Bonos on llkkihokkatki) Exports.
To establish the trade I therefore sug-
gest that the State offer a bonus of
20s. per ton for five years on refrigerated
exports, provided that the freights on
beef, mutton, and butter do not exceed
'd., and Id. per lb. respectively,
and I further surest how thin can he done
without imposing one farthing of additional
taxation. Abolish the Diseases in Stock and
Brands Departments, all but the chief inspector
and, perhaps, one assistant. I have long con-
tended that the work ought to bo performed by
the police and by local honorary boards. The
stockowners under the Brands Act and the
Diseases in Stock Act contribute annually about
.£“20,000. Abolish also the Hydraulic Engineer’s
Department. The savings thus effected will
pay the bonus for the present. Then, to pro-
vide for expansion. No mail subsidy ought to
to be paid in future unless the mail ships are
tilted up with refrigerating chambers. Speaking
from memory, the subsidy now paid for carrying
our mails is £19,00) per annum. Finally, the
sheepowners should, as far as possible, combine,
and agree to ship their wool by refrigerated
vessels only. 1 know of several large
financial companies that will gladly assist in
this direction. Should shipowners not respond
to the oiler of a bonus by supplying ships it is
the duty of the State to step in and supply
them. It will not take much. lam unable to
give the figures from any knowledge of my
own, but I am informed that if we chartered
the vessels we could fit up sufficient ships to
cany away all the refrigerated products that
Queensland could supply for the next two or
three years for about £70,000 or £BO,OOO. Is
the country to perish for lack of such an expen-
diture? I would, under ordinary conditions,
say that all this ought fo be done by private
enterprise. But years of misgovernment have
depleted the people and left them unable to do
so.
Prospects or Dai by Pnonuci:.
Before I conclude I would like to say some-
thing about the prospects in store for products
other than meat. England takes from Denmark
£4,500,000 worth of butter annually, and from
France about £3,500,000 worth, and the total
annual value of butter imported into England
amounts to over £11,000,000. What prospects
are thereby opened up here to an intelligent
and industrious people ! We have cheap land,
good pasturage, and a certain market. In fact,
all the primary elements of success. But
without refrigerated ships we might as well
sigh for the moon as the markets. I hear end-
less talk about a bonus, and I trust it will end
in talk. No bonus is required. At the prices
ruling in England for good butter it pays
handsomely. But I am not insensible to the
initial difficulty of getting a start. Let me
say to the dairyman, if you have not
money you have hands and skill. Com-
bine ; then select suitable sites near a
railway; erect your works by your own
labour ; and having thus shown your bowi fide*
I think you might fairly ask the State to


advance sufficient to pay for the necessary
machinery, you giving security over your build-
ings. Send oneor two of your most intelligent
men to New Zealand or Victoria to learn how
to conduct the business, or get a few skilled
men from these colonies. Hut avoid State *
inspectors and State Government interference
as you would a pestilence. Attend to your own
business. If you can do so properly it will pay
you, otherwise it won’t. I may mention in con-
nection with the question of dairy produce
that unless butter realises Is. per lb. it docs
not pay so well as cheese. This is the
New Zealand experience. Hut exportation
of meat, butter, and cheese only touches
the fringe of the question. England
imports annually from America over
.€‘20,000,000 worth of wheat. Now, wheat to
be grown profitably must be grown in large
areas. Darling Downs is particularly suited
for extensive cultivation. There are hundreds
of thousands of acres ready for the plough.
Why not exchange the Downs for the western
lands? Finally, 1 would
Ski.i. Evkiiy Hah,way in Queensland,
giving the buyers the right to extend them
on land-grant principles. Do you think we
would be in the position we arc in to-day
had our railways been made by private enter-
prise ? or if we had paid for our railways by land
grants? Just consider what the Canadian
Pacific Railway has done for Canada. Look at
the efforts—and the successful efforts—made
by the company to make their line a success bv
settling people on the land. Part of their
scheme includes a splendid line of steamers.
They do not allow their land to become value-
less for want of external carriage. And here 1
find another argument in favour of what I
previously said about the duty of the State.
Having become an internal carrier this work is
incomplete unless it becomes an external
carrier, or in some way provides sufficient,
suitable, and certain freight. My scheme of
reconstruction would be incomplete did I not
make some reference to a serious danger with
which we are confronted. I refer to the in-
creasing number of people who are living by
public charity. Some of the cases are doubt-
less genuine and deserve all the sympathy and
assistance that can be given to them, but many
of the recipients of charity are rank impostors.
Even the best of inert under such conditions
become demoralised. To. assist the helpless
and distressed is a duty, to encourage idleness
is a crime. In ■ that valuable work,
“Modern Science and Modern Thought,”
the author points out that “ the idle man is
always a useless man, and often a dangerous
one,” and I suggest by way of remedying this
growing evil that food ought only to be served
out in return for useful work,
WoilK IN ExCHANOK FOB FoOl*.
I would, in this connection, survey an area
of land, say, in the Yandina scrub, or
elsewhere, erect suitable buildings, and
send there every male . applicant for
» food, and I would only feed him in con-
sideration of his doing a fair day’s work at
clearing the land, which would add to its value
and prepare it for settlement. The honest
worker, overtaken by misfortune, will gladly
avail himself of food and shelter, and, without
being pauperised, he could wait until an
opportunity arose for obtaining remunerative
employment. Hy health-giving labour, and by
not being exposed to the temptation of town,
many a man Would be prevented from joining
the residuum, and the impostor would vanish.'
I have now, gentlemen, got nearly to the end of
this address. It has stretched to proportions
never dreamt of by me when I accepted your
invitation. I have given you my views with
respect to the causes of the depression, and I
have suggested the remedy. If you think that
in the past there has been no misgovernment,
then do nothing. On the other hand, it you
concur with me it is your bounden duty to put
your shoulders to the wheel and prevent such
misfortunes from arising in the future. I
have dwelt at much greater length on
economic laws than I would have done,
because they have been so persistently set at
defiance that I fear they have been forgotten.
It really seems to me that for the last twenty
years or more we have lived in the belief that
Providence made water to run up a hill. I
also dwelt at length on tiie export question
because we must light our way to prosperity by
placing our productions on the markets of the
world ; and there is no other way. The public
mind is greatly exercised at present on the
question of refrigerated exports, bonuses, Ac.
Many of my best and most valued friends are
greatly interested in the meat question. With ,
the views of some of them I agree. With others.
Ido not. They arc not, however, the less my
friends on that account. I think they are on
the wrong track, and I trust that some of my
remarks will put them on inquiry. We arc all
lighting for the same good cause—the prosperity
of Queensland and the happiness and welfare
of her people. In conclusion, gentlemen, lam
deeply sensible of the compliment you paid me
in asking me to deliver an address before such
an intelligent and representative body as the
Chamber of Commerce,
At the conclusion of the address Mr. Forrest
was greeted with prolonged applause.
DISCUSSION ON THE ADDRESS.
Mr. .1. 1!. Dickson said he considered that the
thanks of the meeting were due to Mr. Forrest
for the very able and interesting address he


'it&p
BlfeUO
VW4*
had delivered. It offered food for great reflec-
tion. While all had listened to him with great
attention, some of the propositions had come
upon the meeting, if not wholly as a surprise,
yet as demanding a little time for considera-
tion before an unqualified acceptance could be
given to them. He thought that too pessimistic
a view of the present condition of the colony-
should not be taken, as Queensland at the
present time was suffering in common with
the whole of the civilised world from the wave
of financial disturbances passing over it. The
position ought to be regarded in conjunction
with local experience, which proved the staying
posverof the colony-. Eight financial institutions
had recently suspended cut of eleven ; yet, not
withstanding the suspension of financial assis-
tance which the community had hitherto
obtained, the business of the country while
restricted had not been embarrassed to the
extent that might have reasonably been
expected. It would be necessary to take
proper care in the preparation of the colony’s
products for exportation, and to see that such
products were brought into contact with the
consumer in other countries, for antagonistic
influences in other parts had to bo overcome.
Another method of re-establishing the
prosperity of the country in the future, and
one which to his mind would be a most potent
factor, was the rcintroduction of suitable
classes of immigrants. While pursuing the
methods which had been referred to by Mr.
Forrest, the question of suitable immigration
should not be lost sight of, because it could not
be expected that the country would ever be-
come a nation while only possessing a handful
of people with a territory nearly half the size
of Europe. He moved a vote of thanks to Mr.
Forrest for his address.
Mr. A. C. Guant, in seconding the motion,
referred to Mr. Forrest’s clearly reasoned argu-
ments, and said he would like to reply to some
.of .the remarks of Mr. Hickson on the question
of immigration. They all recognised the im-
portance of introducing immigrants, but the
question was how to get the right class to
come to the colony. Capital would always seek
' oYTV. *
6 •
profitable employment, and if people were
shown that money could be ’made out of
the land there would be plenty of immi-
gration. The country could not be developed
without a market, and the bridge to this
market was the. bridge of cheap freights. The
cry of settling the people on the land was pro-
posing to begin at the wrong end. The land
must first be shown to be profitable to settle on,
and there would then be no need of settling
people—they would settle themselves, and there
would be a rush for the land.
Mr. J. Claukk asked Mr. W. Forrest, as
chairman of the Eagle Farm Meatworks, if
there was any truth in the statement that
outside agencies were at work to endeavour to
obtain the works at a nominal price?
Mr. Fouukst said lie had heard many reports
on the matter, some true, some exaggerated,
and some untrue. There was an attempt being
made to corner the whole of the meat trade of
Australia. The attempt would have been
successful had it not been for the action of—to
start with the New Zealanders, lie warned
those who were listening to him that if they
wished to make the export of meat a profitable
one for Queensland they would have to keep
that business in their own hands. (Hear, hear.)
lie would like to point out that some of the
offers being made would require careful
handling, or would have an effect not
contemplated. Instead of being beneficial
quite the reverse would be the case,
lie dwelt on the necessity for the works being
conducted by men possessing the requisite
knowledge of the business if it was hoped to
make them successful. He could give the
whole of the details of the attempt to corner
the meat trade.
The Ch.ukman said that some of the propo :
sitions of Mr. Forrest were somewhat startling,
and required to be carefully thought out.
Whether the meeting agreed with the lecturer
or not, there was, nothing like ventilation to
properly determine the merits of the various
proposals brought forward.— Courier y 19th July,
18H3.
