

A FUNERAL SERMON,
PREACHED IK
ST. PAUL’S, COBBEDEE,
OK THE OCCASIOK OF THE DEATH OF THE
KEY. THOMAS HASSALL, M. A.,
OF DEKBIQH, LATE IKCUMBEKT OF KARELLAK,
TOGETHER
WITH A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF HIS CAREER,
BY THE
KEY. R. L. KING, B. A.,
{Of St. John's College, Cambridge.)
IKCUMBEKT OF lIOLSWORTHT,
PRINCIPAL OP MOORE COLLEGE, AND CHAPLAIN TO THE LORD BISHOP OP SYDNEY.
PUBLISHED AT THE REQUEST OF HIS FAMILY.
THE PATH OP THE JUST.
“ I cared not whore or how I lived, or what hardships I went through, so
that I could but gain souls to Christ. While I was asleep, I dreamed of
these things, and when 1 waked, the first thing I thought of was this great
work.” — Beainerd.
SYDNEY:
F. WHITE, PRIKTER, WILLIAM STREET, SYDKET
1868.




THE PATHS OF THE JUST.
“ Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conseience, that in simplicity
and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom hut by the grace of God, we
have had our conversation in the World.”—ll Oor. i. 12.
It can hardly have escaped your notice, dear brethren, what
frequent reference St. Paul makes in his Epistles and sermons to
the testimony of his own conscience.* He knew very well that
that conscience sometimes makes a mistake, especially when it
is not enlightened by the teaching of the Holy Ghost, He
himself had formerly been much in error, even while he thought
he was serving God ; for he had thought that he “ ought to do
many things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth.”
Others as well as Paul are no doubt exposed to such mistakes,
for a man’s conscience is not always an absolutely safe guide.
Yet when the mind is enlightened by the teaching of the blessed
Spirit of God, and when the affections are tenderly alive to divine
truth and holiness, and when, so enlightened and tender, our
conscience testifies of us that we are striving to serve God and
to live in all respects according to his will, then is that testimony a
source of true comfort. It is indeed a true joy. And “if our
heart condemn us not, then have we confidence towards God.” I
do not for a moment mean to say that conscience can ever be
correct if it tells us that we are living in sinless perfection, or in
such a state as must make us deserving of the blessing of God.
Such an idea would argue only ignorance alike of the word of
God and of the plague of our own hearts. But Ido mean to
say this —that when a man’s conscience, enlightened by the
teaching of God’s Holy Spirit and by the study of God’s word,
bears witness to his honest persevering and self-denying efforts to
live in accordance with God’s blessed will; then is its testimony
* See Acts xxiii. 1., xxiv. 16.; I Tim. i. 5.; II Tim- i. 3.; and many other
instances referred to by Dr. Howson in his very interesting “ Lectures on the
Character of St. Paul.”


a source of pure and hallowed joy, such as Paul himself was not
unwilling to experience.
He gives us in the text some particulars with reference to which
his conscience was clear, and upon which he reflected with humble
exultation and holy gratitude. “Our rejoicing,” he said, “is
“ this, the testimony of our conscience , that in simplicity,* and
“ godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of
“ God, we have had our conversation in the world.”
The truth of this “ testimony ” we may readily perceive when
we read the history of the great Apostle in the Acts and his own
Epistles. The particulars mentioned are such as should plainly
appear in ourselves. They were very clearly manifested in the
life and conversation of one for whom this parish has much
reason to thank God, —one who was spared to care for its best
and brightest interests for more than forty years,—one who now
rests from his labours, and who has fallen asleep in Jesus. Oh,
that you all, beloved brethren, among whom he ministered, may
have grace to follow him, as he followed Christ; and to your
own everlasting happiness be his joy and crown of rejoicing “ in
that day.”
I propose to point out to you this morning the several partic-
ulars in the Christian character to which the Apostle is referring
in my text. May the blessed Spirit of Grod direct us in our
enquiries and enable us to profit in the study of His word and
will.
I. In speaking of the character of his life, and especially of
his ministerial intercourse with the Corinthians, the Apostle lays
stress in the first place upon the simplicity of his conversation.
The word is the same with that translated singleness in Ephesians
vi. 5.; where he bids servants to be obedient to their masters
“in singleness of their heart.” That is, they must ever keep
before them the necessity of doing one thing, and of doing that
one thing well —that one thing being the will of their master.
Thus it was with Paul. The simplicity of his conversation con-
sisted in a holy singleness of purpose to serve God and to
promote the glory of Jesus. If you read his life, whether in
the Acts or the Epistles, you will find that he was a man of one
thing. That one thing was his heavenly Master’s work, the
honouring the Lord Jesus, the winning souls for Him.
Dear brethren, may I not refer to the same Christian grace as
a characteristic of the life of him who has so lately been removed
from among us ? His singleness of purpose, the holy simplicity
of his life and conversation was very remarkable. His one
thought ever seemed to be—how can I honour my master ? How
* For “simplicity,” many critics read “holiness.” Without presuming
to alter the authorized version, I have yet sought to incorporate in the sermon
the idea suggested by a reading which has very high MSS. authority.


can I win souls to love and praise Him ? The cares of his family
and dependants did, no doubt, at times tend to distract his atten-
tion. The Christian man and the Christian minister has no right
to let others suffer for his neglect of the ordinary duties of his
situation. For if “ any provide not for his own and specially for
“ those of his own house, he hath denied the faith and is worse
“ than an infidel.” Yet the true Christian will think but little of
such worldly things, in comparison with the attention he will
give to his Master’s work. Earthly things, if they occupy any
place, will occupy a very secondary place in his mind. For he
knows that “the Lord will provide,” and I think I may appeal to
you, who knew dear Mr. Hassall so well, to say whether his
Master’s work did not always appear to be uppermost in his
thoughts —in his heart —on his lips. It was the one thing he
thought of. All other things had but a slight and transitory
hold upon his mind. He was eminently a man of one thing.
When he saw you at your homes, or met you abroad, was there
any one thing which he loved more to speak to you about —than
Jesus ? Hot that that name, though so dearly loved, was always
being thrust forward. Hot even that it was always mentioned.
Yet even when not mentioned, there was ever a holiness and
consistency of conduct and manner of life Avhich pleaded with
you for Jesus. He seemed to say —“ I have set the Lord always
before me.” Ho one ever spoke to him about his soul, or desired
spiritual advice, but found him ready and willing to give his
whole attention. Ho one ever heard a word fall from his lips
which was otherwise than perfectly consistent with the character
of a servant of the Lord Jesus.
My dear friends, is this the character of your conversation P
Has the holy simplicity of his life, and the manifest singleness of
his purpose, for the last forty years among you, produced upon
your minds and exhibited in your life the happy results, which
it was his desire and object to produce ? Is it evident to all who
watch your conduct, or who listen to your words, that you are
influenced by a simple desire for the honour of the Lord Jesus,
and that you have but one great object in view, one which
everything as it occurs is constrained to help forward, one to
which everything else is made to give way, that one thing being
the salvation of souls—your own soul and the souls of others—
their salvation through the atonement of the Lord Jesus ? Do
you ever speak to others of Jesus and his love ? What are you
doing for Christ ? Will he say to you when he comes, —“Well
done, good and faithful servant ?” For remember it is as much
your duty to serve Jesus Christ on earth, according to your
opportunities, as it was dear Mr. Hassall’s duty. The principal
difference between your position and his was simply this, that he
as a clergyman had more opportunities than you have. Yet even
you, aye, every one of you, have some opportunities. The


question is, are you trying to make use of them for Jesus ?
11. Then again, to return to my text, St. Paul speaks of
living “in godly sincerity .” He did not say one thing and mean
another. He did not profess to be a Christian, and yet actually
live as a man of the world. The word refers to the manner in
which people are sometimes seen to examine a work of art.
They take it out of the dark room, and they let the sun shine
upon it. They examine it by sunlight; and when it can bear
that test they pronounce it really good. So that St. Paul seems to
have meant that he was not conscious of having anything hidden
which would not bear the light—anything which might not be
examined under the full glare of the noon-day sun.
I do not wish to hold up dear Mr. Hassall’s character to you
as perfect: for “ there is not a just man upon earth who doeth
good and sinneth not.” He would have been the last to represent
himself as such. Indeed his views of himself were then dictated
by true Christian humility. I well remember on the occasion of
his receiving what he regarded as a signal mercy, how he wept at
the remembrance of what he called his own “many shortcomings.”
(It was on the occasion of his son’s ordination.) But with all
the imperfections which he deeply lamented, there was that true
Christian godly sincerity which ever adorns the children of Grod.
He was not a man of mere professions, or of words alone. He
was not a man of mere outside show, like the Pharisee of old.
Tou all well knew that if he said anything he meant it. The
sun shining upon him might point out imperfections, but so far
as they were known to himself, they were acknowledged and
mourned over and prayed against. And notwithstanding them
all, he was what he appeared to be, a child of Grod. Yes, —and
when the sun of righteousness shone upon him, that divine light
might indeed point at manifold infirmities, but they were pointed
out simply to testify how entirely they had been forgiven.
And how is it in these resepects, dear brethren, with you ? Are
you living in this “ godly sincerity F” Are you what and all
that you profess to be P When brought out of the darkness, in
which men naturally learn to conceal themselves, into the broad
light of the sun, can you endure the searching examination of
the Judge ? What does conscience say of you F Por it is of
Paul’s conscientious knowledge of himself that he is here speaking.
What are you in the sight of Grod F Can you endure His in-
spection “ whose eyes behold, whose eyelids try the children of
men ?” Even His whose “ eyes are as a flame of fire F” Does
He see no passions indulged in secret ? Does He observe no
insincerity in your conduct Fno imperfections F no sins F Oh,
search ; try your own hearts. Whatever you are, be sincere
with Grod. Mere profession goes but little way with Him. Yea,
mere profession will only condemn as an evidence of opportu-
nities possessed but neglected, granted by Grod and yet forgotten
and abused by man,


111. Then again Paul’s conscience testified that his conver-
sation was “ not with fleshly wisdom.” The wisdom with which
he acted was not that which was in accordance with his flesh.
He sought to do, not what was politic, or expedient, or the best
that could be done under the circumstances, but what was right.
For well he knew that nothing but what was right and true
would honour Christ, or be accepted before God. His cure of
the girl who was possessed of a devil, was an instance of this. —
Acts xvi. 18. A less conscientious man, one who walked by the
rule of expediency, might have argued that a confession extorted
from such a quarter would be of some service. But Paul felt
that no real honour could accrue to Jesus from the ravings of
one possessed by a devil. And therefore he dispossessed her.
I think too that in this particular also, our dear friend’s character
was what a Christian’s should be. The only question with
him was, not what is expedient , but what is right. It was not
what does worldly policy dictate ? “ but what will please God?”
His very last appearance in this pulpit may be referred to as a
case in point. Although at the time under medical treatment,
and although he was reminded that the doctor would be vexed at
his preaching, he conferred not with flesh and blood, but deter-
mined at any risk to himself to deliver to you the message with
which he was charged, and in his Master’s name bid you prepare
to stand before the judgment seat of Christ. “I am thinking,”
he said, when his wife told him that the doctor would be angry,
“I am thinking of the people.” Ah, brethren, he was thinking
of yon,. Fleshly wisdom would have dictated his remaining
quiet. We, in our shortsightedness might think that it would
have been better if he had been quiet that Sunday. His valuable
life might have been spared to his family, and to the church, and to
you a little longer. But he thought that his Master called him to
speak to you, and speak he would at any risk. And shall those
solemn words of his, with which he parted from you, on that
most solemn subject,* shall they be forgotten by you? Oh,
dear friends, he at the risk of his life, (and I cannot doubt but
that the effort hastened his end,) he at the risk of his own life,
came here only four weeks ago, and as we now know for the last
time to warn you of the approaching “ day of judgment,” and to
bid you flee to Jesus from “the wrath to come.” Surely you
cannot have forgotten it already. But have you yielded your-
selves to the advice he strove to give—not indeed with fleshly
wisdom, not with wisdom of words, not with earthly elo-
quence —but with a heart full of true spiritual wisdom, with
the eloquence of heartfelt affection, and with his breast over-
* His subject at Cobbedee on that Sunday morning, was “ the day of
judgment,”— a solemn subject, and a sermon more so than even usual with
him—from Itom. xiv. 10.


flowing with love for you, and with a zeal for his Master’s glory ?
Have you accepted the message he brought you, and sought
peace with G-od through a believing acceptance of Jesus and his
great salvation ? Are you now resting for pardon upon that
crucified Saviour, of whom he loved so much to preach ? Oh,
brethren, whatever earthly, fleshly wisdom may suggest, however
under Satan’s influence you may be tempted still to delay. Rouse
yourselves I entreat you to a just discovery of your true condition,
and “ prepare to meet your G-od.”
IY. And then once more ; Paul’s conscience assured him that
he was living and seeking to live “hy the grace of God." To
that grace he attributed all the progress he had made in holiness,
in knowledge, and his successful labours for Christ. “By the
grace of G-od,” he declared, “I am what I am.” How fully dear
Mr. Hassall felt and acknowledged the same, those know well
who knew him the best. How fully and completely he rested
upon divine grace to enable him to perfect holiness in the fear of
the Lord, and to continue stedfast even unto the end, you, dear
brethren, to whom he ministered and among whom he “ had his
conversation ” for the last forty years, cannot, I feel sure, be
ignorant. But how about yourselves P Is that grace the sole
foundation of your strength, your trust, and hope ? Is it upon what
Jesus has done for you, that you are resting in your walk with G-od?
Is it upon the power of his grace to support you through the
whole of your pilgrimage, that you are staying yourselves in the
prospect of temptation, trial, sickness, death, judgment, eternity ?
Oh, remember, brethren, —that grace alone can be your sufficient
support, which was found sufficient for Paul and for a great
cloud of witnesses from his days to the present. Would you
know the secret of their strength in hour of trial and sorrow —
of that strength which failed them not in their season of greatest
weakness—which carried them triumphantly through their con-
test, even with the last enemy—yea, and which turned that very
enemy, though a king of terrors to many a brave man, into a
welcome messenger of peace?—You have it in that blessed
promise which was made to Paul, —“ My grace is sufficient for
thee.”
And now, my dear brethren, before we part with so edifying a
theme, will you let me suggest a few thoughts for your consider-
ation in connection with the memory of your late beloved min-
ister. There is probably hardly one among you but was known
to him. Por he “had his conversation” —“more abundantly
to you-ward.” You were known to him not only by name and
worldly circumstances, but also by your manner of life and state
of spiritual progress. With how many of you has he not con-
versed with reference to your eternal prospects! Por how
many of you has he not prayed! Over how many has he not
mourned! Over how many has he had cause for rejoicing! But


all fcliat is now past. And lie lias gone before bis Master with
his report of each. What is the report which he has taken of
you? what the testimony which “in that duty” he shall bear
concerning you before the judgment seat ? Oh, brethren, I ask
this of each individual present; and I entreat you to let your
conscience answer the question. Can he say of you —“ Such
“ and such a one, I believe to be growing in grace and following
“ Jesus fully.” Oh, if so, brethren, go on in your Christian
course. In holy “ simplicity, and godly sincerity, not with fleshly
“ wisdom, but by the grace of Grod, have your conversation in
“ the world.” See to it that you are, as he trusted and expected
you would be, his joy and crown of rejoicing in the day of the
Lord Jesus. That grace, which was sufficient for our dear
friend, will be sufficient for you; and meeting him again in
heaven, pastor and flock, in the presence of the great shepherd
of the sheep, will rejoice for ever and ever.
But are there any of whose spiritual state a different report
must be given ? any whose conscience tells them that they are
not now living for and ivith Jesus ? Oh, dear friends, and shall
the testimony of him who so lately besought you to come to
Jesus, and whose loving heart which so lately yearned over you,
now lies silent in yonder grave, shall that, his testimony, be
against you ? Shall he have to declare, “ I warned such a one,
in public and in private; I prayed for him in my own study, and
I prayed with him at his bedside when he was sick or in trouble ;
I exhorted him on his recovery to turn to Jesus. But it was all
in vain. Shall this be the kind of testimony which must be
borne by him, dear brethren, of any of you? Oh, no ! no!
Turn ye then at once to Jesus. Let the words of him who
sleeps yonder still speak to you from his grave, and speak more
effectually than ever, now that he is dead and gone. Turn at
once to Jesus —even to Jesus, who loves you more than ever
dear Mr. Hassall did. Turn to Jesus that He may give you
rest. He still waits to be gracious. He still holds out his offers
of mercy. Oh, come to him that you may indeed obtain life
through his name.
Tet, brethren, near and dear as you all were to our beloved
friend, I cannot forget that there are others among us, who, if
possible, were nearer and dearer still. And what can I say for
them, but that the Lord has been very gracious to them, in taking
one whom they loved so much to be with himself for ever. True
he has gone away and his place on earth shall know him no more.
But there is comfort in the reflection that he has gone to be with
Jesus. He has joined the rapidly increasing company of the
spirits of the just —“ the general assembly and church of the
“ first-born which are written in heaven,” —the church which
only awaits the resurrection of the body, to be finally triumphant.
Doubtless he now rejoices in the full vision and fruition of that


which was once only an object of hope, and faith, and expectation,
He now beholds the king in his beauty. He is uniting with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob ; with Peter, John, and Paul; with
Newton, Scott, and Cecil; with Wilberforce, Simeon, and Mars-
den; and a great company besides in singing the praises of
“ Him who sitteth upon the throne and of the Lamb.” He is
indeed absent from the body, but he is present with the Lord —
which he doubtless considers “ far better.” And may not those
who are left behind for a little while, remember the blessed words
of Jesus, and apply them here ; “If ye loved me, ye would
“ rejoice because I said Igo unto the Lather.” And they do
rejoice, even in the midst of their sorrow. Nature will grieve
when the parting hour has come. Yet well do I know that it is
not for him they mourn. They are too well assured of his
present happiness. And yet to themselves, the loss, humanly
speaking, is irreparable. Then brethren let us seek to repay the
blessing which our dear friend has been to us, by offering our
fervent prayers for the consolation and support of those whom
he has left behind him. May He, who “ comforteth the cast
down,” be their support and stay, as the reality of their present
bereavement grows upon them. May they be led by sanctified
affliction nearer and nearer to Jesus. May his grace be sufficient
for them. May they become daily more full of grace and more
meet for heaven. And when the short waiting time on earth is
over, may they be united again with the Husband and the Father
who has gone before —united before the throne of God —a whole
family in heaven —not one, no, not one missing; singing on angel
harps, and in louder than angelic strains, the eternal praises of
God and of the Lamb. Amen.
The following brief memoir of our departed friend was inserted
in the Australian Churchman for April 4th, 1868. A few additions
only have been made.
THE EEY. THOMAS HASSALL, M.A.
It would hardly be consistent either with our own feelings, or
with what we believe to be the wishes of the readers of the
Australian Churchman, were we to allow the decease of the late
Senior Chaplain of the Colony to take place without some special
notice in our columns of the details of his active and useful life.
Mr. Hassall has for some years formed one of the connecting
links between the present and that memorable past, in which the
foundations, not only of the Church of England in the Australian
Colonies, but of the Colonies themselves were laid. The records
therefore of his life will be found to supply some useful and in-
teresting information bearing upon our Church history; and at


the same time may serve to remind many, who loved his very
name, of one, who through a long ministry of forty-seven years;
maintained a simple consistent unwavering and holy testimony
to the truth as it is in Jesus
Mr. Hassall was born in Coventry, May 29th, 1794. While
the Princes and Statesmen of Europe were seeking the means of
withstanding the progress of the French Eevolution, and of
warding off from their own dominions its demoralizing results,
some Christians in England, who had formed themselves into the
(London) Missionary Society, were engaged in laying the foun-
dations of a scheme for the Evangelization of the South Sea
Islands, and for thereby extending the kingdom of the Lord
Jesus. In pursuance of their object, the ship Duff, commanded
by Capt. James Wilson, a man of eminently Christian character,
was chartered and sent to Tahiti and other Islands of the South
Pacific, with such Missionaries as had approved themselves to
the Directors of the Society. Among the number of those who
were landed in Tahiti was Poland Hassall, who was accompanied
by his wife and two children. Samuel, the younger of the two,
was but an infant in his mother’s arms. The elder, the subject
of this memoir, then nearly three years of age, appeared in his
infantine dress, running in and out among the missionary party,
when the first meeting with the Tahitian chiefs took place, and
when Pomare, the ancestor of the present royal family of Tahiti,
ceded the district of Mataviah to the strangers. Eoland Hassall
did not remain at the Island more than about fifteen months ;
when he with some others removed to the newly founded settle-
ment of Hew South Wales, and arrived at Sydney in the year
1798.
We are not directly informed what circumstance led Eoland
Hassall to live at Parramatta. Yet those who know that “ the
steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord ” may well believe
that in this circumstance, as well as those which brought him
to the Southern Hemisphere at all, there was a hand of infinite
wisdom directing him. The immediate effect was that the
missionary’s elder son, Thomas, as he advanced from boyhood,
came more and more under the notice of the Eev, Samuel
Marsden. That true servant of Christ watched with no unobser-
ving eye the progress of divine grace in the boy’s heart. His
father seems at one time to have designed him for a farmer’s life,
and sent him to the Hawkesbury; and at another time sent him
to an office in Sydney, entrusting him to the care first of
“ Merchant Campbell, (as he was called,) and afterwards of
Captain Burney. But although in these situations he acquired
that love for farming pursuits and those methodical habits which
he retained through life, and formed friendships which were
interrupted for the first time at his death, he was not designed
to be either a merchant or a farmer. Mr. Marsden, partly in-


fluenced it would appear by Ms young friend having successfully
established a Sunday school for the religious education of the
children in Parramatta, took a more just view of his inclinations
and endowments. He therefore recommended his seeking the
ministry.
With this object in view, he sailed for England in 1817, in
the Kangaroo. We need not dwell upon the events of that
voyage, further than to state that the vessel went round by
Batavia, and was ten months in reaching England —that the time
was - one of peculiar trial to the young student, trial however
greatly alleviated by his being made the instrument of the con-
version of a poor convict, who was found “ stowed away ” after
the Kangaroo had sailed, and who died on the voyage. He arrived
in England in 1818 ; and having been introduced by Mr. Marsden
to some of those eminent men, under whom the Church of
England was beginning to awaken from her lethargy, William
Wilberforce, Dr. Mason Good, the Eev. Charles Simeon and
others ; he was by Mr. Simeon, brought under the notice of the
excellent Dr. Burgess, Bishop of St. David’s, and by him placed
in the Diocesan College, at Lampeter, under the charge of the
Eev. Dr. Williams, the then Principal.
He remained at Lampeter for nearly two years ; when he was
ordained Deacon by Dr. Howley, who was then Bishop of London,
1820. There was a difficulty about his “ Title to Orders.” Wil-
lingness to serve in the Colony, and to assist the few —Marsden,
Cowper, Cartwright, and Hill, who were bearing the burden and
heat of the day—this was not enough. What was to be done ?
“I wish I were a Bishop,” said Mr. Wilberforce, “I would ordain
you, and send you out at once.” At last however, acting upon
the suggestion of the Bishop of London, he produced a letter
from Mrs. Macquarie—a kind motherly letter written to him
when leaving New South Wales, warning him against the tempt-
ations incident to a life in England, advising him as to his
Christian conduct, and expressing great interest in his future
ministry in New South Wales. He showed this letter to the
Bishop, and upon it as his “ Title ” he was admitted to the order
of a Deacon.
Three months afterwards, he was ordained Priest by the Bishop
of Ely, by letters dimissory from the Bishop of London; and
receiving his appointment as Colonial Chaplain under the sign
manual of George IY., he immediately returned to the colony.
Before, however, he finally left the mother country, he was enabled
to take a part at a public meeting of the British and Foreign
Bible Society, held at Portsea. His speech, though short, was
listened to with more interest, on account of his connection with
such a Terra incognita as New Holland, or Botany Bay, as the
colony was then generally called. If this was his first appear-
ance on the platform of a public meeting, it may be recorded


that one of his last efforts of the kind was to advocate the cause
of an auxiliary of the same great and good society, at the cele-
bration of the Jubilee of the New South Wales auxiliary, in
Sydney, March 7th, 1867. “That noble society” had ever a
strong hold upon his aeffctions, “which has done so much,” he
said, “ for true religion throughout the world.” (Speech at
Jubilee Meeting at the Masonic Hall.) He arrived in Sydney
in the convict ship Mary , January, 1822. His first cure was
Parramatta; of which parish (having married Ann, the eldest
daughter of the Bev, Samuel Marsden) he took sole charge
during one of Mr. Marsden’s visits to New Zealand. In Sep-
tember 1824, he went to Port Macquarie, at that time a “special”
penal settlement; and remained there until the beginning of
1826, when he was removed to Bathurst. While there he resided
on a little property which belonged to him at O’Connell Plains;
and every Sunday he rode into the township of Bathurst to hold
Divine service, and returning in the evening preached at “ Salem
Chapel,” Avhich he had built near his own residence. Salem
Chapel has now given way to a more commodious and substantial
structure, which has not inappropriately, been called St. Thomas.
He left Bathurst in March 1827, and in April of the same
year, he went to the Cowpastures to take charge of a Parish
which he often used to describe as consisting of “ Australia
beyond (or south of) Liverpool .” Here he laboured during the
remainder of his life, a period of nearly forty-one years. He lived
however, to see “Australia beyond Liverpool,” divided and
sub-divided into Dioceses and Parishes, clergymen appointed,
churches built, and all the ordinances of the Church of England,
provided for congregations which he had himself been the first
to collect. We have before us a list of sixteen different places*
which he was accustomed, more or less frequently, to visit; the
nearer places weekly or monthly, the more remote quarterly,
half-yearly, or annually; at fifteen of these substantial churches
or school-churches are now erected and the ordinances regularly
administered. Nor was his zeal in forming these congregations
more remarkable than the regularity of his visits to each, and
consequently he seldom found an empty church. The nature,
however, of the country, the scarcity of roads, and the distances
by which his congregations Avere separated, compelled him to be
continually in his saddle, —“his easy chair,” as one of his old
friends used to call it. This necessity soon became a confirmed
habit which clung to him through life ; so that he seemed never
more “at home ” than when riding about the country. Indeed
he used sometimes of later years, when the parish allotted to
* Cobbedee, Cabramatta, Camden, Browulow Hill, Aarc!lan, Vermont,
Mulgoa Forest, The Oaks, Picton, Mulgoa, St. Mary’s, South Creek, Illa-
warra, Sutton Forest, Greeudale, Inverary, Goulburn.


himself became more contracted, to express a wish to be relieved
of his regular work and to be “ licensed ”to itinerate. There
were few places within the more settled districts unvisited by
him. The wilds of Nattai and Burragorang were as familiar as
the more pleasant valleys of Mulgoa and Illawarra.
And wherever he went he was welcomed. Few men have been
more dearly loved by their congregations. Not possessed of
that kind of eloquence which might rouse a large and critical
audience, there was yet in all he said and did such an evident
humility, such zeal for his Master’s honour, and such intense
love for souls that no one knew him but loved him. And perhaps
it was owing to his own most affectionate disposition that few—
and of the “old hands ” perhaps none —knew him as Mr. Hassall,
still less as the Reverend. It was generally Thomas Hassall, and
not uufrequently Thomas.
And yet as a mark that his services were known and recog-
nised by those in authority, he received the honorary degree of
M.A. from the Archbishop of Canterbury, through the late
Bishop Broughton; who himself also entertained for him the
highest respect and esteem.
We have spoken of his frequent and regular visits to his nu-
merous out-stations. His journeys to and fro were always those
of a Missionary. Not only were the wealthy cared for; but the
cottages by the roadside and the huts in the lonely bush could
each tell of his visits; and each visit was the occasion of friendly
intercourse and Christian conversation. He was always about
his Master’s business, in season and out of season, at home or
abroad. Many a humble cottager at the roadside has had reason
to feel when he had left, after reading a chapter and perhaps
taking a pot of tea, that she had been “ entertaining an angel,”
even if not quite “ unawares.” And many a lonely shepherd in
the bush found something to cheer him in his loneliness when
Thomas Hassall had ridden by on his Timor pony, and had left
an encouraging Christian exhortation behind him or a suitable
tract.
But while he was thus diligent and active abroad, that portion
of the parish which lay nearer home was not neglected. When
he first went to the Cowpastures the materials were collected
for building a Parsonage at Cobbedee. But the opportunity of
purchasing Denbigh having offered itself, the materials were
used in building a commodious room in which he might assemble
the people for Divine Service. This room he called “ Heber
Chapel,” and in it he continued to preach until 1842, when St.
Paul’s Church was completed. That Church, at once the result
of his energy, and to a very considerable extent of his liberality also,
may now be regarded as forming a fitting earthly monument of
one whose body sleeps beneath its shadow, but whose real resting
place is on high.


But even the longest ministry must at last come to an end.
Arrived at his seventy-fourth year, it was evident to all that the
silver cord was loosening and that the resting time after an arduous
life was approaching. Towards the close of 1867, his health,
which had hitherto hardly known an interruption, seemed to
give way principally in consequence of the amount of work
which he undertook. For some weeks he was kept from his
labour of love. It was our privilege to visit him when beginning
to recover from that illness ; and we shall not readily forget the
deep emotion with which he told us of his intercourse with a Jew
who some time previously had come to his door as a hawker, how
he had got into conversation with him on the subject nearest his
owui heart, how he had taken him into the study (that dear hal-
lowed little room) for further conversation, how the poor fellow
had come again and again to state his difficulties, and to read and
converse and pray ; and how only a few months back that same
Jew had been publicly baptized as a believer in the Lord Jesus.
And if the voice of the narrator did tremble with emotion as he
spoke of the Lord’s goodness to himself in making him the
instrument of bringing back one of the “ peculiar ” people into
the fold of Christ, and if the hand shook more than ever, and the
head too, with the feebleness of age ; there was no feebleness in
the faith by which he laid hold on the promise, that “ He that
hath scattered Israel shall gather Israel,” and that in His own good
time the Lord would “ comfort all the waste places ” of Zion.
He seemed for a time to recover from that illness, and returned
to his accustomed work. But it was only for a time. The
message was coming which was to call the servant home. “ Why
should you go out to-day,” said his dear wife to him on the
Sunday morning, “ you know the doctor will be angry.” “ The
doctor is not my master. lam thinking of the people,” was the
characteristic reply. “ I think lam strong enough, at least for
to-day,” and he had strength given him for the day. He preached
a very impressive sermon on “ The Judgment,” —and that evening
was taken ill. And though the flame flickered a little, as if
unwilling to leave, and although he himself almost to the last
expected to recover, yet to those who stood around his bedside
the heavenly nature of his remarks, his exhortations and prayers,
and the chiJd-like simplicity of his faith, might—had they loved
him less—have told how soon he was to depart and be with
Jesus. He was taken ill on Sunday, March Bth, and on Sunday
morning, March 29th, he “fell asleep.”
“ I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, Write, Blessed
are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth; yes, saith
the Spirit, that they may rest from their labours; and their
works do follow them-”
We have little more which we shall add to this record of a
good man’s life, though much more might easily be added. That


the whole neighbourhood should have been present at his funeral
was not surprising. For who had not lost a personal friend in
Thomas Hassall ? They came in carts and in carriages, on horse-
back and afoot. Nor was it to be wondered at that, even on
short notice, some should come from a distance. The friends
of his youth (few, indeed, remaining now, but they were there,)
the Bishop who spoke of him as the most dearly loved of his
beloved clergy, the Christian Jew who regarded him as his father
in the Lord, the domestic who had lived in his service for more
than forty years. One of his sous was present, several of his
grand-children, and two of his sons-in-law. But there were
many others, who were his sons in the faith; andmany besides, both
of clergy and laity, who had derived encouragement and strength
from the contemplation of his godly example. How many have
owed the commencement of their Christian life to his ministry
he never knew here. But the last day shall declare it all. Yet
nothing gave him greater pleasure, while he was yet with us,
than to know that his preaching had been blessed in the conver-
sion of souls. One such instance he has himself recorded in a
tract —“ Jemmy Mullins, the little Irish Sailor Boy;” another
which came to his knowledge when he was on his dying bed,
cheered him not a little. Such instances were his joy here ; they
shall be his crown of rejoicing in the day of the Lord Jesus.
They were gathered from all quarters ; from families of the
young (and he loved children), from the cottages of the poor;
from the houses of the rich ; from the sick bed ; from the con-
demned cell. The salvation of souls through the cross of Jesus
was his ambition, if the term may be rightly used in connection
with one so truly humble. The Church of England, which he
loved, and to which he clung with intelligent and ever increasing
affection (although he had room in his large heart for many who
belong not to her communion;) has had greater scholars, more
eloquent preachers, and more learned divines ; but she has not
had many who could with greater truth adopt the conscientious
language of the Apostle:—“ In simplicity (or ‘holiness,’ as critics
read: in this case it makes little difference) and godly sincerity,
not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of (xon, we have had
our conversation in the world.'’
Servant of G-on, well done !
Praise be thy new employ.
The battle fought, the victory won,
Enter thy Master’s joy.
T4-F.
fci&Lio
M
