

‘ )
THE DIVINITY HALL
OF THE
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH OF QUEENSLAND;
BEING
AN ACCOUNT
OF ITS
ORIGIN, PROGRESS, AND OPENING.
2 rtf
PRINTED AT “ QUEENSLAND EVANGELICAL STANDARD ” OFFICE.


The Board of Examiners appointed by the last General Assembly has deemed it
advisable to issue the following account of the origin, progress, and opening of the
Divinity Hall, in order that the Presbyterians throughout the colony may know
what is doing in this important sphere of operation, and become interested in the
prosperity of the institution. It is fondly hoped that the perusal of the following
pages may lead to increased efforts to promote the great object which the Church
has now taken up, and that the immediate effect will be to raise up for us both men
and means for the arduous and honourable work of the Ministry,
Young men throughout the Colony who have a vocation for the work
of the Ministry are requested to put themselves in communication with the
convener, the Eev. Colin M‘Culloch, without delay, or with any member of the
Committee for Training Young Men for the Ministry, when every information
will be given as to how they are to proceed, and to what extent the General
Assembly will be willing and able to assist them in their preparatory course. It
depends upon the attainments of the young men, when they present themselves for
admission to the Hall, what the length of the curriculum shall be ; but, speaking
generally, as soon as they attain the standard prescribed by the Church in logic,
metaphysics, moral philosophy, natural philosophy, Latin and Greek, and theology,
they will be admitted to the full status of ministers. When those applying are
not young, the full curriculum cannot well be carried out ; —it is therefore desirable
to encourage the youths devoting themselves to this work, to come up to the Hall
as soon as they have finished their course at the highest school within reach
of them. For this purpose, it is strongly recommended to Presbyteries to
be on the look-out for such young men as possess likely gifts and are willing
to devote themselves to the Ministry ; and to bring them under a course of
preparation, with the view of forwarding them to the Hall in March. As the
future of our Church must largely depend on the thoroughness of the work
now entered upon, all our Ministers are earnestly requested to take the matter up,
and find out likely young men and give them all kindly encouragement in their
desire to enter the direct service of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Those disposed to assist in the maintenance of the Divinity Hall are requested
to forward their donations to Mr. James Braden, Treasurer of the Presbyterian
Church of Queensland, or to the Convener or any Member of the Board of
Examiners , or to any of the Ministers.
BOARD OF EXAMINERS;
Rev. Dr. Nelson, Toowoomba ; Rev. Charles Ogg, Brisbane ;
Rev. Alexander Hay, Rockhampton ; Rev. Colin M‘Culloch, Brisbane.
Mr. M'Cullooh, Convener.


0?%. HZZS&/
% - DECi9»2 H) , 3 1? (J-.'l
% * mV# ■*
OSreHf'lND PROGRESS OF THE ENTERPRISE.
Foe a considerable time past the Presbyterian
Church of Queensland has been exerting itself
to provide for the training of a native ministry,
and in order to the more effective prosecution
of this scheme an effort was made to procure
the erection of a Divinity Hall. This effort
succeeded beyond expectation, and now a
handsome and most comfortable building, with
all the requisite conveniences for theological
study, has been completed, and that without
debt or encumbrance of any kind. The first
contribution, amounting to £5, was ‘ 1 from a
Christian mother, with promise of earnest
prayer for success.” The second contri-
bution, which amounted to £2, was from
another “mother interested in the godly
instruction of our young men.” The third was
a bag containing 500 sovereigns, from one who
greatly approved of the object, and who had
vowed to the Lord a tenth of his increase, and
now began cheerfully the payment of his vow ;
and this was followed by other princely gifts,
until the sum in hand amounted to £1,270.
Besides these gifts a sum of £376 9s. sd. was
given for laying the foundation of a theological
library. From various other quarters, money
came in with little or no solicitation —one
contributing £25; another a thank-offering of
£5 from himself and pious wife, together with
“ the dedication of a son to the holy ministry,
provided the Head of the Church shall accept
the offering, and grant the boy the gracious
gifts necessary to a good and faithful minister
of the Word ; ” another offered £10 —“ £5 to
be paid when the foundation should be laid,
and the other £5 when the building should be
finished,” which promise was duly and punc-
tually fulfilled. An elder, attending the
General Assembly, handed over to the college
fund the whole expenses a oted to him by the
congregation whose representative he was.
After very careful deliberation it was
thought advisable to make a commencement
on a scale suited to the present condition of the
Church, and afterwards increase the educa-
tional apparatus in proportion as the church
might gather strength in future years. Accord-
ingly, when the question came before the
General Assembly in May last, a proposal was
submitted to that body to the effect that a
temporary Divinity Hail should be erected on
a portion of the Presbyterian Church ground
on Wickham Terrace, if the trustees of the
property would grant a site ; and that, so soon
as the Presbyterian Church of Queensland felt
strong enough to undertake the responsibility
of a permanent and fully-equipped college, it
should be transferred to the permanent situa-
tion which the General Assembly might deem
the most eligible. The following is the record
H33 55/F
of the resolution adopted by the General
Assembly ;
“Called for the report of the Committee on the
Training of Young Men for the Ministry, which was read
by the Rev. C. McCulloch, convener, and the Assembly
resolved as follows
“ That the report be received and adopted, the com-
mitee, and especially the convener, be thanked for their
services, and that the committee be re-appointed with
power to add to their number, the Rev. C. McCulloch
to be convener, with instructions to use all diligence in
forwarding the object which the Assembly has in view
through the committee.
“ That the Assembly further instruct its committee to
carry out, at as early a date as possible, the proposal for
the erection of a temporary hall for receiving the library,
and furnished with the requisite fittings of a students
class-room. . ....
“That the Assembly further instruct this committee
to make arrangements for holding a session of six
weeks’ duration, terminating each year in the month of
April, not less than one week before the meeting of the
General Assembly, for advancing the studies of the
young men who have devoted themselves to the
ministry. , . . .. „ ~
“Further, that the Assembly appoints the Rev. Hr.
Nelson, and the Revs. Messrs. Ogg, Hay, and McCul-
loch, a Board of Examiners (Mr. McCulloch, convener),
who shall superintend the studies of the young men
during the session, and, at the close of it, shall make
out for each student a programme of study, and send it
down to the Presbyteries within the bounds of which
the young men reside, and that said Board of Examiners
shall annually report to the General Assembly the
result of their labours.”
Thereupon, on the breaking up of the As
sembly, immediate steps were taken to carry
the above recommendation into effect. The
consent of the trustees, Messrs. George Raff,
James Bryden, William Pettigrew, and Alex-
ander Stewart, was cordially granted ; and
though they felt that they could not legally
give away the ground on which the hall is
built, they offered every requisite guarantee
for securing to the Assembly all right to, and
the sole disposal of, the hall and its furnishings. •
Accordingly, upon a plan furnished by Mr.
Gailey, the architect, and under his super-
vision the hall was erected.
The hall is constructed of wood and the roof
covered with shingles. It is cruciform in
plan, the main building being 46 feet long
from north to south, by 18 feet wide, and 32
feet across the transepts, by a similar width
from west to east. The height of the walls to
the roof-plate is 12 feet, and the ridge 24 feet.
There is a fireplace erected in the northern
gable, in front of which is placed the presi-
dent’s chair. The general design of the build-
ing is in the early English style, varied with
the over-hanging eaves, &c., of the Swiss
chatelet, each gable being pierced with narrow
three-light windows, with pointed heads, rest-
ing on corbelled sills. The heads are pro-
tected with label moulds. There is a large
quatrefoil window over the entrance-door,
which is protected by a small porch supported
on cut and moulded brackets. The whole of
the glass is frosted and diagonally lined out in


The Board of Exan
advisable to issue tli
Divinity Hall, in c
what is doing in thi
prosperity of the ins
pages may load to i;
has now taken up, £
and means for the a
Young men 1
of the Ministry ai
convener, the Rev.
Committee for Tra
will be given as tc
Assembly will be wil
depends upon the at
admission to the Ha
generally, as soon a
metaphysics, moral
seined it
ig of the
lay know
in the
following
3 Church
both men
the work
with the
)er of the
formation
General
inrse. It
selves for
speaking
, in logic,
theology,
applying are
they will be admitted to the full status of ministers. When those applying are
not young, the full curriculum cannot well be carried out ;-it is therefore desirable
to encourage the youths devoting themselves to this work, to come up to the Hall
as soon as they have finished their course at the highest school within reach
of them. For this purpose, it is strongly recommended to Presbyteries to
be on the look-out for such young men as possess likely gifts and are willing
to devote themselves to the Ministry ; and to bring them under a course of
preparation, with the view of forwarding them to the Hall in March. As the
future of our Church must largely depend on the thoroughness of the work
now entered upon, all our Ministers are earnestly requested to take the matter up,
and find out likely young men and give them all kindly encouragement in their
desire to enter the direct service of our Lord Jesus Chiist.
Those disposed to assist in the maintenance of the Divinity Hall are requested
to forward their donations to Mr. James Bryden, Treasurer of the Presbyterian
Church of Queensland, or to the Convener or any Member of the Board of
Examiners, or to any of the Ministers,
BOARD OF EXAMINERS:
Rev. Dr. Nelson, Toowoomba ; Rev. Charles Ogg, Brisbane ;
Rev. Alexander Hay, Rockhampton ] Rev. Colin M‘Culloch, Brisbane.
Mr. McCulloch, Convener.


For a considerable time past the Presbyterian
Church of Queensland has been exerting itself
to provide for the training of a native ministry,
and in order to the more effective prosecution
of this scheme an effort was made to procure
the erection of a Divinity Hall. This effort
succeeded beyond expectation, and now a
handsome and most comfortable building, with
all the requisite conveniences for theological
study, has been completed, and that without
debt or encumbrance of any kind. The first
contribution, amounting to £5, was ‘ ‘ from a
Christian mother, with promise of earnest
prayer for success.” The second contri-
bution, which amounted to £2, was from
another ‘ * mother interested in the godly
instruction of our young men.” The third was
a bag containing 500 sovereigns, from one who
greatly approved of the object, and who had
vowed to the Lord a tenth of his increase, and
now began cheerfully the payment of his vow ;
and this was followed by other princely gifts,
until the sum in hand amounted to £1,270.
Besides these gifts a sum of £376 9s. sd. was
given for laying the foundation of a theological
library. From various other quarters, money
came in with little or no solicitation —one
contributing £25 ; another a thank-offering of
£5 from himself and pious wife, together with
“ the dedication of a son to the holy ministry,
provided the Head of the Church slxall accept
the offering, and gx’ant the boy the gracious
gifts necessary to a good and faithful minister
of the Word ; ” another offered £10 —“ £5 to
be paid when the foundation should be laid,
and the other £5 when the building should be
finished,” which promise was duly and punc-
tually fulfilled. An elder, attending the
General Assembly, handed over to the college
fund the whole expexxses x oted to him by the
congregation whose representative he was.
After very careful deliberation it was
thought advisable to make a commencement
on a scale suited to the present condition of the
Church, and afterwards iixcrease the educa-
tional apparatus in proportion as the church
might gather strength in future years. Accord-
ingly, when the question came befoi'e the
General Assembly in May last, a proposal was
submitted to that body to the effect that a
temporary Divinity Hall should be erected on
a portion of the Presbyterian Church ground
on Wickham Tex’race, if the trustees of the
propei’ty would grant a site ; and that, so sooix
as the Presbyterian Church of Queensland felt
strong eixough to undertake the responsibility
of a permanent and fully-equipped college, it
should be transferred to the permanent situa-
tion which the General Assembly might deem
the most eligible. The following is the record
Ind progress of the enterprise.
of the resolution adopted by the General
Assembly :
H33STS/P
id
“Called for the report of the Committee on the
Training of Young Men for the Ministry, which was read
by the Rev. C. McCulloch, convener, and the Assembly
resolved as follows :
‘ ‘ That the report be received and adopted, the com-
mitee, and especially the convener, be thanked for their
services, and that the committee be re-appointed with
power to add to their number, the Rev. C. McCulloch
to be convener, with instructions to use all diligence in
forwarding the object which the Assembly has in view
through the committee.
“ That the Assembly further instruct its committee to
carry out, at as early a date as possible, the proposal for
the erection of a temporary hall for receiving the library,
and furnished with the requisite fittings of a students
class-room. . , .
“That the Assembly further instruct this committee
to make arrangements for holding a session of six
weeks’ duration, terminating each year in the month of
April, not less than one week before the meeting of the
General Assembly, for advancing the studies of the
young men who have devoted themselves to the
ministry. „
“Further, that the Assembly appoints the Kev. Hr.
Nelson, and the Revs. Messrs. Ogg, Hay, and McCul-
loch a Board of Examiners (Mr. McCulloch, convener),
who shall superintend the studies of the young men
during the session, and, at the close of it, shall make
out for each student a programme of study, and send it
down to the Presbyteries within the bounds of which
the young men reside, and that said Board of Examiners
shall annually report to the General Assembly the
result of their labours.”
Thereupon, on the breaking up of the As '
seinbly, immediate steps were taken to carry
the above recommendation into effect. The
consent of the trustees, Messrs. George Raff,
James Bryden, William Pettigrew, and Alex-
ander Stewart, was cordially granted ; and
though they felt that they could not legally
give away the ground on which the hall is
built, they offered every requisite guarantee
for securing to the Assembly all right to, and
the sole disposal of, the hall and its furnishings. *
Accordingly, upon a plan furnished by Mr.
Gailey, the architect, and under Ins super-
vision the hall was erected.
The hall is constructed of wood and the roof
covered with shingles. It is cruciform in
plan, the main building being 46 feet long
from north to south, by 18 feet wide, and 32
feet across the transepts, by a similar width
from west to east. The height of the walls to
the roof-plate is 12 feet, and the ridge 24 feet.
There is a fireplace erected in the northern
gable, in front of which is placed the presi-
dent’s chair. The general design of the build-
ing is in the early English style, varied with
the over-hanging eaves, &c., of the Swiss
chatelet, each gable being pierced with narrow
three-light windows, with pointed heads, rest-
ing on corbelled sills. The heads are pro-
tected with label moulds. There is a lax-ge
quatrefoil window over the entrance-door,
which is protected by a small porch supported
on cut and moulded brackets. The whole of
the glass is frosted and diagonally lined out in


small pattern. The side and return transept
walls are left unpierced by windows, as they
are designed to receive book cases. The
interior of the walls are lined, and the roof is
open, timbered, and sheeted, the whole being
varnished throughout, giving it a light and
graceful appearance. The two bays on the
right of the chair are fitted up with book cases
14 feet long by 8 feet 6 inches high, enclosed
with glass sashes. The hall is fitted up with
Haywood’s cane-bottom oak chairs and presi-
dent’s table, desk, &c., and is lighted with a
gas sunlight and side brackets.
The present arrangements are necessarily
initiative, temporary, and limited. The office
of the Board of Examiners, during the six
weeks or two months’ session, will be mainly
to revise and supplement the studies carried on
under the direction of their various Presby-
teries, by the young men during the rest of
the year. The following distribution of
branches was arranged by the Assembly ;
“Systematic Theology and Apologetics,” the
Rev. C. M‘Culloch ; “Sacred Languages and
Biblical Literature,” the Rev. A. Hay;
‘ ‘ Church History, Church Government, and
the Practice of Church Cozzrts, together with
Readings in the Institutes of Calvin,” the Rev.
C. Ogg; “ Moral Philosophy and Pastoral
Theology, including Homiletics, the Conduct
of Public Worship, and Pastoral Visitation,”
the Rev. Hr. Nelson. Tutorial assistance
will be called in when required and obtainable,
and any aids which the Board may deem
requisite for the more efficient working out of
the Assembly’s scheme.
To meet the expenses of maintaining the
Hall, a Maintenance Fund has been formed,
which, it is hoped, may yield, when fairly in
operation, five or six hundred pounds a year.
Of course, when the time comes for the ap-
pointment of a Principal, with befitting assis-
tance, the ways and means will require to be
carefully arranged; and perhaps no better
model could be adopted than the Education
Society of the Presbyterian Church of America,
by which some thousands of young men
have obtained a learned education, who, other-
wis«*would have been destined to pass their
lives in uneducated obscurity. In the mean-
time, the temporary arrangement will be car-
ried into effect with all the force which the
General Assembly has at command. The
ministers told off' for the departments above-
named will give their services gratuitously,
and during the six weeks’ session will strive to
make arrangements for giving thorough assis-
tance to the students to the utmost of their
power, and as far as other duties will permit.
It is expected that, during the session, and till
the General Assembly is over, their congrega-
tions will strive to have them relieved of all
but the most necessary duties.
The commencement of this important under-
taking is necessarily very limited. Even
when young men were willing to offer them-
selves to study, the means were wanting for
gratifying their desire; and even yet the
organisation so auspiciously commenced, will
require to be in efficient operation for some
time before we can fairly judge what influence
it will have in drawing young men forward to
the work of the holy ministry. Meanwhile,
it is a great point gained to have a comfortable
hall for study, and a library in it so selected
that any young man, of good ability and per-
severance, and with the helps provided for
him there, may become accomplished in
theology, history, Hebrew, Greek, Latin, arid
other branches necessary for thoroughly effec-
tive service in these days of doubt and inde-
pendent thinking. We live at a time of
special advantage for such training as is con-
templated, inasmuch as so many lectures of the
ablest and most successful professors have been
published, and arc, therefore, available for the
students here, who are, therefore, almost on a
footing of equality with the students who
heard the lectures delivered in their universi-
ties. The library contains an ample supply of
the most advanced text-books and the wonder-
fully simplified aids to study which have been
offei’ed to students of late years ; and it will
be the care of those who have promoted the
scheme of this Divinity Hall to feed the
library, year by year, with all the newest and
best works bearing on the main business in
hand.
It will fall to the General Assembly, which
meets in the first week of May, to consider
whether an extension of the special design of
the hall may not be advisable whereby' classes
may be opened for young men who, on pay-
ment of a fee, shall have the benefit of a course
of study. The Assembly may possibly be
encouraged to institute such a course by the
hope of drafting out of these classes some
young men into the ranks of the ministry ;
and, if so, it is probable that the liberal
Scottish system will be adopted, which throws
the course open to all of every denomination,
leaving the young men free, if they choose the
ministry, to do so in connection with any
Church they please. Some of the most emi-
nent ministers among the Baptists and Congre-
gationalists of England were wont to take one
or two sessions at a Scotch University ; and it
is needless to say to any who knows what the
Scotch Universities and Divinity Halls are
that denominationalism never cropped up to
disturb the peaceful fellowship of these ardent
youths.
The Maintenance Fund, on which so much
depends, has been just started, and, so far, with »
good promise. The Rev. Dr. Nelson, of Too- I
woomba, sends in a list of annual subscribers, I
and promises more ; the Rev. Mr. Knipe, of I
Maryborough, follows ; and from Rockhamp- J
ton and other places, subscriptions and hand- |
some donations are beginning to be offered. |
The General Assembly will, it is confidently >
hoped, be able to publish the list of names, \
and so goodly a sum, that the Church will be \
led to “thank God and take courage.” What
hath the Lord wrought already ? He has the
hearts of all men in His hand, and for His own
approved Christian work He raises up the men
and the means.


The opening services in connection with the
first session of the Divinity Hall were held on
the evening of Tuesday, the 14th of March.
Though the evening was unfavourable, a
large and influential company assembled, and
the whole services were impressive and cheer-
ing in the highest degree. The Rev. Colin
M'Culloch, as convener of the Board of
Examiners, took the chair. After praise and
solemn prayer, the Chairman gave a short ac-
count of the origin and progress of the institution,
and of the great object which the Church aims
at; and the Rev. Charles Ogg followed with a
brief sketch of the curriculum of study pre-
scribed by the Presbyterian Churches in the
mother country. The Rev. D. F. Mitchell,
recently arrived from Scotland, was requested
by the chairman to lead in prayer, when a
most impressive and edifying prayer was
offered up for the blessing of the great Head
of the Church on the institution and all con-
cerned in it—the students, the instructors, the
parents who have dedicated their sons to the
ministry, and the sons who have been so dedi-
cated. After the introductory devotional
services,
The Rev. 0. M'Cxtllocii said: My
heart overflows with thankfulness on this
happy occasion. The instructions of the last
General Assembly have been successfully car-
ried out without a single hitch or the slightest
jar; and the committee will be able to hand
over to the coming Assembly as its own pro-
perty this comfortable, comely, and well-fur-
nished Divinity Hall for training and educating
for the Church of Christ in this land her hopes
of the future. Some may say, ‘ ‘ But where
arc your men?” 1 reply that He who opened
the hearts of a few people to give their sub-
stance for the erection of this Hall, will open
the hearts of our young men to choose the holy
ministry and not shrink from the preparatory
studies for it, however hard these preparatory
studies may be. It is of the Lord ; and to the
Lord we shall look for the higher life now,
as we have looked for the material resources,
and not in vain. The first stones of the build-
ing, if I may so speak, were full of life and
promise. It was two Christian mothers that
brought the first offerings. Other givers, long
exercised in their minds about Christ’s instruc-
tions concerning giving, found themselves sud-
denly placed face to face with this idea of a
Divinity Hall ; they found it press upon their
heart more and more ; it seemed as though
Christ’s claims were clearly visible in that
OPENING OF THE HALL.
direction ; and so money came pouring into
the treasury of Christ. How, was not this
clearly of the Lord and none else ? But more
than money was offered in this cause ; more
than one little Samuel have also been offered
for the service of the ministry in the house of
the Lord ; and surely here too the hand of the
Lord is seen. Such are some of the vital signs
that this undertaking will not be permitted to
come to nought. The Head of the Church
charges Himself to provide ministry for the
edification of His own body, and the gifts
needed for efficacious ministry are in His own
power. If He gives the air and the cloud and
the rain and the sunshine to mature man s
harvest and the reapers to reap it down, is it
for a moment to be supposed that He will stint
His bounty when the harvest of the Lord is in
need, or that He can refuse our prayer to raise
up and qualify the labourers when the harvest
is a harvest of souls. We begin with four
students, if they all shall be able to take ad-
vantage of the course ; but we will not cease
to pray the Lord of the harvest that they
may be men of the right mettle, with large
gifts from the Divine Giver,—men f«ii
Holy Ghost and power, and who shall have
manly purpose enough to cultivate their gifts
highly in order to offer unto the Lord their
best. Who hath despised the day of small
things ? In fact we are then no longer small :
if God be on our side, we shall do bravely
enough ) fbr one shall then chase a thousand,
and two shall put ten thousand to flight. Our
teaching power will be found competent, I
trust, to make learned men of them and sound
theologians. We have unfortunately lost the
services of one of the four nominated by the
last Assembly as Examining Board, but Mr.
Ogg’s scholarship which is sound, accurate,
am? extensive, is available ; and I trust that
Dr. Nelson’s infirm health is not to deprive us
of Ins valuable accomplishments as a scholar,
a theologian, and an instructor of youth.
Services, all these, I assure you, of no mean
order for the work in hand ; services which
will cost the church nothing, but which with
God’s blessing will enrich, strengthen, and
extend the church mightily in this colony.
The famous Harvard College commenced in an
humble room of brick enclosed within a rough
palisade of slabs to keep the Indians off, and
what has Harvard become now ! The same
may be said of Princeton and other great
American Universities now of world-wide
reputation : they began like Christianity
itself, as a root out of a dry ground, but they
now overshadow America with their stately
branches. The blessing of God is all we need
here also, and I think wc may make pretty
sure that we have it. Indeed at every move


of this scheme, it seems to have possessed a
self-propelling force which carried it forward.
The other day when the books lay all dusty
and in mazy confusion, I confess 1 fairly drew
back from the dust and the disorder ; but I
only gave a hint, and lo ! and behold, in one
evening the gentle fingers of ladies had passed
over the books, and not a speck of dust was
thereafter to be seen. And thereafter, night
after night a company of young men were here,
numbering, classifying, cataloguing, and arrang-
ing the their cases, —a company so
imposing that any stranger, looking in to see
our Hall, would have gone away saying that
such a lot of grave, business-like, sober,
earnest, intellectual, and bigheaded students
he never saw in his life. And thus it comes
about we are all here to-night full of heart and
hope, blessing God for mercies received and
praying for increase of favours in the years
which are to be.
The Rev. C. Ogg said : Before I enter upon
the subject allotted to me in the deeply
interesting proceedings of this evening, allow
me to congratulate the Presbyterian Church of
Queensland on the acquirement and opening of
the elegant Divinity Hall in which we arc now
assembled, and on the possession of the choice
selection of literary and theological works
which form the commencement of its library.
So far as I know this is the first institution
erected and equipped for the training of a
native Christian ministry in this young but
splendid portion of the Colonial Empire of
Great Britain. To those members of our
Church who have laid this useful and hand-
some gift at her feet, our Church, as a whole,
must ever owe a debt of gratitude. Let me
say that the beginning now made in this
matter, as compared with the beginnings of
similar institutions, now of world-wide fame,
is not to be despised. Let us hope and pray
that, as the vast voids of this colony are filled
up with an intelligent people, and its varied
and rich resources of material wealth are deve-
loped, so this institution will also develope,
and spread abroad among its inhabitants the
richer and more elevating and enduring
treasures of learning and true Christianity.
And now, as to the subject upon which I am in-
vited shortly to address you, namely “The
Training Required for the Ministry of the Pres-
byterian Church,” it has often struck me that it
is a subject too seldom brought under the notice
of our people generally. This may possibly have
arisen from the idea that the subject is a dry
one for a popular audience, or that those only
who have themselves received an academical
training could fully understand, and an
interest in it. Now, while this impression
may be correct to a certain extent, it is not, I
am persuaded, so absolutely true as to prevent
it being brought before a popular audience and
on befitting occasions, and such an occasion,
we think, is the present. In this attempt to
give you a popular remmd of the subject, I
must, of course, lay aside as much as possible
the use of academical phraseology, and present
it in as plain an English garb as I can. And
yet, I am persuaded, when thus imperfectly
set before you, you will find enough in it to
awaken your sympathies on behalf of our own
institution, so that, aided by your support, we
may go on to perfect what is now only begun.
The course of training for our ministry is, in
general, so similar in the various sections of
the Presbyterian Church, that a sketch of it as
pursued in one will suffice for the whole. In
some sections, also, somewhat different terms
may be used to describe what is nearly the
same thing in itself, and a longer time taken,
or given, to travel over the course. The full
course of the Scottish churches occupies eight
years, and as that is the one I passed through
myself, and am, therefore, best acquainted
with, I shall take it as the groundwork of my
sketch, without, however, saying, or leaving
you to infer, that that long time is absolutely
necessary to acquire all the training which, in
the case of these Churches, is spread over that
time. Such a lengthened period was adopted
when students entered the universities at a
much lower average than they now do. Some
have entered at the age of fourteen years, or
even less ; whereas now, according to Professor
Ramsay, of the University of Glasgow, the
average age of students of the first year is
nineteen years. This fact, and the new im-
proved text books, which so materially expe-
dite the course of study, and save much time,
render it possible to abridge considerably the
period of study, without abridging or lessening
the amount of education required ; and the
propriety of doing so, is, I believe, engaging
the attention of those sections of the Presby-
terian Church referred to. We then take up
the student with a sufficient amount of learn-
ing to enable him to benefit by entering the
University, During his first year there, his
chief studies are Latin and Greek. In his
class-book he may have selections from Virgil,
Horace, Ovid, Cicero, Livy, Tacitus, &c.
These he must thoroughly get up,
and be examined upon in the class.
Prelections on these, elucidating the
text, arc delivered by his professor at another
hour in the day. All this is fitted to tho-
roughly work him up in the language, and the
subject treated on in the extract. As yet,
notiiing has been discovered equal to this for
training the young student, and laying the
foundation of a learned education. Being
thoroughly grounded in the Latin language, he
is enabled thereby to master any other in a
much shorter time than lie otherwise could,
and is also made much better acquainted with
his own English tongue. Besides this, a
knowledge of Roman history and antiquities,
and religions, and superstitions, and connec-
tions with the many nations over which it
swayed its sceptre, throws many side lights
upon the sacred Scriptures. No one thoroughly
furnished for the work of the Christian mini-
stry would like to be without the key which
opens up all this in the original tongue ; and
then, if we desire an illustration of what high
Roman society was without Christianity,
where can we have this better disclosed than


in Cicero pro Clmntio —Cicero’s defence of his
client Cluentius, Incidentally, we see in the
same oration the constitution, and practice of a
Roman court of law, all of which throws
illustrations on portions of Paul’s Epistles,
which the uniustructed cannot see the full
force and beauty of. And now, as to the
Greek class, much of what I have said with
reference to the Latin applies to it also. But
whatever pleasure we may have in holding
intercourse with the poets, and orators, and
philosophers, and historians of Greece in the
original tongue, the fact that the New Testa-
ment, except a small disputed part, was
written in that language, renders its study an
absolute necessity to a fully qualified Christian
minister. Then there is the vast field of
patristic theology, or the writings of the
Christian Fathers, as they are called, which
these two languages open up in the original,
and the quotations from which it is necessary,
now-a-days especially, that one should be able
to verify for himself. In the second year, the
student continues his studies in Greek, but
the chief class this year is the logic class. He
may also pursue his studies in Latin, or some
class not lying directly in his course. The
logic class, where metaphysics are to some
extent studied also, is one of the most interest-
ing in the course. Here, in a preliminary
course of prelections on psychology, or the
science of the human mind, man’s intellectual
nature, and especially his reasoning powers,
are examined, and the laws which regulate
the succession of his thoughts are explained.
Then in logic proper, the laws of right reason-
ing—logic inductive and deductive—the syllo-
gism—the fallacies, &c. When the student
lias made himself master of this noble art of
reasoning correctly, he is in possession of
weapons by which he can detect error and
overthrow it, whatever false garb it may
assume. By the petitio principU he can detect
the crafty movements of an adversary, who
would try to steal a march upon him in argu-
ment by begging the questions at issue, and
quietly take for granted what he ought to
prove. In the use of the argumentum ad
hominem, he can turn an opponent’s principles
or admissions against himself, and vanquish his
false arguments with his own weapons. And
by the reductio ad ahsurdum, he can render
the arguments of an adversary so absurd as to
render further refutation of them unnecessary.
And when this science and art —for it is both
—provides such powei’ful weapons for the
detection and overthrow of error, and for the
vindication and establishment of truth, no
lover of truth would despise their possession,
and especially would the minister of divine
truth be weak without them. This session
ends by a course of prelections and exercises in
I’hetoric. A lengthened oration requires to be
written and delivered in the class-room. Two
other lengthened written papers must be given
in in connection with the work of the class,
ere the student is entitled to his certificate at
the close of the session. There are also daily
examinations and short papers in connection
with the prelections delivered in the morning.
In the third year, the student enters the
mathematical class, or pursues this study if he
has commenced it in a former year. Apart
from the science itself, the reflex influence of
its study upon the mind, in enabling it to
follow out closely and consecutively any pro-
cess of reasoning, is of great value, while the
science itself is indispensable to the student of
astronomy and natural philosophy. Another
of the necessary classes this year is moral
philosophy. The subject is introduced by
another course of prelections on man’s spiri-
tual nature ; not now, however, with reference
to him as a merely intelligent and reasoning
being, as in the logic class, but having special
bearing on him as a moral being, and his
duties as such. Here, his motive powers are
examined; his affections, his impulses, or by
whatever name those principles within him
which move him on to action are called. The
question of the freedom or bondage of the will
is philosophically examined; his sense of
accountability, or conscience; and the fact
proved that, as he is a moral being and under
a moral law, so he is under a moral Lawgiver
and Governor. In the fourth year, natural
philosophy and senior mathematics are the
chief classes. Those who are studying for the
ministry now begin Hebrew under a private
tutor. In addition to these compulsory
classes, others for which the student has
time and taste, may be attended by lum,
as for example, botany, astronomy, poliuH»L-
economy, &c., while one or more of the
modern languages is now generally studied
outside, and that sometimes by way of relief
from more severe studies. The student now
prepares to enter the Divinity Hall. He is
examined orally, and by means of examination
papers on the literary and philosophical course
he has passed through at the university. If
his examination is satisfactory, he receives a
certificate to that effect, and in due course •
enter the Hall. During his first year there,
he pursues his studies in Hebrew. He has to
read the Old Testament in the original; and
learn portions of it, so as to repeat them cor-
rectly from memory. He writes out exercises
in the Hebrew character; turns English into
Hebrew et vice versa. There are prelc,
on the original of which he takes notes ; and
upon which he may be examined. Another
of the classes which I had to attend this year
was that of natural science. Its position with
regard to natural history on the one side, arid
natural philosophy on the other, was set be-
fore us. Its object was to guard students
against “science falsely so called,” and it
became, in a great measure, an illustrative
natural theology class. That great Christian
minister, and philosopher, Dr, Chalmers was
the originator of the class. He judged it meet
that students for the ministry would be bene-
fited by a regular course of instruction in
sound natural science, so as to be able to hold
their own against the scientific sciolists of our
day, who have ever directed their efforts
against divine revelation, After Chalmers


'fhVmany antichrists that arose within her
pale, and the noble strivings of those faithful
to the Great King and Head of the Church,
its minister. Such, then, is the our
church in the training of her ministry, both in
secular and sacred literature. Her object in
who maintained the purity of saving truth
even unto death. The rise of the great anti-
chnstian power which threw its dark shadows
the course she pursues in this matter is, to
send forth as her ministers men ‘ ‘ thoroughly
furnished for every good word and work” in
of ignorance and superstition and immorality
the highest service which is given men on
over'so many ages of the world’s history. The
earth to accomplish.
light which God, of His infinite mercy, be-
stowed upon so many noble and learned men
at the time of the Reformation, whom he sent
It was explained, in course of the evening,
forth to rescue mankind from Papal error;
and the preservation of the Church down to
our own day as the “bush burning but not
consumed when, now, at length, the man of
that the present arrangements are temporary.
A Board of Examiners was appointed by last
Assembly to “ revise and supplement” the
sin has reached his culminating blasphemy,
studies which the young men have prosecuted
« and, under the decree of Heaven, tottms to
' his fall. In the systematic theology’clfei.';,
under direction of their Presbyteries during
the rest of the year. As the institution pros-
tire student has the truths of divine revelation
pers, a permanent staff of teachers will be
set before him according to some plan of logi-
cal arrangement. This can be done in various
appointed, and more extensive arrangements
made for young men’s classes ; and a hope is
ways. There is a principle in man’s nature that
entertained that the Presbyterians of Queens-
leads him to systematise, and this faculty can
land will, like the Presbyterians of America,
nowhere be better employed than in connection
send any divinity student of high talent, and
with tire word of Him who is a God of order and
who gives promise of eminent usefulness, to a
not of confusion, in all His works and ways.
German or home university to finish. Our
Nay, these truths of God’s word seem so
best wishes go with an enterprise so full of
naturally fitted to fall into order, that they of
hope and promise.
FI43SO k - DECOT2 J-
N
had instituted this course of study, I am in-
formed that the University of Oxford followed
his example. Although this class does not
exist in every Divinity Hall, yet something
equivalent to it is generally attained by pri-
vate reading. Apologetics, or the evidences
of Christianity is the remaining class of this
year. These include the .monumental evi-
dences ; the evidences from prophecy, the
external and internal evidences of the Bible,
or those outside of it and those contained
within itself. The experimental evidences.
And here, also, is discussed the inspiration of
the Scriptures, although this is also taken up
in a later class. From all of which, it is shewn
that the evidence of the truth of the Bible is
so overwhelming that no man in his sound
senses can resist it. In the second year at the
Hall the student pursues his studies in He-
brew and the criticism of the sacred text in
the original languages, the science of herme-
neutics, or interpretation. During the same
year he also enters the junior class of Church
history and the junior class of systematic
theology, and in the next year, he takes the
senior divisions of these two classes. In the
Church history class the student has spread
out before his mind the state of the visible
Church of God in all ages. Its contendings
against the powers of darkness without, and
within its nominal pale. Her increase in the
knowledge of the truth of God regarding the
salvation of man, as He saw meet, from age
themselves almost seem to unite us to it. In
this way of orderly arrangement, the student
obtains a firmer hold of them ; and knowing
the order that underlies them, he is never at a
loss in any part of the Word as to the position
that one holds to another. Moreover, there
can be no dishonour done to these truths, or
Him who gave us them, by thus setting them
forth in order before men’s minds. The gar-
dener who arranges the plants and trees which
he finds in the natural world, in his carefully
cultivated garden, does no dishonour to them
or Him who made them by doing so. Nay,
they attain a beauty, and usefulness, and
vigour, which they had not before. So, by
thus arranging the truths of Christianity, we
see a beauty and power in them, which,
although existing in each •of them inherently
before, is more clearly brought out as they
stand in an orderly array before the mind’s
eye. In the third year, the student follows
out these two latter subjects in the senior
divisions of these classes. In the fourth year, he
takes the pastoral theology class, in which he
is prepared for the practical work of the
ministry, and possibly an exegetical class, or
perhaps one in which he might find himself
somewhat deficient. For th,e most part, he
now prepares for his examinations for license.
These consist of trial discourses in Latin,
Greek, Hebrew, and popular lectures and
sermons in English. Passing through these
successfully, he is licensed to preach, and is
then called a probationer, and is open to a call
to a<-e according to His infinite wisdom, and then called a probationer, and is open to a call
pleasure of His will to reveal it. from any congregation who may wish him for
The innnv antichrists that arose within her its minister, Such, then, is the care of oui
