

THE GREAT SHEARERS’ STRIKE
OF 1891.
SOME FACTS, PRINCIPLES & OPINIONS.
ISSUED BY THE
United Pastoralists’ Association of Queensland.
MUIR & MORCOM, PRINTERS, QUEEN STREET, BRISBANE.


ADDENDUM.
A Free Labourer’s Opinion.
Mr. Goodman, chairman of the free labourers shearing at Wolfang,
has made the following statement : —I recently came from Victoria, I
am perfectly satisfied with the pastoralists’ agreement, rates, wages, &c ,
paid. On a full day 98 of us have shorn on an average 110 sheep. My
opinion of the situation is that the unionists have shown lately a good
deal of the ‘ dog in the manger” spirit. They cannot eat hay them-
selves, and are determined to starve the ox. There is abundance of
work to be done, and a fair and reasonable consideration is offered <|or
doing it. The unionists refuse to do it, and forsooth, deny the
anyone else to do it. The climax of assumption and intolerance in
unionism has been reached. We free labourers have waited in dis-
tressful silence for returning signs of reason and justice, in vain, and
much as it is to be regretted that defence stratagems have become
necessary, free labour must unite to protect and secure its own
interests against the unscrupulous forces of unionism now being made.
We have inte ests to conserve and maintain.' Capital and labour I
consider to be so intimately related that any violence offered to the
former injures both. The resolution we passed at last Saturday night’s
meeting was drafted by me. It reads as follows : “ That taking into
consideralion the unsatisfactory state of labour interests arising from
strikes, this meeting deems it expedient to form a union upon a wider
or more national basis to meet necessities of the case.” I have care-
fully thought out this matter, and I am of the opinion that any future
union must be entirely run on different lines to those of the past. I
suggest the name “ National Union of Labour,” as it must be cosmo-
politan in character, with a shearers’ section, rouseabouts’ section,
carters’ section, &c. I admit freedom of contract, and consider that
racial controversies would be unwise; but I thoroughly believe in only
a white labour standard ; rates of wages to be maintained ; strikes to
be reduced to minimum by requiring a two-thirds vote of the members of
any section before they can take place. Alterations of the constitution
and rules to be made only in conference, all parties being represented.
We have adjourned the meeting until next Saturday, when, instead of
general principles, we will go more into details. I have no doubt that
we shall get all the free labourers in this district to join us. They nearly
all come from the same colony as myself—Victoria. They are steady
sensible men I am a strong believer in the proper principles of
unionism, but it seems to me that the unionism of this colony is but a
covering name for anarchy, used as a means to piovide fat billets to
certain individuals who do not want to work, and live by endeavouring to
prevent others from working also.” Mr. Goodman seems to be a most
intelligent man, an apt and fluent speaker, and has considerable influence
among his fellow workmen. —Darling Downs Gazette, April 8.


THE CHIEF SECRETARY
ON THE
AUSTRALIAN LABOUR FEDERATION.
It will be remembered that on March 24 las
Mr. Albert Hinchelille, General Secretary o
the Australian Labour Federation, wrote
the Chief Secretary to enter “ another protes
against the manner in which the whole fore
of the Government are being strained to su
jugate the wage-earners of the central distri
to the dictation of capitalistic organisations
In the course of the letter the Premier wa
reminded of his own efforts to secure an oper
conference ; it is emphasised that the Au
tralian Labour Federation’s “ steady influenc
has been to substitute peaceful agitation anc
mediation for needless suspension of industry
The Government was asked to exert its “un
questionable influence to induce organisec
capitalism to meet organised labour in ope
conference,” and in the concluding paragrap
the Chief Secretary is urged to “ tak
immediate steps to secure for those whom th
present electoral laws unjustly deprive of
vote, including the great bulk of the bus!
workers, an equal voice in the making of law
which the poorest as the richest is supposed t
be equally bound to obey.”
The letter was formally acknowledged, and
yesterday the following reply was sent:
“ Chief Secretary’s Office,
“Brisbane, April 14, 1891.
“ Mr. Albert Hinchclifle, General Secretary
Australian Labour Federation.
“ Sir,—Your letter of the 24th ultimo, the
receipt of which has already been formally
acknowledged from this office, and in which
you, on “behalf of the General Executive of the
Australian Labour Federation, ‘ enter anothei
protest ’ against what you describe as ‘ the
manner in which the whole forces of the
Government are being strained to subjugate
the wage earners of the central districts to the
dictation of capitalistic organisations,’ having
been laid before the Chief Secretary on his
return from Sydney, I have now the honour
by direction to inform you that Sir Bamuel
Griffith very much regrets that the Australian
Labour Federation, who profess that their
objects and intentions are peaceful, should
nevertheless characterise the action of the
Government in endeavouring to maintain law
and order, and in punishing disorder, violence,
and crime, as an attempt to subjugate the
wage-earners of the central district to the
dictation of capitalistic organisation.’ The
federation cannot but be aware of the actual
facts of the case, and Sir Samuel Griffith does
not see that any useful purpose can be served
by misrepresenting them.
“ I am to say that it is notorious that
elaborate preparations have been made for
committing outrages upon property, and
violence upon the persons of men who are
equally entitled, with the members of the
Australian Labour Federation, to enjoy free-
dom under the laws. The Government have
met these preparations in the only way in
which the Government of a civilised country
can meet them, and, while standing officially
neutral, have taken precautions to preven
the intended outrages. The necessity of the
precautions has been proved by the event
which have shown that the Government, i
they have erred at all, have erred on the sic
of not taking sufficient precautions.
“In the face of the existing organised ii
timidation and violence in the western di
trict of the colcny, an organisation which,
far as public information enables the Chie
Secretary to judge, is not condemned, bu
rather approved, by the Australian Labou
Federation, he finds it difficult to accept th
pacific assurances contained in the letter now
under reply, and cannot regard the federatio
as dissociated from the action of the men wit
whom they appear to be acting in concert.
“ Ihe Australian Labour Federation nuts
recognise that the existing state of thing
renders it very difficult for those who desire t
see a satisfactory termination of the presen-
unhappy struggle, to take any step in activ
support of their views. It is impossible fo
law-abiding "persons, and especially for thos
charged with the maintenance of law ant
order, to do anything which directly or in
directly would indicate a sympathy with th
methods adopted by the unionists in the
western districts.
“ Sir Samuel Griffith has himself throughou
the struggle exerted his personal influence to
bring about a meeting between the two organi
sations, but he feels that his efforts have been
altogether neutralised by the policy of violence
and intimidation pursued by the unionists.
“ It appears to the Chief Secretary that the
term ‘freedom of contract,’ so much used ol
late, has been used by the two parties in quite
different senses, and that much of the reluc-
tance on the part of the employers to meet the
unionists has arisen from this cause.
_ “ I am further to say that for his own part
Sir Samuel Griffith has no hesitation in repeat-
ing what he said at the interview referred to in
your letter, that the claim that employers
should not be allowed to employ any but union
men, and on union terms, is, in his opinion,
altogether inadmissable in a free country and
amongst free men, and would involve a tyranny
that might become insupportable. He thinks
that if this claim is not intended to be put for-
ward, the sooner it is authoritatively disclaim-
ed the better it will be for all parties.
“ With respect to the last paragraph of your
letter, the Chief Secretary would be glad to
know in more detail what steps it is suggested
that the Government should take in this
matter.
“ I am to add that in the opinion of Sir
Samuel Griffith, one of the most lamentable
features in the present position is the daily-
increasing alienation of sympathy from the
wage-earners in consequence of the violent
methods pursued with the active or tacit
approbation of the leaders.—l am, «Sc.,
“ W. E. Parry-Okeden,
“ Under Colonial Secretary.”




Executive of the “United Pastoralists’ Association of
Queensland ” have thought it advisable that the following
articles be published in the form of a pamphlet, in order that
v matter of so valuable a nature may obtain a more permanent
record than is possible if it appear only in the column of a daily news-
paper. At such a crisis in the industrial history in Australia it is of
great importance that the attention of the public should be directed
clearly and continuously to the principles which are at stake in this
contest.
The Executive feel that this is a fitting place to deal with one of
the most striking features of the struggle. One of the many boasts
on the part of leaders of the new unionism during the late maritime
strike, and also at the beginning of the present struggle, was, that should
the Government call out the Defence Force and Volunteers to repress
disorder no such call-out would be effective—there is abundant evidence
in disproof of this assertion. When the authorities felt the time had
arrived for some display of force against the lawless and disorderly
action of the new unionists, a special parade of the Moreton Mounted
Infantry was called for Friday, the 20th February : Major Ricardo,
after a few quiet words, called upon all who were willing to serve their
country by helping to repress disorder, to signify their willingness by
stepping forward-—the whole company to a man, stepped out, as an
indication of their readiness to do this, and they the next day confirmed
that by the very definite act of leaving Brisbane by the “ Wodonga ”
for the'seat of disturbance, and they have since their arrival there given
evidence, beyond the possibility of the slighest suspicion, that their
hearts are in the resolve to aid in the repression of disorder and the
protection of those who are exposed to danger. The story of the Moreton
Mounted Infantry is precisely the story of every body of Defence Force
and Volunteers to whom the appeal has been made. Not only has there
not been any unwillingness or unreadiness to do the disagreeable but neces-
sary duty which has been thrust upon them, there has been an ardent
desire to prove that they deserve the confidence which the Government
has placed in them—so gratifying a result of this test of loyalty to oath
and order deserves such permanence of record as this pamphlet may give,
and the Executive name the following companies in this connection, viz :
the Moreton Rockhampton, Mount Morgan, Wide Bay (Gympie
and Maryborough) Maekay, Toowoomba, Warwick, Charters Towers and
Townsville Mounted Infantry, and Rockhampton and Roma Infantry.*
The ready response which these companies have heartily given to the call
to duty is worthy of all praise, and the same response will, we are confi-
dent, be given in the event of a similar call being made to companies in
the same or in other places, when the Government feel the necessity
* See note A Page 30.


arises. Exposed to the hostility and abusive language of the more
tuibulent section in the disturbed districts and elsewhere, they have
stood smiling and firm, and have endured discomiort bravely, proving
themselves by this very practical Easter encampment avd campaign
that they are made of sterling stuff, they have heartily done their
duty. And this does not apply to one place or one corps for at one end of the
Colony we hear of Captain fepencer Browne and his men, after a hard days
patrol on horseback, starting with his troops for a 35 mile ride from
Gordon Downs to Clermont at nine o’clock at night in pouring rain and
through wet soil, and reaching his destination at nine in the morning.
At the same time at another part of the Colony, Augathella, 300 miles
from Clermont, we hear of Captain Harry King and 25 men of the
D.D.M.I. dashing across the country, 65 miles in a day, surrounding a
large mob of marauders, and arresting 21 out of their number. We do
not name these cases for the purpose of any invidious comparison, but
simply as instances of the energy, pluck, discipline, and dash, displayed
by every arm of the service and police all over the disturbed districts.
Many other cases will be fresh in the reader’s memory.
Whatever be the result of the struggle, the people of Queensland
will always be able to look back with pride upon such unequivocal
evidence of loyalty to order, standing as it will, against incitement to
cowardly action and deeds of savagery, such as happily are neither
common nor congenial to Australian civilisation.
The Pastoralists, and other Employers of Australia, are now engaged
in a contest, the issues of which are of such vast importance to the whole
community, that for them to surrender, would mean disaster to the whole
industrial order, and would be so serious a blow to freedom in this free
country, that years would pass before the Colonies could recover their
position. ..
The papers reproduced hereafter, tell their own story, dealing
directly with the principles at issue ; and their, selection has been chiefly
governed by the directness and unmistakable plainess, with which those
issues are stated. #
It has been deemed advisable also to reproduce copies of certain letters
which were found in the possession of Delegate Taylor when he was
arrested, and others which were found in the office of the Shearer s Union at
Barcaldine and Roma, and also a portion of the speech which was made
by Mr. T. Glassey, M.L.A., at a political meeting at Fortitude Valley,
all these set forth very explicitly the aims and approved methods of the
Unionists.
Brisbane , 10th April, 1891.


SHALL LAWLESSNESS PREVAIL?
Order and lawlessness struggling for the mastery over a large area
of Central Queensland is a singular and at first sight a disconcerting
commentary on the inspiring motto of 4< One people, one destiny,” with
which the Federal Convention opened. Moving in the midst of the bush
disturbances men may begin to think that a revolution is upon them,
while the irritation is local and superficial, and the heart of the nation is
sound as a bell. A majority in a community, either of rogues or
anarchists, would be the disintegration of society, and a return to the
savagedom in which every man’s hand was against his neighbour. How
far we are from such a pass is shown both by the action of the Govern-
ment, and by the response with which it has been met. Let any man
compare the state of affairs here with that of Chili and the Argentine
Republic if he would know how truly united we are. Our Government,
responsible as it is for its every action to the country, has had no
hesitation in ignoring the demand of the insurgents that their movements
should be unimpeded, and has not shrunk from making appeal to the
loyalty of the Volunteers whose working mates are in revolt, How that
appeal has been responded to is now matter of history, and is most
creditable to Queensland. The men constituting the Volunteer Force of
the country have placed themselves at the disposal of the authorities,
leaving their employment and forfeiting their wages, and facing a task
very different in its exacting nature from that to which they have been
accustomed in the Easter encampment of previous years. It goes without
saying that the inhabitants of the disturbed districts themselves are
enthusiastic on the same side. Congratulations to the Government,
similar to those sent from the Town Council of Clermont, have been
forwarded from Blackall, and if they do not come from every township
in Central Queensland it is because people have something else to do
than move formal resolutions. Men who are “ afraid to keep their
places,” as at Thylungra* who find business blocked as at Augathella, or
who are “ thoroughly sick of the strike,” as at Clermont, are not likely to
be in two minds touching the Government action, and their declared
approval of the arrests is doubtless of the heartiest. The sentiments of
the people in the neighbourhood are most conclusively evinced by the
subscriptions raised for the compensation of the Volunteers who lose
pecuniarily by their service under the Government. But the feeling is
the same everywhere. Maryborough approves of the firm action of the
authorities. Places so widely separated as Warwick and Charters Towers
send off troops with cheers to the scene of conflict. Great enthusiasm is
exhibited in Townsville, and hearty cheering fills the air as the Mounted
Infantry leave for Hughenden. The same entlniisasm on a larger scale
greeted th* l troops which on Thursday left Brisbane under command
of Colonel French. The most casual observer of opinion in our streets
and homes cannot fail to see that the intelligence and sympathy of our
people are overwhelmingly on the side of the Government, and of the
stern enforcement of the law.
What now is to be placed upon the other side 1 The conduct of the
insurgent shearers, always wild, becomes daily more erratic and outrageous


and is rapidly alienating whatever little sympathy was felt for them. The
disclosures made in the arrest of the leaders were themselves a blow to
the party, and the loss of guidance is the precursor of further discredit.
The Mr. Ellis who was invited to take possession of the union pren.ises
at Barcaldine after the arrest of the strike leaders there, belied his own
words as he asked his unionist hearers to “keep calm, steady, firm, and
reliable.” He spoke himself under great excitement, and declared that
they “would do the Government yet in spite of their arrests.” This
open confession that the quarrel is not with the pastoralists, but with
the enforcement of the law, should go far to extinguish the last remnant
of public support for the strikers. What sympathy is due to men who
burn, destroy, and shoot as they travel, who by sheer force thrust out
from their billets unionist and non-unionist alike, and whose chief talk is
of revenge, of anarchy, and defiance of the Government? No doubt they
are to be sincerely pitied. “ The winter.” says our Charleville correspond
dent, “ promises to be severe, and the amount of misery and destitution
throughout the west promises to be too awful to contemplate.” But
even to the strikers the misery of the situation will be more or less in
proportion as they persevere in their madness, or as they are encouraged
by any mawkish sympathy and foolish support from the extreme wing of
the working classes. And are we not called on still more to pity and do
our best to rescue the unhappy men who have been inveigled or forced
into a false position, who, if left to themselves, would gladly return to
work, and who are leaving their camps by night with their swags and
seeking re-engagement with the pastoralists ? It will be observed that,
while employers have been compelled to .import shearers from the South,
they have always wished, and are still ready so far as places are vacant,
to take on Queenslanders or their old hands. Even now it is safe to say
that fear alone prevents this happy settlement of the difficulty. Daily it
appears that the new unionism, at least as the shearers have illustrated it,
is nowhere more a tyrant than to the unionist himself. Against his will
and his judgment it takes him from his work, thrusts him into others’
quarrels, drives him to illegalities and crimes. Never has unionism been
so discredited in the eyes of civilised Australia as it is to-day. In vain
do the council or officials of the Australian Labour Federation hold
meetings here and there to throw dust in the eyes of the people. The
wild work of the last few weeks has not been done in a corner; and the
day will come when it will not be possible to take shelter from the dis-
graceful facts in incredulity or in the aspersion of the press. Everybody
else sees that this is no longer a case of labour against capital, but of
anarchy against law ; and the sooner the leaders of unionism in Queens-
land ste, it and deplore it and seek energetically to put it down the
better will it be tor the cause they advocate, and for the colony whose
industries they have harassed.— Courier . March 28.
OFFICIAL MISREPRESENTATION.
If any further evidence were needed of the inveterate habit that
union leaders have of misrepresenting facts which are contrary to their
designs or wishes it was afforded yesterday by a telegram from the


secretary of the Shearers’ Union in Melbourne to the duped victims of
modern unionism at Barcaldine, relative to the engagement of free
labourers and shearers. That telegram stated that no labour had been
got. Anything more misleading could not have been transmitted by wire.
It was purposely misleading. It was viciously false. It is much the
custom of the misleaders of the too confiding working classes to assure
their dupes that the newspapers misrepresent facts Now what possible
benefit can it be to newspapers to pervert or conceal truth ? It would
not make one shilling a week difference to their profits, unless they
pandered in that way to people who prefer lies to truth, then a few more
papers might be sold. But it is to the interest of labour leaders to
conceal or traduce facts which go against their cause. If their followers
accepted the honest truth they would no longer believe in men whose very
living depends on the continuance of strife between employees and
employers. But if this motive be considered too low and the suggestion
libellous, we will change to reason. Well do those leaders know that if
the real truth were told by them the courage of the strikers would die in
their souls. Down-hearted men have not the pluck to fight. It is only
by keeping their courage up that the leaders can make use of them to
prosecute their ulterior designs. So the truth is concealed from them.
That this was the case with the telegram referred to we have the strongest
proof. So far from no free workers having been obtained in Melbourne,
a steamer with a cargo of that sort of labour will leave before this week
closes. As for Sydney, there has been almost a riotous rush for priority
of application. The poor starved victims of unionism were nearly fighting
to get near the door of the registry. The applicants were five times the
number required. As many labourers as were needed were engaged on
Wednesday ; shearers were engaged yesterday. Here, in Brisbane, a
selection of reliable men has been made out of a large number of applicants.
In a few days several hundreds of free workers will be landed in the
central district It is worse than useless for the leaders to beguile the
strikers with the misrepresentation that no rival labour is available. It
is plentiful, and it is plucky. It only required proof that it would be
fairly paid and protected. It prefers the protection of the State to the
protection of socialistic unionism. To tell the strikers that they cannot
be displaced is a mockery of their fidelity to unionism. Moreover,
displacement now means permanent exclusion from the sheds. Pas-
toralists will not turn their backs on the free workers. Strikers with
money may fearlessly face the winter, but what is to become of the penni-
less JDonellys ? As for subsidies this strike is less helped than was the
maritime strike. There is no public sympathy with it. Yet an official,
so high in office as A. Hinchcliffe, wr'te3 to the west ab< ut a successful
public meeting in Brisbane, and the people everywhere recognising the
impoitance of the strikers’ cause. Yet Mr. Hinchcliffe is very much
hurt if he is in the least degree misrepresented. Was he honestly
representing facts when he sent such a telegram to Barcaldine When
he said—if as reported, he did say it—that “ the people were everywhere
recognising that if the bush unions went down all Queensland would go
down with them,’’ was he correctly representing the opinion of “ the people
everywhere?” Is it necessary to stimulate courage by stifling truth?


The fact is that “ the people everywhere ” are beginning to see that when
such unionism as is advocated in the manifestoes signed A Hinchcliffe
down, Queensland will begin to rise from beneath incubus of
infatuated despotism and tyranny which has been crushing the very life
out of its industry and commerce. It is abundantly apparent that when
the terrorism of the union open vote has been removed hundreds,
aye thousands, of men will be ready to go to work for fair wages and
trust their employers for justice. These reasonable men have recognised
that the unionism which has been tyrannising over capital has been
making slaves of the workers, forced by its threats, intimidation, and
starvation into its ranks. They are full of it. They want to go to work
peaceably. They have been forced into unionism by the terrorism ot
demagogues They are now forced into revolt against unionism by the
socialistic aims and despotic methods of the same demagogues. -Telegraph,
April 2.
FREEDOM.
That extraordinary variety of the thing called freedom, for which
the labour leaders tell us their followers are now contending, has received
fresh and effective illustration within the last two days. In the more
Central districts, in which union tyranny is weakened by the presence of
the Government troops, men who have been coerced into the unions are
dropping quietly off, free at last to do as they please, and aie offering
themselves for work. Yerv pathetic is the testimony of poor old Donnelly,
discharged from custody at Clermont who declared that he was penniless
and wished he could get to work, and that hundreds more were of the
same opinion, only they were afraid to open their mouths. Compelled in
this way to loose their iron grasp over their comrades in the Central camps,
and concerned too no doubt for the safety of their own skin in the midst
of disconcerting arrests, the more headstrong of the malcontents have
betaken themselves further afield, and are renewing their dastardly
exploits of burning, destroying, and coercing willing workers in districts
to which the protective force are only penetrating From so far south as
Cunnamulla comes the news that armed and mounted unionists patrol in
force the border of Queensland and New South Wales, with the view
of stopping the wool teams and “ knocking the stuffing ” out of free
labourers. At Boombah, near St. George, so serious an assault was made
upon free labourers by way of “ persuading ” them to join the union that
one of them had to be carried to the hospital. It is gratifying to know
that seven unionists were yesterday arrested and identified in connection
with this outrage. At Augathella Captain King, with his small force of
thirty men, was menaced by a body of 200 unionists, and found it necessary
to read the Riot Act, The reading was followed by the arrest of twenty-
one individuals on the charges of arson and conspiracy. A messenger on
his way with Government documents to Northampton station escaped a
party of unionists, who demanded his papers, only by the speed of his
horse. Worse still, it appears from a telegram seized at Barcaldine that
the wild proposal of the introduction of rabbits is not the myth which
sensible men were fain to suppose. The telegram is from a prominent


resident of one of the Western towns, stating that he had netted 600
rabbits, and that if the pastoralists did not give in by the end of March
the rabbits would be distributed over the stations. Again, it is satisfac-
tory to learn that the Government are on the alert to prevent this whole-
sale atrocity ; but, all the same, it suggests that no bounds can be set to
the madness of these human firebrands. Firebrands they literally are ;
for it appears that, in spite of the rain, burning and destruction of every kind
goes merrily on. The stations of Oakwood, Nive Downs, and Biddenham
have suffered severely in this way. One of the most memorable marches
of the trying time was that of Captain King, who traversed sixty-five
miles without camping in order to anticipate the arrival of a strong party
of unioninsts at Oakwood. The way was marked by fired grass, burnt
gates, and destroyed fences, and a boundary rider who will be remembered,
tried hard to persuade King and his little band from Toowoomba not to
attempt the last twenty miles of his march through the dark night.
Happily, the brave men pushed on, arriving before the shearers. When
at length the latter came on yelling, grass-firing, cutting down gates, and
demanding to interview the free labourers, the sight of the troops
cooled their ardour, and the result was, that their leader,
Delegate Fanning, and six others were arrested. The obscenities
poured out before women and children, probably by the same party,
in passing Biddenham, formed a fitting sequel to the defeated
assault upon Oakwood. What limit, either of number or destructiveness
would be set to these outrages but for the presence and the activity of the
Government troops ? The one satisfactory feature in the black record of
atrocities is that the insurgents are being checked and counterchecked on
every hand, and that their leaders and prominent offenders are being
everywhere placed under arrest. A little longer and the marauders will
be reduced to the position of desperadoes so indefensible and uncontroll-
able, that even the stump orators of mass labour meetings will be ashamed
to*recognise them.
Profoundly humiliating it must be to the union leaders to see this
second great attempt to assert their control of the country's industries so
covering itself and its authors with disgrace. Very gladly would we save
them the humiliation. And even yet if they would but listen to reason,
they might be saved the deeper depths of it which must open up to mad
persistence. Why should they assume a non possumus before the com-
promise suggested by the Carriers’ Union ? * The one thing which, as they
certainly must know by this time, they are utterly unable to do is to
succeed m coercing pastoralists and free laboureis in the face of the
Government forces. They may here and there harass the country, may
pounce on a free labourer, or even burn out a squatter, may set up in the
inland wilds a few Ned Kellys, who but for them might be honest men,
but they must be well aware that they will never by their present policy
induce the squatters to set aside their agreement or discharge the men
who are working under it, or may yet be engaged to work. It is a terri-
ble thing for responsible men to stand before the people and prate of rights,
and justice, and victory, when they are deliberately burying their cause
beneath the opprobrium of violence and wrong, and rushing straight to
certain and mortifying defeat. How much better were it to accept the
half-way helping-hand held out to.them ! We submit to the common-
* See note B on page 30.


sense of the leaders that it were better to concede gracefully and before all
is lost what it is clear cannot be withheld. The pastoralists have offered
te confer if freedom of contract be conceded. This offer in effect the
Carriers’ Union suggest should be accepted. On Monday it was even
reported that the Strike Committee had met the Carriers’ Union in con-
ference and had agreed to a proposition making the concession required,
provided the pastoralists would grant an unfettered conference on all other
points. Later news asserts that the movement is not likely to come
to anything. The trouble seems to be that the Strike Committee have
not the courage of their convictions, and dare not advocate before the
shearers what in their hearts they approve. Are there not mm on the
council of the Australian Labour Federation bold enough and wise enough
to step in and guide these suggestions to a happy issue ? Enough non-
sense has been talked about the Government coercing the pastoralists into
an open conference. Nothing has surprised us more in this dispute than
that men presumably not altogether fools, have so persistently harped upon
this string. The merest thred of common-sense suggests that the Govern-
ment can no more force the hand of employers in their selection of workers
than it can force the hand of workers in their selection of employers. Ail
that it can do, and all that it is doing now, is to conserve the liberty of
selection on either side, and to see that neither party violently interferes
with it. To what purpose is it to blatantly denounce the Government for
performing its sinq le and obvious duty ? The language in which officer
after officer has addressed his troops in leading them to the affected
districts, and the fact that already one soldier has been punished for mis-
conduct towards unionists are enough to show how strictly the Govern-
ment confines itself to its rig fitful and bounden functions of a
preserver of the peace. Whatever hope, therefore, yet exists of an end
u> this wretched strike, other than that of deepening disaster and disgrace
for the strikers, must lie in reconsideration and compromise on the part
of the leaders themselves. Even yet, close as it is on the eleventh hour,
there is room for a change of attitude. Is there wisdom enough, is there
genuineness enough of anxiety for the labour cause amongst these leaders
to made the change. —Courier , April 1.
THE SHEARERS’ WAR.
At length the decisive blow, which we knew to be impending when
publishing our last issue, but which we were not in a position to mention
then, has been struct, and with good results. Our information is that
despite the advice of the Premier to continue a temporising policy, the
members of the Cabinet in Brisbane took the bit between their teeth on
Saturday last and determined to govern the country. The result has been
that the law has begun to be put in force for the first time. Police Magis-
trate Morey at Clermont made a firm announcement of the intentions of the
Government, and events there and at Barcaldine have since proved that
action and not merely talk is to be the order of the day. On Monday
night last Lieut. Spencer Brown, and a squad of 20 Mounted infantry
were sent from Gordon r *owns to Clermont by a forced march. It has


providentially been raining in the disturbed district, and the black soil is
almost impassable. Nevertheless the march off was taken up at 9 p.m.
in the rain, and despite the fact that some of the men had done thirty
miles of scouting that day, and that three hours were spent in going
six miles, the troops, after changing horses at Langton Downs, did their
march in twelve hours, entering Clermont at 9 a.m. This splendid action
enabled a most important deed to be safely executed. When the train
came in from Capella the crowd of unionists who came down to chivvy a
lot of free workers, as they thought, saw instead two of their leaders and
ten others chained together as prisoners.
Better still, the two agitators Taylor and Stewart were called on to
the platform and at once arrested and handcuffed. On Taylor were
found a lot of most important papers, the contents of which are said to
be of the highest consequence, implicating many in a treasonable con-
spiracy. The papers were only obtained by great skill ; for when
Inspector Ahern was taking them from his person and placing them in a
handkerchief on the platform, Taylor suddenly stooped and threw the
whole lot among the crowd. Instantly the word was given, and the
troopers with drawn swords drove back the mob, and are believed to have
secured all the papers. The effect of their disclosures has been that
Colonel French has been sent to the North with 130 extra men, a field
piece, and a gatling, and that other troops have left Warwick for Oharle-
ville. It is also understood that many other prominent agitators are
implicated, and will be arrested, as have been all the leaders at Barcal-
dine. The whole country is crying out as one man to have a stop put to
the state of anarchy, and it now looks as if that would soon be done. —
Southern World.
HINTS TO MAGISTRATES, &c.
NOTES BY THE COLONIAL SECRETARY.
In consequence of the “novelties of the situation” presented, during
the present troubles in the bush, to magistrates, police officers, and others
charged with keeping the peace, the Colonial Secretary has prepared and
issued “ notes for the assistance of magistrates and officers of police on
the criminal law and practice connected with proceedings taking place in
Queensland at the present time
Summary Jurisdiction.
Intimidation ,
(6 Geo. IY., c. 129, ss. 3,7, 8.)
Should any person—
1. By violence to the person or property ;
2. By threats or intimidation ;
3. By molesting or in any way obstructing another—force, or en-
deavour to force, any person hired or employed in any
business to depart from his hiring or employment, or prevent
or endeavour to prevent, any person not being hired or em-
ployed from hiring or accepting work ;
or, if any person shall—


(1) Employ or use violence to the property or person of another ;
or (2) Threats or intimidation ; or (3) Shall molest or
obstruct another for the purpose of forcing or inducing such
person to belong to any union, or to contribute to any common
fund, he shall be liable to three months with hard labour
before two justices, and every person aiding or abetting or
assisting shall be equally liable, as also witnesses refusing to
give evidence.
A warrant may be issued in the first instance.
As to what amounts to intimidation the following opinion of four
judges will be instructive :
“ The intention of Parliament is plain upon the face of the statute.
The object is to prevent and to punish intimidatory action or threats
employed towards those who are doing what they have a legal right to do,
and the rubric of the clause founded on describes its contents as ‘ penalty for
intimidation or annoyance by violence or otherwise.’ It would be a pre-
posterous thing, and a defeat of a chief end of the clause, if it were
established that threats of personal violence and other forms of intimida-
tion and annoyance can be indulged in with impunity, so long as those
against whom they are directed have the strength of mind and sense of
duty to resist them. It is the purpose of the Act and the interest of the
public and of the working man that law-abiding subjects should be protected
from annoyance and bodily fear, as well as that property—the property
of the workman in his labour and of the employer in his means and
capital—should be preserved from injury.”
Assaulting or Resisting Special Constables.
Under section 55 of the Defence Act military are special constables.
Should any person assault or resist any special constables whilst on duty,
or promote, incite, or encourage any other person to do so, two justices
may sentence the offender to six months hard labour—section 18, Lands
Police Act.
Assaulting Generally.
The punishment may be two months’ hard labour under clause 40,
Offences against Person Act.
Indictable Offences. •
In addition to the above, triable before justices, persons may be
charged with the following indictable offences, and committed for trial
under section 108, Justices Act. See also section 132, 133, 136, and
138, same Act.
Indictable Offences not Punishable on Summary Conviction.
Assaulting police or specials, or any person acting in their aid, or
assaulting any person with intent to resist or prevent lawful arrest of
himself or aoy other person, is an offence punishable with two years’
hard labour under section 36, Offences Against Person Act. This is a
misdemeanor.
Assaults on free labourers, or upon pastoralists, is a misdemeanor,
punishable under section 39, Offences Against Person Act, with two
yeais’ hard labour.


Setting fire to grass is a felony (sections 17 and 19, Injuries to
Property Act, explained also by 52 Vic., No. 4, page 2519, Statutes).
The punishment for this offence is not less than three nor more than
fourteen years’ hard labour, and the convict is also liable to be whipped.
Police and military should apprehend, even without warrant, persons
seen setting grass or other property on fire maliciously, or who may be
charged with, or be reasonably suspected of, having ’committed such
offence (section 63, same Act).
This section also gives the pastoralist or his servant, or any person
authorised by him, power to arrest without warrant any person found
injuring property.
Under the common law, it is an indictable misdemeanour for men to
conspire to intimidate hired men or men desirous of working. The offence
of intimidation is punishable before justices, as before stated, but the
conspiracy to intimidate is a misdemeanor.
It is also a crime for three or more persons to meet together with
such circumstances of terror as cannot but endanger the public peace, as
where numbers complaining of a common grievance meet, armed with
sticks or other offensive weapons, to consult together, for no one can
foresee what may be the result. This is an unlawful assembly, and the
offence a misdemeanor at common law.
Magistrates may disperse such assembly, and by warrant arrest any
member.
If such unlawful assembly proceeds to acts of violence against
persons or property, everyone present and concerned is a rioter, and may
be dispersed or arrested on warrant. If the violence continues, a magis-
trate can read the proclamation in the Riot Act, and proceed to disperse
and arrest, using sufficient force to accomplish his purpose ; and if 12 or
more persons remain riotously for one hour after the proclamation is read
they are felons, and all peace officers are indemnified if they kill rioters
whilst endeavouring to seize, apprehend, or disperse them.
Inciting persons to riot is also a misdeamor at common law, and
all persons stirring up others or persuading members to tumultously
assemble together should be arrested on warrant, and it is a graver crime
if the incitement is followed by riot.
Seditious speeches also constitute a felony.
Power to Arrest.
Proceedings to Arrest Offenders.
The power to arrest is not as well understood as it should be. It
may assist some now engaged in remote districts to explain :
i hat peace officers should not, as a rule, arrest without warrant a
person merely on suspicion that he has committed a mis-
deamor ;
but with regard to felonies :
Any magistrate witnessing a felony or breach of the peace committed
in his presence may personally apprehend or order any other
person to arrest the offender.
Any person may arrest, and is even bound to arrest:
1. Any person actually participating in an affray.


2. Any person committing or attempting to commit in his presence
a felony.
3. To prevent the commission of a felony.
4. To assist a peace officer demanding help to arrest a felon or
suppress an affray.
All peace officers, including in that definition police or military, may
arrest without warrant—
1. A person breaking the peace in his presence, or then threatening
to commit an offence ;
2. Any person he has reasonable cause to suspect has committed a
felony ;
3. Any person against whom another makes a reasonable charge of
felony, and requires him to arrest such person.
MOMENTOUS DECISION.
Testing the Intimidation Clause .
Great alarm has been caused in New Trades Union circles (says the
Scotsman of 17th January) by the decision given by the Recorder of
Plymouth (Mr. Bompas) in an intimidation case. Of the great import-
ance of that case there can be no doubt, since, if the judgment is actually
in accordance with the law, there will be an end, at any rate for the time
being, to a class of strikes which have lately seemed to be favoured by
trades unionists. The circumstances are as follow. In November last
three trade union secretaries were convicted by the Plymouth magistrates
of intimidating a coal merchant named Treleaven, and were ordered to
pay fines of £2O each, or to go to prison for six weeks. Intimidation is,
of course, a criminal offence, but it' has been the custom, at least of late
years, to limit the offence to intimidation by threats of violence. The
peculiarity of the Plymouth case is, that the three defendants not only
abstained from threats of violence, but urged Mr. Treleaven's workmen
not to be guilty of any conduct which might bring them within the
criminal law. The threat which they used was, that unless Mr. Treleaven
dismissed certain non-unionist workmen from his employ they would
damage his business by inducing the trades unionists, who formed two-
thirds of his workers, to strike. Mr. Treleaven refused to comply with
the demand of the secretaries ; he did not object to employing unionists,
but he did not see why a workman should be turned adrift because he was
not a member of a union. Thereupon his unionist workmen were ordered
to cease work, and he was put to much inconvenience and loss. The
three defendants appealed from the magistrates to the Recorder ; and the
latter, after a full hearing of the case, and taking time to consider it, has
upheld the conviction, adding, that if similar cases are brought before
him in future he will send the defendants to gaol without giving them the
option of a fine. Mr. Bompas, Q.C., the Plymouth Recorder, is an able
lawyer, and the three secretaries, upon hearing his decision, paid their
fines, and intimated that they would not carry the case any further. Mr.
W. M. Thompson, the barrister, who conducted their defence, gives, in a


letter to the Times , the chief points of the Recorder’s judgment. They
are :
1. That Mr. Treleaven was afraid of injury to his trade through the
course which the defendants stated the unions would pursue, and that he
had reasonable grounds for that fear, which would have influenced any
man of ordinary sound views.
4. That the union men, in leaving their employment at the request
of the defendants, were, as the defendants knew, breaking their contracts.
6. That the defendants had not ill-will against Mr. Treleaven per-
sonally, but acted with the object of obliging all the labourers to join the
union as a means of getting employment, and of obtaining for the mem-
bers a monopoly of the labor of the port.
And again, “ A strike for the purpose of compelling employers not
to employ other persons, or to alter the terms of the employment of such
other persons, is illegal, and renders all persons engaged in it liabP to
proceedings under this section.”
He contends that if these points are sustainable, “ nine-tenths of the
strikes which take place are absolutely illegal, and the protection afforded
by the Trades Union Acts to combinations of workmen is, to a great
extent, absolutely illusory.”
PASTORALISTS’ MANIFESTO.
The Result of the Federal Council.
The following resolutions were passed by the Pastoralists
Federal Council of Australia, in Brisbane, on 16th, 17th, and 18th
March :
1. “ That the Pastoralists’ Federal Council of Australia adheres to
the determination arrived at by the several pastoralists’ unions of New
South "Wales, Victoria, Queensland, and South Australia, of granting a
conference to the Shearers’ and Labourers’ Unions, provided that * free-
dom of contract” be first admitted, and the subjects for debate specified,
a conference on any other terms being impossible to the employers, and a
great injustice to the free laborers of Australia , but in no case will any
conference be held while the present lawless proceedings continue in the
disturbed districts, which constitute a demand for conference under threat
of armed force.”
2. “ That additional shearers and laborers be obtained in accordance
with the following notice :
Notice to Queensland Shearers and Woolshed Hands Now
on Strike.
On 6th February the Executive of the Queensland United Pastor-
alists’ Association advertised for shearers and rouseabouts willing to work
under the pastoralists’ agreement. Their advertisement is still regularly
appearing in the local papers throughout the pastoral districts, and the
following is an extract therefrom : _
The pastoralists have no wish to engage outside labor if Queensland men are
willing to accept the liberal terms offered. No reduction in the rates of shearing
or wages.


Nearly six weeks have elapsed since that advertisement first appeared
without any adequate response being made thereto. On the contrary, all
the men connected with bush labour unions have been ordered to leave
their employment on the 23rd instant, and drastic penalties are threatened
in the case of those disobeying the mandate of the unions.
An attempt is further being made to persuade the bush unionists
that when the present strike is over they will be “ victimised.” If this
term means, that after peace is restored, unionists, as such, will be sub-
jected to persecution by employers, the Pastoralists’ Federal Council of
Australia (representing the owners of three-fourths of the sheep in Aus-
tralia) hereby gives any such statement an absolute and emphatic denial.
Should the present hostile attitude of the bush unions be abandoned,
the desire of the pastoralists is to let bygones be bygones, and to engage
men on their merits as workmen without enquiring or considering whether
they belong to any union or not.
The great majority of bush unionists now on strike are respectable
hard-working men, from whom the pastoralists have been sorry to part,
and whom they would welcome back to their employ. It the bush unions, *
however, persist in their present determination of calling out all members
of their organisations, the pastoralists will have no alternative other than
tc introduce additional labour, insomuch as they will be conpelled forth-
with to take steps to procure hands for the protection of their stock and
property.
They, therefore, very reluctantly give notice to all shearers, rouse-
abouts, and station hands now on strike, or contemplating going on
strike, that after the 25th instant additional men will be engaged to take
the place of those who have left or may leave their work. Moreover
when engaging these additional men the pastoralists will have to give
them a guarantee of extended employment, so that there will be no em-
ployment available for the unionists should they subsequently desire to go
to work.
Issued by order of the Pastoralists’ Federal Council of Australia.
(Signed)
Fkederick Ei anson, Secretary United Pastoralists’ Asso-
ciation of Queensland.
Whiteley King, Secretary Pastoralists’ Union of New
South Waleg.
Edmund Mitchell, Secretary Pastoralists’ Union of
Victoria.
H. C. Baker, Acting Secretary Pastoralists’ Union of
South Australia.
Brisbane, 18th March, 1891.
3. “ That the Government of Queensland be informed of the fore-
going resolutions, adopted unanimously by the Pastoralists’ Federal
Council.”
This morning a meeting of the Federated Employers’ Union of
Queensland was held, at which the resolutions embodied in the above were
unanimously and warmly approved of. Telegrams received from the
Employers’ Unions of Victoria and New South Wales also indicate that
similar motions of approval have been passed by them


COMING EVENTS.
{By A. B. Salom, in the Buffalo Iron Industry Gazette).
Labour agitations are rapidly tending inevitably to one conclusion.
Throughout the civilised world, for thirty years or more, labour has been
engaged in organizing, in preparing for a conflict with capital, and in
drilling its army in defensive and offensive warfare. Demagogues
have moulded the organizations, outlined their policies, timed their
conflicts,, selected their weapons and managed their campaigns. The
community has suffered in every conflict. The strikers have struck, and
all the lawless elements of their community have nude their strikes the
occasions for riot, bloodshed, arson, outrage of every form and destruc-
tion of property. The strikers did not invite those lawless elements,
but the methods of the strikers themselves were so closely akin to lawless
methods that the anarchists and destructionists recognised them as their
own. Burning buildings, torn up tracks, “ killed’' locomotives, obstructions
placed on railroads, mangled men, corpses of those who were killed for
wishing to work, frantic mobs, all these things appealed to the anarchists.
Terrorised labourers, intimidated men and women, boycotted firms and
individuals, these were the results of the lawless warfare urged and
waged by the demagogues who misled labour.
Revolutions never stand still. The labour revolution did not, and
does not stand still. The logic of events is inexorable. Cause insists
on effects. The demagogues, once started on a campaign of aggression,
cannot retreat. The demagogues aimed to convert the world to the
theory that the only element deserving consideration is the labour
element, that the one element always and everywhere wrong and
indefensible is capital, that all the crimes comm'tted by organized
labour are excusable, and that all the acts of capital, good or bad, are
wholly criminal. With this theory inscribed on their banner; the dema-
gogues have for thirty years been waging a one-sided conflict with
capital, law and order, and the community at large. What is the result?
Loss, chaos, disunion, and disaster to labour ; loss, inconvenience, and
discomfort to the community, and finally a perception by capital of the
necessity for a counter combination, for a defensive and offensive alliance
to meet and cope with the demagogues and their followers. The signs are
multiplying that a combination of capital is to be one of the events of
the near future. Capitalists have rested content with doing what they
could single-handed against the unreasonable demagogues, but they begin
to see that they can no longer safely trust their interests to the mercies
of the organized demagogues. Shadows of this coming event are cast
before. Recently the organized demagogues who control the bricklayers
in New York, made an attempt to compel the makers of brick, at
several points on the Hudson River, to discharge 1900 non-union em-
ployees or to force them to join the 100 union men in their employ.
The makers refused. The 100 union men and the “walking delegates ”
insisted. The makers remained firm in their refusal. The New York
“ walking delegates ” ordered a “ boycott ” of the product of the yards
of the makers. Labour was “on top.” I hen a new element appeared
The other Hudson River makers, thoroughly understanding the signific-


ance of the boycott, knowing that it was likely to be extended to their
own yards,came to the rescue of the boycotted makers. They decided to
send nomore brick to New York so long as the boycott remained on the
other firms. Labour had invited a contest with capital. The shipments of
bricks to New York ceased. Nearly 100,000 labourers were thrown out
of work. Capital made its power felt most uncomfortably. The boycotters
were boycotted. The situation was novel. It revealed to thousands of
labourers their utter helplessness when once capital actually accepts the
challenge so often offered by organized labour. The biters were bitten.
The “ walking delegates ” were nonplussed The calculations of the
demagogues went astray. They did not know what to do. They were
appalled by the shadow of a coming event, a disastrous defeat for labour
misled by quacks.
Capital is showing its teeth against organized crime masquerading
under the name of organized labour. The New \ork Central Railroad
Company takes the initiative. That corporation recently locked horns
with the Knights of Labour, in a contest forced by the order. The
revelations of dangerous conspiracies made at the close of the strike
startled the country. The attempts to wreck the company’s trains and
kill innocent passengers as a means of revenge upon the company, were
traced to and confessed by members of that order. The confessions gave
the public another insight into the peculiar working of that peculiar
order, and the officials of the New York Central Railroad Company,
wisely concluding that prevention is better than cure, have issued the
following notification to its department head :
“ The recent strike, the acts of lawlessness committed in connection
therewith, the published correspondence between the leaders of the
organization that ordered it, and the fact that many men now seeking
re-employment state that they quitted work from fear of personal violence,
and did not dare to offer to resume work for the same reason, compel the
management of this company to announce that it objects to its employees
being members of the organization known as the Knights of Labour. The
management is satisfied that membership in this particular organization
is inconsistent with faithful and efficient service to the company, and is
liable at any time to prevent it from properly discharging its duties to
the public. You will at once take such action as will bring this circular
to the attention of the employees in your respective departments.”
Across the Atlantic the coming event is casting a more pronounced
shadow. Early in September, in London, where trades unionism has
been particularly rampant and unreasonable, the shippers formed a
combination to protect themselves against further outrage at the hands of
the demagogues. Their union is formed with the avowed object of dealing
with labour questions throughout the world, <">f protecting employees from
trade union terrorism, and especially of resisting the tyrannic and unreason-
able encroachments of the trades unions The majority of the cargo and
passenger lines are in the union, and the association represents an invested
capital of $800,000,000. In Scotland the shipbuilders have been forced
into forming a similar defensive league, and they employ $400,000,000 of
invested capital. British trades unionism has now a chance to show the
relative strength of capital and labour. The demagogues assert that


capital will be helpless when every labour revolts. It will be interesting to
study the condition of labour when once capital shall make an organized
revolt against its intolerable and unreasonable tyranny.
Elsewhere there are signs of the coming event. It is hinted that the
railroad companies of this country are quietly forming a combination that
it is to include every important line in the land. In all probability their
motto will be that of the labor demagogues, “ The injury of one is the
injury of all.” The existence of such a combination will precipitate the
inevitable conflict. Cheap demagogues, like the discredited head of the
order that recently attempted to stop all the business of the United States
because a railroad company dismissed several drunken, inefficient, and
superfluous employees, may dislike to face the stern fact, but the fact is
here. Organised demagogism and anarchism will be met by organised
capital. The advantage, morally and materially, will be with capital.
Capital is not forcing or inviting the contest. It does not offend. It
merely defends. It can live while the contest lasts. The demagogues,
not true and honest labor, but the demagogues and anarchists, offend, in-
vite the battle, and select the weapons. The law is against them. They
are offenders. The battle can have but one ending. The aggregate
moral seuse and intelligence of the community will applaud the defeat of
these irresponsible criminals.
Labour should not follow the demagogues further. The heads of
the unions are unsafe leaders. Honest working men should refuse to be
parties to movements based on unreason and furthered by criminal
instrumentalities. The great bulk of American labour is outside the
organisations, and it will remain outside. The average American,
whether working man or capitalist, is more interested in justice than
anything else, and he will never be able to believe that a company has
not the right to discharge an employee without interference by the State
or*the nearest body of anarchistic agitators. If the American labourer
cannot see the truth now, his eyes will be opened suddenly when organised
capital takes up the sword against organised folly and lawlessness,
masquerading under the name of labour, and in one mighty battle scatters
the army and wrecks the structure of so-called trades unionism beyond
all hope or possibility of repair.
ORDER OR LAWLESSNESS.
On Tuesday, thirteen of the shearers’ leaders were arrested at
Clermont. The men submitted under protest, and though their
followers were indignant there was no resort to violence. The fact
inspired a hope that the mood of the men had been exaggerated.
Unfortunately, the telegrams which we publish to-day prove that the
gods have dealt with the shearers as they deal with those whom they
intend to destroy. The shearers, be it conceded, displayed some little
grace, for they approved the arrest of the man Martin, who delivered a
seditious speech on Saturday. But their desertion of Martin seems a
little inconsistent when we read how about Augathella they fired the
grass and destroyed the fences as they retreated before the troops. Nor


does this one act stand alone. At Biackall, which is not very far
distant from Barcaldine, eleven working bullocks, owned by a non-union
carrier, were shot in the bush. This is vengeance of a sort Australians
have been wont to pique themselves was practised only by old world
peoples whose condition verged on serfdom. There is trouble too at
Townsville, where rowdyism is rampant ; whilst at Barcaldine the
shearers are mustering so fast that they are expected to number two
thousand before Sunday. It is satisfactory to learn that the Government is
aleit. Troops are being despatched to the various centres of disturbance,
and the railway employes all along the line are being sworn in as special
constables. There must be no hesitation. If Central Queensland is
handed over to bands of amateur bushrangers, Australia as a whole will
sink in the esteem of the civilised world. The vaporings of those who
have prated concerning the < stablishment of a republic will be taken
seriously, and men will talk of the colonies as they talk of the South
American States. The shearers must be disarmed. To talk further of
arresting the leaders is idle. Every man who, seeing the pass to which
things have come, persists in flourishing a revolver is a public enemy, If
a few days are lost scores of men will have gone so for that they will
deem retreat impossible. Action must be as rapid as it should be
decisive.
Unionists would do well to ponder the exceeding folly of these
outrages, which give their bitterest foes texts for uncomplimentary
homilies. The trades unions have done much for labour. The men who
made those unions great began their work with both hands tied ; they
were without votes, and an Act of George the Third’s reign declared all
agreements between workmen for obtaining a rise of wages, &c., illegal.
The general secretary of the Iron Founders’ Society, established in 1809,
delighted to tell in happier days how at the outset the officers of the
society had buried the books of the lodges after each meeting. In spite
of political disabilities, in spite of laws which were a disgrace to the
statute book, the leaders of the early years fought on till the position of
the working classes was revolutionised. And now it seems not
impossible that prosperity will destroy the unions which flourished in
adversity. The Queensland disturbance adds one more to the many
proofs that the unionists are placing their fortunes in the hands of
leaders incompetent to an almost incredible degree. The folly of those
who called out the shearers during last year’s strike only to order them
back has been eclipsed. The conduct of the 1890 struggle was a series
of blunders, the conduct of the Queensland business has thrown those
blunders into the shade. There are thousands of intelligent men in the
unions, and they should make themselves felt. They may be dissatisfied
with our industrial system, but they have wit to know that it is not to
be mended by maiming cattle and burning down homesteads. They
know that artisans ate but one of many classes which form the nation,
and they realise that the nation will not stand with folded hands whilst
either capitalists or workmen undermine its prosperity. If they wish to
save the unions from creeping paralysis they must elect leaders who are
not of the Martin and Taylor stamp. The events of the past twelve
months have given the employers a very strong position, but the unions


may rally. To that end they should dismiss the bunglers who run to
wind and waste, should look the position lairly in the face, and put in
command men who will consolidate the unionist forces and prepare them
for effective action. —Melbourne Age, March 26.
SADDLE THE RIGHT HORSE.
Who is primarily responsible for the outbreak of disorder and
insurrection in the western portion of this colony ? Are the men
primarily responsible who have perpetrated criminal outrages ? Or does
the first responsiblity attach to their leaders ? By leaders we do not
exclusively mean the local delegates or members of strike committees
who have directed and managed the strike. These are included ; but
they are only secondary culprits. They are themselves the agents of a
higher conclave which has been acting as if it flattered itself that it could
with impunity usurp the legislative functions of Parliament, and the
administrative authority of Government. So much so that every effort
put forth by the constituted authorities to preserve propeity and maintain
order has been regarded as an affront to the high executive of the Labour
Federation. Queensland soil has presumably been created for the people
over whom this junto sits in its supreme dignity. Federated labour
is intended by those who have organised it, to be a propagandism of
blackmail, plunder, and rapine ; and the sooner workers with contented
spirits and moderate views accept this truth, the better it will be for
themselves and for Queensland. It is now perfectly clear that the object
of federated labour is the coercion of all capitalists, employers, and Govern-
ment to the orders of a General Council of Labour. Their .unionism
means the submission of all classes of people whose interests are supposed
to be different from their own.
These are the men who are primarily responsible for both the revolt
and the violence of the strikers in the west. That there is a strong set
of rowdies amongst the crowd of strikers everybody believes. But tiie
General Council of the Australian Labour Federation knew that when
they gave their sanction to the strike. They knew that some of the
men whom they called out had no character worth keeping to lose.
They knew that some of them had boasted of the wreck and ruin
that were to follow a strike. They knew that a campaign of compulsion
was to be entered upon. They knew that the official organ of their
federation had inculcated the doctrine of coercion by extreme methods.
Since the strike, leaders sanctioned by them have publicly set con-
stitutional authority at defiance. It has been done at Clermont, at
Barcaldine, at Winton ; aye, and it has been done in Brisbane by a
member of Parliament, and by the organ of socialistic unionism. Where
then is the justice of arresting and punishing a few victims of socialistic
unionism, whose ignorant zeal, inflamed by printed communism and
revolutionism, has led them to acts of indiscretion ? These poor dupes
are rather to be pitied than punished. The real criminals are the non-
working leaders. They have kindled the fires of incendiarism. They
have called into operation the forces of disorder and devastation. They


have stirred up the angry passions of discontent and envy, of malice and
revenge. They have taught the doctrine that everybody but their own
unionists may be victimised by their unionism. They have maintained
that “justice to all classes” means freedom of their followers to ruin all
who refuse to accept their terms of work. They have insisted that the
Government should not call out the military to maintain order against
them ; but rather should use the power of the State to compel employers
to discuss an established and indispensable principle of trade relations.
The strike was justified by a long and characteristic manifesto drawn up
at Rockhampton by the General Council, assisted by Messrs. Lane,
Taylor, and Bennett, and an urgent appeal was made to the public for
funds to carry on the struggle. Therefore the General Council must be
held responsible for the shearers’ strike. No strike by an affiliated trade
can, we persume, take place without its consent.
For downright malignant sentiment and counsel we must refer to
the Worker. The last issue will be enough, and we need only quote from
a single page :
“ A certain section debars from the franchise the great mass of the
people. ... It puts its police and military up at the head of the
disfranchised, plunders them in robber fashion, and treats them altogether
as serfs and villains.”
“It cannot possibly be claimed that any man owes it as a duty to
obey a law in the maintenance of which he has no voice. . . . When
M'llwraith grandiloquently apostrophised the General Council thus : ‘ I
call upon you to obey the law,’ he attempted the ordinary thimble-rigging
trick.”
“Governments which rely on force alone for their continuance are
manifestly tyrannies 1 ”
“When law is made by a class in selfish despotism and administered
for a class in shameful nepotism, it is tyranny, and to be hated and
protested against by ail honest men. The extent of their protesting is a
mere matter of judgment. Sometimes they protest as our fathers did
when they cut a tyrant's head off , and sometimes they protest as O’Connell
did, who bade the Irish ‘agitate, agitate, agitate.’”
“ If Parliament refuses to do us justice, and scorns our demand to
be made full citizens, then we shall have full justification for any action
we may adopt, even if that action is revolution .”
“ I think in times like these men ought to expose the flaws in our
political constitution fearlessly and without hedging.”
These are samples of the mendacity, the shameless misrepresentation
of truth, the unblushing incitement to disaffection and revolution, the
sophistry and cajolery, which are served up by a literary Ishmaelite
under the sublime auspices of the General Council of the Australian
Labour Federation. The italics are ours. We agree that such conduct
should be exposed •* fearlessly and without hedging.” With such incite-
ments to defy constituted authority ; with such seditious libels stirring
their prejudices and inflaming their passions ; with such reiterations of
imaginative grievances and fictitious wrongs—seethed in a brain with
fine phrenzy boiling—can it be a matter of surprise that disorder occurs


when a large body of men have become puffed up and puffed out by such
inflated sophistry ? But do not victimise the dupes while the real agents
of insurrection go scot free. — Telegraph , March 27.
THE VICTORIAN EMPLOYERS’ UNION.
THE PRESIDENT ON TRADES-UNIONISM.
At the complimentary dinner tendered to r. E. E. Smith, the
president of the Victorian Employers’ Union, by the executive ot that body,
the guest of the evening in reply to the toast of his health, reviewed the
position of the affairs in connection with recent labour troubles. Speaking
on the progress of the colonies, he said :—Australasia, as you are all
aware, is an immense territory, with a population not equal in number to
that of the city of London. The population of Australia, say about
3,00(1,000, is located almost entirely upon a narrow fringe of coast, and
then only upon a fractional part of that ; the remaining portion of the
coast, with the vast interior, is almost without inhabitants. The progress
of these colonies, as a whole, has been somewhat remarkable, owing to the
richness of the pastures and the minerals, the pluck, perseverance and
industry of tbe colonists, and hitherto, to the unlimited power of borrow-
ing from the mother country. The loans have enabled the Government
to spend lavishly, the population not increasing in the same ratio as the
indebti dness. The investments as a whole have not been worked so as to
return the interest, and the combined revenues have not been equal to the
current expenditure, the deficiencies being paid out of the loans and the
proceeds derived from the sale of public lands. These matters will have
to be seriously dealt with in the near future, but my reason for specially
alluding to them here is that not only will there have to be increased tax-
ation, but the employment of labour must be restricted, and the expendi-
ture cut down considerably, probably biinging about a general fall of wages
and leaving many unemployed. It has been roughly estimated that there
are about 40,000 unionists :n Australasia, a large proportion of whom are
sober and industrous workmen, with a stake in the country, peaceable
citizens and good colonists ; 'the balance are a dissatisfied, agitating class,
not always the most industrious or reputable citizens, and having little or
nothing to lose. This class having more time on their hands, for obvious
reasons often mislead the majority. Unionism, until lately, has done
much to improve the position of the working classes, but the marked
success has been in a great measure due to the liberal expenditure of the
Governments, which has absorbed the surplus labour, so keeping up its
price to the maximum, and almost giving 'lie trades-union command of
the labour markets. We are told nothing is so dangerous as success, and
this is a great truism as applied to trades-unionism in these colonies.
The late serious strikes have caused a dead loss to the country uf some
millions, and at a time when the continent was just recovering
from extensive droughts and floods, and when we had a right
to expect a return to prosperity —the more disheartening for all
concerned. Considering that the strikes have not been for increased
pay or shorter hours of labour, it makes it the moie remarkable.


The Corinna case was one questioning the right of an employor to dismiss
an employe without giving reasons for doing so. The strike of the
marine-officers upon the right of the trades-unions to envelop the imme-
diate representatives of the employers, or foremen, in their ranks ; the
endeavour to boycott the wool shorn by non-union labour; the strike of
the miners, wharf labourers, and the. gas-stokers were upon the question
of the right of employers to employ whom they liked, and the right of
the workmen to work for whom they thought proper. The present serious
strike of the Queensland shearers is also upon the last named principle.
Shortly summed up, it means freedom of contract, or the right of the
employer to manage his own business, the right of the individual to
work for whom he thinks fit, and the right of the employer to employ
whom he thinks proper. The majority of the colonists are in favour of
this freedom, and the Governments and the Press being but a reflex of
that majority naturally must and will support their views. Therefore
the new principle of trades-unionism as opposed to this must fail, ending
in disaster to the labour unions, and in a loss, more or less, to all
colonists. It is surprising that the labour unions do not see that they
are sapping the very foundation upon which their whole structure rests,
viz., the credit of the colonies and commercial prosperity. Aire; dy we
have had a check to our borrowing powers; and as the news reaches
Great Britain of the civil war now raging in Queensland, the more scared
will be the English Investors, and the more unlikely will they be to lend
their money to us. I think I am safe in saying that the principal sufferers
bythis calamity will be the trades-unionists The employers—not neces-
sarily capitalists—are often spoken of as the enemy of the working
classes ; but it is clear that the employer is a necessity. It is he who
welds the capital and labour together, directing it with his brains and
hands, and the success or failure must rest with him to a very large
extent. The statement that the employers have beaten the labour unions
in the late strike is, I consider, incorrect, because as a matter of fact it
was solely the acts of the trades-unions which brought the results about,
certainly not by any action of the employers. The employers simply
employed those who were willing and able to work for them. There are
no just grounds for placing the onus of the late strikes upon the
employers, or reasons for retaliation. I feel sure that any such attempts
will rebound with the greatest force upon those who try it. In con-
clusion, it is certain that the prosperity of these colonies in a great
measure depends upon the union and harmony of the inhabitants, and
their industry, forbearance and common sense. Let this be recognised
by all ; and with our magnificent clips, our plenteous harvests and our
rich mineral yields, whilst depending more upon our own exertions and
resources rather than upon our power of borrowing, the result will be all
that can be desired.


CORRESPONDENCE FOUND IN POSSESSION OF UNION
DELEGATE TAYLOR.
“ Queensland Labourers’ Union,
“ Maranoa Branch,
“ Roma, March 10, 1891.
“ Mr. George Taylor, organiser, C.D.O.
“ Dear George,—l drop you those few lines to let you know how
things are getting on down here. Well, old boy, things are anything
but pleasant in the Maranoa district. All the rouseabouts about here
are frightened to join, as they saj that the squatters’ union is too strong,
and that we will bo smashed up in no time. They say we will join as
soon as we see it going ahead, and it does not matter if I preach to
them for a month of Sundays, it is all the same.
« Bungeworgorai, Merino Downs, Bellevue, Dalmally, Cooinda,
Bindango, Roma Downs, Eurilla, Mitchell Downs, &c., all reduced their
wages as soon as shearing was finished, and all the union men with but
one or two exceptions stopped on at the old rates the exceptions that
have come under my notice being the Murrays and Laycocks of Bunge-
worgorai Enclosed you will find a scale of wages as struck by this
branch —it is low enough, God knows. Forrester is down at Noondoo,
50 scabs having come over the border to there. 1 think they will
remember Forrester before he has done with them. I received a tele-
gram yesterday re the call out. Ido not think there will be many men
found in this district who will come out. I trust I may be mistaken.
Well, old fellow, do you not think it is a mistake collecting all our men
at the terminus of the railways. I think it would be far better split
them up into bodies, say 150 each party. Let one lot stop at Clermont,
another lot up towards Tambo, and another on outside stations, such as
Bowen Downs, Ayrshire Downs, Richmond Downs, Maneroo, and
Westlands, Northampton, and Malvern Hills. And say 150 in the
Maranoa and the same quantity down below St. George. Keep these
bodies of men continually moving about, and they have not got the one-
tenth of police it would take to watch men split up in that manner. As
we are now, the same amount of police can watch your men (camped as
you are close together) as it would take to watch half your number.
Every station that 150 men came near would demand police protection
from the Government —also every town they pass through. n.s it is
now, the protection they receive at Clermont is taken away from other
towns all over the colony. Roma has been for a long time now with
only two policemen in town, whereas, if their men were scattered about
as 1 say, they could not take the police away from a certain place to
send them to another place. .
“ Then if you wanted to make a grand coup at any time you could
send mounted messengers round and have all your forces concentrated
at a given point (away from railways if possible), and force the running
by a little more devil in the fight. .
“ What chance would Police or Defence Force have against bush-
men when in their own element, the heart of the bush. They would
have no trains there to cart them and their gatling guns, cannon, and


Nordenfelts about; they would find they would have their work cut out
to shift themselves about. Bungevvorgorai finished shearing with scabs
and blackfellows to-day. Twenty-two of them were four weeks shearing
16,000 sheep. Some of them shore 250 sheep in four weeks, and shore
every day. They are gone from Bunge to Bindango, 17 policemen be-
ing escorting them across the paddocks. Ten of them came to Hodg-
son, where I met them by myself. They were going to smash me into
mincemeat, but I kept clear of a row ; when they got a few more drinks
in they started upon one another —two Irish natives from Ipswich
named Muroneys double-banked a couple with sticks and stones ; they
left one for dead and a couple of others senseless. It took the
remainder of them all their time to get them round again. I was wish-
ing they would end like the Kilkenny cats —have nothing left but their
tails.
“No more this time, old boy—but I send you my best wishes.
Remember me to all inquiring friends.
“ I remain,
“ Your sincere friend,
“ (Signed) Ned Mup.rHV,
“ Roma.
“ P.S.—Write soon and let me know what you think of things.—
E.H.M.
“P.S. —Anything particular send under cover to R. King, Court
House Hotel, Roma.”
From Fothergill to Taylor, March 15 : “ Lyons has been here
this morning. He seems to sit on the rail, and was a bit nervous about
giving answers to the broad questions relating to the present struggle.
A splendid mass meeting was held this afternoon, and several fiery
speeches were given, and the tone of the whole meeting was splendidly
firm and determined. The forces are camped in the Court House, and
the Oddfellows’, Masonic and employers’ offices, and if they are the best
forces in Queensland, God help them. An iron bar placed across the
railway lines very nearly caused an accident. I was speaking to a fire-
man, and according to him the drivers are in terror. Campbell, of
Champion, believes in the tone of the men to force a conference.
Hillier says if there is no conference he will sell out and clear. Lyons
privately thinks there will be no conference.”
On March 21 Griffin wired Taylor “ Men waiting in readiness at
Gordon Downs for you.”
W. Hamilton, chairman of the Control Committee, wired Taylor
on the 19th, “ Scabs dropped Ebor, four miles Clermont side Capella.
Men following.”
A piece of paper was found on Taylor with the address, date, and
name torn off. It stated, “We are advised of supposed movements of
scabs, and understand they go either to Capella or Retro Siding, and
have arranged about 60 men to Retro, and sent about 20 to Capella.
Interview if possible, (here some person’s name was carefully torn
off) on ordinary train 11.30. Capella scabs expected to-morrow or
next day.


Stamp of Central District Council, A.L.F.
Barcalcine, March 12, 1891.
Mr. George Taylor, Q.D.C. Organiser.
Dear Sir, —Your letter of the Bth received yesterday. Sorry for
the bit of a squabble, and hope the chaps won’t drop in for hard times.
If they do, and some more follow suit, i suppose all hands w.ll have to
make a rush and fetch them back again, it' armed forces and unionists
were about an equal, would our men be willing ? Supposing they
failed, have you any plans for a get away, &c.
You say men are firm and take you all your time to keep them
quiet. Send a few parties of two or three organising until the 23rd.
We have had seven or eight organising parties out some weeks with
surprising success, and we have made arrangements for same class of
work being done from Hughenden, Winton, Muttaburra, Adavale,
Charleville, Cunnamulla, and I hargomindah, &c.. &c.
Send three or four strong parties of horsemen round all stations in
your district and give them a free hand, not as a whole body, but that
two or three may do a night’s ride when a chance occurs.
About railway men, we will also arrange here and if necessary at
headquarters. You cannot fight the forces. Keep the forces employed
in detail, and they will not use their big guns. Send thirty or forty
good men to act with Meteor Downs men in Sptingsure.
Have you or your agents got a direct answer from members of the
military ? Would they in large numbers hold their hands while your
crowd surrounded and secured the lot ?
Remember the commune, and see if the thing is possible in
Clermont ; received wire 100 come here from Gympie and Bundaberg
—we’ll have a try. Think it over with your com. only.
The back country men will do their duty. Have patience for that.
A few little bush fires have occurad, and Maneroo shed has been
struck with lightning. Thirteen scabs have been arrested on Maneroo,
and are being conveyed to camp.
We are getting three or four scabs every day off the train. Dias is
in charge Hughenden. A. J. Brown left this morning take charge
Charleville ; Ormsby, Adavale ; Fanning, Cunnamulla and Border ;
Kewley, Barcoo ; Winton man to be appointed; ditto. Muttaburra;
Moore is recalled under cloud. When the call out has taken effect
more arrangements will be made.
Expenses only allowed hon. organisers. Semsley and Curtis give
half wages while strike lasts.
Re motion on clothing. Cannot entertain for two or three weeks.
We must be assured of more funds, and if we once start giving there
will be no end to expenses, more than we at present dare face. You
will please lay the whole of this before your committee and take it into
consideration not from an ordinary strike view but from the tone of
determined resistance that is all over the colony. ’Tis now getting to
such a stage when nothing but a square look between the eyes will serve
any purpose, and determination must go with it.—Yours very truly,
W. Fothergill, Secretary F.W.J.B.
Stamp of Central District Council, A.L.F., Barcaldine.


CORRESPONDENCE FOUND IN OFFICE OF STRIKE
COMMITTEE, BARCALDINE.
The following extracts are taken from letters written by Hugh
Blackwell, secretary of the Queensland Labourers’ Union :
To A. Forrester, St. George, 22nd February.—“ Things are quiet
in Clermont. The first shot fired there will, may be, cause the
Australian Revolution. Men are very determined here and anxious to
be at work What work I leave you to imagine.”
To Bruce M'Callum, Katemore, 25th February, 1891. —“The
Government have issued instructions to disarm our men, martial law
being declared, and when they start doing this the fun will commence
all over Australia. New South Wales is ready and ripe fora revolution
by all accounts. It is more than probable that things will hum here soon
to a pretty tune.”
To J. R. Malan, Mayne Hotel, sth March, 1891. —“Further
developments may be expected shortly, and that of an aggressive
character, as most of our men are ready for anything, any devilment,
and are grumbling at their inactivity ; and are itching to find work of
some sort to do, providing the employers do not find it for them.”
To T. Porter, Winton, 16th March, 1891.—“ The troops (115)
have arrived. They appear to be a fair-spoken lot, but, as we all know,
appearances are deceitful, and for my.own part, I have no doubt if they
were ordered to fire they would do so. ‘ Fire low and lay them out :
d them.’ ”
Hugh O. Blackwell to Mr. W. H. Ewan, Welford (telegram), sth
March, 1891. —“ Use compulsion. Force men out.”
Smith-Barry to Blackwell, 7th February, 1891. —“ At the best,
moral suasion is but a poor weapon in our hands. Is it ripe ? Are men’s
ideas strung up to concert pitch ? For in my opinion the only certain
method for the working man to get justice is by his becoming an expert
in the use of the Winchester rifle, or what is better still the Gifford gun,
as ‘ It leaves behind no smoke and is noiseless.’”
S. Byrne to Blackwell, 9th January, 1891. —“When I was in
Winton it was sickening and disheartening to hear members advocating
1 Murder, robbery, and incendiarism.’ ”
Blackwell to S. Byrne, 14th February, 1891, in reply to the above.
—“ I think, with a number of others, that if a little more devil was put
into our actions the better it would be for us in the end. We have
tried passive resistance, and it appears to have failed. Let us try the
other now and 4 Have a fair go.’ ”
To the Secretary of the Queensland Railway Engineers’ Association,
Rockhampton, from William Fothergill, dated 12th March. —“We now
approach your members in the hope that they will seriously consider the
following resolution carried by the Strike Committee : —‘That the
members of the Q.R.E. Association be earnestly requested to give their


consideration to the critical position now occupied by our unions with a
view of strengthening us by refusing to assist in the conveyance of
imported blacklegs on the Queensland railway lines.’ ”
W. Fothergill to the Secretary of the Queensland
Engineers’ Association, Brisbane, dated 20th March, 1891, —“ Endeav*
ouring to persuade the members of the Q.R.E.A. to assist the cause of
unionism by coming out on strike, and to refuse to assist in the intro-
duction of more ‘scabs’ (free labourers). It is also stated that the
sympathies of the railway men are known to be on the side of the
unionists, and that the Strike Committee gratefully acknowledge the
generosity of the railway men in devoting one day’s pay per month
towards the funds of the Union ”
Fothergill to Whelan, Adavale, 10th March, 1891. —“The
Government have no idea that we are going to fight them ; they will
soon find out that, however, and we will harass them on all sides and in
such manner that we will injure them without injuring ou r selves. In
these times, old man, you cannot trust much to a letter. So trusting
that all the men in your quarter are good and faithful unionists, &c.”
The following letter was found in “ Ned ” Murphy’s office at Roma
at the time of his arrest. It was addressed to him by A. Forrester.
21 st March, 1891 : —“I have captured seven of Amos’s scabs, and have
also influenced twenty-two at Noondoo to leave'work. Five went back.
I have not done with the dogs yet. At a camp meeti ig to-day it was
decided to bring out on next Tuesday all the scabs from Noondoo.
Forty-six have volunteered to bring them to camp or put out their
lights.—(Signed) A. Forrester.”
PORTION OF SPEECH DELIVERED BY THOMAS GLASSEY,
M.L.A., IN FORTITUDE VALLEY, FEB. 26TH, 1891.
“ Because a few shearers in a moment of excitement had declared
intentions which they would probably never have carried out, the whole
military force was sent from Brisbane to overawe them, the men being
told by their superior officer to go forth like noble and gallant defenders
of their country, (Laughter.) This force was sent to overawe a number
of persons banded together in a constitutional manner to defend their
rights and liberties, and the only means by which they could live—their
labour. The time was coming, he believed, when some of these free
labourers —serfs, he called them, in the hands of the capitalistic party —
would see the error of their ways and throw off their spirit of serfdom
and join their fellow labourers. A proclamation was issued by the
Government calling upon the shearers to lay down their arms, but it was
a very poor document. He believed in constitutional action, but he had
made up his mind to reject the doctrine that had been inculcated in the
past, that when smitten on the one cheek he should turn the
other. If he was a shearer in the Western territory, woe be
to that man who came to him and ordered him to disperse and


hy down his arms. The man who did so would do it at the
pen ofh.s own existence, for he solemnly declared that the weanon
wotdd only be taken from him (the speaker) over his corpse. (Loud
cheers ) He believed m fair play ; but when 200 or 300 men were
brought into this colony in a ship chartered bv the squatters and armed
the H C hf hto * a + ke , the , bread and butter out of theirmouths he claimed
the right as a British subject to refuse to lay down arms unless the com
mand was made to apply all round. (Hear, hear.) If there was the
slightest attempt on the part of the authorities to force the men to lav
down their arms it was the duty of every unionist throughout the colonv
o come forward and defend the rights and liberties of these men
(Cheers.) Nothing should be done on the part of the unionists to
create a conflict; at the same time they should not surrender their man-
hood in the slightest degree. He hoped that some scheme would be
devised for the settlement of the difficulty in a peaceful and constitu
tJ anner ‘ ' P U^ 6d UP ° n th ° Se P resent the necessity of combina-
tion if their social condition was to be improved, and if they were to
occupy their true position in the colony. (Cheers.)” *
®l E A- 4 ai ' a< 3e State of Corps called out. as on April 6 1891 “a’> p *+
Q.A. 61 ; Moreton Mounted Infantry, 91 ; Rockhampton Mounted InW™ qf 7
Brisbane Ambulance. 11 ; 2nd Regiment 30 • nwrtoro ~ n * an trv, 31 ,
54; Townsville Mounted Infantry 43 ;
Q.A., 10 ; Brisbane Field Battery, 27 ; Wide Bay Mounted infantry 100 •
Mounted Infantry, 57 ; Ist Regiment, 60; 2nd Regiment 35 3rTli • 5
“ A Company, Rockhampton, 42 ; “B ” ComnanvZnfM 3 d Re f' me i lt ’ 44 5
land Volunteer Rifles. 65 ; Queensland Scottish 26 • Wide BavAmh ’ <^uee I n . s '
Staff. 2; “A” Company Darling Downs Mounted InfantrvfiO ■“£ » p 06 * 14 ’*
Darling Downs Mounted Infantry, 28 ; 4th Regiment, 42. * Total,’ 988. Compan7
- KSf u 3 km>
conditions shall not be altered or amended for three vears ” rj£.™ ages ® the f
to a joint meeting of the Strike CommiSee thj Commit Tee SU r bmi te l
Union. After a discussion of over two hours the of ® a l T]ers
basis of settlement to be submitted to a joint meeting of the g DiKtr,Vt C< n Pted -f S *
the Labour Federation, the Strike Committee. a“dtheCommittee of f 1T' 311 f
and labourers' Unions. vis.:-" That the unions coined? t. ££& 5 »n«mc?a7d
in return the pastoralists grant an unfettered conforpn™ J < '° mrac w and
That meeting ias held alllongh a very smlT„„e“feTasX:
ing on the question of freedom of contract, but no result was communist*// 7i?'
carriers until they pressed for a definite reply whereupon i 1 ft t f f CSt f to „ the
of March, sent to them by the Strike ffiiStSTSutto,, X, 0 ” , theBl ‘‘
concede freedom of contract on any consideration. 8 ‘ 1 they refused *°


SHEARING AGREEMENT
TO BE USED IN NEW SOUTH WALES, QUEENSLAND, AND THE NORTHERN
DISTRICTS OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Adopted by the Intercolonial Conferences held in Melbourne, 7th November ;
and in Sydney, 22nd December, 1890.
AGREEMENT made this day of 18 between
herein called the employer of the one part, and the
undersigned shearer of the other part. The terms of this Agreement are that the
undersigned shearer hereby agrees to faithfully serve the employer by shearing
with all reasonable dispatch all the sheep required of him by the employer or his
agent during the present season in a good and workmanlike manner and to the
satisfaction of the employer or his agent, the total number of sheep required to be
shorn by the whole of the shearers employed during the shearing to be not less
than thousand nor more than thousand. i
1. The pi ice of shearing wethers, ewes, and lambs (including ram lambs under
six months old) to Ire at the rate of twenty shillings per hundred for all such
6heep shorn ; rams at the rate of forty shillings per hundred for all rams shorn ;
money to be paid by cheque.on a local bank, or exchange to be added.
2. The shearer shall be at the Station or run ready to commence
shearing on the day of 18 , and the employer agrees to be
ready to commence shearing on that date, and to keep the shearer fully supplied
with sheep, unless prevented by weather or by some unforeseen cause.
3. The employer shall, during the whole of the time the sheaier is engaged
shearing, provide him with hut accommodation, cooking and table utensils, wood,
and waier free of charge.
4. The shearer shall not absent himself from work, but in case he leave before
the completion of shearing, owing to sickness, accident, or other such unavoidable
cause, or by the permission of the employer or his agent, he shall be paid in full
for all sheep shorn by him, but shall be charged 15s. per week for his board
and lodging, cook’s remuneration included, such sum to be deducted from the
amount due to him and placed to the credit of the shearers’ mess account.
5. If a shearer be discharged, as he may be, for breach of this Agreement, or of
the Rules endorsed hereon or attached hereto, he shall be paid for the number of
sheep shorn by him up to the time of such discharge, but he sh ill be charged 20s.
per week for his board and lodging, cook’s remuneration included, which amount
shall’be placed to the credit of the shearers’ mess account.
6. Once a week, on a day to be named at commencement of shearing, on demand
the employer shall pay to the shearer any sum not exceeding 50 per centum of the
amount due over and above one week’s earnings at the time of such demand,
except in case of the shearer breaking this Agreement.
7. The employer and the shearer shall conform to the Rules endorsed hereon or
attached hereto, which Rules it is hereby agreed shall be taken aud deemed to be
and form part of this Agreement.
As Witness the hands of the parties the day and year first before written.
Signed by the Employee
in the presence of
Signed by the Sheaker
in the presence of
RULES.
Embodied as part of Agreement.
1. The shearing shall be carried on under the direction and supervision of th.e
employer or the person placed by him in charge cf the shed.
2. Before commencing work the shearer shall draw lots for his pen, and shall
abide by the result of such drawing, the person in charge of the shed having the
right to make any alteration deemed advisable.
3. All the sheep must be taken carefully from the pen to the shearing board and
be shorn closely and in a fair and workmanlike manner, and to the satisfaction of
the person in charge of the shed, the belly wool to be taken off first and laid aside.


4. In opening the fleece at the neck and belly, both blades of the shears or the
machine to be kept under the wool and close to the skin so as to avoid twice
cutting, and the shearer shall not be allowed to run the shears or the machine
through the fleece so as to break it down the centre or the back, and shall not
stand on the fleece.
5. In case the said shearer turns out a sheep badly cut or insufficiently tarred,
he shall at once sew and tar such cut or wound, in his pen, or otherwise dress
or treat such sheep as directed by the person in charge of the shed.
6. The shearer shall not be allowed to kick or otherwise injure or iiluse any
sheep, and in case he seriously injure or iiluse any sheep, or cut the teat of any
ewe or pizzle of any wether or ram, he shall immediately report same to person in
charge of the shed ; and he shall pay to the employer the mess rate for the sheep
so injured, and if the sheep be fit for food it shall go to the shearers’ mess, the
employer to have the right to refuse such payment and keep the sheep.
7. The shearer shall not be allowed to catch any sheep from his pen while it is
being filled, but shall during such filling shear from any pen or pens that may be
alloted to him by the person in charge of the shed. No sheep to be caught after
the signal has been given to cease work by the person in charge of the shed.
8. The prices to be charged by the employer for rations and shearers’ requisites
shall not exceed cost prices, with 10 per cent, and cost of carriage added.
9. Each shearer may have free run for two horses, but the employer accepts no
responsibility for them.
10. No shearer shall bring, or cause to be brought, any intoxicating liquor on to
the station ; no profane or obscene language or singing shall be allowed in the shed.
11. The employer shall provide at least one grindstone for every ten shearers
employed.
12. Shearers shall provide their own cook, except where cooks work conjointly
for shearers and the employer, in which case the cook shall be engaged by the
employer, and the proportion of mess account and of cook’s remuneration shall
be matter of mutual agreement.
18. In all sheds where shearing machines are provided, shearers shall pay for
cutters and combs a price not exceeding cost. In case of stoppages through breakage
or otherwise shearers shall, if required, go on shearing with the hand shears.
AGREEMENT FOR EMPLOYEES ENGAGED DURING SHEARING.
Adopted by the Intercolonial Conferences held in Melbourne 7th November, and in
Sydney 22nd December, 1890.
Agreement made and entered into this day of between
of hereinafter called the Employer of the one part, and
hereinafter called the Employee of the other part.
Whereby the Employee agrees to work as a generally useful hand at
Station during shearing season of 189 ; to obey all lawful commands of the
Employer or his agents ; to continue so working from day to day till the whole of
the sheep and lambs that the Employer desires to shear, which, in number, will be
not less than nor more than , are shorn ; and to be diligent
and of good conduct.
In consideration of such services being duly and faithfully performed, the
Employer agrees to pay the Employee wages at the rate of per week
for each and every week the Employee shall have worked in accordance with this
agreement; and the Employer further agrees during such service to provide the
Employee with hut accommodation, cooking and table utensils, wood and water,
free of charge, and also to supply him with rations as endorsed hereon —the cook to
be engaged and remunerated by the Employer.
Once a week, on a day to be named at commencement of shearing, on
demand, the Employer shall pay to the Employee any sum not exceeding 50 per
centum of the net amount due over and above one week’s earnings at the time of
such demand, except in the case of the Employee breaking this Agreement, money
to be paid by cheque on a local bank, or exchange added.
Signed by the Employer in the presence of
Signed by the Employee in the presence of
