







~^r
fi Q /
ySjoiuJ' yJTsPwsLW? f \






THE
BROTHER OF THE SHADOW
A Mystery of To-day
BY
MRS. CAMPBELL PRAED
AUTHOR OF “AFFINITIES,” “NADINE,” ETC
LONDON
GEORGE ROUTLEDGE AND SONS
BROADWAY, LUDGATE HILL
NEW YOLK: 9 LAFAYETTE PLACE
1886


A LUXURY
UNKNOWN IN ENGLAND.
BARBER AND COMPANY’S
(SEE THAT YOU HAVE NONE OTHER)
FRENCH COFFEE
AS USED IN PARIS,
IN ITS HIGHEST PERFECTION, TENPENCE PER
POUND.
This is the Choicest and most carefully selected Coffee, roasted on the
French principle, and mixed with the finest Bruges Chicory.
5 lbs. in tins free by Parcels Post for ss. 6d.
or 2 ” » „ for 2s. 4d.
To all Post Towns in United Kingdom and Channel Islands.
Barber and Company,
274, REGENT CIRCUS, OXFORD STREET, W.
61, BISHOPSGATE STREET, E.C.
102, Westbourne Grove, W.—King’s Cross, N.—42, Great Titchfield
Street, W.—The Borough, London Bridge—Brighton: 147, North
Street—Birmingham; Quadrant—Liverpool; 1, Church Street—
Manchester: 93, Market Street—Bristol: 38, Corn Street-Preston :
Fishergate,
Postal Orders from Is. 6d. to 10s. 6d. may now be had
for Id. from all Post Offices.
Cheques to he crossed London and Westminster Bank.


INTRODUCTORY NOTE.
When Messrs. George Routledge & Sons
kindly asked me to write a story for their series
of one-volume novels, I had no hesitation in
accepting their invitation, although the form was
not familiar to me, and I had been accustomed
to tell my tales at greater length. I am
inclined, however, to believe that there is a new
career —if I may use such an expression in such
a case—opening for the short story, the one-
volume novel, in this country. I have no com-
plaint to make of the three-volume system, or of
the circulating library. The latter has helped into
existence many a promising and successful book,
which, if it had to be bought and sold altogether
on its own merits, might have waited a long
time a mere promise without success. But there


is room enough and to spare for a literature of
short stories, such as France lias always had,
and I am glad to have a chance of writing my
name in it.
The suggestion to write what I may call a
mystical story came from the publishers also. I
willingly accepted the idea, because it is one that
floats upon the wave of thought which is just
now swelling in so strangely on modern English
Society.
R. M. PRAED


THE
BROTHER OF THE SHADOW.
I.
Letter from Colonel Julian Vascher to
Dr. Lemuel Lloyd.
Military Compound, Allahabad,
January 20tli, 1885.
Dear Old Lem. Lloyd,
We used to be such capital pals in days
gone by —before I went to India and you turned
mystic—that I really can’t begin an elaborate
apology for forcing myself on your notice, etc., etc-
I never was much of a hand at letter writing,
and have dropped you so completely—more shame
to me—that, I daresay, you have forgotten the
style of my list, and before you read any further
will be turning to the end of the letter to
see who your correspondent can be. Well, I


hope you are satisfied now; and, perhaps, after
all, you have asked my Hindoo friend, Ananda,
a good many questions about me, and are in a
position to skip preliminaries. It is difficult to
believe that ten years have passed since we
shared the same diggings in Ebury Street. I
can’t think why I missed you in both of the trip!
home that I have made. I heard about you
however. The first time you were set up as a
swell London medico in Harley Street, and were
physicking the Prime Minister; and the second
you had come a cropper over mesmerism and
homoeopathy, and had gone off to Asia Minor to
doctor the Druses. I felt a great respect for you
when I heard that you had struck out a new
scientific line. I have always had a lurking belief
in magnetism, though I am of the commonplace
flesh-and-blood order of mankind, and mystical
contemplation, metaphysics, and miracles are a
good many pegs above me. That is the sort of
thing Ananda goes in for, and he tells me that he
has found in you a kindred spirit. I can’t say
that, personally, I have much sympathy with his
ideas, but I have lived long enough in the East
to have satisfied myself that the Yogi and Fakir


business is not all humbug. There are more
things in heaven and earth ! It was a piece
of luck Ananda hitting upon you by chance in
Paris. I wanted to give him a letter to you when
he made up his mind to go and study European
civilization, but as I hadn’t heard of your return
from the Druses, there wasn’t much use in
writing it. I hope, however, that you have got
to like him for his own sake, apart from my
recommendation. He w T as always a sort of
protege of mine, and used to spend a good deal
of time in my quarters before he got mixed up
with the wise men of Gotham, as I irreverently
style the brotherhood of Tibetan adepts who are
instructing him in the mysteries of occultism.
When I heard from him two or three months ago,
he said that you had asked him to stay with you,
and gave me your address. He told me that you
are making a speciality of curing nervous dis-
orders by electricity. That bit of information
touched me very closely, as you will see pre-
sently. If you and Ananda happen to be together
when yon receive this, tell him that I am
ashamed of not having answered his letter, but
the truth is 7 that I have been so weighed down


by home anxieties that I have had no heart tc
write. And that brings me to the point of my
letter to you, to which all this is only a “ sadly
smilingprelude. I am going to ask a favour of
you; and, as you used to be a real good fellow
and an awfully clever chap in your profession, I
am certain beforehand that the favour will be
granted, and that the whole thing will work just
as I have arranged it in my mind.
“ This is what I want you to do for me, in the
double capacity of doctor and friend. You will
have heard from Ananda that I married out here
a little time before he left India. My poor wife
has fallen into bad health. She suffers from
neuralgia of the most violent kind, the pain of
which is simply killing her. The doctors here
can do nothing except stupefy her during the
paroxysms by injecting morphine ; and of late
the attacks have been so frequent, that she is
almost always under the influence of the dru< r
O*
You know what a terrible effect this must have
upon her constitution; and there seems no
prospect of any real respite from pain. The
men here can’t account for her illness, but they
all agree that she must be sent at once to another


climate. A friend of mine, wlio once suffered in
the same way and got relief through a mesmerist,
has talked me into the conviction that magnetism
is the only thing which can cure her. He
advises electric baths, and she is very anxious to
try the whole system. She has been ordered to
stay on the Riviera, as they consider her too
delicate to encounter an English spring. I have
applied for leave, but my getting off depends on
the settlement of these infernal Egyptian compli-
cations, and so, I am compelled to send her to
Europe with only her maid, who fortunately,
however, is a trained nurse. I shall hope to
follow her in a month or two. In the meantime
imagine my anxiety, for I have no one to whom
I can confide her—except, indeed, yourself; and
should know no peace if I had to think of her in
the hands of possibly an unscrupulous quack. I
can’t tell why one should associate the idea of
mesmerism with charlatanry—but so it is. Since
this is your specialite , you can relieve me of a
heavy burden. Will you take charge of her,
settle her comfortably in or near Nice—they
advise a short distance from the sea—and
consider her your patient? Spare no expense.


I know you well enough to feel absolutely sure
that in placing her under your care I am,
humanly speaking, securing for her all that skill
can achieve. This will reach you, according to
my calculation, a day or two before her arrival at
Marseilles. I have taken her passage by the
Messageries boat Orontes , and post this in
advance by the P. and 0. to Brindisi. Our
minds were only made up yesterday, so that
there is no time to make elaborate arrangements,
and I must trust Fate to bar accidents. I have
instructed my wife to telegraph to you as soon as
she lands at Marseilles. Should you fail her
through absence or any other cause, I can depend
upon the doctor of the Orontes , whom I know per-
sonally, to establish her at Cannes or Nice, and
introduce her to a competent medical man. Wire
to me immediately when you get this and set my
mind at rest.
Yours ever sincerely,
JULIAN VASCHER.
On tlie lieights above one of the great Riviera
watering places, there is a quaint fortress-like


village which dates back to the time of the
Saracens, and is called Monte Santo.
Though only two or three miles distant from
the city of pleasure, which, —with its white villas
stretching downward to the dancing Mediter-
ranean, its palm groves, its Parisian boulevards,
its stream of cosmopolitan population, its general
air of frivolity—seems to distil the very essence
of modern life, Monte Santo has an old-world
atmosphere, a weirdness, a solemnity of aspect
that is apt to produce a dreamy, almost mystic
feeling on an impressionable mind. This effect
becomes intensified by the sombreness of the
surrounding olive plantations; the deep shadows
cast by the hills—in such strange contrast to the
dazzling sea; the chill air which creeps up the
ravines ; the pallid greyness of the rocks ; the
grotesque outlines of the stone pines which dot
the arid slopes; and the cold splendour of the
snow-clad Maritime Alps visible through rifts
in the encircling chain of nearer mountains.
The outer walls of Monte Santo are of crumb-
ling stone, with windows small and barred, the
streets are narrow and rugged, and on the doors
and lintels hang strings of green curled orange


peel, used for the manufacture of bergamot, and
twisted loaves of brown bread. The crooked,
weather-stained campanile is roofed in tiles of
three different colours. There is a tiny square
place where wrinkled crones sit winding* hemp, and
mumbling in a patois of mingled French and
Italian, and children in oddly shaped blue cotton
blouses, with queer little round faces and bright
black eyes, tumble over each other in play.
On the very brow of the hill lies a grassy
plateau which commands a magnificent view of
the sea to the south, and of the mountains to the
north-east. Here is a defaced shrine, lonely,
wind beaten, and seldom visited. Here also
stands a half-ruined chateau with red gables, and
a curious square tower, the base of which
resembles a fortification. The chateau is hardly
visible from below, and is screened from observa-
tion on one side by the walls of the old tower,
and on the others by rows of cypresses and
gnarled olives.
From the tower, a plummet might almost be
dropped into the giounds of a large hotel built
further dov n the slope, and as it were, a connect-
ing link v ith the gay world below. But even


the hotel has its mediaeval associations, and the
terraced garden, the arbours, the marble steps
and balustrades, are not the mushroom growth of
financial enterprise. The hotel was originally
the winter abode of a family of Italian Princes,
and is still called the \ ilia Vimiera. A circui-
tous carriage drive winding round the hill leads
from the hotel to the old town, but is seldom
used, the strand and the boulevards offering greater
attractions to the herd of semi-invalids by whom
the villa is frequented.
In the beginning of the present year, the
Chateau St. Etibnne, as it was called, was occupied
by Dr. Lemuel Lloyd. He was a physician of
talent and formerly of note in London.
Dr. Lloyd was in age about forty, and had
started some eight years previously in the ordinary
groove of medicine, though he had always a lean-
ing towards mysticism, an insatiable craving after
scientific discovery, and a vague belief in occult
forces. One or two startling cures brought him
into prominence, but gradually he acquired a
reputation for quackery, and his failure in an
important case plunged him into direct conflict
with the faculty. By degrees his practice


dwindled. He had, however, independent means,
so did not count this a misfortune. He made a
specialty of the treatment of disease by magnetism.
Clairvoyance gave tantalising glimpses of an
unexplored world. He felt himself at the very
door of Nature’s temple. Oh, for a key! He
became a student of Paracelsus, Jacob Boehme,
Van Helmont, and the Kabalists. Oriental lore
fascinated him. Swedenborg partly lifted the veil
of spiritual mysteries. He was conscious of
strange forces within himself. The desire for
occult powers possessed him like a thirst. He
practised suppression of his animal impulses.
Though a man of strong emotions, and artistic
sensuousness, he became almost an ascetic. A
slight delicacy of the lungs forced him to seek a
warm climate. His peculiar methods and his bent
towards solitude, forbade the pursuit of his pro-
fession in any of the fashionable resorts. Yet, to
prosecute his inquiries magnetic subjects were
necessary. He had also a sincere wish to benefit
mankind. Monte Santo took his fancy. Here
was a retreat easy of access to those who desired
his services. He advocated the use of electric
baths. A large room in his house was set apart


for the purpose, with apparatus under competent
superintendence. A thin stream of patients
flowed in during the winter; and proximity to
the Chateau St. Etienne was considered one of the
minor recommendations to the Hotel Vimiera.
Ananda, the Hindoo of whom Colonel Vascher
wrote, took up his abode with Dr. Lloyd in
December of ’B4. He was a young Brahmin of
high caste and a student of occultism. He had
been educated in the English University of Cal-
cutta, and even in point of western culture was
the equal, if not the superior, of Dr. Lloyd.
Ananda stated himself to be the pupil of certain
adepts of Inner Asia, who even at this distance
were able to maintain communication with the
young man by occult means, such as psycho-
logical telegraphy and the projection of the Astral
Double. This was the secret of Dr. Lloyd’s
interest in the Hindoo. Ananda denied the
possession of any abnormal powers, and declared
himself to be merely a neophyte in the earliest
stage of advancement; but Dr. Lloyd knew that
he was sometimes during sleep taken out of his
body, and that upon these occasions while keep-
ing his faculties active, he conversed with his


master and received instruction in philosophy and
occult science. It was Lloyd’s ardent desire that
he also might enjoy these advantages, but as his
aspirations soared higher he became conscious
that the inferior magnetism generated by his
foimer grosser contact with the world, barred
him from communion with these lofty beings,
and stultified his really spiritual yearnings, while
from his imperfect psychic development, it was
but larely that his inner eyes were unclosed; and
for the most part the world of the unseen, and its
wonders, remained to him a sealed book.
Magnetic experiments had familiarised Dr.
Lloyd with some forms of clairvoyance. It
seemed to him in his difficulty, that could he but
operate upon a sensitive, etherealized temper-
ment with psychic faculties ready to burst into
play, the knowledge for which he panted might
be his ; and, also, his will-power would be
stiengthened and trained, and his sphere of use-
fulness widened.
Ananda concurred in this theory, but did not
encourage it. He feared the supremacy of
Lloyd s earthy propensities, for he was aware of
the probability nay, almost certainty, that only


in the person of a woman could a suitable subject
be found. He knew the dangers of mesmeric
rapport to one not wholly purified from desire,
the subtle intoxication of the senses which it
produces, the paralysis of the will on one part,
and on the other, its liability to intensify itself in
the physical direction. Ananda was an ascetic,
single-hearted in devotion to truth, yet young
though he was, he had battled against the most
dangerous temptation that can assail the occultist.
But to warn was only to stimulate longing.
Hr. Lloyd sought in vain among his patients for a
clairvoyante of the higher order. He was on the
point of leaving Monte Santo in order to pursue
his investigations in Paris, when Colonel
Vascher’s letter arrived and turned the direction
of his thoughts.
Hr. Lloyd when he read this letter was seated
in his private room at the Chateau—the room
where he received his patients and carried on his
professional studies. There was another—an
inner sanctum, veiled now by a heavy curtain,
but to this he retired only when desirous of with-
drawing himself completely from the outside
world.
o


The library, as it was called, which he at this
moment occupied, overlooked the gardens of the
Hotel Vimiera. It was built adjoining the square
tower, and had an entrance from without, used
only by Ananda and himself. It was com-
paratively spacious and was furnished with a sort
of sombre magnificence. The carpets were velvet
pile, the cabinets early Florentine. The large
writing-table at which he sat, was curiously inlaid,
and the bookcases, almost covering one side of the
oblong room, were surmounted with choice
specimens of antique ware. The other side was
hung with tapestry, except where a massive door
opened out upon a small balcony ending at the
angle of the tower wall. From the balcony a flight
of stone steps led to a raised terrace bordered by
palms.
In appearance Dr. Lloyd gave the impression
of great mental power combined with intense
animal vigour. Except for a few perpendicular
lines in his lofty forehead, there was nothing to
indicate the sedentary life of a student. He held
himself erect; his frame was muscular, his com-
plexion sanguine; he had a look of dominance and
resolve, and his dark, quickly piercing eyes told


of action rather than contemplation. He had
a curious square face, with full decisively cut lips,
a short crisp moustache and beard, and a smile
the sweetness of which was at once fascinating
and provoking, it seemed so much out of harmony
with the general characteristics of the countenance.
Dr. Lloyd laid down Colonel Vascher’s letter,
and for several minutes seemed absorbed in
thought. A struggle of some kind was going on.
Suddenly, he took up his pen and wrote two
telegrams.
The first was to Julian Vascher—a cordial
message expressing Dr. Lloyd’s willingness to
undertake the charge of his friend’s wife. The
second, addressed to Mrs. Vascher on board the
Orontes , to the care of the Messageries Maritimes
Agency at Marseilles, stated that he awaited her
commands either to join her at Marseilles or meet
her at Nice, where he would at once arrange for
her accommodation.
Touching an electric spring, he summoned his
servant, to whom he delivered the telegrams for
transmission. Almost immediately after the man
had withdrawn, the door opened again and
Ananda, the Hindoo, entered.
o 2


A direct contrast to his host, Ananda was
slight and with a physique almost feminine in its
delicacy. A striking, indeed a god-like, head
crowned his spare form. The face was oval, the
skin a pale olive, the features of the purest type
—instinct with sensibility, the eyes full and dark,
the irises of wonderful clearness, the pupils as it
were slowly gathering in and emitting light, the
whole countenance so tender, so spiritualised, and
withal so intellectual, that to watch its play was
a delight.
Ananda placed himself opposite Dr. Lloyd;
and, taking a cigarette from a box upon the
table, began to smoke dreamily. Dr. Lloyd
followed his example. The two sat thus for a
short time without exchanging a word. One
cigarette exhausted, Ananda lighted another.
Then, the same thought appeared to strike both.
They smiled simultaneously. Ananda spoke in his
slow melodious voice with its foreign intonation.
“ If to sit for hours together doing nothing be
a sign of madness, then I am surely very mad;
and many Hindoos are so likewise. Your cele-
brated Durham divorce case occurred to me at the
moment. I sit for hours and hours in lazy


meditation. I have been meditating ever since I
came back from the Hotel Vimiera.”
“ What were you doing there?” asked Dr.
Lloyd indifferently.
“ I went to see the tennis, and to study the
women,” replied Ananda.
“Do you like women, Ananda? Surely they
bore you.”
“ There were some singers from Nice at the
hotel. After the dejeuner they produced Guada-
loupe rum, which they said afterwards was the
liqueur that everyone drinks in Paris. They
would have had me swallow it. They called it
Extrait de Cafe. I was just saved from that by
the expression on the face of one of them.”
Ananda laughed softly. “ Oh, this human
nature! It is a beautiful study.”
“ You are daring, Ananda, for a philosopher.
I shall hear of you next at Monte Carlo.”
“ I like the Bohemian life,” said Ananda. “ I
confess it suits me better than the monstrous
sham they call Society. What does it matter
with whom I come in contact? If there are
affinities between us, I shall influence them for
good—if not, it is no matter ”


“ Gro on, Ananda.”
Frankly, continued the Hindoo, u I am bored
when a woman talks to me of philosophy; but if
she will be herself I am more than interested.
Women are better teachers than men, and they
suipiise one, which is always a pleasure. I know
before a man speaks what he will say; but I do
not know what a woman thinks, or how she will
phrase her thoughts.”
Ananda ! said Dr. Lloyd, “ what sort of a
woman is Julian Vascher’s wife ? ”
Ananda did not reply for some seconds. He
put down his cigarette. His expression changed.
His eyes deepened.
“ I do not know.”
But you have seen her? They were married
before you left India.”
I hear that she is beautiful. I know that her
nature is sweet and sensitive as a musical instru-
ment to the touch of the performer. I know no
more. She is passive. No hand has swept the
strings.”
“ How ? She loves her husband ? ”
‘ £ She loves him—most fondly.”
“ Is he then unworthy of her ? ”


“ More than worthy of the woman in her,” said
Ananda with animation. “ But the spirit is asleep.”
There was silence. A curious expression
dawned upon Lemuel Lloyd’s face. Ananda
smoked on. “ Why do you ask ?” he said.
Lloyd handed him the letter. Ananda read it.
He sighed deeply. “ Poor Toni! ”he murmured
as if involuntarily.
“ Toni! ” repeated Lloyd, his voice taking an
inflection of almost tender interest.
“ Her husband so calls her. She is named
Antonia.”
Again there was silence. Presently Ananda
asked, “ You will not go to Paris ? ”
“ No.”
“ You have replied? Yascher’s mind will soon
be at ease. I met Barnett with the telegrams.”
“ Ananda! ” exclaimed Dr. Lloyd, in an ex-
cited manner, “ you know of what I am think-
ing? When I wrote the telegram I felt a
presentiment which is now conviction. Why
should I go to Paris when Fate is sending me
the sensitive for whom I am searching ? ”
“Why?” repeated Ananda, in a mournful
tone. “It would be better, perhaps ■”


“ No. How difficult to conduct experiments
with the professional clairvoyante amid the foul
magnetism of Paris ! You say she is pure and
sweet,” he went on with gathering eagerness.
“ It is unfortunate that she should have led the
married life ; but she will be apart from her hus-
band. Through her I shall gain access to your
master. Fate ! This is no mere accident.
“ There are no accidents in Life! ” returned
Ananda, dreamily. “We are but bundles of
forces which must work themselves out. But
Will can determine whether in doing so, they
generate fresh forces of good or of evil.” He
fixed his luminous eyes upon Lloyd. “ You have
no misgivings as to the result of your treat-
ment ? ”
A slow flush mounted to Dr. Lloyd’s cheek.
11 1 not a mere selfish egotist,” he cried.
“ She will be released from suffering. She shall
be cured. That before all. And now Ananda,
come with me to the Vimiera and decide upon
her apartments. You should know something
about her taste.”
Ananda complied. But his manner now struck
Dr. Lloyd as cold and preoccupied. He showed


no inclination to discuss Mrs. Vascher, and
became like ice to his friend’s glowing curiosity,
launching himself upon a metaphysical argument
with a deliberation that exasperated the Doctor.
Lloyd had before now observed this peculiarity
in Ananda, and especially when his emotional
nature had been touched. It was as though
afraid of his personality he had forced himself into a
state of abstraction from his surroundings, and that
while the outer self moved and spoke, the real self
had been withdrawn beyond reach of circumstance.
Once only during the walk, while discoursing
upon the position of Paley in regard to the theory
of happiness, he kindled to enthusiasm.
“ It is a paradox but it is true, when I say that
to me pain is pleasure,” he cried with dreamy
fervour. “ Oh, it is true that when an ant was
crushed the Lord Buddha wept. The sympathy
which identifies itself with an ant’s pain, identifies
itself also with the highest pleasure. I don’t know
the term ‘ righteous indignation.’ There cannot
be anger at that which is mean and base, but
only pity. I joy in Joy. I grieve in Sin. That
too is part of me. It is a part of the Universe ;
and I am of the Universe.”


“ This is not unselfishness,” said Lloyd, im-
patiently. “It is a sublime egotism.”
“It is both,” replied Ananda. “ There's
another paradox. But Life is an enigma which
can only be described by paradoxes.”
They entered the Hotel, and chose Mrs.
Vascher’s rooms, a sunny suite facing south.
Lloyd then despatched a second telegram to
await the Orontes , stating that all things were in
readiness for his patient.


II.
On the evening of the following day, a note
from the Hotel Vimiera was brought to Dr.
Lloyd. It was in the delicate hand-writing of
a woman, and was signed “ Antonia Vascher.”
It apprised him of the arrival of his friend’s wife,
and of her wish to see him.
He went after a little while to the Hotel and
was shown to Mrs. Vascher’s salon. As the door
opened he became conscious of the fragrance
of jasmine and tea-roses, and, somewhat to his
surprise, saw that the table was covered with
magnificent flowers arranged in bowls of Vallauris
ware. The Venetian shutters were partly open,
and the room was flooded with the soft evening
light. At the first glance he saw that it had
only one occupant, a young lovely woman who
reclined upon a sofa drawn up to the fireplace,
in which some fir-cones and logs of olive wood
were blazing.


A light Eastern wrap was thrown over her
feet. Her form, as she lay almost at full
length, gave him the impression of being very
tall and slender. She was dressed in a loose
robe of pale yellow cashmere, profusely trimmed
with lace, which heightened the lustre of her eyes
and the transparency of her complexion. Pre-
pared though he had been by Ananda, Dr. Lloyd
was yet startled by her beauty, to which the
traces of sickness, so plainly visible, and of pain
bravely borne, seemed to impart a pathetic
dignity that he had never seen equalled in the
face of any other woman. There was something
inexpressibly touching in the curves of those
exquisite lips which could scarcely have been
more bewitching when reddened by the bloom
of health, and in the eyes of deepest blue that
beamed with a languorous brilliancy due perhaps
to the violet stains beneath their heavy lashes.
She moved as he advanced, and extended her
hand.
> “ You will forgive me for not rising, I am very
tired after my journey. I wanted so much to see
you, Dr. Lloyd, I felt that I could not rest without
thanking you for all that you have done for me.”


“You would not let me meet you at Marseilles/’
lie said, as lie took a chair beside her couch.
“ Indeed, it was not necessary. The doctor of
the Orontes put me into the train. And I should
not have liked to encroach too much on your
time, when you must have so many patients who
need you perhaps more than I.”
“I have not many patients,” he replied,
deliberately. “ I tell you this at once, Mrs. Vascher,
that you may understand how entirely I am at
your service, and I could have no greater pleasure
than being of use to my old friend Julian’s wife.”
She smiled with a child-like sweetness that was
very captivating. “I am glad, for I like to have
my doctor all to myself. Though I feel sorry for
the people you do not help. Julian has told me
how clever you are, and what wonderful cures
you have made. I hope you will cure me.”
“ I feel certain that 1 can,” he rejoined with
earnestness; “ and you must believe so, for that
will go a long way towards the cure.”
“ I know a little about mesmerism,” she
answered. “ I have been reading about Dr.
Esdaile’s experiments, I bring a great deal of
faith.”


“ lie said, “ you must tell me presently
about yourself. But first of all do you like the
situation of tbe hotel, and the rooms we have
chosen ?”
“ I they are perfect,” she replied. “ And
how kind it was of Mr. Ananda to remember my
passion for flowers, and to bring me such beauti-
ful roses.”
“Ananda!” exclaimed Dr. Lloyd. “You
have seen him ? ”
“No ; he left the roses a little while ago, but
he would not come in. The view from these
windows is beautiful, Dr. Lloyd. I longed so to
get settled, and when I found your telegram at
Marseilles, I determined to come on at once by the
rctpide , now I feel that if only Julian were with
me I should be quite happy.”
You had a calm voyage ? ” he asked.
“Yes. I think the sea did me good. I had
not so many attacks, and I was able to bear them
without morphia. That made Julian so unhappy
that I promised him to leave it off if I could.
But it is very hard to think taking it wrong,
when one is in bad pain.”
It is not wrong to do anything which relieves


pain. But we will try to find better means than
morphine.”
She glanced up at him. Hitherto she had
apparently avoided meeting his eyes, which he
kept steadily upon her. Now she turned hers
away again immediately. He thought she was a
little embarrassed.
“ Are you trying to mesmerize me already,”
she asked, “ that you look at me so earnestly ? ”
“No, not yet. The treatment must be begun
systematically.” He explained something of his
method, and asked her several questions, which
she answered unreservedly.
“ Julian will be so relieved to know that I have
found you,” she said. “He put such confidence
in you ; and I will do the same, Dr. Lloyd.
You shall praise me to him for being an obedient
patient.”
He did not at once reply. His mind was full
of compassionate interest, and he was mentally
planning the first steps towards her restoration
to health. Suddenly she gave a little gasp and
leaned back. He saw at once that a change had
come over her, and started to her assistance.
Her face had turned deadly white, her lips were


drawn together, her features pinched with
agony.
She gazed up at him piteously, her eyes suf-
fused with tears. “It has come on—the pain,”
she said, faintly. “ Will you call Bridget, please
-—my maid. She knows what to do.”
He went to the door of the inner room. The
maid, a plain elderly woman, who was there
unpacking, came at his summons to her mistress’
side; and they both applied remedies, without
avail. Antonia uttered stifled moans. It could
he seen that the torture was excruciating. Dr.
Lloyd took one of her hands, and fixing his eyes
upon her and concentrating his will, tried the
effect of magnetic passes. No result was imme-
diately perceptible. Her condition was not suf-
ficiently passive to facilitate the action of the
odyle fluid. He desisted, wrung to the heart by
her groans. “ She must have some morphine,”
he exclaimed, seeing that strength was failing
her, and that the dew on her forehead moistened
the short rings of her hair. He took out his
instrument and filled the syringe, but when he
turned back to the couch, she lay drooping like a
bruised flower, and he saw that she had fainted.


He bared her beautiful arm, limp and soft as
snow, but warm still. His touch, thrilling with
the nerve force that had streamed through it,
roused her. She murmured and stirred. His
hand faltered, as he performed the slight opera-
tion. The prick of the needle drew blood. He
felt himself brutal. She opened her eyes.
“ Thank you,” she said. His heart ached at
sight of the smile she forced to her lips. “ Don't
mind, Julian,” she whispered; “it doesn't hurt so
much now.”
“ Poor thing ! ” said the nurse aside. “ She
has got into the way of controlling herself, so
that Colonel Vascher should not know how much
she suffers.”
Never had Dr. Lloyd experienced such an
anguish of pity. Case-hardened though he had
believed himself, his susceptibility afflicted him
with a shock of surprise. He felt that he would
almost lay down his life if by so doing he could
bring back health to this fragile, suffering creature.
He sat by her side while the morphine did its
work of alleviation, and continued his passes,
now over the face, now over the limbs of
Antonia, as though he wished to bathe her in
D


the mysterious emanations sent forth by hig
quivering fingers. At intervals, she would
glance up at him and smile with drowsy
sweetness. The pink had returned to her lips
and faintly tinged her cheek. He fancied that
her eyes lingered longer on his, while over her
face and form there seemed to have crept an
indefinable softness and relaxation that was all
in keeping with the darkening room, the elec-
trically charged atmosphere, the powerful scent
of the roses.
As the pain lulled, and there stole over both a
sense of expansion and rapport) he talked to her
in a low soothing voice of every-day topics,
touched by the gentle emotion of the hour and
the influences in play, paving the way for
confidence and closer intimacy. He left her at
last eased and inclined to sleep, promising that
he would come early on the morrow.
In the morning he passed by the concierge and
walked straight to Mrs. Vascher’s apartments,
which were on the first floor of the hotel. It
annoyed him to see that there were children playing
in the corridor; and he blamed himself for neglect


ing to provide against contingencies, when, on
turning back, the concierge informed him that a
large family—the famille Bingham—tenanted the
salon adjoining that of Mrs. Vascher.
Bridget, the maid, replied to his knock, and
conducted him to her mistress’s bed - room.
Obeying his injunctions Antonia had not risen.
She was still pale, but no longer in pain. She
greeted him familiarly, with gratitude in her
smile. Her thick brown hair, with glints of gold
in its waves, lay loose on the pillow. He thought
her even more lovely than on the previous even-
ing. Accustomed though he had once been to
the luxurious accessories of the bedchamber of a
woman of taste and fashion, and the daintinesses
of apparel reserved for its sanctity, a tremor of
artistic pleasure seized him as he noted the deli-
cate texture of the muslin and the fineness of the
lace which veiled the outlines of her shoulders
and bosom, and out of which gleamed her lovely
throat and half-bared arms j and as his eyes
rested upon the exquisite contours of her limbs,
partly defined beneath the clinging draperies that
enfolded her. When he saw that a drooping
yellow rose lay between her fingers, he was
D 2


stirred by the faintest disagreeable sensation. It
troubled him that Ananda, and not, he had been
the donor. The feeling intensified as, after some
conversation concerning her health, she fell into
silence, during which she toyed with the blossom.
Lifting it to her lips she seemed with her breath
to caress the petals, and looked up at him with
full, languid eyes. “ I love roses,” she said.
The gesture, the tone, the simple words
moved him as a balmy summer breeze may bring
ripples to the surface of a smooth lake. They
seemed to imply a subtle change in her, an un-
conscious allurement —he hardly knew how to
characterize it. He only felt that she was dif-
ferent from what she had been yesterday.
Bridget had withdrawn; but he could hear her
moving in the salon. “ Would you like me to
magnetize you now ?” he asked abruptly. “ I
am anxious to establish a complete rapport
before the pain returns again. By degrees, I
hope to banish it altogether.”
She raised herself a little and threw back her
hair. “Yes; please begin now,” she said. “I
want to know what it feels like.”
He drew his chair nearer to her and took her


hands, pressing his thumbs against hers, and
keeping his eyes on her.
“ Have you any curiosity about sensation ? ” he
asked.
“ Oh, is there any woman who does not some-
times feel in her nature springs which, if touched,
would thrill her through and through! ” She
spoke dreamily. “ Dr. Lloyd, I puzzle myself.
I should like to tell you about thoughts—feelings
I p aV e—which perhaps you would help me to
understand.”
“ Tell me,” he said softly.
“By - and - by, perhaps. I cannot express
them in words. It is when one draws in the
perfume of a flower, when the warm wind makes
our nerves quiver, when we —when we love, 1
her voice faltered, “ and are near the one loved,
there, there comes the certainty that there is
something more —something supremely exquisite,
if we could only reach it—if only the thrill would
intensify.”
“It could not,” he said, in a strange way.
“ At that point we should die.”
They were both silent.
“ Your hands are a little hot,” he said presently>


in the calm tone which was beginning to impress
her with a sense of being dominated. “ Lie
against the pillows—so. Another one would be
an improvement. May I call your maid ? I fancy
that she thought I was performing incantations
yesterday. I will assure her that I don’t mean
anything uncanny.’’
Antonia laughed. “ Bridget is an excellent
old thing, and very attentive to me. She doesn’t
know much about mesmerism, but she quite ex-
pects something in the shape of virtuous magic
which is to do me good.”
Bridget listened with stolid respect to Dr.
Lloyd s exposition of the elementary laws of
human magnetism. Antonia listened too. It
pleased her that he should take pains to make his
theories intelligible to her maid. Bridget had
heard of- nay had once touched an electric eel,
and she had received a shock from a galvanic
battery. As soon as she heard that magnetic
baths were to form part of the treatment, she drew
a corollary from those two facts in nature and
science, and required no further enlightenment.
When Dr. Lloyd impressed upon her the necessity
for conducting his operations without noise, or


outside disturbance, slie shook her head despair-
ingly. “ That’ll never be managed heie, Sir,
listen now.” The children in the conidoi were
uproarious at their play; and from the tennis
court below laughter rose. “ But I thought, Sir,
added Bridget mysteriously, “ that once they
were got off, needles nor cannon wouldn’t wake
them.”
“ I don’t want to put your mistress right off,”
said Dr. Lloyd, “ I want to soothe her gradually.
Never mind, I will think of a suitable ariange-
ment.”
“Oh!” cried Antonia, “don’t interfere with
the children. I like them to be happy. I anr
fond of children. I wish ”
She paused and coloured slightly. She had
often wished for a child.
Dr. Lloyd stood up, and threw all his energy
into some powerful passes. The vague wonder
in Antonia’s eyes deepened. “ It’s very strange,”
she said. “I like the feeling 5 its exhilarating.
Something seems to draw my body, and my limbs
tingle. What is it ? ”
“It is the mesmeric fluid,” he answered,
Beichenbach’s odyle the vital forces with


which I am reinvigorating your exhausted nervous
system.’'
Do you think that you did anything for me
yesterday ? ” she asked. “ May I talk ? ”
les, certainly. Try to be unrestrained, and
obey your impulses. All I wish is that you
shouldn’t oppose your will to mine.”
My will would not be strong enough to resist
yours.”
Perhaps not, but it would delay good re-
sults.”
‘ l Are you certain that they will be good ? ”
I have every reason to feel so,” he replied;
“ are y°u not now comfortable and at ease ? ”
Ah, I was not in pain, but I had such strange
dreams last night. I felt quite unlike myself this
morning. That made me ask whether you had
done anything for me yesterday.”
Possibly. But it is difficult to tell how far I
affected you, because of the morphia.”
I nevei felt quite like that when they gave
me morphia before,” she said.
“ Were the dreams happy ones ?”
“Yes. I think so. lam not sure. They
were strange.’ She spoke in a wandering way,


and turned more towards him, as he seated him-
self again. She lay for a few moments, as if
under a spell, with her lips partly unclosed, and
her breath coming more quickly. Her bosom
began to heave in slow undulations. With a
gesture of unconscious abandon she threw her arm
above her head, and her hand lay upon the pillow,
the delicate pink palm uppermost. Her eyelids
drooped. “ Are you willing me to do anything \ ”
she murmured.
“I am going to will you to sleep. I think that
would be good for you.”
“ I feel so drowsy,” she murmured, nestling
her cheek against her arm. “ But the children
distract me.”
“ 1 do not think I shall be really successful
with you here,” he said. “ I have been thinking
that it would be better if once a day you came to
my house. You will have your electrical bath,
and then I will magnetize you in a room where
all the conditions will be favourable.”
She lay with eyes closed. Presently she
uttered a confused sound. “ How strange! ” she
murmured. “I see a room —I feel sure it is
yours. I’ve never been there before.”


He started and bent over her, turning pale in
his excitement. “ Tell me what you see/’ he
said.
“ There don’t seem to be any windows. It is
hung with blue silk, that gleams. The light is so
lovely. Oh, it is electric light. Ther e are
strange things floating about • they’re like white
shadows. Oh! how beautiful! ” She sighed as
if in ecstacy. “ Oh! do not go. Now it is all
getting dark. I don’t see the light,”
He waited, still directing the nerve force upon
her, and presently asked her if she saw again,
but she only sighed gently, and was quiet, and
then he knew that she had passed into a peaceful
sleep.
He sat beside her for a little while. To watch
her as she lay thus in her perfect beauty, warm,
living, lose-flushed, was to feed his keenest
aitistic perceptions, and to kindle the more
human instincts which had been held in abey-
ance. And then,, also, there was intellectual
excitement in the discovery of her latent clair-
voyant faculties, in thought, and of the vistas
opened to him. He tore himself reluctantly
away. A patient in Nice claimed his attention.


He promised himself, however, to return later in
the day, and, if medical observation should show
that his ministrations were beneficial, to take
Antonia to his house, and lay all in train for the
future.
An impulse of which he was half ashamed
prompted him before he moved away, to take up
the rose which her lips had touched. And while
driving through Nice, in obedience to another
impulse equally imperious, he stopped at a
florist’s, and purchased a sheaf of the roses she
loved.
All day he was troubled by a vague unrest, a
desire to yield himself to reverie, not of a philo-
sophical nature, and to visions of that recumbent
form, of the pink-palmed hand and soft, round
arm, on which the angry spot made by the point
of the morphia needle was like a reproach to him
for desecrating its whiteness.
His analytical habits of thought made him
observe the science of the sensations she evoked,
and he reasoned, that since he could so analyse
them, they must be as it were, outside his per-
sonality. She was like a beautiful picture, he
said, and in that way affected his senses. It was


to the artist in him that she appealed, not to the
man. She was his friend’s wife, his patient,
confided to his honour, protected by a triple tie.
The idea was preposterous. Nay, did she not
represent also the fulfilment of his aspirations
after the occult life of purity, of knowledge, of
superhuman power ? Her magnetic atmosphere,
untainted by any grossness of living, would he
his medium ot access to the Adepts, those
guardians of highest wisdom; her soul should be
his guide into unknown regions, and should
unfold to him the pages of the Astral Book. But
the woman clung to his imagination. Her very
name even, “ Toni,” uttered below his breath, set
his pulses faintly throbbing, the scent of the roses
he had bought recalled her. At last, by an effort
of will he forced his thoughts into other grooves,
and set himself to study till four chimed, the hour
he had mentally appointed for his visit to the
hotel.
Antonia was risen and dressed : and his first
glance at her assured him that physically she
had derived no ill from his essay at healing. She
looked less fragile. Her face was not so pale,
lliere was more elasticity in her gestures; and


her manner was animated, even vivacious. She
acquiesced with evident pleasure in his proposal
that he should conduct her to the Chateau, and
cause Bridget to be initiated into the mysteries
of the Baths. They went out to the garden of
the hotel, and then, leaving it, he led her by a
zig-zag path through the olive groves, up the
hill, on the summit of which Monte Santo was
built.
Antonia was delighted with the view of the
old town and of the Chateau, as, during the
ascent, it opened upon her, and shook her head
playfully when, in capacity of physician, he
rebuked her eagerness to explore the narrow
streets of Monte Santo, examine the church, and
climb the ruined fortifications. It was strange to
remark how rapidly their intimacy had giown;
and from her manner a stranger would have
inferred that she had known him for years instead
of hours.
He watched her with absorbing interest. And
now he observed in her an abandon , a plasticity,
a susceptibility to external influences which he
did not connect with his earliest impression of
her. Her moods reflected her surroundings.


"When in the sunshine and among the flowers
on the marble terraces of the hotel garden, she
showed the unconscious gaiety of a child. Then,
as she leaned upon his arm ascending the hill,
where the weird shadows cast by the olives met
their steps, where the earth gave forth moist
exhalations, and the scent of hyacinths and tube-
roses weighted the air, her form swayed with
greater pliancy, and her smile and her eyes
gained a more seductive sweetness; while under
the grey old walls, and in face of the mouldering
shrine, she seemed affected by the traditions and
associations that haunted the place.
Dr. Lloyd first showed his visitors the Bath-
room, a late addition to the Chfiteau; and,
leaving Bridget to make acquaintance with the
woman in charge, he brought Mrs. Yascher to
the palm-bordered terrace which stretched below
his study.
Here they came upon Ananda in his favourite
attitude of contemplation, extended upon a bam-
boo lounge, his cigarette in his mouth, and his
eyes turned upward to the sky.
The Hindoo started to his feet as Mrs. Vascher
approached. She advanced to him with out-


stretched hand, blit drew it back, remembering
that Ananda’s peculiar tenets did not sanction the
ordinary mode of salutation. “Mr. Ananda,”
she exclaimed, “ I want to thank you for having
been so thoughtful as to send me the beautiful
roses.”
Ananda was still, it appeared, in the realms of
abstraction, yet another self seemed to gaze some-
what anxiously from his eyes, behind the outer man
who greeted Antonia with a cold formal courtesy
hardly in keeping, Lemuel thought, with his gift of
flowers, and implied intimacy with her in India.
He asked for news of Colonel Vascher, and then
for the first time Dr. Lloyd noted in his mind that
Antonia had not once that day alluded to her
husband. The mention of his name, and the
recall to her old life, seemed to come upon her
with something of a shock. She looked painfully
agitated, and gazed round with an expression of
bewilderment. But she recovered herself quickly.
“Oh my poor Julian!” she exclaimed. “He
suffered so on my account. How happy he would
be to see me now well, and in such good spirits.
I don’t know why it is,” she added, glancing at
Dr. Lloyd, and then turning away her eyes with


a slight access of colour. “ I feel as though I
had been drinking moral champagne. My heart
is so light, and I take a kind of physical delight
in the beauty around me, like a bird or an animal.
It seems wicked to be so free from care when
Julian is far away.”
Ananda gazed at her earnestly.
“I have heard other people, whose nervous
organizations were highly strung, say that the air
of the Riviera produced that effect upon them
before they had become acclimatised,” remarked
Dr. Lloyd, constrainedly.
“I hope that I may never become acclimatised,”
exclaimed Antonia. She seated herself upon a
cane chair, and, taking off her hat, leaned her head
back. “ The sky is so blue,” she continued.
“ The sea is so blue too, and the flowers are so
sweet. The wind seems to be telling a story, like
the wind in a dream.”
“What story does the wind tell you?” asked
Ananda, absently.
“ The story of Spring,” she replied, turning to
him. “Do you remember, Ananda, a Sanscrit
poem you read and translated to me? Every-
thing to-day reminds me of it. The God of Love


passed by. The flowers thrilled into beauty and frag-
rance; the bee drank honey out of the same flower-
cup with his mate; the embrace cf the creeper in
blossom became closer to its beloved tree —and—
Does it not go so? ah, say it again, Ananda!”
Ananda was silent for a few moments, his dark
spiritual eyes fixed upon the sea line.
“ You mean the Kumara Sambhaba ,” he said.
“ It is this.”
He broke into a melodious sort of chant,
uttered in a strange liquid tongue, the notes of
which seemed to breathe nature’s sweetest har-
monies, the cooing of birds, the joyous rustling
of forest trees, the fervid murmurs of summer
breezes—he paused. His face seemed for the
moment transfigured with purest poetry, and
again he spoke in that wonderful language, his
voice vibrating with an unearthlike passion:
“ Sarigama viralia vikalpe
Baramiha viraho na sangama,
Sange Saiva tathaika stasya,
Trivuvana mapi tanonayam viralie.”
“What is the translation of that?” asked Lloyd.
“It is a Sanscrit love-song,” replied Ananda,
rising. “I do not know how to say it. There
£


are ideas in our Eastern poetry,” lie went on, “so
subtle, so delicate, that the Western mind cannot
conceive, far less express them. The meaning is
this. A lover tells his mistress that he prefers
her absence to her presence, for he says:
“ ‘ Should cruel fate e'er lead this faithful heart
To choose my love from her own absent self
I’d prefer to lose her from these eyes;
With her, I've her alone —lost all beside
Without, the regions three by her are filled.'”


III.
Ananda moved a few paces, but presently
returned. “ Lemuel,” lie said in an altered tone,
“ tlie air grows chill. Shall I turn doctor in your
stead and warn Mrs. Vasclier against the dangers
of a Riviera sunset ? ”
Lloyd roused himself with a start. He offered
Antonia his arm, and they ascended the stone
steps and entered the library. She examined it
with interest.
“ This is not the room you saw ? ” he said
tentatively.
She did not appear to comprehend him. “ I
have not been here before,” she replied simply.
He perceived that she had no recollection of
her glimmering vision of the morning.
“Is this where you work and see your
patients % ” she asked.
“ Yes,” he answered ; “ but I will show you my
sanctum in the tower, which is sacred to our occult
E Z


studies and to my magnetic experiments, and lias
been remodelled in accordance with Ananda’s
theories. Don’t look alarmed, Mrs. Vascher,” he
added; “it is no sorcerer’s chamber. Ananda
will have nothing to do with the vulgar parapher-
nalia of magic. All that he allows one are rods
of different kinds of metal and wood, which have
certain affinities with the elements, and influence
our electrical condition.”
He drew aside the plush curtain, and opened a
door which it concealed. They found themselves
in a square, lofty room, lighted by an electric
globe, and lined with pale blue silk. At first it
appeared that there were no windows or means of
free ventilation, but the cool freshness of the
atmosphere proved that there must be some
cunning arrangement above for the admission of
air. The carpet was of a yellow colour, which
threw into relief the somewhat sombre furniture.
Low divans, luxuriously upholstered, were ranged
here and there against the wall. A couch of
peculiar construction, and with glass feet, was
placed nearer the centre. Its head lay northward,
and above it was suspended a large horse-shoe
magnet. Near the fire-place was a comfortable*


looking double writing-table, on which were some
manuscripts, books in attractive bindings, and
dainty modern appliances, such as might be seen
in a county bouse library. There were a few hand-
some and valuable chairs of repoussd leather ; and
small massive tables, one of which supported a
crystal bowl filled with the roses, which reminded
Dr. Lloyd of Antonia, stood here and there.
Except a closed cabinet, a row of book-shelves
and some apparatus for chemical experiments,
there was no other furniture in the apartment. The
effect produced by the combination of colouring,
the yellow carpet, the blue walls, and the silvery
illumination of the electric light, was fantastic in
the extreme; but if peculiar, the room was in all
respects attractive, and did not suggest anything
weird or awesome. Antonia’s face wore a puzzled
expression. “ Oh, what a beautiful light! ” she
exclaimed. “ How strange it all is! And yet,”
she added thoughtfully, “it doesn’t seem quite
strange either. I think that once I must have been
here in a dream.” She stooped over the bowl of
roses. “My flowers ! ” she said, and moved about
inspecting the magnet and the various properties
scattered about, and asking questions.


“Will you rest here, Mrs. Vascher?” said
Lloyd, pointing to the couch, which was low and
furnished with downy cushions. “ Let me take your
hat, and now lean your head back. ,, He drew a
rug over her feet, and adjusted the pillows. “ I
think you will allow that the conditions of this
room are more favourable to mesmerization than
at the hotel.”
Antonia did as he bade her. “ Tell me,” she
said, “ why are the walls hung with silk, and why
do you guard yourself so carefully from the outer
world ? ”
“ For the same practical reason that your
sofa is made of glass, and that I asked you to
wear a dress of woollen material in preference to
silk. For the purpose of insulation. It is our
object to keep the magnetism pure and to turn
back hostile currents. You must ask Ananda to
explain the laws of occult physics,” he added
smiling.
They looked round, but Ananda was not to be
seen. Fie had slipped away, leaving them alone.
“ Shall I call him ? ” asked Dr. Lloyd. “Would
3ou like him to be present while I mesmerize
you?”


“No,” she returned: “I think Mr. Ananda
finds me frivolous, and that he does not care to
be in my society.”
He began his passes. She yielded readily to
the influence. Hardly a minute elapsed before
her head drooped and her features assumed that
mobile expression, that intensely feminine charm,
which so captivated him. Her eyes were still
open, but gazing up to his—they swam in a
delicious languor.
Presently, at his will, she closed them. He
bent over her, and his breath stirred the little rings
of hair upon her brow. She was quite still,
sleeping, as it seemed, like a child tired with
play.
But his heart was beating. He moved from
the couch, angry at his own weakness, forcibly
crushing back the fiery impulses which would not
suffer him to gaze at a beautiful woman without
emotion. Was this the passionless calm of the
philosopher ? This, the only fruit his efforts at
self-repression had borne ? He went to the
writing-table, and, being seated, tried to compose
himself into a frame of mind suitable to the
scientific investigator of psychic mysteries.


He returned once more to where she lay. The
roses’ scent, or a perfume more delicate, more sub-
tle, which she herself seemed to exhale, caressed
his senses. How exquisite was the curve of her
cheek—the warm soft flesh which he longed to
kiss. Toni! Magic word ! More potent than the
spells of the Alchemists. He must speak it aloud.
“ Toni! ”
Her lips murmured responsively. Irresistible
temptation ! He kneeled by her. He touched
with his own the hand which lay like warm snow
on her bosom. “ Where are you, Toni? ”
She spoke. The utterance was confused and
indistinct. He strained his ear to listen. “ Speak
louder, Toni.”
“ I am by the sea. lam in Egypt. It is a
long, long stretch of sand, so lonely! The waves
roll in on the dead beach. The dead desert lies
beyond. The sun is setting, and the sand is like
blood ; and the sea is of blood with a light on the
foam. There is a great black column by the
shore. It casts a deep shadow. The shadow meets
the sea and turns to blood . . . and I see a
woman standing in the shadow—a black woman ;
and she holds a dead child in her arms.”


There was silence for a few moments. The
mesmeric fluid seemed to quiver as it was pro-
jected from the fingers of the operator. Antonia
spoke. “ She breathes upon the child’s face, and
it is dead no longer : it lives. And she breathes
once more, and now it is dead again. There is a
man beside the shadow. He comes near me.
He fixes his eyes upon me. . . He fills me with
fear. . . And yet —he is so beautiful.”
“Describe him,” commanded the mesmerist.
“He is very tall. His skin is dark. He is
like an Egyptian ; and he has black eyes which
pierce me through. His face is full of intellect
and majesty, but it is sad —oh, so sad,’ she spoke
in pitying accents. “It looks as though he had
never smiled. His hair hangs below his shoulders.
He wears a white dress almost to his feet, and a
turban with red in it. Now he is speaking.”
“ What is it that he says ? ”
She raised her head a little, and seemed to be
listening.
“ He tells me that he has marked me out and
watched me for long. That the strange yearnings
I have felt at times, for more perfect happiness
more exquisite enjoyment —are the struggles of my


inner self towards that fulness of life which he
says may he mine. He tells me, that through
your instrumentality, my psychic faculties may he
developed and my finer senses sharpened. He
bids me follow him, and he will show me secrets
of nature.”
She paused. Trembling with eagerness, yet
fearful lest his self-control and, with it, his
power might forsake him, Lloyd kept his eyes
fixed upon her, and concentrated his will with
an intensity of purpose that might almost have
enabled his spirit to free itself and traverse space.
He waited in breathless suspense. For a little
while she was silent. Then a deep-drawn, won-
dering, exclamation broke from her.
“Ah!”
“ Where are you ? ” he asked.
lamin a cave. There are rocks all round,
and sculptured pillars. It is like a temple. I
see men in long white garments with shaven
heads. I think they are priests. One of them
steps forward. He is not shaven like the rest,
but vcais a led cap ; and he can'ies a rod—
No ! ” she shuddered; “itis a snake. He traces
with it all lound him on the floor of the temple


which is covered with sand. The priests put
burning lamps where he has traced in the figure
of a triangle interlaced with a circle.” . . . She
waited. “Now one pours something on the
ground and a mist rises. It is grey at first —and
now it is getting red, and I see shapes in it... .
Ah I” she uttered a stifled shriek ; “ I can’t look.
Take me away.”
She struggled as though to free herself from
invisible bonds. Her tones were shrill, and yet
sounded far away ; her eyes, open now, glassy,
and, as it were, transfixed with terror. “ Oh, it
is horrible ! ” she cried. “ No, no, I don’t want
to know your secrets.” Her shuddering became
more violent, her limbs were convulsed, and she
writhed on the couch. In alarm, he made some
rapid reverse passes. Withdrawn from the
influence which appeared so to terrify her, she
grew calmer ; the frenzied movements ceased, and
her eyes closed, though she moaned a little like a
child sleeping, yet half conscious of pain. Gradu-
ally, however, the moans died away. He feared
to awaken her suddenly, and sat by her while she
slept, his mind and his emotions in a tumult.
Into what mysteries had she been on the point of


initiation? Could lie dare again confide lier to
the guidance of this mysterious Being, who, for the
moment, he doubted not, was connected with the
Brotherhood of Adepts, the custodians of occult
secrets ? He was sufficiently versed in the science
of mesmerism to be aware that he had the power
of limiting his subject’s experiences on the astral
plane. To stand back on the very threshold of
the Immeasurable region would be a sacrifice
almost beyond him ; but to proceed in face of
possible bad results to her would be worse than
cruelty. Could it be that the failure arose from
his own incapacity to receive the Higher Know-
ledge. He knew that perfect purity of life and
thought were essentials to its attainment. As he
pondered, a knock sounded, and Ananda entered.
The Hindoo glared half apprehensively at
Antonia’s prostrate form. Evidently relieved by
her now tranquil appearance, he said,
“ I see that she is in a magnetic sleep. Hoes
your treatment promise well ? ”
Hr. Lloyd rose, and paced the room before he
replied.
<£ There has been no return of pain since
I magnetised her yesterday. I have every


reason to Lope that I am doing her good.
Ananda,” he added, with some agitation, “ I was
right; she is clairvoyante.” And he related
briefly what had occurred.
Ananda listened with the deepest attention.
His face was grave and concerned. He made
Dr. Lloyd repeat the description of the Egyptian’s
dress, and also of the High Priest’s headgear;
then stood for a few moments silent and
thoughtful.
“ Lemuel,” he said at length, “ we will talk of
this by-and-by. In the meantime it is getting
late. Had you not better awaken Mrs. Vascher.
If she appears unconscious of her vision, do not
tell her of it.”
Antonia awoke with a deep sigh. She showed
some slight symptoms of distress and bewilder-
ment, but these passed off after a few moments, and
she spoke in a natural manner. “ I feel,” she said,
looking at Lloyd with her soft, charming smile,
“as though I had taken chloroform or laughing-
gas ; and I have a vague unpleasant impression
of having gone somewhere and done something—
I don’t know where or what.” She turned and
surprised Ananda’s gaze. “ Ananda,” she ex


claimed, “ you told mo, when I once described
to you my feelings after taking laughing-gas in
India, that my soul had been wandering. Do you
think my soul wandered just now ? ”
“ Perhaps, ” replied Ananda; “ but since you do
not know where it went, that is of but little conse-
quence to you.”
“On the contrary,” returned Antonia, “to
remember one’s dreams might be to live in a world
more beautiful than the reality.”
fehe sighed softly, and her eyes shining with a
dreamy lustre, meet those of Lloyd. LTis eyes had
been ardently watching her. He wondered if she
had heard his impassioned utterance of her name.
He fancied, as she rose from the couch, and took
up the hat he had laid on a divan, that there was
an indefinable consciousness in her air and her
face. It was like the look of a woman who has
half granted a caress and, who in mingled distrust
and fascination, coquets with her impulses. But if
Antonia were affected by the strange intoxication
which overpowered Lloyd, she herself was but
dimly aware of it. She was like a person under
the influence of a drug which seems in some
strange way to blend illusion and sensation.


They left the mesmeric room and went out on to
the terrace. There they found Bridget waiting
and relieved at the sight of her mistress. Antonia
said little. She accepted Lloyd’s arm, and returned
Ananda’s farewells. They descended the zigzag-
path, neither speaking. Her contact thrilled
him. He would gladly have prolonged the walk.
The twilight, the heavy odours, the olive shadows
seemed to wrap them round as if with a veil, and
he was gnawed by a faint sensuous desire which
yet seemed to bring its own satisfaction. As he
parted from her at the entrance to the hotel he
said, “You have not told me yet whether my
treatment is agreeable to you or not.”
She paused before replying. “I don’t know,
I feel so strange .... It—it excites me, and
gives me a feeling here,” she touched her heart.
“ I don’t know if it is quite pleasant. I like it
best, I think, when you don’t put me to sleep, but
when you sit beside me and soothe me, and make
me feel happy. I know that lam safe then ; but
when I am asleep I don’t know what happens to
me.”
“Do I soothe you, and make you feel
happy ? ” he said very low, releasing her hand.


“ You sliall be safe, I will not put you to
sleep.”
Later on, Dr. Lloyd began to question Ananda
as to his ideas concerning the chief personage of
Antonia’s vision.
They were in the library at the Chateau, not
the occult room, as it was called, in which they
usually passed their evenings. Dr. Lloyd felt a
sudden impulse, the sources of which he dared
not analyse, to keep that apartment sacred as far
as might be possible to Antonia Yascher; and his
guest, with the instinctive courtesy which charac-
terizes the high-bred Hindoo, divined his disin-
clination to follow their usual habit, and made no
proposal to quit the library.
Ananda lay half buried in a large arm-chair
close to the fire, —he revelled in warmth and sun-
shine,—smoking meditatively while he rolled
cigarettes between his thin pliant fingers. He
handed one to his friend without answering the
question which had been put to him. Dr. Lloyd
lighted the cigarette, but laid it down after a whiff
or two. 11 Ananda,” he said, “ you know how
earnestly I have longed that one of your masters
would make himself visible to me in the astral


body, but you have always told me that my
magnetism has not been sufficiently purified to
enable me to obtain that favour. You have said,
however, that it would be possible for an adept
to communicate with me through a mesmerized
sensitive.”
“I have said that it would be possible,” replied
Ananda, drawing in and expelling a cloud of
smoke. “Lemuel,” he exclaimed, “why have
you so intense a desire for occult knowledge when
I hose who know have intimated that your strong
passions, however closely you may keep them
under leash, must always make it dangerous,
almost impossible, for you to lead ‘the life?’ ”
“I have proved that they can be controlled,”
lejoined Dr. Lloyd. “ For the last four years my
existence might have been that of a monk.”
“ Asceticism is not virtue,” said Ananda ; “ and
bad blood thrown into the system corrupts at the
core.”
“ Why do I desire occult knowledge ? ” re-
peated Dr. Lloyd, not heeding the last remark.
Lecause there is an irresistible something within
me urging me towards the unknown, the dark,
the mysterious—a longing like thirst to solve the


problems of life and death —a consciousness of
power to command the elemental spirits. At
times, when I intensify my will and project the
magnetic fluid —that master force which can com-
pel nature to give up her secrets —I am almost
intoxicated by this consciousness of power.”
“ You are right,” said Ananda, “ mesmerism is
the key to every mystery in occult science. You
have the power. But do you not see that the
will-force may be as easily used to injure and
destroy as to comfort and bless ? It is but a turn
of the handle which directs the stream this way,
or that.”
“You do not imagine that I would do anything
that could injure Mrs. Vascher?” exclaimed
Dr. Lloyd.
“ Not consciously. It is well, though, that you
should place the possibility before your mind.
As a healthy vitality can be transmitted by a
mesmerist pure in heart, so a destructive and
brutalizing influence may be thrown upon the ner-
vous system of a chosen object of desire or malice,
provided there be some moral taint in the nature
of the victim. It is nothing that the evil germ
has lain unsuspected. It was there like a hidden


cancer. The mesmeric mjpport calls it into
activity; and before the foul magnetic tide, honour,
happiness,— all are swept away.”
Ananda, overpowered by his emotion, spoke
with impassioned fervour. Lloyd rose from his
seat pale, shaken.
“ How can you hint at so horrible a possibility
in connection with a man such as I am —your
friend, and the would-be disciple of your masters,
and a woman noble and pure as Mrs. Vascher.”
“ I hint at it only,” replied Ananda mournfully,
“ because I believe you to be true of heart, and
because I know Antonia Vascher to be pure.
Her purity is her safeguard against the evil in-
fluence which assailed her to-day.”
“ To-day ” cried Lloyd in an agitated voice.
“ Yes,” said Ananda, “ To-day; during her
trance.”
“ Ananda,” said Lloyd impressively. “ The
Oriental in a white dress, with the beautiful face
and strange, sad eyes which Mrs. Vascher de-
scribed, was surely one of the Great Occult
Brotherhood who work for the good of men.”
“ You are mistaken,replied Ananda, rising to
his feet. “ That man was not one of these Great
r %


ones wlio tread the fourth path of Holiness. He
was a black magician, a follower of the left-hand
path, a Brother of the Shadow.”
There was a brief silence.
“ How do you know this? ” asked Lloyd.
“From the general features of the case. That
sadness upon which Mrs. Vascher laid so much
stress, and which comes from intensification of the
will upon all that is gross, base, and sensual, is no
characteristic of the true adept. The aim of real
knowledge is happiness, and the first fruits gained
by the aspirant are a lightness and buoyancy
of spirit and a pure delight in the joys of nature,
which seem to take him back to the sweetest
days of childhood. Then also,” continued Ananda,
“a minor point which might seem to you unim-
portant—the wearing of red by Mrs. Vascher’s
astral guide and by the High Priest—convinced
me that they belong to a school of Black Magic.
“I do not follow you,” said Lloyd, again
seating himself and bending towards Ananda, his
face sharpened with intense interest.
“Ao! said Ananda. “I am not able to
explain fully. There is a law of correspondences
in the occult world which cannot be violated.


The Dugpas, as we call these black magicians
in the East, aim only at internal enjoyment,
sensuality, the things of the flesh, which red, the
blood-colour, typifies. The blood is the life.
Seen in the light it is red, but the blood as it is
seen through your veins is blue. It is red in its
material aspect, blue in its higher one. Thus the
colour of the true occultist is blue, and the Dugpa
is forced to have some red about his person. It
is an occult law. Also that pouring of blood on
the ground is part of the ceremonial of evoking
the worst elemental.
Lloyd shuddered. “ And I exposed her to
this!”
“Forewarned is forearmed,” said Ananda. “It
depends now upon your will whether her soul
escapes from your control. The horror she ex-
pressed shows that she is not capable of being
contaminated. Continue your treatment, Lloyd,
only do not again throw her into a state of
trance.”
“I have already promised her that,” said Lloyd
in a low voice.
“ Then all will be well. While your desires
are pure, your magnetism will be beneficial and


healing; and you will have the happiness of
restoring her to her husband freed from pain.”
Lloyd did not speak. He left his seat and
walked up and down the room as though his
mind were filled with agitating thoughts. By-
and-by he returned to his former position.
Ananda had again buried himself in his armchair,
and was composedly rolling cigarettes as before.
The Hindoo’s temperament was a source of
frequent wonder to Dr. Lloyd. Ananda seemed
to live completely in the moment. Emotion
glided by him, and a brief access of excitement
left him again placidly cheerful. It was one of
his favourite sayings, “ Do your day’s work with-
out motive and be happy : ” and he would some-
times add, “ I feel a criminal to my conscience,
because it seems wrong to be happy when the
world is so full of sorrow.” He smiled now in
answer to Lloyd’s gaze, which was fixed curiously
upon him.
“Do not be disturbed, Lemuel,” he said.
“Those who are true in heart have nothing to fear:
the Dugpa cannot injure the pure and good.”
“ Tell me something about these Brothers of
the Shadow,” said Lloyd, abruptly.


Ananda resumed liis conversational manner.
He stretched himself out and talked, smoking the
while. “ There’s a school of them in India, and
one in Egypt. I should think this man is an
Egyptian. One of the first dangers against
which our masters warn their pupils is that to he
feared from the Dugpas. These occultists become
adepts for evil by the force of a concentrated
selfishness. The first step towards black magic
is in the use of mesmerism and psychic powers
for selfish ends or base purposes. F rom this, the
left-hand path is easy.”
“ Ananda,” asked Lloyd, u have you ever
been brought into contact with any of these
men ? ”
“ They have not injured me,” replied Ananda,
“I am merely a neophyte of the lower grade. I
have developed no abnormal faculties, and so
am guarded from dangers on the astral plane.
Possibly my temperament may not be susceptible
to such magnetism. Their attention is usually
most attracted by those likely to advance in
occultism, and the danger to these is great, if
there be any leading passion in them upon which
the Dngpa can operate. I have known cases in


which high students have been severely injured-
It is one of the duties of our masters to counteract
the evil work of the Brothers of the Shadow/’
For what reason do you suppose that Mrs.
Vascher has been singled out by this man ? ” said
Lloyd.
e -^ r °bably 5 because she has psychic faculties of
a high order, answered the Hindoo thoughtfully,
‘ and wishes to use her as an instrument, but
if I judge her rightly that cannot be.” Silence
fell again between the two. Dr. Lloyd did not
pursue the subject, and after a little desultory
conversation, Anandarose and bade his host good
night.


IV.
Dr. Lloyd sat up late, a prey to tormenting
thoughts. Ananda’s words had struck home.
As he paced the lonely room, he wrestled honestly
with emotions, which threatened to overpower his
purer aspirations. It seemed to him that only
now had he discovered the tremendous love-force
pent up within him, and reasoning upon it even
while he combated it, he told himself that it was
no mere fleshly desire, but something stronger,
holier, which under favouring circumstances might
have metamorphosed him into a new being—a
force that in his previous relations with women
had never had free vent, an imperious want of his
nature to which the gross and vulgar opportunities
of life had not responded, and which had never
till now found its ideal realization. For, again
and again, he assured himself that it was not
Antonia’s beautiful form which he loved, but
the soul that animated it—the soul that could


have supplied the all embracing, spiritual, intel-
lectual, and emotional sympathy his own nature
needed.
Was it not possible, he thought, that even now
this love-force might exhale itself upon a higher
plane of existence than that of mere physical
manifestation. Is there not a divine poetry of
love which transfigures sense ? And, if this were
so, why should he crush down his appreciation of
her beauty; why cultivate a loathing for that
which was not in itself unholy; why exhaust
his energies in battling with the vehement long-
ing which possessed him to be near her, to gaze
into her eyes, to watch the play of her expression,
to recall her during absence in ravishing visions ?
He had feared to enter the occult room, lest the
spell of her presence lingering there still, should
prove an enchantment too powerful. Each time
in his walk, that he passed the veiled door, he
had checked the impulse to open it. The clock
struck twelve. Ananda had long since retired.
How could he rest racked by this fever of the
heart ? A fancy seized him to test the magnetic
virtues of the spot where she had lain. The idea
of allowing his emotions natural vent was surely


a happy inspiration. To conquer a foe, it must
be boldly met.
He drew the curtain and stood in the soft
silvery light, now subdued by an opaque cover-
ing that dropped at evening, which illuminated
the chamber like cold moon-rays. The scent of
Antonia’s roses filled the atmosphere. Her hand-
kerchief had been dropped on the floor. He
raised it reverentially to his lips. The pillows
of the couch were yet indented by the pressure
of her head. He placed himself beneath the
magnet. A luxurious sensation of well-being
and repose stole over him. Before long, he
slept.
How long, he knew not. He awoke with a
thrill of expectancy and excitement. He had a
feeling of exhilaration which was yet not without
a vague awe. The consciousness of a presence
was so strong in him that he half rose and looked
this way and that to convince himself that he
was alone. Yes. If shape there were in the
chamber, it was no corporeal one. The silvery
rays streamed in all parts of the room, lighting
up every nook and reflecting themselves back
from the gleaming silk hangings.


He closed his eyes again. The exaltation of
Ins nerves, however, banished slumber. It was
as though he had quaffed some volatile and
fiery elixir. That strange sense of a presence
near him, became overpowering. Again he
opened his eyes. This time he was not deceived.
He uttered a cry of alarm and wonder, and
started to a sitting posture. At the distance
of a few paces from the couch stood a figure
in a white woollen robe, which he recognized
at once as that of Antonia’s vision. The com-
manding stature, the pale olive face—superhuman
in beauty. Yet almost demoniacal in its gloom,
its utter lack of human sympathy and generous
sentiment; the dark piercing eyes; the majestic
port of head and neck; the long silky hair, and
lofty brow surmounted by a turban of mingled
white and blood-red—these could belong to none
other than the Brother of the Shadow.
It was no spectral hallucination. Whether in
the astral or the physical body, the man was
living, moving, actual.
He canied a light, stout staff or wand, the top
of which was surmounted with a cross-piece T
the Egyptian Tau. With this he traced a


luminous geometrical figure on the ground, his
eyes, all the while, fixed steadily upon the doctor’s
face. This figure Lloyd recognized as the
reversed pentagram. The single triangle instead
of being at the base, pointed towards the north,
and thus represented the dominion of the evil
principle in Nature.
“ You are wrong,” said the stranger, as if divin-
ing his thoughts, in a voice of bass timbre , but
sweet and penetrating as a deep-toned bell.
“ This has been the gigantic mistake of
centuries. Neither principle in Nature can be
justly called evil or good. Satan, the principle
that has been denounced for ages, is the god of
the world. Without him there would be nega-
tion. Jehovah and Satan are but brothers strug-
gling together in a pleasant love-wrestle of
exercise, by which the equilibrium of the
Universe is preserved. No wonder that
Humanity has made itself wretched. It will
never be happy till it has acknowledged that
evil and good are but opposing forces, either of


which might be termed good. Does not the
Christian world even now adore God in the
Devil and a Devil in God ? ”
The aptness of the paradox struck pleasurably
upon Lloyd’s intellectual perception. He laughed
in a bewildered manner. His first feeling of
alarm had left him. He sat up on the couch,
would have risen, but his visitor motioned him
to remain.
u I am glad to see that you don’t resent my
unceremonious intrusion,” continued the deep
musical voice, which was exercising a powerful
fascination upon Lloyd. The accent was de-
cidedly that of an Oriental, though the English
was good, and Lloyd wondered how an Egyptian
—for such he assumed this mysterious person to
be had obtained so perfect a mastery over the
language.
U I once lived for several years in London,”
said the stranger again, answering an unspoken
thought. “ That was a very long time ago.
Since then I have contented myself with excur-
sions in the astral body. I first made your
acquaintance there, Dr. Lloyd, though you are
unaware of the fact. It may interest you to


know that I also made medicine the stepping
stone to occultism. I have watched your pro-
gress with great interest, though till to-day I
have found no opportunity of making myself
known to you.”
“I presume,” said Lloyd, “that it is in the
astral body I now see you.”
“ Precisely. There is a convenience in being
able to penetrate closed doors, and to announce
oneself without disturbing the household. Under
ordinary conditions I might have run the risk of
being treated inhospitably by your friend Ananda,
who has no very flattering opinion of me, or at any
rate pretends that he has not. I am pleased to
find that, notwithstanding his warnings, you don’t
show any signs of alarm.”
“ The first lesson which the would-be occultist
has to learn, is not to fear—even the powers of
evil.”
“ Well said. But we shall quarrel over terms
as long as you persist in believing that Satan and
Jehovah are mortal enemies striving to destroy
each other. However, this point we can discuss
another time. Having established a rapport , I
hope to dispense with such aids as this.” He


lowered his staff and pointed to the magical figure
which from a pale bituminous appearance
had now intensified into a deep red. “ There
will be no further need for an intermediary. Mrs,
Vascher is a good sensitive. The best, however,
is but a poor kind of speaking box; and you
must overcome her womanish terror of the urn
known, before she can be of real use to you in
unravelling Nature’s knots. Your determination
not to throw her into trance —at all events for a
time—is a wise one. You now see that I have no
evil designs upon your patient, and may continue
your healing ministrations without any appre-
hension that I shall frighten her again. You are
doing her a great deal of good. Magnetism
is the only certain cure for a malady like
hers.”
“ Who are you ? ” exclaimed Lloyd. “ Since
you know so much, you are aware that I am fore-
warned and forearmed against you.”
The stranger smiled, contradicting Mrs.
Vascher’s fanciful assertion. But the smile it is
true w r as saturnine, though it seemed to heighten
the beauty of the face, and to intensify the lustre
of those piercing eyes.


“ Who are you ? ” repeated Lloyd. “ I know
that you are no true Adept.”
“ What constitutes Adeptship ? The attainment
of knowledge, of power, of happiness. Ananda
declares happiness to be the aim of his philosophy.
It is the aim of mine. In essentials, lam at one
with the school of which he is the pupil. But I
claim a more all-embracing knowledge. Yes, I
am an Adept. But what lam named is of little
consequence. You may adopt Ananda’s term and
call me a Brother of the Shadow, or, if you prefer
it, simply Murghab the Egyptian.”
“In other words, you profess Black Magic;
and your powers are devoted to base purposes.
Well, explain yourself, I am not afraid of you ! ”
“Friend Lemuel,” said the Egyptian, “you
will discover as you advance in wisdom, that pre-
judice and sectarianism exist not only in lower
humanity. There is schism among the higher
occultists—ay, and hypocrisy also. What if I
were to tell you that Ananda, while he preaches
a life of asceticism and theorizes upon moral
purity, is in reality given over to the most sensual
longings.”
“ I should not believe you.”
Q


The Adept smiled again.
“ Well, it is not my business to unveil shams.
In the first place, it would take too long, for there
are so many of them. In the second, it is a
thankless work, and I can aid mankind better by
pointing out the true path to happiness.”
“ You talk of aiding mankind! ” said Lloyd.
“ Why not ? For what reason do you suppose
I have come to you ? Since, as you will believe,
I have the power to gratify my own desires, how
can it benefit me to inform you that you may, if
you choose, possess the same power. Let us talk
sensibly. You want to know the laws of Nature.
Do you imagine that you can learn them by dis-
obeying Nature ? ”
“ How ?” asked Lloyd, in a startled voice.
“ Are you not disobeying Nature, when you try
to strangle your human sensibilities —your natural
affections ? These are the influences which, if
allowed free operation, would call into manifesta-
tion the latent forces in you, now held down
by the weight of asceticism. Trample on your
passions and they will turn and sting you. Let
them exhaust themselves upon the universe, and
you have mounted many steps on the evolutionary


ladder. Can there be any more perfect develop-
ment than that in which the emotional, the intel-
lectual and the spiritual faculties at once find their
fullest realization. The discipline of asceticism
may suit some temperaments, those in which the
purely intellectual element is paramount—which
have no craving for the higher joys of love. The
philosophy that teaches contempt of love can
only be imperfect and hurtful to the progress of
such as you. Is it not in opposition to Nature’s
sublimest laws ? ”
There was a pause during which the magician,
sad, cynical, cold, eyed Lloyd, who sat apparently
absorbed in thought.
Murghab went on :
“ It has been truly said that the magnetism of
love is the originator of all created things. Judge
for yourself. Four years have passed since you
renounced wine and meat, since you resolved
upon a life of celibacy and absolute chastity.
Are you any nearer your goal ? In spite of your
sleepless endeavours, have you made any practical
advance in occultism? Yet it is a fact which
Ananda and his masters cannot deny, that you
have in you the potentialities of a master occultist,”
G 2


“ I feel it —I am certain of it,” cried Lloyd, off
his guard.
“ There exists in Nature, as you well know,’
went on the evil Adept, “a force more powerful
than the ordinary electricity, by the help of
which, a single man able to grasp and direct it
might change the face of the world. This is the
great secret —the knowledge of its manipulation.
Only those capable of absorbing and concen-
trating immense quantities of this most subtle
fluid can become initiate of the Secret Brother-
hood. You, Lemuel Lloyd, are one of those com-
manding souls. But till you give your nature free
opportunities of development, you will never attain
the Great Secret. A little while ago you yourself
realized this truth.”
There was silence for a moment: Lloyd seemed
still lost in deepest meditation. His eyes were bent
upon the ground. Raising them he met Murghab s
gaze.
“Your reasoning is specious as that of the
proverbial devil,” said he, with an uneasy laugh.
“My convictions are not so easily shaken however.
Still, for form’s sake, granting your argument,
what is its practical bearing 1”


The magician laughed also, “I have not come
here in my astral body, with a bond all ready for
you to sign, in which you shall agree to deliver up
your soul to me, on condition that I confer upon
you youth, wealth, love, and all the rest as per con-
tract. I don’t want your soul, or your personality
either; and you are still far from mature years, are
sufficiently endowed with this world’s goods, and,
without any aid from me, have the power to
inspire with love the one woman you have met
during your life, capable of responding to the
needs of your nature. I only bid you think over
all I have said, and when you have tried your
life of abstinence a little longer, and are con-
vinced that it is a mistake, I shall be happy to
enlighten you further as to my views upon occult-
ism. Now, before I go, I will show you two
pictures in the Astral Light which will illustrate
my meaning. Look.”
He raised his wand and pointed to the wall
opposite. At the same moment, there deepened
in Lloyd that sense of expansion and exhilaration
which he had experienced in a lesser degree upon
becoming conscious of the magician’s proximity.
“ You find my magnetism agreeable ” said the


latter quietly, but Lloyd could not reply, so
deeply absorbed was be in the vision which
unfolded itself to him.
He saw, as it were, a symbolic representation
of himself —his own face and form, aged by study,
dried up by self-repression, dead, as it appeared, to
life and joy—only the smouldering gleam in his
eyes, telling of unsatisfied longings; dark narrowing
walls closing him in, like the stones of a vaulted
chamber; no companion, spiritual or human, to
cheer his solitude—all hard, dull negation, dreari-
ness, void.
Then, in an instant, the scene changed. A
rosy light suffused the spot. He seemed gazing
upon plains and distant heights illumined by a
celestial radiance. Shadowy shapes of surpassing
beauty hovered in the air. Flowers bloomed in
profusion. Fruit hung temptingly. Rich per-
fumes intoxicated the senses. It was a
Greek landscape. It suggested the revels of
Olympus; and he himself stood in the fore-
ground, as it were, a God-man power, in-
tense capacity for enjoyment and for all the
finer emotions, intellect, spirit embodied in the
perfectly developed being who stepped to meet


the embraces of his beloved, his twin soul, his
chosen mate.
The thrill from the imaged form seemed to
communicate itself to his own frame. For there,
reclining upon a mossy bank, with love-lustrous
eyes turned towards him, and rose-flushed cheeks,
with ripe lips parted in a smile of the most
alluring sweetness, with arms half outstretched,
the exquisitely outlined form curved in an atti-
tude of enchanting grace, he beheld Antonia, the
Toni of his waking dreams, the woman whom he
loved with all the might of his soul.
“ Toni,” he murmured passionately, and sprang
to his feet with arms extended also. .... But
the faint illumination thrown by the electric
globe, was now but as darkness compared to the
vanished glory of the Astral Light. The vision
had faded. The Brother of the Shadow was no
longer to be seen. He was alone.
Hardly knowing whether what he had seen
and heard were nightmare or reality, Dr. Lloyd
sought his chamber. He looked from the case-
ment. The grey dawn was creeping up over the
olive trees. The Hotel Vimiera lay below him a


cold, white pile, silent and ghost-like. He un-
dressed and lay down. Soon he was asleep
again. It was his habit to rise early ; but to-day,
the sun was high before he awoke. The first
object upon which his eyes rested, was a note
directed in Ananda’s handwriting, which had
been brought in and placed by his bedside.
It brought him a surprise, for it informed
him of Ananda’s sudden departure from the
Chateau. The Hindoo stated that he had at
an early hour received a summons from an Indian
friend, an occultist now at Genoa, who wished to
see him. In order to catch the morning train, it
was necessary that he should leave Monte Santo
at once. He would not awaken his friend, who
seemed in the most profound sleep, and therefore
wrote his adieux. He might be absent a week,
perhaps longer. The hurried letter concluded
with a hope that Lloyd’s ministrations to Mrs.
Vascher might prove beneficial, and that be
wmuld adhere to his determination, not again to
throw his patient into a trance, and so expose her
to maleficent influences.
Though unwilling to own, even to himself, that
Ananda’s presence was a restraint, Hr. Lloyd


breathed more freely now that he had gone. It
would have irked him to recount his experiences
of the previous night, and to hear Ananda’s
explanations, the point of which he could foresee.
The insinuations of his strange visitant recurred
hauntingly. The germ of distrust had lodged in
his mind. He was conscious of a faint, inde-
finable jealousy. He envied Ananda his oppor-
tunities in India of companionship with Mrs.
Vascher. He fancied that he read below the
surface, and divined the Hindoo’s true reason for
wishing to study European civilization. It had
been, he thought, torture to Ananda to witness
the happiness of Antonia and her husband. He
had dreaded lest her society should interfere with
his occult training. In this respect, Lloyd gave
Ananda credit for sincerity, and he put aside the
suggestion that his friend’s life was not what it
appeared. But who knew better than Lloyd
what hidden tumult may rage in the breast of
man!
It seemed to him that since Antonia’s arrival
there had crept over Ananda a subtle yet
unmistakable change. Various little episodes
occurred to him —the gift of roses ; the tone in


which her familiar name “Toni ” had been uttered
—the only time he had heard it pass Ananda’s
lips; the recitation of the Indian poem, and the
curious emotion in Ananda’s voice, quickly
subdued, yet evident, and unlike his ordinary
calm or abstract enthusiasm.
Antonia was in the garden when Dr. Lloyd
called at the hotel, to inquire for her health and
to arrange for her visit to him that afternoon,
lie had placed a strong check upon himself, and
his manner was grave, courteous, and pro-
fessional.
She herself seemed even more lighthearted than
upon the day before, and her look of elasticity
and of renewed strength struck him with greater
force. He felt the genuine and unselfish joy of
the physician when she thanked him for doing
her so much good. It was seldom, she said, that
twenty-four hours went by without gnawing dis-
comfort even where there was not violent pain ;
and now since the commencement of the magnetic
treatment she had been completely at ease. And
all this she owed to him ! She was eager to
continue the course. It was settled that she
should come with Bridget to the Chateau a little


earlier than yesterday, take her first electric bath
and then submit to magnetization.
He left her, his restlessness subdued ; and as he
drove towards Nice, he dwelt, with a quiet tenderness
which deceived him into self-confidence, upon her
renewed vigour, her sweetly expressed gratitude.
The perturbations of yesterday had subsided. This
he believed due to the self-confession which had
relieved him of fancied guilt. He reproached
himself for a want of that fine perception which
would have enabled him to distinguish readily
between the lower forms of love and the sym-
pathetic friendship, the delicate appreciation of
truly feminine charm which he now persuaded
himself was the root of his feeling for Antonia.
He hailed it as the first effect of her refinino-
C 5
influence that he could now so separate the two.
Why should he fear to let his heart expand, as a
flower might under the sun’s rays. He accounted
for the first flush of ardent longing by the law of
reaction, and the rebound of his impulses turned
forcibly from a direction which he had imagined
injurious to his spiritual development. True
development, he told himself, was not to be
achieved by the arbitrary crushing of human


sensibilities, but rather by gentle purification of
the desires, by a gradual transformation of the
physical into the emotional, and of the emotional
into the spiritual. So he reasoned to himself it
would be well that he should give rein to his
aesthetic cravings, and feast them upon Antonia’s
beauty, that he should steep his imagination in
dreams of a poetic and elevating love. He would
cultivate Antonia’s society, would draw forth and
revel in every charm and grace of her form and
mind; and as their intercourse became unembar-
rassed, a pure and ennobling interest would be
added to his life, and vistas of unexplored delights
would open before him.
He avoided the occult room that day, but
magnetised her in the library, merely soothing
her by passes into a semi-somnolent state, during
which she retained her susceptibility to outward
surroundings. She talked dreamily of herself, of
her impressions of life, her thoughts and feelings
in a frank abstract way that fascinated him
beyond measure. There seemed to creep over
Antonia while under his mesmeric influence a soft
expansiveness that deepened at moments into
almost passionate sympathy. She herself appeared


hardly aware of this, though it affected him deeply ;
and, when he was not directly operating upon her,
she glided back into her ordinary manner, which
was by turns gay and faintly agitated. Several
days went by, and he continued the process,
never allowing her to fall into trance, but
keeping her in a sort of half dream. He observed
that his magnetism, as is the case with some
narcotics, at first excited her, and then, in pro-
portion to its intensity, produced the pleasant
languor, the emotional responsiveness, and the
sort of fantasia, through which, all the while,
there ran a thread of self-consciousness, that can
only be likened to intoxication by haschisch, at
once intellectual and sensuous.
But in contradistinction to that drug, it left no
baleful after-effects. Every day she grew stronger,
her mental faculties seemed more active, and she
surprised him by the vividness of her imagination
and the poetic beauty of her drowsy utterances.
He could not always keep sufficiently cool to
note and analyse her moods in their varying
aspects. It was as though the mesmeric fluid
set loose, acted and re-acted upon both; and
sometimes he would demagnetise her, hardly


knowing whether hours or minutes had been
passed under this delicious glamour, her hands in
one of his while he held the other upon her fore-
head. Thus they would talk in low tone, a
soothing ripple of the nothings which so soon
become the everything in such converse, and he
would watch her face, discovering in each prof
longed contemplation some dimple or depression,
or enchanting curve which he had not before noted.
Recalled to the world, she would slowly rouse
herself as if reluctant to resume the conditions of
every day life. She would blush, and look up at
him questioningly, as though she were not quite
sure of what had been said, and whether the
impressions that vaguely embarrassed her, had
any ground in reality. Her eyes would droop
before his gaze, and he would see the glamour
gradually fade, never entirely vanishing, but
lingering in her movements, her glances, in a more
tender intonation of her voice; he himself main-
taining the grave, quiet manner which always
reassured her. Then by an effort he would turn
the conversation into impersonal channels, now
interesting her in some chemical experiment, now
showing her books and drawings, till she would


declare lierself horrified at the discovery that
twilight was falling. They would descend the
stanrcase to find Bridget slumbering peacefully
on the terrace, or gossiping with the bath-keeper
as far as the limited English of the latter would
permit.


V.
At the end of a week Ananda had not re-
turned. A letter which Dr. Lloyd received from
him, told that he had gone with his occult friend
to Leghorn, where were a knot of persons devoted
to the study of Eastern philosophy, and eager to
avail themselves of his knowledge.
Ananda was immersed in plans for the formation
of occult societies in Europe. He had been given
definite work to do, and it was his peculiarity, as
well as a principle, of his philosophy, to immerse
himself mind and soul to the business of to-dav,
without seriously troubling himself concerning the
morrow. He was wont to say, “ Throw all the
energy of which you are capable into th.e act of
hurling a stone in the right direction; but take
no heed where it falls: so will your good deeds
be untinged by personality.’’
If he had ever felt real uneasiness on the score
of Lloyd’s relations with Mrs. Vascher, he did not


now show it, but merely expressed his satisfaction
that she was benefiting so much by the magnetic
treatment, and again recommended Lloyd to
abstain from testing her clairvoyant gifts. He
intimated jestingly that he looked upon the inter-
vention of the Brother of the Shadow as advan-
tageous to Lloyd, for it had obliged him to curb
his curiosity and practise self-discipline.
The Adept had not repeated his astral visit.
In the re-actionary stage of his feelings, Dr. Lloyd
was not disposed to accept Ananda’s view of the
Brother of the Shadow—if such he were. The
experiences of the past week, chimed strangely
with the warnings and admonitions of the
magician. Dr. Lloyd had found that the gnawing
want within him--the desire for feminine com-
panionship and sympathy, could be assuaged by
his friendship with Antonia. No matter that
every day his thirsty heart demanded deeper
draughts. Pretexts were not needed for the
whiling away of an hour in the Vimiera Gardens,
for bringing Antonia to the Chateau, somewhat be-
fore the time fixed for the magnetic treatment,
for lingering among the olives on the way back to
the hotel, or for making excursions to ruined and
u


almost deserted Monte Santo. No word of love
had passed his lips, and, if in spirit he had been
unfaithful to his trust, he had been true to it in
the letter.
One day, after having taken her electric bath,
Antonia came as usual into the library where he
was waiting to magnetise her. She did not show
her accustomed willingness, but begged him to
defer the operation for a little while, and come
out with her into the garden. He agreed, and
they rambled about the old house, visited the
shrine, and strolled on the terrace, where tea was
brought them English fashion. Antonia’s mood
was fitful. She seemed struggling against inward
depression, and her vivacity was forced and
unnatural. Nevertheless, she chatted freely to
Dr. Lloyd ; and Bridget, who wat walking behind
them, by-and-by took an opportunity of re-
marking to him that she had not for months seen
her mistress so well. “ It’s a miraculous change,”
added the woman, “ I wish Colonel Vascher
could see her at this moment.”
Antonia heard her husband’s name, and a
faint look of bewilderment crossed her face, like
that which it had worn when Ananda asked her


for news of him. 11 Bridget/’ she said, “Do you
think Colonel Yascher would be pleased if he
were here now ? ”
“ Oh, ma’am,” ejaculated the maid, “ Why he
wouldn’t know what to make of you. How glad
he would be. There’s some colour in your cheeks
now, and you’re in such good spirits. I couldn’t
have believed that a dozen of those electric baths
would have done all that for you, though, to be
sure, the first day when I put my hand in and
felt the queer creepish feeling, I thought they
must have an effect one way or the other.”
Antonia took two or three turns in silence.
She paused at the foot of the stairway leading to
the house.
“ Dr. Lloyd,” she said abruptly, “Let us go in,
I want to talk to you. She mounted a few steps,
and then halted to say, “ Bridget, you may sit here
and knit, and if you have anything to do in the
hotel, go. I do not mind walking back by myself.”
He followed her, and opened the outer door for
her to pass through.
As they entered, he said, “ This will be the
most convenient entrance for you at all times,
Mrs. Yascher, and will save you a good many
H 2


steps round to the other side of the house, where
my ordinary visitors come in.”
He took a small key out of a drawer in the
writing table, and handed it to her. “ I gave
this to Ananda,” he added, “ now that he is not
here, I will make it over to you.”
She fingered the key abstractedly. “ When is
Ananda coming back ?” she asked.
“I don’t know. The week he gave himself
has stretched into two. But Ananda is a strange,
uncertain creature, and he, as you know, is under
the command of others.”
“ His Masters! Do youbelieve in them, Dr. Lloyd,
and in their wonderful knowledge and powers?”
“ I believe that they exist,” he replied, “ and
that they know secrets of Nature which are
hidden from us ordinary mortals. But you have
lived in India, Mrs. Yascher, and must have heard
tales of the Rishis or Mahatmas ? ”
“Yes; but all the Yogis I have seen looked
very dirty and horrid. I could not believe much
in their exalted knowledge. They say, though, that
it is wonderful how news likely to affect India is
known in the bazaars even before it can be
telegraphed from Europe.”


She sat down, looking absently around her.
“ Dr. Lloyd/’ she said, “Do you want to be
an occultist like Ananda ?”
“ I want to wrest from Nature some of her
secrets,” he answered grimly.
“ Ananda’s idea is that he must train himself to
be absolutely pure and unselfish, and in time he
will gain knowledge and be able to help the
world. But you ought not to want more know-
ledge,” she added, thoughtfully, “ for you do a
great deal of good already. See what you have
done for me ! ”
“ I have made you better! ” he exclaimed,
seating himself near her. “ Bridget is right; the
change is miraculous. It gives me happiness to
look at your face, which is so much brighter than
it was a fortnight ago.”
“ Is it bright now ? ” she asked, looking up at
him, solemnly.
“No ; you have grown suddenly sad. There is
something the matter with you to-day. What is
it ? Tell me.”
She was silent and grave.
“ Will you not tell me ? ” he urged.
“ I feel an inclination to tell you all kinds of


things,” she began impulsively, and hesitated. “ I
don’t know why I should not; and again, I
don’t know why I should. It’s a feeling that I
struggle against.”
“ Oh, why ?” he exclaimed. “ All that I care
for in life is to serve you ; ” then afraid of startling
her, he added more calmly, “ you must often feel
dull and lonely here. It would be a relief to
you to confide in me.”
“ I have never once since I came here felt dull
or lonely,” she answered sweetly and solemnly.
“At home my spirits are unequal. Julian was
often disturbed at my fits of melancholy. I tried
to conquer them, but it was of no use. Fond as
I was of him, I could not even for his sake over-
come my depression and irritability. Here every-
thing is different. Why am I almost always in
good spirits ? It’s unnatural.”
She fixed her large violet eyes upon him.
They filled him with trouble. He could not
speak for a minute, at last he said, with a forced
laugh, “ It is a strange thing that you should
distress yourself because you are now more light-
hearted than you used to be. Isn’t that a natural
result of freedom from suffering ? ”


“ Ob, no. You don’t understand. Why was
I dull and miserable in India? I had nothing to
make me so. When I married I thought that
there could not be a happier girl in the world
than I. And Julian never disappointed me. I
loved him more as time went on.”
A spasm contracted Lloyd’s heart; but he
answered composedly. “ The pain and the mor-
phia you took were quite sufficient to account for
the most horrible depression.”
“It was before I got ill. I think the pain did
me good, for it showed me how much I must love
my husband to keep myself from crying out in my
attacks. There was a shadow upon me before it
came on.”
“ The shadow of your illness. Don’t you know
that nervous maladies frequently show themselves
first in fits of moodiness and irritability ? ”
He rose from his chair and stood over her.
She was leaning with her cheek upon her hand.
He saw a tear fall upon her wrist.
“ Oh, I cannot bear to see you unhappy,” he
cried. “It hurts me.”
She let her hand drop. “ Dr. Lloyd,” she said
in an agitated manner, “ I will tell you what


made me sad to-day, when Bridget spoke of my
husband. It is this. I have changed. Ido not
love him as I used. I never think of him. I
have to force myself to remember him. On my
voyage, every night my last thought was of him.
Every morning when I awoke I said to myself,
1 Another day nearer to the time when I shall see
Julian again/ And now—he is gone out of my
life. lam happy without him. I am a wicked
woman ; and yet I don’t seem to realize it. It’s
only at moments like this, when something brings
the feeling upon me suddenly, that he affects me
at all; and then lam filled with remorse and
terror.”
A sob shook her voice. He felt a thrill of
exultation. This was the moment for which he
had unconsciously longed, for which he had not
dared to hope—the moment in which she should
become alive to the feeling that he—Lemuel
Lloyd was a reality in her life, and her husband
but a shadow. Yet morally he was guiltless.
Yes. He could acquit himself of base design.
He had never willed that she should cease to
love her husband. He had not misused his
magnetic power. He had not voluntarily


attracted her towards himself. He held in
abhorrence the grosser temptations which assail
the mesmerist. All this he told himself with some-
thing like triumph, in the minute that followed
her faltering confession. The impulse which had
prompted it was not due to the mere electric
rapport between them. The higher magnetism
of Love had brought their beings into harmony.
With an immense effort he commanded himself.
He still stood looking down upon her. She went
on in a wandering pathetic way, not looking up
to meet his fiery gaze.
“ I sometimes think it may be the mesmerism
.—when I can think about it. For I notice that
it is only just before I come here that I am
troubled. I have a vague horrible feeling like
waking up out of a dream ; and it goes oft after
you have magnetised me. Then I am quite
joyous again, and often the feeling does not come
back the next day .... Hr. Lloyd,” she looked
up now, but lowered her eyes instantly beneath
his. Her voice rang with passionate entreaty.
“ Do you think that it is the mesmerism which
has changed me?”
“No,” he answered in a low tone, “I do not


think so. It may have developed yon. It has
not changed you.”
u I have heard, I have read,’"’ she continued
with gathering agitation, “ that anyone who
yields passively to the influence can be made to
believe and even to feel what the mesmerist
wishes. I understood how necessary it was to
choose one who would only wish me good. Dr.
Lloyd, I don’t know how to say it —it is a bad
thought to come into my mind, but I must say it.
Why should you wish to do me harm? Why
should you want me to be different from what I
used to be .... ? If you are not good—you!
Julian s friend !—then no one is good ” —she rose
in her excitement and faced him, her lips trem-
bling, her cheeks faintly flushed.
Her appeal wrung him to the heart’s core. “ I
am not good,” he said, brokenly. “ I have feel-
ings which are sometimes almost too strong for
me. You have made me ” He paused—her
wide eyes recalling him to himself. “No one is
good,” he went on hurriedly, “but to abuse such a
power knowingly would be a baseness that . I
swear to you before Heaven,” he added solemnly,
“ that I have never used my will to wean you


from your husband. My most earnest desire in
magnetising you has been to do you physical
good ; and in that I have succeeded.”
“ Yes,” she answered, her colour deepening.
“ Oh! forgive me, I am not ungrateful. The
feeling came over me suddenly, and I was
frightened. I am frightened still. I don’t
understand myself. To-morrow, perhaps, I shall
be at peace and happy again.”
He took her hand in his, and gently placed her
on the divan, seating himself by her side.
“You are ill. You need tranquillizing. Let
me magnetise you now.”
“ No, oh no ! ” she exclaimed, shrinking. “Not
to-day.”
“ Are you afraid of me ? ” he asked in a voice
of the utmost tenderness.
“No. I do not know ... I am afraid of
everything.”
He still kept her hand in his. Her profile was
towards him.
“ Antonia! ”
She started ; and her hand moved in his as
though she would have withdrawn it. But his
fingers closing on it stilled the flutter.


“ I can’t call yon by your formal name,” lie
exclaimed. “It seems He hesitated
again. “ All conventionalities jar when we
touch the deeper things of life —I do not vex
you ? ”
“ No,” she rejoined in a mechanical way.
“ Call me Antonia.”
“ Do you not trust me, that you will not let
me soothe and make you happy again ? ”
“ To-morrow,” she said; “ not to-day—Oh, I
beg of you—not to-day.”
He released her hand.
“ To-morrow then —or never, if you have any
doubt of me or of yourself. You shall come to
me of your own free will. Neither physically
nor morally will I try to influence you, unless you
yourself ask it.”
He spoke with passionate intensity. He was
making a bond with his honour. It was an heroic
struggle. It was the last. He was guarding
her against himself. At her command only would
he surrender. She turned with a sudden gesture,
as though his words had struck an unsuspected
chord. Her eyes were piteous.
“ I do not understand,” she said, almost in a


wliisper. “You know better than I. I could
not bear you to forsake me ; lam afraid. I am
like a child playing with fire/’
“Yes,” he said, with sorrowful vehemence;
“ you are like a child ; but you have nothing to
fear. There is nothing in your nature which
should make you shrink from the light. The fire
cannot hurt you. The Light can only reveal in
you living and pure forces —mysterious affinities
which have lain dormant in your being, but which
must obey the irresistible law of like to like.
This is the secret of my magnetism. It has not
changed you. It is only showing you your true
and noble self.”
“Oh, not true —not noble!” she cried, in
accents of pain. “ Give me back the love I felt
for my husband. Make me one with him as I
once was.”
She had risen, and moved tremulously to the
door. She stood there an image of beseeching.
Her beauty and her grief so acted upon him that
the temptation to exercise his power and draw
her to his side was almost maddening. Oh
that he might once more weave round her that
fatal glamour, that he himself, intoxicated, deluded


by his imagination, believed due not to physical
fascination, but to a higher, purer affinity.
He had extended his arms charged with the
subtle magnetic fluid. Suddenly he let them
fall. His face grew deadly pale, and by the
strongest effort of will he abstained.
“ Look/’ he said, “ I obey you so faithfully that
I can see you suffering, and yet refrain from
giving you ease. But what you ask is beyond
my power. If your love for your husband had
been rooted deep in your nature, it would not
have withered so soon. Something within me
speaks and tells me that your love was no more
than a girlish fancy. It is I who have touched
your heart —l—unworthy that I am. You love
me, Toni.”
She uttered a little cry. In an instant he was
beside her. She motioned him away. “ Good-
bye,” she said; “I will never come here again.”
He saw her vanish through the open door, and
heard her step die away on the terrace.
He could not remain at the Chateau. Im-
possible to sit still in his study and give himself
up a prey to his torturing emotions. The strain
of keeping himself negative was greater than that


which the most determined concentration of
energy could involve. He longed for some
powerful magnetism which would lull his mind
into inaction. Fiercely torn though he was, he
still clung to the instinct of honour which forbade
him to influence her by occult means. He knew
well that by merely putting forth his will he could
force her to return, and hear without anger the
declaration of his love. But he shrank with
horror from the thought of deliberately using his
power to intoxicate her senses, and thus degrade
both himself and her. He cherished the belief
that Fate would waft them to a plane of existence
where by right of higher evolution they might
free themselves from conventional trammels.
Love between them might be justified by an
imperious necessity; but it was something more
than the love to which vulgar arts could minister.
Earthly it might be, but it was spiritual also.
Fantastic visions of a dual existence—her soul
dwelling unfettered with his in the astral world
while in the flesh she was true to her material
obligations—flitted through his brain, intensifying
the tumult of feeling he was undergoing—duty to
his friend; professional honour, keen in the


breast of a physician ; love in its baser and nobler
aspects; aspirations towards the occult life—all
contended.
He bad left the Chateau and had wandered
away from Monte Santo far along the Cornice
Road, till, from the heights of Turbia, he over-
looked Monaco. It was moonlight. He walked
on and on, descending by the zigzag route to
Mentone. He spent what remained of the night
at an hotel near the station.. He kept himself
awake lest in sleep he might be false to his bond.
He would not think of hers. He chastised his
too active fancy whenever it evoked the image
of her —slumbering—the statuesque shape—the
yellow roses —the unbound hair—the white neck
smooth as a camellia petal
In the morning he took the train back to Nice.
He made a detour in climbing the hill of Monte
Santo, so that he should not pass the Hotel
Yimiera. He set himself a task —some abstruse
geometrical problems taxing to the utmost his
brain and attention. He goaded his thoughts.
He would not suffer himself to pause —to hope—
to wonder if she needed him—if she would write
—or if, at the usual hour, she would come.


It was noonday. Through the closed Venetians
the warm air and breath of roses floated. The
wind heaved in long sighs with a yearning, far-
away sound. The insects murmured very softly.
The bees were nestling in the orange-blossoms,
and in the ilex grove a wood-pigeon cooed.
There was a step upon the terrace : it ascended
the stairs. He heard the timid knock—the
fumbling of a little key. He rose and flung open
the door before the key could turn. Toni was
there. She entered, dazed, like one walking in
sleep. The surprise, the joy overcame all his
self-command. He took her hand : he kissed it
wildly. “ Oh, my Toni,” he cried, forgetting
everything. “You are mine—you are mine.
Fate gives you to me. Before heaven, I have
kept away from this place. I have forced myself
to walk—to think of all the world but you—you,
who are my very world—that you might be free.
I would not sleep lest my spirit should seek
yours in a dream. No stolen joy for me, Toni.
It is mine by right.”
She trembled violently. “I am in pain,” she
said. “ I have come to you, because it is only
you who can do me good.”


He saw now that she was suffering. Her face
was very white —almost as white as the dress of
clinging cashmere which she wore. She had bound
a broad crimson scarf round her waist. Why to-
day? The thought flashed through his mind.
But the physician was paramount even over the
lover. She was in pain ! He loosed the mantle
which she seemed to have cast hurriedly about
her, and removed her bonnet, sbe submitting
child-like. “ Come,” he said, and, drawing aside
the curtain, led her into the occult-room.
A sort of tremor seized her. She shrank back
before she had advanced far.
“ Not here,” she exclaimed.
He was quite composed now. “You are in
pain,” he said. “ I want to relieve you quickly ;
and the magnetism is strongest here.”
“ Oh, I am in great pain,” she answered, and
sank upon the couch beneath the magnet. “ You
will take it away,” she said, with her pathetic
smile; “but do not send me to sleep.”
He stood over her and began his passes. The
strange, soft light enveloped her with a mystic
radiance as she lay in her white dress with her
pale face against the blue cushions. Again her


limbs seemed to relax, and the strained, drawn
look went from her features. “ Tell me as soon
as the pain leaves you,” he said quietly; “then I
will not magnetise you any more, but will sit
beside you, and perhaps you will fall into a
natural and peaceful sleep.”
Presently she held up her hand. “ The pain
has gone now,” she said. She smiled as she spoke.
There was no care in her eyes. They were very
sweet and languid. Her lovely lips had resumed
their tender curves, and her cheeks were delicately
tinted. His heart swelled with unselfish joy.
He had brought her ease. For the moment, all
was merged in impersonal solicitude for her. He
drew forward a chair and seated himself at the
head of the couch. A weird fancy struck him.
Had the magnet been charged by a subtle electri-
city of which he also felt the influence ? The same
sense of exhilaration as that which he had ex-
penenced in the astral presence of the Brother of
the Shadow thrilled his nerves. The warring
forces within him subsided into delicious accord.
No more struggles now. The fruit he had held
his hand from gathering had fallen at his feet.
They were both silent for a little while. There
i 2


were no roses in the room that day. The omission
pained him. He wished to cradle their love in
soft perfumes. He left the couch and sprinkled
some powder upon a silver chafing dish. In a
moment thin wreaths of smoke filled the air with
a delicate oriental odour.
He resumed his seat. Antonia looked up at
him with a dreamy smile. “ You are very good
to me ” she murmured, “I was ungrateful yester-
day.” Suddenly she gave a start, and opened her
eyes wide, a vague alarm showing in them.
:t You are there! ” she said I thought I was
being borne away; I felt frightened. It was
nothing. I was beginning to dream. Hon t let
me go to sleep.”
“ Shall I read to you ?” he asked. His voice
sounded to himself far away and mechanical.
She assented. He took from the shelves a
volume of French poems and read on, turning the
pages rapidly—a verse here—a tiny love song
there. While he read, she stirred, and leaned a
little forward, one arm upraised upon the cushions
supporting her head, and throwing into relief the
contour of her bust. Her large eyes were upon
him. Involuntarily, he too bent nearer, and his


hand stole to where her hand was lying among
her hair, and closed on it.
He read at haphazard.
O est la brise da soir qui languit sur la greve
Defaillante ct sans bruit comme un soupir d’amour,
Effleurant le sein bvun de la vierge qui rive,
Un baiser du pecheur qu'elle attend chaque jour !
Sous les jaunes roehers la Mediterranee,
Se ride en bleus sillons, et le souffle leger
Penetrant de fraicheur la nature fanee,
Fait tressaillir tout bas le myrte et Voranger !
L air est lourd de parfums, et la brise embaumee
Garesse les pieds nus de la fille qui dort,
Sur la greve assoupie et qui moitie pdmee,
Invoque en murmur ant le saint patron du port.
Jeunesse ! Amour ! Beaute! Pour vous la douce brise,
Et les illusions du tempts des voluptes ,
Mais pour les cheveux blancs, Mias ! la froide Use.
Les desencliantements et les reality !
He closed the book. She was still looking at
him. His breath came quickly. That strange
horrible magnetism was like serpentine coils
enfolding them. She had raised her face. He
slipped to the ground beside her, and kneeled so,
his face close to hers.
“ Toni—l love you ! ”
Their lips met, like two flames, and parted.
Toni—tell me that you love me.”


She said very low, a When you are near me I
am happy, I suffer no longer in body or in mind.
Your touch is sweet to me. I live, I breathe for
you. You are my master.”
“ No —your slave. I tremble before you. You
are so beautiful in body and in mind. I reverence
you. I scarcely dare touch your lips. Is this
love baseness ? This worship ! ”
He brushed with a kiss the waves of her hair.
He pressed her hand to his burning lips. Yet,
how strange it was! Though his caresses were
unrebuked, though she smiled at him, and though
her eyes swam with tenderness, the intense long-
ing that he felt to hold her close to his heart, to
drink all her sweetness in a long close embrace,
was restrained by a feeling of awe —of sacrilege.
It was as though a white-winged angel of purity
hovered over her, and guarded her with an invis-
ible sword.
Again he wildly clasped her hands.
“ Toni, kiss me.”
She bent towards him. Her fragrant lips were
laid on his forehead. It was like the touch of
one of her own cool fresh roses.
“Ho not let us stay here,” she said. “ Let


us go out into the sunshine among the
flowers.”
He rose to his feet, staggering as though the
fumes of the perfume had mounted to his brain.
Something seemed to be stifling him. He wanted
to draw deep breaths—to fling himself at her feet
and exhale all the love strength in him in a
passion of adoration.
“ Come, Toni,” he cried.
He stood gazing at her; yet still that subtile
barrier intervened between them and held them
both back, for she had half risen, and was before
him pliant and unresisting as in that vision of the
astral light.
“ Come, Toni,” he said again, but in a changed
tone. “You are right. We will go into the
flowers and the sunshine.”


VI.
From that clay Antonia’s trouble seemed to
vanish. She spoke no more of her husband. Her
spirits were again buoyant. She was gentle and
unembarrassed in Lloyd’s presence. They might
have been an affianced pair, so little suggestion
of guilty love did her manner convey. She
yielded sweetly to his caresses —rare —for always
the passion turned as it were at swords’ point,
and his hot kisses melted as if in snow. Often
she would touch with her lips his hands —his
forehead, but her tendrest endearment was be-
stowed with the innocence of a child; and in the
very gratification his love received, there was
something phantasmal, so that the fever of his
heart was never allayed.
He suffered. Every draught that he took of
bliss intensified his thirst. When most happy,
he was most wretched. Having once accepted
the theory that they were fate-driven, he threw


aside doubts and qualms of conscience. His one
care was so to surround her with an atmosphere
of love and ease that no haunting thought of her
husband should assail her. She had apparently for-
gotten that he existed ; and she seemed a creature
of youth and sunlight for whom the future holds
no sorrow. There was not a shadow in her eyes.
She was all grace and loveliness. Her form had
grown rounder. Her complexion was clear and
healthful, her whole system vitalized. She took
long walks with Lloyd. She spent hours with
him at the Chateau or in the Vimiera Gardens.
He magnetized her every day.
Already gossip circulated. The people at the
hotel had begun to comment upon the intimacy
between doctor and patient. Yet even the most
virulent scandal-monger acknowledged that it
was difficult to associate lightness of conduct with
a face so pure and candid. Indeed strangely
enough, that very innocence of expression, not so
noticeable at first, had become startlingly accen-
tuated during the past few weeks.
This petty scandal did not reach Dr. Lloyd’s
ears, but Ananda heard it on his return, and till
Antonia’s manner reassured him, was deeply


troubled thereby. He had been absent nearly a
month. During that .time no news had arrived
from Colonel Vascher. Antonia did not evince
any anxiety at her husband’s silence. Ananda
was perplexed. He thought it probable that
some communication had failed to reach its des-
tination, and the suspicion was confirmed by a
letter he received shortly after he had come back
to Monte Santo, from another friend in India,
which vaguely intimated that Colonel Vascher
had left for Europe within a fortnight of his wife’s
departure.
Ananda watched Lloyd closely. The Doctor
puzzled him. The familiar fashion of their inter-
course had not been resumed. For the first time
Ananda felt himself merely a visitor at the
Chateau. It would have been difficult to say
where the change lay; but change there undoubt-
edly was. Lloyd was colder and less confiden-
tial. His interest in occultism seemed to be now
purely scientific, his more personal enthusiasm
had waned. He evaded Ananda’s inquiries con-
cerning the Brother of the Shadow ; and an
instinctive delicacy forbade the Hindoo to ques-
tion him too closely upon his treatment of Mrs.


Vascher. The manifest physical improvement
she showed, ought to have been an ample answer.
But the subtle alteration in her manner was to
him a source of deep anxiety. He tried to hide
it, however, for Lloyd did not encourage frank
conversation. For the rest, they pursued
their usual avocations during the day-time, and
some literary work which Lloyd had suddenly
taken up with great ardour, excused silent
evenings.
They were on the terrace late one afternoon.
Antonia was with them. She had been mag-
netised, and was on the point of returning to the
hotel, folding her woollen scarf round her in an
abstracted way. But instead of moving, she sat
down again, and her eyes turned towards Lloyd,
who waited, leaning silent against a buttress of
the old tower. The two pairs of eyes seemed to
draw each other; and a third pair—Ananda s
wandered from the face of Antonia to that of
Lemuel. The Hindoo was buried, as usual, in a
great wicker-work chair, a cigarette in his mouth,
and a book of Sanscrit philosophy before him.
Suddenly, a commissionaire appeared on the
terrace. He had approached by the zigzag path


from the hotel, and carried a piece of folded
paper, which he handed to Antonia.
“ Une ddpeche pour Madame.”
Antonia opened out the blue slip, and gazed in
a dazed manner at the printed characters. She
put it down in her lap, as though she had
hardly comprehended the message, and then
looked up piteously at Lloyd. She had grown
white to the lips. Ananda was observing her
keenly.
“Mrs. Vascher,” he said, “I hope you have
not had any bad news of your husband? ”
Antonia turned towards him a strange blank
look.
“It is from Julian,” she said. “It comes from
Naples. I don’t know what it means.”
“Ah!” replied Ananda quietly. “It is as I
thought. He is on his way here.”
Lloyd started violently. He advanced to An-
tonia and took the paper from her lap.
“What does it mean?” she asked in a be-
wildered tone.
Lloyd did not immediately answer. His teeth
were tightly clenched together, and his face had
become grey and stone-like, as though he had


been struck with sudden terror, or had heard
some horrible news. It was with a perceptible
effort that he mastered his voice, as he replied
mechanically.
“ Your husband must have telegraphed from
India some time ago, and the telegram has not
reached you. He seems to think that you are
expecting him. This has been delayed in trans-
mission. He wires from Naples that he has got
off the steamer there, and will arrive here by train
to-morrow evening.”
“ To-morrow ? ” repeated Antonia.
She gave no sign of surprise or joy. Indeed,
she seemed but vaguely to understand his words.
There was a curious silence. To Ananda the
whole scene was a revelation. Hr. Lloyd was
the first to speak.
“Mrs. Vasjher,” he said, “this news has come
upon you with a shock. You would like, perhaps,
to go back to the hotel. I will walk down with
you."
She rose submissively. Without a word to
Ananda, she moved along the terrace, Lloyd by
her side. They disappeared presently among the
olive trees. Ananda stood for a moment per


fectly still, 'his dark eyes full of trouble and
wonder. Then he slowly went up the steps and
into the library.
Dr. Lloyd placed Antonia’s hand within his
arm. They walked down to the hotel without
uttering a word. He could not trust himself to
speak. It was as though a heavy black pall had
fallen round him, and he was closed in and
stifled, a horrible doom impending. In silence
still, they entered and ascended the staircase to
Antonia’s salon. The Venetians were closed,
and a fire of pine logs burned brightly on the
hearth. The flames leaped up and reflected them-
selves fantastically in the mirror and the big
Vaullauris bowls filled with spring flowers.
Antonia seated herself upon the couch and
mechanically laid aside her wraps. He stood
opposite, his eyes fastened upon her, his face like
a white mask.
“ Toni,” he said at last in hollow accents, “ to-
morrow night, your husband will be here.”
She half lifted her arms and let them fall again
with a despairing gesture. He dropped upon his
knees, and seized her hands, clasping them to his
breast.


“ Toni, do you know what it means ? ”
She shook her head; but her features were
expressionless as though she had been stunned.
“ It means that he will claim you as his own.
It means that I, who love you better a million
times than my life, better than my soul, must see
you snatched from me in the very moment that I
have gained you. It means that he will take
you in his arms and be in Heaven, while I stand
aside, and watch, enduring the tortures of hell.
It means —And for you, —Oh, my Toni, you
who belong to me —I cannot. It is horrible. It
is devilish—lt is more than I can bear.”
His frame shook with a suppressed sob, “What
can I do? What can I do? And you are so
calm, so silent. You are stunned. Isn't it so,
Toni ? Rouse yourself. Think. Think of the
agony of it —the shame of it.”
She shuddered. He drew her close to him.
“I am cruel to task you. My dove! Oh, my
Toni. I am mad. Say once more that you
love me.”
“ I love you,” she repeated, very low.
“ Are you brave ?” he went on. “ Will you
face the world ? You have given yourself to me


in word. Will you do so in deed ? Will you go
with me away from this place—now to-night—
before Julian takes you from me. Will you trust
your life to me ? ”
For the first time since their strange compact,
she appeared to realize her true position. She
was overcome with agitation. The tragic ele-
ments in her nature seemed roused, and the
forces within her, no longer stupefied, were
warring. A storm of emotion swept her features.
She trembled like a leaf. Wresting her hands
from his, and covering her face, she sank among
the cushions of the sofa, her bosom heaving.
Now, utterly beside himself, he pleaded madly,
painting his passion—his despair.
Was it not he who had calmed her troubled
heart, he who had given her back health, had
torn away her girlish illusions, and shown her
of what her grand womanhood was capable ? It
was he who had taught her the true meaning of
love. In his presence she was happy, under his
influence she drank in sunlight and sweetness,
and enjoyed the fairness of earth and the beauty
of life. She was his. They were united by a
higher bond than the mere conventional tie of


marriage, to which her better nature had never
consented. . . . They would fly to some free and
lovely spot where they might live together in
bliss and die in gladness, for time and eternity
would be theirs. All this he poured forth. He
told her that she was gifted beyond ordinary
women. Together they would explore the Un-
seen World. No secrets would be withheld from
them. They would emancipate themselves from
the fetters of grovelling humanity.
She raised her head as he spoke thus, with
all the wild eloquence of passion. A spasm of
horror convulsed her features. Suddenly, she
rose and stretched forth her arms, a strange
light in her eyes, a strange smile on her lips.
“Julian,” she murmured, in a far-away dreamy
voice. “ You are coming to-morrow. If you
are stronger than this man who has become my
master, break the spell that is upon me, and make
me your own true wife once more. Come in
God's power, if you are noble and pure, and set
your Toni free/’
Lloyd rose also, startled by her words, and
stared round, almost expecting to see the absent
husband whose aid she had invoked. But the
K


room was as it had been, only darker now, for
the fire had died down. Phrensy seized him.
His head felt light. He saw only her smile.
Something seemed to hurst within him, in the
supreme effort of concentration that he made. He
was conscious of nothing in the world but his in-
tense longing. Honour, delicacy, all that held
him back and forced him to grant her freedom of
choice, were swept like straws before the torrent
of his desire. His form seemed to expand. His
eyes glowed like fire. He felt himself, as it were,
borne up and inflated by an extraordinary sense
of power.
Antonia moved slowly towards him, as if in
obedience to an inaudible mandate. She appeared
rigid: her eyes were glassy. She paused, and
stood swaying slightly. Then, in an instant, the
stiffness of her frame relaxed. An indescribably
alluring expression stole over her face; and her
eyes became soft and tender.
Suddenly a shriek of horror burst from her lips.
She started back. “ I cannot. I cannot,” she
cried, and fell fainting upon the couch.
He left her when she had recovered and lay


pale and exhausted, with Bridget watching over
her.
There was still the morrow.
He could not return to the Chateau and meet
Ananda’s questioning looks. Baffled, torn by
the fury of his passion, he walked through half
the night like a restless wolf prowling the hills.
One o’clock had struck when he entered the
Chateau. Moved by an impulse he did not try
to combat, he went straight to the occult room
and threw himself on the sofa beneath the magnet.
At two o’clock he awoke with the same feeling
of excitement that he had experienced upon a
previous occasion. It was no surprise to him
to behold, standing at the foot of the couch, the
form of his astral visitant Murghab, the Brother
of the Shadow.
Murghab held the steel wand in his hand, and
as before traced the shining pentagram, the single
point turned northward. Bound it he drew a
serpentine figure that seemed to coil about the
horns of the triangle.
“ Friend Lemuel,” said the smooth deep voice
of the magician. “ Have you not proved the truth
of my philosophy ? Have you not found that


Asceticism but forges chains for your soul, and
that only by the power of fiery love—love pure
and mighty, stronger than death, greater than life
—can the perfected being soar upwards to light
and knowledge ? ”
Lemuel gazed in fascination upon the inscrutable
countenance of the magician, over which that
ghost of a smile hovered.
“ You have spoken wisely, Murghab,” he an-
swered, “ there is one mightier force than magne-
tism ; and that is love/’
The Brother laughed gently. “ Your occult
training should surely have taught you that the
spiritual magnetism which brought a universe
into being, and the physical magnetism that draws
a man to a woman, are higher and lower manifes-
tations of the same force : matter and spirit;
the positive and the negative; attraction and re-
pulsion ; the two poles of electricity ! What does
it all come to?” And he murmured softly,
“ J’aime ! voila le mot que la nature entiere
Crie au vent qui l’emporte, a l’oiseau qui le suit !
Sombre et dernier soupir que poussera la terre
Quand elle tombera dans l’eternelle nuit ! ”
“You are convinced,” he went on after a


moment’s pause, “that the love you feel for
Antonia Vascher is no mere physical affinity—no
outbreak of the old sensual impulses you fancied
had been crushed down ? Had this been so, the
power and the opportunity to gratify it have been
yours.”
“ No,” exclaimed Lloyd, with vehemence. “ By
this, I know that our love is holy. Her presence
vanquishes all my longings ; and when I look into
her eyes, my passion seems reflected in their
clearness, and I draw back guilty and ashamed—
to worship.”
“ Yet,” said Murghab, with cold distinctness,
“ you are maddened by the thought that at this
time to-morrow night she will be in her husband’s
arms.”
Lemuel started to his feet, the dew on his brow,
his limbs writhing in anguish. “ Why did I fail
this evening ?” he cried in a frenzied voice. “What
was there in her which resisted my will ? I felt in
me the strength of a god—or a devil. At that
moment, I could have drawn her very being into
mine. She would have obeyed me —And now! ”
He sank on the couch again, and covered his
face with his hands.


“ And now ! ” repeated Murgliab. “It is not
too late. The train by which Julian Vasclier will
arrive is not due at Nice till evening.”
“ Why did I fail ? ” cried Lloyd again. “Is it
that she still loves her husband; and that the un-
conscious magnetism of his longing over-powered
mine ? If that be so, every moment that brings
him nearer weakens my power.”
“ Let us talk this matter out,” said Murghab,
seating himself. So real did this Astral man
appear, that Lloyd involuntarily put forth his
hand to touch the slender olive fingers that
rested on the leathern arm of the chair; but
Murghab with a motion of his wand checked the
gesture.
“ You put the case clearly,” he said, with his
sardonic smile. “It is a strange study in
occult dynamics. The husband is speeding through
the night, each minute bringing him nearer to his
wife, and tightening the invisible chains which
bind them. The forces which their union has gene-
rated, are in full play, the more violent for months
of quiescence. That is natural law. You, an
occultist, know well that every emotion, every
exercise of will-power causes a vibration in the


astral ether of which the effect is incalculable.
The keenness of his desire for her, the influence
of the physical bond which has united them, are
acting against the more subtle and spiritual
affinity that links her with you. Matter and
spirit! To-morrow it will be seen which has most
power to move her—the human—or shall we say —
the divine ? ”
Lemuel burst into a discordant laugh.
“ Your sophistries are very ingenious, but they
do not impose upon me,” he exclaimed. “ I tell
you, Murghab, that I love her, basely, humanly if
you will, in one phase ; divinely in another. I
love her with my sense and with my soul. But
the bodily impulse must exhale itself before the
spiritual one can come into play. Is it so, or
not ? ”
“ It is so, Lemuel/’ rejoined the magician. “ A
sensual force may be utilized spiritually, if the
energy be brought to culmination point, and then —.
turned. We will consider the situation : it is a
curious one. Briefly, you love this woman, in, as
you express it, both the higher and lower phases.
She also loves you, but in the higher phase only.
Her human nature is held in that physical,


emotional bondage called marriage, where, in the
natural order of things, her progress arrests itself.
Poor Toni! The soul within her pants and
struggles—hence the vague unhappiness which
she described to you. In both your natures there
is a certain love-force which must be exhausted
on the physical plane—or turned in another direc-
tion. You might then mount hand in hand a
perfected pair—her psychic faculties supplying the
need in you, your immense will giving her the ele-
ment she lacks. Which is it to be ? The struggle
for the moment, the bursting of shackles; and
then, on the one hand, the unimpeded development,
the entire satisfaction of each dual nature, the grand
occult life, the acquirement of power and know-
ledge. On the other hand—for you, retardation,
the gnawing at your heart of desires forced back—
having known 7mr, could you ever descend to
the material level ?—fret, fever, imprisonment in
.the dungeon, forced asceticism is building for you :
for her, an even Worse death in life—the stulti-
fying of her psychic capacities—the murder of
her soul. Picture her, Lemuel : your Toni—the
conventional English matron, the instrument to
her husband’s pleasure, the prop to his egotism,


ministering to his vulgar instincts, minding his
house, nursing his children.”
The magician laughed again. A groan escaped
the tortured Lemuel.
“ The picture does not please you ? ” said
Murghab.
u Oh, cease,” cried Lemuel. “ You madden
me with your sneers and sarcasms. Leave me, it
you have nothing better to offer than gibes.”
“ I have something better to offer,” replied
Murghab, changing his tone. “My gibing is the
ice-brook water which tempers steel. You need
to be braced, hardened, elevated for the destiny
in store for you. It is for that lam here.”
“ Why do you interest yourself in me ? ” ex-
claimed Lloyd impulsively.
“ I have already told you,” rejoined Murghab,
“ that my motive is not one of self-interest —that
is, if a Being superior to circumstance can be said
to have a motive. The law T s of our order oblige us
to keep guard over those in whom we see the
potentialities of an Adept. You are so far in
advance of your kind that, a little more, and you
may claim it as your right to be an Initiate of the
Secret Brotherhood. Dupotet, the Prince of


French mesmerists, said truly, that he who can
wield the power of magnetism possesses the key
to Nature’s Mysteries. He himself possessed that
power—you also. Every step of your career has
been watched by the custodians of the Great
Knowledge. Ho you think that accident led you
into the path of occultism ? Do you think that
accident brought Ananda hither ? Do you think
that accident threw Antonia Vascher in your
way ? No—all these influences have been slowly
converging towards one point. Your masters
have been preparing you for the ordeal which will
test your worthiness to become one of their
number.”
Lloyd’s eyes were dilated; his chest heaved.
“And this ordeal? he exclaimed breathlessly.
“Ye shall be as Gods knowing good and evil! ”
said Murghab in his bell-like tones. “ This signifies
that, for the Adept, there is no absolute good—no
absolute evil. The conditions of his being trans-
cend human law. At his height, of what value
is the conventional scale of measurement ? But,
to attain this height—to transcend law—the will
must in one sublime effort free itself for ever;
and the aspirant, trained by unconscious trials of


strength, must in a final and stupendous struggle,
slay the last one of the serpent Superstition’s
brood. Then, for him, there will be no so-called
moral obligations, and he will have gained posses-
sion of the Tree of Life and its fruit for ever.”
There was silence. Br. Lloyd seemed lost in
thought.
“ Explain to me the nature of the ordeal,” he
said abruptly. “You speak of slaying super-
stition—the superstition of right, of moral obliga-
tion, of the sacredness of marriage, if I understand
you clearly. It is your wish that I should make
Antonia my mistress, and you hold out as a bait
that thus I shall obtain entrance into the Occult
Brotherhood. That is a strange perversion of
Ananda’s teaching. It appears that your royal
road to Adeptship lies not in purity, but in sensu-
ality. I put the matter baldly, but lam anxious
for information. And I tell you at once plainly
that I am no candidate for the school of Black
Magic.”
Murghab, stooping, traced a cabalistic figure
with the point of his wand. He took no notice
of Lemuel’s question.
“Well ? ” demanded the latter.


The magician raised his head. “ What is
moral obligation ?he cried scornfully. “ Does it
not belong to the phenomenal plane of existence ?
Would the term have any meaning if the vast
scheme of the universe could be viewed as a
whole, and if the imperishable records of the
Astral ether were visible to the multitude ? Con-
ceive of the stupendous revolution in human
thought, could it at once be vividly realized that
the Ego has always been and will always be,
and that it is most nearly dead during its periods
of imprisonment in flesh—for then all the higher
faculties are in a state of torpor. Life is the
short night filled with horrible dreams. Death
the full and glorious day in which the finer senses
are alert and active. The Adept, who sees
beyond the grave, knows too well that affinity
of souls is the only true marriage. He knows too
well that to kill the body may be to free the
spirit. Who think you would live if he could
die? But the Adept is aware that to turn his
hand against himself is no high road out of his
difficulty. The pendulum must swing backward
if the impetus be given, and by the law of re-
bound his next incarnation will be hastened. But


to be liberated without conscious volition ! Happy
Ego! For example, I who can read the Astral
Book of the Past and the Future, need no
assurance that were Julian Vascher to die
to-morrow before he embraces his wife, he would
he blessed beyond the power of mortal to
imagine.”
There was a long silence. At last Lemuel
spoke in strange, anxious tones.
“You who have power to read in the Book
of Astral Light, know that her fate and mine are
written there. Disclose them.”
“Were I to do so,” replied Murghab, “there
could be no ordeal —no test by which you would
prove your right to the higher joys. Bear this in
your mind. To know the Future implies emanci-
pation. To know the ‘ may be ’ implies that the
power of controlling destiny can be obtained.
This, however, I may reveal to you. To-day a
strange conjunction takes place of the planets
which govern not only your fate and those of
Antonia and her husband, but that also of Ananda.
By the occult law of affinities, Antonia’s destiny is
blended with yours and with Ananda’s. Do you
suppose that this is the first time the three Egos


have been brought into connection 1 That would
be to say that effects could take place without
causes. Fail now in this opportunity which has
been granted you both, to link Antonia’s being
indissolubly with yours, and either in this incar-
nation or in the next —my foresight does not
accurately predict which—she will be united to
Ananda, and you lose her —not for Time only,
but for Eternity—See.”
He raised his wand. Again the electric light
grew dim before the Astral Radiance.
Twin spirits of air, yet gloriously human,
divinely beautiful, Toni and Ananda, floated
together. Their forms seemed to blend. Their
faces met. Their lips were joined as one.
A cry of anguish, wrung in dire extremity, burst
from Lemuel Lloyd. The celestial splendour had
faded; the vision vanished; the blue walls
mocked him in their blankness.
But Murghab was still before him : the pale
olive face, so wonderful in its superhuman beauty,
its intense sadness; the thin lips wreathed in a
sinister smile; the lofty brow surmounted by that
ominous red turban, so grand and mysterious.
“ Murghab,” cried Lemuel, “ Brother of the


Shadow or of the Sunbeam, I know not, I care
not which, I am ready to face the ordeal. Com-
mand, and I obey.”
Murghab bent forward and pointed with his
staff towards the writing-table. Lemuel’s gaze
followed the direction of the wand. He saw a
thin vaporous cloud, which at first appeared like
a faint smoky haze, form upon the table and
gradually assume shape and density, till it resolved
itself into a square sheet of curious Oriental paper
covered with writing in small blue characters.
His eyes turned in amazement to the spot
where Murghab had been. The chair was empty.
The Brother of the Shadow had melted into air.
Only his voice lingered.
“ Study and prepare for the Ordeal.”


VII.
That night Ananda the Hindoo sought counsel
from his Master.
He fell into a deep sleep; and in the slumber
of his body his spirit awakened, and he saw with
his inner eyes the face and form of one whom he
knew not in the flesh, but wdrom he reverenced
above all others living or dead.
Ananda prayed.
“ Master, thou art of the Light, and thy strength
dwelleth only in truth and purity. Thou hast
trodden down all earthly passions, and through
love hast conquered love, yet art tender, and
yearning to comfort the weak. Protect this
woman against the Brother of Shadows and
Darkness. Guard her against the evil will of
him who has strayed into the Left Hand Path
and would turn his powers to baseness. Save
her in her innocence, and restore her to her
husband. For him she has the soul-love which


alone makes marriage—l feel it—l know it. Let
not that love be defiled and clouded by the
glamour of the senses. Let it shine forth re-
splendent, mighty, triumphant—a radiance before
which all that is foul shall flee away.”
A smile of exceeding tenderness broke over
the Master’s god-like countenance, and his eyes,
benignant yet sorrowful, rested upon the face of
the suppliant, as he answered gently :
“Fear not, Ananda, nor trouble for the
morrow. The affinity of souls must, in the end,
assert itself, for duality is the law of being.
Sooner or later, the grosser scales fall away, and
the currents blend for ever. What matter if this
take place in one life or in the next; on one
plane of existence or on the other? If this
woman be pure in heart, the Brother of the
work her no lasting ill. If there be
evil in her, it will be purged. Out of sin may
come good.”
* * * # * * *
It was long before Lemuel Lloyd mastered the
contents of the document which had formed itself
so mysteriously before his eyes. Part of it was
couched in cabalistic language, which, notwith-
standing his researches into Magic, his intelli-


gence did not at once grasp. Other parts were
clear and forcible, and upon these his imagination
dwelt with avidity. Such passages held his
attention in thrall.
For it is known to those who possess the Great
Secret that by instrumentality of this Force , there
may be evoked the Scin-Lecca or Astral Double
of one not present in the body; and at the will of
him who has learned to direct the Force, a hostile
current may be projected against the Scin-Lecca
which shall 'produce Death in its material counter-
part. And this death shall be painless, swift,
and its cause shall be undiscover able. The man
so struck ivill fall suddenly and die . in syncope,
and there shall be no trace. * * * * * * *
He who would evoke the Scin-Lecca , should be
learned that he encounters deadly peril. This is
the last, the stupendous ordeal in ivhich the Larvae
most inimical to the human race are subjugated,
and he who passes it successfully, is henceforth
entitled to rank among the Initiates. Let the
neophyte beware, if there be any shadow of fear in
Ids mind, if his mastery of the Will Force be not
absolute. A moment's tremor may cause his own
destruction. * * * * * *


Let him understand that he calls into activity
the most subtle and deadhj potencies of Nature ,
for these potencies are allied to Humanity. He
vitalizes by his will Elementals of the Borderland
most dangerous to the rash intruder. These■ are
the archetypes of human passions , and , like the
genii of the Eastern fable , will rend their master
if once suffered to escape from his control. To the
resolute there is no danger , but death or madness
may be the penalty paid by the imprudent or
untried invoker. ~ n “ The rite of
Evocation should be thus conducted.
Then followed minute details of certain
mystic ceremonials, and instructions for self-
preparation and strengthening of the will, also for
the establishment of necessary rapport between
the operator and the victim by means of a third
person in affinity with both.
The instructions now became more personal
and explicit. It w T as indicated that Antonia
Vasclier furnished the requisite link between
Lemuel and her husband. The mesmerist was
directed to turn an odic current upon her, which
should at a given hour bring her to him. All
would then be complete, and the conditions which
L 2


exact for any magical rite the presence of three
persons, fulfilled. The hour fixed was six in the
evening.
Morning found Lemuel Lloyd still poring over
the document. All day he remained in the
occult room. At sundown everything was in
readiness.
He felt no thrill of fear, no doubt of success.
His nerves were strung to their highest pitch.
He was almost numbed by the intensity of his
exaltation. Wavering was now out of the ques-
tion. The concentration of his energy amounted
almost to physical pain. So violent was the
tension that he even found himself contemplating
the possibility of the strings snapping. A little
more, and lie knew well the boundary line of
sanity would be passed.
All day, in a sub-conscious way he heard the
roar of the Roman express. He knew intui-
tively when it drew near the time of its arrival.
He knew also intuitively that Ananda had gone
to the station to meet Colonel Vascher.
All was clear to him. He could ponder upon
the scheme with diabolical calm. Julian Vascher
would never reach Monte Santo. At the ap-
pointed moment the occult forces would converge


in one supreme and deadly dart: and the doom
would fall.
The chamber was prepared. The mysiic pen-
tagram had been traced. The magic-lamps were
lighted. Strange and horrible substances burned
in a brass brazier placed within the cabalistic
circle. Blood had been spilled. Murghab stood
in his white robes and crimson insignia, erect,
demoniacal and magnificent.
At his bidding Lemuel began the incantation.
His voice, low at first, grew louder by degrees.
Smoke rose from the brazier. The fumes of the
blood spread. A thin cloud filled the room.
Then Lemuel became aware of the most subtile
and exquisite perfume, like nothing he had ever
before known, which suffused the atmosphere and
sharpened his senses, producing in him a feeling
of wild elation and buoyancy, so that he lost
the idea of weight, and appeared to himself to be
borne upon wings.
But this sensation subsided and was replaced
by one of resistless ascendancy and might. Space
itself seeming subject to him.
Thrice he repeated the invocation. And now,
the cloud had become at once more dense and
more transparent. Of such ethereal particles was


it composed that it might have been likened to
rarefied glass, glowing with the prismatic colours,
and yet, though absolutely imponderable, shaping
itself in innumerable snake-like convolutions that
by turns contracted and expanded, each time gain-
ing, as it were, fresh vigour and size. To
Lemuel’s bewildered vision the mist appeared
to have strange chameleon-like properties —for
it was now grey, bloodless, and hazy—now a
gigantic and glittering snake, and now faintly
human, at one instant showing the exquisite
outlines of a nude female figure, and again, ere
the eyes could seize a tantalizing glimpse of
delicious flesh tints, and the glory of snow-white
bosom, the strange larva had distended once more
its serpentine coils, which, as they folded back
upon themselves and upon him, took each time
greater consistency.
“ This,” murmured Murghab, “ is the mightiest
of the Elementals. It is the typified Love.”
In a brief flash from among the coils, now
shining as if with jewels, Lemuel beheld the
face of a woman, maddeningly beautiful—of the
sensuous model —full lips, low arched brows, deep
shaded eyes, hair of gleaming gold. Was she
the type of a Helen, a Phryne, a Parisian


cocotte ? As with a blood-curdling thrill, he
realized the horrible fascination of the creature:
lo! it was again a bloodless aerial phantom, a
winding formless cloud.
The sound, or the intuitive perception of a
footstep, a presence approaching, struck upon
Lemuel’s keenly sensitive nerves. The blood
forsook his heart. He was transfixed; but with
ecstasy. He stood dauntless. She was here —
she had paused in the adjoining room —the
woman he loved.
“ Antonia has come,” said Murghab, with his
cold smile. “ The crisis of your destiny draws
near. You have need of courage. All depends
upon the fiery energy of your will. See ! The
Scin-Lecca rises. From your hate the Elemen-
tals drink in strength to destroy their prey.”
Murghab pointed with his wand, and in the
distance, for the room now seemed all cloud and
serpentine eddies, so that material objects and
actual dimensions were lost, Lemuel beheld a
faint simulacrum, the reflection, as it were, of
Julian Vascher’s face and form ; but so dim, that
though eyes and features were defined, and the
living expression of mingled hope and anxiety
was recognizable, the apparition resembled a


shadow thrown upon some pale wall by lamplight
rather than the astral double of the breathing man
for which he had been prepared.
Gradually the image seemed to become more
real and human, and a soft silvery aura , which
radiated from it, intensified into an almost
dazzling lustre. This aura surrounded the Scin-
Lecca like a translucent veil; and in comparison
with its brightness the vaporous mass which
appeared to embody the Elemental Force, was
turgid and miasma-like. Lemuel observed also
that it seemed elastic and to have the power of
repelling the insidious advances of the serpentine
Thing,—the typified Lust—not Love which
would circle round, and recoil, and then, as it
were, sucking strength from his malevolent will,
would propel itself with renewed animosity.
Suddenly innumerable jets of flame sparkled and
flickered all through the vapour, orange, ruby-
coloured, and azure, now elongated, now round,
now assuming grotesque and horrible shapes,
now a brood of young salamanders, with the
limbs and faces of children caressing the formless
Thing, which was at the same time woman,
snake, cloud, all three, and yet never one of the
three. The Child Elementals appeared to have


alike Protean capabilities ; for, in one instant
they were heavenly cherubs, in another, tongues
of fire, in another, fiends whose faces, notwith-
standing their beauty, were strange masks from
which glowed eyes luminous with hate and
venom.
Forwards, backwards, and round they circu-
lated, always returning to Murghab and to
Lemuel as to a base, and seeming to derive life
and strength from the breath of the latter and
from the horrible mesmeric fluid that streamed
through his extended fingers, meeting again and
converging once more to the point where floated
the image of Julian Vascher, protected by its
glorious aura.
A woman glided through the veiled doorway
into the occult chamber, and approached Lemuel.
It was Antonia. She moved automatically like
one walking in sleep. Her eyes stared, and yet
were unseeing, her features rigid. It was evident
that she had been brought hither by the mesmerist’s
spell unconscious of her own fate, and of that
impending over her husband, unconscious of the
pestilent magnetism, the superhuman forces, the
ghastly larvae, which by foul arts had been invoked
for the destruction of the man she loved.


Was she unconscious? If the outer eyes were
blind, might it not be within the range of possi-
bility that slumbering clairvoyant vision would
awake, and would comprehend the horror of the
position ? Was there no safeguard for her
but her own instinctive purity?—No shield for
the victim’s life, but that shining veil—the love, of
which her own beclouded senses did not realize
the intensity ?
Lemuel took her hand in his. This was the
fateful moment. The world stood still. His
whole being was merged in the passion of mur-
derous desire. The drops stood on his brow.
His frenzy numbed him. Murghab spoke.
“ Concentrate your vital energies, and direct
the fluid, while you mentally conjure the larv® in
the form of evocation. Beware of faltering. The
great impetus once given, and the astral potencies
set in motion they will accomplish their aim, but
if arrested, the force will rebound upon yourself.”
Like the mother, who, while she strangles her
infant, lays her hand upon its mouth, that she
may not hear its last cry, Lemuel turned, so that
when his will launched the destroying bolt, his
eyes might not be forced to meet those of his
betrayed friend.


A voice sounded. It seemed to come from a
distance. It was Julian’s voice. Was it the
Astral double which spoke ?
“ Toni.”
As though she had been a dead woman recalled
to life Antonia started, and a long shriek of horror
and bewilderment echoed through the room. She
moved a few steps. The mesmeric spell was
broken, the rigidity was gone, and the sightless
look had left her eyes. Clear and undaunted they
gazed around; and her mind, quickened by intui-
tion, took in every detail of the ghastly scene.
She saw the burning brazier, the mystic lamps,
the pentagram of ominous import. She felt the
bloody fumes. She saw Murghab the Magician
standing cold, disdainful, and satanic. She saw
the half materialized elemental forces —and she
saw others hovering in the Astral Light seraphic
and radiant. She saw the image of her husband,
and, as in a lightning flash, she realized the
truth.
Her eyes sought those of Lemuel with wild
appeal, piercing reproach. He uttered a faint cry,
and with a passionate imperious gesture motioned
her to his side. She recoiled from him with
loathing and horror.


Then her gaze turned like that of an indignant
angel upon Murghab, Brother of the Shadow.
Victim and destroyer confronted and defied
each other. Antonia’s form dilated. She neither
quavered nor shrank. She was no longer
helpless. Though she saw him not, a God-
like Being stood close behind her, and above
hovered the pure spirits who attend the inno-
cent. Ananda s prayer had been answered.
The magnetism of his Master, the White Adept,
shielded the weak woman against the powers of
Evil.
“I know you,” she said to Murghab. “It is
you who stood m the shadow by the sea shore,
where the sand and the waves were blood. It is
you who would have taught me horrible secrets—
you who made me mad, and turned my love from
my husband. But he is here, he is here, God has
sent him to save me, and to make me his own
a £ am Julian” she cried, stretching forth
her arms to the Scin-Lecca which seemed to smile,
I have been mad. I have been dreaming.
Now I am awake. Now, I see and I know. °I
love you. I love you, and you only! Oh soul
of my soul! Husband! ”
Her agonized tones pierced the mephitic air of


the chamber, and seemed to disperse the deadly
vapours.
A human voice replied, “Toni, I am here.”
In another moment the door crashed open, and
Julian Vascher in bodily presentment entered the
loom, followed by Ananda. They, sense-bound,
saw not that which could be visible only to the
eye of the clairvoyant. For them, the Brother of
the Shadow, the Elemental Forces, the Scin-
Lecca, even the form of the White Adept, had no
existence, but Ananda knew that the crisis had
come, that the peril was past, he felt intuitively
the presence of his Master. Julian Vascher
stopped for a second, just a second, on the thres-
hold and looked round like one suddenly roused
from sleep by a cry for help, like one uncertain,
straining his eyes to see their way through vapour,
mist, and darkness, rushing to the rescue of some
one he loves—rescue from danger, the nature of
which as yet he hardly understands.
Yet another moment, and Antonia was in his
arms, and he was crying, “My Toni, I have
come to you.”
And she clung to him ; and he, defiantly facing
Lemuel, the false fnend, held his wife, as it were,
prepared to defend her against all powers in earth


or air, in heaven, or the central darkness of hell,
that should attempt to keep her from him.
And now a strange change came over Lemuel.
There was no violent throe, no throbbing con-
vulsion. He stood very still; his extended arms
dropped nerveless. It was over. The struggle
was ended. The ordeal was past. A clammy
coldness and sensation of faintness overpowered
him. He gazed silently at the woman he loved,
at the man he had sought to betray and destroy.
He knew that the deadly current had rebounded
upon himself, and that for him there was no more
of life. A mist closed in around him, and
swallowed up Murghab and the Larvae he had
evoked. Antonia’s eyes shone still for him like
veiled stars. Then they vanished too, and he
was alone with Death.
THE END.
BRADBURY, AGNEW, & CO., PRINTERS, WIUTEFRIAKS.






on /*' _
Met S '€£/fC\J iL ( nejt //tjJ- J ■s<n(/ntjLj )
-f&'ecZtv-L; chuyjr&&*-
fy-GiSfl•j-r.OY'Z , ftrm yfarrted 1%&7 ft
tCA<d 4rn erf
1)k /^U^CtCi^-Cc/6'j crnu
ayt ft>cuyyiaC / r x t /ib^l t ci/r~3tai'jj «
* ''*-
tM.. ®)ych\S,'j SffrjJxA <SC+t oy\
z£( y{ij L<"j ly //*/ yftady
-fejcwtr t/ewff/bu cr^ ,
i^ r 'lAt3Co(AA''j(
~S f(A' jd.& v K &Y\
c n'vjftst) c>y nftti ifct
r /ftt isnvftcij? Stf Qy\
tii &yj St V*4Y\J(&r <M-h&U (w ftt-Sf j


y[c.-vVUi
U-t$C ( z ~
7 ; &&lVi*ry) frn&l . bJt
/h ui l>Of ~ cryxi o^<-








