



THE AUSTRALIAN
ABORIGINES
PROTECTION SOCIETY.
INSTITUTED 1838.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY JAMES SI’ILSBUHY,
LOWER GEORGE STREET.
1838.


THE AUSTRALIAN
ABORIGINES’ PROTECTION SOCIETY.
At a Provisional Meeting of the Friends of the Abo-
riginal Cause, convened by notice of the 29th September,
the following gentlemen present ;
R. Bourne, Esq.
G. Cavenagh, Esq
Rev. P. Crook.
Mr. Dredge.
A Foss, Esq.
Mr. Hoskins.
Rev. Dr. Lang.
The Chief Protector.
Mr. Parker.
Mr. Sadlier.
Rev. J. Saunders.
Rev. L. E. Threlkeld.
Mr. W. Thomas.
R. Windeyer, Esq.
Resolved—That an Auxiliary Society be now formed
in connexion with the British and Foreign Aborigines’
Protection Society,* entitled “ The Australian Abori-
gines’ Protection Society,” to be governed by the follow-
ing rules:—
I. That the object shall be to assist in protecting and
promoting the advancement of the Aborigines of this
colony and the neighbouring islands.
11. That every Subscriber of 10s. per annum, shall be
an Ordinary Member, and a donation of £5 shall con-
stitute a Life Member.
111. That a Committee be appointed to manage the
affairs of the Society, and that such Committee do con-
* The Address of the British and Foreign Aborigines’ Protection
Socie’ v is appended for the information of the public.


sist of the following gentlemen, with power to add to
their numbers, viz.:—
G. Allen, Esq.
W. A’Beckett, Esq.
R. Bourne, Esq.
Rev. W. Cowper.
Rev. W. P. Crook.
G. Cavenagh, Esq.
R. Jones, Esq., M.C.
Rev. Dr. Lang.
Rev. J. M‘Kcnny.
R. Mansfield, Esq.
Rev. J. Saunders.
S. Stephen, Esq.
Mr. Sadlier.
Rev. L. E. Threlkeld.
R. Windeyer, Esq.
IV. That the Ministers of Religion, and the Pro-
tectors of the Aborigines, be ex officio members of the
Committee.
V. That five be a quorum, who shall be competent to
conduct the business at any meeting of the Committee.
VI. That the Committee shall meet at least once every
month ; and that a General Meeting of the Society shall
be held annually for the election of office bearers, and
for the promotion of the general objects of the Society.
VII. That A. M'Leay, Esq., be respectfully requested
to accept the office of President, and that the Rev,
Mr. M‘lntyre be requested to act as Secretary, and
Mr. A. Foss as Treasurer; and that these officers be
ex officio members of the Committee.
VIII. That the Magistrates of the territory, and such
other friends of the Aboriginal Cause, hereafter to be
named by the Committee, be requested to become Cor-
responding Members.


BRITISH AND FOREIGN
ABORIGINES’ PROTECTION SOCIETY.
President. —T. Fowell Buxton, Esq., M.P.
Committee.
W. Allen, Esq.
G. F. Angas, Esq.
E. Baines, Esq., M.P.
S. Blackburn, Esq.
E. N. Buxton, Esq.
Edmund Buxton, Esq.
Rev. G. Christie.
Sir A. d’Este, Bart.
Josiah Forster, Esq.
William Forster, Esq.
Rev. J. J. Freeman.
S. Gurney, Esq., Jun.
C. Hindley, Esq., M. P.
Gurney Hoare, Esq.
T. Hodgkin, Esq., M. P.
M. Hutchinson, Esq.
A. Johnston, Esq., M.P.
R. King, Esq.
Dr. S. Lushingfon, M. P.
C. Lushington,Esq., M. P.
W. Overend, Esq.
J. Pease, Esq., M. P.
Rev. Dr. Philip.
T. Roscoe, Esq.
Ehenezer Smith, Esq.
W. Stroud, Esq., M.P.
J. H.Tredgold, Esq.
Treasurer. —H. Tuckett, Esq., 20, Finsbury Circus.
Honorary Secretaries. Rev. J. J. Freeman, Waltham-
stow ; J. H. Treclgold, Esq., 41, Wellclose Square.
The Report of the Parliamentary Select Committee oh Aboriginal
Tribes, is reprinted with comments by the Aboriginal Protection Society,
and published by William Ball, Aldine Chambers, and Halchard and
Son, Piccadilly.


REGULATIONS.
I. The Object. —The object is to assist in protecting
and promoting the advancement of defenceless or unci-
vilized Tribes.
11. The Members. —The Members shall be of two
classes, Ordinary and Honorary. A Subscription of One
Guinea a-year, or a Donation of £lO, shall constitute an
Ordinary Member. An Honorary Member shall be
elected by a majority of the Committee.
111. The Direction. —The business of the Society shall
be transacted by a Committee of at least Twenty-four
Members, exclusive of the President, Vice-Presidents,
Treasurer, and Secretaries, each of whom shall be allowed
a vote. The body shall have the entire control of the
affairs of the Society, and the disposal of its Funds, for
the attainment of its objects.
IV. — Meetings. —The Committee shall meet at least
once every month, and Four Members shall be a quorum.
The General Meetings shall be held annually in Lon-
don, in the Month of May, and oftener, if necessary, to
choose a Committee, Treasurer,Secretaries,and Collector;
and to receive Reports, and to deliberate on what further
steps may best promote the object of the Society.
V. Local Associations. —The formation of Branch As-
sociations shall be promoted both at home and abroad;
and a regular correspondence maintained with them by
the Parent Society.


ADDRESS.
It is a melancholy fact that the intercourse of Europeans
with the uncivilized Aboriginal Tribes has, in almost all
cases, been characterized by injustice on the one side, and
suffering on the other. By fraud and violence Eu-
ropeans have usurped immense tracts of native territory,
paying no regard to the rights of the inhabitants. In
close alliance with the process of usurpation has been
that of extermination, which has already been carried to
an incredible extent. In some cases the work of destruc-
tion is already complete, while in others it has made, and
is still making, the most fearful advances. There is
scarcely a tribe that has had communication with what
are called the Civilized Nations, which is not the worse
for the intercourse. European diseases and vices have
been so deeply ingrafted, that the extinction of the native
races cannot be far distant, if measures be not speedily
taken to check the growth of these evils.
It is, however, satisfactory, that the desire to improve
the religious, moral, and political condition of mankind,
keeps pace with the increasing intellectual freedom of
our native country. We, as a nation, have not only
sought to loosen the mental bondage of our own country-
men, by the establishment of schools and the removal of
many barriers to religious and intellectual improvement,
but we have struggled to establish the liberties of man in
our colonial possessions, by the abolition of negro slavery.
Societies have also been established for the diffusion of
Christianity among ignorant and idolatrous nations, and
much good has resulted from their labours. But, although
these efforts have been made to benefit the slave popula-
tion and aboriginal tribes, we can as yet be scarcely said
to know the extent of our duties towards the uncivilized
races of our fellow-men. The Missionary Societies are
established on such principles, and for such objects, as


prevent them from interfering, except on particular occa-
sions, with the civil and political condition of the natives.
They have, however, long felt the importance of protect-
ing the natural rights, and promoting the civilization, of
those communities, for whom they provide the constant
administration of Sacred Truth.— The British and Foreign
Aborigines’ Protection Society has been framed for these
purposes.
The first object of the Society will be to collect authentic
information concerning the character, habits, and wants,
of the uncivilized tribes, and especially those in or near the
British Colonies. Our present knowledge is, for the most
part, confined to the imperfect notices of travellers, who,
with numerous admirable exceptions, have devoted so
little attention to the subject, or have been so much
biassed by prejudice, as to forbid full dependence on their
opinions. Further evidence will, consequently, in many
cases, be required, before efficient measures can be
adopted to relieve the condition, and to promote the civili-
zation, of the several communities. The Society has
therefore commenced its operations by the election of
Corresponding Members, the number of whom will, from
time to time, be increased; and by the information they
give, and that derived from other sources, the future pro-
ceedings of the Society will be in a great measure regu-
lated.
It is not, however, sufficient, that the Society alone should
be in possession of accurate information. One of its most
important duties will be to communicate, in cheap publica-
tions, those details which may excite the interest of all
classes, and thus ensure the extension of correct opinions.
It is probable that some cases may be brought under
the attention of the Society, in which the interference of
the Legislature may be required, and it will then be neces-
sary to appeal to the Government, or to Parliament, for
the relief of those who, as natives of our colonies, have a
right to the protection of British laws. The distinctions
which have been drawn between the privileges and immu-
nities of the settler and the native must be removed.
Nor will this, it is anticipated, he difficult of accomplish-
ment, for the enquiries recently made by the House qf
Commons afford a prospect that the ; political and social


injustice so long suffered by the Aborigines will soon
receive the attention of an enlightened government.
To obtain justice for the natives by an improved admi-
nistration of law, is now the Society’s principal object.
But it hopes to do more than this, by its efforts to convince
European settlers that they will better consult their own
interests by conciliatory conduct towards the native inha-
bitants, than by any measures of oppression and violence.
The plans to be adopted by the Society for the benefit of
the native tribes in existing colonies, will depend upon the
circumstances in which they may be found; but in the
event of the formation of new settlements, every effort
will be made to secure the rights of the natives. The
principles of the illustrious William Penn, are as wise as
they are just:—for the purchase of land is a safer as
well as a better title, than the acquisition thereof by fraud
or force, and its maintenance by oppression and blood-
shed .
The Committee cannot, however, too strongly impress
upon the public mind, the determination of the Society to
be governed in all its measures by the fact, that the com-
plete civilization and the real happiness of man can
never be secured by any thing less than the diffusion of
Christian principles.
SYDNEY:
Panted by J. Spilsbury.
