

The Aborigines
THEIR PRESENT CONDITION
AS SEEN IN
NORTHERN SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
THE NORTHERN TERRITORY,
NORTH-WEST AUSTRALIA AND
WESTERN QUEENSLAND
BY
J. R. B. LOVE
Travelling under Honorary Commission
from the Board of Missions
of the
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH
OF AUSTRALIA
1913-14
?
Arbuckle, Waddell & Fawckner, Printers
1915




Fr oword
IIE Board of Missions of the
Presbyterian Church of
Australia has sincere pleasure in issuing
this Report, and is convinced that it Will
do much to arouse interest in the cause of
our aboriginal tribes in Australia, and to
deepen that interest . among those who
already have the welfare of the
aborigines at heart. It embodies the
results of two years of travel and investi-
gation into the condition of the natives
of unfrequented regions, by Mr.]. R. B.
Love, a son of the manse and student
from South A ustralia. Mr. Love carried
his helpful work through without finan-
cial aid of any kind from the Church.
The cost of printing the Report has
been generously borne by R. Barr
Smith, Esq., of South A ustralia. To him
and to Mr. Love the Board of Missions
tenders hearty thanks on behalf of the
Church.
ALEX. STEWART
Convener
T. W. LEGGATT
Secretary)








To the Board of Missions
Presbyterian Church of Australia
Gentlemen, —
On September 24th, 1912, you favoured me with an
honorary commission to enquire into and report to you
upon
1. The present conditions of life among the aborigines
of the settled and unsettled parts of Australia.
2. The approximate numbers at various localities.
3. The suitability of various places as centres for
the mission work of the Church among the
aborigines.
I forwarded letters from Alice Springs, from Darwin
and from Borroloola.
I now venture to submit to your consideration the
appended report, in which I have tried, to the best of
my ability, to give a fair and unprejudiced representa-
tion of the present condition of the aboriginal people as
I have seen them, with such suggestions as I believe
will aid in the uplifting of this extremely interesting and
most neglected race.
1 would not wantonly offend any, but, in speaking
of a people such as these, who are subject to much
indifferent neglect and a certain amount of deliberate
wrong, no less than well-intentioned folly, it is apparent
that the truth must inevitably' hurt some. I can only
say that I have endeavoured to avoid a narrow-minded
svmpathy with, or hostility towards, the missionary, the
stockman, and the travelling “bushwhacker,” the three
parties most concerned with the aborigines in their daily
life.


You will notice that I place the position of the children
as of first importance, with care of the aged and infirm
and employment of the able-bodied as the next considera-
tions.
The care of the children is particularly the province
of the Christian Church. To take the hundreds of boys
and girls, of aboriginal and mixed blood, who are now
growing up, most!}’ in idleness and, I am convinced,
almost invariably in immorality, in the camps, and to
give them such a sound Christian and industrial training
as will at least give them a chance to live a decent and
useful life, is surely a splendid call.
I have the honour to be,
Gentlemen,
Faithfully yours,
J. R. B. LOVE.
Charleville,
Queensland,
August Sth, 1914.


I.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
1. —Flinders Range District.
For the purposes of this report we may pass over the
remnants of the aboriginal tribes now living in a more
or less civilised condition in the southern part of the
State.
In the north the aborigines have almost disappeared
from the settled parts. A few families remain on some
of the sheep stations, where they find employment and
good treatment.
The rendezvous for the last of the Flinders Range
tribes is at the Government camel depot at Mt. Serle,
near Leigh’s Creek. Here as many as forty blacks gather
at times for a holiday, to renew old acquaintance, and
to practise what few of their ancient customs still remain
to them. After their holiday is ended they disperse again
to their various stations, where they build their charac-
teristic little round huts of bent sticks, roofed with
leaves, rags, and any old sheets of tin that may be lying
about the station rubbish heaps.
The men chiefly spend the greater part of their time
in stock-work on the station; the women are welcome
as domestics and washerwomen; while the very few
children that are found amongst these civilised blacks
are usually treated almost as pets by the white men
on the stations.
The Aborigines


2.—Hergott to Birdsville.
In the north-east part of the State the Lutheran mis-
sionaries have worked on bravely for some forty years
at the Killalpaninna Mission Station on Cooper’s Creek,
with out-stations at Etladinna, Kopperamanna and
Blazes Well. Of late years the Station has not prospered
very well. Venereal and throat diseases have carried off
the blacks with terrible rapidity. When I visited this
station in igio there were thirteen children attending
the Mission School, out of a total of one hundred and
sixty-five blacks on the station. I was informed that, in
the early days of the mission, there were over one hun-
dred children present.
The fact that, for the year igio, this station registered
eighteen deaths and one birth (the child dying since) is
painfully eloquent testimony that in a few years there
will be no Mission Station on Cooper’s Creek.
Yet few who have seen the kindly missionaries at work
on the Cooper, or witnessed such scenes as the little
black children playing kindergarten games with Mrs.
Riedel, while the old men and women sat about on the
sand, chuckling with delight, will say that all that time,
labour and expense have been in vain.
Far back in the Northern Territory and Queensland,
travellers meet and talk, with a kindly laugh, of old Mr.
Vogelsang and the other missionaries, who once worked
on the Cooper Station. Religious men these travellers
seldom are, but they usually agree that the German
missionaries have always been the best of good people.
Living cheerful and refined lives, on salaries pitifully
small, they have spread an influence that has touched
man}' whites as well as blacks, and that will be remem-
bered when the Cooper blacks have become extinct.
3.—Far North.
From Hergott Springs to Oodnadatta one may fall in
with a camp of, perhaps, twenty blacks, living to a great
extent in their primitive condition. x-\ camp is frequently


to be found alongside one of the large waterholes of
Stewart’s Creek, where the blacks fish and hunt for ducks
and other birds, goannas, snakes and rabbits. The men
will frequently work for a time under whites, secure a
supply of clothes, tobacco and rations, then go off to
join their friends, wherever they may be camped at the
time.
Oodnadatta itself has a fairly large number of blacks.
One sees the men sweeping, chopping wood, and doing
odd jobs, while the women wash, or nurse the children
of their white employers. As nurses, the black “gins”
(women) are excellent. I have never seen an aboriginal
woman strike or ill-use a child.
I noticed two black children attending the State School
with the white children. The majority of the black
children run wild about the town.
Xo doubt these blacks are well fed and more or less
clothed, though their accommodation leaves much to be
desired. The usual blacks’ home is the round “humpy”
constructed of bent sticks, covered with rags and tin.
In one of these “humpies” will live the entire family,
including a pack of mongrel dogs. A small fire smoulders
constantly before the entrance, round which the men and
women sit and smoke, while the children play near by.
Left to themselves, the blacks will always build such
lints, living in one till tired of the locality, when they
either evacuate or burn the old hut and build a fresh
one. When built of boughs and leaves in the bush they
are well enough as temporary shelters, though hardly
suitable for township residences.
4.—West and North-West of Oodnadatta.
That portion of Australia which lies on the boundaries
of South Australia, Western Australia and the Northern
Territory, including Lake Amadeus, the Musgrave, Mann
and Petermann Ranges, is still practically terra incognita.


Opinions differ as to the number of aborigines living
in this country. A member of one exploring party
informed me that he had seen, in the Musgrave Ranges,
a camp containing about three hundred aborigines. A
member of the late Mr. Frank George’s ill-starred party
told me that the blacks in the Petermann Ranges were
numerous and aggressive. It was here that they were
attacked in 190 “j, one member of the party losing an
eye from a spear-wound.
On the other hand, Mr. Allan Davidson, the discoverer
of Tanami, reports that he saw very few aborigines west
of the overland telegraph line.
Much depends on the season of the year. In a good
season the blacks are scattered far and wide, hunting
for food. In a dry season they flock in to the permanent
waters, there to struggle for a living till the next rains.
A traveller may be fortunate enough to fall in with a
large camp of blacks who have assembled, from
frequently hundreds of miles apart, for a corroboree, to
use the term generally used by the whites to denote a
meeting of the blacks for religious ceremonies, amuse-
ment and fnendl}' re-unions.
Vague rumours are heard of large permanent waters
hidden away in these ranges, to which no white man
has yet found his way, but it is very doubtful if any large
permanent water exists, though it is probable that water
can frequently be obtained at fairly shallow depths, as
at times one finds a “mickri,” or native well, containing
water.
In time of severe drought the blacks flock in to the
stations west of Alice Springs, to the overland telegraph
stations, and to the northern waters as far as Victoria
River downs. It is likely that such gatherings drain
the very heart of the unknown country.
Here lies a very alluring field for the missionary, and
ethnologist. Living absolutely under primitive condi-
tions, dependent for their daily food on the stone
tomahawk and stone-and-fire-worked wooden implements,


they still maintain the ancient customs which have largely
disappeared from the settled parts. The fact that a
member of one exploring party brought back with him
a fair-haired boy from the Petermann Ranges proves
that the white man’s influence has penetrated to this
remotest corner of the desert, most probably through
the travelling into station waters of the blacks during
drought.
It is extremely desirable that a well-equipped expedi-
tion should ascertain the exact position as regards the
desert tribes of the west-central part of the Continent,
on both religious and ethnological grounds.


11.
THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
1.—Alice Springs District: Charlotte Waters to Barrow
Creek.
Excepting those tribes living in the western part of
the Mac Donnell Ranges, and beyond to the west and
north-west, the blacks of the southern part of the
Northern I erntory may be described as semi-civilised.
Most can speak a few words of English, though few can
speak more than a halting “pidgin” English.
On the cattle stations, as far north as the Mac Donnell
Ranges, the usual custom is for the blacks’ camp to be
placed near the station homestead, within a quarter of
a mile- The station managers insist that the blacks
shall camp near the homestead, and forbid them to camp
at their pleasure on any part of the run. With the blacks
near the station, the manager knows that the cattle are
fairh’ safe. If the blacks were scattered about on the
run, the}' would, of course, help themselves to beef at
their pleasure. Apart from the actual amount of beef
consumed, the stations would suffer chiefly from the
wildness of cattle that were being constantly hunted,
and also from the loss of wounded beasts, as the spear
seldom kills outright.
When the}’ wish to hunt for kangaroos, goannas,
roots, seeds or any other edible commodity, they will
inform the manager as to the direction they propose to
take. He will then make it his business to ride that
way, and see that cattle are not molested.
The camps are much the same at each station; a
dozen or more of the shabby and dirty little “humpies.”
At two places, however—Alice Springs and Henburv
Station—the huts are quite respectable affairs, built with


NUg UGLY BLOT ON AUSTRALAI
{Copyright J Flynn)




a ridge pole and thatched roof and walls. These are of
more civilised construction. In fact, one energetic Alice
Springs blackfellow follows the calling of builder, build-
ing a hut for any of the tribe at a cost of half-a-crown.
At each station are found from twenty to fifty blacks
of all ages. Of this number the station will employ from
six to twenty “boys,” as the men of all ages are called.
These boys are stockmen, and in the southern part of
the Northern Territory it is now customary to pay the
boys wages. The usual wage at present paid to an
aboriginal stockman is io_/6 per week, in addition to
food. One station, which draws all its stock-water from
wells by means of donkeys and double whips, pays from
£\ to ;£ 1/4/6 per week to a boy and his gin, who operate
fhe whip. In passing, it may be remarked that the boy
sits at the well-head and simply guides the bucket and
pulls the string to release the water, while the gin walks
backwards and forwards, driving the donkeys as they
raise and lower the buckets. Boys, when on the road
with travelling cattle, receive 14/6 per week.
It is encouraging to note that the principle of paying
wages for labour performed by blacks is finding its way
into the interior. The wages are small, but one
acquainted with the blacks will understand that the boy’s
small wage is more just than at first it might appear.
At each station is a camp of, perhaps, fifty blacks.
Of this number probably on an average six boys are
constantly employed by the station. They are fed and
paid wages. One or two of their gins, employed in the
domestic work of the station, are also fed and clothed.
The remainder of the camp live partly by hunting and
partly on the beef which they receive from the station.
These stations kill about one bullock per week. The
whites take what they want and leave the bones and a
good share of the beef for the blacks. The blacks’
share amounts to about a third of the total beef killed.
The managers almost invariably take care that the old
and decrepit shall get a share, and it is customary for


the manager to give the blacks a Christmas treat at his
own expense.
Of course this does not supply the needs of the blacks ;
very far from it. The position is this: Station managers
are employed to produce the greatest possible returns
from their stations. Mission stations, which have for
their sole ends the uplifting and support of the blacks,
find it difficult to make financial ends meet. Obviously,
then, a cattle station can hardly be expected to return
a handsome dividend to its owners and at the same time
support comfortably all the blacks who may live on the
run.
The private generosity of the managers, even with
the station policy of allowing a certain amount of beef,
fail to meet requirements. One finds as a rule that
the children are well fed. The young men and women,
who are able to hunt, procure enough native food supplies
(“bushy tuckout” in “pidgin” English) to satisfy them.
The old men, by an ingenious system of banning certain
foods usually the choicest—to the young people, get
a good share of whatever the younger men and women
catch.
The unfortunate old women are in a sad position. At
no time does a blackfellow give much consideration to
his gin, except in a few rare instances. He will eat his
fill of, say, a goanna, and when satisfied, throw the
remains over his shoulder to his gin, who squats on the
ground behind him, waiting, with the children and dogs,
for her share. I have known of a blackfellow to eat part
of a goanna and lay the rest aside. His gin, thinking
her lord had finished his meal, took the goanna and
began to eat, when the angry buck felled her to the
earth with his boomerang for daring to help herself
before he had finished.
Be that as it may, the gins do the greater part of the
food gathering. While the bucks take their spears to
hunt for kangaroos, turkeys, and other big game, the
gins collect seeds, roots, fruits, grubs and goannas, and


I have a shrewd suspicion that if the gins should find
two goannas, they will cook and eat one before returning
to the camp with the other. In the same way the children
who, when little, go with the mother, will get a good
share of food in the bush, away from the camp.
When the blackfellow gets too old for vigorous hunting,
he becomes entitled to the delicacies which he dared not
eat in his youth, and so receives ample food from the
younger members. Thus, for instance, in certain parts
ypung blacks must not eat wild turkey, but by all means
can catch it, and give it to the old men. Young blacks
must not eat rock wallaby, nor wood-duck, nor emu
fat, nor other things according to the local food supplies.
The result is that, in a fairly good season, the old men
are all in good condition, sleek and glossy-skinned.
The poor old gins have no such comforting restrictions
for their benefit. Unable to hunt well for themselves,
they subsist on any odd scraps they can get. In every
blacks’ camp I have seen, from Oodnadatta to Darwin,
and to the west and east, there are from one to a dozen
underfed old women; frequently they are simply starving.
In time of drought old and young suffer.
The blacks invariably persist in keeping hordes of
mongrel dogs. These are of little or no use, and are
never properly fed. One is somewhat relieved to know
that in severe seasons the blacks frequently eat the dogs,
and so make some small use of them.
Strangely enough, though they do not feed their dogs,
they are apparently very fond of them. Pups are never
killed as encumbrances. To kill a blackfellow’s dog is
to offend him mortally. On several occasions that have
come under my notice, when the blacks were not desired
in certain places, the white men rode to the camp and
opened fire, not on the blacks, but on the dogs. When
several dogs had bitten the dust the blacks decamped.
One camp I saw had in it a pup with a broken leg. The
wretched creature, a mere handful of mangy skin and
bone, crawled about the camp in misery, yet none


dreamed of killing it. When a. dog dies, the blacks
usually cry and howl over it, finally according it the
same burial as is given to a man of the tribe. It is not
uncommon, in certain districts, to find a dead dog
wrapped in bark and placed in the fork of a tree. With-
out the dogs the blacks would be better off.
Government ration depots have been maintained at
various places. In time of drought rations are certainly
needed by all, but in a fair season it is difficult to dis-
tribute rations justly. If they are given only to the old
and helpless, the whole camp share the rations as soon
as the recipient returns to the camp, and an old gin is
lucky if she gets even a fair share of what was issued
to her.
The question of morality among blacks that come into
contact with the whites is one that is most serious and
painful. It cannot be denied that the standard of
morality among the white men of the interior is low.
But, however it may be deplored, it is futile to pretend
that the present condition of living among the bushmen
is other than the inevitable result of a life that neces-
sarily brings whites in daily contact with blacks, without
any restraining or uplifting influence whatever.
A young man may go into the bush for the sake of
a free life, excitement, or other reason, with the best
intentions in the world, more probably with no particular
intentions, good or bad. Several years of separation
from all that he once knew of uplifting influences, and
of daily growing familiarity with bush standards will
almost certainly deaden his moral sensitiveness.
But let those who would censure the bushman reflect
that a heavy debt lies at the door of the Christian
Churches, which have allowed a generation to go by,
and a fresh generation of bushmen to arise without a
word of exhortation and encouragement in the struggle.
The work of the Australian Inland Mission, which, in
the name of the Presbyterian Church, has been inaugur-
ated by the Rev. J. Flynn, should, in time, have a vast


influence on the character of the interior. So far, help
received for this mission has been exceedingly encourag-
ing, and it is hardly too optimistic to regard it as
probably one of the strongest forces in shaping the future
of the interior of this Continent.
Similar fine work is being carried on in Queensland,
under the Church of England, by the Bush Brotherhood,
and in 1913-1914, the Rev. Mr. Wilkinson, of the same
Church, was pluckily travelling through the Northern
Territory with his two black boys, and plain pack horses.
To all such attempts to introduce a sane, sympathetic
and broad-minded standard into the interior, we can lend
our hearty support.
These schemes, however, all deal directly with the
whites. To return to our own subject. The most serious
feature of the aborigines question is, to my mind, the
fate of the children in the blacks’ camps.
In 1912 the number of half-caste children under the
apparent age of fifteen years in the Alice Springs dis-
trict was estimated at one hundred and nineteen; of
quadroons twenty-one. I should say that, as nearly as
I can judge, there are more than twice this number of
full-blooded aboriginal children. These numbers refer,
of course, only to the aborigines who are in contact with
the whites, and do not refer to the outlying desert tribes,
whose numbers can only be guessed at.
At times one is startled to find, in a blacks’ camp, chil-
dren with white skins and golden hair: quadroons, of
course; that is to say, the children of half-caste mothers
and white fathers. • Of course, these children are no bet-
ter than the others, yet it seems particularly painful that
these children should be growing up to the life of the
camps—in a word, white savages.
The woman in a blacks’ camp has no possibility of a
life of virtue, not that such an idea enters her head. As
far as the tribal customs remain, the men lend their
wives to each other, within strictly recognised limits,


but there is no limit to the white man, and I believe I
am not exaggerating when I say that probably every
gin in any blacks’ camp in the interior is at the disposal
of any passing traveller for the price of a stick of
tobacco or a piece of damper.
One cannot well blame the blacks. Life is never too
easy for them, and frequently food is hard to obtain.
The white man has flour, tea, sugar, and above all,
tobacco, and perhaps some spare clothing and a few
yards of Turkey twill. The gin sees no wrong in obtain-
ing the coveted luxuries easily, and comes to the travel-
ler’s camp of her own accord, brought by an older gin,
or sent by her aboriginal husband.
The blame rests largely with ourselves, in that we
allow children to grow up to such a life, and make no
attempt to take them from it and lift them to a higher
level.
Not infrequently one finds the white man caring for
his half-caste child, and bringing it up to the best of his
ability, in some cases sending the child to a school or
mission station during its tender years, and finally taking
the child back under his own care.
In two cases that came under my notice, the father
had drawn his will in favour of his half-caste son, be-
queathing him his property, a considerable amount in
both cases. Such cases, however, are distinctly in the
minority. The majority of white fathers do not care,
and probably do not even know of their child’s existence.
A proposal has been made, to convert a certain station
in the Alice Springs district into a Government Station
for the training of aborigines, and raising of stock.
It is an open secret that this station is the Lutheran
Mission Station at Hermannsburg, on the Finke River,
85 miles west of Alice Springs. Some account of
this station may not be out of place.
In 1877 Messrs. Schwarz, Kempe and Schulz started
from Taminda, in South Australia, with waggons and


supplies, for the Finke River, which had been recom-
mended to the Lutheran Church as a centre for mission-
enterprise by the Government of the time.
After eighteen months’ travelling they arrived at the
site of the present mission station, and set to work to
establish themselves, and to win the confidence of the
blacks. Six months passed before friendly relations
were established. Ten years passed before the first bap-
tism of an aboriginal into the Christian faith. When the
present superintendent of the mission, Mr. Streplow,
arrived, there were some thirty-five blacks on the station.
To-day there are about one hundred and fifty—the birth
rate slightly exceeding the death rate —and fresh arrivals
coming in from time to time.
The present inhabitants of the mission station are
principally of the Arunta tribe, made famous to the
ethnological world by the work of Messrs. Spencer and
Gillen. Arunta is the language spoken on the station,
English also being taught in the school. Next in num-
bers are those of the Loritcha tribe, living to the west
of the Finke, and also members of various tribes from
the surrounding country.
In time of drought the blacks come in from the desert,
and mostly depart again when the rains come. It is not
to be wondered at that they should prefer the untram-
melled life of the wild. An excellent plan is that adopted
by the Anglican missionaries on the Roper River, of
encouraging the blacks to leave their children at the
mission station, where they shall be cared for and taught,
the parents being free to visit the children, and even, if
they so wish, to take them away into the bush. Such
children usually soon come back from their bush holiday,
gradually growing less and less anxious for a “walk-
about.”
The Hermannsburg Station has lately been subject to
a considerable amount of adverse criticism. Some of
such criticism has been justified, and some of it not so.


With regard to the religious work of the mission, it
would hardly appear just to accept the criticism of a
non-religious or, perhaps, even an anti-religious man.
Perhaps I may be allowed to venture a candid opinion
of this station. In the first place let me say that I have
personally the strongest regard for the Lutheran mis-
sionaries, both on the Finke and on Cooper’s Creek, as
gentlemen, as devoted missionaries, and as the embodi-
ment of kindness and hospitality. They will, I hope,
forgive me if I state what are, I believe, defects m their
work, while applauding the undoubtedly good work
achieved.
It has been said that the Hermannsburg blacks are
dirty. This I deny. The habit of personal cleanliness
is hard to instil into the aboriginal mind, and Hermanns-
burg has not entirely overcome this difficulty. The rows
of plump, bright-faced little boys and girls m the school-
room, with hair combed and glistening black eyes and
white teeth, were to me one of the most pleasant sights
of the interior. True, one small rascal had to be sent
back to perform his ablutions: an occurrence not un-
known among white children.
It has been said that the blacks are ill-dressed. This
I emphatically deny. On one day in each week each gin
washes and mends her own clothes, and those of her
family. When dry, the clean clothes are folded and
taken to the head missionary to be placed, under his
direction, in the store till the end of the week, when
all hands receive a change of clothes. New clothes are
issued to all hands four times in each year. Here and
there I did see a dirty and ragged aboriginal. The
explanation will not be surprising to those who have had
experience of the ways of the aborigines. Blacks fre-
quently come in to the mission station, with no intention
of staying and submitting to mission influences, but
simply to get what they can and see their relatives. It
must be remembered that all members of a tribe are
more or less closely related, the Australian marriage code


TWO ABORIGNEES-
{Copyright J. Flynn) AND A CHOICE OF MORALS




to prevent the evils of consanguity being one of the
marvels of the ethnological world. Particularly will these
visits take place at the time of distributing fresh clothes.
A mission gin will meet a ragged relative, and promptly
exchange her new dress for the old, dirty one. This
habit is, of course, excellent in its way: the essence of
true socialism; but it is often annoying to those who
have aborigines in their employ.
I have known a boy to receive a new stockwhip, cost-
ing £2/10/0, from a station manager, and next day to
exchange it for a worthless trifle from an outside boy.
Similarly, the blacks will share their food, and, indeed,
am’ article, with their bush relatives.
The discipline of this station has been criticised. This
criticism was made at an inopportune time in the history
of the mission. Personally, I think a little muscular
Christianity is sometimes an excellent thing in dealing
with blacks. On this point, however, opinions will differ,
and who so liable to public obloquy as the missionary
who delivers what may be a thoroughly deserved punish-
ment ?
It has been said that the blacks are ill-fed. The best
reply to this is the condition of the blacks themselves.
The Arunta are, as a rule, tall, well-built, and not very
plump. The Hermannsburg members of the tribe were,
when I saw them, a fine body of men and women. Indeed,
these and the blacks of the north-east coast of the Nor-
thern Territory, are people of magnificent physique. The
chief article of diet at Hermannsburg appeared to me to
be soup or stew, and, though manifestly nourishing, I
think a more varied diet might be supplied without extra-
vagance, and to the greater contentment of the blacks
themselves.
An idea seems to be prevalent among a good many
people that this and other mission stations are money-
making concerns. To those who know the salaries paid
to missionaries, and the anxious canvassing necessary
to secure support for the missions, such a notion seems


hardly worthy of consideration, yet it is surprising how
wide-spread it is, even among some otherwise well-
informed persons.
The financial basis of Hermannsburg is cattle raising.
With the free lease of the land, and the Government
annual grant of £ 3OO, the station by itself is practically
self-supporting. Freight on goods delivered at the mis-
sion station amounts to about ,£4OO yearly.
Hermannsburg is carried on by the Lutheran Church,
in conjunction with the mission station at Killalpaninna,
on Cooper’s Creek, in South Australia. The latter station,
from several causes, entails a considerable loss.
It has been stated that the Hermannsburg Station
sends money home to Germany. The truth might add
that the German Lutherans send financial assistance to
these two stations, which repay what they can—less than
the amount received, as the missions have several times
been in danger of abandonment owing to lack of funds.
One great problem is the employment of all the abori-
gines. It does not take many persons to work a cattle
station. Agriculture is out of the question in Central
Australia, beyond gardening, carried on by means of
well water. While any Central Australian station con-
tains many aborigines, some of them will be partly idle
unless suitable industries can be introduced. This, I
believe, can be done.
I am inclined to think that this, and other mission
stations that I have seen, suffer from two main defects:
they are over-staffed, and too little opportunity of self-
reliance is allowed the blacks.
Many men insist, and thoroughly believe, that a black-
fellow cannot be trusted to carry on any work alone.
Few have the opportunity, and, as long as the black-
fellow is watched and shepherded at every point, so long
will he need to be.
Undoubtedly it would be foolish to place an untaught
blackfellow in a position of trust. His shifts to avoid


work are often very ridiculous. Much depends on the
training he has received since childhood, for, excepting
the colour of his skin, the aboriginal child is much the
same as any other.
Two capable and practical men: one to take charge
of the religious and secular instruction, the other a
stockman and handicraftsman, should, with their wives,
be ample staff for a mission station. If the mission
cannot train members of the tribe to take minor positions
of trust, the mission has so far failed.
Apart from mission stations, I have met with, and
known of a half-caste head stockman, half-caste drovers,
a half-caste drover owning his own plant of working
horses, half-caste teamsters and horse-breakers.
I have not heard of a full-blooded aboriginal occupying
a responsible position; not, I believe, because he is unable
to do so, but because the colour prejudice, which will
frequently be waived in favour of a half-caste, absolutely
bars an aboriginal from associating with whites.
In the cattle-camps, stations and towns, the half-caste
will frequently be seen at meals with white men; the
full-blooded black invariably takes his meals in his fingers,
and sits on the ground apart.
It would be foolish to argue that all men are equal.
The blackfellow is inferior and must necessarily remain
so, but he is by no means so inferior as to be unable
to rise above the level of a working animal.
The accommodation of the blacks is a difficult question.
When an aboriginal has died in a building none of the
tribe will live in it again. This is a problem that is
usually solved by the simple method of burning the hut
in question. However, it is by no means hopeless, and
while the older people might be allowed to continue in
their flimsy huts, it is very desirable for a mission station
to be equipped with substantial and airy boys and girls”
dormitories.


Considerable ill-feeling has been aroused over the ques-
tion of locking girls’ dormitories at night. One moment’s
reflection will reveal the absolute necessity of such a
course, though most decidedly dormitories must be airy
and sanitarily equipped. As for the girls’ opinion of the
matter, I could not see that they felt the restraint un-
necessarily. When dismissed at bed-time, all ran off
laughing and singing, which continued till one by one
they dropped to sleep.
Concerning the religious work of Hermannsburg: It
is possible that all stations at times suffer from a certain
amount of stagnation. What is at first spiritual exalta-
tion and exercise of devotion, may in time become partly
matter of habit. Mission stations are not alone in this
respect. The remedy is change of scene, which is to be
obtained by regular furlough, and sufficient salary to the
missionary to enable him to take his furlough.
After all arguments for and against this and other
mission stations that I have seen, the strongest argu-
ment in favour of Christian missions is m the faces of
the aborigines themselves. I here unhesitatingly repeat
my conviction, by which I have unfortunately offended
some good people, that the faces of mission blacks, on
the whole bear a brightness that is not seen in the faces
of blacks in the bush camps, or on the cattle stations.
It has been argued that the change is due to regular
feeding, washing and clothing; but there is something
more, which has impressed not myself alone, but others,
both of religious and non-religious tendencies. Call it
what you will, I can only attribute this bright look to the
influence of Christianity, as taught by unselfish persons,
who love the blacks they teach.
More than one man has said to me that the blacks
cannot understand Christianity. I will not say that the
blacks understand every sermon on Christianity that is
preached to them, nor for that matter could I wholly
understand some of such sermons myself, but the essen-
tial principles of Christianity are within the comprehen-
sion of the humblest.


Speaking technically, as an ex-State School teacher,
1 am bound to admit that the secular instruction on the
mission stations is in some respects far from perfect,
yet the missionaries lacking, as a rule, technical know-
ledge of the methods of teaching, have achieved what
we, the critics, might fail to do, in that they have most
surely instilled the Light that shines in the eyes of these
people.
A photograph is in my possession of a group of abori-
gines at Killalpaninna on a Christmas Day. A number
of “myall” (wild) blacks came in to the station to share
the treat. Several persons, who have never seen these
blacks, when asked to pick out, from the looks in their
faces, the myalls from amongst the mission blacks, did
so unfailingly. What argument could be more forceful?
Should the Government take over the control of the
Hermannsburg Station, a fine work may be done in
effecting improvements and revivifying the work of the
station, provided that the main issue is not neglected.
Work amongst the aborigines is not a question of suc-
cessfully raising stock. It concerns the souls of men.
While religion without sound industry is idle, industry
without religion is worthless.
In June, 1913, I was accorded the privilege of an
interview with the Administrator of the Northern Terri-
tory. Dr. Gilruth stated this opinion, that it is the duty
of the State to care for the physical needs of its people,
black as well as white, and the duty of the Church to
care for their spiritual needs.
The religious instructor who will also undertake a
share in the everyday work of the station, will be wel-
comed in the event of the establishment of a Government
aboriginal institution. The prime need is for a volunteer
to inaugurate the work. He must be a married man.
His chief qualification is to be his character. Next, Dr.
Gilruth advises a knowledge of agriculture.
The work awaits a leader!


Whatever may be the case in the south of this Conti-
nent, work for the aborigines in the centre and north of
Australia is not merely a question of smoothing the
pillow of a dying race. It is a question of training and
utilising good material in the form of men and women,
in a land that wants men and women to develop it. It
is a question of rescuing and uplifting boys and girls
who, under present conditions, are most certainly doomed
to a life of vice, sloth and disease, and of starting them
in life equipped to take their places as useful men and
women.
Trained as stockmen and generally handymen, blacks
from Central Australia will probably find employment on
cattle stations, particularly on the stations of the Barkly
tablelands, where blacks are few. Under present condi-
turns a missionary would be sorry to see a boy pass from
the mission station to the life of station black; but,
doubtless, as the principle of paying wages to blacks
extends, and as the blacks themselves become more com-
petent through capable training, station conditions will
improve.
The future of the half-caste boy need not, I think, cause
misgiving. Given a fair training, he can take his place
as a white man; colour prejudice is not severe against
the male half caste, particularly in the more settled
parts.
The quadroon child is white, and should be treated
as such.
The half-caste girl is in the saddest position of all.
I can see no hopeful future for her. Let the half-castes
marry half-castes, advise some; but, strangely enough,
the half-caste man who has a gin usually has a full-
blooded black gin. It may be that, with the advance
of civilisation and a more assured position for the half-
raste man, he may prefer to marry a half-caste.


The State Children’s Department of South Australia
has adopted a policy of bringing half-caste girls down to
the city and surroundings, and educating them with a
view to their ultimately marrying white workmen. I
cannot believe in the success of such a course. With
abundance of white women to choose from, the white
man will hardly prefer a coloured woman, and the fate
of a single half-caste girl in a community of whites seems
certain.
In southern towns I have seen children pointing the
finger at the occasional coloured child, crying, “Black-
fellow, blackfellow.” In the interior this does not occur.
The blackfellow is native to the soil, and is regarded
as matter of course.
Brought up well, the half-caste girl may marry a
white man in the interior, where white women are rare.
She can hardly hope to compete with white women in
thickly populated centres. A few such mixed marriages
are met with, and appear admirable in some cases. Such
cases, however, cannot be seriously contemplated to any
great extent.
Better for the half-caste girl to marry a decent black-
fellow than to be at the disposal of worthless white men.
The greater part of the interior is pastoral country,
and will remain so for many years. Cattle stations will
probably always be manned chiefly by single men. Mar-
ried managers are becoming increasingly frequent.
Married stockmen are unknown.
The position of a white stockman married to a black
woman is pitiable. His wife is not admitted to the house.
He cannot allow her to go to the blacks’ camp. So they
are both regarded as outcasts.
Strange to say, the white men who treat lightly, and
indeed openly avow relations with black women, scoff
at the white man who marries a black woman. The one


who marries his gin and supports his children is the
more honourable man.
A minor issue of the Northern Territory Aboriginals’
Act of 1910, as applied to this district, is the question
of employment of aboriginals by Asiatics, which is now
illegal. None who have had experience of the Asiatic
in Australia will be likely to doubt that he is unfit to
employ aboriginals. I am not sure, however, that we
are not a little hypocritical in this matter. Are our own
men at all times quite virtuous?
The person affected by the Act in Central Australia
is the Afghan camel teamster. Formerly the Afghans,
with the help of aborigines, shared in the carrying trade
to the overland telegraph and cattle stations. Deprived
of aboriginal labour, the Afghans have gone to Western
Australia and New South Wales, leaving the camel-
carrying trade virtually a monopoly, which, by the way,
is one more argument in favour of the construction of
the overland railway.
2. —Tennant Creek to Daly Waters.
""The only white settlements in this north-central part
of the Northern Territory are the overland telegraph
stations at Tennant Creek, Powell’s Creek and Daly
Waters, the Banka-Banka and Newcastle Waters cattle
stations, sixty miles south and north of Powell’s Creek
respectively, and, to the south-east of Tennant Creek,
the Frew River cattle station.
As is to be expected, the blacks living in this mostly
unoccupied country are in a much more primitive and
free condition than those in the occupied country south
of the Mac Donnell Ranges. They roam where they please
and, for the most part, live on the resources native to
the country.


OLO STYLE
NEW STYLE
(Copyright J.Flynn) " COOPERTOWN," ALICE SPRINGS




In dry times they flock to the above-mentioned stations,
both for water and for rations, which are kindly supplied
to the telegraph masters by the Government.
The Overland Telegraph staff are some of the finest
fellows in the world, and in these gentlemen the blacks
find friends and helpers who go to a considerable amount
of trouble in seeing that rations, needles, thread, and
what cloth is at their disposal are fairly distributed accor-
ding to the needs of each member of the tribe.
In a good season one will find from a dozen to twenty
aborigines camped at each station, consisting, apart
from those employed by the whites, principally of old
people who are unfit to travel about the bush and hunt.
In time of drought the numbers at each station are from
one hundred to two hundred.
When I passed through this district, the country was
at its best. Water was plentiful; turkeys, kangaroos,
and emus were fairly numerous; goannas, bush rats and
witchetty grubs—these last being really excellent when
well roasted—abounded; and many kinds of edible plants
and fruits were available, some requiring a blackfellow’s
digestion to appreciate, others, such as native figs and
konka berries, being very nice.
The result was that most of the blacks, particularly
the men and younger women, were in splendid condition,
supple and glossy-skinned. Indeed, one might truthfully
describe many of the interior blacks, when in good con-
dition, as living models of physique.
The bloodwood trees, a species of stunted eucalypt,
which are very plentiful throughout the interior, are
usually thickly infested with large galls of about the
size of apples. These galls consist of a hard, woody
outer coat, an inner soft, white kernel, and, in the centre,
the larva of the gall fly. This inner kernel is eaten by
the blacks and by not a few white men. For myself,
I found it similar to unripe almonds, with the same gas


trie effect, but in time of drought these galls are the
main standby of the blacks : a poor diet, indeed, and one
that helps to explain the small numbers of the interior
tribes.
Faring well in a good season, the interior blacks are
annually confronted with several months of dry weather,
during which life is a struggle for the survival of the
fittest. Children are not numerous, and one rarely sees
a really old aboriginal.
The blacks of the interior are usually very shy. Should
a traveller surprise a blackfellow in the bush he will run,
and silently disappear among the trees. It is often
ludicrous to see a blackfellow busily engaged, perhaps,
in digging out some edible root, intent only on the work
beneath him, till, as the horses draw nearer, he hears,
looks up, and at a bound is on his feet and running for
the nearest cover. Such shyness, however, can be annoy-
ing when the traveller wishes to get information as to
the country ahead, information usually obtained only-
after a good deal of gesticulation and laughing on both
sides.
The blackfellow in the centre of Australia never travels
without a load of weapons; usually' spear-thrower, several
spears, and non-returning boomerangs. The other
weapons are laid in the broad, concave spear-thrower of
this part, and the entire collection carried on the head.
Behind the man walks the gin, carrying all the house-
hold goods, food, and frequently a child perched on her
shoulder or on one hip. The blackfellow never thinks
of helping the gin to carry' the luggage. On the con-
trary, I fancy- that his load of weapons is often a mere
excuse for leaving the greater part of the carrying to
the gin.
Should he wish to approach the white man’s camp, the
blackfellow lays his weapons on the ground and walks


up empty-handed, a lesson he has evidently learnt from
hard experience.
More frequently an old gin comes to the camp. She
knows that she is safe, and, further, she is often laugh-
able in her wheedling and coaxing for food and any
article belonging to the traveller, which she may fancy.
“Let the blacks alone,” is the cry of many white men.
In some cases this might be understood as meaning,
“We have here a source of cheap labour and unbridled
license. Do not interfere with us.” But, on the other
hand, the declaration is often quite sincere.
Can we let the blacks alone?
To the Christian Church the injunction to go into all
the world, preaching the Gospel to every nation, is
imperative.
But let us for the moment waive the religious aspect
and meet the bushman on his own ground.
Wherever blacks come in contact with whites or other
races, the blacks are affected often to their great hurt.
Each year sees the white man’s influence spreading fur-
ther among the tribes. It is, I believe, possible along
the north coast to institute reservations, where, as civili-
sation advances, the tribal life may be preserved. In
the interior, certainly along the overland telegraph route,
it is not possible. The blacks must inevitably be inter-
fered with. The question is, shall the interference be of
such a nature that they may have a fa'ir and clean chance
to maintain their existence, or shall they be interfered
with, as in the southern parts of the Continent, in such
manner that hunger and disease shall wipe them out with
appalling rapidity?
The health of the interior blacks is, on the whole, won-
derfully good.
Here we have good clean material to work upon. With
a training station for the Alice Springs district, and a
similar station for the Tennant-Daly Waters district,


where the boys and girls shall receive a wholesome
industrial training on a sound religious basis, with a
view to their going out and fighting their own way in
the world when fairly equipped, so far at least as half-
castes are concerned, we may save the Central Aus-
tralian blacks from shameful extinction.
A suitable site exists, and I believe might be secured,
in the neighbourhood of Powell’s Creek,
The aim of work amongst the aborigines, says Pro-
fessor Baldwin Spencer, must be directed mainly towards
the children, and must be primarily industrial. To which
I might venture to add: and ultimately religious.
Hie half-caste problem in this district has not yet
attained such dimensions as in the Alice Springs district,
though it is now quite serious enough to call for atten-
tion. Here, too, one finds, although less frequently, a
practically white child in a blacks’ camp. In a community
of whites such children would not attract attention, but
seen in a blacks’ camp, the peculiar lustrous black eye,
with china white, and a certain heaviness in the cast
of nose and mouth betrays their origin.
One writer on the aborigines problem has said: “ The
sooner this miserable drop of blood is fused in the com-
mon reservoir, the better.”
Whether fusion, extinction, or separate existence shall
be the ultimate fate of the race is beyond our ken. We
are concerned with the blacks as they now are. If such
fusion is to take place upon honourable terms, well, did
the writer quoted contemplate that?
Before quitting this district, one instance will serve
to show how primitive are the conditions under which
these people live :
When I visited Powell’s Creek, there were in the camp
five men who had come in from the desert country to
the west. A party of blacks had come down from the
Victoria River to the camp to which these men belonged,


speared some of the men and carried off the women.
The remaining hve men had fled, to live with their
Powell’s Creek friends until the affair had blown over.
3. —Katherine to Darwin.
Travelling southwards, one is impressed with the
increasing frequency of disease in the camps towards
the north coast.
The Asiatic influence is certainly marked, frequently
in the features of the blacks, at times in their dress,
and perhaps principally in their health.
It is not an uncommon thing to see in a camp one or
more blacks who have lost fingers, toes, nose, or entire
limbs. A popular notion prevails that these maimed per-
sons are lepers. This has been denied by medical men.
Probably such cases are all venereal in origin.
During the past few years, between £B,OOO and
£9,000 has been annually granted to the Northern Terri-
tory Aborigines Department. In addition to a Chief
Protector and several Protectors of Aborigines, the chief
officer at each police station in the Northern Territory
is ex-officio, a Sub-Protector of Aborigines.
1 he position of Chief Protector has now been abolished
on the grounds of economy. In the late Chief Protector,
Mr. W. G. Stretton, the blacks had an able and sympa-
thetic champion, whose long experience of the Northern
Territory specially fitted him for this work.
That the police should be Sub-Protectors is, on the
whole, a wise provision. The duties bring them into con-
tact with the aborigines throughout the interior, and my
experience has been that they are usually willing to do
what they can to help the blacks.
The position of Protector appears so far to be rather
a sinecure. Their work is to issue permits to employers
of aborigines, to see that the aborigines are not ill-used


in any way, and, if necessary, to take legal proceedings
against offenders under the Aborigines’ Act, on the whole
rather a vague and apparently not too strenuous an
office.
Such work as that undertaken by Protector P. Cahill,
however, on the Alligator River, seems more hopeful.
I have not had the privilege of visiting the Alligator
River, but am given to understand that Mr. and Mrs.
Cahill are undertaking the industrial instruction of the
aborigines of that part, particularly in the direction of
agriculture: an admirable aim.
Doubtless, as the duties of Protector of Aborigines
become more clearly defined much good work will be
achieved.
The Aborigines Department has instituted, on the out-
skirts of Darwin, an aboriginal village. At the time of
my visit this was still under construction, but work done
so far was very encouraging. The village was to accom-
modate about one hundred aborigines. They were to
receive industrial and secular education from the Govern-
ment. Visiting clergy would be welcomed. A teacher
has been appointed for the children.
The aim of this village was to bring in aborigines from
the outlying districts, and, after a period of training,
send them back to their own people as advertisements
of the Aborigines Department’s intentions, and as re-
creating forces among their own people: an excellent
plan, and one which, it is to be hoped, will be consis-
tently maintained.
On Bathurst Island the Roman Catholic Church has
lately established a mission station, where a special
feature of the work is the training of children, including
half-castes.
The Aborigines Department has adopted a policy of
ordering half-caste and quadroon children to be sent
to one or other of the mission stations, or to the Darwin


village, in addition to which some fathers are voluntarily
sending their children and paying for their upkeep.
With regard to medical work among the aborigines,
the Aborigines Department has so far failed, perhaps
chiefly owing to the lack of a suitable medical man. It
was originally ordained that the Chief Protector should
be a medical man, with medical assistants. The first
gentleman to occupy the position was equipped with
requisites for a travelling surgery, and great hopes were
entertained of the work that might be accomplished.
Unhappily such plans fell to earth. A rather spas-
modic medical visit or two have since been undertaken,
but a consistent plan of isolating and treating aborigines
who are diseased to the danger of infecting others, has
not yet been inaugurated.
Many of the camps now contain aborigines seriously
affected with venereal disease, for whom nothing is done.
On the other hand, two aborigines whom I saw diseased,
I had the pleasure of seeing again at the end of 1913,
apparently cured, since they had been taken in to Darwin
by the police and treated at the hospital, which is hopeful.
The prime need is for the qualified medical man who
will travel through the camps, issue treatment where
necessary, and order into isolation dangerous cases,
doing this, not for the sake of financial position, nor
the sake of medical nor ethnological experience, but from
a heartfelt desire to perform a noble work.
The question of venereal disease in the Northern Terri-
tory is not one confined to the blacks. One is astonished
at the number of whites who candidly confess that they
have suffered from one or other form of such disease,
though few will admit that they are still suffering.
The Aborigines Department has issued to each police
station, and some other stations, well-equipped medicine
chests containing instructions and requisites for the
treatment of such diseases as are likely to be prevalent
in the northern part of the Territory.


One has only to consider the effect of such diseases
not only on the blacks, but upon the future of our own
people in the Northern Territory, to realise the grave
importance of bush medical work.
4.—Pine Creek to Western Australian Border.
In the coastal portion of the Northern Territory, the
aborigines are much more numerous than in the interior.
Various estimates have been made as to the probable
number of aborigines in the Northern Territory, the
generally accepted number being from twenty to twenty-
five thousand (25,000).
With the single break at Darwin, it may be said that
the coast is uninhabited by whites.
Water is plentiful; fish, game and edible plants, chiefly
water-lilies, are abundant.
Recent agricultural experiments and surveying opera-
tions have brought the whites considerably into contact
with the blacks of the Daly River. On this river was
originally a Roman Catholic mission station, which has
been abandoned.
West of the Daly the main waters are the Fitzmaurice
and Victoria Rivers.
Report says that this country is inhabited by a great
number of aborigines, who are treacherous and savage.
While travelling through this country I did not meet with
a single aboriginal, nor, when well away from Pine
Creek, any white man. I saw, however, many smokes
and fresh tracks of aborigines—at times ahead, some-
times to the right or left—though any fires that I reached
were always deserted, either by coincidence or purposely
by the blacks, who may have seen me. I can, therefore,
only speak from scant knowledge of the coastal country.
I believe the number of aborigines to be large, and living
in practically a primitive condition.


Owing to rank high grass, deep waters, and boggy
ground, it is difficult to travel through this country with
horses. The best means of access is from the sea.
This country is almost a virgin field for research among
the coastal tribes.
further inland, along the route from one cattle station
to another, one finds at most stations a fairly large camp
of blacks. Some managers encourage the blacks to camp
near the station, on the principle that they are less likely
to cause trouble if under the manager’s eye.. Others,
on the other hand, will not allow a “myall” black to
approach the station, keeping only such boys and gins
as are actually employed. In either case, the country
is as yet too sparsely settled to adopt the policy of the
stations south of the Mac Donnell Ranges, where the
blacks are more than encouraged to camp near the
stations.
While mustering on these stations, the stockmen fre-
quently see the smokes of myall camps among the hills,
or come upon camping places by the billabongs, where
the myalls have been collecting and cooking lily roots.
Living practically within a stone’s throw of each other,
these blacks and whites seldom meet. Occasionally the
blacks descend to the plains, spear a bullock and carry
it off to the hills, where they are rarely molested save
by an occasional police pursuit of a thief or murderer.
Last year a solitary traveller was speared while resting
at his dinner camp near the Northern Territory-West
Australian border. A large police party was organised
to pursue and arrest the murderers. Eventually they
captured the ringleader, who was hanged.
On the first occasion of surprising the camp of the
fugitives the men escaped, but the police captured four
gins, who were detained as witnesses. These gins were
naked, and had each a little child. It would be most
unlikely to take any four gins at random on a cattle
station and find that each had a child.


Children are much more numerous in the myall camps
than in the station camps.
Infanticide is difficult to prove. The strongest ground
for suspecting it is the absence of the children.
Occasionally one hears details of a case where a child
has been deliberately killed after having been reared for
some time. More frequently the child is killed before or
immediately after birth.
The present and growing practice on the part of the
whites at these stations is to send the half-caste children
in to the care of the Aborigines Department in Darwin,
leaving the full-blooded children in the camps.
For the care of these latter children, and also for a
medical centre for treating cases of disease among the
blacks, which in this part are all too frequent, several
suitable sites exist on the Victoria River or one of its
tributaries.
Monetary wages are not yet paid to aborigines in the
Northern Territory, on the cattle stations north of Bond
Springs, twelve miles from Alice Springs. Boys and gins
actually in employment receive food, clothes, tobacco,
and whatever they need, while the blacks who are
camped near the station receive the usual share of beef.
On more than one Northern Territory station extra
boys are engaged for the bullock muster and branding
muster. They are provided with hat, shirt, trousers and
boots, food and tobacco while employed. At the end
of the muster the clothes are taken from them and they
are sent back.
A person not familiar with the bush point of view,
would hardly credit such meanness. One is told that
the blacks are absolutely useless, nevertheless he
observes that the black, whose labour is practically free,
is employed in preference to the white man, who has to
be paid wages.. Such cases are, however, in the minor-
ity, and I can personally testify that boys employed on


a cattle station are abundantly fed and clothed, as, for
instance, when one boy hauled from his swag six pairs
of trousers and a coat.
That the black woman on a cattle station is common
property goes almost without saying. To state the fact
is easy, to suggest a remedy is a different matter.
5.—Katherine to Borroioola.
Eighty-five miles south of Katherine one reaches Bitter
Springs, the head waters of the Roper River. Sixty
miles from the mouth of the Roper is the Church of
England Mission Station.
From the Roper to the McArthur blacks are numerous
and native food supplies are abundant.
Ihe young girls of this country are not infrequently
very pretty, the north-east coastal part of the Territory
possessing the best featured of any of the native tribes.
The men are mostly well built. Especially is this the
case with the boys of from about twelve to twenty years.
1 hese boys show much greater muscular development
than white boys of the same age. They do not seem to
mature to such physique as one would expect from the
promise of their youth, though they do grow into power-
ful men.
The Malay influence is more apparent in this area than
in any other. One frequently sees a man with smooth-
skinned face, and features unmistakeably Asiatic. The
pure Australian man grows a vigorous beard, which, in
the interior, is usually worn long. In the coastal coun-
try the custom of the men is to shave their faces, with
a steel razor if it can be procured, if not, then with a
sharp stone or chip of a glass bottle.
An interesting minor evidence of Malay influence is
the Malay style of tobacco pipe, which is commonly seen
in the blacks’ camps, manufactured from the hollow


bough of a tree, and the use of which they probably
understood before white men entered the country.
The Roper Mission deals only with children, of which
there are at present about seventy on the station, includ-
ing a fair proportion of half-castes and quarter-castes
sent to the mission station by order of the Aborigines
Department.
It is a very pleasant experience to witness the work
of this station. From the moment of the stranger's
arrival he is surrounded by fearless, laughing, confiding
children, clean and bright, all anxious to render some
small service, a great contrast to the shy and timid little
fellows in the bush camps.
With an oil engine to pump water from the river,
gardening is conducted on an extensive scale. Fruit and
vegetables can be grown abundantly, very materially
assisting the station commissariat. Experiments are
also being conducted with Kaffir corn and maize, with
considerable success. A start has also been made in
cattle raising. Little progress has so far been made
in this direction, though in time, with a good area under
irrigation, and cattle breeding carried on systematically,
this station will be self-supporting, and maintain a large
number of aborigines.
The aim of this mission is to finally establish these
children, when mature, in cottages of their own on the
two hundred square miles which comprise the mission
reserve.
A difficult question is that of marriage between the
blacks. A mission boy and girl may wish to marry. Two
obstacles may confront them; (i) They may both belong
to a sub-division of the tribe within which members may
not inter-marry. In other words, they are too closely
related. Such a bar, of course, is final.
In nearly every case, however, an aboriginal girl is
betrothed at birth to a man of the tribe. The man is


usually adult when the girl is an infant, so that when
the girl matures she must marry an elderly man.
Ihe old men have usually one or two wives each; the
young men have none.
Endless quarrels arise m the camps from this cause,
and probably have arisen for generations; but the girl
must go with her old husband, and he has power to lend
her to another man as a favour, or in return for some
service.
Ihe missionary s trouble is that a carefully trained
girl, when grown, is destined to marry an old myall in
a bush camp. Though very often the trained aboriginal
drifts back to the wild life, the girl at first certainly does
not wish to go with her old spouse and live in a bark
humpy. More than likely, she desires to marry a smart
young fellow on the station.
The solution of this problem is one that can only be
armed at by tactful and careful consideration of the
aboriginal point of view, which would regard a girl who
left her tnbally betrothed for another as a moral outcast,
while the offending couple are almost certain to be
speared at the first opportunity.
One solution attempted has been the buying of the
girls from the old men, which seems a very satisfactory
method if it can be fairly concluded. Perhaps an agree-
ment could be arrived at between the young man and
the old man, whereby the young man may earn his bride.
hull-blooded aborigines are life-long wards of the
Aborigines Department. Half-castes are subject to the
same guardianship until the age of eighteen years, when
they become independent, unless they are habitues of a
blacks camp, in which case they are regarded as abori-
ginals.
Concerning infant betrothal of half-caste girls, tribal
law does not apply, and the blacks are given to under-
stand that they have no voice in the control of the
half-caste child.


The country to the north of the Roper is unoccupied
and largely unexplored, with the exception of Protector
Cahill’s settlement on the Alligator River, and the camps
of a few buffalo shooters and trepang fishers.
The Anglican Church has proposed an extension of
mission enterprise in this country, and on Groote Eylandt,
off the mouth of the Roper. They have a fine field before
them.
6.—The Barkly Tablelands: McArthur River to Queens-
land Border.
There are few aborigines on these tablelands, and no
permanent bush camps. After rain occasional parties
come to the open tablelands from the McArthur River in
the north, and occasionally from the Newcastle Waters
—Powell Creek country, and the Frew River to the west.
Such parties are small and do not remain long.
The only permanent inhabitants of the tablelands are
those employed at the cattle stations and by the police.
The cattle stations employ from twelve to twenty blacks
each..
Tins eastern part of the Northern Territory will pro-
bably afford employment to a fair number of capable
black and half-caste men. One gentleman in this coun-
try estimated that the tablelands stations would gladly
employ one hundred blacks.


OLD FOLKS AT HOME
YOUNG FPLKS AT HOME
{Copyright J. Flynn) THE HOME INCLUDES BOTH COMMODIOUS TENTS




III.
NORTH-WEST AUSTRALIA
The aborigines of this part are in practically the same
condition as between Darwin and the Western Australian
border, being in their primitive condition near the coast,
and partly civilised on the cattle stations, where they
have come into contact with the whites.
The Roman Catholic Church has for some years main-
tained a mission station at Beagle Bay, which is described
as an industrial success, and has recently inaugurated
a new station on the Drysdale River, west of Wyndham.
The Presbyterian Church has lately established, under
the charge of Mr. R. H. Wilson, a mission station at Port
George IV., between Wyndham and Derby.
The Western Australian Government has, for a con-
siderable time, maintained an aboriginal station near
Hall’s Creek. This I have not visited. I understand that
this station is an industrial success, but no religious in-
struction is undertaken. To members of the Christian
Church the question arises : What is the purpose of such
industry? If certain missions have been criticised as
la}dng too much stress on religion, while not being prac-
tical enough, it might be answered that a purely
industrial institution fails in the opposite extreme.
Along the entire north coast there is ample scope for
mission enterprise. As men and means are forthcoming
doubtless more stations will be established. But, fascina-
ting though these untouched areas are, the tribes who
have already come into contact with our race have first
claim. WTrere the white man has not penetrated, at least
the blacks are no worse off than formerly. Where the
white man’s influence has already been felt, there is our
first duty.


IV.
WESTERN QUEENSLAND
Here the aborigines problem has already been solved
to a great extent by the process of extinction. Such few
blacks as remain are mostly employed on the stations.
Amongst those that remain it is instructive to notice
how the\’ are received amongst white people. The black
man remains utterly an inferior. The half-caste, how-
ever, is on a level with the white stockman, receiving the
same wages, eating at the same table, and sleeping in
the same hut.
I was considerably astonished to witness, at a dance
in a western town, a half-caste man dancing in one of
the square dances with one white woman after another,
according to figures of the dance, without any embar-
rassment on either side. Such a thing is unheard of in
the Northern Territory. At the same dance, however,
none danced with the half-caste woman, who sat aside
throughout the evening.


V.
CHILD LIFE AND PLAY
The attitude of the black gin towards her child is
incomprehensible. Frequently she does not seem to care
particularly whether she keeps her baby or not, and will
quite coolly discuss the matter with a white man. “Might
be me kill ’em; piccaninny no good.”
Should the child be saved it is treated with lavish kind-
ness. The aboriginal child is never struck. The parents
nurse it and carry- it, and it is a common sight to see a
hardened warrior of the tribe amusing a tiny black baby,
going through the most ridiculous antics in play, or to
see an old man patiently carving a toy for a small
grandson.
In the north-east of the Northern Territory the mothers
plait very pretty grass bracelets, which they place on
the babies’ arms, between shoulder and elbow, replacing
them with larger ones as the child grows, almost every
adult wearing several bracelets on the upper arm.
While small, the children are totally naked. As they
become older they wear the usual dress of the tribe;
among the less civilised solely a tassel of fur strings sus-
pended from the waist. This tassel is now frequently
replaced by a strip of rag, a few inches wide, worn as
an apron by men and women.
Among the-more civilised, the gins manifest the keen-
est desire for dress, very often securing a tattered man’s
shirt; at times a piece of cloth for an apron, or even
a complete dress.


The men usually prefer the frontal tassel alone. One
of the first acts of a blackfellow on leaving employment
and returning to the camp is to cast off his civilised
clothes.
Often one sees a gin carrying a child that is several
years old and quite big enough to walk. In the interior
and north the baby sits either on its mother’s shoulder,
or, when bigger, sideways on one of her hips, with one
leg in front and the other behind, being held in position
by the mother’s arm or clinging to her like a young opos-
sum. Yet, sometimes, when the child grows heavy, the
mother may tire of it and callously kill it. One police
officer told me of a gin employed at the police station
in herding goats. She had a little boy who became a
great pet at the police station, till at last he was just
able to toddle about and come for lollies when he heard
the tin rattled. One day the gin went out as usual tend-
ing the goats, but returned without the little fellow.
Questioned as to his absence, she replied harshly, “Him
all dav cry,” and refused to say more. Undoubtedly she
had grown tired of carrying him, and had killed him in
the bush.
Aboriginal babies in the interior are not washed. Con-
sequently the disease known as “yaws” is frequently
seen on small children, consisting of sores round the
eves, under limb joints, and wherever friction is liable to
chafe the skin.
In the coastal districts, however, where water is plen-
tiful, the blacks bathe frequently for the pleasure of
swimming. One may see a tiny boy, hardly able to walk,
and too young to swim, clinging to the neck of a bigger
boy, who swims and dives with the little fellow splutter-
ing and gurgling, but grinning with delight.
It is often said that aboriginal children have no games.
This is hardly correct, though they have no highly organ


ised games, nor have I seen any specific toy or game for
the girls.
Various explorers have brought back some very in-
genious and interesting toys. Most of these are rare,
but three games are very widespread : In Northern South
Australia “throwing the kookeroo,” in Central and North-
West Australia “throwing a flat boomerang,” and in the
North and North-East “playing with spears.”
The “kookeroo” described by Dr. Howitt as the weet-
weet of Victorian tribes, is shaped like a slender club
or elongated tadpole, about four feet in length. A small
heap of rushes or grass is laid on the earth at the edge
of a clear patch of ground. The kookeroo is then thrown
in such a way that it glances off the pile of rushes, and
shoots head foremost along the ground. The game is
a very pretty one to watch, the aim being to throw far-
thest, and is played by boys and young men.
The famous returning boomerang is unknown in the
interior. A flat, rather heavy boomerang, with one arm
shorter than the other, and invariably coloured with red
ochre, is used. In addition to its use as a weapon, the
young men use this boomerang in a game. The boomer-
ang is held vertically and thrown so that it shall strike
the ground some twenty yards ahead of the player, when
it rebounds from the earth, spinning forward like a cart
wheel, to strike the earth and again rebound,* till finally
it falls at a surprising distance. Usually several players
will stand opposite, and when the flight of one boomer-
ang is expended, another player will pick it up and return
it.
The blacks of the north-east coastal part of the North-
ern Territory use no boomerangs, nor, throughout the
entire north, shields, and rarely a dub. Their main
weapons are spears, of which they possess some yen’
handsome types, the type of spear and spear-thrower


(womera) varying in different localities. Consequently
one finds the boys playing spear-throwing. In hunting
or fighting a long-handled spear-thrower is used, but in
play light sticks and reeds are thrown with the hand
alone. In Darwin itself one may see the black boys in
their compound, drawn up in opposing ranks, and throw-
ing sticks across the intervening space.
At Barrow Creek I witnessed the gins playing quoits
with hobble rings, a game of obviously late introduction.
But if toys are few, and the girls have none, it by
no means follows that the children do not play.
One small boy near Charlotte Waters used each even-
ing to climb a sloping sapling, where he swung and
shouted in glee for fully half an hour at a time.
The black children are keen mimics. Wishing for
some firewood, I once sent four children to collect some.
The}’ brought the first load in willingly, but without
much zeal, till one ingenious boy hit upon the happy idea
of bestriding a log, while the others hauled him and the
log. The game rapidly developed, and soon the driver
was armed with a strip of greenhide tied to a stick.
Cracking this whip he shouted “Gee-off Lion; hey-up
Tallboy,” imitating the horse-driver, and, with shrieks
of delight, the firewood came in merrily.
Similarly, any chance article lying about may cause
the rapid development of a game. During an afternoon’s
spell in a mustering camp, some of the boys chopped
out a “sugar-bag” (hive of native bees). One lad took
a piece of the fallen bark and whittled it into the shape
of a revolver. Soon every boy had a bark revolver, which
he pointed at another, shouting “Bang!” One genius
hung his gun on the front of his saddle, imitating my
manner of carrying a revolver. This was greeted with
roars of approval, and when another hung his gun at
the side of his saddle, in the fashion of the station


manager, they simply rolled on the ground in their joy.
These boys were from twelve to twenty years of age, and,
except that their toy guns were very cleverly carved,
it was exactly the sort of play that might be expected
from white boys of seven or eight years.
On another occasion, when out shooting, a boy drew
my attention to what he thought a turkey, which proved
to be a bunch of grass. Throughout the day one boy
or another would suddenly become excited and point,
saying “Turkey,” at which all, including the one who had
made the error, laughed heartily.
One curious incident I witnessed shows how much alike
children are the whole world over. While cooking I was
surrounded by several children, who stood about expec-
tantly, waiting for cakes. I happened to be using a
large biscuit tin, on the wrapper of which was the picture
of a pretty girl. This picture attracted the attention of
one little black girl, who slapped one of her hands upon
the other in a certain manner, pointed to the picture,
then to one of the little boys. The other children laughed,
but the boy indicated became most indignant, slapped
his hands in the same way, pointed to the picture and
then to another boy, who in his turn became indignant.
Evidently the joke was “That is your sweetheart”—a
jest so popular among white children, and one which
always makes the little boys so angry. I was particularly
amused at the idea of this stark naked, pot-bellle'd little
savage being addressed as the sweetheart of the very
pretty and stylishly clad young lady on the tin.
Such instances might be related ad libitum, but
enough has been told to show that, though they may
lack organised games, the aboriginal children are bv no
means without play. -
The true savage is revealed in their treatment of birds
and small animals. The children love to catch a bird


as a plaything, the men will bring birds to the chil
dren. These they play with till tired, then callously
break their limbs and tear them to pieces. In one week
the children last mentioned caught, played with, and
finally tore to pieces, a whistling duck, a cockatoo parrot
and two quail.
The nearest approach to systematic amusement is the
nightly corroboree.
The corroborees may be classed as of three kinds.
Most important are the religious ceremonies periodi-
cally held, at which rites are performed to ensure the
food supply and initiate young members into the laws
of their fathers. Any adequate account of these corro-
borees would require years’ research and intimate know-
ledge of the language and customs of a tribe, and is
far beyond the scope of this report.
The second class of corroboree corresponds to the war
dance of the American Indians. I have only witnessed one
such. A party of the Ireeriamon blacks came into the
Victoria River depot and announced their intention of
killing one of the Timber Creek men. On the previous
day 1 had visited the Timber Creek camp, and found
the men lying about, some dressed in trousers, shirt, or
both, with very few weapons in the camp. On the day
following the advent of the Ireenamon men I found the
Timber Creek men all stripped, except for the character-
istic frontal tassel of fur strings, and newly-tipped spears
lay around in profusion, while all were busily engaged in
preparing for the corroboree that was to take place that
night.
At this corroboree the main part was taken by four
men, who were ornamented with white down stuck in
patterns over their bodies with blood, and who wore
the high corroboree caps familiar throughout the Con-
tinent.


The remaining men formed, the chorus, and, under a
leader, sang and clapped boomerangs, while the four
leading performers went through a dance that at times
bore a marked resemblance to certain figures of the
Lancers,
dhe children sat with their fathers, while the women
sat together in the rear and joined in the chorus in a
rather subdued fashion.
The third class of corroboree entails no decoration
nor preparation, but is a more or less comic resume of
the day’s happenings. Any outstanding incident will be
enacted, often repeatedly, amid shouts of laughter.
At first the European fails to notice much but noise
in aboriginal music, but on becoming familiar with the
aboriginal songs, he detects a certain rythm and cadence
that remain constant throughout many repetitions of the
same song.
An aboriginal man or woman will compose a song;
usually of only two or three words, on the spur of the
moment, but it will be sung in perfect rythm. During
a lull in the evening’s amusement one person will sud-
den!}' shout a song that he has just composed. He will
repeat it, and very soon all are singing of some striking
incident, such as a man falling from a horse, of what he
said when he fell, or, as once happened after I gave a
boy some tobacco of a different kind from that he usually-
got, a song which, translated, simply ran, “Oh, the Pine
Creek tobacco! the Pine Creek tobacco.”
Throughout the interior two boomerangs are clapped
rapidly in time to the song. Throughout the north coast
country an instrument is used, commonly known among
the whites as the didgeree-doo, but bearing different
names among the different tribes.


It is a hollow bough, usually from three to four feet
long, and two or three inches in diameter. This is blown
trumpet fashion, producing a loud droning, not unmusi-
cal, similar to the name. A shot-gun barrel makes an
effective “didgeree-doo.”
During these performances the children mostly sit
beside their fathers, chuckling at each amusing turn.
