

SOCIETY OF ST. VINCENT T)E PAUL.
“The title of the Poor to our commiseration is their poverty itself. We are not to enquire
to what party or sect they belong.”— St. Vincent’s Manual.
4b
THE
CIVILIZATION OF IRELAND
BEFORE THE
ANGLO-NORMAN INVASION
A LECTURE
DELIVERED BY
THE MOST REV D PATRICK F. MORAN,
Archbishop of Sydney, Metropolitan, &c.,
at THE
E X HIBITIO N B TJI L DIN G, BYDN E Y,
ON THE
2 7th APRIL, 188 S.
The Lecture contained in this Pamphlet was delivered by His Grace the
Archbishop for the benefit of the Poor who are assisted by the Society
of St. Vincent de Paul in New South Wales, and His Grace has given
his kind permission to the Council of the Society to publish the
Pamphlet for the same charitable object.
PRICE, SIXPENCE.
SYDNEY:
F. CUNNINGHAME & Co., General Printers,
146 Pitt Street.




CIVILIZATION OF IRELAND
BEFORE THE
ANGLO-NORMAN INVASION.
A LECTUEE
THE MOST REV D - PATRICK F. MORAN,
Archbishop of Sydney, Metropolitan, &c.,
AT THE
BXHIBITIOIT 38-CTIIj33X2TQ-, S"X"3DXTB"Z",
On the 27th April, 1885.
SYDNEY:
F. CUNNINGHAME & Co., General Printers,
146 Pitt Street.
18 85.
DELIVERED BY




IRISH CIVILIZATION
BEFORE THE ANGLO-NORMAN INVASION.
At the request of the gentlemen of the St. Vincent de Paul’s
Society, who labour with unwearying devotedness to alleviate
the distress of the poor of every denomination among our citizens,
I will address you this evening on the Civilization of Ireland
before the Anglo-Norman Invasion. There are but few indeed
who will venture at the present day to question the fair fame of
Ireland for culture and science and religion during the centuries
that immediately followed the Apostolate of her Apostle St.
Patrick. For four centuries at least, all Christendom resounded
with her praises, and the nations of Europe, rejoicing in the gifts
and graces lavishly bestowed on her by Heaven, reverently
saluted her as the bright star of learning for the western world,
the sanctuary of Religion, the Island of Saints. The chronicler
Marianus—whose great work is of itself a standing proof of
Irelands civilization, for he led the way among all the chroniclers
of the middle ages—treating of the sixth century, attests that
“ Ireland, the Island of Saints, was to a sublime degree full of
holy men and of innumerable wonders.” The Anglo-Saxon,
St. Aldhelm of Malmesbury, writing in the eighth century, is not
less emphatic in his praise, and describes Erin as a country “ rich
in the wealth of science,” and “ as thickly set with learned men
as the firmament is with stars.” What wonder then that the
illustrious German writer, Goerres, should cry out, —“ When we
look into the ecclesiastical life of the Irish people, we are almost
tempted to believe that some potent spirit had transported over
the sea the cells of the Thebaid, with all their hermits—its
monasteries with all their inmates, and settled them down in this
western island; an island which in three centuries gave emlit
hundred and eighty saints to the Church, won over to Christianity
the North of Britain and a large part of Germany, and, while it
devoted the utmost attention to the sciences, cultivated with
especial care the mystical contemplation in her communities, as
well as in the saints whom they produced.” Surely a people
such as this must not be stigmatized as barbarous, but rather
is it justified in claiming for itself a foremost place among
the most civilized nations of the middle ages.


*Without entering into minute details in this matter, which
presents such a wide field for historical inquiry, a few general
remarks may suffice to bring before you in its true light the
civilization of Ireland at this period.
From the sth to the 9th century schools and monasteries
were everywhere multiplied throughout the length and breadth
of the land, and became so many centres for learning and
higher studies, fountains of sacred wisdom, homes of discipline,
sanctuaries of religion. Need I name Clonard, with its bright
array of Saints, following the Rule of St. Finnian the Wise.
The ancient writer of St. Finnian’s life declares that from that
monastery “like the sun in the firmament, he enlightened the
world by the rays of his virtues, of salutary doctrine and
miracles : for the fame of his good works invited many illustrious
men from divers parts of the world to his school, as to a holy
repository of all wisdom, partly to study the Sacred Scriptures,
and partly to be instructed in the rule of the religious life.” In
the school of Beannchuir, in the “ Valley of Angels,” four
thousand disciples used to assemble under the guidance of
St. Comgall. St. Bernard styles it “ a very noble monastery, and
head of several others; a place truly sanctified, abounding in
saints, abundantly fruitful to God: so much so that one of the
religious of this holy congregation, named Luanus, was said to be
the founder of an hundred monasteries:” and he adds that “ its
disciples not only filled Ireland and Scotland, but swarms of its
saints spread themselves over foreign countries, one of whom,
St. Columbanus, coming to our shores of Gaul, .founded the
monastery of Luxeuil.” The other countless monasteries had
each its distinctive grace. Thus, Derry was famed for the angelic
life of its religious, Saigher for its almsgiving, Iniskeltra and
Glasnevin for the study of the Sacred Scriptures, Lismore for the
classics, Aghabhoe for geometry, Clonmacnoise for history,
Clonfert for missionary enterprise. The Aran islands, off the
western coasts, were popularly known as Aran of the flowers, but
so many were the holy men who flocked thither to lead a
heavenly life under the abbot St. Enda that thenceforward they
became known only as Aran of the Saints. For centuries all
these great monasteries have been little more than shapeless ruins,
yet the spirit of God seems to linger around each hallowed spot en-
nobled by such heroism of piety and sanctified by so many virtues.
Not many years ago a few devout pilgrims knelt together within
the ruined enclosure on Aran-more where St. Enda was interred,
and where likewise repose the relics of a countless army of white-
robed saints. One of those pilgrims subsequently wrote : “We
can never forget the scene of that morning: the pure, bright
sand, covering the graves of unknown and unnumbered saints as
with a robe of silver tissue, that glistened in the sunshine ; the


delicate green foliage of the wild plants that rose here and there,
as if wrought in embroidery upon the white expanse ; on one side
the swelling hill crowned with the Church of Benignus, and on
the other the blue sea, that almost bathed the foundations of the
venerable sanctuary itself ; the soft, balmy air that hardly stirred
the ferns on the old walls; and the fresh, happy, solemn calm
that reigned over all.”
In those early centuries travellers had not the railways and
steamers which facilitate communication in modern times.
Nevertheless, countless strangers from all the European nations
Hocked to Ireland, that at the pure fountains of her schools and
monasteries they might satiate their thirst for science and religion.
Dr. Johnson does not hesitate to say that throughout all this
period “ Ireland was the school of the West, the quiet habitation
of sanctity and literature.” Bishop Nicholson also ,writes,
“ Within a century after the death of St. Patrick, the Irish
seminaries had so increased that most parts of Europe sent their
children to be educated there, and drew thence their bishops and
teachers.” Montalembert attests that “ Ireland was then regarded
by all Christian Europe as the principal centre of knowledge and
piety. In the shelter of her numberless monasteries a crowd of
missionaries, doctors and preachers were educated for the service
of the Church and the propagatian of the faith in all Christian
countries. A vast and continuous development of literary and
religious effort is there apparent, superior to anything that could
be seen in any other country in Europe. The monasteries which
gradually covered the soil of Ireland were the hostelries of a
foreign emigration. They were open to all: the poor and the
rich, the slave as well as the freeman, the child and the old man
had free access and paid nothing. Nor did the Irish monasteries
confine the benefit of their literary and religious instruction to
the natives of Ireland. They opened their doors with admirable
generosity to strangers of every country and every condition ;
above all, to those who came from the neighbouring island,
England, some to end their lives in an Irish cloister, some to go
from house to house in search of books and masters capable of
explaining those books. The Irish monks received with kindness
guests so greedy of instruction, and gave them both books and
masters, the food of the body and the food of the soul, without
demanding any recompense. From the seventh to the eleventh
century, Anglo-Saxon students flocked into Ireland, and for
four hundred years the schools of the island maintained the great
reputation which brought so many successive generations to dip
deeply there into the living waters of knowledge and faith.”
This influx of devoted men from the sister island, in the
pursuit of science and piety, is further attested by Camden, who
writes: “No men came up to the Irish monks, in Ireland and in


Britain, for sanctity and learning, and they sent forth swarms of
holy men all over Europe, to whom the monasteries of Luxeuil in
Burgundy, Pavia in Italy, Wurtzburgh in Franconia, St. Gall in
Switzerland, and so many others owe their origin. The Saxons at
that time flocked to Ireland from all quarters, as to a mart of litera-
ture. Wherefore it is that we frequently meet in our writers of
the lives of the saints : he was sent over to Ireland for educa-
tion.” But if we go back 800 years before Camden wrote, we
will find the same fact attested by Venerable Bede, who, speaking
of the 7th century, says : “ Many nobles and others of the English
nations were living in Ireland, whither they had repaired either
to cultivate the sacred studies or to lead a life of stricter dis-
cipline. Some of them became monks ; others chose rather to
apply to reading and study, going about from school to school
through the cells of the masters; and all of them were most
cheerfully received by the Irish, who supplied them gratuitously
with good books and instruction.”
The brightest name on England’s calendar of missionary
saints is St. Willibrord. He spent twenty years in the schools of
Ireland preparing himself to do God’s work, and laying up a rich
store of those spiritual treasures of which he was to be the
bearer to distant lands. The Litany of St. iEngus, composed in
the eighth century, commemorates several Britons, Piets, and
Saxons, and also Gauls, Germans, Romans, and Egyptians, holy
men who went to Ireland in the pursuit of the science of salva-
tion, and chose it for their resting place. As late as the 11th
century we find Bishop Sulgen from Wales setting out for the
Irish shores, as we read in his metrical life :
“ Exemplo patrum commotus, amore legendi
Ivit ad Hibernos sophia mirabile claros.”
By his ancestors’ bright example moved,
He sought in Erin the science which he loved,
And in her schools those skilful masters found
Whose wisdom is throughout the w r orld renowned.
But not only was Ireland thus rich in the blessings of
Christian civilization at home, —she was moreover chosen in the
ways of Providence to be the dispenser of those blessings to
almost every nation of Europe. So numerous were the Irish
missionaries who laboured in the cause of religion and civilization
throughout France, that the contemporary Eric of Auxerre cries
out: “It would seem as if a whole nation of Christian sages had
landed on our shores.” Other ancient writers compare those
missionaries to swarms of bees that, quitting their parent hives,
hastened to less favoured regions to enrich them with their
honied store : and St. Bernard declares that “ from Ireland as
from an overflowing stream crowds of holy men descended on
foreign nations.”


I 7
The testimony of a few historians not prejudiced in favour
of any of Ireland's claims may serve to place this important fact
in its true light. Mosheim writes : “ That the Irish were lovers
of learning, and distinguished themselves in those times of ignor-
ance, beyond all other European nations, travelling through the
most distant lands with a view to improve and communicate their
knowledge, is a fact well known; for we see them, in the most
authentic records of antiquity, discharging with the highest
reputation and applause the functions of teachers in France,
Germany, and Italy,” Thierry in his History of the Norman
Conquest thus speaks of Ireland : “It possessed a multitude of
saints and learned men, venerated alike in England and in Gaul;
for no country had furnished a greater number of Christian
missionaries, animated by no other motive than pure zeal and an
ardent desire of communicating to foreign nations the learning
and the faith of their native country. The Irish were great
travellers and everywhere they gained the hearts of those whom
they visited.” So, too, the German antiquary Wattenbach:
“ Above all others, the Irish went forth into every part of the
world. They filled England and the neighbouring islands. In
France they were everywhere to be met with, and they made
their way even into the heart of Germany.” Montalembert also
writes: “ A characteristic still more distinctive of the Irish
monks, as of all their nation, was the imperious necessity of
spreading themselves without, of seeking or carrying knowledge
and faith afar, and of penetrating into the most distant regions
to watch or combat paganism. This monastic nation became the
missionary nation par excellence, While some came to Ireland to
procure religious instruction, the Irish missionaries launched forth
from their island. They covered the land and seas of the West.
Unwearied navigators they landed on the most desert islands;
they inundated the Continent with their successive immigrations.”
It is at least a thousand years since the sons of Ireland thus
laboured in building up the bulwarks of religion and civilization
throughout the continent of Europe. Nevertheless their memory
is still held in benediction, and their names are enrolled among
the Patron Saints of the chief nations of Christendom. One
hundred and thirty Irish Saints have found a place in the calen-
dars of Germany ; forty-five are honoured as patrons in France ;
thirty in Belgium, and several others in Italy, Switzerland and
even in remote Iceland. What is most remarkable, we meet with
those Irish pilgrims and missionary saints in the most out-of-the-
way places,—in the depths of the Black Forest in Germany, in
the remotest and most sequestered hamlets in France, on the
highest peaks of the hills of Switzerland. Let me take one
instance. On the face of a precipice above the Lake of Thun in
Switzerland, there is the cave in which an Irish patron of the


district, St. Beoadh —latinized Beatus, —dwelt- It would be
difficult to find a more romantic spot. The path that leads
to it threads along the edge of precipices overhanging
the green Lake. Tufts of wild flowers cling to the ropk
and dangle their glorious harmonies of colour at dizzy heights
over the tranquil water. About thirty feet below the mouth of
the cave a large stream rushes out of the rock, and forming a
silvery cascade of 800 feet, plunges into the still mirror of the
lake. The cave of the Saint is itself screened by a fir wood
clinging to the rock ledges. Its wide entrance was once walled
up, so as to leave only a door and a window, but the stones have
fallen. The rude altar, too, is now overthrown. For a time after
the triumph of Zwinglianism in Berne the faithful pilgrims
continued to visit the sanctuary of St. Beatus, till at length the
civil authorities drove them away at the point of the spear. At
present a little chapel bears the name of the Saint at Lungern, on
the nearest point of the adjoining Canton of Obwalden, where
the ancient faith still maintains its ground, and thither flock
crowds of pilgrims every year to honour the memory of their
Apostle on his feast, the 9th of May.
But to return to the subject before us : We may conclude
from these few remarks, that so far from Ireland being sunk in
ignorance and barbarism in those days, it was enabled, from
the overflowing abundance of its literary and religious life,
to yield rich streams of true Christian civilization to the most
favoured countries of Europe.
We might desire, perhaps, no better proof of the develop-
ment of studies in the Irish schools than the high perfection
attained in the cultivation of the native tongue. The languages
which now hold the foremost place in civilized nations were as
yet only in their first rudiments whilst the Irish tongue was
being perfected in all the branches of literature in poetry and prose.
It is no small tribute to the ability with which the Irish scholars
of those days cultivated their native language that we find the
most learned professors of comparative Philology in modern times
in the Universities of Paris, Leipzic and Berlin, as well as in New
York, Edinburgh and Oxford, devoting their time and talents to
illustrate the Celtic fragments that have been preserved to us
from those golden ages of Irish literature.
The Ollamhs, or Masters of the Sciences, were everywhere
treated with marked honour, and in all the assemblies the
highest place —after that of the Monarch himself—was assigned
to them. Nor was it so easy a matter for them to attain that
rank. Their course of instruction occupied twelve years; eight
of these were devoted to the study of Philosophy and Grammar,


and the cultivation of the Irish language; and the four remaining
years were spent in the composition of treatises in poetry and
prose in their native tongue, to prove themselves qualified for the
degree to which they aspired.
It is from those ages that the Brehon laws have come down
to us. They lead us back long before the Justinian laws, and
they present the minutest details of a system of legislation
sanctioned by religion, which of itself would suffice to prove the
high civilization of Ireland a thousand years ago. The publi-
cation of those ancient Celtic laws has been carried on for twenty
years under a Royal Commission, and the four volumes already
published are most valuable as illustrating the character and
institutions of the Irish people in those days. Lord O’Hagan —
who has been so lately snatched from a wide circle of friends who
loved him, and from the country which he loved so well —in an
Essay on the Study of Jurisprudence, writes that “to the study
of those Brehon laws which for so many ages held sway in
Ireland, some of us, children of the soil, will be attracted, as by
ancestral voices from the buried past. And for all the learned
of Europe, who have interest in the history of Jurisprudence
and the Archgeology of Law, they must be the subject of intelli-
gent curiosity and careful investigation.”
It appears to me that I have said enough to justify the
statement which I made, that during the centuries which
immediately followed the death of St. Patrick, Ireland deservedly
held a foremost place among the civilized nations of Christendom.
But there are some writers who would fain persuade us that
this bright era of civilization closed with the 9tb century; that
before the Norman invasion Ireland had become degenerate and
had relapsed into barbarism. Hear how a brilliant English
writer, who but a few weeks ago paid a hurried visit to the
Australian shores, describes the Ireland of those days;—“ The
Irish, when the Normans took charge of them,” thus writes
Mr. Froude, “ were, with the exception of the clergy, scarcely better
than a mob of armed savages. They had no settled industry, and
no settled habitations, and scarcely a conception of property
. . . The only occupation considered honourable was fighting
and plunder . . . The religion of the Irish Celts, which three
centuries earlier had burnt like a star in Western Europe, had
degenerated into a superstition, and no longer served as a check
upon the most ferocious passions . . . Their chief character-
istics were treachery, thirst for blood, unbridled licentiousnes, and
inveterate detestation of order and rule,” As a nation, he adds,
“ they have done nothing which posterity will not be anxious to
forget;” they “ have little architecture of their own, and the forms
introduced from England have been robbed of their grace;” in
fact, they are “ unable to boast of one single national work of


art.”* Of this semi-barbarous people the Normans came to take
charge, thus “ fulfilling the work for which they were specially
qualified and gifted . . . The true justification of the
conquest lay in the character of the conquerors. They were horn
rulers of men, and were forced, by the same necessity which has
brought the decrepit kingdoms of Asia under the authority of
England and Russia, to take the management, eight centures ago,
of the anarchic nations of Western Europe.” Thus, with the
Norman victors, everything was fair and bright; whilst the island
which they invaded, was plunged in the depths of ignorance and
barbarism.
Such are the views which many who have made a mere
superficial study of Irish history, are only too eager to adopt.
Now, there are several ways in which we may test the
accuracy of those statements, but there is one which commends
itself particularly to me; and, as it not unfrequently happened
in days of chivalry, that whilst hostile armies were marshalled
face to face in battle array, some chosen combatant from either
side would enter the lists to decide by personal combat to whom
should be awarded the palm of victory, so too I will lead into the
arena before you two illustrious champions, each a fitting repre-
sentative of the race to which he belonged—the Irish monarch
Brian, and William, the Norman conqueror. They present to us,
indeed, many features in common. Each of them successfully
usurped an imperial power ; they were wise and prudent in
council, brave and valorous in the field; victory smiled upon
their arms in countless battles, and on the day of their greatest
triumphs, at Clontarf and at Hastings, they were alike engaged
under the banner of religion; so too they have both received
from posterity the title of “ the Great,” and by their respective
races they have been honoured with an uninterrupted chorus of
unrivalled applause ; and hence, it seems to me that the distinct-
ive merits of their imperial rule may, without the risk of
partiality, be fairly accepted as a test of the civilization which
they represent.
Brian entered on his career, pledged to free Ireland from the
oppressive yoke of the Danes. Wave after wave of these
northern barbarians had, for a hundred and fifty years, swept
over the fairest territories of Erin, and long and painful was the
bondage which they imposed upon her people. The richest
shrines and sanctuaries were plundered, and the whole country
was laid waste. The leaders of these pagan bands even assumed
the title of kings of Ireland ; and, indeed, more than once they
seemed to have secured for themselves a complete mastery over a
great part of the island. The chieftains of the subjugated
* Froude, “The English in Ireland,” i., 14, 22.


districts were led away to work as slaves for the Danish lords ;
a Danish soldier was billeted not as a guest, but as a master in
every household ; each church and monastery had a pagan chief-
tain appointed to it, and a heavy tax was imposed as well on
those who administered, as on those who received the sacred rites
of religion. Wherever the invaders went the schools were closed
and the teachers slain, and it was an imperative command that
all books which were met with in their devastations should be
burned or carried away. In sadness, the annalists add: “No
Irish chief was able to give deliverance from the foreigner
because of the excellence of their armour, the greatness of their
prowess, their strength and valour, and the excess of their thirst
for the fruitful, grassy lands of Erin.” Together with material
conquest they sought to ensure the triumph of Paganism. Their
leader, Thorgils (who is better known by his Latinized name,
Turgesius), caused himself to be proclaimed in Armagh the head
of the religion of Ireland, whilst h's wife, Otta, was enthroned as
Chief Priestess on the high altar of the great church of Clonmacnoise,
and proceeded to deliver thence her pagan oracles.
The Dalcassians of Munster were among the foremost and
o
bravest in resisting the tide of invasion. They had vowed that
their battle-axes would know no repose so long as Ireland was
not entirely free from the Danish thraldom, and they were
faithful to their vow. With the chieftaincy of the Dalcassians
Brian had inherited that pledge ; its fulfilment was the one great
purport of his life ; and he lived long enough to see it crowned
by a glorious triumph. But let us examine somewhat in detail
the chief features that marked this monarch’s career.
The first great feature of Brian’s rule that presents itself, is
his disinterestedness. Though victory after victory attended his
arms, we nowhere find that riches or plunder or personal aggran-
disemement were his aim, When a decisive battle forced the
Danes of Munster to submit to his authority, the one condition of
peace imposed was that every Irishman held by them in bondage
should be set at liberty; and the annalists add that thousands of
captives were at once seen joyfully returning to their homes.
So, too, when as Monarch of Ireland he again broke the Danish
power, his decree went forth that every Irishman held in bondage
throughout Erin should be free, and once more thousands of
noble captives were restored to their homes and to freedom.
Though Brian had vanquished the Danes, he took no steps to
exterminate them or to banish them from the kingdom. On the
contrary, he recognized the element of strength which, as faithful
subjects, they would add to his power, and he permitted them to
remain in the chief seaports, thus to promote commerce and to
develop the resources of the country. He made use of them too to
carry the war into the enemy’s camp. He gathered together a


mighty fleet from all the Danish harbours, and, accompanying it
with a chosen band of his own Dalcassian heroes, sent them to pursue
the marauding Vikings and to ravage the islands off the Scottish
coast and the more northern islands which they had made their
resting-place. The fleet returned laden with an immense booty ;
the Vikings were forced to acknowledge the superior sway of the
victor, and Brian was now able to assume the proud title of
Chief Monarch of Ireland and of all the Danish isles.
Brian was also renowned for his hospitality. The Danes of
Dublin were compelled to supply to his palace at Kinkora 360
butts of wine every year, and a proportionate quantity was
exacted from the Limerick Danes. Each Irish chieftain paid so
many head of cattle as his tribute, and whatever was thus re-
ceived was devoted to enhance the hospitable fame of the royal
residence. Its halls were open to all, and rich and poor, chieftains
and pilgrims, were welcome to the hospitality of the Irish
monarch.
He applied himself in a special manner to repair the
material ruin that had resulted from the Danish invasions. The
bridges were everywhere repaired, the causeways were restored,
new roads were made, the residences of the Irish chieftains were
rebuilt, and his own palace at Kinkora was adorned with a mag-
nificence befitting the abode of Ireland’s monarch.
In his reverence for the Church and her clergy, the Irish
king proved himself to have at heart the true interests of his
people. There is no surer test of a monarch’s merits in the work
of Christian civilization than his dealings with the Church. All
the nations of the civilized world are indebted to her in this, that
by her they have been lifted up from the mire of pagan bar-
barism, and have received at her hands the crown of religious
and social blessings that adorns them. The truths of heaven are
upon her lips; her mission is divine. She does not seek to
intrude her authority into the secular domain; but nevertheless
her beneficent influence permeates the whole body of the State.
Whosoever seeks to fetter the Church whilst she guides her
children in their heavenward course, is an enemy of civilization,
and it matters but little that these fetters be of iron or of gold.
True civilization gives freedom to the Church of God, and aids
and sustains her in that wondrous mission of beneficence which
has been confided to her by her Divine founder. Such was the
freedom given by the monarch Brian to the Irish Church, such
the generous aid with which he strengthened her and encouraged
her to achieve her glorious work. At his visit to Armagh he
offered twenty ounces of gold at the altar of our Apostle; and
when a few years later he again visited the same shrine, he re-
peated the same rich gift. Guarded by his protecting hand,
religion went forth arrayed in heavenly comeliness, and her bless-


ings were multiplied throughout the land. Her schools and in-
stitutes of piety were revived, the poor were protected, councils
were held, strict discipline was enforced, and distant nations
began once more, as of old, to look with delight towards her
tranquil shores, and to repeat rejoicing the Prophet’s words, —
“ Blessed is the people whose God is the Lord.” And this hallowed
influence of the Church continued throughout the whole of this
period down to the Anglo-Norman invasion ; the monasteries of
Ireland flourished, her cloisters were adorned with the maturest
fruits of virtue, and peace poured out its richest blessings upon
her people. We find a St. Celsus in Armagh, a St. Gillibert in
Limerick, a Malchus in Lismore ; there was St. Lawrence O’Toole,
the fearless champion of the liberty of the Church, aye and of
the liberty of his nation too ; and together with these there were
a thousand other saints and learned men forming a galaxy of
bright and glorious names, of which the greatest nations of
Christendom would be justly proud.
The contemporary writer of Brian’s life attests that, besides
restoring the religious houses which the Danes had plundered, he
founded seven new monasteries. Everywhere the churches were
clothed with new splendour, the desecrated shrines were adorned,
and the deserted chancels resounded once more to the praises of
God. He erected no fewer than thirty-two round towers, 1 those
characteristic monuments of Irish architecture which, whilst as
beacon-lights they served to guide the weary pilgrim to the
sanctuary wherein he would find repose, offered at the same
time, in case of any sudden irruption of the barbarians, a
safe retreat and a secure defence for the inmates of the
monasteries, and the relics and the shrines of their holy
founders and the other sacred treasures which have been at all
times so dear to the piety of our faithful people. So, too, the
schools of Ireland in a particular manner engaged the attention
and the solicitude of the Irish monarch. And allow me to add
that, after the Church, there is no more powerful factor in the
work of civilization than the school; for religious education
enlightens the mind and strengthens the will; it teaches man
his duties, and disciplines him to be faithful to them ; it makes
known to him his rights, and enables him to assert and defend
them. The schools of Ireland flourished during Brian’s reign,
and throughout this eventful period of her history the Univer-
sities of Armagh and Bangor and Lismore won for themselves a
world-wide renown. It is recorded that no fewer than 7,000
students’ names were inscribed on the roll of Armagh. There is
1 Mac Liag, in the Irish MS. Life of Brian: —“ By him were founded cells and
churches ... It was Brian that gave out seven monasteries, both furniture
and cattle and land, and thirty-two cloicteach.”


one special feature of Brian’s patronage of science to which I may
particularly refer, for it teaches a great lesson which many of the
rulers of the world at the present day, notwithstanding all our
boasted civilization, have not wisdom enough to learn. Wherever
throughout Ireland a youth was found whose talent gave promise
of being suited for the higher branches of learning, it was the
monarch’s wish that he should be trained to science, and his
education was provided for from the royal revenues. But better
than any words of mine the ancient chronicler will set before you
the boundless munificence which thus distinguished the reign of
the Irish monarch. In the old English translation of the Annals
of Clonmacnoise, under the year 1002, we read: —“The whole
realme was overrunn and overspread by the foreigners. The
churches, abbeys, and other religious places were by them quite
razed and debased, or otherwise turned to vile, base, servile, and
abominable uses. . . . But King Brian was a meet salve to
cure such festered sores ; in a small time he banished the Danes,
made up the churches and religious houses, restored the nobility
to their antient patrimony and possessions, and in fine brought all
to a notable reformation.”
Again, “ The Wars of the Gaedhil ” records that: —“ By him
were erected in Erin noble churches and their sanctuaries. He
sent professors and masters to teach wisdom and knowledge and
to buy books beyond the sea and the great ocean, because the
writings and books in every church and sanctuary had been
destroyed by the plunderers, and Brian himself gave the price fo
learning and the price of books to every one separately who went
on this service. Many churches were built and repaired by him‘
bridges and reads were made, the fortresses of Munster were
strengthened. ... He continued in this very prosperous,
peaceful, hospitable, just-judging, venerated—with law and rule
among the clergy, with honour and renown among the laity—
powerful, secure, for fifteen years in the chief sovereignty of
Erinn.” (page 139.)
We cannot be surprised that under such munificent patron-
age the arts and sciences should once more have flourished ;
they even attained a high perfection, and added new lustre
to Ireland’s ancient fame. The art of illuminating was
cultivated with particular care. So perfect were the Irish copyists
in this beautiful branch of art, and so wonderful was their skill,
that the first Norman invaders could find no words sufficient to
express their admiration ; and Giraldus Carnbrensis, contemplating
one of their masterpieces, cried out in astonishment that it was
the work not of men but of angels. “ Among all the miraculous
things of Kildare,” he writes, “nothing surprised me so much as
that wonderful book said to have been written from the dictation
of an angel. This book contains the four gospels according to


Jerome’s version, and is adorned with almost as many richly
illuminated figures as it has pages. Here you see the majesty of
the divine countenance, there the mystical figures of the Evangel-
ists, together with other designs without number, which, if
carelessly surveyed, seemed rather blots than intertwined orna-
ments, and appeared to be plain work where there was, in truth,
nothing but intricacy. But, on close examination, the secrets of
the art were evident; and so delicate and subtle, so laboured and
minute, so intertwined and knotted, so intricately and brilliantly
coloured did you perceive them, that you were ready to say they
were the work of an angel and not of man. The more intently
I examined them the more was I filled with fresh wonder and
amazement. Neither could Apelles do the like ; indeed mortal
hand seemed incapable of forming or painting them.” Mr.
Westwood, in his classical work, “ Palseographia Sacra,” after
examining the Book of Kells and other works still treasured in
the home libraries, adds, “ Ireland may justly be proud of the
Book of Kells. This copy of the Gospels is unquestionably the
most elaborately executed manuscript of early art now in
existence. At a period when the fine arts may be said to have
been almost extinct in Italy and other parts of the continent, the
art of ornamenting manuscripts had a perfection almost miracu-
lous in Ireland. The invention and skill displayed, the neatness,
the precision and delicacy far surpass all that is to be found in
ancient manuscripts executed by continental artists.” Several
Irish illuminated manuscripts, dating from the period of which
we treat, are still preserved in the Continental libraries, and not
long ago a distinguished German writer pronounced the following
judgment on them : —“ The ornamented pages, borders, and initial
letters exhibit so correct an architectural feeling in the distribution
of the parts, such a rich variety of beautiful and peculiar designs,
so admirable a taste in the arrangement of the colours, and such
an uncommon perfection of finish, that one feels absolutely struck
with amazement.”-}*
It is a constant tradition that the monarch Brian cultivated
the study of music, and was himself skilled in the harp. Certain
it is at least that music was at this period highly prized among
our people. Polydore Virgil and other chroniclers attest that
the Irish people were “ musica peritissimi.” Wherever the Irish
missionaries found a home they were sure to introduce a passion
for poetry and the music of the harp, as at the monastery of
St. Gall, where the use of that instrument continued long to be
taught by Irish masters. The Normans were enraptured with
the strains of the Irish harp, and Giraldus Cambrensis, to whom
we have already referred, did not hesitate to write that “ Irish


musical skill was incomparably superior to that of any other
nation. For their modulations are not slow and morose, as in. the
instruments of Britain, to which we are habituated ; but the
sounds are rapid and precipitate, yet sweet and pleasing. It is
wonderful that the musical proportion is preserved amidst such
precipitate velocity of the fingers, and that the melody is rendered
full and perfect by an undeviating art, amidst such trembling
modulations, such organic tones so infinitely intricate, possessed
of such pleasing swiftness, such unequal parity, such discordant
concord. . . . They commence and close their modulations
with so much subtilty, and the tinklings of the slender strings
sport so freely with the deep tones of the bass cords, so delicately
pleasing, so softly soothing, that the perfection of their art lies in
concealing art.”
In gold and silver work the Irish schools attained a high
perfection, as may still be seen in the cross of Cong, the shrine of
St. Manchan, and other precious fragments that happily escaped
the ravages of later times. The work of art known as the Tara
Brooch, now preserved in the Royal Irish Academy, Dublin, is
described as “ formed of white bronze as a base which is covered
with a variety of ornaments in gold, silver, niello, variously coloured
glass and enamel. No language can convey an idea of the won-
derful delicacy of the workmanship of this brooch.” It was
exhibited at the South Kensington Museum in 1863, and a writer
in the Times referred to it as “ more like the work of fairies than
of men.” A most practised jeweller who examined this and other
works of the Irish artists of those days, attested, “ that so won-
derful is their workmanship, that they cannot be imitated exactly
at the present day. They have been executed in a peculiar manner,
unknown to modern times.” But in this matter I may be per-
mitted to cite the words of Dr. Stokes, who in our own day has
proved himself second to none in labouring to restore the study
of ancient Irish art. In his Life of Petrie he thus writes : —“ It
is in the variety of form and the exquisite tracery in metal work
that the skill and taste of the old artificers is mainly shown.
The jewelled shrines of the consecrated bells, as well as many of
the earlier and even of the later croziers down to the fifteenth
century, exhibit great power both in design and execution. To
him whose sense of beauty and of excellence is not narrowed or
tied down by formulas, it has in all the qualities of proportion,
variety, and gracefulness a singular and unapproachable beauty.
It it be true that the characteristic of a savage art is its want of
progression, the rule does not apply to that of Ireland. Incon-
testable evidences of the rise, progress, and final decay of art in
this country were long ago pointed out by Petrie, and it seems to
have culminated in the latter part of the twelfth century. From
this time, the period of the Anglo-Norman invasion, it gradually


declined until, after more than three centuries of anarchy and
war, it died away, leaving its old monuments, its beautiful shrines,
its sculptured crosses, decorated churches, and illuminated MSS.
to tell of its former lustre.” (Page 271.)
To the munificent patronage of Brian, to the impulse given
by him to restore the religious monuments of Ireland, we are
indebted that Church architecture was developed to a wonderful
degree. Suffice it to name St. Cormac’s chapel at Cashel, the
chancel arch at Tuam, the churches of Clonfert, Roscrea,
Inishmain, and Kilmacduagh, all of which date from this period,
and which, so beautiful even in their ruins, are admitted to be
some of the noblest monuments that the twelfth century presents
to us. The twelfth century was, indeed, a period of great archi-
tectual revival in England and throughout the continent, yet, the
ablest writers on the subject are now agreed that in richness of
ornament, and perfection of minute detail, the architectural
remains which Ireland still preserves belonging to this period,
are unsurpassed and unrivalled by any contemporary monuments.
And here I wish to recall to your mind two of those groups of
monuments, Clonmacnoise and Glendalough, which, though they
belong in part to a much earlier age, yet, received at the period
of which treat, that crown of loveliness which even in their
desolation and decay, they have never ceased to wear. It is not
very long ago that an illustrious statesman of England, who for
years had been familiar with all the great monuments of England,
visited Glendalough, and delared that, as a group, he had seen
nothing in Great Britain to surpass it. It would seem as if nature
had chosen this singularly interesting valley to be a tranquil
retreat for religious seclusion and for prayer. High mountains
arise to the north, and west, and south, which serve as impene-
trable barriers to repel the intrusion of the world on its solitude.
Towards the east alone the valley expands to welcome the first
rays of the rising sun. The still waters of the lake mirror the
glory of the Creator, and the varied beauty of nature and the
grandeur of the surrounding scenery raise up the mind to the
contemplation of heavenly things. No wonder that as far back
as the 6th century St. Kevin and countless other Saints should
have loved to dwell there. No wonder that it should be known
to the Fathers of the Irish Church as the valley of God, the Rome
of the isles of the West. And what shall I say of Clonmacnoise,
standing as it does on the banks of the lordly Shannon, its
majestic stone crosses, its lofty towers, its causeways, its churches
and sanctuaries, all leading back our thoughts to those days when
its monastery was the chief retreat of learning and piety, when
the bells of those towers gave joy to the distant traveller, and
those churches resounded to the praises of the Most High ? And
here I may adopt the learned Petrie’s words: —“ There is not,


perhaps, in Europe a spot where the feeling heart would find more
matter for melancholy reflection than among the ancient churches
of Clonmacnoise. Its ruined buildings call forth national associa-
tions and ideas. They remind us of the arts and literature, the
piety and humanity, which distinguished their time, and are the
work of a people, who, in a dark age, marched among the fore-
most on the road of life and civilization, but who were, unfortu-
nately, checked and barbarized by those who were journeying in
the same course, and ought to have cheered them on.”
Such were the schools of Ireland, such the wonderful develop-
ment of every branch of art which bespeaks the refinement and
civilization of its people. By the invasion of the Anglo-Normans
all this was undone, and from the period of their arrival precisely
dates the nation’s decline. But on this growth of art in the
eleventh and twelfth centuries, and its rapid extinction subse-
quent to the landing of the Anglo-Normans on the Irish shores,
you will permit me to cite two authorities whose testimony cannot
be gainsayed; —
“ It is a remarkable fact,” writes Dr. Stokes, “ that as Ireland
was in the vanguard of progress in religion and art, in Western
Europe, from the seventh to the twelfth centuries, so also does it
seem to have been foremost in decline; and though in other
countries mediaeval art touched its finest point in the thirteenth
century, Celtic art had reached its full perfection a hundred or
two hundred years before. This art sprang from the heart and
instinct of the native population, and drew its indescribably
minute perfection of execution from the intense devotion of the
holy men who carried it to its highest point, and so for the secret
of its premature decay, the study of her history will not long-
search in vain, Ireland became the scene of intestine war, her
monasteries were rifled, her libraries burned, her precious
reliquaries robbed or destroyed . . . her native energies were
paralyzed, and her inspirations chilled, by the long years of
suffering thus entailed.”
Not less explicit is Petrie’s testimony:—“The progressive
decline of the fine arts in Ireland from the end of the twelfth
century is as yet an unwritten chapter in the history of oar
country. Nevertheless, there are few circumstances in our annals,
that more strongly depict the debasement which it was the
unhappy fate of Ireland to have suffered in those troubled times,
or that more strikingly indicate the indissoluble connexion which
ever exists between the cultivation of the fine arts, and the
civilization, greatness, and happiness of a people. If, iji such a
state of barbarism as Ireland was then reduced to, genius had
arisen, it would have died like a flower of the desert—unnoticed
and unknown, for it was not the warrior’s rude and bloody hand
that could preserve and cherish it, nor his yet ruder mind that


could appreciate its excellence and beauty; the seed should be
wafted to some more genial clime before it could be nurtured into
vigour ”
There was another feature in the Irish monarch’s rule which
must not be omitted; this was, his firm repression of crime and
the even-handed justice which he meted out to all. Order and
contentment and social happiness followed in the train of this just
rule, and the annalists relate, not as a matter of poetic imagery,
but as a stern fact, that in those times of peace, a fair maiden
decked out with precious jewels, and bearing rich treasures in her
hands, could traverse the whole island from shore to shore, with-
out injury or insult being offered to her.
And now we come to the closing scene. If, during his reign,
Brian displayed the wisdom of a Christian monarch, the close of
his career was one which merited for him the aureola of a Christian
hero. The Danes had resolved to make a last effort for the
conquest of Ireland, determined that one spot at least should
remain in Europe where triumphant Paganism would enjoy an
undisturbed control. From the Isle of Man, and the Scottish
coasts, and the northern islands, the Vikings gathered together
their bravest troops, and left nothing undone to ensure their
success. The chief figure in the confederation was the apostate
Viking, known in the Irish annals by the name of Brodir. He is
thus described in one of the northern sagas : —“ He had been a
Christian man, and was a deacon by ordination, but he had thrown
off his faith and became God’s dastard, and now he worshipped
heathen fiends, and was, of all men, the most skilled in sorcery.
He had on him that coat of mail which no steel could bite. He was
both tall and strong, and had such long black locks, that he tucked
them under his belt ” This apostate leader, fired with hatred of
the Christian faith, rallied all the Northmen’s strength to secure
the triumph of paganism. So manifest and so terrible were his
dealings with the evil one, that his brother Ospak, at length,
declared, “ the Christian faith must be true which the demon thus
assails,” and quitting Brodir he hastened to receive the waters of
Baptism, and bore to Brian the first intelligence of the imminent
danger that now threatened him. The Irish monarch, on his
part, lost no time to summon his forces around him, and all that
was best and bravest in the land hastened to his standard to
ensure the victory of the Cross. On good Friday, the 23rd April,
in 1014, at morning’s dawn, the pagan troops and their allies
stood marshalled in battle array on the plain of Clontarf. Their
mighty fleet rode tranquilly beneath the shelter of the Hill of
Howth, and besides furnishing them with supplies, offered them
a safe retreat should disaster attend their arms. The city of
Dublin did not then extend beyond the district around Christ
Church : all that now is Abbey-street, and Sackville-street, and


thence down to Bally bough-bridge, was covered by the sea shore.
Along the valley of Clonliffe the Danish armies extended their
lines towards Dublin, and, as the day advanced, the battle seems
to have grown warmest there, for the Danes left nothing undone
to maintain, whilst the Irish troops spared no effort to cut off,
their communications with the city. Foremost among the Danish
confederates was a picked band of 2,000 men, encased from head
to foot “in polished, strong triple-plated armour ” ; the raven
banner, their enchanted standard, was borne before them, and
Brodir took their command. But neither the raven banner nor
the coats of armour could save them from the Dalcassian battle-
axe, and at sunset on that eventful day, every one of that chosen
band lay lifeless on the plain. The whole number of the invading
army is supposed to have been about 80,000, and so sure were
they of success that they had brought with them their families,
resolved to make Ireland their adopted home ; “ the Northmen,”
writes Adhemar, “ came at that time to Ireland with an immense
fleet, conveying even their wives and children, with a view of
extirpating the Irish and occupying in their stead that very
wealthy country.”*
The Irish monarch formed his troops into line of battle,
along the rising ground where All Hallows College now stands.
He addressed only a few words to them, telling them to hold in
mind that it was on Good Friday they were called upon to fight
for their religion and their country. The Cross was their banner
and Brian’s son their leader. The aged Monarch himself, now in
his 87th year, retired to his tent, and there, like Moses of old, with
eyes and hands uplifted towards heaven,remained in prayer
while the battle raged around him. As evening came on, it
became apparent that the Irish troops were victorious along the
whole line, whilst the high tide that had set in rendered the
escape of the invaders to their ships impossible. Thousands of
them were driven into the sea, and found there a watery grave.
The contemporary annalist gives the total Danish loss in this
battle as no less than 60,000. But whilst the power of Danish
Paganism was thus broken for ever, Brodir, with a few com-
panions, had cut his way through the Irish lines, and, passing by
the royal tent, espied the aged Monarch wrapt in prayer. Full
of Satanic rage he rushed in, and dealt him his death-blow.
Thus closed the heroic career of Brian, laying down his life,
in the moment of victory, for his country and for the Christian
faith. The day after the battle, the Abbot of Swords, with his
religious brethren, conveyed the Monarch’s body with religious
pomp to that monastery of St. Columba, and thither the Arch-
*Apud Labbe “ Nova Biblioth. MSS.,” tom. ii,, page 177.
f Marianne in Chronico, “ manibus et mente ad Deum intentus.”


bishop of Armagh and the clergy from all parts of Ireland came,
and they paid him all honour as a true Christian hero, and
conveyed his remains, in triumphant procession, to the Cathedral
of Armagh. There, after seven days’ vigils, his body was laid in
the tomb close to the sanctuary of our Apostle, which, during life,
he had so loved.
I have thus endeavoured to sketch for you the distinctive
features of the rule of the Irish King. They do not bear with
them the impress of a semi-barbarous condition of things ; on the
contrary, it seems to me that if we lay aside preconceived preju-
dices, and take the witness of history as our sure guide, we must
consider the Monarch Brian as a sovereign of whom any nation
in Christendom might be justly proud.
And now we may turn our attention to the champion of
Norman civilization, and see what were the distinctive features
of his rule. I need not dwell on the valour shown by William
the Conqueror in the field of battle, of his prowess in arms, or of
the vast resources of the kingdom which he won by the sword ;
for, such material strength and such success are not the true tests
of civilization that history presents to us. Like the Irish
Monarch, he had usurped a crown which was not his of right, and
his chief battle was won under the banner of religion. Yet, even
here, there is a great disparity between both princes. Brian
grasped the sovereignty of Ireland for his country’s good, to
combine its strength against its Danish oppressors ; but William
seized the English crown as a matter of selfish aggrandizement
and personal ambition. Brian at Clontarf was, in truth, the
champion of religion, and his victory was the triumph of the
Faith ; but William had procured from the Pontiff by intrigue
and by false representations the religious banner under which he
fought, and thus from the outset he made a mere pretext of
religion the better to further his political aims.
But to enter more particularly on our inquiry into the
distinctive traits of the Norman monarch’s rule, the first great
feature that presents itself is the cruelty with which he exercised
his irresistible power in extirpating those who had shown them-
selves bravest in defending their country and their homes against
him. Tne Northumbrians were reckoned among the most valiant
of the English race, and more than once they had made the
armies of William dread their assault. On the approach of
Christmas in the year 1069 William entered York, the Northum-
brian capital, in triumph. The North was at length hushed
before him, the Northumbrians had returned to their own fire-
sides, and there was no longer an army to oppose his progress.
How did he use his victory ? I will not detail to you in any
words of mine his dealings with the unhappy men who had thus
accepted him as sovereign. I will rather read for you the words


of Mr. Freeman, wh 3, by his historical researches on this period
of English history, has won for himself immortal renown. He
thus writes; —“ The king took the work of destruction as
his personal share of the conquest of Northumberland. He
left others to build his castles in York, but he himself
went through the length and breadth of the land, through
its wildest and most difficult regions. That all who resisted
were slain with the sword was a matter of course; Harold
had done as much as that in his great campaign against
Gruffydd. But now William went to and fro over points a
hundred miles from one another, destroying, as far as in him lay,
the life of the earth. It was not mere plunder, which may at
least enrich the plunderer ; the work of William at this time was
simple unmitigated havoc. Houses were everywhere burned with
all that was in them; stores of corn, goods, and property of every
kind were brought together and destroyed in the like sort; even
living animals seem to have been driven to perish in the universal
burning . . . The long-abiding traces of the destruction
which was now wrought were its most fearful feature. The
accounts of the immediate ravaging are graphic and terrible
enough, but they are perhaps outdone in significance by the
passionless witness of the great Survey, the entries of “waste,”
“ waste,” “ waste,” attached through page after page to the
Yorkshire lordships, which seventeen years after had not
recovered from the blow. Indeed we may be inclined to ask
whether Northern England ever fully recovered from the blow
till that great development of modern times which had reversed
the respective importance of the North and the South. For nine
years at least no attempt was made at tilling the ground between
York and Durham every town stood uninhabited; their streets
became lurking places for robbers and wild beasts Even a
generation later the passing traveller beheld with sorrow the
ruins of famous towns, with their lofty towers rising above the
forsaken dwellings, the fields lying untilled and tenantless, the
rivers flowing idly through the wilderness. Men, women, and
children died of hunger; they laid them down and died in the
roads and in the fields, and there was no man to bury them.
There were those who did not shrink from keeping themselves
alive on the flesh of their own kind. Before the end of the year
Yorkshire was a wilderness. The bodies of its inhabitants were
rotting in the streets, in the highways, or on their own hearth
stones ; and those who had escaped from sword, fire, and hunger,
had fled out of the land.”
Such was the devastation of Northumbria, and yet amid
such harrowing scenes, William did not hesitate to keep the
Christmas feast with special pomp and rejoicings at York.
Another feature of William’s reign was his selfishness ; that


is to say, his readiness to sacrifice the country’s weal in order to
gratify his own thirst for amusement and pleasure. There was
no lack of hunting grounds in England ; hunting had been a
favourite pastime of its royal princes for centuries before
William’s conquest. All these, however, did not suffice for
William’s amusement. He wished for some new theatre of
pleasure reserved entirely to himself and his favourite courtiers,
and he marked out Hampshire for such a hunting ground.
Hampshire was at this period “ the most civilized and best culti-
vated part of the kingdom. To find room, therefore, for William’s
sport, a fertile district, thirty miles in extent, was deliberately
laid waste. In the days of Edward and the kings before him it had
been a flourishing land, full of the habitations of men, and thick
set with churches, where the worship of God was duly paid. At
William’s bidding men were driven from their homes, their houses
were pulled down, their churches were rooted up, and the fruitful
land became a wilderness. The historians of both races raise
their indignant wail over the homes of men which were changed
into the lairs of wild beasts. The great Survey calmly gives us
the names of the Englishmen who were driven forth from their
wasted homes, and shows how a few of them were allowed to
retain some small scraps of land beyond the limits of the sacred
precincts of William’s sport. There, we are told, amid the deso-
lation which he had wrought, the Conqueror would gladly have
spent his life, rejoicing in the slaughter of the lower animals
during the short intervals of the slaughter of mankind. But we
are told also that the scene of William’s greatest crime was the
scene of the heaviest blows which were dealt upon his house. A
curse seemed to brood over the region from which man had been
driven to make room for the wild beasts. The wilderness which
William had made was fatal to his sons, and to his sons’ sons.”
{Freeman, “Norman Conquest,” vol. iv., p. 613). I may add the
testimony of a contemporary chronicler, otherwise a eulogist of the
King, but who thus complains of the selfishness of the Monarch;—
“ He took great sums, both by right and also with much
unright, from his people, and for little need ; he was fallen on
covetousness, and greediness he loved altogether. He made
great deer chases, and therewith laid down laws, that whoso slew
hart or hind he should be blinded. . . . His great men
complained of it, and the poor men murmured, but he reckoned
naught of them all, and they must altogether
Follow the king’s will
If they would live or have land—
Land or goods, or even a quiet life.
Wo, Wo ! that any man should be so proud,
Should so lift himself up, and reckon himself above all men.”


The dealings of a sovereign with the Church are, as I have
already remarked, one of the best tests of true civilization.
William showed but little reverence towards the Church, except
when it was the purpose of his policy to make her an instru-
ment in accomplishing his designs. Abbots and Bishops not
subservient to his interests were set aside: if some of them
received rich gifts, it was done to bind them the better with
golden fetters to his throne. The Churches and Monasteries
had hitherto been regarded as inviolable sanctuaries, and
several of the nobility had deposited their family treasures
in them. “ But the thresholds of the English Saints proved no
safeguard against the Norman King. Early in the year 1070, in
the course of Lent, William caused all the monasteries of England
to be searched, and all deposits of this kind to be carried to the
royal treasury.” 1 The historian compendiates in one short
sentence the systematic policy of William towards the Church;
“ The Prelacy of England was to be used as a means for rivetting
the fetters of England.” (iv. 131.) It is true that Lanfranc and
St. Anselm shone as brilliant stars in the English Church during
this period ; but they were foreigners. Lanfranc was a Lom-
bard from Pavia; and when he entered the Norman monastery of
Bee, which was to become so famous under his guidance, he
found that the brethern were “ neither well lettered nor much
trained in religion.” Anselm, too, was an Italian, a native of
“ wild Aosta, lulled by Alpine rills.” The name of St. Thomas of
Canterbury alone remains—a name which indeed must not be
forgotten. It was not, however, as an Apostle or as Confessor
that he adorned the Church. His aureola is that of Martyr, and
it is no proof of Norman civilization that the chief agents in his
martyrdom were the English monarch and his Norman courtiers.
It is set forth in eulogy of William’s reign that every crime
against property was inexorably punished, so that a theft or
robbery was a thing unheard of throughout England. The law
of justice, however, is not one-sided : it teaches that property has
its duties as well as its rights, and it is particularly by the fulfil-
ment of those duties that true civilization is made known.
William had distributed to his Norman knights almost the whole
property of the kingdom, and they had made themselves secure
in their strong castles against every attack. From time to time
William extorted large sums of money from the knights whom he
had thus enriched, and they in their turn extorted still larger
sums from the unfortunate natives subject to them. Thus the
significant word unlaw was for the first time introduced into the
annals of England : it implied, as the historian of the Conquest
writes, “ a state of things where law was on the mouth of men in
1 Freeman iv. 328.


power, but where law itself became the instrument of wrong.”
(iv. 621). The contemporary chronicler records thatall classesshared
in the general corruption, and that “ little righteousness was in this
land amid any men ; and as man spake more of right law, so man
did more of unlaw. All that was abominable to God and oppres-
sive to man was common in William’s time.” (Chron. of Peter-
borough, written in 1087.) The system of feudal extortion thus
introduced by William, long continued to bear its bitter fruits. I
will read for you one passage from the Saxon chronicle under
the year 1137 : “Every powerful man made his castles and held
them against the king; and they filled the land full of castles.
They cruelly oppressed the wretched men of the land with castle-
works. When the castles were made-they filled them with devils
and evil men. Then took they those men that they imagined
had any property, both by night and by day, peasant men and
women, and put them in prison for their gold and silver, and
tortured them with unutterable torture ; for never were martyrs
so tortured as they were. . . Wretched men died of hunger ;
some went seeking alms who at one while were rich men ; some
fled out of the land. Never yet had more wretchedness been in
the land, nor did heathen men ever do worse than they did ; for
everywhere at times they forbore neither church nor churchyard,
but took all the property that was therein, and then burned the
church and all together.” 1
This was the feudal system which the Normans a few years
later introduced into Ireland, and can we be surprised that it
should have produced the same sad fruits of iniquity and
oppression ? The brave chieftain O’Melaghlin fully appreciated
this feature of Norman rule, when he sent the remarkable message
to Henry the Second : “ Notwithstanding his promise of support-
ing me in the possession of my wealth and dignities, he has sent
robbers to invade my patrimony. Avaricious and sparing of his
own possessions, he is lavish of those of others, and he thus seeks
to enrich libertines and profligates who have consumed the
patrimony of their fathers in debauchery.”
We now come to the closing scenes of William’s reign. To
none more truly than to princes can the motto “ Qualis vita, finis
ita ” be applied ; their end is too often the picture of their career.
We have seen how the death of the monarch Brian was in every
way worthy of the Christian hero. He died in the moment of
triumph over the enemies of the Cross, adding the martyr’s crown
to the many laurels of a glorious reign. Strange indeed is the
contrast that the death of William presents.
l Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, published, under the direction of the Master of the
Rolls, by Benjamin Thorpe, ii. 231.


In the beginning of August, 1087, he sailed for the coast
of France to avenge some words of insult that had been uttered
by the French king. “When the corn was in the fields, and the
grapes in the vineyards, and the apples in the orchards, he led
forth his troops to gather in the rich spoil of the fruitful season.
All was laid waste ; the thought of mercy passed utterly away
from William’s mind.”* At last he reached the city of Mantes ;
and he resolved to make that city an example of utter ruin. On
the loth August, the gates were opened to him, and he issued the
order that the city should be burned to the ground. “On that
day all was destroyed ; the houses and goods of the citizens
perished; the churches were burned, and holy recluses, who
deemed it a crime to leave their cells even at such a moment, were
burned with them. William’s heart was gladdened at the sight:
he rode, and bade his men heap on fuel to make the flames burn
yet more bravely.” Whilst thus engaged his horse stumbled on
the burning embers, and the king, unwieldy in his weight,
received his death wound.
The dying king was carried to Rouen, and there on his death-
bed he openly acknowledged the many faults of his iniquitous
career; he had won England by no right, by no claim of birth ;
he had treated the sons of the English soil with harshness; he
had cruelly wronged nobles and commons alike ; he had despoiled
many wrongfully of their inheritance; he had slain countless
multitudes by hunger, or by the sword. The harrying of
Northumberland rose up before his eyes in all its blackness. He
told how cruelly he had burned and plundered the land, what
thousands of every age and sex among the noble nation which he
had conquered had been done to death at his bidding.
On the 9th September, 1087, King William died. The
knights and nobles who had hitherto attended him, without
delay mounted their horses and hastened homeward with all
speed, not knowing what deeds of lawlessness might now be
witnessed. Not one knight remained to show honour to his
deceased sovereign. The servants and other followers set to
work at once to make spoil of the royal chamber: “ they stripped
the deserted house and the very corpse of the dead, of all that
they could lay hands upon, and made off with their prey;
weapons, clothes, vessels, the royal bed and its furniture, were
carried off, and for a whole day the body of the Conqueror lay
well nigh bare on the floor of the room in which he died.”*f*
Well indeed might the contemporary Ordericus Vitalis cry
out: “ O magnificence of the world, how worthless thou art, and
how vain and frail: like the rain bubbles of the shower, swollen
* Freeman, iv., 701.
+ Freeman, iv., 713.


one moment, burst into nothing the next. Here was a most
mighty lord, whom more than a hundred thousand warriors just
now eagerly served, and before whom many nations feared and
trembled ; and now by his own servants, in a house not his own,
he lies foully stripped, and from the first to the third hour of
mornihg is left deserted on the bare floor.”
None but a plain Norman gentleman named Herlwin, was
found to convey the king’s remains to Caen, where William had
expressed a wish to be interred. At Caen a numerous body of
clergy and nobility awaited the remains and formed a solemn
funeral procession. As the procession was on its way, flames
were seen to issue from a house, and in a little time a great part
of the town was on fire. Clergy ancb laity alike hastened to check
the flames, and a few religious men alone kept on their way
bearing the body to St. Stephen’s minster. Everything seemed
to conspire that he who had received during life such court and
homage, should be treated with dishonour and contempt in death.
The horrors, however, of that funeral are not yet complete.
On the interment day, all the great knights and nobles of
Normandy with the bishops, and abbots, and clergy, had assembled
in St. Stephen’s minster. The Bishop of Evreux delivered the
funeral harangue, and at its close called on all who were present
to forgive the deceased monarch anything he might have sinned
against them. At once a knight named Ascelin arose amid the
vast assembly, and declared that he forgave him not: “ This
ground where ye stand,” he said, “ was the site of my father’s
house, which the man for whom ye pray, while he was yet but
Count of Normandy, took away by force from my father, and, in
spite of law and justice, built this church upon it by his might.
I therefore claim the land : I forbid that the body of the robber
be covered with my mould, or that he be buried within the
bounds of mine inheritance.” (iv. 719.) Terrible indeed were
these words, and yet the justice of this bold claim was admitted
by the assembled nobles and clergy; and before the ceremony
was proceeded with, the ground had to be purchased from Ascelin
One misfortune more was still in store for William’s
remains. The corpse was removed with royal state from the
bier in the centre of the minster to the stone coffin which was
to be its last resting-place. But by the unskilfulness of the
workmen the stone coffin was too small for the unwieldy corpse
of William. “In the efforts which were made to force it into its
narrow room the body burst; a fearful stench filled the church,
which the burning of incense and of all sweet savours could not
overcome.” Such is Mr. Freeman’s narrative (iv., 720). Sir F.
Palgrave still more vividly describes this last terrific scene : “ The
debt was paid, the price of that narrow plot of earth, the last bed
of the Conqueror. Ascelin withdrew his ban : but as the swollen


corpse sank into the ground it burst, filling the sacred edifice with
corruption. The obsequies were hurried through, and thus was
William the Conqueror gathered to his fathers, with loathing
disgust and horror.”
Such was the inglorious end of William’s eventful reign.
Selfishness and personal aggrandisement and the oppression of
his subjects were the most prominent features of his rule.’ You
will probably conclude with me that they merited the dishonour
and ignominy which marked its close.
I have endeavoured thus briefly to set before you the chief
events that in a distinctive way marked the reigns of the
monarchs, to each of whom posterity has awarded the title of
“ the Great.” One of these rulers presents to us Celtic life as it
was before the Normans set foot upon the Irish shores ; the other
exemplifies the Norman customs, and the habits of those whose
mission, forsooth, it was to bring the blessings of civilization to
Ireland. It seems to me most clear ; and unless I have entirely
misconceived the testimony of the documents to which I have
referred, it will be your judgment also, that the verdict of
authentic history will pronounce William, notwithstanding his
mighty power, to have been little better than a semi-barbarous
prince, whilst it will award to Brian the palm and the crown of a
true Christian Monarch. And looking back upon the arguments
which I have endeavoured to compendiate in this brief address, I
will ask you to draw from them the conclusion that during the
period that preceded the Anglo-Norman invasion, Ireland was not
immersed in ignorance and barbarism, but on the contrary was
justly ranked among the most civilized nations of Christendom,
F. Cunninghame & Co., Printers, 146 Pitt-street, Sydney.




