

Final Report
SECRET
CONSTITUTION, SUMMARY AND GENERAL CONCLUSIONS
OF THE MISSION
MINISTRY OF AIRCRAFT PRODUCTION




FEDDEN MISSION REPORT
SECTION 1
Assigned to
Address
Copy No.
Date of issue
This report contains confidential information, and must
therefore be treated accordingly by the person to whom this copy
is issued. Anything contained in this report must only be
communicated to approved and accredited executives of Government
departments or firms undertaking the manufacture of aircraft or
accessories for His Majesty's Government; and must not be published
or disclosed to unauthorised persons.
There is a considerable amount of detailed information in
this report which may only be of interest to those specialising on
the particular problem. In order, therefore, to assist executives,
this report has been so framed that at the beginning of each Part a
special coloured page has been provided which sets out as shortly
as possible the broad policy conclusions of the Mission on this
particular subject, including the action that is advised.
By this means it is hoped that those concerned with policy
may have as concise a picture as possible of what is considered
should be done to put into effect the work of the Mission.
The purpose of the Mission was to learn what American
methods could be introduced into this country to improve our output,
and to investigate certain technical problems and new developments
In America. The report is therefore mainly concerned with those
aspects in which the American industry is ahead of ours, and with
promising technical developments. No emphasis has been laid on
points where the Mission consider that British production methods
or technical development are ahead of American.
S.T.A.M.
Cook's Building,
2*jo Stratton Street, W. 1.
June,


This report is issued in seven separately bound Sections, as follows:
SECTION 1 CONSTITUTION, SUMMARY AND GENERAL
CONCLUSIONS OP THE MISSION
M 2 AIRCRAFT PRODUCTION
" 3 AIRCRAFT DESIGN
M 4 ENGINES, POWER PLANTS AND PROPELLERS
M 5 ACCESSORIES AND EQUIPMENT
” 6 EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
* 7 POST-WAR PROBLEMS
Each Section is divided into two or more Parts, and a list of
contents appears at the beginning of each Part. The Parts in a
section are lettered A, B, C etc.
Each Part is divided into Chapters, the first of which (on a
coloured page) gives the broad policy conclusions for the Part. The
Chapters are made up of Items, and each Item has a number indicating
the Chapter to which it belongs and its position within the Chapter.
For example:
2.03 indicates the third item of Chapter 2
5.12 M M twelfth • " ■ 5
For specifying completely any item, it is also necessary to
quote the Section and Part, and in the text, at the beginning of
each Item, its complete reference is given.
For example:
3A - 2.03 indicates Section 3> Part A, Chapter 2, third item.
bO - 5.12 indicates Section 4, Part C, Chapter 5, twelfth item.


CONTENTS OF THE WHOLE REPORT
SECTION 1 - CONSTITUTION, SUMMARY AND GENERAL CONCLUSIONS
PART A - OBJECTS OP THE MISSION, PERSONNEL AND ITINERARY
Chapter 1 Scope, object and general survey of the Mission
" 2 Itinerary, December 1942 to March 1943
M 3 Broad policy conclusions
w 4 Future policy in regard to Missions to America
PART B - AMERICAN NATIONAL AIRCRAFT ORGANISATIONS
Chapter 1 General
" 2 Array Air Force
" 3 Navy Department
H 4 War Production Board
H 5 Joint Aircraft Committee
" 6 Office of Scientific Research and Development
SECTION 2 - AIRCRAFT PRODUCTION
PART A - ORGANISATION
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
" 2 Engineering departments
" 3 Factory layout
H 4 General notes on organisation of airframe factories
M 5 Boeing Aircraft, Seattle
" 6 Consolidated Aircraft, San Diego
" 7 North American Aviation, Inglewood
" 8 Bell Aircraft, Buffalo
" 9 Curtiss Wright
w 10 Other aircraft firms
" 11 Data on American airframe factories
M 12 Canadian aircraft industry
PART B - FACTORY LAYOUT AND PROCESSES
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
" 2 Special applications of lofting
M 3 Economy of floor space
M 4 Conveyors
" 5 Drop hammer
** 6 Rubber die press
" 7 Mechanical press
" 8 Stretcher
" 9 Special tools
M 10 Famum rolls
” 11 Rivet sorting
n 12 Finishing and painting
M 13 Extrusion manipulation
H 14 Pipe bending
n 15 Glenn Martin skin stretching process
M 16 Plaster moulds for light alloy casting
" 17 Powder metallurgy
" 18 Riveting
w 19 Spot welding
13 20 Flash welding of undercarriages and engine mountings
" 21 Heliarc welding
M 22 Cycleweld


SECTION 3 - AIRCRAFT DESIGN
PART A - GENERAL DESIGN TECHNIQUE
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
2 Scope and organisation of engineering departments
M 3 Weight analysis
” 4 Factors and design requirements
M 5 American stressing technique
” 6 Aerodynamic design
n 7 Aerodynamic controls
M 8 Stressed skin construction
M 9 Pressure cabins
M 10 Undercarriage design
M 11 Materials
” 12 Processes
n 13 Aircraft testing procedure
PART B - REVIEW OF AMERICAN AIRCRAFT
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
w 2 Description of new North American P. 51
** 3 Descritpion of Curtiss P. 60
” 4 Description of Bell P. 63
M 3 Description of Douglas A. 26
M 6 The Boeing 8.29 and Consolidated 8.32
7 Current fighters in production
8 Current heavy bombers in production
" 9 Transport types
10 Wooden aircraft
n 11 Flying boats
" 12 Tailless aircraft
w 13 Tabulated data
PART C - PHOTO LOFTING-
Chapter 1 Board policy conclusions
n 2 Technical summary
M 3 Layout procedure
M 4 Alternative reproduction processes
** 5 Camera procedure
" 6 Miscellaneous
PART D - SELF SEALING FUEL TANKS, OIL TANKS AND FUEL HOSE
Chapter 1 Broad conclusions
w 2 Technical summary
" 3 Fuel tanks - American practice
M 4 Hose - American practice
SECTION 4 - ENGINES, POWER PLANTS AND PROFELLERS
PART A - PRODUCTION
Chapter 1 Broad Policy conclusions
2 General design and production notes on firms visited
" 3 Organisation and output
4 Engine and propeller production processes and equipment
PART B - DESIGN
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
2 Technical review of American engine developments
" 3 Propeller design
n 4 Pbwer plant policy and installation
" 3 Specific technical items


PART C - REGENERATIVE ENGINE TESTING PLANT
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
M 2 Technical summary
H 3 Methods of absorbing engine power
" 4 Speed control
" 3 Relative merits of testing plant and methods
'* 6 The Buick arrangements at Melrose Park, Chicago
PART D - FUEL AND OIL
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
M 2 Fuel
" 3 Oil
.
SECTION 3 - ACCESSORIES AND EQUIPMENT
PART A - ELECTRIC WIRING-
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
" 2 Summary and conclusions
H 3 Principles underlying American methods
w 4 American wiring practice
" 3 Maintenance and repair aspect
M 6 Comparative appraisement of British and American
practice
M 7 Developments in relation to alternating current
M 8 Application to British development and production
PART B - AIRCRAFT ELECTRICS
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
f ‘ 2 Conclusions
M 3 Present use of low pressure direct current
” 4 Effect of operating conditions on choice of system
” 5 Review of electrical services in relation to hydraulics
" 6 Manuals on installations
" 7 Design and production of electrical equipment
" 8 New developments in aircraft electrics
w 9 Approval and standardisation of equipment
" 10 Liaison with America on electrics
PART C - INSTRUMENTS AND RADIO INSTALLATIONS
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
n 2 Aircraft instruments
" 3 Radio installations
PART D - AIRCRAFT VIBRATION TESTING AND EQUIPMENT
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
" 2 Summary and conclusions
** 3 Introduction
w 4 Equipment
M 5 Application
" 6 Scope of activities
" 7 Review of technique
M 8 Equipment ordered for M.A®P.
n 9 Application to British development


PART E - INSTHDMSNTATION OF TEST FLIGHTS
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
** 2 Summary and conclusions
M 3 Introduction
" 4 Outline of installations
M 5 Organisation
M 6 Equipment
M 7 Review of technique
M 8 Application to British development
SECTION 6 - EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
PART A - ENGINEERING- STAFF
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
” 2 Economical use of present aircraft engineering
staff
" 3 American publications and engineering propaganda
” 4 Manuals prepared by firms for instruction of
drawing office staff etc.
" 5 Manuals prepared by firms to explain administration
and define duties
" 6 Standardisation
PART B - INDUSTRIAL AND SERVICE TRAINING
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
H 2 Technical manuals for part time study
M 3 Schools for training industrial and service personnel
H 4 Instruction manuals prepared by firms on their products
" 5 Instructional films
PART C - UNIVERSITY EDUCATION OP AERONAUTICAL ENGINEERS
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
H 2 American education
PART D - RESEARCH ESTABLISHMENTS
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
" 2 Need for increased research equipment in Britain
** 3 Langley Field
" 4 Canadian National Research Council
** 5 American wind tunnels
tt 6 Engine research
SECTION 7 - POST WAR PROBLEMS
Chapter 1 Review of the civil aviation position in America
M 2 Training aircraft


CONSTITUTION. SUMMARY AND GENERAL CONCLUSIONS
PAST A OBJECTS OF THE MISSION. PERSONNEL AND
ITINERARY
CHAPTER 1 - SCOPE. OBJECT AND GENERAL SURVEY Qg THE MISSION
Item I*ol Constitution and brief history
" 1»02 General impressions of the tour
1»03 Scale of American production
M 1.04 Improvement of aircraft output in Britain
" 1.Q5 Improvement of engine and propeller in Britain
M I*o6 Immediate future American aircraft production
” I*o7 New American prototype aircraft
w I*oB American stressed skin construction
w I*o9 Strength factors
I*lo Tricycle undercarriages and American brake hear •
" 1.11 De-icing and winterisation
" I*l2 New power plant
” I*l3 Puel
” I*l4 Propeller development
" I*ls Structural materials
M I*l6 Plastics
M I*l7 Wooden aircraft
" I*lB Materials for engines and propellers
" I*l9 Electrical developments
” I*2o Aircraft and engine vibration testing
M 1.21 Instrumentation of flight testing
1.22 Intensive development of American ancillary equipment
" 1.23 Naval types and naval training
M 1.24 Engineering personnel
1.23 Aircraft research in America at the present time
H 1.26 Training methods
1*27 Making the most use of our engineering staff
1.28 Collaboration between firms in the industry
1.29 Liaison with M.A.P. and B.A.C.
M 1.30 Conclusions
CHAPTER 2 - ITINERARY DECEMBER 1942 to MARCH 1943
CHAPTER 3 ~ BROAD POLICY CONCLUSIONS
CHAPTER 4 . * FUTURE POLICY IN REGARD TO MISSIONS TO AMERICA




CHAPTER 1 - SCOPE, OBJECT AND GENERAL SURVEY OF THE MISSION
IA-1.01 Constitution and brief history - On November 17th the then Minister of
Aircraft Production, Colonel J. J. Llewellin, arranged for Sir Roy Fedden to
organise and lead a special technical Mission for a tour of the American
aircraft industry, to last approximately three months* The terms of
reference of the Mission were to be broadly as follows: -
(i) To select representative American aircraft, engine and propeller
firms, and, from an engineer’s standpoint, review their
production, and ascertain whether it would be practicable to
introduce any American methods into British production in order
to improve our output during the next 24 months.
(ii) To confer with the American authorities on a selected number of
technical problems and investigate certain new developments in
U.S.A.
The team was selected and the party set off by sea on December 20th
and arrived at New York on December 26th, The final constitution of the
Mission was as follows: -
Sir A.H. Roy Pedden
Mr. I.G-.Duncan - General Technical Assistant
Messrs. J.Lloyd, W.Tye and
D.M.A*Leggett - Stressed skin construction
and aircraft design
Mr*M*B.Berks - Works administration and
organisation
Mr. S.P. Woodley - Aircraft production
Mr.W*W.W.Downing - Factory planning for
aircraft production
Messrs. B.G-.Markham and
N.S.Muir - Power Plants, and engine
accessories.
Mr.A.H.Tiltman - Photo lofting, self sealing
tanks, and manuals
Mr. C.G-. A. Woodford - Electrical problems.
Wing Commander Maurice Summers on aircraft matters and Mr. John Reed on
Engine Production were loaned to the Mission for a portion of the tour by
the B.A.C. Pew of the Mission were known to each other personally before-
hand, but all were experienced in their own particular field of aircraft
engineering and soon became united into a gpod working team.
The passage by sea was found useful to discuss the wrk that the Mission
had to tackle on arriving in America, to work out a general plan of campaign
and to allocate the various problems which had to be investigated.
On arrival in Washington the Mission were met by Mr .T.P.Wright of the
War Production Board, Mr. G-rover Loening, Technical Adviser to Mr. Nelson
and Dr. Edward Warner, Vice-Chairman of the Civil Aeronautics Board. The
American authorities had understood that Sir Roy Pedden was bringing out
the members of The Royal Aeronautical Society's Advisory Committee to the
Minister of Aircraft Production and had prepared a schedule accordingly.
With the help of Sir Richard Fairey and the three gentlemen named above, this
matter was soon remedied and an adjustment of the programme made. Meetings
were held at the Navy Bureau of Aeronautics with the Amy and Navy
authorities at which the terms of reference,and proposed work of the Mission
were discussed, and the best way to carry out the tour and the firms to be
visited,were reviewed in detail. A complete pro grannie covering the next 10
weeks was worked out and final arrangements made for permits to visit the
various firms. At these preliminary meetings the American authorities
asked that certain additions should be made to the list of technical items
to be investigated by the Mission; this was agreed to, and the following is
a list as finally drawn up at Washington before starting on the tcur:-


AIRFRAMES
1* Plastics
2. Pressure cabins
3* Stressed skin construction
4» Plywoods
5* Structure for Laminar flow wings
6 . Surface finish
7* Tricycle landing gear
8* Airplane controls
POWER PLANTS
1* Cockpit and cabin heating
2* Induction systems, including dust strainers
3* Winterisation
k* Supercharger hydraulic controls
3* Flame damping
6. Power eggs
7* 2 speed supercharger gears
8. Two stage blowers (intercooling and after-
cooling)
9* Single lever power control
10. Exhaust turbo applications
11. Exhaust turbo control
12. Auxiliary power plants
13» Long shaft drives
PROPELLERS
1. Contra rotating
2. De-icing
3* Interconnected propeller controls
4* 2 speed reduction gears in conjunction with
contra-rotating propellers
5* Wooden blade technique
6. Steel blades
ACCESSORIES
1* Electric and hydraulic systems
2. Aircraft electrical wiring systems
3* Installation of radio systems
4* Engine starters
PRODUCTION METHODS
1. Automatic welding of light alloys
2. Special machine tools
3* Riveting methods
4* Self-sealing tanks
5* Conveyor systems
GENERAL AIRCRAFT ITEMS
1. Design for production
2. Carbon monoxide
3® Load factors and structural design
4* Aerodynamic brakes
5* Flight test procedure of prototypes
MISCELLANEOUS
1. Oscillograph vibration equipment for aircraft,
engines and propellers
2. Electrical regenerative dynamometers
3» General production and development position
of series type exhaust turbos
4* Photo lofting


LABORAT OKIES
1* Pasadena - Aerodynamic problems
2. Langley Field - Aerodynamic problems, Power Plant
cowling
3* Wright Field - Aerodynamics, propellers and power
plant
4* Naval Aircraft Factory, Philadelphia - Aerodynamics
and engines
5. Cleveland - New Engine Laboratory
The Mission had attached to them Colonel Bunker of the Array Air Force ani
Lieutenant Ludington of the Naval Bureau of Aeronautics, These officers
were of inestimatable value, and accompanied the party nearly the whole time,
making advance arrangements, booking rooms at hotels, attending the meetings,
etc., as -well as ensuring the timely issue of permits, to visit the plants
and diffusing a background of information on the industry. The Mission
were also accompanied by Mr. G-rover Loening as technical adviser, and for a
portion of the time by Mr .T.P. Wright and Dr .Edward Warner.
The Mission were provided with two Lockheed Lodestars, by the courtesy
of Mr .Robert Lovett, Assistant Secretary of War for Air, and arrived at Dayton
on January 4th. Two full days were then spent with General Carroll, Director
of Engineering and Research and General Wolfe, Director of Aircraft and
Engine Production, and their assistants, who provided much information as to
what to look far. For the next two months the Mission travelled some 12,000
miles in these 2 aircraft, and also on occasion by train, covering a con-
siderable portion of the United States. The tour was divided into two
parts; the first portion entailed going West visiting St. Louis, Los Angeles,
San Diego, and Seattle, under the aegis of the West Coast War Production
Committee. During the first period one aircraft went East after 3 weeks
with the power plant section to make a series of visits in the Detroit area.
Subsequently the -whole Mission with both aircraft returned to Dayton for a
series of conferences lasting 5 days, starting on Monday, February Ist, with
the Army officials under the chairmanship of General Carroll. Dr. Warner
and Mr.Loening also took part in these conferences. For the second
portion of the tour the Mission went East, and a series of visits were made
under the aegis of the East Coast War Production Canmittee to aircraft firms
in the Detroit, Cleveland, Cincinnati, Buffalo, New York, Long Island,
Williamsport and Philadelphia areas; while the power plant section made
their Production and Technical review of Engines and Propellers.
When the Mission were about half way the tour a cable was
received from Sir Richard Fairey asking that a visit be mi.de to the Canadian
aircraft plants. Having already a tight schedule planned with many
American firms, it was impossible for all the Mission to @d, but five members
went into Canada for a hurried visit, and the production and research aspects
of the Canadian aircraft war effort are dealt with briefly in the Report.
The Mission arrived back in Washington on March Ist, spent several days
in writing up their notes and then had a final 2 days' conference under the
chairmanship of Admiral Pace and the Navy Bureau authorities, with Mr.T.P.
Wright, Dr. Warner and Mr. Grover Loening in attendance. The two
conferences, one at Dayton and the other at Washington, were undoubtedly of
great value as they required the Mission to crystallise their ideas and put
them forward for discussion and criticism by the Military and Naval
authorities.
During their stay in Washington the Mission received every help and
assistance from Sir Richard Fairey and the staff of the B.A.C. where they
had temporary office accommodation.
The various members of the Mission returned to England by the end of
March.
c After the issue of a preliminary report on April Ist, the Mission took
part in conferences with the principal members of the M.A.P. and the inlustry.
The first; at which the Minister presided, was held at Millbank on April 28th.
At the Royal Aeronautical Society's Library more detailed discussions were


held on April 29th on aircraft production, on April 30th on aircraft design,
on May 3rd on power plant production and design and on May 26th on aircraft
electric and instrumentation problems. The intervening period was spent
on preparing this final report.
IA-1.02 General Impressions of the Tour.
Throughout the tour, the Mission received the most generous and broad-
minded treatment on all hands. The Americans appreciated the practical
training of the personnel, and the constructive criticism they were able to
offer. Opposite numbers in the firms vied with each other to help each
member on his own particular job.
Enthusiasm for a new cause in America tends to reach the level of a
crusade, and the urge to go full out to create new production facilities in
record time and regardless of cost, was almost everywhere in evidence during
the tour. The American industry have been supplied with unlimited resources,
but must be given full credit for having embarked on their work with enthu-
siasm and vision. They have planned in a large way, and in some cases
perhaps extravagantly, but they certainly have acted quickly and boldly as
regards setting up new plant facilities, and the selection of suitable pro-
duction types; and on the whole they have chosen wisely.
The Mission were impressed with the scale, extent and seriousness of
the wartime expansion of the American aircraft industry. The President
has called for what is an unheard of number of aircraft, but there is no
question that the Army and Navy authorities as well as the industry have
jumped to his demands in a wholehearted way, and are doing all they can to
meet them, although the promised output may appear a long time coming.
IA-1 •03 Scale of American Production.
It must be appreciated that the Americans have had a short time in
which to expand their Aircraft Industry and their goal is an extremely high
one. Broadly speaking the number of people in the American industry has
increased during the last four years 50- fold and the output about 20 times.
Such a growth is, of course, phenomenal, and is only possible from a nation
that is young mentally, and has enthusiasm and drive. It would be equally
true to say that it would only have been possible, with unlimited money
and by being given quick decisions, and that they have had the further ad-
vantages of climate, at any rate on the West Coast, and they have no distrac-
tions such as bombing and dispersal to hamper them.
The Mission found excellent collaboration between design and production
staffs, and a real appreciation by design staffs of the necessity for easing
production and the breaking down of components to meet unskilled labour
conditions. On the whole it is felt that there is more extensive jigging
and tooling, line production is carried out to a fuller extent, greater
supervision exists in the shops and more experience of how to plan for
production, than is current practice in our own plants at home. All these are
logical steps to have taken with the larger plan of production, and with
the ability to draw upon all the experience, background and staff of the
American automobile industry. Everywhere large quantities of first class
production plant were seen and it is felt that it is not an exaggeration to
say that much of the old equipment still doing good work in this country
would not be accepted in America for production.
The Mission were impressed by the excellence of the new plants, the good
lighting and ventilation, and the speed at which new buildings are put up.
In passing it may be mentioned that the output of machine tools in America
is of the order of }OO,OOO per annum, and the machine tool industry now
caught up with American requirements and is being put to other munitions
work. The Mission consider that the introduction of a larger number of
modern machine tools in Britain might economise our labour force.
Taking all things into consideration the Mission felt that the work-
people were doing well. There were approximately 25 to women in air-


craft factories and 10 to 15% in propeller and engine factories. There
is no piece work in the aircraft industry as we know it; all workers
operate to a carefully set time rate. Up to the present there has been
a sufficient supply of labour in America to enable workpeople to be set
a given task, and if they do not, by means of a complete training, and
tool set up, get up to this required standard in a given time, they are
replaced. The wages are high and after a period of probation women
are paid the same as men. Absenteeism is stated to be high which is
an evil often present with high wages.
The Mission were heartened by the large number of excellently made
aircraft rolling off the production lines. Generally the output seemed
to be building up well and by the end of this year it should be of the
order of 8000 - 8500 per month of which about 60-70% will be operational
types.
As will always occur in any great effort of this kind, mistakes are
inevitable, and the Mission have not been mesmerised by the scale of the
American aircraft expansion scheme or that everything has gone to schedule
without any setbacks. While there is no object in being destructive,
they do not take the view that everything is perfection in the American
aircraft industry, and they appreciate there are certain things which we
are doing better at home. For instance, the Mission have seen that some
mistakes have been made in the automobile industry where, in a few
instances, the point of view has been taken that they would show this
young aircraft industry how to produce aircraft in quantities,and without
knowing the true facts have wasted time and money in the process. There
are shortages of fabricated materials which may become more serious in the
near future, and the American methods of ordering these materials by
priorities rather than by allocation is, in the opinion of the Mission,
inferior to ours and this whole question of material supplies is being
entirely re-planned. Sub-contracting and modifications are both difficult
problems which are emphasised due to the great distances, and both are having
the careful consideration of the authorities. A number of aircraft were
seen waiting for different components.
About 900 aircraft were noted waiting for delivery, and as the output
mounts, this question of getting the machines to the scene of action will
undoubtedly be a serious problem with a continually mounting output. In
other words, the American industry are still going through some of the
troubles which we have already got over, such as the difficulties in the
supply of embodiment loan equipment, but it is believed, these matters will
rapidly straighten themselves out.
The Mission do not wish to make any deprecatory comparisons between
the British and American industry or aircraft, but desire to bring to the
notice of our officials and industry at home, that there is a great deal to
be learnt from what is being done in America to-day.
IA-1 •04 Improvement of aircraft output in Britain.
As was anticipated, the Mission do not feel that the smaller British
output, now stabilised on a lesser number of established types, can have any
drastic changes in methods of production introduced, but there are a number
of processes which can be brought into our current manufacture quickly,
which, althought not revolutionary, will contribute to efficiency and increased
production. Typical examples are:-
A standardised method of lofting and photographic reproduction.
A closer study of factory layout and flow lines.
The flash welding of undercarriage and engine mountings.
The introduction of improved methods of welding and riveting
light alloy materials.


IA-1.05 Improvement of Engine and Propeller Production in Britain,
The Mission found less that was novel to British ideas and procedure
than in the American aircraft industry. On both sides of the Atlantic
there are the same two schools of thought on air cooled and liquid cooled
engines, and they are generally of the same geometric form. Manufacture
of these types in both Continents is more stabilised and generally follows
the automobile industry. There are, however, certain processes which if
introduced at heme would improve our engine production, Typical examples
are:-
Special purpose machine tools.
Methods of quenching and straightening hardened
components.
The Packard method of stripping and rebuilding Rolls
Royce engines on a continuously moving conveyor.
Improved methods of engine packing.
IA-1.06 Immediate Future American Aircraft Production.
(i) Fighter class. Three interesting pursuit types already on test
and falling in line with British fighter school of thought, were
especially noted. These were the modified Mustang, a new
Airacobra, and a new air cooled Curtiss Wright fighter, all
fitted with two stage mechanically driven superchargers and
beautifully finished laminar flow wings. The Mustang fitted
with the Merlin 68 is thought by the Mission to be the most useful
type of the three. It has an excellent all-round performance
(details are given in Section 3)> and as is well known the design
has been considerably influenced by British operational experience.
(ii) Medium Bomber class. The Mission were struck by the variety of
types including Boston, Havoc, Marauder, Mitchell, etc., designed
for practically the same work. It was felt that there is a
considerable wastage of manufacturing effort in tooling,
maintenance and spares owing to such a multiplicity of similar
types. There is one new example of this type however, that
must be mentioned, namely, the Douglas A. 26 which is a twin engine
aircraft of 29,000 lb. all up weight and a top speed of 372 m.p.h.
at 17,000 ft. It is an interesting type of aircraft about which
there has been a great deal of discussion recently in this country.
It is going into large production in a variety of forms and
should prove a valuable asset to the R.A.F. The Mission re-
commended that this machine should receive the careful consider-
ation of all our authorities, that a sample be brought to
England and that full particulars and working drawings should be
obtained.
(iii) Heavy Bomber. Two new types of heavy bombers are just starting
in large scale production. The Mission were asked by the Minister
to report on these two machines, and have recommended the Boeing
8.29 as being a good type of aircraft embodying the latest American
form of construction. Even if present American estimates of range
are written down somewhat, and it is assuned,to be on the safe side,
that on British airfields take-off considerations will restrict the
all up weight to 115,000 lb., it will be capable of carrying a
20,000 lb. bomb load for a theoretical range of 1600 miles. It
should prove to be a useful type, and in view of the fact that
we could not get into production with anything of this size and
calibre of our own design in under 4 or 5 years, the Mission con-
sider that one should be obtained for test as quickly as possible,
and a nucleus staff should be sent over to obtain full details of
this machine, as it has many original features in its design which
would be useful to us in any case.
(iv) Transport machines. In .america they have provided for a large alloca-
tion of transport aircraft; over 12,000 are on order. The necessity
for numbers of this class of aircraft for carrying troops and freight
was not appreciated by us in the early stages of the war. These
transport machines are in fact modifications of civil types of which
the Americans have had such wide experience.


They vary from the well known Lockheed Lodestar, Douglas
DC3 and DC4 to the latest Lockheed Constellation. Millions
of dollars have been spent on the jigging and tooling of
these types for interchangeable and rapid production. A
personnel and spares organisation is being created on a big
scale and a mileage experience built up all over the world,
fetching and carrying on behalf of the Allied forces. In
a few months time an air transport system will exist almost
comparable to a pre-war road transport organisation. These
orders are quite separate from the categories of lighter
transport types under 14,000 lbs.
(v) Flying Boats. Before the Mission went to America they were
under the impression that the flying boat was dying in
America for military work. They did not find that this
was the case. There are three types in production,
Catalina, Mariner and Coronado, the last two being modern
types. The technical side of the Mission reviewed in
detail the Coronado, which is of the new form of American
stressed skin construction, the four engines being fitted
with two stage mechanically driven superchargers.
The Mission spent an interesting afternoon on the
Glenn Martin Mars, which is a fine job and has now gone into
small production; 20 machines are ordered and will come out
in about 12-18 months’ time. One machine has been flying
for over a year, but it has been under-powered. The
production series with 3,000 h.p. engines and an all up
weight of something in excess of 150,000 lbs. will prove to
be a useful type of freight carrier.
(vi) Training Machines. Since the Mission were flown in service
aircraft they came down at odd military airfields especially
in the Western Desert and had a good opportunity to see large
numbers of service training machines. There is a fine family
of training machines, some 7 or 8 types in all, including the
Harvard, whose reputation is known over here, Cessna, Curtiss
Wright and Boeing. These types include twin engine stressed
skin aircraft with up to date engines, variable pitch propellers,
and full flap control.
IA-1.07 New American Prototype Aircraft. Reference will be made only to those
machines which are serious propositions and are actually produced experimen-
tally, rather than new schemes which are merely being talked about. The
Mission saw several new types of prototype aircraft in course of construction,
some of which were most promising. The American authorities are pressing
firms to go into new types, and there is sufficient engineering capacity,
draughtsmen and manufacturing resources to undertake this work. Amongst
these the Mission were interested in a number of shaft driven and buried
engine aircraft. The American industry seem to have taken a logical view-
point on this subject, namely that until the non-conventional type of power
plant is an accomplished fact, the buried engine and shaft drive is probably
the most practical way of reducing drag. They also have found that the
bogey of vibration and harmonics in shaft drives have been eliminated by the
new electrical strain gauging technique.
In this category, the Mission discussed a single seater fighter with
24 cylinder 2,600 h.p. Allison liquid cooled engine placed behind the pilot,
with single shaft driving a tractor propeller, a Northrop single seater
fighter with 18 cylinder air cooled engine placed behind the pilot, with
shaft drive and fan cooling incorporated, a 4 engined bomber with 3,000 h.p.
Pratt & Whitney buried engines and shaft drive and fan cooling, with contra-
rotating pusher propellers, the shafts being about 24 ft. long, and a 6
engined bomber with six of these same engines and pusher propellers. All
these machines are actually under construction and it is understood that
one of the fighters has actually flown since the Mission saw it in January
of this year.


The Navy also have a flying boat prototype in the mock-up stage,
with the main engine plant arranged inside the hull with shaft drives
up to the wings, in order to give engine accessibility and minimum drag
for long range work. Tail-first, tail-less and pilotless wireless
controlled aircraft are all being pursued in the United States and are
actually flying, and were reviewed by certain members of the Mission.
IA-1.08 .American Stressed Skin Construction. One of the important matters
that the Mission was sent over to investigate was the latest American
stressed skin technique, developed especially for easier production,
and to accommodate the new form of laminar flow wing which is becoming
almost universally used on new designs in that country. Steps
are being taken to allow British engineers to examine this type of
construction for possible use on their new designs. Its chief advant-
ages are that it employs a thick skin in combination with heavy
stringers or corrugations, in conjunction with light spar flanges.
The result is a stiffer structure and a smooth surface, having
at least equal strength and lightness to the conventional construc-
tion. The structure weights of these wings are not inferior to the
best British practice.
IA-1.09 Strength Factors. A study of strength factors and design require-
ments and a comparison of American and British procedure was made and
it is hoped that this investigation by the Mission will clarify onee
and for all the inaccurate statements made in the past about the
overall strength of sane American machines. As an interesting example
of the sort of thing that came to light - if approval is based on
calculation, American procedure is to work on average thickness of
materials whereas we work on minimum gauges, with the result that
the British designs will be VJ/o stronger if equal factors are quoted.
IA-1.10 Tricycle undercarriages and American brake gear. Tricycle under-
carriages were being used on more than 50/ a of the new types of air-
craft which the Mission viewed while in the States. Only one fira
who had used tricycle undercarriages was not enthusiastic about
them for the future.
American brake gear in conjunction with their wheel and tyre
standards makes a powerful braking combination, and is worth keeping
in mind, in the opinion of the Mission, for new British designs.
IA-1.11 De-icing and Yfinterisation. The Mission having flown many miles in
fairly strenuous climatic conditions during their tour had the
seriousness of this problem brought home to them and have collected
a good deal of information on the subject. Exhaust heat de-icing
of leading edges is coming in as quickly as possible on new production
models in the United States.
IA-1.12 New Power Plant. Active development is going on of conventional
engines, and there seems to be no feeling in America that the rec-
iprocating engine is dead - rather that it is healthy and alive and is
going up considerably in power. As a practical example of this
the JUssion saw 4 new test houses with electrical dynamometers and
refrigerating plant to take powers up to 8,000 h.p. and several
dynamometers for 5,000 h.p. It is true that the 8,000 h.p. dynamometer
plants only had engines of 2,000 and 2,600 h.p. on them at the time,
but it gives some idea of the line of thought which is being pursued
in America. On several occasions the members of the Mission were
told that American aircraft designers anticipated the production of
4,000 h.p. reciprocating engines within 5 years and were planning
for double the size in less than 10 years.


Air cooled and liquid cooled power plants are being pursued actively.
The success of British and German liquid cooled in line engines has had its
effect in America during the last few years, but the Mission saw two
promising 24 cylinder liquid cooled high power engines abandoned, and there
seems to be a tendency to go back to air cooling for the higher powered
engines, in conjunction with some interesting new developments on cylinder
construction, baffling and fan cooling.
The Mission saw 5 promising new engines exceeding 2,000 h.p. At
Pratt & Whitney they saw two 3* ooo h.p. engines of the same type running on
the bench side by side at the same time. Over s*ooo hours of development
have been carried out on this particular type of engine. One liquid cooled
and one air cooled engine of sound and approved design of 2,600 and 3,000 h.p.
respectively will be in series production quite shortly, and several
hundreds per month being made by the sumner of 1944. The Mission are
satisfied that these are not empty promises; the development work, test
plants and factories were there to ensure the realisation of this work.
It is hoped that the Mission were able to be of some use to the American
authorities on the exhaust turbo and supercharging generally. The Amy
authorities are relying on the exhaust turbo for the auxiliary stage of their
two stage supercharger and several thousands of these are operating success-
fully in service.
The G.S. C. exhaust turbo is scheduled for large output, possibly in
excess of requirements. There are still some problems with the G.E.C.
edition of the exhaust turbo, and the Mission saw certain new installations
for both liquid and air cooled types in which the cowling and sheet metal
work was complicated, cumbersome and in their opinion unsafe from a fire risk
point of view. The Americans are alive to these facts and are doing their
best to modify them. The Mission would not like our authorities at home to
feel that the exhaust turbo in America is likely to drop out, although in
its present form it leaves something to be desired, and promising developments
were seen.
IA-1.13 Fuel. Fuel was a subject which the Mission were asked to leave alone and
they did so, but they could not help being asked a number of questions on the
subject and they were invited by the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey to a
luncheon followed by an interesting discussion with lantern slides in the
afternoon. Arising out of this meeting some important points come to light
on the subject of inproved fuels during the present hostilities. The
Mission would like to sound a warning that in their opinion the 12*0 fighter
grade fuel is going to be late, and that it will not be available by June
1944. Looking further ahead, the development may be expected of suitably
blended hydro-carbons, which it will be quite practical to produce
commercially in 3 or 4 years after the war, owing to the vast new plants for
high octane fuel; these blends will enable a much higher power and
efficiency to be obtained from the reciprocating engine. This is a matter
which should be watched as it will give a longer life to the conventional
type of reciprocating engine.
IA-1,14. Propeller Development. As regards propeller development, the Mission were
unsuccessful in arousing interest in the compressed wooden blade and it is
felt that it might be a mistake to push the matter further; the technique
of forging the duralumin blade has been so highly developed, and there are
other new developments for blades. Hollow steel blades are being pursued
actively and are considered to be the most promising line of attack for
engines of 4*ooo h.p. One of the interesting developments the Mission saw
in regard to propellers is the new Hamilton superhydromatic which provides
for very rapid pitch change (30° per second) and does not use engine oil.
The General Motors Corporation have in production a promising new variable
pitch propeller with steel blades and the operating mechanism in the blade
roots. This means a new geometric layout of the hub, but it is commended
to our industry as being worth attention. Contra-rotating propellers are
being pursued actively and are in about the same position as in our country,
but they will be in series production earlier. The Mission saw two 2 speed
contra-rotating reduction gears; one was stripped down and seemed a clean
and light design. The Americans intend using two speed reduction gears
chiefly to improve cruising at altitude.


A-1.15 Structural Materials. As regards materials, a considerable amount of re-
search work is being carried out by the Aluminium Company of America, which
has been fully reported on by Mr. Devereux. A new high zinc alloy of
British origin, with better physical properties than we are using in
production, is being pursued actively. It is felt by the Mission that
American sheets are generally flatter. There is considerable interest in
magnesium as a material for aircraft structures, not so much to save weight,
as to obtain stiffhess and smoothness and thus better finish. This material
is being employed in conjunction with the new Heliarc method of welding, and
the Mission saw spars being built up with this process for a new prototype,
some of the sections of which were 4”. At least one new aircraft has gone
into production with certain of the primary structures in magnesium with
Heliarc welding.
The Mission did not find much Interest in steel as a medium for aircraft
structures and following the American line of thought of thick skins, this
seems logical. However, a number of tailplanes and wing type were seen made
of steel experimentally for production models, also the centre section of
one of the big heavy bombers. The Budd steel transport plane is going into
production and will be coming out in quantities by the end of this year.
A-1.16 Plastics. In spite of the stories to the contrary, the Mission did not
find any great advances in true plastics; in fact they are only being used
for the same sort of items as we are doing at home, such as levers, covers
etc. Some people are still enthusiastic about the future of plastics, but
it would appear that this is a long way off and has probably got to come first
in some more stabilised industry, such as the automobile, before it can be
applied to primary structures in aircraft.
A-1 •17 Wooden Aircraft. Some excellent efforts have been made In America during
the last two years in the development of wooden aircraft, particularly the
Curtiss Caravan which is a large transport machine of about 28,000 lbs. and
of which 2,600 are proposed, but the general opinion was that wood was dis-
appointing in the larger types of aircraft and that it was a war-time
necessity which would not be perpetuated. The members of the Mission went
to see two or three firms who are working on compressed and impregnated wood,
but they cannot find any enthusiasm amongst the most advanced designers for
consideration of this class of material, except for trainers and unstressed
parts. There is one exception to this; the Mission understand that the
Kaiser-Howard Hughes design office are planning two large all wooden freighters
exceeding 200,000 lb. in weight.
A-1.18 Materials for engines and propellers. As regards material developments for
engines and propellers, one of the chief interests lay in the scantlings of
American steel stampings; for instance the Rolls Rcyce crankshaft stamping is
30 lbs. lighter than its British counterpart. The Mission saw several good
examples of coining and final working of steel and small duralumin stampings
in production. Mr. Henry Ford has had some cast crankshafts and cylinder
barrels made experimentally at his Engine Factory, and it is understood that
the cylinders are successful.
The Mission feel that they must say something about magnesium castings.
There has been so much change of policy at home on this matter that the
British foundry industry and aircraft and engine constructors are in a con-
fused state. In America on the other hand, magnesium casting technique
has been steadily pursued for a number of years and the percentage of success-
ful magnesium castings used in high powered engines is considerably greater
than in England. The Mission recommended that a foundry representative, .
engine designer and chemist should be sent to study American Magnesium foundry
technique, and that a clear policy should be laid down as to the use of
magnesium castings in England.
V-4.19 Electrical Developments. Simplicity in production is the keynote of the
present American wiring practice as compared with British methods, and a
saving in weight and man hours, together with a reduction in vulnerability,
could be achieved by the introduction of some of the American methods. The
Mission are in agreement with the proposals for new electrical Installations
on future American and they hope that their visit will enable this
country to collaborate and standardise on these, and thereby save time and


effort for the future. The Mission found that there is some tendency
to go over to electrics, in place of hydraulics for ancillary equipment,
on the score of simplicity, maintenance, ease of manufacture, and less
vulnerability even at the expense of a slight increase in weight.
IA-1.20 .Aircraft and Engine Vibration Testing. Important work is being
carried out with seismic and cathode ray electrical oscillograph equip-
ment, in conjunction with strain gauges and other precision instruments,
for measuring the deteimining vibrations of aircraft components on
the ground as well as in the air; also for components of engines and
complete engines. This technique is being applied to the flight
testing of all new types of aircraft. This electrical strain gauge
technique, as well as photo-elasticity, stresscoat, and extensometer
analysis has made great strides in America during the last 2 years,
and has opened up an entirely new field to the aeronautical engineer
for checking his designs even before the complete aircraft or engine are
built and running.
IA-1.21 Instrumentation of Flight Testing. Prior to the war the American
films did not as a rule possess the type of highly trained test pilot
that we had in this country. Plight testing of civil types was
entirely in the hands of transport companies and the tefets of military
machines were carried out at the Army and Naval depots. The growth
of the American aircraft industry has been such that it was impossible
to obtain a supply of suitable men, and a new procedure has been devel-
oped during the last two years. For instance, on the Boeing 8.29>
the Lockheed Constellation, and the Consolidated 8.32, the prototypes
are fitted up with equipment weighing nearly two tons and operated
by precision automatic equipment in combination with motion picture
cameras. The wiring etc. of this equipment is built into the proto-
type machine as its construction proceeds, and takes same weeks to
complete, but saves a great deal of time and expense in actual flight.
This work is combined with but is complementary to the vibration
technique already outlined.
The most complete equipment was fitted to the first Constellation
and during the first three hours flight, records from 57 electrical
strain gauge pick-ups were made and over 5700 photographs taken. An
excellent paper by the late Eddie Allen has appeared on this subject
in the last January issue of Aeronautical Sciences.
IA-1.22 Intensive Development of American Ancillary Equipment. The Mission
found that the American aircraft industry have been particularly
quick during the last two or three years to benefit from their own
mistakes in this respect, and to absorb quickly and introduce those
qualities of our aircraft which have proved valuable as the result of
our longer operational experience. A notable example is Gun Turrets.
As a result of bad weather upsetting arrangements, one or two members
of the Mission were lucky enough to pay a short visit to a new factory,
which had never seen a gun turret 20 months ago, and whose normal
production was electric washing machines and fans. The Mission
found a fine new plant of approximately 800,000 sq.ft, and 6,000
workpeople, an engineering staff of 450 engaged on excellent turret
development, which the Executives were only too anxious to say had been
initiated on information from Frazer Nash and Boulton & Paul. American
power driven gun turrets were non-existent early in the war; now
their latest types have many good points. In fact although this work
did not come within the official purview of the Mission, many of the
developments which have been seen in America in regard to gunnery
control and sights are in their opinion far reaching.
IA-1.23 Naval Types and Naval Training. The Mission were charged with no
direct work in connection with the Navy or Fleet Air Arm machines,
but the Navy Bureau were so extremely kind and helpful, that a good
deal was seen of how the Navy operates. The Mission studied in some
detail 3 Naval fighters, two Grummans and the Chance Vought Corsair,


and 3 dive-bombers, the largest being a new type of 19,000 lbs, all
up weight. The Mission were most impressed with the design features
and construction of these types. The construction is somewhat com-
plicated and expensive as compared with land types, but they are superior
in performance to anything that has been seen before. Two of the
machines are fitted with two stage mechanically driven superchargers.
Certain members of the Mission visited 4 Navy main Depots, San Diego,
Sands Point, Philadelphia and Washington. The San Diego Naval
Air Station is splendidly equipped with modem foundry, press tool and
machine shops and employs over 4,000 men. Any part of an engine or
aircraft can be and is constructed there. aircraft were repaired
in the month of December including main constructional replacements
which were produced in these shops. There are 60r7 of these Naval
Stations so equipped, and the Mission were impressed with the excellence
of the training of the engineering staff and the nucleus that is
provided for carriers and outlying shore based depots. Certain
members of the American Navy Headquarters Staff suggested that any
further British Mission which may be sent over might deal, with ad-
vantage, in detail with the American carrier based aircraft.
IA-1.24 Engineering Personnel. The Mission were impressed by the technical
training and the breadth of vision of certain of the senior executives
of both the Army and the Navy, and as they obtained a more detailed
knowledge of the extent of the aircraft expansion in America, they
formed the opinion that it would have been difficult to have realised
the results that have been attained without such men having been in
harness for an extended period. The Mission were equally impressed
with the scale and size of the engineering staffs of the most
important firms in America. These do not cover planning, jigging and
tooling. They are responsible for design and experimental work only,
and are generally about five times bigger than our staffs. The most
important bomber firm has a staff of 2,700 as compared with something
like 400 in this country, and the most important fighter firm 1,100
as against our 180. The American staff pyramids down with five or
six really experienced executives under the Chief Engineer and a dozen
good men under these again.
Although America may have lacked the few outstanding personalities
this country has been fortunate to possess during the last 10 years,
and who have been responsible for the standard and technical excellence
of the present R.A.F. equipment, nevertheless the general technical
training and theoretical knowledge of the average aeronautical engineer
and draughtsman in America is of a higher order than in this country,
and there is undoubtedly a great number of trained men in this category.
This is due, in the opinion of the Mission, to the excellent facilities
at the various engineering universities for the training of aeronautical
engineers. Great strides have been made in this direction in America
during the last few years. Large sums of money have been devoted
to the building up of research equipment and suitable personnel for
the training of aeronautical engineers.
In America, aeronautical engineer students at universities are
employed on up to date research work for specific new aircraft and engines,
and are therefore in touch with the latest developments. Post-graduate
courses with an excellent syllabus and up to date research equipment are
in operation at many universities throughout America, outstanding examples
being at Pasadena and M.1.T., Cambridge. Army and Navy officers and
members of the Research and Experimental Departments go to Pasadena
and M.I.T for post-graduate courses. There are well attended courses
in jigging, planning and production engineering, as well as such im-
portant questions as electrical vibration technique. The Mission feel
that something has got to be done immediately to increase the future
supply of Aeronautical Engineers in this country, and submit that we
must tackle this question of aeronautical engineers* education at once.
IA-1.25 Aircraft Research in America at the present time. The Mission were
impressed with the volume of new equipment which has been spent on


research during the last two or three years, and the general character
and extent of research work that is going on both in Government
Departments and in industry.
The Mission believe that M.A.P. and the industry have no conception
of the volume of work that will be coming out from these departments
during the next 12 to 18 months. Considering wind tunnel work as
an example, whereas valuable work is going on in England, it is wrong
to assume that our tunnel equipment is sufficient and that we are
going quickly enough. There are 12 large high speed tunnels in
America, either completed or under construction. In Britain we have
two. In America there are three large privately owned tunnels
and one shared by four films either finished or under construction.
In terms of power for these 12 tunnels, the Americans employ 186,000
h.p. as compared with our 8,000 h.p.
The Americans are fully alive to the necessity of putting complete
power plants into tunnels. A new 20 foot closed Jet wind tunnel is
being erected at Cleveland which has independent facilities for
refrigeration and engine exhaust gas extraction. The tunnel will be
capable of testing a 3*ooo h.p. engine at feet altitude
pressure and temperature, and is designed for a maximum speed of
300 m.p.h. at 30,000 feet with a fan power of 18,000 h.p.
The whole layout of this engine research laboratory is unique,
and it is complete with the latest dynamometer plants for s*ooo h.p.,
modern machine shops, electrical strain gauge department, separate
buildings for heat exchanger, fuel and oil laboratories as well as
the 20* altitude tunnel. One engine firm has a similar type of
tunnel absorbing 16,000 h.p. nearly completed and 2 other such tunnels
are under consideration. One engine firm is spending a million
dollars a month on development, and another 800,000 dollars per month.
Certain members of the Mission had the privilege of spending
half a day with the Chief Engineer of one of the largest aircraft
firms in inspecting the research department of the company and the
work that was being carried out there and had been planned for 1943*
This is quite separate and apart from the manufacture of new proto-
types that will be caning into production during the next three to four
years. The schedule approved for the current year was 1,124,000
dollars.
IA-1.26 Training methods. Since the end of 1941 the American authorities and
industry generally have entered into a big scheme for training of
workers. Some of these seem to be somewhat elaborate and long. Never-
theless there was a general feeling that these schools were well worth
while and that a short individual training is better than bringing
people directly into the shop.
Most films have extensive film making departments, and a staff
of pictoral artists for making suitable perspective drawings and
breakdown diagrams for use in the shop.
Examples follow of a few points that the Mission were struck
with along these lines:
At Boeing there were being fitted up a batch of special
trucks, somewhere about 60 feet in length, in which com-
ponents of the Portress such as the undercarriage, flaps
etc., were set up in section form and capable of being
operated. These were to be sent over the country to
the different training centres with suitable demonstrators.
At Consolidated there was a good organisation for training
Army Air Force personnel. There were some hundreds of
men being trained on the Liberator, with extensive class
rooms, and sample machines set up in the open and sectioned
for instructional purposes such as operating the undercarriages,


flaps, loading dummy bombs, etc.
The Mission were fortunate enough to spend an afternoon with
Walt Disney, and saw the extent of the work he is doing for the Army
and Navy in preparing instructional films. His studios are almost
entirely given over to this work. The Mission have brought back
examples of these films of which 33 have already been issued.
The Mission also visited, while in Los Angeles, the Aero Industries
Technical Institute and brought back samples of their instructional
manuals.
IA-1.27 Making the most use of our Engineering Staff. An investigation made
by the Mission of the American Engineering Departments, their organ-
isation and scope, has brought home the necessity for conserving our
energies and rationalising our design staffs until such time as we
can build up a stronger force of trained engineers. This, it is
submitted, can only be accomplished by the industry of their own
free will, and necessitates unselfish collaboration and the production
now of a number of standardised manuals on such subjects as drawing
office procedure, weight data, engineering and lofting, which if
they could be established and worked to, would conserve the energies
and economise the work of our design staffs. Some of these matters
such as drawing standardisation and material specifications were
tackled by the M. A.P. in the summer of 1941* and a practical scheme
for both was inaugurated, which it was hoped could have been brought
rapidly into operation in a few weeks. It is the Mission’s earnest
desire to see something along these lines done promptly. In America
these matters have been tackled in a most complete but somewhat
extravagant way, and we should be able to tackle this problem benefit-
ing from experience gleaned in America.
IA-1.28 Collaboration between firms in the Industry. The Mission would
like to draw attention to the collaborative work being done by
the West and East Coast War Production Committees which have now
been strengthened by a National Aircraft Council. Although under
normal conditions there is the most keen competition between firms
in the industry, they appear to have been ready to sink personalities
and trade- competition for the war effort, and to exchange their
ideas, pooling patents, engineering processes, methods of training
etc. They are doing an excellent job to eliminate bottlenecks
and get on with the war from the aircraft standpoint. The Mission
were impressed by the breadth of vision of the senior executives
serving on these Committees. The result obtained by these
Committees is certainly good and we understand that considerable
freedom of action is given to them by the authorities.
IA-1.29 Liaison with M.A.P. and B.A. C. Members of the Mission have been
somewhat surprised to find that certain matters, which they had been
asked to look into, have already been the subject matter of reports
from B.A.C. On their return they have also had reason to contact
members of the M.A.P. and the industry, and find that they are not
aware of certain developments going on in the U.S.A. and reports
that have already been sent from America. The Mission talked this
matter over at some length at the B.A.C. Headquarters at Washington,
and it was felt that we should submit some proposals as a result of
this discussion,by means of which considerable improvements can be
made in regard to interchange of technical data. It is suggested tha
that a Technical Records Department should be set up at M.A.P. with
quite a small staff, which should contain a central registry of all
matters upon which reports or data have been forwarded from U.S.A.
or vice versa. It is suggested that if such a department could be
set up, to which all firms could have access and could also send
requests for information, it would do much to help general liaison.


Similarly several firms in America stated that they had been asking for
information on certain subjects from England, and had not been able to
get a reply.
IA-1 *3O Conclusions. To sum up, the Mission feels that it has been privileged
to have had the opportunity of making this tour. The members have had
a valuable and instructive time, and have learned a number of things
which, if the British industry are able to accept, will improve our
output in the near future. They have also been afforded every opportun-
ity of discussing with the American authorities and industry a number of
technical problems set them by the Minister of Aircraft Production to
investigate while in America. They have benefited from these discussions
and at the same time feel that they have been able to impart certain
useful information to the American authorities, details of whidh are
recorded later in this report.
They have also been afforded the opportunity of inspecting new
prototype aircraft and engines which are about to go into production
in America, and these also are dealt with in detail later in this report.
CHAPTER 2 - ITINERARY DECEMBER 1942 to MARCH 1943
IA-2.01 Saturday, December 19th. Left London by train.
Saturday, 26th. Arrived by sea at New York.
Monday, 28th. Arrived at 8.A.C., Washington.
Monday, December 28th to Conferences with 8.A.C., Amy and
Friday January Ist. Navy authorities.
Saturday, 2nd. Visited Glenn Martin, Baltimore.
Sunday, 3rd. Left by night train for Dayton, Ohio.
Monday, 4th to Conferences with the Wright Field
Tuesday, sth. authorities.
Wednesday, 6th. Left by air for St. Louis.
Wednesday afternoon 6th Spent at the Curtiss Wright plant,
and Thursday 7th. St. Louis.
Thursday, 7th. Arrived late at night at Phoenix.
Friday, Bth. Arrived by air at raid-day at Minesfield,
Los Angeles. Conference with West
Coast War Production Committee.
Friday Bth to Visits to aircraft plants in the
Thursday, 14th. Los Angeles area under the aegis of
the West Coast Consnittee.
Friday, 15th to At Consolidated Aircraft, San Diego.
Monday 18th, inclusive.


Tuesday, 19th. Left by air for Seattle. Delayed en route by
bad weather.
Wednesday, 20th to At Boeing, Seattle.
Friday, 22nd inclusive.
Saturday, 23rd. Left Seattle by air for Los Angeles.
Sunday, 24th, to The Aircraft section returned to Los Angeles under
Saturday,3oth. the aegis of the West Coast Committee for further
visits to aircraft plants.
Sunday, 24th. The Engine and Power Plant section of the Mission
left by air for a series of visits in the Detroit
area.
Sunday, 31st. All the Mission assembled again at Dayton,Ohio.
Monday, February Ist, All the Mission at a series of conferences with
to Saturday, 6th. Wright Field authorities.
Sunday, 7th to Aircraft section went to Canada to inspect
9th inclusive. Canadian aircraft factories.
Sunday, 7th to Power Plant section at Allison, Indianapolis.
9 th, inclusive.
Wednesday, 10th. At Curtiss Wright, Buffalo.
Friday,l2th. At Bell, Buffalo.
Saturday, 13th. The Aircraft section at Bell, Buffalo, Power Plant
Section to New York.
Monday, 15th. Aircraft section at Curtiss Wright, Buffalo.
Monday, 15th to Design 3ide of the Power Plant section in the New
Saturday, 27th York area,
inclusive.
Monday, 15th to Production and Development side of the Power Plant
Saturday, 27th. section at engine and propeller factories in the
New York and Detroit areas.
Tuesday, l6th to Aircraft section in the Detroit and New York areas.
Thursday, 25 th.
Friday, 26th to 27th. At Philadelphia.
Sunday, 28th. The Mission re-assembled at Washington.
Monday, March Ist. At Navy Airfield at Annacostia to see the Japanese
"Zero" fighter.
Tuesday, 2nd to Conferences at B.A.C.
Thursday 4th.
Friday, sth. All day conference with Navy Bureau, Washington.
Saturday, 6th. All day conference with Navy Bureau.
Sunday, 7th. Final conference of the Mission at B.A.C. offices,
packing papers and final dispersal.
From then onwards the Mission split up, returning home by different
routes by sea and by air. All but four members of the Mission were home by
the 19th March. Ihe last members of the Mission were back by April 13th.


LIST OF VISITS TO FIRMS
Aircraft Engine, power Accessories
plants and propellers materials, etc.
West Goat District
Boeing, Seattle Kinner, Glendale Miller, Los Angeles
Consolidated, San Diego Rohr, San Diego
Douglas, Santa Monica Solar, San Diego
Lockheed, Burbank \
North American, Inglewood
Northrop, Hawthorne
Yega, Burbank
Vultee, Downey
/
\. '
Central District
Briggs Body, Detroit Allison, Indianapolis Aluminium Co. of
America,
Pittsburgh
Chiysler, Detroit Buick, Detroit Bendix Products,
• South Bend
Curtiss Wright, St. Louis ' Cleveland Graphite
Bronze, Cleveland
Ford, Willow Run, Detroit Ford, Detroit Dynarnatic Corp.
Chicago.
Hudson, Detroit General Motors, Detroit General Electric,
V Schenectady
A.O.Smith, Milwaukee Packard, Detroit Minneapolis -
Honeywell,
Minneapolis
Stewart-Warner,
Chicago
Thomson Products Co.
Cleveland. -
East Coast District
Bell, Buffalo Hamilton Standard, ' Bendix Aviation,
Hartford New Jersey.
Curtiss Wright, Buffalo Lawrance, Linden, Eastman Kodak,
New Jersey. Rochester
Fairchild, Long Island Lycoming, Williamsport General Electric,
West Iynn.
Glenn Martin, Baltimore Pratt and Whitney, / Lanstone Monotype,
Hartford Philadelphia
Grumman, Long Island Ranger, Farmingdale Sperry, Brooklyn
Republic, Farmingdale Wright Aeronautical,
Cincinnati
Wright Aeronautical, *
Paterson


Aircraft Engines, power Accessories,
plants and propellers, materials, etc.
Canada
Canadian Car & Foundry, Canadian Propellers, Dowty Equipment,
St. Hubert & Pointe Montreal. Montreal.
St. Charles. Bloctube Controls,
Fairchild Aircraft Ltd, Montreal.
Longueuil
Canadian Vickers,
Montreal and CartiervilDe
Noordyn, Cartierville
Victory Aircraft, Malton
De Havilland, Toronto.
Massey Harris, Toronto.
Fleet Aircraft, Fort Erie.
LIST OF VISITS - GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS, RESEARCH
ESTABLISHMENTS, UNIVERSITIES, ETC.
East Coast District Central District West Coast District
East Coast War Production
Council
Navy Bureau of Aeronautics, N.A.C.A. Engine Lab., Aircraft War
Washington Cleveland Production Council,
War Production Board, Los Angeles
Washington
Naval Aircraft Factory, Wright -Field, Dayton
Philadelphia
N.A.C.A., Langley Field
New York University California Institute
M.1.T., Cambridge. of Technology,
Pasadena.
✓- ' ■
Canada
National Research Council,
Ottawa.


CHAPTER 3 - BROAD POLICY CONCLUSIONS
IA-3.01 To sum up the broad conclusions of the Mission, the members consider
that they have been afforded a remarkable opportunity to obtain a com-
prehensive blue print of the American aircraft industry as it stands to-day,
what it will be like in 9 months' time, and what are the plans for future
aircraft developments and activities in the United States.
As Britishers, whose chief desire is to see victory for the Allies, they
are greatly heartened at the scale of the American aircraft industry and the
numbers of well finished aircraft which are now rolling off the. production
lines in ever increasing quantities.
At the beginning of each section of this report there is a separate
summing up of the high spots, so that the M.A.P. officials and the industry
will know exactly what the Mission feel on each subject, together with
their recommendations of what action they consider should be taken on each.
It is hoped thereby that it will be possible to get busy on each of these
sections as quickly as possible.
It is felt, however, that apart from these specific problems there are
some broader aspects of the Mission's visit which should be emphasised, not
so much as lessons which may be learnt to improve our output in the immediate
future, but which must receive our attention for a longer term policy.
First the Mission would like to refer to the question of maintaining
close technical and policy liaison on all aircraft matters with Anerica. It
is believed that this question is an important one, and just as the broadest
thinking people in both countries realise that without the help of each
other on international matters our future is precarious, so also it is con-
sidered to be of the highest importance that there should be close collabor-
ation and sympathetic understanding on all aircraft developmeit, between
Great Britain and America.
It is believed that the leaders of the aircraft movement on both sides
of the Atlantic now appreciate the true position and will take every
opportunity to make up for any misunderstandings, that may have occurred in
the past,by working along these lines.
Undoubtedly a great deal of good work has already been accomplished to
this end in America, and the Mission hope that they have been able to add
their quota by their practical outlook and their ability to give constructive
criticism, as well as a quid pro quo on the various matters under review.
It is felt that if the recommendations of the Mission in regard to a
central technical records organisation, and close liaison and dissemination of
information between the two countries, can be built up, it will be mutually
beneficial.
There is no doubt that the Americans are benefiting rapidly from practical
operational experience. They are facing up to facts and are making progress
at a rapid rate on certain features of military aircralt in which they did
not excel in the past.
As a counter to the convictions of the Mission as to the rapid technical
growth of the American aircraft industry, it is realised that it may be said
"If what the Mission say is true, why are British aircraft superior to-day in
certain respects to those of any other nation, either Allies or Axis, and
why are British machines so successfully carrying such a heavy load of the
air war?" There is a clear and definite answer to this challenge. Design,
development and production of modem stressed skin aircraft takes much longer
than even the most realistic engineer will admit. From the original con-
ception to the date when the machines are rolling off the line in sufficient
quantities to be an asset to the war effort, rather than a liability, is a
long time. Machines have so changed and have become so much more
that even with the latest engineering technique, it would appear to require
some two and a half to three years for fighters and four to five years for
heavy bombers to mature to a stabilised production stage. The British
production aircraft which are now taking the load of the air war are for the


most part 6-7 years old, and were conceived at a time when English
technicians were more steeped in problems of military aircraft,
whereas the Americans had more experience in civil and transport
aircraft. Further, in those days aircraft development was more of
an art as compared with an applied science as it is to-day.
Much water has flowed under the bridges since this time. Both
countries industries have expanded enormously and the American, auth-
orities have, over this period, poured vast sums of money into research,
and have trained a large band of aircraft engineers, whereas British
engineering and research capacity has remained practically static.
While it is fully appreciated that the latter position was inevitable
because we were holding the fort until America could come into the war,
this situation, it is submitted, is now changed and it is necessary
for us to do something about it.
Further, the new family of American aircraft, which has benefited
from this research work and increased force of engineers, is
barely coming into the picture. We have the Mustang, the first of
the new fighters, which it must be admitted is a valuable type,
and the new four engined bombers, also employing many new technical
features, which will not be delivered from America into the war area
until the middle or end of 1944*
The Mission have tried to emphasise the number of new prototypes
and the volume of research and development that is going on in
America at the present time. It is appreciated that certain of
these prototypes might be open to criticism and might, at the present
time, be thought to be unprofitable. Nevertheless it is quite
certain that some of them will prove successful, and will be in
advance of anything we have, because we have neither had the time
nor opportunity to investigate such projects.
It is therefore hoped that the authorities and the technical side
of the industry will give full weight to the views of the Mission
as to technical development, and will not rest satisfied by emphasising
the quality of the present British fighter and bomber products, which
is already so well known and proven.
As has been said elsewhere in this report, any new movement in
America very soon hits the level of a crusade and it is felt that
the aircraft industry is no exception to the rule. The last war
made the American motor car the largest engineering industry in the
world; it is felt by the members of the Mission that the ordinary
man in the street in America is taking a great and surprising interest in
aircraft and air transportation, and is doing all in his power to
encourage the view that this world war is going to give his country
the chance to make American aircraft the largest and most important
industry of its kind in the post-war world.
Coming back as the Mission have, a band of engineers who have
seen their counterparts in America provided with money, equipment
and facilities beyond their wildest dreams, it may be thought that
they are looking at the whole problem with tinted glasses and with a
somewhat disparaging and unjustified view of the situation at home.
It is seriously believed that this is not the case, and that we in
this country ought to be preparing, as the Americans are, for big
steps forward in the design of engines and aircraft.


The Mission consider that the practical way of dealing with this
situation, which undoubtedly exists, is to take stock of our present facilities
and equipment for producing a few types of new aircraft, worthy successors of
those which have maintained our supremacy in the present war, and it is
believed that this can be done. It must, however, be approached with the
viewpoint of action and determination and without so many delays.
The question of long term research and development is the subject of
other sections of this report, but rapid action on this side also is
necessary along certain definite lines.
Dealing first with power plant, a more definite and concerted policy is
necessary on conventional type high power engines. It would be conservative
to state that we want two types of 5,000 h.p. engines as quickly as possible,
and that testing equipment should march in line to meet the realisation of
these types. Steps should be taken to further shaft drive, and we must
develop our own exhaust turbo units and bring our propeller designs up to
date to meet the latest requirements.
It is appreciated that all these things are being talked about, but, it
is understood few of them are being proceeded with on a realistic basis.
The other lesser items in regard to power plant will not be discussed in this
broad review, as they are the subject of detailed investigation in the various
sections. , "
Turning to aircraft it is appreciated that we shall maintain our position
m regard to high altitude single engine liquid cooled fighters, but it is felt
that greater push should be given to the low altitude high performance fighter.
We shall see American aircraft with ground level speeds more nearly approaching
what is feasible from the unconventional type of power plant, and a very defi-
nite target should be set which will necessitate a specialised power plant and
aircraft. A ground speed of 430 m.p.h. should be attainable, with a rate of
climb in excess of 6,000 ft. a minute, and with the aim of maximum performance
at 20,000 ft. of over 480 m.p.h. A large conventional type of high speed
bomber, and a civil aircraft of about 150,000-170,000 lbs., should also be em-
barked upon at once, with the necessary staff and personnel to ensure their
being got out sufficiently quickly. As mentioned above, a suitable type of
power plant requires developing for this size of machine, with attention to reli
ability and fuel consumption.
Certain developments on offensive armament, which it is understood our
technicians are fully alive to, and which are in line with the latest American
school of thought, but which may not yet be fully appreciated by our operational
people, require, it is believed, careful attention and unbiased investigation.
The items just enumerated are considered by the Mission as short term and
logical developments and could, it is submitted, be embarked upon immediately
if the recommendations in regard to rationalisation of design staff were
incorporated. Included in the short term projects the Mission would like
to emphasise the following also.
Amongst the technical items which it was asked to investigate were a
number of controversial matters such as winterisation, starting, de-icing,
single lever control, which it was impossible to finalise because the matters
were in a fluid state, and there has not yet been evolved an altogether
satisfactory solution. However, the discussions that took dace were worth
while and carried the problems a stage further.
It did, however, become patent to both the Americans and ourselves that
closer collaboration between the technicians of both countries who are right
down on these jobs was necessary to obtain a rapid solution, and that it was
really not of much use to use the M.A.P. and B.A.C. as a post box for the
solving of such problems.


The different aspects of these problems are so intimate, are changing
from day to day, and are affected to such a degree by climatic and operational
conditions, that it really is necessary that, for the most important of these
items, two or three engineers should go over from England to America or
vice versa on each of these subjects, and be able to spend sufficient time
to get down to the drawing board and experimental developments of their
opposite numbers. It is urged that the M.A.P. should take stock of these
various matters, which have been ventilated to ascertain extent but not far
enough, and arrange with the American authorities that we should send over
some people to stay for a few weeks on a certain problem, and they would
collaborate in another field by sending people over to stay with us until
the particular problem is solved. The Mission wish to make a strong
point of these comments, as it is felt that it is a really important
contribution to the solution of these problems.
The Mission would also like to reiterate here the views already expressed
at the Conferences in London after their return on the question of electric
strain gauge oscillograph and instrumentation technique. To grapple with
these problems quickly enough, they feel that special sections must be set up
in this country. They would again put on record their sincere desire that
selected people should be sent to the post graduate courses at Pasadena and
M.I.T. Cambridge this year; that a school for test pilots incorporating the
new instrumentation technique should be set up in this country, which a
number of American pilots should be invited to attend. It is felt certain
that such a scheme would be welcome in America, both by the British and
American flight test sides.
\
The questions of long term research and the training of engineers to
operate this equipment, both of which are so necessary in order that we may
be able to introduce new and more revolutionary designs of an unconventional
nature, necessitates concrete and realistic planning and execution of a new
research programme, which is dealt with in a separate section. It i 3
earnestly hoped that the views of the Mission, or some other similar scheme,
will be adopted on this subject and proceeded with quickly, but it will take
time, and we must be prepared to be behind for the time being while such a
scheme is coming to fruition. The Mission do not feel, however, that this
need be the cause for alarm and despondency, if only immediate action can
be taken on a new research programme as well as to interim projects. It
is felt that we possess such a wealth of experience and background of conven-
tional types for the latter that if we can only act quickly we shall be able
to meet any competition in the future.


CHAPTER 4 - FUTURE POLICY IN REGARD TO MISSIONS TO AMERICA
IA-4- 01 When this Mission was originally initiated, it was given very broad
terms of reference, and it was stated that on its return to England, those of
its recommendations which were approved by the Minister should be implemented
by the members of the Mission; and that in due course further tours and
investigations would be carried out in America on behalf of the M.A.P.
For the reference of the Minister it is considered desirable to record
the impressions of the Mission in regard to future policy.
It is believed that generally speaking, due to the practical knowledge
and enthusiasm of the members, coupled with the excellent reception and
help given to them throughout America, a considerable amount of useful data
and information has been collected. It has been brought home clearly that
there is great scope for better and closer liaison between the two countries
on aviation matters generally; at present this is somewhat lacking and both
countries suffer therefrom.
As to future Missions, there are certain points -which it is felt must
be ventilated if they are to be worth while. First it is submitted that
visits conducted in this way are more efficient, and more appreciated by the
American engineers, the industry and the authorities generally, than
haphazard individual excursions. All such Missions must inevitably be an
interference with work, but all who wish to see the war successfully
prosecuted are willing to bear with such incursions if they are properly
organised, with practical specialists to deal with specific problems, do
not come too often, and have something worth while to offer as a quid pro
quo.
The Mission gleaned that in the past there has been a certain amount of
overlapping by British visitors, and that individual visits are not welcomed.
If at a firm, or such a place as Wright Field, the authorities have due
warning that a number of engineers are coming, details of who they are and
what they want to discuss, the authorities are prepared to receive them,
give them proper attention and prepare information for them; the mutual
association is worth while to both sides. But if British visitors drop in
at odd times, not knowing exactly what they have come for, and often over-
lapping each other, they are nothing more than a nuisance.
The American authorities and the industry appreciated the fact that the
Mission prepared their agenda carefully in advance, and gave explicit
details of what they wanted to talk about. The Mission endeavoured to
obtain a frank opinion from the American authorities at Washington and
Wright Field as to whether they would be welcome again, and they were given
an answer in the affirmative, providing the arrangements could be made on
similar lines, that some new subjects could be taken up and that the visits
were not too frequent.
To undertake such a Mission and obtain results is a big undertaking
requiring careful preparation. From the time the Mission is initiated,
and a set of tasks allotted to it, to the time the final repcr t is completed,
, should be eight months; two months should be allowed to collect together
the team and prepare the necessary information, so that the Mission has not
only a knowledge of what is to be investigated in America, but a quid pro
quo to give in return. Then three months are required in America, followed
by three months at home to co-relate the results, write the report and impart
the necessary information to those interested.
It would appear therefore, that it should be feasible to make one and
a half trips per annum to America. Each time a Mission goes it should
achieve more because more would be known as to how to tackle the problems,
what to avoid and what to concentrate upon.
If it is decided to continue with this procedure it is submitted that a
number of specific jobs should be selected, that they should be notified to
America in advance and ample time given to prepare the data. It is felt
that it would be appreciated by the Americans, if say two additional senior


authorities from England could be spared, as well as the leader of the
Mission, so as to add weight to it, and enable greater authority to be
given to those most valuable conferences and discussions on policy questions
which took place at Wright Field and the Navy Bureau, "which most certainly
should be repeated#


CONSTITUTION, SUMMARY AND GENERAL CONCLUSIONS
FART B AMERICAN NATIONAL AIRCRAFT ORGANISATIONS
CHAPTER 1 ~ GENERAL
CHAPTER 2 “ ARMY AIR FORCE
CHAPTER 3 , ~ NAVY DEPARTMENT
CHAPTER 4 - WAR PRODUCT I(K BOARD
CHAPTER 5 - JOINT AIRCRAFT CQMTTEE
CHAPTER 6 - OFFICE OF SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH AND
DEVELOPMENT




CHAPTER 1 - GENERAL.
18-1«01 As the organisation in America for aircraft technical matters and
production is split up into a larger number of units than it is in this
country, the set up is liable to appear complicated at first sight, and
for this reason the following notes have been written to explain the
main functions of the various groups.
In a number of cases organisation charts were handed to the Mission
by the various Government departments etc., and some of these are
reproduced. In view of this, only brief notes will be given on the
individual branches.
Chart 1 shows the National Organisation and it will be seen that,
as far as aircraft matters are concerned there are five sections as
detailed in the following Chapters.
CHART 1. NATIONAL ORGANISATION
CHAPTER 2 - ARMY AIR FORGE.
18-2.01 The Army Air Force, who have their headquarters in Washington, comprise
the departments shown on chart 2A. The Director of military Requirements
in Washington is in charge of Directors of Bombardment, Training, etc.,
and these are normally operational personnel rather than engineers,
although technical advisors are attached to this departments.
The Materiel Command under General Echols also has a headquarters
staff at Washington, made up as shown on chart 28, and General Chidlaw on
the experimental engineering side has a number of qualified engineers on
his staff, some of whom have graduated from Wright Field.
The actual technical work and production liaison is done at the
Materiel Centre, Wright Field, which is run hy General Vanaman through
three main divisions; Production, Experimental and Procurement, the
details of which are shown on charts 2C, 2D and 2E respectively. The
Procurement Division is further sub-divided and the layout of the
Aircraft Procurement Branch is shown on chart 2F.
Probably the most interesting part of the Wright Field organisation
is the use of Project Officers. Groups of Project Officers are attached
both to the Production Division and to Experimental Engineering and they
are responsible for all work on their own particular types.


CHART 2A ORGANISATION OF THE ARMY AIR FORCES


CHART 2B MATERIEL COMMAND
Going back about three years, Wright Field consisted of
(a) Field service. This is now removed from Wright Field and
is called the Air Service Command.
(b) Engineering - which at this time had just been strengthened by
the formation of a separate production engineering section.
(c) Procurement.
Project Officers were started by Major Echols, as he was then, when
he was chief engineer at Wright Field nine years ago. At this time a
small group of Project Officers were located in an office adjacent
to Major Echols and each of these specialised on a particular class of
aircraft as follows: -
fa) Bombardment
Pursuit
(c) Attack and observation
(dj Trainers
The above scheme has functioned ever sinoe, and there are now about
six Project Officers under Colonel Craigie in the Experimental Engineering
Division and a further six under Colonel Harman in the Production Engineering
Division.
These Project Officers are assisted by civil project engineers, and
also by junior Army officers who are also trained engineers and who are
sometimes pilots.
The Mission vrere impressed by the wide experience of these Project
Officers and a few lines are therefore included on their training and
experience.
Army cadets normally go straight to West Point from school, but
quite a large number enter the Array after taking university courses in
engineering. People in this category who wish to enter the Army Air
Force go directly from the university, after graduating, to the Amy
Flying School. After preliminary training and three or four years in
normal service officers go to the Amy Staff College for a years engineering
training and the most promising of these are subsequently sent to post
graduate universities such as the California Institute of Technology to
take their master's degree.
X GEN. ECHOLS IS NOW RESPONSIBLE ALSO FOR THE
SUPERVISION OF MAINTENENCE t DISTRIBUTION


CHART 2C PRODUCTION DIVISION


CHART 2D. EXPERIMENTAL ENGINEERING SECTION
Project Officers must be active pilots and most of the present Project
Officers have been at Wright Field for about 8 years* During this period
these people have had experience in several departments, each having spent
probably two years on end in a position in one of the laboratories or
other technical sections. Promotion to Project Officer is obtained after
the necessary experience has been built up, and it was interesting to find
that most of the Project Officers have been in their present positions
for something like four years.


CHART 2E PROCUREMENT DIVISION MATERIAL CENTRE
CHART 2F. AIRCRAFT PROCUREMENT BRANCH OF THE PROCUREMENT DIVISION


Officers from Wright Field are frequently transferred hack to flying
duties with the Army Air Force for periods of up to three years, after which
they return again to Wright Field# Others are given experience as Air
Force representatives at factories, and in some cases a man*s experience
includes both the above#
The Project Officer is the final authority at Wright Field on all
matters appertaining to the design and development of the aircraft (Experi-
mental Engineering Division) and production matters (Production Division),
subject to the supervision of their respective Chief Project Engineers
and the Commanding General# They act as the contact between Wright Field,
the active Air Force and the industry#
All correspondence and queries referring to a particular aircraft
pass direct to the Project Officer concerned, who gets reports or advice
as required from the Flight Section, the various laboratories etc.; the
decision is then in the Project Officer 1 s hands.
The Project Officer spends something like a quarter of his time at
the contractor*s factory, and often goes there to fly the first prototype
to Wright Field, after which he dictates the tests that are required and
usually spends some time himself flying in the machine with the test
pilot and test crew provided by the Flight Section.
When preliminary designs are submitted by alternative manufacturers
for a new machine it is the duty of the Project Officer on this type
(bombardment, pursuit, etc#) to consult the specialist laboratories, etc.
and then advise the Commanding General, through the Chief Project Officer,
on the relative merits of the competitive designs. The final decision
for the placing of an order for a new prototype is made by General Echols.
Despite the good organisation of Wright Field, it was found that the
speed of issuing reports and the quality of these reports, was considerably
behind similar publications in this country and this was one of the points
which were taken up by the Mission with General Echols and Admiral Davison#
CHAPTER 3 - NAVY DEPARTMENT.
18-3#ol Aircraft matters for the Navy are, of course, dealt with quite separately
CHART 3 BUREAU OF AERONAUTICS


CHART 4 - WAR PRODUCTION BOARD


CHART 5.


from the Army Air Force organisation. Control is effected through the
Bureau of Aeronautics at Washington under Admiral McCain and his
organisation is shown on chart 3* Unlike the Army, the Navy has
concentrated its technical departments in Washington. Research is
carried out mainly at the Naval aircraft factory at Philadelphia,
and there are some excellent aircraft yards at such places as San Diego.
CHAPTER 4 - WAR PRODUCTION BOARD.
ID-4*ol The War Production Board operates from Washington and is responsible
for priorities, scheduling, etc. The Aircraft Production Board is
under the chairmanship of Mr.C.E. Wilson, Vice Chairman of W.P.8., and
Mr.T*P. Wright is the main executive of the department. The organisation
of -this department is shown on chart 4*
CHAPTER 5 - JOINT AIRCRAFT COMMITTEE.
18-5• 01 The Joint Aircraft Committee is made up of representatives from the
Army, Navy, War Production Board and British authorities. The main
committee has set up a number of sub-committees on standardisation,
allocation of deliveries, spares, etc., and the layout of these is shown
on chart 5*
CHAPTER 6 - OFFICE OF SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH AND DEVELOBMENT.
18-6.01 This office operates through a committee in Washington, of which
Dr, Bush is chairman. The N.A.C.A. is the official Government research
organisation for aeronautics and operates under a committee made up of
representatives from the Army, Navy, civil aeronautics authorities etc,,
together with six representatives appointed by the White House, The
organisation of the N.A.C.A.is shown on chart 6.
The untiring energy of Dr. Lewis and his persistence in the importance
of research, has had a considerable influence in building up the best
possible research facilities for the N.A.C.A.
CHART 6 - NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON AERONAUTICS.
NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
★ These committees are made up of representatives of Government Departments
and Industry, and appoint various sub-committees as reouired.




