

THE
taxation of mwii
A TREATISE ON
Sir Henry Parkes’s Proposed
“Short Method” with
Capitalists
C. M C KAY SMITH.
ONE SHILLING
TURNER AND HENDERSON.




THE
TAXATION OF pi^TY.
A TREATISE ON
Sir Henry Parkes’s Proposed
“ Short Method ” with
Capitalists.
C. M°KAY SMITH.
ONE SHILLING.
TURNER AND HENDERSON.
FtF7B&




fers/TWf?
PREFACE
It would, in my opinion, be so deplorable a thing to
see placed on the Statute Book of New South Wales
the threatened taxation which forms the theme of this
little volume, that even with the probability that it will
not be read, and the certainty that it will not pay, I have
made up my mind to offer it in the literary market.
There is, I regret to say, poor encouragement here
for any one who, with honesty of purpose and indifference
to popularity of the less worthy sort, seeks to raise
political discussion out of the rut of party recrimination
and self-seeking aims. In one sense alone is he likely
to be truly blessed—that is to say, with the blessedness
of those who, expecting nothing, find it impossible to be
disappointed.
C. M. S.




THE
TAXATION OF PROPERTY.
A Treatise on Sir Henry Parkeds proposed
“Short Method ” with Capitalists.
The hundredth anniversary of New South Wales as
a colony, proclaimed to us by the thunder of great
guns, is now as much a thing of the past as the
expended reverberations of the salute fired by
H. M. S, “ Nelson” at high noon of that eventful
day. The show is over; the pretty lamps, the
rockets, the unveilings, the laying of imaginary
foundation-stones, the Redfern high festival with
its pretentious speechifyings, are nothing but
memories. The holidays have got spun out, and
the inevitable necessity of facing the schoolmaster
is again upon us. One would wish very much to
see a kind of stock-taking of the colony at this cen-
tennial period entered upon by some competent hand,
after the model of the annual reports of the better
kind of joint stock companies. We have had enough
and to spare of this kind of thing from the point of
view of the claquer. The thing wanted is a chapter on
the same theme from that of the critic. I have no
intention here of attempting its composition ; but it
would rest upon the writer to ask some pertinent
questions. He would have to enquire whether the
expenses of Government were not growing at an
accelerated pace which threatened very soon to
overtake the wealth-producing capabilities of the
country: whether a colony with a population
no greater than that of the single city of Paris,


unharassed by civil war, threatened by no enemy, free
of that terrible burden of military expenditure* which
weighs almost to the crushing point on European
nations, should in the matter of its public finances
be in a habitual state of unstable equilibrium : whether
its largest and most important producing interest is
not injuriously harassed and paralysed by a confused
and oppressive mass of legislation, in the construc-
tion of which the scientific economist has had no
place, but in which the governing influence has been
an appeal to a mean kind of social jealousy, and the
most prominent motive the applause of the least
instructed section of the people. He would have to
ask whether the enormous expenditure of the colony
under the head of Education—amounting 1 believe
to something about annually, and not a
thing of yesterday, —had borne any fruit, or looked
like bearing fruit, in the supply of men competent
to fill the higher offices of state, either with honour
to themselves or advantage to the country. And
as bearing more immediately upon my subject, he
* But we are making progress. Having caught a travelling general
and dubbed him “eminent,” we are now, as it appears, at his instance
preparing military estimates which include mounted riflemen, the fortifica-
tion of Broken Bay, the erection of new batteries all over the place, and
other trifles too numerous to mention. I suppose it is all along of these
terrible and übiquitous Russians who, if we are to believe our press instruc-
tors, have for the last two or three years been uninterruptedly engaged in
the act of “ massing troops” somewhere or other. Unless they adopt the
method of the grim warriors who used nightly to take the Malakoff at old
Vauxhall and were able to pour over the defences in a countless stream by
dint of rushing round the back way and always starting afresh, it is difficult
to believe that they can have any unmassed troops left. These press
telegrams curiously enough are all dated from London and not as the
internal evidence might suggest, from any remoter suburb. I permit
myself to hope that the able cablegraphist through whose enterprise we
were informed one morning that “ heavy firing was heard yesterday in the
neighbourhood of Silistria” received some special mark of his employers’
approbation. One may laugh at these absurdities, but there is a more
serious side to them, inasmuch as in weak minds they perpetuate a constant
feeling of semi-panic based on no greater reality than the necessities of
“ our London correspondent ” in the way of cablegraphic “ copy,” and the
frame of mind so superinduced is one which reacts upon and stimulates the
mischievous activities of the party of militarism.


would perhaps help me to the extent of enquiring
how it comes to pass that in this hundred and first
year of her existence—her coming-of-age so to
express it—New South Wales finds herself under
the presumed necessity of resorting to methods of
taxation which in older civilizations, have been
rarely if ever adopted, save perhaps as a temporary
imposition at the close of some great and exhausting
war ? *
I have set myself to a less ambitious and more
limited yet sufficiently important task. The pro-
posals now before us for the taxation of property —
in other words, taxation directly levied on the
accumulated savings of the people —I believe to be
fraught with danger to this colony in its most
vital interests, and the purpose of these remarks
is to try and make that contention good. It is
with no desire to thrust myself gratuitously upon
public attention that I put them forward. If any
alternative method could have suggested itself of
keeping attention alive to the serious issues involved
in these proposals, 1 would certainly have preferred
it to one impelling me to place these lines over a
signature which I am conscious enough carries with
it neither weight nor influence. But neither in par-
liament, nor on the platform, nor in the press, does
there appear evidence to indicate that the subject
has taken hold of the public mind in any degree
commensurate with its overwhelming importance.
In our lower house of parliament —to transpose the
telling phrase employed recently by a member of the
Imperial Government in a speech delivered in Man-
chester —the forces on the ministerial side apparently
respond to the mot d’ordre of their chief with the
regularity of a regiment of guards on parade. The
* In England the assessment on personal property was abandoned in
1833. “Lecky’s History of England, Vol. V.”


hope which prevailed at the last general election of
finding any considerable section on the right of the
Speaker’s chair, with a capacity for independent
reflection, and a determination to make its legiti-
mate influence felt in any beneficial sense, seems a
thing past praying for. The upper chamber has
become more remarkable for an amiable com-
placency than for the exercise of the functions
entrusted to it by the Constitution in any large-
minded competent or determined spirit. On the
platform the subject has scarcely been touched save
in election speeches, in respect of which it is almost
superfluous to say the fine manly instincts of the
average politician are at all times alive to the
applause to be expected from the gallery when it is
a question of the hand of Lazarus finding its way
into the pocket of Dives. One ably-conducted
morning paper* warms itself almost into enthusiasm
in its advocacy of the taxation of property, but
although a tolerably constant reader, I am unable to
remember, having seen in its columns anything
which would amount to an elaboration of the scheme,
or which took into account the many difficulties
besetting its practical operation. The other and
older journal appears to regard the subject as scarcely
worthy of serious notice. In no section of the news-
paper press have I seen the subject approached from
any critical standpoint, or in a vein worthy of the
higher aspects of journalism.
Great were the issues at stake in the con-
troversy in connection with which the country
so emphatically vindicated its title to good
sense a little more than twelve months ago.
But the triumph won by Free Trade was the triumph
of reason asserting itself with great patience and
* I have however, to acknowledge the generous readiness with which
the Daily Telegraph always concedes a place in its columns to any worthy
antagonist.


persistency, and with no uncertain sound, both in the
press and on the platform. Here is a new question
containing within its four corners potentialities of mis-
chief graver than anything to be found in th
of the protectionist; and curiously enough, so far as
any public interest in it is evoked, it looks as if judg-
ment in its favour might be claimed by default.
Now, I do not take kindly to the attitude of
silent spectator when this kind of process is going
on, more particularly when I regard that judgment as
a supremely foolish one. And I trust that I have
succeeded in showing cause for the presentation of
a side of the case in which, be its shortcomings
what they may, there is present neither aim nor
motive other than a desire to arrive at right and
honest conclusions.
In January 1887, Sir Henry Parkes in I think
a speech delivered to the electors of St. Leonards,
gave the first sign of an intention to impose a
property tax. At that time it was sufficiently obvious
that the Premier had no fixed idea in his own mind
in what sense the term property was to be interpreted.
The prevailing belief pointed to the land as probably
enough intended for this penal form of preference,
but a rebuke to light-minded enquirers was placed
on record to the effect that “all curious persons
“ who wanted to know more about the intentions of
“ the government than the broad lines laid down
“ must wait until the Treasurer made his exposition
“in the new parliament.” The current opinion of
the time favoured the impression that ministers knew
their own minds just as much or as little as the
despised seeker after truth on the street side of the
treasury door. Hustings pledges had somehow to
be got out of the Mont de Piete y and that was
shrewdly understood to be about as far as the
ministerial deliberations had got.


Even at the risk of a break in my subject, I may
be permitted a sentence or two here to touch upon
the peculiar intensity with which plausible delusions
warp the common judgment on this question of the
obligations supposed to associate themselves with
the ownership of landed property. To the competent
analyst they would afford material for an interesting
chapter in the domain of psychology. They are
by no means peculiar to New South Wales. In
rural Ireland, for example, I become a thing of
phenomenal iniquity if I propose to disturb the
holding of a tenant paying me /30 a year, when
there are a dozen willing and solvent candidates for
the same patch at But in Dublin or London
the law is with me and public sentiment does not
ostentatiously condemn me, if I rack-rent a lot of
poor half-starved creatures in some back street to
the limit of human endurance. And in enforcing my
contract as a brewer, a miller, an iron-founder, a soft
goods merchant, or whatever else my calling may be,
all the power of the secular arm, even in Ireland, is at
my humble service. Here, the Treasurer proposes
to turn his bull’s-eye on my “unimproved” land
with a view T to my moral discipline at the hands of
the tax-collector.
And curiously enough, there is a considerable—
though I hope not a preponderating—mass of out-
door sentiment which regards any idea of large-
minded justice as altogether misplaced where land-
holding is the institution under the lens. The
free-holder is perhaps not quite so flagrant a criminal
as the squatter, but he runs him close. It seems
that so long as I elect to place my accumulations in
bank stock, mining shares, steamers, omnibuses, or
in any of the hundred other investments open to me,
the principle of enlightened self-interest or if you
like it more plainly the pure impulse of selfishness,


is held to afford a sufficient motive to induce me to
make the best of them. If I am the owner of an
idle steamer laid up in Waterview Bay, I am probably
enough sympathised with as the victim of an inju-
dicious speculation. The greatest fool in the place
would not argue that the Treasurer should so frame
his legislation as to punish me for not running her
somewhere at a loss. But why should this principle
of toleration break down at land? If I have 1,000
acres of that commodity which I do not use, let, or
otherwise employ, may it not be —as in the case of
the steamer —that no sufficient inducement offers
itself why I should use, let, or employ it; may I not
be credited with enough regard for my own interest to
derive an income from it if I find it possible to do so.
If by some device of legislative ingenuity you drive
me to use it in your way and not mine, do you think
that this artificial result will conduce to the
prosperity either of the country or the individual.
Do you think prosperity is a kind of plant you
can grow in a hot-house ? All you really have to do
is to let it alone. The free play of natural forces
in any properly governed country will result in the
gradual application of its soil to the purposes for
which it is most fitted, and the attempt to anticipate
and improve upon their operation is on an exact
level with the wisdom of the philosopher in one of
Captain Marryat’s delightful novels, who set about
the regeneration of the world by altering people s
phrenological bumps with his air pump.
To do the ministerial mind justice, later develop-
ments have made it obvious enough that the naked
absurdity of using the freeholder as the exclusive
subject of so invidious an experiment has got itself
recognised. The notion seems to have found a
place there that those whose fidelity to the ideal
of citizenship had evidenced itself in the most


permanent and immovable of all forms of invest-
ment were at all events entitled to the small
mercy. of having companions in their affliction.
Depositors in certain monied institutions, and
shareholders in certain selected kinds of joint
stock enterprise, are now to be included in the
new taxation. But diluted injustice is not an
equivalent term for that substantive quality which
men call justice, and the injustice of selecting certain
special interests as material for the operations of
the tax-collector is surely a thing in reference to
which elaborate demonstration should be the merest
surplusage.
Taxation of property all round—that is to say,
taxation of every realiseable asset or object which a
man may have inherited, or in which he elects to
embark that part of his income which he does not
use for his passing necessities—is a thing which the
economist would condemn, but there would be a
certain kind of rough justice in it. It would be
injurious—deeply injurious as I think—to the best
interests of the country, but in a relative sense it
would not be unfair: it would affect all alike.
But the scheme of Ministers now before the
country will have the effect of introducing an
element of pure caprice into the relationship between
governors and governed. Its type is Oriental, and
is inconsistent with the self-governing instincts of a
free people. In its immediate as in its remoter
issues it holds within its compass a greater potenti-
ality of injury to this country than has found a
place in any measure ever before submitted to
parliament.
I now quote from the Treasurer, in his place in
parliament, and the temptation is irresistible to set
forth his words in juxtaposition with those of an
acknowledged master of economic science :


MR. BURNS.
The Government had resolved
upon at once submitting to Parlia-
ment, proposals for imposing, from
ist July, 1888, a tax of in the
£ on the unimproved value of all
lands in New South Wales which
may exceed £5OO in value, and
from the same date a tax of id. in
the £ on the capital, reserves, and
deposits of all banking, mortgage,
and loan companies, insurance
companies, and financial insti-
tutions of whatsoever kind.
(Cheers). In bringing this before
the House, he desired to explain
that it was no new conception of
his. Hon. members would recol-
lect that when he had charge of
the finances under the Stuart
Government, it was part of his
policy to impose a tax upon these
banking, mortgage, and loan
companies—these wealthy corpo-
rations. It was no easy matter to
reach some people, but it was
easy to reach the financial insti-
tutions. The amount the tax
would realize would be very large.
MR. J. R. McCULLOCH.*
Whenever the burden of taxation
is not fully compensated by increase d
production or increased saving, it en-
croaches on the means of future pro-
duction, and the country begins to re-
trograde. Taxation, when carried to
this extent, is oneof the severest scour-
ges to which a people can be subjected.
By diminishing capital, or the funds
destined to support productive in-
dustry, it lessens the national revenue,
the only fund out of which taxes can
be permanently paid; and lays the
sure foundation of public poverty and
disgrace, in the destruction of private
fortunes. Like falling bodies, which
are precipitated with a constantly and
rapidly increasing velocity, a system
of taxation acting on capital multi-
plies pauperism and distress in a
geometrical proportion, and destroys
alike the desire and the means of
reproduction. It is impossible to
regard the taxes which really fall on
capital as permanent sources of public
income. Capital consists of produce
saved from immediate consumption,
and employed partly tomaintain those
who are engaged in the great work of
production, and partly to facilitate
their labour. Its amount determines
the amount of productive industry.
And it is, therefore, plain that what-
ever has a tendency to diminish
capital, or convert it into revenue,
must, by diminishing the means of
employing and facilitating labour,
and consequently the annual produce
of the country, be a fruitful source of
pauperism. This, however, would
be the precise effect of taxes on
capital; and it is for this reason that
they should always be regarded in
the light of extraordinary resources,
and should never be imposed except
in cases of necessity. The mis-
application and destruction of the
means of production which they
occasion would not only defeat every
attempt to render them permanent,
but would, by impoverishing and ex-
hausting the country, render all
other taxes comparatively unpro-
ductive.
*' Treatise on the Principles and Practical influence of ‘ Taxation.’ ”


I ask what right has Mr. Burns, or what right has
any set of ministers to presume to make penal dis-
tinctions between one form of investment and another.
It is a right claimed by the Shah of Persia and, I
believe by the Emperor of Morocco ; but, so far as I
know, it is one which has not thriven so far on consti-
tutional soil. And there is just a whiff of the fine
aroma which surrounds those bejewelled potentates,
in the smug expression of ease with which these
wealthy corporations are to be reached. Wealthy,
indeed ! There seems a fine disregard in its author’s
mind of the patent fact, that corporate w r ealth is as
often as not, built up of the contributions of those
with whom it is not at all times easy to make both
ends meet, and that the lessened dividends with
which he not remotely threatens them will be felt
in many a humble enough home.
Whether public opinion is likely to assert itself
to the extent of putting its foot down on any general
scheme for the taxation of property is a proposition on
which I should not like to speculate. But Ido think
that there is an instinct of justice among us strong
enough to condemn in practice any set of propo-
sitions, in virtue of which the provident classes are
to be divided into two sections, one to be taxed—
the other to go free. And for purposes of further
remark I will assume the impossibility of such a
distinction commending itself to parliamentary
sanction.
The taxation of property then —using that term
in its most comprehensive sense —how are we as a
people, to stand affected by it ? Economists regard
it as among the axioms of their science that pre-
ference should be given to those forms of taxation
which, at the same time that they are productive in
point of revenue, involve the least waste, cost, and
personal annoyance in collection, and interpose the


minimum of interference with the people in the
pursuit of their ordinary avocations. The taxation
of property would simply operate as a flat contra-
diction to each and every one of these compact and
wholesome maxims. It would involve the maximum
of waste, cost and personal annoyance in collection.
The per centage of collection to gross proceeds would
be in the highest degree extravagant; and to carry
out the plainest obligations of any such legislation
there would be involved an inquiry necessarily
inquisitorial in its operation into the private circum-
stances of nearly every person in the community
above the class of those earning daily or weekly
wages.
I make my adversaries, if I have any, a present
of the admission that the direct taxation of property
—using the term in its most comprehensive sense —
prevails in nearly every state of the American Union.
The Americans have, at all events, the courage of
their principles. These, for example, are the returns
upon which the people of Ohio were assessed in
1884, the latest year in reference to which I can
obtain complete data. The figures represent money
value in dollars :
DOLS.
Horses ... ... ... ... 45,283,146
Cattle ... ... ... ... 31,060,840
Sheep ... ... ... ... 13,249,166
Hogs ... ... ... ... 7,39M5°
Mules ... ... ... ... 1,643,663
Carriages ... ... ... ••• 9,5*8,741
Watches ... ... ... ... 2,521,295
Pianos and organs ... ... ... 5,027,424
Merchant’s stock ... ... ... 48,185,849
Manufacturers’stocks... ... ... 17,617,935
Moneys and credits ... ... ... 160,338,742
Property of banks and corporations ... 103,188,508
Real property ... ... 1,131,058,750
I do not know sufficient of the history of these
taxes to explain how they arose or to what extent


they commend themselves to the people who pay
them. Probably enough they had their origin in the
taxation called for by the sacrifices incidental to a
great war. One may say, without serious disparage-
ment of the many admirable qualities of the American
people, that legislation within the sphere of economics
is not their strong point. But, be that as it may, to
anyone familiar with the temper of our people here,
it calls for no special gift of the imagination to
foretell that, should the machinery of taxation on
similar lines come into practical operation among
us, it will bode ill to its originators. The stock in
every shop, every warehouse, every bond will have to
be taken and valued on some fixed day in the year.
The tax gatherer can make no distinctions, he can
only deal with visible realities. The struggling
tradesman with his stock owed for will have to pay
in the same ratio as the well-to-do one with his stock
held free. The conveniences of our market to inter-
colonial customers, with free trade restored, will be
partially neutralised by the necessity of letting stocks
run low on the day or days fixed for assessment;
and importers in compiling their indents for new
supplies will be found making their calculations
converge upon the same point. Every device of
ingenuity will be brought to bear upon the evasion
of such a law. Among other things you must of
necessity pry into a man’s bank-book, for money is
very certainly “ property.” At the tax-gatherer’s
appointed time it is probable that all but a nominal
balance to keep the account alive will be transferred
to the customer’s trouser’s pocket, or, it may be to
the lining of his wife’s petticoat. And if your
machinery of collection is too vigilant to permit of
this temporary evasion, you will only contribute to
the graver mischief of spare money being perma-
nently hoarded and concealed, and thereby removed


from the usual channels of deposit in which it
operates as a fructifying influence upon all kinds of
legitimate enterprise. The lender to the banks on
fixed deposit —a form of transaction which runs to
very large figures in this colony —will continue to
lend as before and to the same bank, but it will
probably be found that for some mysterious reason
his future lendings, which you cannot possibly follow,
will be either to the Melbourne or the Brisbane
branch instead of the Sydney one.
But I must remember that I am not writing a
book, but a pamphlet, and must resist any temptation
to follow the subject to its remoter ramifications. I
therefore simply express the belief, lor what it is
worth, that the kind of taxation which is necessarily
comprised within the heading of this paper will, if
extended into law, operate as a standing barrier to
any large-spirited manufacturing, agricultural, or
commercial undertaking. Those who possess capital
will hold it in its most liquid and convertible form,
watching the course of events. Everyone will play
that protracted waiting game, which is as fatal to the
best development of the energies of a people as if
they were visited wdth the worst effects of a prolonged
drought, or as if they lived in daily dread of war or
pestilence, and the mischief is none the less real that
it operates in silence.
It will not be out of place, if I relieve the
tedium of ploughing through my own dull
labours by giving one or two more extracts
from a work already laid under contribution.
They are so applicable to circumstances into which
we seem drifting, that their reproduction calls for no
apology :
“ Taxes (says Mr. McCulloch), which affect only certain
classes of properties or persons, or which cannot be
assessed without prying into the circumstances of


the contributors, or which discourage improvements,
uniformly occasion, even when comparatively light, the
greatest dissatisfaction, and have a most pernicious
influence. The extremely vicious nature of the taxes to
which Spain has been subjected, and not their magnitude
has been one of the most potent causes of the decline of
her industry, and of the abasement into which she has
sunk.”
Mr. McCulloch, in the sentences immediately
preceding my next quotation, had been illustrating
the absurdity —rather the practical impossibility —of
a Government official undertaking to value, even
with a pretence of accuracy, the capital embarked
in a farm in which expensive manuring and other
incidents were present to complicate the calculation.
And he goes on to observe that —
“Were an attempt made to calculate the stock of any
individual engaged in trade, the difficulties would be
much greater. It is to no purpose to refer to books;
for, were they used for such an object, it would be
the easiest thing in the world to construct them so
that they should yield no information, or such only as
was false and misleading. In fact, it would be found that
in nine instances out of ten, except in the cases of
funded property, money lent on mortgage, and a few
others, nothing better than the declarations of the parties
concerned could be obtained. And we look upon every
system of taxation as radically vicious that sets the
interest and the duty of individuals at variance—that
tempts them to balance between the sacrifice of property
and the commission of perjury.”
Again—
“The productiveness of property is an important element
in measuring the ability of its owners to bear taxes.
A has a farm, a house, or a shop, let to a substantial
tenant who pays his rent punctually. B has a property
of the same time and of the same value, but it happens
to be let to a bad tenant, unable to pay any rent. In
like manner, one shipowner has a ship at sea, making a
profitable voyage, while that of another is in port


unemployed. The furnaces of one iron master are
in-blast, while those of the others are out-of-blast, and
so in fifty other instances. And such being the case,
could anything be more unfair—more completely at
variance with the principle of proportioning taxes to
the ability of the contributors —than to subject parties
placed under such different circumstances to the same
rate of taxation? If we would avoid injustice, the
productiveness, as well as the amount of the property
belonging to individuals must be taken into account in
subjecting them to taxes. Taken by itself, property is
no accurate test of the capacity to bear taxation. That
depends quite as much on income as on property; and
to leave the former out of view in assessing taxes of
this description would be like leaving the influence of
currents or of contrary winds out of view in estimating
the course of a ship.”
And I specially ask attention to a side of the
question on which I have laid stress in a previous
work. Mr. McCulloch’s words will have more
weight than mine.
“ Besides being unfair, taxes on property have sundry
practical consequences of the most mischievious kind.
If a tax be laid on income- it creates an inducement to
conceal its amount; but it does not tempt any one to
employ inferior instruments or processes in carrying on
his employment. This, however, is the inevitable effect
of taxes on property. They create a motive to elude
their pressure, by underrating its amount, or employing
it in some underhand manner. Those engaged in
industrious occupations are tempted to carry them on
with the least amount of capital. An indisposition is
generated to make fresh outlays on works or improve-
ments, seeing that it will be taken as an evidence of
increased wealth, and will consequently expose the
parties to additional taxation. The object, under such
circumstances, is not to appear rich, but to appear poor;
and the reality too often corresponds with the appearance.
We have already seen that this was one of the worst
consequences of the tattle in France. And such, in a
greater or less degree is the effect of all taxes pro-


portioned to the capital or property of individuals. Had
a tax of this sort of any considerable amount existed
during the last half-century, in England, there is no
probability that the progress either of manufactures or
agriculture would have been so great as it has been.”
Sir Henry Parkes well emphasised the truth
in one of his election speeches that CONFIDENCE
(I put the word in capitals) is the only true root of
national prosperity. I should like to see this motto
embossed in large and enduring characters upon the
front of the Houses of Parliament. But confidence
will not come for the asking. I for one do not
know for example, why the country should be asked
to confide in the head of an important spending
department who, after his elevation to office on the
top of a great Free Trade wave, was happy enough,
as the only literary effort of his life, to coin a new
phrase for the purpose of emphasising the fact that
the taxpayers’ money, so far as lay within his power,
should be spent in the maintenance of fancy wages
in a favoured craft. Nor do I know why it should
be expected to confide in a set of men pledged by
every consideration of political honour —if indeed
there be such a thing —to a policy of retrenchment,
but who show themselves as thriftless and reckless
in the waste of public money as the most skilled of
their predecessors in that doubtful accomplishment.
In the Dibbs-Jennings days these things used to be
called “ treachery.”
It will be said that money must be had, conse-
quently that new taxes must be found to provide it.
For the present let the presumed necessity be con-
ceded. I have tried to point out that the taxation
of property is of all alternative means of satisfying
it—the worst. I confine myself to the functions of
the critic. The business of adapting means to ends
properly rests with those in whom the country has


so unreservedly proclaimed its confidence. In this
direction I will therefore only go so far as to express
the belief that there has been of late too much of a
tendency to erect the dogma of the sacredness of
the unalienated portion of the public estate into a
superstition. If our consciences are so painfully
tender on behalf of posterity, it is clear that in the
commonest consistency we must tax ourselves to the
breaking point so that we may restore to the public
treasury the greater part of the amount received
from land sales in the past. If, on the contrary, we
have had a moral sanction for parting with the acre-
age so far alienated, who is entitled to tell us that
thus far shall we go and no further—even to get
ourselves out of the direst mess ? Consulting the
“ Statistical Register for 1886,” —the latest com-
pleted period—l find that the Crown lands in this
hundred and first year of the colony’s existence
have so far only been trenched upon to the
extent of about 11 per cent, of their total area; and
even in the comparatively limited section known as
the “ settled districts,” two-thirds appear to be still
in the ownership of the country. So far as an indi-
vidual opinion is worth anything, I should pronounce
it an entirely legitimate and statesmanlike conception
to let the acres pay for the railways —those railways
which, in very many instances, contribute to them
the only value which they possess. From the point
of view of striking an impressive moral attitude, one
who argues in this way naturally poses at a great
disadvantage as compared with those whose con-
sciences appear so deeply moved (with perhaps the
faintest possible suggestion of Mr. Pecksniff about
the business) on behalf of our more or less remote
successors on this part of our planet’s surface But
I do not think there would be any great difficulty
either from the point of view of the moralist or that


of the economist, in demonstrating that we should
do more good, not only to ourselves, but to that
shadowy abstraction called posterity, by courageously
applying the doctrine here advanced to its remotest
practical conclusion than by following any alternative
course at present available for restoring the financial
equilibrium.
I should like to offer a short but significant
illustration of the working of that great motive
power “Confidence.” In the years 1881-82, your
lands submitted for absolute sale found ready
purchasers to the extent of in hard cash.
Conditional purchases during the same period also
reached an enormous total. Pass we on to 1886.
Sir Patrick Jennings —then Premier —addressing his
constituents at Dubbo on November 20, told them
that—
“ In making up the Estimates for the present year, it was
calculated that £350,000 would be received from auction
sales of land ; but it was ascertained that although the
Government offered all the statutory quantity of land for
sale, there was no demand for it. If they were ever so
willing to sell the land, they could not make people buy it
unless they could afford to pay for it. Instead of the
land being greatly sought after, not a third of the
quantity offered by public auction had been sold. The
quantity estimated to be sold was £350,000 worth,
whereas the quantity sold, and that which it was
estimated would be sold during the rest of the year, was
£118,893 worth.”
The colony, no doubt, has passed through some
trying times, but I should doubt whether it has
at large upon its outer crust at this moment a single
individual clothed and in his right mind capable of
asserting that the contrast presented by these
figures yields any true inference as to its existing
land-buying capacity in 1886, as compared with
earlier years. The so-called explanation of people


being unable to “afford” more than for
such a purpose in . 1886, was one not worthy
of the ex-premier’s intelligence. Nothing can be
more simple than the real -one. We come back
to our old friend “ Confidence.” Under normal
conditions, no form of investment is in such
high favour as land with a direct Crown title;
but the land buyer, like others of the capitalist
species, thought it high time to button up his
pockets when he found it the fashion among the
Cabinet Ministers of the period to cultivate parlia-
mentary as well as after-dinner applause, by threats
that the necessities of the immediate future were to
be met by wealth and capital in the concrete being
specially and invidiously selected for taxation. The
depreciation in value imparted to the still unalienated
Crown lands by the tactics of these men must be
estimated in millions, and I regard it as a deplorable
incident in the career of the new helmsman, that he
should have made up his mind to steer the same
course. It is not the course which will fetch that
secure harbour called “confidence.”
But I have drifted somewhat from my subject in
reference to which, however, I have mostly had my
say. If I might add a sentence, it would be to depre-
cate any imputation which might be laid against me
of appearing in these sentences as the rich man’s
advocate. I suppose I may without reproach quote
what bears on this point from a previous work of
my own, in a passage dealing with threatened tax-
ation of a like kind on the part of the Dibbs-
Jennings administration. “It is precisely because
“ my active sympathies are with the more struggling
“ sections of our social system that I have put
“ together these words, in the hope of being able
“ more especially to serve their cause. I have
“ tried, in a modest enough spirit, to study the events


“ of the world from both men and books, and if I
“ have done so discreetly, I should be led to pro-
“ nounce as the lesson of universal experience, that
“ under such circumstances as those now under
“ review, the poor man will be the earliest, as well as
“ the most permanent participant in the desolating
“effects which must surely follow the passage of
“ such measures into law.”
For one more digression I make no apology.
The opportunity is a legitimate one to permit me to
remark with regret that, so far as my experience
extends, the Public Library in Bent Street is of
the smallest service to anyone desirous of doing
justice to any special subject. Mr. McCulloch’s
standard work, from which I give these extracts, is
one of many to which I sought reference there in
vain, and I am indebted to the courteous kindness
of Mr. Lecky, the eminent writer and historian, for
the copy from which these extracts are taken.
Again, I was particularly desirous of tracing, if pos-
sible, the operation of property taxation in many of
the States of the American Union, but although it is
scarcely possible to doubt that the materials for such
an investigation are in existence', I could find no trace
of them here. For all I know to the contrary such
taxation in these States may ere now have ceased to
be in force. New South Wales spends a huge
annual sum upon education, running I believe—
University vote inclusive —to something about three-
quarters of a million. I suppose this machinery is
in operation, at all events partially, in the hope that
a minority of those who profit by it may cultivate
literature in its higher walks, and do their little part
towards domiciling it among us. They are not,
however, likely to be influenced towards that course
by any seductions available to them in Bent Street.
It is really nothing short of an active affliction to see


the re-erection going on from day to day of that
poverty-stricken apology for a great public library.
Unless that process can be arrested, the whole
question will, I fear, be hung up perhaps for another
hundred years. We appear to have several hundred
thousand pounds ready on demand for a filthy
charnel-house ; but for that imperishable legacy of
humanity —better than its dead bones —which lives
perenially in the best writings of its master spirits
—away with it. Here we can only find space for a
few samples and odd lots.
In an appendix I give, with the consent of the
proprietors, a transcript of a most able and charac-
teristic article on the subject of the ministerial pro-
posals for the “ Taxation of Capital and Reserves ”
in New South Wales, which appeared in the Decem-
ber number of the Australasian Insurance and
Banking Record.
C. McKay Smith.




APPENDIX.
PROPOSAL OF THE NEW SOUTH WALES GOVERN-
MENT TO TAX CAPITAL AND RESERVES.
[From the “ Australasian Insurance and Banking Record,”
December, iBBy.]
The finances of New South Wales have so long been in an un-
satisfactory condition, that any Treasurer to whom is entrusted
the task of grappling with and overcoming the constantly recurring
deficits which confront him, is entitled to a certain amount of
sympathy. To us it seems strange, that with a magnificent
revenue, averaging over eight millions per annum, the ruling
powers in New South Wales are unable to keep expenditure within
income. With a population but slightly in excess,of that of Vic-
toria, and with perhaps greater natural resources, it might be
imagined that the sum just mentioned would be ample to provide
not only for all the legitimate requirements of government, but to
yield a considerable surplus to be employed in aiding industrial
development by the construction of great public works. But
apparently this is not the case, for we have been treated during
the last few years to the announcement (fast becoming monoto-
nous) of heavy deficits without any immediate prospect of their
extinction.
When the Parkes administration took office nearly twelve
months ago, the two leading features of its political programme
were the re-establishment of free trade and good government.
The first they have certainly gone a long way towards realising, but
if by the latter we understand chiefly an economical management
of the finances, we find that the results are as yet far from satis-
factory. Instead of the surplus at the close of the financial year,
which the Treasurer looked for and confidently predicted,
Mr. Burns finds himself face to face with a deficiency of
to be added to the burden of debt with which the colony is
already saddled.
In circumstances such as these, there is always a danger of
the introduction of hasty or experimental legislation, the proxi-
mate effects of which only are calculated upon, while the ultimate
results are ignored. Viewing the situation from one aspect only,
the statesman is apt to lose sight of the various modifications to


which of necessity the new enactments must give rise, and his
range of vision being intentionally limited, he cannot but fail to
grasp in their entirety the complex influences which the adoption
of his measures is likely to exert upon the economic conditions of
the country.
We should be glad to instance Mr. Burns as the exception
which proves this rule, but from the nature of his proposals for the
restoration of the financial equilibrium of the colony, it is evident
that we cannot accord him that place of honour. From his
speech recently delivered in the Legislative Assembly we learn
that it is the intention of the Government of which he is a member,
to submit for the approval of Parliament a scheme of direct
taxation, imposing from the Ist July next, “ a tax of |d. in the £
on the unimproved value of all lands in New South Wales exceed-
ing in value, and a tax of |d. in the £ on the capital,
reserves, and deposits of all banking, mortgage, and loan com-
panies, insurance companies, and financial institutions of every
kind.”
There is nothing very novel in the former of these proposals,
but the latter, if carried into effect, will inaugurate a new departure
in the financial legislation of the Australian colonies. Up to the
present (if we except the stamp duty or note issues, fire policies,
&c.), banking, insurance and similar companies have been
carried on comparatively free from State interference and from
State taxation, a circumstance to which no doubt, among others,
is due in a large measure the enormous expansion we have
witnessed in the operations of these institutions and the present
state of prosperity which characterises them. This very prosperity
however, exciting as it does the cupidity of an impecunious
Treasurer, points out these “wealthy corporations” (to use Mr.
Burns’ designation) as a convenient prey in his search after
revenue, for as he naively confesses “it is no easy matter to reach
some people, but it is easy to reach financial institutions.’, Mr.
Burns therefore proposes to “reach ” the banks in the same way
as the American banks were “reached” up to the year 1883
(when the system was abolished), i.e., by a tax on their capital
and deposits.
We have no hesitation in saying that we regard this scheme
as one prompted rather by a false idea of expediency than by a
recognition of the true principles which should govern the imposi-
tion of taxation. It is aimed at institutions which, speaking
generally, have been admirably conducted in the past, and which
have conduced in no small degree to the progress of the colony.
Their prosperity, which, from the tone of Mr. Burns’ remarks,
might be considered sinful, really represents the average prosperity
of the population, and were they reduced to the condition of non-
dividend-paying concerns (of which we have unfortunately had a


recent instance), it would be a bad omen for the financial pros-
pects of the future. And to make these prosperous and well-
managed institutions a kind of well from which to draw oil to
lubricate the wheels of a costly and mis-managed governmental
machine, is an idea which, though not new to Mr. Burns,
according to his own confession, is hardly an evidence of that
superior statesmanship which should distinguish the Treasurer of
the mother colony of the group.
The taxation of capital is at all times a dubious step. The
excuse that it is an easy means of obtaining revenue is no set-off
against the well-known fact that anything which tends to impede
the influx and free circulation of capital in a country tends to
divert it into other countries where no such hindrances exist. Or,
to put it concisely, “ tax capital, and you drive it away.” And that
this directly tends to the impoverishment of a country is so
evident as to need no demonstration. A decrease in the available
stock of capital results, as we well know, in a tightening of the
money market and a consequent check upon industrial develop-
ment, and were any circumstance to arise or enactment to be put
in force (such as the permanent imposition of a tax) to diminish the
inflow of capital which is to us so essential, a serious blow would
be dealt to the progress of the colonies. For, as McCulloch
puts it, “ a system of taxation acting on capital like falling bodies,
which are precipitated with a constantly and rapidly increasing
velocity, multiplies pauperism and distress in a geometrical pro-
gression, and destroys alike the desire and the means of repro-
duction.” Nor is there any escape from this conclusion, for unless
we can imagine a state of civilization in which all the countries of
the world should impose the same tax upon capital (a condition
which is at present an impossibility) it is certain that, like other
forces, capital will operate in the line of least resistance, and will
certainly flow from the country in which it is taxed to the country
in which it is not taxed.
But, harm-ful and injudicious as a tax upon capital must be, a
tax upon deposits is utterly indefensible. For what do the deposits
in banks and public companies for the most part really represent ?
Simply the savings of the people. And any tax upon the savings
of the people is a direct blow at the virtues of thrift and economy,
and an encouragement to extravagance. Such an impost is
founded upon a wrong principle altogether, and should find no
place in the schemes of taxation of a well-governed nation. For
why should the prudent man, who saves a portion of his earnings,
be compelled to witness their taxation to a continually increasing
amount as their accumulation increases, while the spendthrift goes
scot free ? One of the many results of the imposition of such a tax
in New South Wales would be to lessen the amount of capital
available to the banks for the purposes of legitimate trade accom-


modation, by the impulse it would give to hoarding money in
private hands, and the withdrawal of deposits for investment in
other colonies where no such tax exists.
Much, therefore, as we sympathise with Mr. Burns in the
difficult position in which he is placed, we cannot congratulate
him upon the means by which he proposes to effect his financial
disentanglement. What New South Wales really requires is not a
larger revenue, buc a smaller expenditure, and until we see its
finances dealt with on this basis there is little use in adding new
taxation to the burdens of its people. We can only hope that the
Legislature of New South Wales will, in its wisdom, see fit to veto
at least that portion of Mr. Burns’ scheme which aims at the
capital and deposits of the great monetary institutions of the
country.




ftlfrUO
SYDNEY :
TURNER AND HENDERSON,
PRINTERS.




