

RELIGION WITHOUT SUPERSTITION.
GLASGOW BOOK WAREHOUSE, 15 COLLINS STREET WEST.
1885.




PUBLISHERS NOTICE.
Tne following pages are reprinted , by the kind permission of the
Bishop of Melbourne , and the Proprietors of the “ Daily Telegraph f
he hope i that so able a reply to an attach of the Sacred Scriptures
may be more extensively read and more carefully preserved in this
permanent form .
Copies will be supplied for distribution at 2s, Gd. per dozen
M, L, HUTCHINSON
15 Collins Street West , Melbourne ,
21st April , 1885,


The. Bishop of Melbourne in reply to Judge Williams,
RELIGION WITHOUT SUPERSTITION.
I promised that when Holy Week should
be over I would furnish you with a supple-
mentary critique on the negative part of
Judge Williams’s book. I proceed now to
redeem my promise. My present communi-
cation will be strictly a supplementary
critique, for, having regard to the published
criticisms of the Rev. Digby Berry and the
Rev. J. M. Abernethy,* it will not be neces-
sary to go over the whole ground.
THE SPIRIT OF THE WORK.
I have to object, then, in the first place, to
the spirit in which this work has been
undertaken. It lacks the earnestness with
which such an effort should have been
inspired. Judge Williams tells us plainly
that be does not believe the Bible to be
“ the word of God”—nay, he heaps upon it
epithets so coarse and scurrilous that, as he
has had the education of a gentleman, one
must believe that his contempt for it passes
almost the bounds of expression. And yet
he begins his examination of the orthodox
doctrine of the Trinity by “ assuming, for
the sake of argument, that the Bible is the
inspired revelation of God.” An earnest man
would not have tolerated such an assumption
for a moment. He would have begun by
showing that the Bible was untrustworthy,
and would then have proceeded to demolish
all the doctrines which had been built upon
its statements. I suppose, however, that the
instincts of the advocate overcame him. He
wished to show how skilful a pleader he
was, and that, making every concession
which the orthodox could ask from him, he
was yet cleverer, not only than old fogies like
Augustine, Anselm, Pascal, and Sir Isaac
Newton, but than all the “ecclesiastical
* See Victorian Review for April.
metaphysicians ’ of the last half-century.
We must be content, however, to take his
work as we find it. He will prove, he says,
that even on the assumption that the Bible
is the word of God, the doctrines of the
Trinity, the Incarnation, and the Atonement
are not fairly deducibie from it. 1 make no
mention of the part of his work on the
Advent, as it is too slight even to deserve
notice.
MISUNDERSTANDING OF THE ORTHODOX
DOCTRINE.
I think it is a pity that, before treating
about the orthodox doctrine, Judge Williams
did not take a little more pains to understand
it, for if he had thoroughly understood it, he
would have seen that much which he has
written is utterly irrelevant. The orthodox
doctrine, for instance, about our Lord Jesus
Christ is this—that He was both God and
man ; as much man as if He had not been
God, as much God as if He had not been
man ; “ equal to the Father as touching His
Godhead, and inferior to the Father as
touching His manhood.” Now why do
orthodox divines consider themselves justified
in saying that Jesus was man—not as
Apollinaris taught, a human body with the
divinity as soul of it, but a true man, with
a human body and spirit, so truly limited as
to his human spirit that he could “ increase”
not only in “stature” but in “wisdom”
also? They felt themselves justified in
coming to this conclusion, because they found
that Holy Scripture declares him to have
been a true man, and as such “inferior to
the Father.” Now, Mr. Justice Williams
cites a mass of texts which affirm our Lord’s
manhood, and his inferiority to the Father,


*as if they disproved the orthodox position, taking the form of a servant, being ma t de in
They do nothing of the kind. Those passages
prove exactly what the orthodox say that
r they prove. Bat they do not disprove the
further statement that Jesus was also God,
as Judge Williams thinks they do. This is
a stranee logical mistake for a judge to fall
into. I say that man consists of soul and
body. Now, suppose that I find it often
stated in a certain book that man is a body.
Is that any proof that he is not also a soul?
And yet the like o! this is precisely what
Judge Williams has affirmed. What he had
to do, and what alone he had to do, if he
wo aid disprove the orthodox position from
Scripture, was to show that in it Jesus was
not as clearly said to be God as He was said
to be man. Certainly the judge has
attempted to achieve this task also, but, as I
think, in a strangely careless and feeble
fashion—careless in overlooking so many
-passages which he ought to have considered,
and feeble in dealing with those which he
has noticed.
OMISSIONS OF IMPORTANT PASSAGES IN
SCRIPTURE.
To advert first to passages which he has
omitted. He has taken no notice of the
following, which I shall quote from the
revised version.
John v. 2123: —“ For as the Father
raisefch the dead and quickenefch them,
even so the Son also quickeneth
whom He will. For neither doth the Father
judge any man, but hath committed all
judgment unto the Son, that all may honour
the Son, even as they honour the Father.”
How can it be right for men to honour the
Son as they honour the Father, if he be only
a man ?
John viii. 57 59 :—“ The Jews there-
fore said unto Him, thou art not yet fifty
years old, and hast thou seen Abraham?
Jesus saith unto them, Verily, verily, I say
unto you, before Abraham was, I am. They
lookup stones, therefore, to cast at Him;
but Jesus hid Himself and went out of the
temple.” Now here Jesus not only affirms
His own eternity, but actually assumes the
incommunicable name of Jehovah. Further,
the Jews understood Him to do so, for they
tried to stone Him for blasphemy ; and Jesus,
instead of indignantly repudiating such an
idea, as the Apostles Paul and Barnabas did,
left them with their impression uncorrected.
Undoubtedly; then, if He were not God, He
was guilty of the awful crixe of robbing God
of His glory.
Philippians ii. 6,7:—“ Who, being in the
form of God, counted it not a prize to be on
an equality with God, but emptied Himself,
the likeness of men.” Here it is assumed
that Jesus was on an equality with God, but
that instead of looking on this equality as a
thing to be grasped at and kept at all hazards,
He voluntarily gave up that equality, emptying
Himself not only of the form of it, but, so far
as He was a man, of the veVy fact of it—
entering the limitations of our humanity % and
dropping all show of His glory.
Colossians i. 15-17 ; —“ Who is the image
of the invisible God, the firstborn ail
creation, for in Him were all things created,
in the heavens and upon the earth, things
visible and things invisible, whether thrones
or dominions, or principalities or powers:
All things are created through Him, and unto
Him, and He is before all things, and in Him
all things consist.” Now, I would ask Judge
Williams who He is who is before all things,
and the stay of all things, and the end (unto
Him) of all things. If He be not God, He is
as eternal, omnipresent, and omnipotent as
God. Nay, does not St. Paul say of Him
(Colossians ii.) —“ For in Him dwelleth all
the fulness of the Godhead bodily.’'
Hebrews!, 2 s:—“God . . , hath at
the end of these days spoken unto us in His
Son, whom He appointed heir of all things,
through Whom also He made the worlds, Who
being the effulgence of His glory, and the
very image of His substance, and upholding
all things by the word of His power,” etc.
And again, in the Bth and 10th verses—“ Of
the Son he saith . . . Thou, Lord, in the
beginning hast laid the foundation of the
earth, and the heavens are the work of Thy
hands.” Now, who is He who created all
things, and upholds all things, and is the very
image of His Father’s substance ? If not
God, what is He ?
Revelation i. 8 : —“I am the Alpha and
the Omega, saith the Lord God, which is,
and which was, and which is to come, the
Almighty.” If any one doubts that it was
Jesus who said this, let him read the words
of our Lord in the 17th and 18;h verses:—
“He laid His right hand upon me, saying
Fear not; I am the first and the last, and
the Living One, and I was dead, and behold
I am alive for evermore, and I have the keys
of Death and of Hades.”
HIS METHOD OF CRITICISM.
Now first, as Mr. Justice Williams has
mentioned none of these passages, I
would ask whether he has any
to say, as he does, “I believe I have fairly
cited, examined, and dealt with all the
principal passages of Scripture on the one side
and the other,” I should very much like to
se9 Judge Williams deal with these passages ;


for, to my mind, they prove incontrovertibly > was begotten of the Father from ever-
that Holy Scripture teaches the Godhead of
Christ. Judge Williams cannot be allowed to
play fast and loose—to say one moment, “ I
admit the authority of the Scriptures for the
sake of argument,” and the next,“ Oh, no, I do
not admit these.” Unless he admits them, his
argument is nothing, and that part of his
book which contains it, so much waste paper.
But, indeed, if he were to turn critic, he could
disprove the genuineness of none of the
passages which I have cited. After the
arguments of Wiess and Westcotfc, the effort
to refute St. John’s Gospel has become a
desperate one. The Eeveiation is now
accepted as the genuine work of Sc. John
by the most sceptical critics on the Continent.
And as for the Epistles of St. Paul which
I have cited, he must be a bold man to
question their genuineness after the exhaustive
examination of that question by Bishop
Lightfoot.
JUDGE WILLIAMS ON ST. PAUL.
Judge Williams’s references to St. Paul
are droll in the extreme. He calls the great
apostle “ the man Paul,” and “ the mystic
Paul,” and charges him with inventing
doctrines which did not belong to his Master,
and to primitive Christianity. Now, no more
infelicitous phrase could have been invented
for St. Paul than “ mystic.” The apostle did,
indeed, live in the midst of a spiritual life of
great elevation of feeling, breaking forth from
time to time into miraculous manifestations.
But it was precisely he who called the
primitive Christians back to the claims of
reason and charity. “He had rather speak
five words,” he tells them, “ with his under-
standing, than ten thousand words in an
unknown tongue.” The purpose of minister-
ing, he reminds them, is not display, but
edification. And if they would be great, he
will teach them a more excellent way. And
then comes that glorious eulogy of love, one of
the grandest pieces of writing and thinking in
all literature. It begins thus: “If I have
the tongues of men and of angels, and have
not love, I am become sounding brass and a
clanging cymbal.” But why quote a passage
which everybody knows ? A man with a
keener intellect, a larger heart, a nobler
genius than St. Paul never honoured our
nature. To see Judge Williams standing on
tip-toe to look over the head of one of the
master spirits of our race is certainly neither
an imposing nor an edifying spectacle.
THE PRIMARY OBJECT OF THE OLD DISPEN-
SATION MISUNDERSTOOD.
But Judge Williams has another method
of endeavouring to escape from the force of
New Testament assertions : “If God the Son
lasting . . . why should there be absolute
silence upon His existence throughout the
whole inspired revelation of God contained in
the Old Testament?” Our author evidently
thinks this argument a clincher, for he
repeats it with a great flourish in respect to
the doctrine of the Trinity. Well, now, let
him think for a moment of the primary object
of the Old Dispensation. Abraham and his
ancestors, as we learn from the Book of
Joshua, were polytheists. It was to escape
from the air and influence of polytheism that
the great patriarch left his country and
became, as Max Milller declares, the first
monotheist in the world. Henotheists there
had been before, in Egypt, in India, and else-
where, but a monotheist never. “ One-
Goddists ” were not uncommon. Abraham
was the first “ Ouly-Goddist”—the first who
believed there was one God, and no other
beside Him. Henceforward it was the great
fight of the religious leaders of his race to
prevent a reversion to henotheism —that
“ One Goddiem ” which tolerated many
separate Divine manifestations, beside the
central “ One.” Now, if the race of Abraham
were under Divine guidance, and this were its
great struggle, would Judge Williams expect
a plurality in unity to be dwelt upon, even
if it existed ? Would it not be imperatively
necessary to confront every tendency to
separation of the Divine ideal by an unbroken
and sharply-accentuated unity? One lesson
at a time of this difficult kind was enough,
and as history shows, more than enough for
human weakness.
THE DOCTRINE OF THE TRINITY FORESHADOWED
IN THE OLD TESTAMENT.
Still, if in the development of Divine
truth it were necessary to prepare the way
for the conception of a deeper mystery, to
exhibit within this unity a richer and more
complex mode of being, we should expect
preparatory hints of such a process of reve-
lation. And do we not find them ? Is it
true, as Judge Williams emphatically
asserts, that “there is no text in the Old
Testament to which Trinitarians can
refer as either expressly or by implication
establishing the doctrine of the Trinity ?”
that “there is absolute silence upon the
existence” of the Eternal Son ? If I may
do so without arrogance, I would ask Judge
Williams to read chapter Y. of my “Expec-
tation of the Christ,” and I shall be very
much mistaken if he ever repeats that
statement. I have shown in that chapter
that preparatory suggestions of the Incar-
nation were made both in the form of
theopanics addressed to the eyes, and of


prophecies appealing to the spirit; and that 14: “Who gave Himself for us, that He
these revelations gradually increased in
clearness till they culminated in those of the
Virgin's Son, who should be called Immanuel
(God with us),.and of the child whose name
should be “ The Mighty God.” How
can any one say, in the face of these facts,
either that there is no mention of the Incar-
nation in the Old Testament, or that even
the revelation of it is not as explicit as the
circumstances admitted of? But Judge Wil-
liams is fond cf strong assertions. They often
serve him in the place of arguments. He
says, for instance, “ I may state, once for
all, that the title Bedeemer is never applied
to Jesus throughout the whole of the New
Testament, but is in the Old applied to the
one true and only God of the Old Testa-
ment, and to the Father in the New.” One
hoped, indeed, that so absurd a statement
had been made once for all. But no ;so
great a discovery is it to Judge Williams
that it is soon after repeated : “ Throughout
the Bible, both in the Old and New Testa-
ment, it is invariably applied to God, and
Him alone. 5 ’ Now, is the title Bedeemer
applied to the Father in the New Testa-
ment? The fact is, that it does not occur in
the New Testament at all. How, then, can
it be applied to the Father in that
Testament ? But is there no passage, then,
in the New Testament which attributes
redemption to the Father? There is
just one, in a prophecy uttered by Zacharias
in the Old Testament spirit, before Christ
was born. Luke i. 68: “Blessed be the
Lord, the God of Israel, for He hath visited
and wrought redemption fer His people.”
After the birth of Christ, not even redemption
is ascribed to the Father.
AN ERRONEOUS ASSUMPTION.
But is not, then, the other con-
tention of the judge true, that “ there is no
warrant whatever to be found in Scrip-
ture for applying to Jesus this title ?” The
statement is as false as it is strong. For
over and over again redemption is ascribed to
Christ, and, after His birth, to Christ
alone. Witness the following passages :
Romans iii. 24: “ Justified freely by His
grace, through the redemption that is in
Christ Jesus. 55 Ist Corinthians i. 30: “Of
Him are ye in Christ Jesus, Who was made
unto us . , . sanctification and re-
demption.” Galatians iii. 13 : “ Christ
redeemed us from the curse of the law.’
Galatians iv, o: “That be might redeem
them that are under the law. 55 Ephesians
i. 7: “In Whom we have our redemption,
through His blood.” Coloesiana i. 14: “In
Whom we have our redemption. 55 Titus li.
might redeem us from all iniquity.”
Heb. ix. 12: “ Through His own holy blood
entered in once for all into the holy place,
having obtained eternal redemption.” Ist
Pet, i. 18: “Ye are redeemed . . .
with precious blood, as of a lamb without
blemish and without spot, even the blood of
Christ.” Comparing these facts with the
audacious statement of our author, one is
tempted to ask whether he ever in his life
studied the New Testament. Homer may
nod at times, but this is too important a
matter to nod over. Besides, Judge Williams
nods in the same way too often.
ANOTHER MONSTROUS BLUNDER.
The Dean of Melbourne pointed out to ire
that the judge had made almost as monetrots
a blunder in his wonderful note about tie
Holy Ghost. It is a matter of astonishment
to the erudite judge that in the ancient
English versions, from which our authorised
version was mainly taken, our translators
used the old Saxon word ghost, or gast, in
its primary signification of spirit. Nobody
else, who knows anything of our language
and the history of the English translation of
the Bible, would have felt such wonder. The
judge, however, is unable to understand the
matter. He must bring his legal acumen to
bear upon it, and clear away the mystery.
Accordingly, he stumbles upon the following
mare’s nest: —“The word rendered spirit,”
he ob-erves, “is frequently used by itself. .
. . It would hardly do to say God the
Ghost. ... So the translators, having
adopted the word ghost, as carrying with ic
a more mystic sound, were forced to add an
adjective in places where no adjective
existed in the original. 55 The Dean was at
the pains to look over the eighty-three
passages where the words Holy Ghost occur
in our translation, and he found that only
once (in Matthew xii. 32) had the word
“holy 55 been added to the word “spirit s’in 5 ’in
our version; and even there, the word
“holy 55 is prefixed to “spirit” in the
original in the very next verse. In what
kind of expository literature has the judge
been disporting himself? Somebody must
have played a hoax upon him. What would
people say if he expounded law in this way ?
The judge again discovers that the word
Saviour is applied to God in the Old Testa-
ment, and even in the New, I have already
observed that, owing to the circumstances of
the Israelitish people, we should expect Gcd
to be spoken of in the Old Testament almost
exclusively in His unbroken unity, and to
find all titles of the Deity ascribed to God in
His unity. With respect to the New Testa-


ment, however, the case is different.
the judge finds that in one passage certainly,
and in another possibly, the title Saviour is
given to God, as distinguished from Jesus
Ghrist. I should deny the conclusion as to
one of the passages; but letting die judge’s
conclusion stand, how is it relevant to his
argument ? To make it so, he must
show that the title Saviour, given to
God, is not given to Jesus Christ; for
if it be given to Jesus Christ, its being
a title of God only leads to the con-
clusion that Jesus is God. Now, is it true
that the title of Saviour is not given
to Christ? It is the very opposite of truth.
The tit'le is used explicitly of Christ no fewer
than fourteen times. It will be sufficient to
quote the following:—Luke ii. 11: “ There
is born to you this day in the city of David a
Saviour, which is Christ the Lord.” John
iv. 42: “We know that this is indeed the
Saviour of the world.” Acts v. 31 : “Him
did God exalt with His right hand to be a
Prince and Saviour.” Philippians iii. 20 :
“From whence, also, we wait for a Saviour,
the Lord Jesus.” let John iv. 14: “The
Father hath sent the Son to be the Saviour
of the world.”
judge Williams’s authorities.
Again, there must be some strange omission
in Judge Williams’s authorities. But, really,
those authorities are very third-rate indeed.
He gives us. for instance, a shovelful of
unassorted material from a hook called
“Sacred Scriptures of the World,” to prove
that there uere loftv spiritual conceptions
of God before the foundation of the Christian
Church, and from sources independent of
the Bible. I need not repeat Mr. Digby
Berry’s exposure of the uncritical character
of these quotations, gathered without dates
or marks of origin from all ages and all
nations. Judge Williams seems not to have
mastered the very alphabet of the new science
called “ comparative religion,” or he would
know the vital importance, for the interpreta-
tion of such passages, of the determination
of their age and home. How otherwise is
one to know whether the mention of one
God is in a henotheistic or a monotheistic
sense, and whether it is the utterance of a
helpless esoteric philosophy or ot a strong
and living religious faith? Let me take one
lump out of the shovelful which the judge
gives us at page eighty-six, by way of
illustration. It is an old friend of mine, an
inscription on the Temple of Sais, in Egypt.
The judge has given a loose translation of
the passage. I will give an exact one, from
the Greet? of Plutarch, who is our authority
for it: “I am all that has been, and is, and
There shall be, and my veil hath no mortal ever
uncovered.” Our knowledge of the history of
this passage enables us to define its meaning
and trace its influence. It was no part of
the living faith of Egypt, but an esoteric
doctrine of the priests. It is the formula of
pantheism, the religion which identified God
with all things. It is an agnostic version of
pantheism. Finally, it expresses a heno-
theietic view of God—the view which can
tolerate the dissipation of the Divine unity
into any number of base polytheistic forms.
And the judge puts forward this agnostic
henotheistic pantheism as “a lofty and
spiritual conception of God.” Pity that he
has not mastered the alphabet of metaphysics
as well as of comparative religion I
THE TRINITARIAN TEXTS
It is time, however, that I turned to
examine shortly his (Judge Williams)
manner of dealing with the Trinitarian
texts which he does notice. Space com-
pels me to do this briefly. The judge
compares the text, “ I and My Father
are One,” with “ Holy Father, keep
through Thine own name those whom Thou
hast given Me, that they may be one as we
are;” and he conceives himself justified in
drawing the inference that the first of these
passages cannot denote unity of essence, for
if so, “ then all followers of Jesus Ghrist
are one in essence with God the Father.”
“Common sense suggests,” he adds, “that
the expressions denote unity of communion-
in love, in purity, in charity—unity in
purpose.” But does the judge think that
common sense—that is, that the ordinary
lawyer’s light of nature is the beet guide in
interpreting a religious book, dealing with
the dread mysteries of sin and deliverance
from sin? Is not a revelation (and for
the purposes of his argument he is
assuming the Bible to be a revela-
tion) a better interpreter of itself than
such common sense. What, then, does the
judge think of such daring statements as
these? —John vi. 53: “Except ye eat the
flesh of the Son of Man and drink His blood,
ye have no life in yourselves.” John xv. 4:
“ As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself,
except it abide in the vine, so neither can
ye, except ye abide in Me.” 2nd Peter i. 4:
“That through these ye may become par-
takers of the Divine nature.” I am not
responsible for the judge’s admission of the
Bible as God’s revelation, “ for the purpose
of argument.” But once having made that
admission, and undertaken to argue from it,
he is not at liberty to say, “ I hold all this to
be nonsense.”


THE UNION OF MAN WITH CHRIST.
And even he should say that, what does
he think of the fact that, as the result of
exact and philosophical analysis, Professor
Green gives this definition of man ? Man
“is a certain reproduction of itself on the
part of the eternal self-conscious subject of
the world—a reproduction of itself to which
it makes the processes of animal life
organic.” Now, if man be that, must he
not have the capacity of being drawn into
unity of nature with Jesus Christ, and
in Him, with His Father; and do not those
passages, which seem so strange to common
sense, fill up naturally the outlines of
possibility traced by that best sense which
results from exact thinking? Perhaps if the
judge turns this matter over in his mind
again, he will see that Jesus Christ meant
nothing less than a unity of nature when he
said, “ Even as Thou Father art in Me, and
lin Thee, they also may be in us.” And in
that case it will not be possible to argue that
Jesus only meant a unity of purpose when
he said, “ I and my Father are one, 1 ’ though,
as i wish to be perfectly candid, I will
confess that it might mean something less
than unity in the proper nature of God. To
arrive at that conclusion, I should have to
call to mind the other passages which I have
quoted in respect to the Divinity of Christ.
Then, indeed, I should have no doubt.
AN ASTONISHING MUDDLE.
It is not necessary that I should expose
over again Judge Williams’s misrepresenta-
tion of Dean Liddon, in connection with
the passage John i. 1. 14. That task has
already been performed in your columns by
the Rev. Mr. Butchers. I must confess,
however, that the muddle which Judge
Williams makes in his examination of this
passage has astonished me. If St. John got
the Logos doctrine “ from the Greek philo-
sophy,” he certainly got it through the
school of Alexandria, and he as certainly
altered it to suit the subject with which he
was dealing. Judge Williams thinks that,
when St. John said, “ the Word was made
flesh,” he meant that “ the thought of God.
or the manifestation of God, became flesh
in Jesus,” If so, then what did he mean
when he said “ the Word was God ?” He
must have meant “ that the thought or
manifestation of God” was God. And how,
then, did he not say that God was made
flesh in Jesus ? The Unitarians are certainly
wise in their generation when they try to
show that the fourth gospel has not apostolic
authority ; and Judge Williams would have
been wise in his if he had followed their
example.
HOW JUDGE WILLIAMS DEALS WITH THE
BAPTISMAL FORMULA.
Again, Judge Williams deals after bsi
manner with the baptismal formula. He
says he thinks that all Christians are bap-
tised “ into the name of God, into His
(Jesus Christ’s) own name ; . and
into the name of the Spirit of God, as being
part and parcel of God.” It is said that
Dean Stanley once remarked to a Unitarian
minister that, so far as he could gather, he
(the Unitarian minister) baptised into the
name of God a man and a metaphor. Judge
Williams tells us “ no—into the name of a
God, a man, and a part or parcel of God.”
Does he think his own explanation more
tolerable ? Would it be, I will not say
reverent, but decant, so to associate the
name of the Infinite with that of a man, and
of a part or parcel of Himself, as names
co-ordinate, if not co-equal with each other ?
Judge Williams evidently feels uncomfort-
able in presence of such a conclusion, and
he tries to relieve his feelings by inserting a
long note from Mr. Matthew Arnold,
throwing doubt upon the genuineness of
this obstinate and inconvenient passage.
But Judge Williams should remember
that be has promised to take it as it stands,
and make his best of it ; and, he and Mr.
Arnold notwithstanding, it has got to be
taken as ic stands. There is clear proof
that this was the baptismal formula from
the very beginning. It is St. Paul who
over and over again, in his acknowledged
epistles, speaks of baptism into Christ.
Dnes he not say, for instance (Romans vi. 8),
“Are ye ignorant that all we who were
baptised into Christ Jesus were baptised into
his death?” Again (Acts xix. 3), when cer
tain disciples at Ephesus told St. Paul
that they had not so much as heard
whether the Ho’y Ghost was given, the
apostle thought it enough to ask, “ Into
what, then, were ye baptised?” Seeing
that every Christian was baptised into the
name of the Holy Ghost, he felt sure they
could not have been regularly introduced
into the Christian church. And so it
turned out. They had only been baptised
into John’s baptism. Unquestionably,
then, the baptismal formula must stand, and
as unquestionably Judge Williams has not
succeeded in explaining it away.
A VICIOUS METHOD OF ARGUMENT.
“ Well, well,” he may cry “ What if Ihave
not? I was only playing with you all
this while. I do not believe one word
of your Scriptures but what I choose
to believe.” Why, then ; we fairly retort,
have you wasted so much of your own


time and paper, and so much of our
patience in talking—it might be uncivil to
eay nonsense—and so will say unreality ?
The method was vicious from the first, and
vicious as it was, it has been, I am
constrained to say, very unskilfully handled.
One half of the book is thus reduced to
waste-paper; for as to the professed
criticism of what Judge Williams calls the
prefaces of St. Matthew’s and St. Luke’s
gospels, it is little else than a series of arbi
trary assumptions.
NOT CRITICISM, BUT CAPTIOUSNESS.
Judge Williams chooses to call the
introductory chapters of these gospels
prefaces, but there is nothing to show
that they are so. He complains
that, the birth of Jesus Christ
having been noticed at the beginning of
His hfe, the evangelists do not go back to
it. Is it common, in the description
of a great man’s work, to go back to the
circumstances of his birth and boyhood?
He complains that St. John does not notice
our Saviour’s miraculous conception, but he
clearly implies it when he says “the Word
was made flesh.” St. Mark, in point of fact,
is the only evangelist who does not explicitly
or implicitly record it. But look at the
plan of his work. He says plainly that
it is his purpose to describe, not
the life, but the ministry of Jesus Christ.
His first words are—“ The beginning of the
gospel (of the good news) cf Jesus Christ, the
Son of God;” and bis very next step is to
describe that mini-dry of John the Baptist
which prepared the way for the mnistry of
Jesus. To ask that St. Luke should begin
his gospel over again in Tbe Acts, a book
which, beginning with the period after the
Resurrection of Jesus, professes to record the
history of the Church’s first day, is simply
unreasonable. This is not criticism, but
captiousness.
CRUDE AND PUERILE NOTIONS.
And what shall we say of the droll obser
vations which the judge thinks it decent and
fitting to make on the mysterious fact in
question. “ God,” be says, “ being admit-
tedly an immaterial spirit, and the Holy
Ghost being God, a material Christ, or Christ
after the flesh, never could have been
begotten ; and if Jesus existed with God
from everlasting he would only have existed
as an immaterial spirit also, and, if so, it is
difficult to conceive how spirit could become
flesh, or immateriality become materiality.”
Ready, on reading such words as these, one
finds one’s self carried back to the days cf a
boys' debating class, so crude and puerile are
tbe notions which they express. The holy
Virgin conceived, and conceived through the
quickening might of the creative spirit. Can-
not Judge Williams believe that He who
created life at the first had the power to
quicken an existing germ of life? Again, he
calls God a spirit, and he believes that this
spirit created all the material universe. Could
not He who created matter come, if he
please, into personal union with matter?
What does Judge Williams think himself to
be? A lump of matter? or a spirit making a
material body its instrument ? And if spirit
and matter can come together into a personal
unity in his own case, why not in Christ’s
case ? How does he know that spirit and
matter are so abhorrent to each other that
they cannot unite? Does he know what
spirit is, and what matter is? He may know
that they are, but does he know what they
are ? He deceives himself by the term
immeteriality, viz., non-materiality. We
know more about soul than that it is not
material. It is that which can be
conscious of its own existence, and can make
the objective world the subject of its states of
consciousness, of its sensations, thoughts, and
volitions. If Judge Williams wants evidence
of the real existence of the soul, and of its
actual connection with matter, I say look
within, and you will find it.
judge Williams’s real thoughts about the
BIBLE.
In his chapter on “Inspiration and
Miracles ” we are favoured at last with the
judge’s real thoughts about the Bible. And
what are they? “No English author,” be
says, “has ever ventured to put into a book
a tenth part of the filth that is to be found
passim throughout the Old Testament.”
“ Then, again, a further considerable portion
of the Old Testament is of the most blood-
thirsty, cruel, and brutal description ; and so
diffused are the characteristics of immorality
and indecency, of vengeance, bloodthirsti-
ness, and cruelty throughout the Old Testa-
ment, that if you keep on rejecting the
chapter or book in which they appear, the
result will be that you have very little left.”
Then, after citing instances of this so-called
bloodthirstiness, he adds : “ And so on
throughout Genesis, ExoduSj Leviticus,
Numbers, Deuteronomy, Joshua, First and
Second Samuel. Judges, First and Second
Kings, and First and Second Chronicles,
there is one continual description of acts of
wholesale and indiscriminate butchery of
men. women, and children ; of horrible
tortures by mutilation or otherwise; of
God’s approval of these horrible acts.”
‘ Throughout the book cf Isaiah, and


throughout those of the other prophets, there
is an almost unbroken series of bowlings and
ravings,” etc. Let us pause to take breath a
moment, and ask where we are. It is a
little reassuring to remember that we are in
the book of a man who has shown himself
already t-i be the most reckless and
inaccurate in bis staHmente ; who has been
before, not perhaps as coarse, but quite as
confident, when all the while he was simp>y
inaccurate and incapable of reason or Pelf-
control. May it not be so here ? One thing,
at least, we see —that while desiring,
apparently, as Thomas Carlyle said, to make
*• the exodus from Hcundsdilcb, 5 ' he has
only left that region to pass into Billings-
gate. We will not follow him into the com
pany of the fishwives, but will simply submit
his statements to the test of reason.
THE PURITY OF THE BIBLE.
And now one preliminary question ob-
viously presents itself. If these books be
what Judge Williams has allowed himself
to describe them, how is it that those w T ho
took them as the rule of their life were
distinguished among all the peoples of
antiquity for spiritual views of God and an
austere morality ? Can a clean thing come
out of an unclean—purity out of indecency—
a lofty spiritual faith out of mere bowlings
and bloodthirstiness ? Above all men upon
earth, the Hebrews have been “the people
of the book.” They have held it to their
heart as their dearest treasure ; they have
studied it night and day ; they have almost
worshipped it. If ever a people were
made by a book, the Jews have been
made by the Bible. Judge the book
by its work then, and what must
w T e say of it ? Look at the strong faith
of the Jews, at their pure homes,
at their tough vitaUty, at their
power to hold their own with the strongest
and ablest nations of the earth, and that
without a country, a king, or a government.
They simply embody to day one of the
mightiest spiritual forces upo»" earth, and
yet they have nothing in t*ie place of coun-
try, king, and nrlcschood but this book,
which is all indecency, howling, and blood-
thirstiness. It is incredible, though a hun-
dred Judge Williamses affirmed it. A great
Jew, who too often mocked he book, but
whose mockeries were at least witty—Hein-
rich Heine—thus wrote about it in describ-
ing the light which had dawned upon his
latter days : —“ I owe my enlightenment
simply to the reading of a book. A book ?
Yes, and it is an old homely-looking
book, modest as nature, and as natural ; a
book which has as work a-day and unassum-
ing an appearance as the sun that warms*
us and the bread that nourishes us ; a book-
that looks as familiarly at us and is as full
of kind blessings as the old grandmother
who reads daily in it w ith her dear trembling
lips, and with spectacles upon her nose—
and this book is called quite briefly the
Book, the Bible.” This from Heine, the
great poet, the brilliant philosopher, who
knew all the wisdom, and had tried all
the culture and pleasure of the nine-
teenth century. Who was right, Judge
Williams or he ? Men and women
throughout the wide earth who have
lived on the Bible, who was right—
the man who dares to say that it is
all indecency and blood-thirstiness, or the
man who found it modest as nature and as
full of kind blessings?
BfODEST AS NATURE.
Modest as nature ; there is the whole
answer to Judge Williams's charge of in-
decency. Indecency with him is to mention
sins which are as common, alas ’ as daily
work, and to call them by their right names-
in order to denounce them. Men may
commit them as much as they like, and
defile and degrade themselves by com-
mitting them as much as they like; but
accord! g to such men as Judge Williams,
they are not indecent if only they will keep
a prim mouth, and say nothing about them.
Ho you think I am doing Judge Williams
an injustice? Then look at tne instances
which he has selected as the worst he could
lav his hands on. The worst are the incest of
Lot, and the shameful act of Tamar. And do
you think there was no use in showing what
evil companionship and temptation would
do for otherwise good men, in an age and a
land when Sodom was destroyed for name-
less wickedness, and when all the heathen
of Palestine and the East were as Corinth
and as Rome in their worst days ? It was
as hard tor a man to be pure in that sensual
world, as it was for Israel when he fell in
with the wanton Moabites on emerging
from his wilderness seclusion. And was
it of no use to pillory these great
defaulters as a warning to the rest :
Moses insists in the fifteenth chapter cf
I rviticus upon wholesome domestic re-
straint, and he is called indecent for saying
what he means. He thieatens punishment
to those who slander an innocent maid, the
punishment of death to those who defile
the home ; and, again, he is indecent for
describing what he means. The writer of
the Book c f Judges describes the hideous
sin and awful punishment of the men of
Gibeah and their sympathisers, and he is


'Called indecent tor holding up before
the men of a sensual time this awful warn-
ing of the reaults of their besetting
sin. What would Dr. Dbllinger be
called for his infinitely darker picture
of the awful sensuality of Greece
and Rome ? And yet I venture to say
that few books have ever been written
by man which are likely to operate as a
•more powerful deterrent from vice. The
historian’s description of David’s sin is
quoted, but notNatr.an’s magnificent rebuke
of it. And this, too, is called indecent,
though I verily believe these very chapters,
and those following ones which show that a
father's wantonness is like the letting out of
poisonous waters in his family, have done
<*nore to check and shame lust than any piece
of literature to which Judge Williams could
point. These are his examples—the worst he
could find—and I say that he ought to blush
crimson for his foul slander of the word of
God. “ Modest as nature.” Yes, the old
book is that. It calls things by their own
true names, that it may make us hate them,
and avoid them, and rise to that truly
natural life which is as pure as it is strong
and happy.
THE CHARGE OF BLOOD-THIRSTINESS-
The charge of blood-thirstiness is not so
-easily disposed of, I confess. Such cases as
those referred to by Judge Williams, or the
old Arab law o f “an eye for an eye, and a
tooth for a tooth,” of the tyrannicide of
■ Jael, of the slaughter of the whoremongers
of Shittim, and of the extermina-
tion of the Canaanites, are only to
be understood by a careful study
of the moral condition and ruling ideas of
those ages. But I will venture upon an
assertion. If only Judge Williams will
carefully study the work of the late Pro-
fessor Mozley upon “Ruling Ideas in Eirly
Ages,” he will never repeat the coarse
charges which he has made in his pamphlet.
He has a comical horror of a class of men
whom he calls “ecclesiastical metaphy-
sicians.” I must take leave to doubt
whether he knows what a “ metaphysician ”
means, for w’hen he comes to describe the
-office of these strange beings, it turns out to
die that simply of the historical critic. Judge
Williams may well fight shy of him. Be-
ds no dummy, whom the judge can set
up to knock down again, as he does his
survivals from the days of verbal inspira-
tion. A real historical critic is a man with
hands and feet, who can use his fists, and
who has hard knuckles. “ Hinc illse-
dachrymas.” Hence also the judges absurd
abuse of this class of men as “ changing and
re-changing front,” “ twisting and straining,
backing and filling,” “ pruning this away,
and that away, keeping this or that, just as
it suits them.” Very bad critics they are
who do these things, assuredly ; but to say
that all ciitics belong to this class who
do not hold the verbal inspiration either of
the whole Bible or of the New Testament is
simply absurd.
THE PRINCIPLES OF MODERN CRITICISM.
The school of modern criticism has
definite principles, and when it adheres
to them it greatly helps us to under-
stand all old literatures. And it is no more
to be distrusted because it is a modern
development than is the inductive school of
physical science for the same reason. It is
impossible to understand an ancient docu-
ment unless first some knowledge be had of
the genius of the language in which it was
written, of the moral and socixl condition of
the people by and for whom it was written,
and of the course of development which led
up to that social ai d moral condition. In a
word, it is hopeless to attempt the inter-
pretation of an ancient document without
throwing oneself back into the moral and
mental atmosphere of the age and land
which gave it birth. This Judge Williams
has not attempted to do in criticising the
Old Testament ; and hence the worthless-
ness of his criticism. Now, Professor
Mozley has done this in the book to which
I have referred.
THE MORAL CONDITION OF THE OLD WORLD.
Adopting the principle affirmed by our
Lord, that the laws of Moses were made
imperfect because of the hardness of the
people’s hearts, that God gave to the
Jews such directions, not as were absolutely
best, but as were most suitable to their
backward moral condition, he proceeds to
show what that moral condition was. The
idea of the rights of the individual was very
imperfectly developed. In all the ancient
world, and especially in the eastern part of
it, the idea of the individual was very much
that of the laws of Manu, that “ a man
consists of himself and his wife and
children.” If, then, he had to be punished,
people would not think that they had
got the whole of him till they had punished
all who belonged to him. Hence such
punishments as that of Achan and his
Punishments, too, have to be more
severe in primitive states of society, where
no provision is made for the maintenance of
criminals, and where the very sense of
justice demands that a rich man shall be
punished as severely as a poor man, and not
be allowed to escape by a mere fine, which


to him is nothing. Go our blackfellows had
no punishment for offences against their
elementary ideas of purity but by spearing.
And it was infinitely better that they should
spear for impurity than lose their first step
towards a higher life.
THE TRUE OBJECT OF THE MOSAIC LAW.
Yes, it may be said, all this is very well,
but could not God havp. srivan those early
generations a law. such as we
Christians enjoy, anj 'uv« eompeueu them
to embrace it? No ; He would not unless He
first deprived them of what was better than
all law, their moral feedorn and capacity of
growth in virtue. God in this matter is self-
lirrited by the nature which He has given to
man. And man, having such a nature, the
best laws for him in a given age are not
those most ideally perfect, but those best
adapted to develop his moral and
spiritual capacity. Hence, as Professor
Mozley puts it, “It seems to belong
suitably to the Divine Governor
of the world to extract out of every state of
mankind the highest and most noble acts
to which the special conceptions of the age
can give rise, and to direct those earlier
ideas and modes of thinking towards such
great moral achievements as can be founded
on them.” The true question, then, to be
asked about the primitive legislation of the
Old Testament is this —Was it such as the
condition of the Israelites needed, and sucha«
would tend to develop amongst them higher
and better modes of thinking and living ?
This is a question which Judge Williams
has never touched, though, in fact, it is the
only question at issue. You, Sr, will do
a great service to your readers if, in your
Saturday numbers, you will publish some of
the essays of Professor Mozley, and
allow your friends and the public to
see the question fairly argued. I
have no doubt but tnat, as a result of
such studies, they will come to think, with
Heine, that God 's word is not only “ modest
as Nature,” but also full of kind bles
sings.”
THE MOSAIC A PREPARATION FOR A HIGHER
LAW.
But it may be objected—though we should
allow this teaching to be good tor a primitive
race during the imperfect phases of its
spiritual progress—how can it be said to be
good for us who possess the perfect law and
pattern of Christ ? I have already intimated
that it was the great purpose of the pro-
gressive revelation and discipline of the Old
Testament to prepare in human nature such
a basis of trained intellect and will as might
be ready not only to take the great stride for-
ward which Jesus Christ demanded, but also,
having taken it, to hold the ground which
had been won. The latter is
harder task of the two. Think of
the lamentable lapse of the New Zea-
’anders into paganism in our own days.
What ground have w r e for the hope of winning:
them back again? Just this that beside-
them lives a race which has been instructed
and disciplined in Christianity for many
centuries. Is it not then of the last import-
ance for us to be taught the gradual stages
through which the victory of our faith has-
been wrn, and to be shown what were the
spiritual powers and principles which won
that victory ? Nay, have we no need of the-
warning which such a history pro-
nounces at the present day ? Men are
asking us to throw away revela-
tion, and to break up the churches—
those organisations of trained will which*
are the moral and religious stay of the
whole society in which they exist. Well, it>
has been possible to make this experiment
under imperfect conditions in the country
which gave birth to the French Revolution.
There, in spite of the continuous protest of
the Christian Church, almost the whole of
the male working-class population cf the-
city of Paris has gone back to what is called
the state of nature—the state without
church and revelation. And with what
result? Such frightful immorality as-
Kail Hillebrand’s statistics have revealed to
us, and such gentleness as was revealed in
the diabolical deeds of the Commune.
THE LESSON OF THE OLD TESTAMENT TO OUR
TIME.
Is it of no value to us to be shown in the'
history of the early stages of revelation
what it is to which we should revert if we
destroyed the sanctified will-basis of the-
Christian Church, and by what painful
discipline, were such a calamity to happen,
we could alone regain the spiritual position
which we had lost ? No one declared more
emphatically for Christian emancipation-
from the trammels of the law than the
Apostle Paul, but there were two respects
in which he saw that the law was still neces-
sary for Christians.
1. Didactically the law was our peda-
gogue to bring us to Christ. It shows us that
our faith had a distinct historical basis and
preparation, and it enables us all the better
to understand the end by displaying to us
the steps through which that end was
reached.
2. Practically, by warning us of the sins
which lie latent in our nature, and showing


us their danger in the example of times
when they had more unrestricted sway.
“ These things were our examples, to the
intent we should not lust after evil things,
as they also lusted.” They were also our
examples in another way. They showed
us, in the history of a people under di.ine
discipline, how God hates and punishes such
sins.
MIRACLES.
Judge Williams simply repeats on the
.question of “ miracles’ the popular scientific
prejudice, that miracles are not to be be-
lieved “ because they involve a violation,
or suspension, of unvarying natural laws
in other words, because appearances com-
monly follow a rule, therefore they must
always follow it. Fortunately. I can refer
your readers to my treatment of this subject,
specially with reference to the great central
miracle of the Resurrection, in a sermon just
published. It is a direct answer to all thr*t
Judge Williams has to eay upon the
subject.
THE QUESTION OF THE ATONEMENT.
Judge Williams has clearly not studied
the question of the Atonement, and as I
hope to treat this question pretty fully
hereafter, I shall only refer at present to
one of his statements on this subject.
“ All through the various histories of
the sayings and teachings of Jesus there is
mot one word found either directly or in-
directly bearing upon this most striking,
startling, and important part of his mission.”
Here we have another of those rash state-
ments of which the truth is in the in-
verse ratio of the strength. Has, then, the
great central rite of the Christian church—
the sacrament of the Lord’s Supper—no
indirect bearing upon the doc f rine of the
Atonement? Wnen again Jesus said
(Matthew xx. 28) “ The Sen of Man
came not to be ministered unto, but
to minister, and to give His life a ransom
for many,” had those words no direct bearing
upon the doctrine ?
FINAL JUDGMENT ON THE BOOK.
The book which I have here reviewed.
Sir, is full of errors. Its mistakes are
fundamental. They arise for the most part
out of an utter ignorance of the subject of
which the author treats. They make his
work, as a contribution to theological
knowledge, utterly useless. The book, I
fear, will nevertheless do great harm It
will impose upon the ignorant and unthink-
ing. It will shock and disgust the pious and
simple minded. Worst of all, it will, I fear,
favour areactionary theology. If, people will
say, criticism leads to such results as these,
to such audacious profanity, and coarse
abuse of all Christians hold most dear, let
us ha ~e nothing to do with criticism, but
entrench ourselves in the old fortifications
of unintelligent orthodoxy. This last would
be a most unhappy result of a most unhappy
attempt ; for in the long run it would do
more harm to truth than any number of
such books as that which I have been re-
viewing Let good men possess their souls
in patience, and rest assured that as
Lacordaire said, “ Truth will never injure
piety, nor freedom kill God.”
Rae Bros., Printers, 35 Elizabeth Street North, Melbourne.




