

C i
Oi v \
THE
REJ ECTED
GIFTS:
A Commercial Drama.
PRICE SIXPENCE.
ft &2.Z'iX




REJECTED
GIFTS:
A Commercial Drama.
By C. M. SMITH.
PRICE SIXPENCES.
©uwntfvilU:
T. WILLMETT & CO.
I‘BBB,
; 9 #*•
ft te-r
ft j* ■
s


Mr. B.—As a general principle, is dearness of commodi-
ties to be preferred to cheapness ?
Mr. G.—ln an old-established manufacturing country,
cheapness might be the better of the two, but in the circum-
stances of a new country, such as this, a minimum point of
dearness must be supported in the interests of native industry.
Mr. B. —Then, for the same reason, I presume that
scarcity is to be preferred to abundance ?
Mr. G. —Undoubtedly. Abundance of commodities com-
pels cheapness. It follows that I must advocate scarcity.
Mr. B.—Mr. Green, I have a great regard for your un-
sophisticated character. I wish to do you a service. If I
offered you a gift of 100 English sovereigns, would you accept
or decline it ?
Mr. G.—ln an old-established coun Oh !' I beg your
pardon. What was I going to say ? ’Pon my soul, you
know, I don’t think —that is to say yes , I really think I
would accept it.
Mr. B. —Well, Mr. Green, I find I haven’t it quite conve-
nient in the shape of money ; but, I suppose it will be all the
same if I give you £lOO worth of hats, boots, and clothes,
which I have in my ship “Bountiful,” out yonder in the
river ?
r r '
Mr. G.—Thanks. Yes, it will be all the same.
Mr. B. —And, I presume, your gratification will not be
diminished if the remaining 349,999 of your countrymen were
to be similarly favored.
Mr. G. —On the contrary, I should rejoice at their good
fortune equally with my own.
Mr. B. ( Calculates tvith a pencil on the bach of an envelope)
—Oh. ! Mr. Green, by the way, I find myself unable to
do this all round; but if I give each one of you £IOO worth of


these things for £5 per head, I suppose you would still say I
was rather doing the handsome thing ?
Mr. G. —Undoubtedly. We shall indeed be fortunate
fellows.
Mr. B.—But, just think, would not you and those others,
in that case, be cursed with certain goods which would be
both cheap and abundant ?
Mr. G.—Oh!, yes; but look what a chance —£100
worth for £5 !
Mr. B.—Would you not be clothing yourselves all the
year through, or, indeed, for several years, for next to nothing,
at the same time that the local makers of clothes, hats, and
boots, were being ruined.
Mr. G —Yes ! but look, what a chance —£100 worth for
£5!
Mr. B. —Then, it is only cheapness in moderation to
which you object. Extreme cheapness commands your ready
acquiescence ?
Mr. G.—Yes ; I suppose that is it.
Mr. B. —Then, what you complain of, as a protector of
native industry, is that imports are not cheap enough. Is
that it ?
Mr. Gr.—Well, you know, ’pon my life ! In the case of
an old-established what was I going to say ? Oh ! hang
this, I don’t like it.
Mr. B.—Your replies, my friend, are somewhat embar-
rassing ; try and explain yourself.
Mr. G. —Well, it is just like this. If any rich lunatic,
saving your presence, offers each of us £IOO worth of these
things for £5, you see it would regularly shut up the 10,000
of us who produce themf consequently we must see what is


to be done. So, I propose, that we send a man whom we
keep for the purpose, to the river side, near where your ship
is, and he will arrange it all. {Exit hastily. ]
SCENE 11.
Enter Collector of Customs and Supercargo of the “Bountiful
Sup.—When can I get my hatches off ?
Coll.—Softly, my friend. This sort of thing will never
do. Our people won’t have it. Who ever heard. of hats at
3d. each, cloth at 2d. per yard, and boots for Is. per pair.
Your master can’t be fool enough to suppose we are going to
stand it. But, if you just wait a day or two, I will see what
can be done.
Sup. (A couple of days later)—Why can’t you let me dis-
charge. I want to be off!
Coll.—Oh! That is all very well; but the circumstances
are so new that our people don’t know what to do, and you
must wait. If you were to offer them £lOO worth of these
things for £B5, they would know how to deal with it. We
have a machine called the ad valorem duty. You see this
large bag. Well, each one of us would have to put fifteen
sovereigns into it, and then he would be allowed to go along-
side of you if he liked for his share. But, as there would be
no great favor in getting £lOO worth for £lOO perhaps we
mightn’t bother about it. When, however, you offer us £lOO
worth for only £5, we don’t quite know what to do. Even
the Chinamen couldn’t make the things so cheap as that.
Sup.—Then it is really the cheapness that is the obstacle.
I thought your Mr. Green said to my master, Mr. Bull, that
he was quite delighted at the prospect of getting £lOO worth
for £5.


Coll.—So well he might be.
Sup.—Then, why cannot you let me discharge my cargo ?
Coll.—Softly, my friend. If you choke up our market
with these things, it is the colony that would suffer. The
10,000 tailors, bootmakers, and hatters, would be out of work,
and would cease to be customers to the butchers, grocers,
candlemakers, and the like. In fact, everybody would be
ruined.
Sup.—Then, at the same time that everybody in the
colony is receiving a handsome present of cloth, hats, and
boots, the. “Colony” is being ruined by that gift. The
colony, then, is something different; I suppose, from the
people in the colony.
Coll. —(Getting warm , rubs his forehead with his ban-
dana.) Oh! confound it all. I’m no scholard. It’s no use
you paying out these yarns to me.
Sup.—But I want to get my ship away.
Coll. —It’s no use, you must wait till my people tell me
what to do.
Sup.—(ln impatient disgust.) Very well, then, lam
under charter to be in San Francisco in six weeks from to-
day, and,, sooner than waste more time, my governor will let
your people have the whole cargo for nothin// !
Coll. —Oh! hut that would be worse still. If you kept
on doing that sort of thing the ruin of our people would be
quite completed.
Sup.—(Aside.) Oh! Bangnation! I can’t stand any
more of this.
[The “ Bountiful ” is seen bending on her canvas, and weighing
anchor. Verdant Green rushes down and confers with Col-
lector. The latter Reports what has passed. Green seizes a
speaking trumpet and hails :—-


SCENE 111.
Again the Brisbane Wharf. (.4 weelt later.)
JAff
Hl/iLIO
FISIUk
A/» w 7-0^
pt-
< JAM 1993 ) Hastings & Jones, Printers,
&. ,-W
★ jg/
Green.—Are you off ? Why you haven't taken any of
our exports !! !
Sup.—You highly-finished, bevil-edged old fossil, how
can I find room for your exports if I cannot get rid of my
cargo. Besides, now I haven’t time. Moreover, I shan’t
come here again.
[Mr. Bull is seen returning on board in the ship’s gig, and the
“ Bountiful ” drops down towards the bay with the evening
tide. Banners, music, blue fire, and general protectionist
rejoicing that the colony has, for the time being, escaped a
terrible calamity. At the same time a large crowd is seen on
the pier watching the departing ship, and scratching their
heads, in a frame of obvious and apparently dissatisfied
emba rrassment.]
The Crowd ( Omnes .) —Oh! that somebody would kindly
oblige by writing us down an ass.




