

flfff
TIE LEAGUE AND SOLEMN ENGAGEMENT
THE AUSTRALASIAN COLONIES.
The following Appeal has beer, prepared by the New South Wales Council of THE
AUSIRALASIAN LEAG UE.—Colonists who may have friends or connexions in Great
Britain, are requested to address to them one of these Letters, and return them (postage
paid) with any additions that may be written on the blank space, sealed (if desired) to the
Honorary Secretary, at the office of the Australasian League, to be by him forwarded to
its destination through the Secretary of the London Board of the League.
THE New South Wales Council of the Australasian Anti-Transportation League appeal to their fellow subjects in the United
Kingdom against the grievous injustice inflicted by the present system of Transportation upon all the Australasian Colonies ; —Confident
in the righteous verdict, and controlling authority, of public opinion, upon every great question of national morality.
It can hardly he necessary to urge the intimate relation between England and these Colonies, as a reason for not inflicting an
injury that any stranger would be entitled to deprecate, and, if sufficiently powerful, hound to resent. And yet it seems an injustice
doubly unnatural; when a Parent Country overwhelms feeble dependencies, to which almost every family of her own Cities and
Counties has sent forth some emigrant friend or relative, with an annual inundation of the Criminals she feels herself unable to retain
within her own bosom without danger.
The origin of this penal system is now matter of history. Of its policy while a mere experiment on a wild coast, remote from
all the haunts of civilized life, various opinions have been formed.—But its propriety then, even if vindicated, can he no criterion of its
propriety at the present day, when it is acting on a nascent community, full of young families who are disposed to cherish and honor by
their own virtues the land of their birth, and crowded with thousands of free Emigrants who came hither upon an understanding that
transportation had ceased to influence the character of these Colonies. The wonder excited by the fact, that a people of decent European
manners could be generated out of such original materials, even with all the assistance of extensive free emigration, has grown into
something like admiration ; and has led to an oblivion of the great moral cost at which this has been accomplished. When indeed the
system came under the review of the British Parliament in the year 1838, disclosures were made which excited a feeling very adverse to
its continuance. Sir William Molesworth and Archbishop Whately led the van of this movement; hut the Ministry of the day were so
far disposed to concur in it, as to adopt measures tending towards a gradual abandonment of the entire system. Transportation to New
South Wales was relinquished even more abruptly than the interests, artificially interwoven with it, could brook without injury; and
although continued to Van Dieman’s Land, an intention was manifested both of restricting and reforming its operation, and of super-
seding it in a great measure by English Penitentiaries. That however which was intended as a reformation in Yan Pieman’s Land, (the
substitution of the probation for the assignment system) turned out a signal failure. The atrocities of the new system surpassed the old,
and when the subject was again forced on the attention of Parliament, the evidence adduced was such as to cause the Government to
recoil with horror from the work of its own hands, and to compel Earl Grey in 1847, in his place in the House of Lords, to express
his
January, One Thousand Eight Hundred and Fifty-One.
cCUmccuo jin the year One Thousand Rignl Hundred and Forty, by an Order in
Council, the practice of Transporting Convicts to New South Wales was abandoned by the
Crown : ®LwD WJ) ,by divers promises the Government of Great Britain engaged
not to send Convicts from the United Kingdom to New South Wales, New Zealand. Victoria',
or King George’s Sound. VjOhtftYSi 0 , by an Act of the British Parliament, Trans-
portation to South Australia was positively prohibited. fIU6 toh C'CGU.,O. Lieutenant-
Governor Dcnlson, in the year One Thousand Eight Hundred and forty Seven declared to the
Colonists of Van Dicman’s Land Her Majesty’s most gracious purpose that Transportation to
that island should be discontinued. gLUfi \u|KtT&t o,thc Colony of Van Diem arcs Uaurt has
been deeply injured by the pouring, in of enormous masses of Transported Offenders. &T\ 6
\nhp ve.g.o divers and repeated attempts have been made to depart from the letter and spirit
of these promises. tX)f)CAC£lo.the avowed object of Her Majesty’s Secieiary of State
is to transfuse the convicts: disembarked in Van Dieman’s Land through the Australasian
Colonics, and thus to evade the spirit of the promise and Act of Parliament so .made. 01 Vt <5
toljtlTt D^jtuge■ tracts of land have been purchased by the Colonists nom the Crown
many millions of capital invested with improvements; and many thousands of Her Majesty's
subjects have settled in Australasia, on the -pledged faith of the Crown, not to disturb their
■•petal we 1 1 arc by the importation of crime. i/gUd 'OdbetCU 0, the native Australasians are
entitled to all the rights and privileges of British subjects, and to (he sympafhv and
protection of Ihe British nation. 3UO VjOj)etT&o many and varied efforts have been
made to induce Her Majesty's Ministers and the British Parliament to teeminale the practice of
Transportation to these Colonies, but without success., £3,ott). tijS'tCfOt® . th< Writ h- of
these Colonies, in conference assembled, 00 bet! ate , their League and Solemn
Engagement, to the effect following:
'lst.—-That they engage not to employ any persons hereafter arriving tinder sentence of
Transportation for crime committed in Europe.
2nd.—That they will use all the powers they possess—official, electoral, and legislative, to
prevent the establishment Of English prisons, or penal settlements within then hounds
that they will refuse assent to any projects to facilitate the administration of such
penal systems, t»nd that they will seek the repeal of all regulations, and the removal of
all establishments for that pm pose.
And lastly, they solemnly engage’ with each other to support by their advice, their monev, and
their countenance, all who may suffer in the lawful promotion of Ibis cause.
Offices of the New South Wales Branch of the Australasian League.


his intention of finally exterminating the evil, in the following remarkable language : “7 he Government have resolved to make a
“ chano-e that amounts to nothing less than the total abolition of Transportation. There is all the evidence it is possible to have, that
“ the system works badly. I will not disgust your Lordships by going into the horrible, the monstrous details. The system is frightful,
“ an d it is a disgrace to the British Nation that such a system should have existed under the British Flag.”
These expressions might be said to do honor to the speaker, if it had been possible for any English Gentleman to have read
the evidence in question without having the same feelings excited. It is painful on the other hand to find that any political
difficulties, miscalled necessities, should have induced the same Minister, whose unbiassed conscience thus execrated the system of 1847,
to perpetrate it during several succeeding years, despite the expostulations of it’s suffering victims. Since the words were used, Earl
Grey has sent to Van Dieman’s Land annual thousands of additional Convicts, to continue that identical disgrace to the
British Flag, which he so strongly reprobated; and his last public act towards that ill-fated Colony, was a laconic assertion of the
right of the British Nation to continue it at pleasure.
There is, it must be confessed, no difficulty in accounting for the Minister’s inconsistency, however remote the explanation
may be from vindication. What Earl Grey intended in the year 1847 is evident enough from the following observation, made in his
Lordship’s speech in the House of Lords already cited : “ I see no difficulty in having the Exile’s passage paid on board some of the usual
“ emigrant ships, that he should thus be enabled to arrive at the Colonies undistinguished amid the general mass, and not recognised as a
“ former Convict.” The position thus taken up in 1847, founded on the then recent Parliamentary Report on Transportation, and the
prevailing public opinion of that day was, that British Offenders ought only to be sent to the Colonies, even after penal and reformatory,
discipline at home, in such numbers as to form a minute and almost imperceptible fraction of the society into which they would be absorbed ;'
and so as to be in fair proportions dispersed through all the Colonial Possessions of England. But it was further admitted as a second, and
equally necessary, condition, that even this minute dose of prison labor should be administered with the consent of each Colony destined
to receive it; a just principle, possibly more cheerfully conceded than it might otherwise have been, under an impression that the demand
for labor in all the important Colonies would universally induce a ready consent. Yet the benefit of this principle has since been
deliberately denied to Van Dieman’s Land on the plea of her standing alone as originally and always a penal colony ; and it is equally
denied, through Yan Dieman’s Land, by insidious evasion, to all the Colonies in the neighbourhood, who are exposed, against their
protests, to be yiiindated by the Criminals sent to Van Dieman’s Land, for the avowed purpose, (see Earl Grey’s speech in the House of
Lords, 12th April, 1850,) of being filtered, through the sieve of liberal manumission, into the adjacent Territories. And it will be
farther denied to New South Wales, if Government, on the application of a few interested flock-masters, who are, as formerly, diligently
besieging the too ready ear of the Minister, shall consent to separate Moreton Bay, with a view to the introduction of Convicts in that
locality.
'This second condition of Colonial consent has, in truth, instead of operating for the protection of the Australasian Colonies, in-
directly drawn them into a greater vortex of injustice, by inducing an oblivion of the first, and to them still more important, condition of
equitable and universal dispersion. For, as the Cape, and each other Colony, have been separately interrogated, and each, with the single
insignificant exception of Western Australia, has separately refused, under an impression that acquiescence would be a voluntary
assumption of the degrading character of a Convict Colony, the British Government has been left with Van Dieman’s Land and
New South Wales, as their only remaining resource. Convicts were accumulating, meanwhile, pending the discussion, in embarrass-
ing numbers, and were thrust on Van Dieman's Land, already gorged with them, thus bringing out the atrocity of the system into
■greater prominence than ever, and aggravating the difficulties and afflictions of all parties concerned.—Each defeat in the effort made
to cajole Colony after Colony into accepting the present of felon labor, has rendered Earl Grey more irritable; more disposed to repent
his admission of their right to reject it at discretion, and to elude, were it possible, the binding effect of his promise to regard it. The
Minister has professed in detail to consult the wishes of each Colony, but in a manner very similar to the Royal Solicitation
of old for the “Benevolence” of the subject. He has yielded one by one to the powerful, or the obstinate; and after thus
destroying the possibility of an equal apportionment, and rendering the number of Convicts for disposal too great to be received by the
others without a violation of his own avowed principles and pledges, he has redoubled importunity and manoeuvre ; and in the case of
Van Dieman’s Land, has assumed naked despotic authority, in order to thrust the nuisance on those Colonies which he considers most
despised and defenceless. —Hence the breach of his promise towards Van Dieman’s Land. —Hence his refusal to receive the second
negative of the Legislative Council of New South Wales as final, and his effort a third time, though in vain, to extort acquiescence by
threatening us, through Van Dieman’s Land, if not even through Moreton Bay, with indirect Transportation, an evasion of his promise
which even the advocates of his measures tell us will be as injurious in a moral point of view, as that direct influx of Convicts to which
he mockingly asked our consent. —Hence his disallowance of our Vagrant Act, by the precautionary provisions of which the mischiefs of
indirect Transportation were sought to be mitigated, (Dispatch, 4th July, 1850, No. 94); and the vetoing of which Act is thus
commented on by the leading journal in Europe: “ A large number of burglaries and highway robberies had been recently perpetrated
“ in Sydney by liberated convicts from Van Dieman’s Land, who, being unknown to the police, facilitated their depredations by passing
“ themselves off as free emigrants. To check these growing disorders the Legislature passed an Act requiring these persons to
“ register themselves, and placing them thus within the knowledge and surveillance of the police. Just as this law had been put
“ into working order, and its good effects began to be felt, the Colony receives from Earl Grey a missive annulling the act, and restoring
“ matters to their former dangerous condition, on the ground that these necessary measures of self-defence are an interference with Her
“ Majesty’s prerogative of pardon. Life and property on the one hand, and Her Majesty’s prerogative on the other, —a prerogative which
“scatters corruption and danger over the Australian Colonies, but against which they are not permitted to bike the most ordinary and
“ necessary precautions!” —London Times, January 21st, 1851.
From the fangs of such a policy we appeal to the fair and honest principles recognized by Earl Grey himself and the whole
British Government and Nation in the year 1847 ; and if it be manifest, as we believe it already is, that Transportation cannot be
carried on in the only way which those principles recognized ds just, namely, in such a manner as to combine the bona fide consent of the
Communities actually influenced by it, with the circumstance of its forming an insignificant and nearly imperceptible element in their
moral structure; we demand in the name of British honor and Christian equity, that it shall wholly cease, and that Great Britain
find some other means of remedying the crime which her social system engenders, than that of sending it when fully matured, detected,
and thereupon detached as a rotten excrescence by legal adjudication, to destroy the happiness and the morals of our infant Communities.
These Colonies may, we think, afford Great Britain yet more valuable aid, and one of mutual advantage, in the way pointed out in a
Resolution


I j
Resolution passed at tlie Great Meeting held in the Barrack Square, at Sydney, on the 16th September, 1850, in the following words,
viz. : “ That while a return to Transportation, would not only he revolting to the feelings of the existing population of New South
“ Wales, it would from its tendency to destroy the attraction of the Colony as a field for emigration, ultimately greatly diminish that
“ very supply of labor which forms the chief recommendation of the measure to its advocates in the Colony, while in regard to Great
‘ Britain, the enormous revenues hitherto wasted in the maintenance of her unemployed population, and in the detection, imprisonment,
“ trial, and transportation of offenders, provide ample means for establishing when more judiciously applied, a vast system of national
“ Colonization, 'which would, relieve the Mother Country from far more of her misery and crime than she has hitherto succeeded in
“ discharging by means of Transportation, upon her Colonies, since it would remove, by anticipation, the very causes of these evils, and
“ transmute them into the seeds of the greatest blessings, supplying the Colony with all the labour required to develope its resources, and
“ yielding to Great Britain in return an incalculable increase of national influence and commercial prosperity.”
We cannot conclude without adverting to a feature in the position of New South Wales which is manifesting itself during the very
act of our correspondence, and assuming an appearance of gigantic importance with reference to its future destiny, and is essentially con-
nected in one of its points of view with the subject under consideration. We allude to the discovery of rich Gold Mines in the neighbour-
hood of Bathurst, accompanied by indications of an extensive deposit of the precious metals over a considerable tract of the interior of the
Colony. This is already inducing those violent changes in our social and commercial relations which always follow in the train of such
discoveries, and the entire results of which, whether good or evil, it would be at present presumptuous to predict. But as respects one
of them, namely, its effect in rendering the Country in which it occurs, and every neighbouring country, totally and for ever unfit for
any purpose of penal discipline, there surely cannot be more than one opinion ; such a country presents the temptations of a paradise to
the reckless multitude, and to transmit thither any more offenders, would be to substitute reward for punishment, and to cherish the
source of crime at the very fountainhead. Any distinction between Van Pieman’s Land and this Colony, for such a purpose as this
is quite'delusive. Earl Grey himself says of the manumitted Convicts of Yan Dieman’s Land, in his speech in the House of Lords, on
12th April, 1850, that “ The whole labour market of the adjacent Colonies, with which Steamers, constantly running, afford an
“ easy communication, will be open to them.” And considering the facilities with which conditional pardons are obtained, there are
few English Criminals avlio would not regard a free passage to the Gold Fields of New South Wales via Hobart Town, as a great boon,
even with the annesure of the requisite legal servitude to be exacted in Van Hieman’s Land, and assuming (what it would be hard to
ensure) an earlier illegitimate escape as impracticable. One of the Sydney Newspapers, in commenting on this subject, forcibly observes :
“It would be a little too much even for Downing-street philosophy to transport a highwayman or a burglar to a gold mine ! At all events, it
“ would very soon prove a little too much for British authority in the Colonies. In the riddance of her morally diseased members in that
“ way, England would very soon get rid of her splendid Australian possessions. If no regard for the social interests of the Australian
“ people, an alarm for the stability of British dominion in Australia should bring Her Majesty’s Ministers to their sober senses. It is
“ not the Botany Bay of three score and ten years ago, where the prisoner could be now sent, to live out his sentence in a strictly Penal
Settlement, or fly from it at the peril of perishing in the inhospitable wilderness; but a country extensively peopled, with the
“ necessaries of life, and even absolute wealth, in thousands of homesteads, scattered over an immense Territory, partially subjugated to
“ the hands of man, and with the solitude of crowded cities for villains to hide in, and in the midst of all an open mine of gold ! The
“ Mazeppa of Byron, bound to the wild steed, and sent flying over the appalling desert to a throne, was an insignificant realization,
'• compared with the Criminals of England careering over the waves in prison ships to be bandit chiefs in the gold regions of New
“ South Wales, and eventually Australian Revolutionists ! ” —(The ‘ Empire,' 16 th May, 1851.)
Policy and humanity alike demand the abandonment at once and for ever of the system, —and difficult though the task may
be of finding a cure for the leprosies of modern society, it is impossible to evade it any longer by casting forth the infected into a
Gehenna at the Antipodes.
Let Great Britain set an example of energetic exertion in reclaiming and educating the children of her poor. —Let each individual
who partakes of the advantages of her high civilization see the personal interest and security of himself and his children involved in
exterminating, at any pecuniary cost, the virus of ignorance and vice, which generates a plague, creeping on slowly yet surely, from the
hovel even unto the palace; let him duly recognize, in order thus to avert, ere it be too late, this awful Nemesis, which by the law of Nature
and God rules alike in the moral, as in the physical world, and all may yet be well. Meanwhile, these Colonies cheerfully tender that
powerful aid in this stupendous task, which may be contributed by a wise system of Colonization, stipulating only for its freedom from
the taint and ignominy of Penal Transportation.
By order of the New South Wales Council of the Australasian League,
GILBERT WRIGHT,
Honorary Secretary.


