



7""
fqiqif.
from a photograph published by
Mr. J WB- Clarice, Stationer, fyc., of the
Market Buildings, George Street.


Just received, splendid notices from
the “ Freeman’s Journal” and “The Express”
Newspapers of the Portrait of his Grace,
A rchbishop Vaughan.
“Portrait of Archbishop Vaughan, —Mr. J. W. R.
Clarke, Bookseller and Stationer, of 5 and 6 Market Buildings,
has sent to this office a cabinet portrait of Archbishop Vaughan.
The portrait is a remarkably clear and faithful one, the ex-
pression of the face and features being true to life, and surpassing
those of any other we remember seeing. Those wishing to have
a good likeness of his Grace would do well to secure a copy
from Mr. Clarke.”
“ Many of our readers will, no doubt, be anxious to secure a
faithful and life-like portrait of the late lamented Archbishop
Vaughan. We have been favoured with a wonderfully expressive
likeness of his Grace by Mr. J. W. R. Clarke, of 5 and 6 Market
Buildings; the portrait is of cabinet size, and the features are
most faithfully represented. We know of none that we can
better recommend to the public notice than that Mr. Clarke has
favoured us with.”
Price; 2s. 6d. each; by post, 2s. Bd. Carte de Visite size,
is. 6d. each; by post, is. Bd.
♦ B
J. W. R. CLARKE,
and
vjsS SJjvS e'erS cdf-' qAT GTfO Air '
5 & 6 MARKET BUILDINGS, GEORGE STREET
THREE DOORS FROM MARKET STREET,
SYDNEY.




THE MOST REV.
ROGER BEDE VAUGHAN, D.D., 0.5.8.,
ARCHBISHOP OF SYDNEY,
LIFE AND LABOURS;
CONTAINING AN ACCOUNT OF HIS CAREER FROM OPENING
TO CLOSE,
A REVIEW OF HIS WRITINGS, SPEECHES AND
ECCLESIASTICAL WORK.
TOGETHER WITH
SOME PERSONAL SKETCHES
NEVER BEFORE PUBLISHED.
F. CUNNINGHAME & CO., STEAM MACHINE PRINTERS,
146 Pitt Street.




PREFACE.
The object the publisher has in bringing out this little book, is to
place the public in possession of all the particulars of the late
Archbishop’s life and labours—in his own country and in ours —
that can be gleaned from authentic records and from every accessible
source of information, with such observations and personal
recollections as the writer and compiler could jot down from the
“ tablets of his memory ” ; also to bind together for better
preservation “the opinions of the Press culled from all the
leading papers of the Australian colonies—concerning the work and
worth of him who
“ Has run his course and sleeps in blessings,”
and whose bones have had
“ A tomb of orphans' tears wept on them.
With some little confidence and reason, the publisher hopes the
book, although having but small pretensions to literary merit, will
prove interesting, and to an extent valuable, if only on account
of the great number of facts, events, and reminiscences—many of
which have never appeared in print —that have been pressed within
its covers. Much of the solid information and the particulars of
the ceremonies at St. Mary’s have been obtained from the columns
of the Freeman's Journal, carefully revised by the writer and
compiler (Mr. James T. Donovan, of the Freeman staff), who has
supplied all the very interesting additional matter, and prepared for
the Press the book now in the hands of the reader.
T. J. MURRAY.
Sydney, September 12, 1883.
*3-355^9/ *?3
19 s nn




Archbishop of Sydney,
THE MOST REV. ROGER BEDE VAUGHAN,




THE MOST HEY.
ROGER BEDE VAUGHAN, 0.5.8.,
ARCHBISHOP OF SYDNEY.
“ This was the noblest Roman of them all—
His life was gentle ; and the elements
So mixed in him, that Nature might stand up
And say to all the world ‘ This was a man .’
According to his virtue let us use him
With all respect and rites of burial.”
*******
“ You all did love him once, and not without cause—
What cause withholds you, then, to mourn for him ?
If you have tears prepare to shed them now.”
Julius CLesak, Acts 111. and V.
“ Men’s evil manners live in brass ; their virtues
We write in water : May it please you
To hear me speak his good now.”
Henry YIIL, Act IV., Scene 11.
Ten golden years ago, when the exalted and blameless life of our first
beloved Archbishop was drawing near its calm and peaceful close, and
when the saintly silver-haired Pontiff needed a strong and valiant
mitred brother at his side —one who was to cheer him in his declining
years, and to receive from him with his dying blessing the pastoral
staff, and the charge of the flock —there came amongst us a young and
noble prelate. Of commanding appearance, with rare gifts and accom-
plishments, and with the prestige of a great name —combining the
matchless chivalry of a knight crusader, and the devotion and pious
bearing of a monk, with the polished manners of a perfect Christian
gentleman, and the dignity and power of a distinguished and cultured
Churchman—the young Coadjutor, in the perfection of physical and
mental strength, set foot upon these shores in December 1873, and the
people, who had prepared a loving reception, met him with outstretched
arms of welcome. The old Archbishop and his Coadjutor worked to-
gether till March 1877, and then, on Dr. Folding’s death, the Most


Eev. Eogeb, Bede Yaughan became Archbishop of Sydney and Metro-
politan. How his Grace laboured and toiled till the day came for him
to leave us for a time, and journey to Eome, we all know. He left us
on April 19, and it is remarkable how exactly, and with what pathetic
charm, the last chapter of his Australian life corresponds with the first.
On his arrival he was met at the Heads by thousands of people, and
from the steamers hundreds of welcome greetings were given amid
cheering and the flying of colours and the sound of joyful music He
said his heart was glad that day ; but who will say that on his recent
leave-taking he did not regard with a pardonable pride and most
pleasurable emotion the magnificent demonstrations in his honour ?
How pleased he was to see the men and women and children crowding
into the Cathedral to hear his last word and to receive his last blessing !
and what joy illumined his countenance as, standing on the bridge of
the mail boat, he raised his hat again and again, and smiled and bowed
in response to the ringing cheers that went up from time to time as the
City of New York, and the fleet of steamers following her, went down
the harbour that beautiful (now to us mournfully historical) afternoon !
That pleasant “Good-bye” spoken by the Archbishop as the vessel
cleared the Heads of the harbour was his farewell to the colony, and
his long farewell to the priests and people to whom he was so devotedly
attached.
His Grace, accompanied by Dr. Gillett, Eeetor of St. John’s
College, proceeded direct to San Francisco, and arrived there on Ihe
17th May in good health. On the Sunday after his arrival the
Archbishop preached a magnificent sermon at St. Mary’s Cathedral,
San Francisco.
His Grace had expressed his intention of personally examining
and “ taking notes ” of the education systems in the United States,
with a view of gathering information that would be of use to him on
his return to Sydney, and he visited all the principal schools and col-
leges in and around San Francisco, by way of commencing his inspec-
tion. Beyond the news from San Francisco no intelligence was received
of his Grace’s doings in America—not even a single letter —but it is
commonly supposed that his three months’ stay was made up of special
visits to Philadelphia and New York, and a rest of some weeks at one
of the celebrated watering-places for the benefit of his health. It has
been reported that during his journey through the States the Arch-
bishop, complying with the wishes of those who had heard of his fame,
delivered lectures; but this is barely possible, especially as his
Grace was suffering from the effects of overwork, and was, as
he himself said before he left us, “ heartily tired of public speaking.”
We were all anxiously awaiting further news, either from America
or from England (four months having elapsed since his Grace’s
departure from Sydney), when the fatal message was flashed
across the water from England, “Archbishop Yaughan died
suddenly at Liverpool.” The particulars of his death are given else-
where. It is not known when his Grace left America, or when he
arrived in England, but it is supposed that he had only just landed in


his native country, and that he died suddenly from disease of the heart.
He was known to have been a sufferer from the disease from boyhood,
and he had himself more than once stated that he was conscious his life
would be cut short. While young it was feared he would fall a victim
to the malady, and it is no secret that on leaving England for Australia
the medical men with whom he consulted expressed their fears that he
would not live two years in this colony. However, God blessed him
with health and strength to do his work here, and it is at least consol-
ing in the midst of our great affliction to remember that his life amongst
us was crowned with the glory of having fulfilled his mission in Aus-
tralia. Among his intimate friends here it was known that he was
suffering from this affection of the heart, and also that his physical and
mental strength was often overtaxed, and it was in all human proba-
bility his consciousness that death would steal suddenly upon him that
nerved him to constant action, to be always “ up and doing,” so that it
might be his privilege to rank with those who
“ In the world’s broad field of battle,
In the bivouac of life, ”
played their part manfully and courageously, and
“ Foremost fighting, fell.”
There is something inexpressibly sad in thinking of the sudden
closing of the great and beautiful life of the lion-hearted and golden-
tongued prelate just at the time when he had achieved the
highest fame for his noble efforts in religion and the arts, and
when his hopes were brightest and his energies strongest, and his
plans nearest perfect accomplishment. Until the arrival of letters or
papers we will have to wait patiently for details of the deeply-lamented
decease of the magnificent prelate who came to us perfectly equipped
and with a ready hand, and an active brain, in our hour of necessity;
who worked with us shoulder to shoulder in all our undertakings ; who
entered with his heart and soul into all our affairs, and who, while ever
pointing out the path for us to follow, always led us and cheered us by
shining examples of virtue, zeal, courage, and devotion. To speak
justly and worthily of his labours during the ten years of ceaseless ac-
tivity he spent amongst us, or to speak in language worthy of the
subject of the great loss the whole colony has sustained in his death,
would not be an easy task at any time, and our difficulty now is in-
creased by the peculiarly distressing circumstances of the unexpected
decease, and the almost agonizing severity of the affliction. We can
only hope now to touch very lightly upon his merits and his services.
To say that his death is a heavy blow to the Church in this colony, and
to reli :ion in Australia, and an almost irreparable loss to our public
life, is not an exaggeration. And we are not the only mourners and
sufferers, for there are thousands not of our communion in all walks of
society who held the late Archbishop in the highest reverence, and who
would not yield to us in admiration of him for his great learning, his
culture, his broad views, his large sympathies, and his honesty and
valour. As a preacher his Grace was popular with all classes, and


idolized by bis own people, bis sermons never failing to draw immense
congregations ; and as a writer and speaker be proved himself a master
of both arts. He has been one of our recognized public men —a man,
too, whose words always commanded unusual attention; and, although
hard things have often been said of him by critics opposed to his prin-
ciples in religion and education, nothing has ever been told to weaken
the love and reverence for his greatness, his candour, his purity, and
his Christian charity. With a marvellous serenity of temperament, he
met difficulties and disappointments with a gaiety of heart which was
proof against the evil effects of personal anxieties, and that high courage
which carried him triumphantly through every conflict or labour always
sustained him when a confident and generous intrepidity was essential.
On all occasions, and especially during the issuing of his famous
Pastorals on the Education question, he proved himself a match for his
critics and opponents, and his firmness and frankness and unquestioned
earnestness generally won him the sympathy and support of honest
men. He was a man of singular nobility of character, and to us
“ has been
As one, in suffering all, that suffers nothing ;
A man that Fortune’s buffets and rewards
Hast ta’en with equal thanks.”
The Archbishop was a firm believer in the doctrine that “ if a
thing’s worth doing it’s worth doing well,” and in all his addresses of
any importance delivered in this colony since the day of his landing he
showed that he had mastered every subject on which he spoke, and
that he had taken the trouble to “ marshal his thoughts,” so that his
words would be intelligible to all, and have the desired effect. All his
celebrated speeches on the Education question, and, in fact, nearly all
his public utterances, were carefully and ably prepared, and, know-
ing how every word of his was weighed and criticised by his opponents
and the general public, he generally had “his speech in his pocket” for
the reporters of the daily papers, in order to prevent possible mistakes
and misrepresentations. The Archbishop frequently read his addresses,
more particularly those delivered at the St. John’s College Commemora-
tions, but generally his wonderful memory enabled him to speak off
with power and vigour and literal exactness —with only an occasional
glance at his manuscript—important speeches occupying sometimes over
an hour in delivery, which he had previously written out in his study.
His speeches were models of good, plain English, and his style polished
and forcible, with a manly ring about his every utterance. To the
members of the press Dr.YATJGHAN was always courteous and considerate,
and no public speaker held a higher place in the good opinion of the
“ fourth estate ” than the gifted prelate whose admirable and spirited
addresses so often relieved the monotony of journalistic existence, and
brightened and adorned the pages of the metropolitan newspapers.
From the fact of the Archbishop writing his speeches, it must not be
inferred that his Grace had not the gifts of natural eloquence and of ex-
tempore speaking. It was his profound consideration for his listeners
or readers, and his appreciation of the importance of his subject, that


induced him to make such elaborate preparation; but in his “happy
moments” —for instance, when addressing the monthly meetings in the
pro-Oathedral, or when speaking at the Christmas gatherings in the
schools, or in his after-dinner speeches, he spoke most fluently, and
with a good humour, a careless simplicity, and a pleasant grace that
had a charming effect. His voice was as clear as a bell—“ a clarion
voice”—and with the statuesque figure, the commanding eye, the big
heart, and the “ honeyed tongue ” of the ideal orator he could fascinate
the densest crowd, and rouse enthusiasm and emotion in the most
phlegmatic and unsympathetic of his audience. In public life the
Archbishop ever maintained that dignity becoming his high office, but
in his “ home ” at St. John’s he was—to borrow a Shakespearian
phrase—“ the best king of good fellows,” and the visitor who for the
first time walked tremblingly through the solemn arches of the College
corridor to meet him face to face soon had his nervousness and diffidence
dispelled by the bright eyes and the friendly voice of the Archbishop,
and, above all, by his easy and homely manners. Everyone that ever had
the privilege of an interview came away from the College with none but
most pleasant feelings of friendship and admiring respect. Upon great
principles his Grace stood firm as a rock, and in the discharge of duties
requiring resolution and courage was stern and inexorable ; but in the
ordinary affairs of daily life, and especially in matters involving some
personal sacrifice on his part, some tax on his patience, or some curtail-
ment of his “ leisure hour,” he was as easily swayed as a child, and was
ever ready to do the will of others when there was something good to be
done. Dr. Vaughan was of a remarkably retiring and studious disposition,
spending most of his time in his library or study at St. John’s, where he
lived very humbly, and, with the exception of occasional appearances at
Government House in his representative character, and calls on such of
his friends as were in serious trouble or affliction, his visits were like
angels’—few and far between. In his reading ho was omnivorous, and
not only was he familiar with every page of the ancient ponderous
tomes on the well-stocked shelves of his library, but he could also claim
a perfect acquaintance with the most modern magazine literature, and
no one could better appreciate the satiric strokes, or more keenly enjoy
the latest hon mot in London Punch or Paris Figaro. His Grace was an
accomplished linguist, and his love of the classics was proverbial. To
the study of mental philosophy he devoted years, and the fruits of this
study were often manifest in his addresses and writings. As an ad-
ministrator and organizer it would have been impossible for anyone to
have succeeded more than the late Archbishop ; and rejoicing in being
a hard worker, he was never slow in appreciating merit in others, nor
in applauding good service wherever and whenever performed. Apart
from his admirable qualities of heart and mind, the late Archbishop
was in personal appearance and in graciousness of manner “ every inch
a king,” and it mast have struck all who were present at the opening
of St. Mary’s, and who watched the noble and imposing figure, tower-
ing above all others, how perfectly it realized one’s ideal of a great
prince of the Church.


“ What a grace was seated on his brow ;
Hyperion’s curls; the front of Jove himself;
An eye, like M ars, to threaten and command ;
A station like the herald Mercury,
New lighted on a heaven-kissing hill;
A combination and a form, indeed,
Where every god did seem to set his seal
To give the world assurance of a man.”
He dedicated to his religion his sunny youth, his bright fortunes, and
his splendid talents, humbly walking in the footsteps of his Master,
and consecrating every day of his life to God. He cherished no higher
ambition —as he could conceive no nobler duty—than to live and die in
the holy service to which he had so completely surrendered himself;
he thought only of religion ; lived for no other object; dedicated to it
all his beautiful fancy, his rich scholarship, his manly courage, and all
the splendour of his astonishing eloquence. No danger ever dismayed
him, as no calamity ever disheartened him, in the performance of what
he in conscience believed to be his duty. With so many natural ad-
vantages, and possessing those rare gifts that command admiration as
they secure fame and affluence, he might have risen to eminence in any
rank of life —poetry, forensic skill, elegant literature, and all the highest
attainments of human genius were within his reach, but he thought the
noblest occupation of man was to do God’s work on earth ; and in the
straight and oftimes thorny path of duty he went on till death, “with-
out one side look,” to use a celebrated phrase, “ without one yielding
thought, without a motive in his heart that he might not have laid open
to the view of God and man.” Our Shakespeare’s words, spoken of a
great cardinal, may not be altogether inappropriately applied to him
who is now at rest for ever. He
“Was fashioned to much honour from his cradle;
He was a scholar, and a ripe good one ;
Exceeding wise, fair spoken, and persuading ;
Lofty and sour to those that loved him not;
But to those men that sought him sweet as summer
Christendom shall ever speak his virtue.”
And let us hope that his memory will be kept green here, where he
gave his heart, energies, and choicest gifts for our service, and that
the remembrance of his name and deeds
“will live in the light of the years
With a reverence not to be bought, and a tenderness deeper than tears.”
THE MESSAGE OE DEATH.
On Sunday afternoon, 19th August, the sad news from England
was received at the Cathedral. A cable arrived about half-past two,
and Father Placid Quirk, on opening it, read the announcement that
afterwards occasioned so much sorrow throughout Australia. The mes-
sage was —“ Telegram from Liverpool Station.—Archbishop Yaughan
died suddenly to-day. (Signed) Salford. Dated Saturday, 18th in-
stant. Time, 9.20 p.m.” Father Quirk at once communicated with
the Very Key. the Yicar-General (Dr. Sheridan), and a meeting of the


senior clergy, hurriedly 'convened, was held at the Cathedral to con-
sider the appalling intelligence. His Lordship the Eight Eev. Dr.
Torheg giant, Bishop of Armidale, who was in Sydney, presided at the
meeting, and, after many expressions of grief and affection, arrange-
ments were made for paying all the sacred honours to the memory of
the lamented Archbishop. Messages were despatched to all the
churches and convents of the city and suburbs, and, so rapidly did the
dreadful news travel, that by evening the whole metropolis was aware
of its great loss and distressing affliction. Telegrams were at once sent
to the Bishops of all the Australasian dioceses, including New Zealand
and Tasmania. The bells of the churches were solemnly tolled, and
the Cathedral bellringers rang a muffled peal throughout the evening.
The Yicar-General despatched a message to Cardinal Simeoni, Prefect
of the Propaganda, Eome—“ Archiepiscopus Sydneiensis mortuus est
improvise and he also sent to England for a confirmation of the in-
telligence. Sir Patrick Jennings also despatched a message to Mr.
Begin add Vaughan, but the hopeful inquiry brought no good news.
On Sunday evening an immense crowd of people flocked to the
Cathedral, but before Dean Mahony made the formal announcement,
the High Altar, draped with black, and the death-knell told their own
tale. After prayers, Dean Mahony entered the pulpit, and, in deliver-
ing the brief but distressing announcement, he said—“ The hand of
the Lord is heavy upon us to-night. We are orphans. Our Arch-
bishop, our father, is dead.” Most of the congregation received the
shock in solemn silence, but many of those present were unable to
restrain their grief and keep back their tears. After this the Dead
March from Saul was played on the organ. Very many of the con-
gregation remained to pray for the soul of their dear Archbishop, and
an air of mournfulness pervaded the whole Cathedral. At the Sacred
Heart Church, St. Francis’, St. Patrick’s, St. Benedict’s, St. Michael’s,
and all the other city and suburban churches pathetic references were
made to the Archbishop’s death, and prayers offered. At St. Matthias’s
Anglican Church, Woollahra, the Eev. Dr. Z. Barry made a touching
reference to the loss sustained by the Catholic Church and the colony.
On Monday morning masses were celebrated at the Cathedral by Dean
Mahony and Fathers Quirk, Eyan, Moynagh, and M ‘lntyre, the at-
tendance at each being exceedingly large. Masses were also celebrated
throughout the whole of the Australian colonies.
the dirge and requiem at st. mary’s.
It was arranged at the meeting of the clergy that the solemn
public service should take place in the Cathedral on Thursday. On
Wednesday, while the preparations were being made, the Cathedral
was thronged with people, the draping of the nave and sanctuary, and
the fixing of the “ trappings of woe ” being watched with a melancholy
interest. On Thursday, the bells
“ Tolling, tolling, tolling, in a muffled monotone,”
brought the people in immense crowds to St. Mary’s, and long
before appointed for the service to commence, the great


edifice was filled in every part. Still men and women came crushing
in, and, so dense became the crowd within the building by half-past
ten, that it is estimated that there were over 6,000 persons present, all
moved with the one desire of paying a tribute of love and reverence to
the dead Archbishop. Hundreds were unable to gain admission. With
so enormous a crowd on any ordinary occasion confusion and disorder
would have been inevitable, but the all-absorbing sorrow, and the
tender remembrance of the dead, calmed people’s hearts and minds,
and there was throughout that long service no incident that marred
the dignity and impressiveness of the ceremonial. The churchwardens,
Messrs. Hickey, M'Mahon, M'Namarka, and Connell, displayed very
great zeal and tact in the management of affairs, and some officers and
members of the A. H. C. Guild also gave valuable assistance. Every-
thing was in keeping with the dignity of the exalted office of the late
prelate, and nothing that faithful hearts and loving hands could do was
forgotten. The doors of the Cathedral bore the symbol of the “ house
of death,” and in the great nave scarcely anything was to be seen but
signs of grief and mourning. All the tall and massive columns from
base to cap were hidden by the heavy black draperies and graceful
white hangings, and the southern wall at the end of the nave was
draped and covered with wreaths and crosses made of white flowers.
At the end of the nave there were also arranged a number of “ weeping
cypresses,” palms, and ferns, which had been sent by Mr. Moore, the
director of the Botanical Gardens. Mr. Burton Bradley, of Ashfield,
sent choice flowers, and floral tributes came in from all quarters. The
pulpit, draped in black, was decked with floral designs of an appro-
priate description, and the sanctuary and High Altar were literally
clofhed in sorrow. Immediately in front of the sanctuary stood the
catafalque, with its hundred wax tapers, and its wealth of beautiful and
fragrant flowers. Above the dark steps of the catafalque, on which
rested the flower and candle stands of golden metal, were the mitre,
stole, and pallium of the late prelate, and the chalice used so often by
him in the holy Mass, and which was originally presented to Arch-
bishop Folding by the Queen of Spain. The other vessels belonging
to the Queen of Spain’s gold altar service, and the plate used by his
Grace when pontificating, were arranged on the steps among the
flowers, while immediately in front of the catafalque was placed his
Grace’s handsome crozier, formed of colonial gold and polished
wood. The countless wreaths and bouquets and floral crosses
and garlands sent as offerings by loving hearts were arranged
with exquisite taste, and the base of the pyramid of lights and
flowers was relieved b> large crosses of snow-white camellias and
spotless lilies. Heavy and black were the drapings of the Archbishop’s
throne, and its steps were covered with dark cloth. A lovely wreath
and a cross formed of white roses, tiny ferns, and violets, the graceful
gifts of the young ladies of St. Vincent’s Convent College, were placed
on the throne, and the floral cross sent by the Sisters of the convent
was fixed on the front of the High Altar. In the draping ol the High
Altar and the reredos, an artistic and refined taste was displayed, and.


for effect, nothing could have been more beautiful and imposing, the
contrast between the white stone, with all the rich carvings, and the
graceful hangings of silk and cashmere and crape being very marked.
High above the altar, on the delicately-chiselled pinnacle of the rere-
dos, was hung a wreath of immortelles, and from this descended a
canopy of crape and silk. The massive brass rails of the sanctuary
were draped, and the gasaliers and altar lamps covered with crape.
Small Maltese crosses of white silk were used for looping the black
drapery, and all along the pillars there were hung immense wreaths of
white flowers. In order to have that “dim, religious light,” so essen-
tial to effect, the great northern window was screened and draped for
the sad occasion, but still the softened golden sunbeams poured in, as
if it were the will of Providence that the light of God’s love should
brighten the darkness of our grief. The arrangements were in the
hands of Messrs Ejley Brothers, and the manner in which the whole
work was done is highly creditable to the firm. Mr. P. T. Eiley and
Mr. A. J. Eiley personally superintended the solemn preparations,
and Mr. P. F. Murphy, the foreman of Messrs. Eiley’s staff, received
every possible assistance from Mr. James Eyan, the sacristan, and
from the clergy of the Cathedral. The High Altar being the gift of
the Eiley family, the Messrs Eiley had an especial interest in devot-
ing so much care and attention to it in making the preparations for the
solemn ceremonial. One thing especially the Messrs. Eiley are to be
commended for and thanked, and that is for having everything per-
fectly appropriate, and in harmony with the canons of good taste, and
for religiously avoiding anything that would have appeared to others
as mere vulgar display, and which would have wounded our sensi-
bilities and distracted our thoughts. A special chair and priedieu,
draped with black, were placed on the epistle side of the altar for each
of the Bishops, and immediately below the sanctuary steps chairs of an
appropriate description and praying stools were placed for the dis-
tinguished persons who had expressed their intention of being present.
The solemn ceremonies commenced at half-past ten o’clock.
Shortly before that hour his Excellency the Governor, Lord Augustus
Loftus, the Hon. W. B. Dalley, Q. 0., Attorney-General; Sir Patrick
Jennings, K.C.M.G., K.8.G., M.L.A.; Captain Burgess Watson, of
H.M.S. Miranda ; Captain Henderson, of H.M.S. Nelson ; and Mr. 0.
Unwin, his Excellency’s Private Secretary, entered the Cathedral by
the Sacristy, and were escorted by Dean Mahony to the places reserved
for them. Sir Patrick Jennings, Lady Jennings, and family were in
deep mourning, being related to the' Archbishop, and it was remark-
able that throughout the entire congregation, composed of people of
all denominations, there was an almost complete absence of any bright
colours.
Among the gentlemen who could be distinguished among the
immense congregation were his Excellency the Governor, Lord
Augustus Loftus; Mr. C. Unwin, his Excellency’s Private Secretary;
Sir Patrick Jennings, K.0.M.G., K.S.G., M.L.A. ; the Hon. W. B.
Dailey, Q. 0., Attorney-General; his Honor Mr Justice Faucett; Captain


Burgess Watson, E.N., H.M.B. Miranda; Captain Henderson, R.N.*
H.M.S. Nelson; Mr. J. E. Redmond, M.P. ; Alderman D. O’Connor*
ML. A.; Alderman R. Butcher, M.L.A., Mayor of Woollahra ; Mr. L..
E. Heydon, M.L.A.; Mr. A. Loughnan, M.L.A.; Mr. Thomas Dalton,
M L.A. ; Mr. J. B. Oliffe, M.L.A. ; the Hon. Alexander Gordon, the
Hon. R. Stout, of New Zealand ; Mr. T. Makinson, Private Secretary
to the late Archbishop ; the Eev. John Osborne, of the York-street
Wesleyan Church; John Hughes, K.S.G, J.P.; Dr. Donovan, Mr.
John Hourigan, J.P.; Mr. P, M'Mahon, J.P.; Mr. William Hughes,
J.P ; Mr. J. Donovan, J.P. ; Mr. J. J. Curran, J.P. ; Mr. Charles
Farrell, LL.B.; Mr. F. J. M'Carthy, M.A.; Mr. F. B. Freehill, M.A. ;
Mr. E. F. Flanagan, Mr. T. Butler (editor Freeman's JournalJ, Mr. M.
Shalvey, Mr. E. J. Rubie, Mr. E. G. Ellis, Mr. T, Curran, Mr. E.
Farrell, Mr. J. F. M‘Donall, Mr. J. D. Fitzgerald, Mr. J. G. O’Eyan,
Mr. A. J. Brady, Mr. Charles Heydon, Mr. E. Hollingdale, Mr. James
Dalton, Mr. R. F. Carolan, Mr. C. A. M. Billyard, Mr. W. P. Manning,
Mr. W. Brady, Mr. J. L, Watkins, Mr. Morgan M‘Mahon, Mr. J. J.
Hayes, Mr. C. Moore, Mr. E. Byrne, Mr. P. T. Riley, Mr. A. J. Riley*
Mr. A. M. Makinson, Captain Punch, Mr, T. J. Murray, Mr. Newman
(David Jones and Co.), Dr. Clune, Mr. T. J. Ryan, Mr. B. Mulroney,
Mr. J. D. Donovan, Mr. F. S. Macdermott (Federal Bank), Mr. P. C.
Curtis, Mr. J. Coghlan, Mr. John Higgins, Mr. P. Kirby, Mr. E.
Eamsden, Mr. Charles Coveny, and Mr. Henry Gorman. The com-
mittee of management were the churchwardens—Messrs. M'Namarra*
Hickey, Connell, and M‘Mahon, assisted by Alderman O’Connor*
M.L.A., and Mr. Hourigan, J.P. ; Mr. F. S. Macdermott, Mr. P. T.
Riley, Mr. J. F M'Donall. Mr. P. Kirby, Mr. W. Brady, Mr. Brophy*
Warden of the A. H. C. Guild, Mr. J. Shehan, Secretary, A. H. C.
Guild, and Mr. Flanagan, Councillor A. H. C. Guild. Commodore
Erskine, of H.M.S. Nelson, had signified his intention of being present,
but was compelled, on account of a sudden illness, to absent himself.
The Sisters of Charity, the Sisters of the Good Samaritan, the
Sisters of St. Joseph, the Sisters of Mercy, and of the other religious
orders had benches reserved for them in the eastern aisle, near the
sanctuary, and the Marist Brothers were also present. After the long
and imposing procession from the sacristy, which was headed by a
cross-bearer and two acolytes with unlighted candles, and the prelates
and clergy having taken their places, according to seniority and dignity,
at either side of the sanctuary, the Dirge was commenced. The scarlet-
robed acolytes, who all wore mourning sashes, were arranged in pic-
turesque groups on the broad sanctuary steps at either side of the
catafalque. Anything more solemn looking, in a religious sense, than
the sanctuary, with its rows of ecclesiastics—the bishops in purple, and
the priests in black soutans, with white cottas—it would be hard to
imagine, and, as one gazed at the vacant throne and its sombre
hangings, memories were revived of the glorious Triduum, when,
amid all the splendour of ceremonial, a tall and kingly figure stood
and moved with stately grace, “ the observed of all observers.”


The prelates and clergy present at the Cathedral during the
solemn dirge and Requiem were his Lordship the Eight Eev. Dr.
Murray, Bishop of Maitland; his Lordship the Eight Rev. Dr. Lanigan,
Bishop of Goulburn; his Lordship the Eight Eev. Dr. Torreggiani,
Bishop of Armidale; the Very Eev. Dr. Sheridan, O.S 8., Vicar -
General and Administrator; the Eight Reverend Monsignor Lynch,
the Venerable Archdeacon Rigney, the Venerable Archpriest Sheehy,
0 S.B. ; the Very Reverend Dean O’Connell, the Very Reverend Dean
Hanly, the Very Reverend Dean Hallinan, D.D.; the Very Reverend
Dean Dwyer, 0.5.8. ; the Very Rev. Dean O’Brien, the Very
Reverend Dean M‘Carthy, Very Reverend Dean Murlay (late of
Queensland), the Very Reverend Dean Kenny, the Very Reverend Dean
Flanagan, Very Rev. J. Dalton, S J., President of Riverview College ;
Very Rev. P. L. Dunne, 0 S.F, Superior of Franciscan Fathers ; Rev.
P. Le Rennetel, S.M.,Vice-Rector St John’s College ; Rev. D. Clancy,
S.J , President St. Kilda College; Very Rev. Dean Mahony, Rev. D.
P. Quirk, M.A. ; Rev. Father M‘lntyre, Rev. Father Ryan, and Rev.
Father Moynagh, St. Mary’s Cathedral; Rev. Z. F. Muraire, S.M ,
Acting Provincial; Rev. Father Coue, S.M. ; Rev. Father Ginisty,
S.M. ; Rev. Father Piquet, S M.; Rev, Father Bertreux, S.M. ; Rev.
Father Ecuyer, S.M.; Rev. J. B. Chataigner, S.M.; Rev. Father
Tressalet, S.M.; Rev. Father O’Connell, S.J.; Rev. Father Brennan,
S.J.; Rev. William Kelly, BJ. ; Rev. Father Morrogh, S J.; Rev.
Father Dooley, S.J.; Rev. M. Kelly, S.J.; Rev. John Ryan, S.J.;
Rev. M. Harrington, S.J.; Rev. Father Keating, S.J.; Rev. Father
Gartlan, S.J. ; Eev. Edmund Butler, M.A., St. John’s College ; Rev.
M. A. Holohan, 0.5. F.; Eev. Father Kavanagh, O.S F.; Rev. Father
Joyce, O.S.F. ; Rev. Father Hanrahan, O.S.F. ; Rev. J. P. Fitzpatrick,
0.5.8. ; Rev. H. B. Callachor, 0.5.8. ; Eev. H. B. Curr, 0.5.8.; Rev.
J. J. Carroll, Rev. J. J. Garvey, Rev. T. O’Reilly, Eev. E. O’Brien,
Rev. D. M‘Carthy, Rev. W. J. Riordan, Eev. P. Cassidy, Rev. J.
Collins, Rev. C. F. P. Collingridge, Rev. Father Patterson, of London;
Rev. A. T. O’Dwyer, Rev. A. Ambrosoli, Rev. E. Walsh, Rev. M.
Walsh, Rev. A. W. Petre, Rev. P. Hewitt, Eev. Father Berry, Rev,
D. F. Barry, O.S 8., Rev. Father Phelan, Rev. P. Carroll, Rev. J. M.
Garavel, Eev. P. Young, Rev. Father Murphy, Rev. J. Sheridan, Rev,
Father O’Donohoe, Rev. J. J. Pollard, Rev. P. Hayes, Rev, James
Mahony, Rev. Father D. Harnett, Rev. P. Ryan, Rev. M. Keogan;
also, the Very Rev. Dr. Byrne, Vicar-General of the Diocese of
Bathurst ; Very Eev. Edmund Vaughan, C.SS.R. ; Rev. Fathers
Hegarty and O’Farrel, C.SS.R., of the Redemptorists, Singleton ; Eev.
Father Meagher, of the Maitland diocese.
During the Dirge the ,Rev. D. P. Quirk, M.A., 0.5.8., and the
Rev. Father Moynagh, were the cantors, and the Rev. J. P. Fitzpatrick,
0.5.8.; Eev. H. B. Callachor, 0.5.8 ; and the Bev. Father Quirk
the antiphonarians; and the Lessons were recited by Father Quirk,
Father Garavel, Dean O’Connell, Archdeacon Rigney, Archpriest
Sheehy, the Vicar-General, the Bishop of Armidale, the Bishop of
Goulburn, and the Bishop of Maitland. The Requiem High Mass


then commenced, His Lordship Dr. Murray officiating as celebrant;
Rev. J. P Fitzpatrick, deacon; and the Rev. P. Le Rennetel, S.M., of
St. John’s College, sub-deacon ; and the Venerable Archpriest Sheehy,
Assistant Priest. The ceremonies were conducted with perfect order
by the Very Rev. Dean Dwyer, 0.5.8., and the Rev, Father M‘lntyre.
Mozart’s Requiem Mass No. XV. was magnificently sung by the great
choir composed of the members of all the Catholic choirs in the city
and suburbs. Over three hundred voices joined in the choruses, and
the singers were supported by a splendid orchestra. The Rev. D. P.
■Quirk had the management of the musical service. Mr. F. J Halle-
well was the conductor. The soloists were Mrs. Riley, Miss L. Healy,
Mr. D. F. Kelly, Signor Riccardi, and Signor Vittorini, and the other
leading singers were Mrs. Hunt, Miss Stafford, Miss Collins, Mrs.
Colley, Mrs. Banks, Mrs. Addy, Herr Alpen, Mr. J, A. Gread, and Mr.
J. B. Doyle. Mr. Sebastian Hodge and Mr. W. Rice led the orchestra,
and Mr. T. P. Banks gave noble aid at the organ. The singing was
grandly impressive, and the manner in which the Requiem was arranged
and performed with so little time for preparation, reflects the highest
possible credit upon Father Quirk, Mr. Hallewell, Mr. Banks, and all
■concerned. The choir was much indebted to Mr. Raimond Pocotsch,
who at a few hours’ notice scored the orchestral parts of the mass. Mr.
Charles Huenerbein, and Mr. J. C. Fischer gave very valuable assistance
to Mr. Hallewell. Before the Dirge the orchestra played the Dead
March from Saul, and at the conclusion of the ceremonies of the day
the impressive march was again performed. The offertory solo was the
“ Pro
Hallewell, gave a dignified and touchingly pathetic rendering of the
solemn aria.
The scene in the Cathedral during the elevation—always the most
solemn part of the mass—was profoundly impressive and soul stirring.
As if by magic the mournful music was suddenly hushed j—the priests
and acolytes with lighted tapers in their hands knelt devoutely round
the sanctuary, and—every head was bowed—the great Cathedral became
as silent as a tomb, the death like stillness being only broken by the
tinkling of the altar bell—it was then the prayers were offered for the
dead Archbishop,—a thousand prayers for eternal rest and perpetual
light in Jerusalem the Golden.
THE SERMON.
After mass the Rev. William Kelly, S.J., of St. Kilda College,
preached the sermon, the immense congregation listening with intense
interest and unbroken attention to the eloquent and gifted preacher.
‘ ‘ And there were much weeping among them all: and falling on Paul’s neck
they kissed him, being very much grieved for the word which he had said that
they should see his face no more.” These words, said the rev. preacher, were
taken from a chapter in the Acts of the Apostles, and had reference to an incident
in the life of St. Paul. The people to whom St. Paul addressed himself were in
grief fearing that they should see the face of the Apostle no more. These words
were singularly in harmony with the unexpected and melancholy circumstance
which had drawn this vast assemblage together on this day. The deep and heartfelt


sorrow with which their hearts were moved arose from the fact that the noble
presence, the fair form, and the intellectual countenance of him who had been the
head of their Church in this archdiocese they would never again behold. When
these words were used by St Paul there might have been a feeling that they might
not be realised—that the Apostle Paul was not speaking from actual prophetic
insight into the future ; that perhaps, after all, it was only a presentiment founded
upon an appreciation of the dangers of the voyage he was about to make, and the
labours which lay before him, rendering it improbable in the ordinary course of
affairs that he would ever appear among them again. The people might have felt
that perhaps, after all, the blow was not to be struck, that the separation was not
impending, and it might be that in the course of God’s love and providence they
should once again behold the beloved face. He need hardly say that such thoughts
could not occupy their minds to-day. They had to speak of the past, not of the
future. They were not now calling before their thoughts what lay in the time to
come. They had to speak of that which had actually taken place, and therefore
it was utterly impossible for them to deceive themselves with the fond hope
that the same fair form, the same noble figure, and the same beaming eyes would
again appear among them. In the parting from St. Paul to which he had
alluded, the people threw themselves upon his beloved form, and lavished
upon him all the testimonies of their reverence and affection, and, as the
Scripture related, they accompanied him to the ship which was to bear him
away, but never bring him back. Their own case was different indeed.
When they accompanied their Archbishop to the ship which was to bear him
from this land, and that, as it was destined, was never to bring him back
again, there was hardly a fear, hardly a thought among the great multitude
that thronged this grand Cathedral this noble but unfinished work with
which he was so intimately connected that he would not return. When
the Archbishop was accompanied to the ship that was to carry him away
on the ocean to distant parts—from the land of his adoption to the land of
his fathers there was certainly no one who did not believe or expect that
the vessel upon which he was destined to make himself a charm and delight
to his companions on the voyage—that that vessel would be the vehicle, under
Divine Providence, of restoring him that strength and health which had been to a
great extent enfeebled and worn away by his gigantic and exhaustive labours, and
that in course of time another vessel would bring him back to them with renewed
health and increased vigour, to receive such a welcome as would show the great
love and the universal joy which the people of his Church would feel upon his
return such a welcome as would have far eclipsed the splendid demonstration that
took place when his Grace left these shores. Such was the distraction of human
affairs that ordinary cares and operations of the last two or three days might have
soften and blunted the great grief which was felt so keenly when the sudden
announcement was made ; but when they came face to face with the tremendous
truth—when they were gathered within this Cathedral which had been built under
his guidance and aided by his great efforts —when they stood before that sanctuary
which he was wont to adorn —when they looked towards the altar and saw what
now intercepted the gaze —when they called to mind the day of his departure, when
he stood upon the spot now occupied by the sad and gloomy emblems of his death —
when they gazed upon the throne where they had seen him perform with grace and
majesty the solemn functions of his noble and saintly office—when they looked at
the spot once occupied by his fair and stately form, but now occupied by that
which represented death—then it was that they could realise the terrible and
sudden blow which had fallen upon them when their beloved Archbishop was
stricken down. The remembrance of the majestic presence and the noble features
of their beloved father the late Archbishop filled them with melancholy and
sorrow when the thought came upon them that they should behold them no more.
When the high functions of the priesthood were vested in a man it was well that
the body and the mind should both be fair, and that he should be worthy to stand
in the sight of God and in His House. Noble as was that Cathedral, stately as
were its proportions, great as were the hopes of its being carried to completion,
there was scarcely one amongst them who thought that the building, fair and


imposing as it was, was too noble for that majestic figure which performed the
exalted functions of his sacred office within its walls. He had an edifice which he
most adorned, and of which he was the very life centre, and it was through him
that it was carried so far towards completion. Their Archbishop sprang from an
ancient line, and he was a man of gentle blood. Generally speaking, the records
of an old family were records of deeds of bravery in old battles, and they might
recogonise in the valour of his ancestors who fought in the field of Agincourt, the
courage, the steadfastness, and the devotedness with which the Archbishop fought
amongst themselves the great battle of his Church and of the souls of her
children. But it was unnecessary for him to dwell upon such things because
they were all as well known to them as they were to him. The Archbishop’s
life since he reached these Australian shores was known to them all. He should
not attempt then, because it is unnecessary, to say to them what manner of
man the late prelate was. His thoughts were his words, his works were
known to everyone, and no one could attempt to ignore his existence, his words,
his works, or his services. He had stood forward so directly, so clearly, that every
action of his must needs be known to all. It was recorded of an illustrious Roman
of the ancient time that when an architect offered to erect for him a dwelling that
sjhould be sacred from the public gaze, he said—“ Erect me a building so that every-
one may see my every action, and everything to which my hand is put,” and
in like manner the Archbishop was placed in such a position that there could
be nothing in his life secret or concealed. Besides, he was of such inherently
truthful temperament —of such a spontaneous outburst of veracity from himself
—that they could read his every word and thought, and feel the certainty
that there was nothing sinister in them they were always sure there was
nothing behind anything he did. After graceful references to the virtues and
accomplishments of the Archbishop, and to his great labours in connection
with Catholic education and the building of St. Mary’s, the preacher said that
the logic of realties proved that neither in one or the other of his great
undertakings had he laboured under any species of hallucination. The Arch-
bishop, in connection with his noble aims and operations for the moral eleva-
tion of men, and for the inculcation of the lesson that mere wordly practical know-
ledge was futile without the conviction that the soul of man aspired to something
higher and nobler—that the human mind was superior to all wordly possessions—-
wrote a book—the life of St- Thomas Aquinas—which, he had no doubt, would
preserve the author’s name in grateful remembrance for generations. Whatever
the Archbishop was considered by others, he was pre-eminently the champion of
Catholic education in this diocese. His memory would be for ever consecrated in
what he had done in that important sphere. In conclusion, he (Father Kelly)
should only say that they had assembled together neither to bury nor to praise him.
Not to bury him, because he had been committed to the dust in the home of his
fathers—a land hallowed of old by the ministry and by the graves of so many of
his brethren of the ancient order of St. Benedict. On the other hand, they were not
there to praise him, because they felt that he might say, in the Apostolic spirit
with St. Paul, that it was a small thing for him to be weighed in the balance or
be praised by them. Let them pray for the great works he had undertaken ; let
them pray for the maintenance of Catholic education, and that the memory of
their beloved Archbishop might for a long course of time, in generations yet to come,
be cherished with gratitude, veneration, and filial love in this island-continent,
throughout the colony of New South Wales, and especially in the Archdiocese of
Sydney, and let them all give expression to their most fervent prayers that the
soul of their dear Archbishop might, through the Divine mercy of God, rest in
peace. — Amen .
When Father Kelly had finished the oration, Solemn Absolution
was given with all sacred honours by their Lordships the Bishops of
Maitland, Goulburn and Armidale, the Vicar-General and Monsignor
Lynch. Then the procession was again formed, and as the orchestra
played for the last time “ The Dead March,” the long train of ecclesiastics
4ind acolytes defiled into the Sacristy, and the solemn ceremony was over.


In the afternoon, at a meeting of the clergy of the Archdiocese,
presided over by the Bishop of Maitland, the Very Rev. Dr. Sheridan,
Y.G., was appointed Administrator, pending the appointment of a
successor to the late Archbishop. It was decided at the meeting that
the Month’s Mind for the Archbishop should take place on Thursday,
20th September, when it was expected the bishops and senior priests of
the colonies who were unable to be present on Thursday would assist at
the ceremonies.
The will of the late Archbishop is dated 13th September, 1878. In
it the Rev. P. J. Mahony, Edward Butler, Q.C., (since deceased), and
Mr. Eyre, G. Ellis are appointed executors and trustees, and the whole
of His Grace’s property with the exception of two small bequests is left
with the executors in trust for the Archbishop’s successor. A large
number of letters and telegraphic messages of condolence were received
from all the colonies, and the grief at the loss of the Archbishop
appeared to be universal. On the day of the Requiem most of the
business premises of Catholics in the city were closed.
SOMETHING ABOUT THE ARCHBISHOP’S FATHER.
John Francis Yaughan, of Courtfield, in magistrate
for the counties of Hereford, Monmouth, and Gloucester, and a deputy
lieutenant for Monmouthshire, sometime colonel of the Royal Mon-
mouth Militia Engineers, was born at Courtfield, on the 2nd of July,
1808, and was at the time of his death in January, 1881, in the 73rd
year of his age. He spent his earliest youth at Courtfield, among the
woods which overhang the Wye, and on the banks of that familiar
stream which well nigh surrounds the ancestral estate of the family.
There he learnt the name of God and the history of his race. There
he began to fear God ; and it was there as a child of seven, in the gloom
of dark nights among those groves and glades that he first realised the
temper of his nature to be so fine that he never knew what fear was of
any other thing but God. He could not understand in after life how a
Catholic could have any other fear, and Pius IX. summed up his whole
life when he once wrote on the fly-leaf of his prayer-book “ Initium
sapientia timor Domini .” His education he received at the hands of
the Jesuit Fathers at Stonyhurst, and at their College of St. Acheul,
Amiens, France, and besides showing great talents, and application he
manifested a remarkably pious disposition. When quite young, he
became a member of the Sodality of Our Lady, and the custom of say-
ing the little office of the Blessed Yirgin, which he began at school, he
never gave up to the end of his life. After two years of special study
at Paris, in the house of “ Pere ” Bailly, he returned to England in
1830, and the next year he married Elizabeth Mary Rolls, daughter of
John Rolls, Esq., of the Hendree, thus forming an alliance with one of
the most honourable families of Monmouthshire. Colonel Yaughan and
his young wife, who was a loving and good hearted woman with every
grace and perfect gentleness of disposition, went to live at Courtfield, in
1833. John Francis Yaughan was something more than a county


gentleman, “ living comfortably on the fat of the land.” He was, in
the first place, a man of information and of accomplishments. He
read constantly, he took a keen pleasure in reading; and in the last
hours at Biarritz, it was one of his touching confidences to thank God
for the delight which during all his life He had given him to feel from
the companionship of books. He talked well—cleverly, clearly, and
even brilliantly, but his mind and genius came out best in his public
speeches. It would hardly be going too far to say that he was a born
orator ; for he had not only matter to use, but he had all the grace and
power of epigrammatic form, presence of mind, and the physical
qualifications which distinguish the orator from the man who can
merely make a speech. It was in these words, and immediately after
his death, he was on a public occasion described by a distinguished
dignatary of the Church. “ Some here present can remember him in
his prime. They can recall the gallant figure, the handsome face, the
noble head with its curling hair, the resonant and far reaching voice,
and the striking delivery of his younger days, when he stood on the
hustings, or defended his faith, or took the part of order in the stormy
and riotous scenes which troubled the country some forty years ago.”
His oratorical powers and his pluck were put to the test in a remarkable
manner and under most trying circumstances. During the hot days of
the “ Papal Aggression ” fury in England, when it was to sacrifice social
position, influence and friendships to stand up publicly in defence of the
Pope and the Church, Colonel Yaughan attended the county meeting of
Monmouthshire, held at IJsk, on the 18th December, 1850, and made a
bold and brilliant speech, which has been preserved. A motion on the
“ burning question ” was made, and an amendment proposed. Colonel
Yaughan then rose to second the amendment. “I am happy and
proud,” he said, “ to take my stand to-day with my friend Mr, Herbert,
of Llanarth. We belong to two of the few Homan Catholic families in
the neighbourhood who have survived 300 years of persecution.” Then
the uproar began, and every succeeding sentence was greeted with yells
and hooting, and followed by confusion ; but the speaker stood to his
ground, and went on to the end of his speech with a power and noble
audacity that ultimately cowed and silenced the raging bigots before
him. As a magistrate, he shared the burdens as he shared the honours
of many honourable colleagues. As an officer of the Royal Monmouth-
shire Militia, of which he was colonel for so many years, he was a model
soldier—skilled, brave, intellectual, and high minded, a father to his
men, and a pattern to his younger officers. As a volunteer in the Crimea,
he took his turn in the trenches during the whole of the terrible winter
of 1854-55. It was true love of country and his soldier’s spirit which
impelled him, against the wishes of many of his friends, to expose his
life in that hour of his country’s trial. He said to a friend, “ I was the
son of my country before I was the father of my children.” Yet, it was
not idle love of adventure, for he was a man of keen observation, and in
the summer of 1855, after his return to England, he published the result
of his observations in a volume of “ Suggestions for Arming and Training


Light Infantry,” “ The Soldier in Peace and War.” The delight of his
life at home was agriculture, and in this capacity, as a speculator, a
director of railways, and as a soldier his advice was widely sought.
Men of all creeds and professions came to him in their difficulties, and
many a priest was indebted to Colonel Vaughan for words more precious
oven than his generous material help. He was wondrously expansive
and sympathetic with those who suffered, and did all in his power, by
word and deed, to relieve them. He was particular never to speak
against others, and we are told that the excuses he made for those who
acted unjustly towards himself were as often nobly generous as they
were ingenious. He was very slow to think evil, and never gave his ear
to tales. Thus he lived among his neighbous, upholding lofty ideals and
carrying on high traditions. The thought of how his ancestors from the
days of the Conqueror downwards had kept the Faith was to him m ore than
a consolation—it was an inspiration. Some had suffered and died, like
that Mary Vaughan who was martyred at Gloucester; many more had
endured the loss of their worldly goods. He often went back to the good
traditions of his race ; but he regretted nothing that had been taken
away. When riding one day in the company of one of his sons, he
pointed out some of the wide lands which had in times past been seized
by the Crown, and then immediately he thanked God that in recompense
for their “ loyalty ” He had given so many “ vocations ” to the family.
Colonel Vaiighan was pre-eminently a practical Catholic, and, without
ostentation, proved it by every action of his life. He loved to walk out
with his children in the evening (as the late Archbishop has more than
once told us) in the summer time, through the Park, saying the Rosary
with them. He never took them for a drive of any length without in-
viting them all to join him in the Rosary ; and “ Monmouthshire” road
at Courtfield was known to the family as “ Rosary Road,” for to enter it
was the signal for the beginning of the customary devotion. He was in
the habit of receiving Holy Communion three or four times a week, and
during his last illness he received it daily. He heard Mass every day of
his life, and sometimes twice a day, and it was a common thing for him
to go eight miles on a week day in order not to miss the holy sacrifice—
instances of devotion which were rewarded in his last illness by having
two Masses said every day by his devoted sons in his room. His
favourite books were the New Testament and the “Imitation of Christ.”
About twenty years before his death he married, as his second wife,
Mary Charlotte, daughter of Joseph Weld, of Lulworth. Colonel
Vaughan’s death was in harmony with his life. About September,
1880, he and his wife went to Biarritz to spend the winter they never
survived. His wife was taken first—a singularly holy woman, a Sister
of Charity in the world—one whom many a poor cottage on the banks
of the Wye missed and mourned. She lay upon her death-bed as he
lay upon his, but she died before him. Their remains were brought to
Courtfield, It was during the closing days of his life at Biarritz that
his children, to whom he had appeared cold, and even hard, and who
hastened from distant countries to his side, really began to know the


heart and spirit of their father. They found out his secret, and the
secret of his life of “ loyalty.” It turned out to be a simple and direct per-
sonal love and devotion to that God whom he knew as his Maker,his Object,
his Father, and his Friend. He had often said—“l have never had but
one object or intention in life, and that is to belong wholly and com-
pletely to my God.” In his last hours he would continually speak of his
children and of their careers, and let those around him understand how
deeply he had felt those long or complete separations to which he had
appeared indifferent. After many weeks of most painful illness,
amounting almost to martyrdom, he gave his soul to God, On the
morning of Monday, December 20, 1880, he said to those near him,
“ Between six and seven this evening my God will come to take me.”
It came to pass as he said, and at a quarter-past six he gently and calmly
drew his last breath. Loyal in life and death, the venerable father of
our loyal-hearted Archbishop passed away, and let us hope that father
and son, whose characters and whose lives were so perfectly and so
beautifully alike, are now enjoying in loving companionship the rewards
of ( their faithful service—the peace of the just and the joy of the holy—
in the Home of their Great Master, in Jerusalem the Golden, where
“ Neither sun, nor moon, nor stars dispense their changeful light,
But the Lamb’s eternal glory makes the happy city bright.”
ROGER WILLIAM BEDE VAUGHAN.
Roger William (in religion Bede) Vaughan was bom at Courtfield,
near Ross, Herefordshire, England, on the 9th of January, 1834. His
father, Lieutenant-Colonel John Francis Vaughan, was the head of one
of the oldest county families in England. The family is of Welsh
origin, and it may be said of any of the Vaughans, even of the present
day, as Fluellen proudly said of Henry V, “all the water in the Wye
cannot wash your Welsh blood out of your body.” The family seat on
the banks of the Wye, midway between Ross and Monmouthshire, is
most picturesquely situated in the midst of some of the loveliest scenery
in the kingdom, and is famous in history as the nursing place of Henry
of Monmouth. The Vaughans have been no less devoted to their
country than to their Church. One of the family, Sir Roger Vaughan,
was knighted on the historic field of Agincourt, by Henry the Fifth, and
the gallant spirit has been preserved to the present day. Even in the
history of our own times, we have records of the splendid military
services of members of the family ; and who will say that the Vaughans
have not been foremost among the bravest and noblest of the Soldiers
of Christ ? The Colonel at the age of twenty-two married Elizabeth,
daughter of Mr. John Rolls, of the Hendre, county Monmouth, on
July 12, 1830, by whom he had thirteen children. He became a
widower, and in February 15, 1860, married Mary, the only surviving
daughter of Joseph Weld, of Lulworth Castle, so it is recorded, by whom
he had two children, both of whom died in their infancy. Nearly all the
members of Colonel Vaughan’s large family—thirteen children in all—


joined the Church, There were eight sons, and of these no less than
six had a vocation for the ecclesiastical state. The late Archbishop of
Sydney, the Most Rev. Roger Bede Yaughan, D.D., 0.5.8., was the
second son. Dr. Herbert Yaughan, the eldest son, who was the
Founder and Superior of Mill Hill Missionary College, London, and has
been for many years proprietor of the London Tablet, is the present
Bishop of Salford, England. Joseph Jerome Yaughan, 0.5.8., is the
Lord Abbot of St. Benedict’s Fort Augustus Abbey and College—the
first Benedictine Abbot created in Scotland by the present Pope. The
Rev. Kenelm Yaughan, who is a secular priest, is travelling in South
America partly on missionary duty, but with the main object of
collecting funds for a Church of Expiation of the Blessed Sacrament in
London. Father Kenelm Yaughan has had the Bible translated into
Spanish—the only translation of modern times—in order that he may
distribute the Holy Book in hundreds among the Catholic people of
South America. The fifth brother, Bernard Yaughan, is a Father of
the Society of Jesus, and he is connected with one of the leading colleges
in England. Father John S. Yaughan, who is a secular priest, and
who it will be remembered, spent some time in the Archdiocese of
Sydney, is now, we understand, assisting in the parochial work at
Manchester, England. The remaining sons are Francis and Reginald.
Before the father’s death it had been arranged that the elder brother
should inherit the entailed estates of the family, and since that
time Colonel Francis Yaughan has been the squire of Courtfield.
Francis Yaughan some years ago married Miss Pope, an American
lady of wealth and position. Reginald Yaughan visited New South
Wales soon after the arrival of his illustrious brother, and having
in this city married Miss Shanahan, sister-in-law of Sir Patrick
Jennings, K.C.M.G., K.S.G., M L.A.; he returned to England, and has
since resided at Glentrothy—an estate bequeathed to him by his father
—near Abergavenny, and not far from Courtfield. Four sisters of the
late Archbishop entered religious life. The eldest sister, Gwladys,
became one of the Order of Yisitation Nuns, and died at Boulogne,
France. The second sister, Theresa, who was a Sister of Charity, died
in London ; and Clare, who was one of the Poor Clares, died at Amiens,
France. Mary, the surviving sister, is Sub-prioress of the nuns of the
Perpetual Adoration, Newton Abbot, Devonshire, England. Of the
immediate relations who have risen to dignity in the Church may be
mentioned three uncles —the Right Rev. Dr. William Yaughan, Bishop
of Plymouth, the Yery Rev. Edmund Yaughan, C.SS.R., Superior of
the Redemptorist Fathers in the diocese of Maitland, N.S.W., and
Father Richard Yaughan, S. J., Professor of Physics and Chemistry, at St.
Francis Xavier’s, Liverpool, and also a cousin, the Hon. and Right Rev.
Dr. Clifford, Bishop of Clifton. Father Bernard Yaughan, S.J., who
entered the Society of Jesus in 1866, and is now 37 years of age,
possesses many of the gifts of the late Archbishop. He is considered
one of the foremost preachers in England. The eloquent Jesuit preached
the Lenten sermons this year at the church of the Fathers, Farm-street


London, and his remarkable discourses have been spoken of in excep-
tionally high terms even by critics. Sir F. Weld, late Governor of
Tasmania and now Governor of the Straits Settlements, is a near
relative.
Roger Bede Yaughan received his early education from private
tutors under his father’s roof, and it is related as a striking con-
trast to his after life that in those bright and sportive days of
boyhood he was very fond of all games and manly exercises, and that he
paid more attention to rabbit shooting and trout fishing than he did to
his studies. But when he said good-bye to the old Welsh river, and
left his home and its hundred dear and pleasant associations to go to
college, he set to work manfully and earnestly, and showing “ the
mettle of his pasture,” very soon made a name for himself among the
students of the Benedictine establishment at Downside near Bath. He
was about seventeen when he entered St. Gregory’s College, and as show-
ing the wonderful natural ability and cleverness of the “ new boy,”
we have it as a tradition that he had not been at Downside
more than a week when he posted a placard on the play-room door
challenging any of his companions to dispute with him for half-an-hour
on any subject. It is scarcely necessary to state that St. Gregory’s,
Downside, was then, and is now, conducted by the Benedictine Order, and
that it was the Alma Mater of our first Archbishop, the Venerable Dr.
Bolding, and of the gifted and zealous Bishop Davis, and of Abbot
Gregory, Dean Sumner, and other good and holy men who laboured in
Australia. After nearly four years’ work at Downside the young
Benedictine proceeded to Rome to complete his philosophical and
theological studies. He studied with the Benedictine Fathers in charge
of the Church and College of St. Paul outside the walls of Rome, and
at St. Callisto within the Eternal City, He also studied at the famous
Monte Cassino Monastery. While a student he was more than once
specially noticed by the late Pope Pius IX., and he was a general
favourite among his fellow students and the Fathers. On April 9, 1859,
the handsome and scholarly young monk was ordained in St. John
Lateran by his Eminence Cardinal Patrici. Soon after his ordination
he returned to England and immediately commenced parochial duty at
Bath, in the neighbourhood of his college, his labours being chiefly
among the poor. It was in the year 1861 he was appointed
Professor of Philosophy at the Benedictine College and Monastery of
St. Michael, Glehonger, Herefordshire. While still a very young man—
he was then only twenty-eight—he was appointed Prior of this important
establishment, and strict monastic rule, which had been somewhat
relaxed, owing to various circumstances, was restored. Under the
management of the young Prior, whose position in many respects was
singular and surrounded by innumerable responsibilities and difficulties,
the restoration of the old forms and discipline was effected at St. Michael’s,
and the work of governing the old monks and of training novices was
successfully accomplished. In the Diocese of Newport and Menevia the
Bishop and canons are all Benedictines, and Prior Yaughan besides


being at the head of the monastery was provost of the Cathedral Chapter,
Prior Vaughan was a constant preacher, and was frequently invited to
visit different parts of England and preach on special occasions. He
never spoke from notes, and rarely made that elaborate preparation
which characterised his utterances in Australia ; still his discourses were
always admirably delivered and highly effective. When the four years
of his official tenure had expired, in July, 1866, he was again elected to
the same position, and held it up to the time of his appointment as
Coadjutor to Archbishop Folding. While Prior he wrote his most
celebrated work, “ St. Thomas of Aquin, his life and labours,” During
this long period Prior Vaughan was a close student and a great reader,
seldom leaving his monastery, and when within its walls seldom leaving
his cell. When he did go out into the world it was invariably at some
earnest request to conduct a retreat, or preach a charity sermon. His
fame as a pulpit orator was known throughout England, and it was
written of him then —“ He has few equals, and his style is one sui
generis. There is an absence of all art, and he seems to be talking
rather than preaching —so familiar, easy, and natural is his manner—
the audience finds itself carried away by the beauty of the language in
which the great principles of Christianity are placed before them. His
mind is essentially original, and the tritest truths are ai ways
presented by him in a new and captivating manner.” As an
instance of his power as a preacher, it is related that on the
first Christmas after his appointment to the office of Prior, it was
resolved to have the midnight Mass in the pro-Cathedral, and that a
number of roiighs—a hundred or more—swarmed into the church, in.
order to create a disturbance. The roughs caused great noise and con-
fusion, and, the congregation becoming alarmed, it was suggested to the
Prior by several of the influential members not to celebrate the Mass, as
intended. The'Prior, however, entered with the procession as the clock
struck the hour, and then walking fearlessly to the pulpit, he commenced
to preach, taking for his text, on the impulse of the moment, “ What
have ye come out into the desert to see ?” and preached such a sermon
that the mob at first became still, then attentive, then ashamed, and
finally all left quietly. He was universally admired as a preacher, and
his appeals in aid of charities and other good objects always inspired a
generous response. He often had a hearty laugh over the newspaper
criticisms of his sermons, in which the critics invariably commenced
with the most complimentary references to the Prior’s personal appear-
ance. Dr. Torreggiani, then Superior of the Franciscan Capuchins, and
having charge of Pontypool and Cwmbran, and now Bishop of Armi-
dale, New South Wales, was an intimate friend of the eloquent Prior,
and frequently secured his assistance. Dr, Torreggiani was consecrated
on March 25, 1879, and he left in the same year for Australia. The
friendly relations that existed in England between the late Archbishop
and the Bishop of Armidale, and which were broken by separation, were
renewed in this colony, and the prelates were warm friends till the last.
Prior Vaughan was a clever writer as well as a speaker, and. his


contributions to the London Tablet and the Westminster Gazette were of
undoubted excellence. He is reported, too, to have been the author of
several of the best articles which appeared in the Dublin Review , and
was known by his friends as one of the champions who fought the battle
of ontology in that periodical. The Prior was considered to have been
mainly instrumental in preventing the destruction of the Monte Cassino
Monastery, his representations to Mr. Gladstone having the effect of
bringing that statesman to desire the Italian Government to spare the
great monastic institution, and save it from the fate which had fallen
upon the other monasteries of Italy. On the occasion of his last visits
to England and Rome, the lamented Archbishop Folding visited St.
Michael’s Monastery, and, so greatly attached did he become to the Prior,
that he expressed a wish to have him for his coadjutor and successor.
On reaching Rome, Dr. Folding made an application to the Holy See, and
on his arrival in Sydney sent a petition urging his request. The Holy See
made no immediate answer, and in the meantime his Lordship Dr.
Thomas Joseph Brown, 0.5.8., Bishop of Newport and Menevia, who
was greatly advanced in years, forwarded a petition to Rome, begging that
Prior Vaughan might be appointed coadjutor, with right of succession to
nis diocese. A second petition was sent by Dr. Brown, and, after a con-
siderable delay, the answer came that Sydney had been already fixed for
the Prior, and that the Holy See would not alter its decision. During
all this time the Prior of St. Michael’s was in ignorance of the struggle
that was going on between the two prelates, and it is said he was some-
what surprised when he received the official intimation of his selection
for the Archdiocese of Sydney. Dr. John Cuthbert Hedley, 0.5.8., who
was Professor of Theology under Prior Vaughan, was afterwards ap-
pointed coadjutor to Bishop Brown, and he is now Bishop of the Diocese
of Newport and Menevia.
HIS APPOINTMENT AND CONSECRATION.
The first intimation of the appointment of Dr. Vaughan to Australia
appeared in the Sydney Freeman's Journal of April 12, 1873, in the form
of a telegram from the Holy Father, and in making the announcement the
Catholic organ said—“ We congratulate the Australian Episcopate in hav-
ing such an illustrious Archbishop added to their body, and heartily rejoice
that the Holy Father has been pleased to give the Catholics of Sydney
such an efficient coadjutor, worthy to assist and succeed our own be-
loved and venerable Archbishop.” The consecration of the Most Rev.
Roger Bede Vaughan as Archbishop of Nazianzum i.p.i., and Coadjutor
to the Archbishop of Sydney cum jure successionis, took place in the
Church of St. Vincent de Paul, Liverpool, England, on March 19. The
Right Rev. Bernard O’Reilly, successor to the Right Rev. Dr. Goss,
Bishop of Liverpool, was consecrated on the same day. The Archbishop
of Westminster was the consecrating prelate, and the assistant bishops
were their lordships of Plymouth, Birmingham, Beverley, Hexham, and
Newcastle. The other prelates present were the Bishop of Menevia and
Newport, the Bishop of Down and Connor, the Bishop of Meath, and


the Right Rev. Abbot Burchall, 0.5.8. The ceremony was attended by
eight bishops and two hundred and sixty priests, and by a singular coin-
cidence, his Grace Archbishop Bolding on that day celebrated the fifty-
fourth anniversary of his ordination. At the consecration thirty canons
were present, and the church was crowded with people. At the singing
of the Te Deum, while the newly-elected consecrated bishops went round
the church in procession, the scene was most imposing. The members of
the Benedictine, Passionist, Redemptorist, and Jesuit Orders were re-
presented, and the ceremonies were described as the grandest and most
solemn ever witnessed in Liverpool.
PREPARATIONS FOR HIS RECEPTION IN AUSTRALIA.
On December 8, 1873, a numerously-attended public meeting was
held in St. Mary’s Seminary, for the purpose of making arrangements
for the reception of his Grace Archbishop Yaughan. His Hono Mr.
Justice Faucett, who presided on the occasion, said —“He confessed
that he might have wished, as others might perhaps have wished, that
the selection had come from another quarter ; but, however, they were
about to receive a prelate of high reputation. He (the Chairman) had
endeavoured to ascertain from England what was the position in public
estimation of the Coadjutor-Archbishop, and he found that his Grace
was a man distinguished in literature, that he had made the writings
of the great St. Thomas of Aquinas the subject of deep study, and that
he was even still more distinguished as a preacher. He had no doubt
that as they were members of a Church that was one and universal
they should all, irrespective of their nationality, join in giving a cordial
reception to the prelate who was about to take so exalted a position
amongst them.” Mr. W. A. Duncan moved, “ That a public reception
be given to his Grace the Coadjutor-Archbishop,” in a very able speech,
and the motion, seconded by Dr. Donovan, was carried. Mr. F.
Gannon, solicitor, moved, “That the following gentlemen form a
committee to carry out the resolution :—The clergy of the Archdiocese
and Messrs. James Mullins, E. J. Hollingdale, E. J. Rubie, J. Barlow,
P. O’Doud, R. Coveny, Daniel O’Connor, J. J. Curran, M. M'Manamen,
P. Mulcahy, P. Freehill, J. Schimel, Corrigan, C. Smith, P. Mulroney,
Robert Butcher, J. Shearer, J. J. Spruson, Thos. Browne, Jas. Butler,
William Hughes, J. C. Blanchard, S. Chisholm, J. J. Moore, J. Gil-
christ, F. Gannon, M‘Grath, Campbell, and J. G. O’Connor, M.P.”
More than half of the gentlemen have since passed away, but the names
of all are familiar to our readers. The other speakers at the meeting
were the late James Mullins, Mr. J. G. O’Connor, M.P., Mr. J. J.
Curran, J.P., the late Mr. Robert M. Forster, the late Mr. J. J. Cope,
Mr. Thomas O’Neill, the Yicar-General, Dr. Sheehy, Mr. Daniel
O’Connor, and Mr. Robert Butcher. The meeting was a very enthusi-
astic one, and a good spirit prevailed throughout the whole proceedings.
THE WELCOME.
Dr. Vaughan’s reception was a royal one, and took indeed, as he
interpreted it, the character of a grand demonstration of Catholic
loyalty. It was not perhaps so magnificent as that given to Archbishop


Polding on his return to the Colony ; but Dr. Folding was greeted by a
multitude of friends-who knew him—welcomed as a father and patriarch
—while the young prelate was welcomed by a multitude of friends who
knew him only by name. The day was unquestionably one of expect-
ations, and the expectations did not end with the day. The people
wanted to honour Dr. Yaughan, and they wanted to see and hear him
—their determination to do this manifesting itself all day from the
time the church bells rang out their signal call in the morning until
the last notes of the joyful Te Deum were smothered in the impatient
crush at the pro-Cathedral in the evening.
On Tuesday, December 16, his Grace arrived in Sydney by the
mail steamer Nubia, and something like twenty thousand persons took
part in the public welcome. It was expected that the mail steamer
would enter the Heads about noon, and a number of steamers all well
filled and some crowded left the Circular Quay during the morning
and proceeded down the harbour. On board the Illalong and Goolwa
there were bands of music, and there was a great display of bunting.
The Nubia did not make her appearance before 4 o’clock, and when
she neared the Heads the crowds on board the Goolwa, the Pelican,
the Hunter, the Illalong, and other smaller steamers sent up many a
ringing cheer, accompanying the cheering with furious waving of hats
and handkerchiefs, “dipping” of flags, and other demonstrations of
courtesy and welcome. Dr. Yaughan and the Eight Eev. Mgr. Yitte,
Bishop of Noumea, who was his companion du voyage , appeared on the
deck and gracefully acknowledged the manifestations of good will. It
was a lovely day, and the harbour never looked prettier or more
romantic, and the scene as the big mail boat, flanked by the steamers
and other smaller craft, came gallantly up the harbour, —bright colours
flying in every direction, bands of music playing on the water, and the
ceaseless ring of cheering and shouting rending the air—was one that
was grandly effective at the time, and one that will be for ever remem-
bered as the first and brightest chapter of the Archbishop's career
amongst us. Archbishop Polding was at the wharf to receive the
Most Eeverend the Coadjutor, who, on landing from the steam launch,
and in the presence of nearly 20,000 people, knelt at the feet of the
venerable prelate, and after mutual salutations had been exchanged,
the two prelates, accompanied by Dr. Yitte and Dr. Gillett, afterwards
Eector of St. John’s, proceeded in carriages through the immense
crowd, and amid vociferous cheering, in the direction of St. Mary’s.
THE ARCHBISHOP’S FIRST SPEECH IN AUSTRALIA.
At the pro-Cathedral arrangements had been made for the formal
reception. Over 4000 persons were crowded within the building, and
almost as many more surrounded the pro-Cathedral. Archbishop
Polding presided. The Yery Rev. the Yicar-General, Dr. Sheehy;
Archdeacon Rigney, Deans Sheridan, Flanagan, Kenny, Forde, and
most of the clergy of the Archdiocese were present, and among the
laity were his Honor Mr. Justice Faucett, Mr. W. A. Duncan, the late
Edward Butler, Q.C., M.L.A., and Mr. J. G, O’Connor, M.L.A., Mr.


James Mullins, Mr. Coveny, Mr. E. J. Hollingdale, and Mr. J. J, Moore.
After the Te Deum was sung the Very Rev. S. J. A. Sheehy, Yicar-
General, presented the address on behalf of the clergy.
In the course of the address it was stated : —“ Your arrival here
is another event in the history of the Australian Church invested with
the deepest interest. It is another landmark in the Church’s marvel-
lous progression, and an additional evidence of her enduring vitality all
the world over. .We still happily see in our midst the first representa-
tive of episcopal authority in the southern continent. He came hither
to take charge of this Church whilst yet it was in a state of apparently
helpless infancy. He has had the singular privilege of nurturing the tiny
mustard plant which in his own lifetime has attained the magnitude of a
majestic tree. He began his labours on this continent with half a dozen
priests, and now he sees around him a complete hierarchy, comprising
one archbishop and nine suffragan bishops, aided by a body of priests
numbering close on three hundred 1 In his venerable age, and after
having guided for so long a period the destinies of this Church, he
might truly say, “Nunc dimi ttis, Domine, servum tuum in pace quia
viderunt oculi mei salutare tuum.” But Almighty God, we trust, has
reserved him to witness in this world still greater triumphs for the
Church of Australia, as also the completion of the noble Cathedral now
in course of erection. The surest pledge of the realisation of these
hopes may be sought for in the fact that he now has a coadjutor whose
shoulders are eminently fitted to receive from him the mantle of
episcopal authority. That singular pastoral vigilance which has never
ceased in the See of Peter, that apostolic “ solicitude omnium eccle-
siarum,” which embraces alike the Churches that are near and those afar
off, is well illustrated at this moment by your Grace’s presence amongst
the Catholics of Austi’alia. The great Pope who now fills the chair of
Peter has appointed to this Church, so many thousand miles distant
from the Holy See, a prelate whose high chai’acter andt ‘ well-known
attainments might have placed him side by side with he most distin-
guished veteran prelates of the Old World. ... In
conclusion, we beg to congratulate your Grace on your elevation to
this important See. We felicitate ourselves that is to be our privilege
under your guidance to defend the faith and morals of our people
against the inroads of iniquity. Finally we hope to be the better able
to protect the education of the rising generation from the blighting
influence of anti-Christian secularism under the leadership of one whose
published writings prove him so deeply conversant with the pure sources
of sanctity and learning, from which the colossal minds of the ages of
faith and scholasticism drew their inspirations.
THE ARCHBISHOP’S SPEECH.
His Grace Dr. Yaughan in reply said : —I thank you most
heartily for the profound and beautiful words you have just read to me.
Here I meet for the first time the clergy of the Archdiocese of Sydney.
I have come many hundreds of miles from home in order that I might


do the will of the Holy Father, and that I may do the will of my father
and friend his Grace the Archbishop of Sydney. (Cheers.) It is
difficult in words to express one’s self upon such an occasion as this. I
did anticipate that the clergy of this Archdiocese would receive me
kindly, but I could not in my wildest moments have anticipated that
they would have met me with such cordiality, showing such signs of true
affection as they have shown me to-day; and I hope I may say that they
shall never find me wanting in the same love of brotherhood and affec-
tion which I see beaming in their countenances this day. (Cheers.)
There are two particular instruments whereby we may do that work
which you have alluded to in your address to me this day. There are
two instruments, it seems to me, we have in our hands by means of which
we may attack what I may call earth worship, and overthrow it. In the
first place we have that which is a continual protest against earth worship,
and that is the commencement of this magnificent Cathedral which is
bein'g built now, and which will for generations stand upon that
eminence and proclaim to a future world that the Catholics who do so
great a part in building up this great city manifest their true love to Him
from whom all strength proceeds, and in doing all they can to advance the
material prosperity of this earth, remember that true prosperity and
stability proceeds from Him who makes men prosper, and keeps men
stable. (Cheers.) Within these walls we shall worship and praise Him,
who is the Giver of all good gifts ; and out for miles around—out into
the vast sea—we shall praise Him whom we love and serve, Him whom
we come here to honour, and for whose love we leave home and friends
that we may plant His Church and build up His House. (Cheers.)
And there is a second instrument which seems to me to be that of
Christian education. You kindly alluded just now to my small labours
in an intellectual way, I must say from what I have read of the labours
of great men in Pagan times, in Christian times, in modern times, that
those who were true, generous, hardy men—heroes, self-sacrificers, self-for-
getters—were men who were built up by Jesus Christ, who were endowed
with the principles of a Christian ; and with such encouragement, with
such help, and with such experience close to one he must do something.
There is another instrument —another help—and that is the character
of those men with whom my lot has fallen in the present. (Cheers.)
You spoke tenderly and beautifully of the faith of the Irish people,
and I could not help feeling in my heart glad that the vast majority of
these clergymen with whom I have to work in this Archdiocese belong
to that nation—-(cheers) —that I have about me men who have the seal
of the faithful upon their foreheads —(loud cheers) —men who have
naturally from the persecution the nation has undergone received
Christ into their hearts, and been brought to the foot of the cross—
(cheers) —I say, that with such encouragement and such help one feels
able to do something ; but it is from Him who alone can strengthen
our hearts and our intellects that good can come. I meet you as you
have met me, and, without any self-adulation, I think I may say you
will find me work with you to build up Christ’s Church unto the end.
(Continued cheering,)


His Honor Mr. Justice Faucett then read and presented the
address from the laity. The address said, “The knowledge that your
Grace has been elevated to your present high dignity by our Holy
Father, on the nomination of our venerable Archbishop, would of
itself give us much gratification, but we have in your Grace’s reputa-
tion for learning, zeal, and all those qualities that shed a lustre on
the Episcopal office—an additional assurance of the great boon con-
ferred upon us in your appointment as Coadjutor Archbishop of
Sydney. This feeling on our part is in no small degree enhanced by
the knowledge of your Grace’s descent from and connection with some
of the great Catholic families that, under the Providence of Almighty
God, have been so largely instrumental in preserving in former times
of trial and danger our holy religion in England.”
Archbishop Yaughan, in his reply, said:—lt is really impossible
for me to thank you in the manner in which I should like to could
I express my feeling in words. You have taken me on trust. You
have not known me —at least you have known very little about me—
before I presented myself. You know very little about me now, but
you know I have come to you at the desire of your beloved Archbishop
—(applause)—and on the appointment of His Holiness the Pope.
(Cheers.) The cordiality of the welcome you have given me to-
day—when I saw one steamer crowded, and then another steamer
crowded, and a third, and a fourth—indeed I did not count them
all, I was so bewildered with the beauty of the scenery, and with
the kindness of those around me—is far more than I anticipated.
With such manifestations of kindness I cannot but feel that we
have met together in a manner that will join us so that we shall
not part. (Loud cheers.) I see far enough to be fully aware that
that great demonstration—that princely demonstration —was not for
the humble individual before you so much as for the office he represents,
in order to make manifest to each other, and to the world about that
you honour the representatives of Christ upon earth —(cheers) —and
that in honouring them you are in reality honouring Him. Therefore,
my thoughts were carried beyond the mere manifestation of that kind-
ness into, as it were, the hidden sanctuary of your own hearts, and
there I saw that love and kindly feeling and readiness to sacrifice your
lives to God which prognosticated to me great things in this city
amongst the Catholics. (Cheers.) I thank you for the most kind
manner in which you have received me ; and I may say this in allusion
to one point,—to my having sprung from a very old Catholic family,—
that we, the old Catholics of England, who went through its persecuting
days, with the rack and the gibbet, can stretch out a hand across the
water to those who live in the Island of Saints (loud cheers); and I
say that I hold out my hand of brotherhood to you. You may call me
an Englishman if you will. I am one ; but I am a Catholic first.
(Cheers.) We join in a holy brotherhood —(cheers) —and, with the
help of God, will fight the evils of the world. I will not detain you
longer, for you will often hear me speak I dare say. (Cheers.) I still
thank you for all you have shown me to-day. I thank you, my beloved


Archbishop, my dear father in Christ. Looking at this demonstration
to-day, I was called back to him (Archbishop Folding), and I was
saying what a father of a family he was when I saw his kindness and
love and amiability reflected on a thousand faces. I thank you much
for the great honour you have done me to-day, and I hope I may never
prove myself ungrateful for all your kindness. (Cheers.)
THE ARCHBISHOP COMMENCES HIS MISSION.
His Grace Dr. Yaughan attended the Christmas Examination and
Distribution of Prizes at Lyndhurst College, on December 18—two
days after his arrival —and on that occasion Mr. John Williamson, on
behalf of the Ex-Students’ Union, presented an address. Dr. Yaughan,
in the course of an eloquent reply, said —“ You have made some kind
allusion to my efforts in the cause of Catholic education, and I beg to
thank you for what you have been pleased to say. We have all our
parts to perform in that common cause, for we have not only to edu-
cate ourselves, but have throughout our lives to do all we can to extend
to others whatever advantages of this nature it may be our happiness
to receive. I hope to do all I can to help you all in fighting the battle.
If we are only true to God and to ourselves we must and shall succeed.”
On the following Sunday evening his Grace attended and addressed a
meeting in connection with St. Mary’s Building Fund, at which £l4&
was subscribed. His Grace Archbishop Yaughan, addressing the
crowded meeting (at which Archbishop Folding presided), said :—“ I
am glad to take part in the magnificent work in which you are engaged
—in building up the House of God, in erecting your splendid Cathedral.
It is, indeed, a cheering thing in this new world to see the great
cathedrals of old living, as it were, over again—to see the old faith and
love of art and architecture in their grandest and most beauteous forms
establishing themselves in this new and growing continent, and to feel
that the old glories of the Catholic Church may yet be rivalled by the
new ones. How is it that these great acts of faith have been raised by
the hands of Catholic men throughout the world ? The secret is a
simple one —simple as sublime—because they believed in the real pre-
sence of Christ crucified upon the altar. No home could be too costly
or too beautiful for Him. Besides this, you feel, however, that no
monument could be too lasting to perpetuate, as it were, his name who
has borne the heat and burdens of the day, and has built this great
Australian church. May he live to see the completion of the great
work he has begun! and may it be my privilege to spend and be spent
in labouring hand in hand with a people who cherish in their hearts so
tender a love of the House of God.”
It may thus be seen that Dr. Yaughan at once set himself to the
work he marked out as his own special labours on the day of his landing
—the work of finishing St. Mary’s Cathedral, and of forwarding the
cause of Catholic education. How courageously he addressed himself
to the great tasks, and with what magnificent energy, strength, and zeal
he carried on both works, we all know; and to his faithful and full
performance of his promises, to his matchless perseverance, his patience,
his devotion to duty, can we not all bear loving and grateful testimony ?


On Sunday morning, December 14, 1873, a public meeting was
held at St. Mary’s pro-Cathedral for the purpose of receiving subscrip-
tions for liquidating the necessary expenses in connection with the
reception of Dr. Vaughan (who arrived a few days afterwards) and
for furnishing the house which the Coadjutor-Archbishop was to occupy.
<£soo was collected, and the sum was further enlarged during the
following week. The residence of the Coadjutor was handsomely
furnished, but Dr, Vaughan wishing to preserve the monastic discipline
to which he had been so long accustomed, had the arrangements altered
so as to have them more in harmony with his habits and associations as
a Benedictine monk. Soon after his arrival here, Dr. Vaughan took
charge of St. John’s College as -Elector, the Very Rev. Dr. Forrest
retiring from the position. His Grace, assisted by the Very Rev. Dr. Gillett,
made many improvements in the internal arrangements of the college,
especially in the library and museum, and by his personal efforts
obtained assistance in the shape of • scholarships and premiums. The
opening of the college under the new regime was celebrated in 1874 by
a public ceremony, on which occasion Dr. Vaughan delivered his address
on “Higher Education.” His Grace continued at St. John’s as Rector
till the death of Archbishop Folding, in March, 1877. During the years
between 1873 and 1877 Dr, Vaughan, beyond delivering an occasional
address and assisting at the great functions of the Church, did not take a
very active part in public affairs, but he was constant in his attentions
to the old Archbishop, and strong in his help when the grand old
pontiff, bending beneath the weight of years and the heavy load of
honours, needed a strong arm on which to rest, and a watchful and
trusty shepherd in whom he could repose confidence, and to whom,
finally, when the lingering sunset deepened into darkness, he could
surrender his pastoral staff and the flock he had himself tended for
over forty years. Perhaps the best, and certainly it was the most
remarkable, effort of Dr, Vaughan before succeeding to the Arch-
bishopric was his “ O’Connell oration,” delivered at the old Exhibition
Building, Prince Alfred Park, on the evening of the O’Connell Cen-
tenary Commemoration in 1875. The object of the lecture, which was
splendidly delivered in the presence of an immense audience, was to
provide funds for the establishment of an O’Connell scholarship at St.
John’s College in connection with the University. The sum handed
over to his Grace by the managers of the Centenary was not sufficient
to establish the proposed scholarship, but the personal generosity of
Sir Patrick Jennings enabled the Archbishop afterwards to carry out
jhis laudable wish, and the scholarship is now awarded annually.
Another celebrated speech of the Archbishop was his address on
“ Hidden Springs” at the laying of the foundation-stone of the Guild
Hall in Castlereagh-street. His Lenten Sermons at the pro-Cathedral,
which were commenced on February 18, 1877, his “Advent Con-
ferences” at St. Mary’s pro-Cathedral, in 1875, and his Lenten
Lectures delivered at St. Mary’s the following year attracted great
crowds, including many people of other denominations, and these
discourses, which were published in extenso in the Freeman's Journal t
were sufficient to establish Dr. Vaughan’s reputation as a preacher.


EVENTS INTERESTING AND HISTORICAL
On Thursday evening, February 22nd, 1877, at St. Mary’s, the
Coadjutor-Archbishop was presented with a magnificent crozier of
colonial gold by the Catholic young men of Sydney. The address,
read by Mr. F. J. M'Carthy, M.A., was signed bv F. J. M‘Carthy
(chairman), M. Fitzgerald (secretary), F. Freehill, M.A. (treasurer);
committee, J. Donohue, C. A. Farrell, 8.A., LL.B.; B. M‘Bride, J.
M'Loughlin, A. J. Brady, M. F. Cullen, T. J. Eyan, F. B. Kenny, and
M. Canty. His Grace delivered, in reply, a scholarly and beautiful
address. On March 16 Archbishop Folding died, and Dr. Vaughan
became Archbishop of Sydney by right of succession. Dr. Vaughan
was at the bedside of the saintly prelate when his pure spirit passed
into “ the world of white souls,” and he presided at the obsequies, and
delivered a pathetic address at the grave. On Palm Sunday, while the
church and the people were yet in mourning for the deceased prelate,
Dr. Vaughan abstained from.using the Archiepiscopal throne, prefer-
ring a chair placed beside it, and this graceful and tender act was not
without its effect on the congregation. The first ceremony performed
outside St. Mary’s by Archbishop Vaughan after the death of his
venerable predecessor was the profession of three nuns at the Convent
of the Sisters of Mercy, St. Patrick’s, Sydney, on the 3rd April, at
which function the Eev. John Vaughan assisted. The first public
ceremony was the laying of the foundation stone of the Forest Lodge
Church, on July 8, 1877. The stone was laid in the presence of 2000
persons, and the collection amounted to £lOOO, the Archbishop giving
£6O. It was about this time his Grace issued his first pastoral —“ Pius
IX. and the Devolution”—the famous Papal Allocution just pro-
nounced by the Holy Father being the groundwork of the pastoral.
The pastoral was spoken of “ as a clear, masterly, and forcible state-
ment.” His Grace also delivered a very powerful sermon on the Allo-
cution in the Sacred Heart Church. The pallium was granted by the
Holy See on the 22nd June, 1877. The solemn ceremony of investing
his Grace of Sydney with the pallium took place at St. Mary’s pro-
Cathedral, on Sunday, January 13, 1878. This was the first time a
prelate of the Church had been invested in Australia with the peculiar
symbol of supreme ecclesiastical authority. A pallium was thrice given
to Dr. Folding, the first two being successively destroyed in the fires.
To Archbishop Goold, of Melbourne, the pallium was also given, but
in all the cases mentioned the investiture took place in Eome. The
late Bishop of Brisbane, being the senior prelate, acted as Commissary,
and the assisting bishops were their Lordships of Bathurst, Goulburn,
Adelaide, New Caledonia, Perth, and Sandhurst. The late Dean
M'Carthy preached on the occasion a very able and eloquent address.
Monsignor Lynch presented an address on behalf of the clergy, and
Archbishop Vaughan made an eloquent reply. The ceremonies were
on a scale of grandeur.
HIS CONNECTION WITH ST. JOHN’S COLLEGE.
From the year 1877 to 1883 the late Archbishop worked and toiled
as only one possessed of his undaunted courage and his wonderful mental


and physical strength could work, and it is beyond the shadow of a doubt
that under his wise and able guidance religion prospered marvellously.
He resigned his office as Hector of St. John’s College on becoming Arch-
bishop of Sydney, and Dr. Gillett, who remained there till his departure
for Europe with the Archbishop, was appointed. His Grace continued
to reside at the college, and filled the office of Visitor. He presided at
all the annual commemorations of late years, and his addresses were
always admirable and scholarly deliverances, showing wide reading and
immense labour in preparation. The fact of the late Archbishop not
having occupied a seat at the Senate of the University has more than
once occasioned much surprise in many circles. In December 1877, a
requisition was sent to his Grace asking him to allow himself to be nom-
inated for a seat then vacant. The requisition was signed by the Chancel-
lor, Vice-Chancellor, Sir James Martin, Sir William Manning, his
Honor Mr. Justice Faucettt, Mr. W. B. Dailey, Canon All wood, Sir W.
Macarthur, the Hon. Wm, Macleay, Mr. Eolleston, and Professor
Badham. His Grace in reply to Sir Edward Deas-Thomson, the Chan-
cellor, after stating that he read the document as implying that he would
have to expect a contest for the honour, said : “ Whilst shrinking from a
contest as especially distasteful, I cannot but thank you, sir, and those
other eminent and influential gentlemen who have signed the requisition,
for having expressed so strong a desire that I should form one of your
number, and I can assure you that, though I cannot bring myself to fight
for a seat in the Senate of the University, I shall ever deem it a privilege
as well as a duty to do all that is in me to advance the interests of higher
education in the colony and to give to the University, to which we owe
so much, all the support I can.” It transpired that after the requisition
was forwarded to Dr. Vaughan, and before his reply had been received,
Mr. W. C. Windeyer, now Judge, nominated Sir George Wigram Allen.
As his Grace the Archbishop would not degrade his exalted office by con-
testing an election, the University lost the services at its Senate of the
scholarly and gifted prelate. The Lyndhurst Benedictine College and
Seminary, founded by Archbishop Folding, and which had been in existence
over twenty-four years, was closed by his Grace Dr. Vaughan and the
grounds and buildings sold. The Fathers of the Society of Jesus and the
Marist Brothers opened colleges, and amply supplied the requirements of
the Archdiocese. The Archbishop often visited the city and suburban
schools and his presence was always looked for at the convents and
colleges on “ speech day.” His Grace took a warm interest in the
Catholic literary and debating societies of the city, and on two occasions
he invited the members to the College, the meeting taking the shape of
a most pleasant re-union.


HOW THE ARCHBISHOP LIVED AT ST. JOHN’S.
It was not surprising that his Grace Dr. Yaughan, accustomed to
“ Those deep solitudes and awful cells,
Where Heavenly pensive meditation dwells, ”
should have made St. John’s his “ home ” soon after his arrival here.
In the college just outside the busy city he lived till the day of his
departure—lived amid the solemn arches and the lofty halls in a
congenial atmosphere; the stillness and solemnity of the place doubt-
less recalling and preserving many memories of his old monastic days,
many
“ Sweet affections and recollections.”
It was his castle. It was there he arranged his plans of action,
brightened up his weapons, buckled on his armour ; and it was within
those great strong walls be rested after “ the heats of the day and the
toils,” and found security and peace after many a hard fought battle in
the outer world—many a daring attack on the enemies of religion and
order, many a gallant defence of the old church and the old faith. The
apartments occupied by the late Archbishop are on the ground floor of
the college, and are approached by a long corridor leading from the
entrance hall and which echoes to every footstep. The first of the
number—the reception room —is a large and lofty apartment lighted
by a handsome bay window which faces the University. The apart-
ment is furnished with an ordinary drawing-room suite upholstered
with a dark material, and the floor with the exception of a large square
of carpet in the centre of the room is bare; yet the room, arranged
with a taste bordering on the esthetic, presents an appearance that at
once favourably impresses the visitor. The dull looking walls have
their bareness relieved by a number of pictures selected for the decora-
tion of this room from among the late Archbishop’s admirable collection.
Many of the pictorial ornaments are photographic copies of famous
Church pictures, and the chief works of art are two oil paintings on
wood—the Blessed Yirgin and St. Jerome —and a magnificent and
beautiful Madonna and Child—an exquisite study characterised by
angelical loveliness and consummate grace —from the brush of Solz-
datics, one of the first of our living artists, which occupies the pride
of place. Every visitor to St. John’s admired the Archbishop’s
favourite picture and envied him its possession. The picture was
presented to his Grace by Lady Herbert of Lea, and is worth £SOO.
On the centre table near which his Grace’s own special chair was always
placed there is a large Pictorial Catholic Bible ; also, a rare and costly
collection of genuine copies of the frescoes executed in the first century
of the Church, and which were discovered in the Catacombs by


Chevalier Rossi, about the year 1847 ; a book of Old London,
a volume of Picturesque Europe, an account of the recent visit
of the young Princes to Queensland, presented by themselves;
and one or two directories. This table as well as the smaller
one near the window (on which there is under a glass shade a
group of miniature figures representing a blackfellow’s camp
in Australia) has a cloth or cover of the simplest description. On
the marble shelf above the fireplace a large crucifix of black and gold
stands conspicuously in front of the mirror. The adjoining room is
that set apart for the Rector, and a little further along the corridor the
visitor finds himself facing the Archbishop’s study and private library.
Inside the study there are two doors— one to the right opening to the
Archbishop’s sleeping apartment, and the one to the left leading to
what during his Grace’s life was used as an ante-room and vestry. It
was here in his study—his favourite place—the Archbishop passed
many an hour ; often
“ pondered weak and weary
Over many a quaint and curious volume of forgotten lore, ”
and was secluded for days with his books as his only companions ; and
in this room every speech was prepared, every letter written, and from
it went forth all those Pastorals that “ shook the world” outside. The
study is a room of not very large dimensions, but very comfortable and
attractive, and its walls are almost hidden by the rows of books. Most
of the books are works of reference in various branches of literature
theological, philosophical, historical, scientific, and biographical—the
works of the Fathers and the books on Mental Philosophy and Canon
Law having prominence ; and there are some shelves specially devoted
to “light reading,’’ on which many of Dickens’ novels and works by
other of the Archbishop’s favourite authors have places. All the
shelves are admirably arranged and the good condition of the books,
and the merits of the works themselves, show that the volumes were
judiciously selected, carefully handled, and highly prized by the
student. There are two desks in the study and the one nearest the
window—a large handsome piece of furniture, in shape resembling an
ordinary piano, with a sliding lid and innumerable little private
drawers—is the one used by his Grace, and the one at which he
wrote on the morning of his departure. Immediately in front of the
bureau, and placed in such a position that it must have been always
before the Archbishop’s eyes when he was seated in his study chair, is
a human skull. One is tempted to put Hamlet’s question, “ Who’s
was it but no answer can be made. The constant contemplation of
this skull must have inspired many meditations on the vanities of our
human existence and on the frailty of our nature, ever keeping before
the mind the form of Death, and ever recalling the warning that even
“ The paths of glory lead but to the grave. ”
But if there was always before the Archbishop’s gaze that which led
the imagination into a sad and gloomy train of thought, there was
also something to inspire feelings of comfort and hope, for above the


symbol of death there is a crucifix—the image of Him who died for
us—Who robbed death of its sting, and the grave of its victory, and
Who has promised peace and rest to us after our trials and labours
here in the better life —the life eternal—in the land beyond the grave.
At his bureau his Grace penned every letter and did all his mental
work. At the time of his famous “ begging letter” writing on behalf of
St. Mary’s, when hundreds of letters emblazoned with his crest, and
bearing his strange and characteristic caligraphy, went through the
post every month, to all parts of New South Wales, and the other
colonies, he was frequently employed day and night attending to his
enormous correspondence, and although so severely taxed he managed
to make every letter so bright and so winning and so effective that he
was able at the end of his epistolary labours to tot up a total of nearly
£20,000 as the result of his efforts, thus proving that the pen if not
“ mightier than the sword, ” is at least a very great and useful
weapon when used by a clever hand in behalf of a good cause. His
Grace when dashing off his letters would, if he were in a happy vein,
amtise himself making little sketches at the top and on the borders
of his epistles. He wrote, altogether, over three thousand letters.
It is not generally known that his Grace combined, with his
other accomplishments, an artistic talent for “ lightning sketches,”
and that he had a humorous mind and a skilful hand for caricature.
His unimportant private letters frequently had artistic embellish-
ments, and the “ proofs ” of his Pastorals and literary efforts were
generally sent back to the printers with one or two humorous little
etchings. At Messrs. Cunninghame and Co.’s, where all his Grace’s
works were printed, there is a most interesting collection of large
envelopes, in which either manuscript or proofs had been sent to the
establishment, and all have some quaint design, or some figures roughly
drawn on them. There is an iron safe in the study—to return to our
description—and in this are all the private papers belonging to the late
Archbishop, and some important documents relating to the Archdiocese.
A step from this room brings one into the Archbishop’s sleeping apart-
ment, which no one save Dr. Gillett or his Grace’s valet was permitted
to enter during the lifetime of the late prelate. Nothing could be
plainer or closer in resemblance to a monastic cell. It is a small room
with its walls and floor perfectly bare—if we except a tiny picture of
Our Lady of Dolors, hanging near the bed—and the only ornament, if it
can be called such —is a crucifix of considerable age, on which is
hung a Rosary, and which stands on the mantelpiece. The bed,
which is of the smallest and commonest description, without cur-
tains, occupies the most remote corner of the room, and at the foot
of this very humble “ couch of greatness ” there is a plunge and
shower bath screened off from the rest of the apartment. The fur-
niture is exceedingly plain, and consists of a table, a washhand
stand, a dressing glass, a wardrobe, and a press for articles of personal
use. His Grace’s dressing-gown, of golden coloured Japanese silk, is
hung in the room as he left it. In one of the drawers of the press his


Grace kept a gun of which he thought a great deal, and which he inva-
riably took with him on his holidays in the country. It was one of the
very few pleasures of his life to have a quiet day’s shooting with some
friends in the country. When young he was reckoned a good shot, and
on his last trip through his Archdiocese he is said to have proved
himself an expert “ knight of the trigger.” A glance at this room gives
one an idea of the real character of the man, and enables one to judge of
the completeness of his sacrifice of personal comfort and of the rigid
severity and perfect smplicity of his daily life. To borrow from one of
the finest and boldest passages in Hamlet, he did not
* ‘ As some ungracious pastors do,
Show the steep and thorny way to Heaven,
Whilst like a puff’d and reckless libertine,
Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads
And recks not his own rede.”
A private door leads to the Archbishop's oratory, which may be also
entered from the outside corridor. In this oratory the Archbishop
celebrated mass every morning, attended by Hr Gillett, who generally
celebrated a mass after his Grace. The oratory is a small apartment,
the only furniture being the Archbishop’s praying stool, and the press
for the vestments. The altar and reredos are of wood, nicely carved
and artistically ornamented with gilding and chapel designs in colours,
the background being white. Above the altar there is a statuette of our
Lord of the Sacred Heart. The ante-room, or vestry, attached to the study
contains a wardrobe, a press with Liturgical works, the Archbishop’s
mitre, crozier, etc., some shelves of the Archbishop’s published writings,
speeches, and lectures, and a collection of pamphlets, reviews, and
magazines, and files of the Sydney Freeman's Journal , the Express , and
one or two other papers. Although a great reader, the Archbishop
rarely forgot anything that he had once impressed upon his mind,
and so marvellous was his memory and his judgment, that he could
find the exact chapter or page of any book he had occasion to refer to
in the twinkling of an eye, and many passages of books he knew by
heart. He had a larger library attached to the general library of the
College, and it is owing to his Grace’s efforts, and to those of Dr.
Gillett, that St. John’s now possesses its fine museum and its great
store of literary treasures. Many of the books in the library are of the
rarest description, and of almost priceless value, and the collection of
relics is one of the best and most interesting in the colonies. It is re-
markable how little the public know of the very men with whose cha-
racters and acts they are supposed to be familiar. Among all the
thousands that from time to time crowded around the Archbishop
whenever he was announced to make a speech or deliver a sermon how
very few knew anything of what might be called the ‘ ‘ inner life ” or
even of the ordinary daily life of the illustrious prelate! There was
nothing secret, nothing to hide, in his life, and to lift the veil that
hid his daily actions from the world is only to reveal a whole life of
labour, of usefulness, and of faithful observance of the duties and obli-
gations of a great office. Dr. Vaughan generally retired to rest in the


evening about ten o’clock, unless pressed with work, and he was stirring
every morning before six o’clock. He commenced his day’s duties with
prayer and meditation, and celebrated mass every day in his oratory at
seven o’clock, attended by Dr. Gillett. At half-past eight he would sit
down to breakfast, and by nine o’clock he would be hard at work in
his study. In amongst his books and writings he would stay till one
o’clock, unless disturbed by some visitors —and that was not often—
and it was in these few hours between breakfast and dinner that his
Grace got through most of his work, and certainly ihe best of it. His table
was served in the plainest manner, for the Archbishop was no epicure.
Before dinner he would have a little relaxation and exercise, and after
the meal he would generally go for a drive in his handsome brougham,
drawn by a dashing pair of horses. Returning at four, or shortty
after, his Grace would again go to work, and continue till half-past six.
After tea he would either read or write till ten, and then retire. It is
not generally known that the late Archbishop was fond of scientific
works, and that it was his intention to make a special study of science
during his travels and on his return to Australia, with a view to deli-
vering a series of public lectures on Science and Religion, in the interests
of Christianity, and in opposition to the views of the champions of Free-
thought. The students of the college saw very little of the Archbishop,
except on special occasions, and in truth it may be said that at St. John’s
Dr.Yaughan lived the life of a recluse —lived among his books, outside of
which he could find little enjoyment. In the principal hall there are
a number of valuable oil paintings—most of them portraits of
celebrated saints—and it will be remembered that when the Art
Union in aid of St. Mary’s Cathedral, which was afterwards abandoned,
was initiated, the Archbishop very generously offered as prizes
nearly every one of his pictures with other valuable presents. His
Grace, although thoroughly practical in everything, had a strongly
developed artistic taste, and was especially fond of architecture and
painting. Although not an enthusiast in music, he was always pleased
and gratified to hear good music in the churches, especially at St.
Mary’s, and never failed to compliment the school children when their
vocal performances were meritorious. If there was one gift and one
power that his Grace possessed in a remarkable degree it was that of
self-control. He was never known to gratify his enemies or dishearten
his friends even in the presence of seemingly insuperable obstacles, and
when “ fighting fearful odds” by any show of personal weakness, or
by manifesting want of heart and hope, and under the most trying
ordeals he has stood without flinching or without letting one word of
murmuring or despair escape him. By many he was, on account of a
firmness that was mistaken for austerity, regarded as of a cold and
stern nature. But those who knew him best can tell of his tenderness,
his sensitiveness, of the strength of his affections when once made ;
how he “ grappled to his soul with hoops of steel” the few friends that
heart he really cared for, and how when there were no strangers’
eyes to watch him, no strangers’ ears to listen, he gave expression to
the grief and the sorrow that weighed upon his heart ; how he


disclosed the wounds and scars that in public he had concealed or
borne with silent suffering out of his high sense of chivalry and noble
manhood. Often he has in private burst into a flood of tears when he
could no longer restrain his emotion, and keep back the rushing
current of the soul. “People think I have no heart,” he once said
to a friend. “It is as well they think so, and I shall never let them
know how I am pained and grieved, and how I feel every blow that
falls upon me and upon those for whom I am striving.” What a
picture ! That great man with his tears streaming from his eyes and
his heart nearly breaking ; and what noble heroism to keep his grief and
his sorrows hidden even from those who would have rushed to cheer
and comfort him in those moments of trial, when “foes assailed and
friends betrayed,” and all the world seemed to have deserted him ! He
sacrificed his sentiments and affections on the altar of duty, and often
assumed a gaiety of manner and spoke with hope and encouragement
when other men would have been overwhelmed with sadness and lost
in despair. We have seen only the brighter part of the late Arch-
bishop's life. The troubles, the anxieties, and the miseries of that
good and beautiful life have been hidden within the walls of St. John's,
and his very heroism in concealing those things that would only have
made us unhappy ought to be his strongest claim on our affectionate
remembrance.
Within a few days of his'departure—it was on the sth of April—
his Grace ordained the Rev. Edmund Butler, M.A., who had been
connected with St. John’s, as Professor of Mathematics, for several
years. There was much affection between the young Professor and the
Archbishop, and Father Butler was one of the last to shake hands with
his Grace on board the City of New York.
sx. mart’s cathedral.
In education his Grace was an enthusiast, but it was by his efforts
in connection with the erection of St. Mary’s that he will be, perhaps,
most remembered in Sydney. For a long time weekly meetings, com-
menced in May, 1873, were held in the seminary, and many of these
Dr. Vaughan attended. The progress made was satisfactory, but not
fast enough for Dr. Vaughan. Meetings were then held every month
in the pro-Cathedral, at all of which the Archbishop presided, and by
his good humour and always cheering words made these monthly
gatherings successful financially, as well as in size and enthusiasm. It
was not until October 1880, at the annual meeting, that the Archbishop
decided to push on the works, and roof the Cathedral. Nearly £60,000
had been expended on the building up to that time, and the Archbishop
announced that he and the hon. treasurers (the late Mr. E. J. Holling-
dale and Mr. W. Hughes, J.P.) had entered into a contract with Mr.
John Young, whereby he was bound to have the Cathedral ready for
opening by the 6th of January, 1882, for the total sum of £30,000.


Mr. Dailey, speaking at that meeting, addressing his Grace, said—
“ To-night you are engaged in that great work which you have made
your special labour. It has not been permitted to me to have ihe privi-
lege of being with you month after month at your meetings, when,
with unconquerable industry and unfailing eloquence and good
humour, you have brightened the struggle, held aloft the colours, and
showed your people the way to victory.” At the first meeting held
within the walls of the new Cathedral on the 17th of October, 1881, the
sum received was £4723 Is. The Archbishop then stated that since
August 1880 he had written 1466 letters with his own hand, asking for
aid in building the Cathedral, and when to this number was added
a thousand replies in thanks for money received, the grand total of
letters written by him to people, in all parts of New South AYales and
in the neighbouring colonies, came to 2446. The total amount re-
ceived by means of this letter-writing, exclusive of promises, was
£16,409 Is 2d. The Archbishop sent “ begging letters ” everywhere,
and he urged his claims so well, that very few refused him “ something
towards St. Mary’s.” As already stated, it was intended when tbe
contract was let for roofing and partially completing the Cathedral,
that it would be opened at the beginning of 1882, but, as the time ap-
proached, it was found that although the roof was on, it would be im-
possible to properly conduct the ceremonies of the Church within the
building. It was finally decided to open the edifice on Friday, Bth
September, 1882, the Feast of the Nativity of the Blessed Virgin, and
this was done. The ceremonies on the occasion, which extended over
three days, were the grandest ever witnessed in the Australian colonies.
During the Triduum the immense sum of £SOOO was given as offerings.
At the meeting in the Cathedral on April 17 of the present year, before
his departure, the Archbishop made the gratifying announcement that
the Cathedral, which had cost £102,763 6s 7d, was perfectly free from
debt. It was on that occasion he said—“ Apart from the immense
blessing of being able to worship here, we have placed this St. Mary’s
Cathedral in such a condition that the community at large will never
now be satisfied until roof and spire—until highest cross and highest
finial—proclaim to ever passenger and sailor steaming or sailing into
Port Jackson that St. Mary’s Cathedral, from deep and broad founda-
tion to giddy summit, is an accomplished fact. Now that the work I
have set myself to do is done, I feel small attraction for making long
speeches and expatiating upon it. I feel more inclined to let our works
speak for themselves.” There is now in the Cathedral, hung in a brass
cornice near the great northern window, a large roll of names of per-
sons of all denominations and in all parts of Australasia—some thousands
in all —who forwarded donations to St. Mary’s, in response to the Arch-
bishop’s begging letters. The names are written in Church text, with
illuminated capitals, and this interesting record will, doubtless, be pre-
served and treasured for many generations in the Cathedral. Alto-
gether Dr. Vaughan wrote something like 3000 letters, and received
nearly £20,000. The new peal of bells is the gift of the late Arch-
bishop.


THE ARCHBISHOP’S WORK FOR RELIGION AND EDUCATION.
Of the late Archbishop’s work during his career of ten years’
constant service to religion and education, it is barely possible to speak
or write in sufficiently laudatory terms. Churches, convents, and schools
sprang up everywhere as if by magic. Only a few days before his
departure he gave “ an account of his stewardship,” and told us what had
been done in the Archdiocese since his arrival, ten years ago. In his
speech at Balmain on Sunday, April 15, his Grace said:—“ When I
came to the colony in 1873, the number of chapels and churches in the
archdiocese was 53, of which 29 were in the city and suburbs, and the
remaining 24 in the country districts. Now, in 1883, the number of
chapels and churches is 120 ; of these 39 are in the city and suburbs,
and 81 in the country districts. In 1873 the number of schools was
34, of which 23 were in the city and suburbs, and 11 in the
country districts. Now, that is, in 1883, we have 102 schools,
62 in the city and suburbs, and 40 in the country districts. The
difference between 34 and 102 during ten yeax's is a vexy remarkable
increase. According to returns that I have carefully pi'epared, we
have at this moment 15,200 Catholic children at school. Of these
12,500 are in Catholic schools, 2700 in other schools. Now, you know
what I have said about schools being ‘ holy places.’ You know how I
believe in the teaching of men and women who have dedicated their
whole beings to God. Well, I have said already that the number of
Catholic schools in the ax’dxdiocese is 102. Of these 22 are taught at
pi'esent by lay teachers, of the rest 11 are taught by religious ox-ders of
men, educating 2,370 pupils, and 69 by religious orders of women,
educating 8,546 pupils. The lay teachers have 1,564, making a total, as
I said just now of 12,500 children. Now, take schools taught by reli-
gious orders. We have under their care 55 primary schools, of which
24 are mixed, 13 high schools, 9 boarding and high schools combined, or
boarding schools only, 1 orphanage, 1 industrial school, and 1 providence
or home, making in all 80 establishments. A modexm prophet foretold,
some time ago, that the change my pastoral letters effected would be
1 death to the calling of the clex'gy.’ Let us look at figures. Of the 80
establishments just mentioned 68 have been stai’ted since I troubled the
peace of sleepy hollow—and of these 45 have been started since Januaxy,
1880, axxd 27 since the beginning of the present year. lam going home
to get mox’e priests and Bx-othex’s—perhaps a few Premonstrabensians —
otherwise their woi’k will grew too big for their hands. Now look at
things fx’om another point of view. Take our great central schools, which
I have always said form the great heart of the archdiocese. I have put
this heart in the right place— in the Brothers’ and Sisters’ hands. At
St. Maxy’s we have 757 childi’en, at St. Benedict’s 895, at St. Patrick’s
673, and at the Sacx-ed Heart 767; these, with St. Kilda’s and St.
John’s, with St. Vincent’s and St. Bridget’s and the Home, make up
4,889 children in Sydney under the Christian and Catholic influence of
men and women of heroic Christian life, teaching the xising generation,
not for pay, but for God’s love and sake. Let us wait : we can afford


to wait. We will work and wait till the broad sense of justice through-
out the land sweeps away all cobwebs and levels all bigotry—and gives
to us—true and loyal Catholics of the British Empire—justice. Gentle-
men, pure and simple justice.”
It was his intention to take the Education question again on his
shoulders on his return to the colony.
The famous Pastoral Letter on Catholic Education issued by Roger
Bede, Archbishop of Sydney; Mathew, Bishop of Bathurst; James,
Bishop of Maitland ; and William, Bishop of Goulburn, was drawn up
at a meeting of the bishops in Sydney in June, 1879. The pastoral,
which was the keynote of all the discussion and agitation that followed,
referred to the existing system as “unjust and galling,” and a principle
of fair play by means of “ payment by results ” was strongly advocated.
Dr, Vaughan issued his first Education Pastoral on August 10, 1879, in
which he said—“ If the denominations be depifived of State support we
shall, in addition to having our convent schools and colleges, call in with-
out delay a strong body of thoroughly devoted men and women to supply
our wants ; and, with Archbishop, Bishops, priests and people united on
the great question of Education, the Church will, though it may take
some years, finally obtain what she asks for, and her children will not
be kept under a disability for being Catholics.” A series of pastorals
followed, and in the middle of ] 880 a bill was passed in Parliament by
Sir Henry Parkes by which all aid to denominations was to cease at the
end of 1882. It was prophesied by Sir Henry Parkes that the bill
would be “ death to the calling of the clergy.”
On Sunday afternoon, February 29, 1880, at the ceremony of
laying the foundation-stone of the new school attached to the Sacred
Heart Church, his Grace the Archbishop, delivered a remarkable speech
in reply to Sir Henry Parkes. The Archbishop said ;—“ I could point
out one man occupying for the moment a high and responsible position
who—impressed I suppose, with the force that truth has been exerted
in some quarters in consequence of my words—has thrown aside argu-
ment and moral suasion, and has taken in hand the gag. He knows my
intense sensitiveness regarding the thorough loyalty of my heart and
conscience, and he thinks to silence me with the cowardly cry of
“ sedition,” and to make the world believe, thac whenever I open ray
mouth on the education question and denounce his odious bill, that I am
disloyal. Would he have the world believe that lam not far removed
from those dangerous characters with whom I well remember my father
had to deal with as a magistrate, when I was a boy at home ? I
recollect it being said, that many of those wild men were of the lowest
and basest of the criminal class, and that hypocrisy, treachery, and
deceit were written in many of their revolting countenances. I
have ever since then, ever since I was boy—when Frost, Williams and
Jones flourished— or rather distui’bed the peace of England—coupled two
thoughts together, that of “ sedition ” and that of a Chartist, and I found
that where Chartists are not plotting, they are tyrannizing. And yet am
I, who have thus ever detested sedition, as much as I have hated


tyranny, to be branded with sedition (no, and cheers) 1 Cannot I appeal
to the past, to many a bloody struggle since Agincourt, when he, whose
name was given to me, Sir Roger Vaughan (cheers), was knighted in
the field of battle by the Prince himself (cheers) 1 .Does my accuser
imagine that though the people of the country are opposed to my religion,
that they will stand silently and approvingly, and see me gagged 1 Will
they not repel this attempt to silence me, and will they not treat as it de-
serves this unworthy effort to stain the minds of my fellow-colonists with
the belief that I am not true to English authority, as well as to English
freedom (cheers) 1 I can read in your eyes, now looking on me, your
unanimous reply; and I hereby challenge my accuser, either to test the
justice of his accusation by legal action, or to withdraw his accusation,
so publicly made in his high place in Parliament against my loyalty
(cheers.)”
Speaking at the laying of the corner stone of St. Bede’s new School,
Pyrmont, on Sunday, August 29, 1880, his Grace thus put forward his
views and hopes :—-“ In spite of the mountain of prejudice and distrust
which stands in our way, in spite of otir being so profoundly misunder-
stood, I firmly believe that our day will come if we deserve it, and that
our fellow men will come to understand our position, and will concede
to us what we conscientiously believe to be our just rights. Now,
so far I have brought out two things; first, the fact that we
have been—as we expected to be—deprived of all help for our
schools; and secondly, that the majority in whose power we are,
though they have their hands upon us now, will, when the day
comes, take them off and give us what we ask for. I believe it
will be recognized at last that Catholics, if we are to live in a
free country, must be treated as Catholics, not as persons with the mere
name of Catholic, and with the practice of some other antagonistic creed.
It will be then seen clearer than it is now that one principle of life—l
mean of religious life—if we are to live at all—cannot be amalgamated
with the principle of an antagonistic form of religious life, and that our
faith is such that, excepting exceptions which must always exist, to
form a Catholic population, you must give the rising generation which
is eventually to represent that population a training which must be to
all intents and purposes Catholic. I must say I have great faith in the
good nature of my fellow men, and cannot help being persuaded that if
we are earnest and self-denying and true to the principles of our faith for
a few years, the sympathy of the public will of itself grow towards us ;
and that, being convinced of our sincerity and straightforwardness, they
will provide some scheme by means of which we shall get equal help
with others—though we do bring up Catholics, Catholics —for the
secular portion of the children’s education. Meanwhile let us throw our
whole energies into the great, the most holy work, of providing schools
and funds for the thorough training and education of Catholic children.”
In an important address on the occasion of the laying of the
foundation stone of St. Peter’s Church, Surry Hills, His Grace, after
reviewing the progress of religion and the amount spent on Catholic


works, said, —However loud the popular cry may be, and however
violently it may express itself against a cause, if that cause be a just
one, under popular and representative government it will eventually
prevail, and justice and fair play will conquer though always opposed by
certain factions which live and thrive in turmoil. We prefer our own
schools, which are under our own control—though we are quite ready
to accept the principle of payment by results ; and we are able—l
think I have shown that and willing, and determined to spend
ourselves and be spent —however unjustly for a time we may be treated
—in giving a thoroughly sound Christian course of instruction, and a
thoroughly sincere Christian education to every Catholic child in this
archdiocese. I have told you what your duty is, and you all know that
the principles I have been insisting on have God’s own truth in
them, and a community that can spend over two hundred thousand
pounds sterling of its own free money on religion and education in the
way'you are doing cannot be ill-treated for ever. And I know that you
hold with me that there could be no more glorious or gracious task on
earth for any man to put his hand to, or for any man to spend his life
in, than that of planting deep into the soil of our adopted country that
Christian faith whose very leaves are for the healing of the nations.”
One more reference to his peeches and we are done. At the
opening of the School Church of the Franciscan Fathers at Eandwick,
on October 10, 1880, the Archbishop said; —“That I should consent
to bless the building in the ordinary forms of the Church will surprise
nobody; but that I should deliver another address may possibly be
considered by some remarkable, inasmuch as I seem to.be continually
talking and putting forward my ideas and hammering at the same
object, when it might be thought I had better keep quiet and hold my
tongue and let things take their course according as the current
happens to carry them, and no doubt that would be by far the easier
plan for me, and I should save myself a world of trouble by letting the
boat be carried down the stream instead of pulling in a different
direction. But, ladies and gentlemen, it is not my calling to sit idle
in the boat and content myself with watching its movements ; my call
is exactly the reverse of this. lam a puller. My vocation is to
write and talk in the right direction —to take a big oar in each fist,
and pull steadily and constantly so long as there is a pull left in me.”
Our late Archbishop was a generous giver, and he always led the
way when funds were wanted for any good object. Whenever there
was foundation-stone to be laid, a school or church to be opened, or
a religious ceremony of any kind to be performed, his Grace was
always ready to assist, and his speeches in every instance were followed
by liberal and oftentimes exceedingly generous offerings. He had a
very pleasant way of his own of calling on the people of various
nationalities to “ come up and put their money down and uphold the
honor of their nation,” and his good humour and familiar pleasantness
were the means of bringing many a stray and unexpected sovereign
into the funds. Everywhere his Grace went to speak there was sure


to be a crowd, and after he had spoken a good collection was a
certainty. Two of his best public speeches were those delivered in aid
of the Indian and Irish Famine Relief Funds—the latter being at the
meeting in the Masonic Hall, on January 12, 1880.
THE ARCHBISHOP’S LAST PASTORAL.
The last pastoral issued by his Grace for the Lent of the present
year was entitled “ Test Points of a Loyal Spirit.” It concluded with the
following words, which have a special interest and meaning for us
now : —“ How happy a thing to feel that wo have done something for
God before we die ! How sweet to serve Him by loyalty of thought,
word and deed towards His Church ! How great a blessedness to see
through the emptiness of worldbness before it is too late, to know the
splendours of true religion and all its loveliness and all its consolations
though it be but in a vague and distant way !* May our King give us
grace to know Him more and more; and may Mary protect us, and Bt.
Joseph never leave us, and Blessed Andrew bring us the Cross of
Christ to kiss when we come to die ! May all the Saints and Angels
love us and guard us from all adversity, from sudden death, and help
us at the very end. May God bless you all, dear children in Jesus
Christ, and so work in you that you may ever be ready by good works
for the great change. For ‘We shall all indeed rise again. In a
moment, at the last trumpet, the dead shall rise again incorruptible.
Death is swallowed up in victory. 0 death where is thy sting ? Now
the sting of death is sin. Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye
steadfast and immoveable; always abounding in the work of the
Lord, knowing that your labour is not in vain in the Lord.’ ”
The Archbishop preached his first sermon—the Dolours of Mary—
in the new Cathedral, on September 17th, 1882, and his last on Good
Friday evening, 1883. During Advent, 1882, his Grace delivered four
discourses in the Cathedral on Death, Judgment, Hell, and Heaven.
LITERARY WORK.
The Archbishop’s literary reputation was gained by his “ Life and
Labours of St. Thomas of Aquin,” “ Views-on'Catholic Education,”
“ Ecclesia Christi,” “Words spoken at the opening of the Second
Session of the Fourth Provincial Council of Westminster,” 187 ;
“ Higher Education,” 1874; “Oration on O’Connell,” 1875; “Advent
Conferences,” 1875 ; “ Hidden Springs: Or Perils of the Future and
how to Meet Them,” 1876; “Lenten Exercises,” 1877; “Pius IX.
and the Revolution,” 1877 ; “Pastorals and Speeches on Education,”
1879; St. John’s College Commemoration Addresses, 1880, 1881, 1882 ;
Arguments in favour of Christianity and Christ’s Divinity, 1882. Dur-
ing the past three years the Archbishop delivered something like a
hundred speeches on Education, all of which were more or less
interesting and important. All the Archbishop’s literary efforts and
his principal addresses and speeches have been published by Mr. E.
F. Flanagan, of George Street, and some of the publications, notably
the first Advent Conferences, have had an exceedingly large sale.


Within a few weeks prior to his departure, his Grace performed
a number of important ceremonies. His Grace having made a complete
tour of the archdiocese, accompanied by the Rev. W. J. Riordan, meet-
ing everywhere with enthusiastic welcomes, returned to the city much
pleased and gratified by what he had seen and heard, and the rapid
growth and expansion of religion he had witnessed in the country dis-
tricts. His last public speeches were made at the laying of the founda-
tion stone of the Good Samaritan Industrial School at Manly, at the
laying of the first stone of the new school for the Brothers in connection
with St. Augustine’s, Balmain, and at the opening of the Bible Hall in
William Street. The last religious ceremony he performed was the
blessing and opening of St. Joseph’s, Balmain West, and it was in this
new church his Grace preached his last sermon —a particularly eloquent
one, taking for his text the words, “ How terrible are Thy works, O
Loyd !” The Archbishop made “ good-bye ” visits to nearly all the
Gatholic schools and colleges of the city and suburbs, and in nearly every
case the pupils presented him with addresses and gifts. In accepting the
presents from the children, his Grace asked them all to pray for him,
promising in return not to forget them in his own prayers.
FAREWELL PRESENTATION AND VALEDICTORY ADDRESSES.
On the evening of the 17th April the Archbishop, who was to
leave for America on the following Thursday, was presented with
addresses by the clergy, the laity, the A. H. C. Guild, and members of
the various Confraternities, and also presented with cheques amounting
to several thousand pounds. The meeting was in the Cathedral and
nearly 5,000 people were present. His Grace made touching and
well-considered replies to all the addresses, and then spoke to the great
crowd that filled the Cathedral. His words read now with a tender
sadness.
He said : —“ I hardly like to go away without saying one or two
very short words to the-people here at large. I can hardly allow
myself to pass away absolutely in silence, inasmuch as I feel an attraction
simply to say with all love and all affection—good bye. It is a painful,
a sad thing to say, but we have to say good-bye from time to time, and
at last we have got to say good-bye altogether, so it is well for us to
practise ourselves in saying it, and I think you are giving me a pretty
good trial of it on this occasion. I need not say how strange my feelings
are on leaving the colony. I do not feel any kind of elation or any
great joy, like a school-boy who is going home. When I came out here
I came out for good. I was 40 years of age, and, by 40 years you
have made all your friends I suppose; and, when you have made them
and left them, you are a different man from one who has been living all
his life in the same place. Now that lam leaving here for home again,
I feel as if I were going back to a dreamland, and when I look back to so
many friends who have been taken away, and so many changes which
have taken place, and to the general condition of things so ai’ranged, as


if I did not belong to them, I rather feel as if I were leaving home in
leaving you. I feel the impression of a kind of sadness rather than any
particularly bright joy in the anticipation ot getting on board ship and
sailing 16,000 miles to the old country from which I came. Of course
I shall be very pleased to see my own people, and they will be very
pleased to see me; but all the time I should have ‘ Good-bye ’in my
mind. I shall go and see them, and come away—come back to you
{great cheers) —come back to you who have made my life so happy in
this colony, and who have given me an opportunity to do that which I
love most—to do good to the people, to preach the high things of God,
to feel that lam sailing and labouring in His favour, and that you
recognize the work I am doing and join and assist me in carrying it
out. All this happiness and pleasure you have given me, and when I
■come back I hope for another ten years to take up my labour and carry
it out, if possible, with more energy and more earnestness than I have
done during the last ten years. I wish you then—as I shall not address
you again, I suppose, until I return to the colony—l wish you, your
wives and families, your children and homes, all the peace of Christ and
God ; I wish you all the prosperity that God thinks good for you in this
world ; I wish you all peace amongst yourselves ; I wish you especially,
when the time comes, the vision of the kingdom of glory for which
we live; and I wish you all a most affectionate and a most loving fare-
well.” The Archbishop then gave his blessing.
In the address presented by Sir Patrick Jennings on behalf of the
laity, after referring to the Archbishop’s efforts in connection with St.
Mary’s, it was said - Important, however, as may be this work, and
great the consolation it affords to the clergy and laity of the archdiocese
to have this magnificent edifice available for the public worship of
Almighty God, the Cathedral, though the foremost, is but one of many
■evidences of the labours of your Grace which are to be found all over
the territory of the archdiocese. On every side, in every locality, how-
ever remote, you have planted and raised churches, schools, presbyteries,
and buildings for those religious orders which render such incalculable
services to our holy religion, and great as has been the increase of the
population since your pastoral charge commenced, the efforts made have
kept pace with the ever-growing requirements of the Church, and we are
now receiving the benefits of the foresight and wisdom of your vene-
rated predecessor, brought into practical fruition by your constant, effec-
tive, and unwearying labours. The bold, resolute, and uncompromising
position taken by your Grace on the all-important question of the
Christian education of our children demands our warmest acknowledg-
ment, and establishes the strongest claims on the gratitude of your flock
and of future generations of Catholics in Australia. We feel assured
that the steps being taken to initiate and carry on a system of Catholic
education will be warmly supported by the Catholics of the archdiocese,
and, whatever the course of events may be on the question of education,
we will be found always following the precepts promulgated by the
Church, which has been so forcibly and so faithfully advocated by you.


and thus preserve the religious character of our teaching, for it is to the
Catholic schools we must look as strongholds of the Faith, and as the
most effective auxiliaries in combating the growth of indifferentism and
infidelity now rapidly spreading amongst the nations of the earth.
(Signed) Hon. Sir P. A. Jennings, K.C.M.G. ; T. M. Slattery, M.L.A. ;
Thomas Dalton, M.L.A. ; Danl. O’Connor, M L.A. ; W. Hughes, J.P.;
John B. Magney, James Carroll.
LAST SCENE OF ALL.
His Grace the Archbishop, after ten years’ residence in Sydney, left
on Thursday, 19th April, in the City of Hew York for America, en route to
Borne, accompanied by the Very Eev. Dr. Gillett. It had been arranged
that his Grace would pay a farewell visit to the Cathedral before going
on board ship, and that the appropriate office of Itinerarium would be
performed. The building was crowded to the doors, and nearly all the
clergy of the Archdiocese were present. The Very Bev Dean Dwyer,
read the beautiful prayer in a most impressive manner, after which the
Archbishop addressed a few words of farewell to the immense crowd that
filled the Cathedral. His Grace said ; “My dear friends,—l thank you
from my heart for the splendid manifestation of good-will and kindness
you are showing me. May God bless and keep you all in His good
keeping, is my constant prayer. You know our surroundings may,
roughly speaking, be divided into two divisions—into our friends and
our enemies. Now, I mean to show my love for my friends, whilst
away, and to be revenged upon my enemies. For you, my friends, I
will offer up the Holy Sacrifice, in the crypt of St. Peter’s, close over
the tombs of the Apostles, praying that our Lord may vouchsafe to
realise for you your dearest wishes, and make you happy in the highest
sense. And as for my enemies (I always prefer calling them opponents)
I cannot let them off so easily. I must heap a few ‘ coals of fire ’on
their heads; so I intend to make, whilst in Borne, an especial pilgrimage
to that beautiful abbey where St. Augustine, my Benedictine brother,
learnt, in a solitary monastic cell, to subdue that England of ours to the
Cross. I will kneel down in that hallowed spot, and fervently beseech
that glorious apostle to touch the hearts of all hitherto opposed to me,
and convert them all, with their wives and families, to the Catholic
religion. I wish you all—whether for me or against me—l wish
you all, one and all, good-bye.” His Grace gave his blessing
and then left the Cathedral. Crowds followed the carriage to the
Circular Quay, and six or seven steamers, two with bands on board,
accompanied the City of New York to the Heads. A large crowd
gathered at Fort Macquarie to give a cheer as the mail ship passed, and
the cheering aboard the steamers was incessant. His Grace was
engaged all the way down the harbour waving his hat in response to the
cheers, and at the Heads, standing on the bridge of the ship, he said his
last good-bye. Mr. Garvan, M.L.A., who went as far as the Heads,
and who came ashore in the pilot boat, was the last person to shake


hands with the Archbishop on the bridge of the mail steamer. The
clergy on board the steamer Mary had the last word from his Grace, and
the City of New York passed through the Heads at a quarter-past four.
Nearing the Heads the Impexial Band on board the Commodore and the
band on the Lily played “ Auld Lang Syne,” “ Home Sweet Horae,”
and other appropriate airs. It was thus our Archbishop left us—left us
for ever.
DR. YAUGHAN ON BOARD THE CITY OE NEW YORK.
(Specially written for the Sydney Freeman's Journal , July 14.)
Dr. Yaughan made himself popular with the passengers from the
start, and before he was a week on board he had captured the good
will of all He was the leader and promoter of every kind of rational
amusement, and initiated a series of lectures in the music room, by
giving the first one himself, the subject being “Ancient Greek
Oratory.” Every gentleman who had an acquaintance with any special
field of knowledge was then expected to give a lecture on the subject,
the one following Dr. Yaughan on the next evening being Mr. White,
of the Melbourne Observatory, whose theme was “Practical
Astronomy,” and so on until Dr. Yaughan’s turn came round again.
With the officers and employees of the ship he was a special
favourite, and all alike, whether Protestant or Catholic, swore by
him before the ship crossed the equator. His favourite place was
the bridge, and many an evening when going through the tropics,
and even when in cold weather approaching the American coast,
he would walk with the officer of the deck for two and three
hours at a time, on more than one occasion remaining till the relief of
the watch at midnight. Captain Searle gave instructions that his Grace
was to have the privilege of both the wheel house and bridge at any and
all times. Mr. John T. Toohey, who was a personal friend of the
Archbishop, spent much time with his Grace on board. On Sundays
his Grace held service in the music hall, and always gave an informal
sermon after prayers. All alike, whatever their creed, were sure to be
present, and all gave the greatest attention to every word. On one
occasion, after some very beautiful prayers for the Queen, and the
President of America, a scion of one of England’s greatest ducal houses
remarked, “ Well, by George, I never supposed there was so much beauty
and solemnity in the Catholic service.” One of the cabin passengers
from Auckland, a fine young man, named Ross, and an American by
birth, died of consumption on Saturday, May 12th, and was buried at
sea. On the next day at service, his Grace gave an illustration of his
broad and catholic views by making some feeling remarks about the
deceased, and then praying for the eternal repose of his soul. The
deceased was not a Catholic. On arrival at San Francisco, the Customs
authoxities passed all the Archbishop’s luggage without examixxation.
During his stay at San Fx-ancisco, he was the recipient of many attentions
from the leading people of the city, and gave much of his time to the


examination of educational matters. Among his fellow-passengers was
the late Mr. N. P. Bayly and bride, and on more than one occasion, his
Grace spoke of what a fine-looking young couple they were. Mr. Bayly
was the second son of the late N. P. Bayly of Havilah, Mudgee, and
died at Liverpool, of inflammation of the brain. Mr. Bayly, who was
only 23 years of age, was on his honeymoon trip, and, travelling via
Frisco through America, he arrived in Liverpool just in time to die.
He was married in Sydney, on the 11th April last, to the eldest daughter
of the Hon. John Marks. It is a safe assertion, that none of his fellow-
voyagers more deeply regretted the sad and untimely death of that
estimable young gentleman, nor sympathised more sincerely with his
afflicted mother and young widow, than his Grace Dr. Yaughan.
HIS GRACE THE ARCHBISHOP IN AMERICA.
The Most Bev. Archbishop Yaughan of Sydney, Hew South Wales
(says the San Francisco Monitor of May 23), arrived in this city on
Thursday last, en route for Rome. His Grace was interviewed regard-
ing the progress of the Church in his distant diocese. Archbishop
Yaughan is a splendid picture of stalwart manhood. He is over six feet
two inches tall, well proportioned, and robust in appearance. The knee-
breeches and silk stockings he wears remind a European of the familiar
costume of nearly all prelates in England, and many of the parish priests
in Ireland. On the Feast of Corpus Christi his Grace of Sydney at-
tended St. Ignatius’ Church. At St. Ignatius’ the procession took place
in the evening, Archbishop Yaughan being present, and participating in
the edifying exercises. All the sodalities connected with the church
marched in procession, and the church was densely crowded.
His Grace the Archbishop of Sydney (rejtorts the Monitor of May
30) preached a very instructive discourse to a very large congregation on
last Sunday, at the Cathedral. Taking his text from the Gospel of the
day, he illustrated in a very lucid manner the beautiful harmony that
exists between the different Gospels, Epistles, and other prayers selected
by the Church to be said in the Divine Office upon every day in the
year. The concluding portion of the sermon was a strikingly graphic
picture of the Crucifixion and its personal surroundings, each of whom
his Grace illustrated as typical of the different varieties of sinners and
saints who abound in the world.
The newspapers of San Francisco spoke in high terms of the ser-
mon, and as this is the last public utterance of which we have any re-
cord, the remarks of the papers have a special interest for us. One
paper said—“ His Grace presents a magnificent presence in the pulpit,
and his style of preaching is at once oratorical, incisive, and impassioned.
He possesses a full, round voice, which is well under control, and his
delivery partakes of that clear-cut English style which drives conviction
into the heart of every hearer.” And another thus described him—
“ The Archbishop of Sydney has many natural advantages in his favour.
He is the possessor of a clear, strident, resonant voice of considerable


volume, while his cultivated accents and graceful and impressive ges-
tures lend great force to his preaching. He has, besides, a commanding
figure, and, in addition to this, he possesses the magnetic attraction
which seems to compel people’s attention almost in spite of themselves.
As he ascended the pulpit he looked every inch a bishop.”
CLOSING CHAPTER,
The concluding chapter of the Archbishop’s life is brief. After e
stay of nearly three months in the United States he proceeded to England,
and on Saturday August 18, died suddenly at the residence of Mr. Weld-
Blundell, near Liverpool. The Archbishop who had been unwell during
the voyage from America, was found dead in his bed by his brother the
Bishop of Salford, having passed away in his sleep. At the inquest a
verdict of died from natural causes was returned. His Grace had
retired evidently in good health on the previous evening, and his death
was altogether unexpected, notwithstanding that it was known he was
suffering from disease of the heart.
THE FUNERAL.
London, August 24.
The mortal remains of his Grace the Most Rev. Roger Bede
Vaughan, Archbishop of Sydney, were, with great solemnity, interred
yesterday in the family vault of Mr. T. Weld-Blundell, at Ince-
BlundelJ. The burial place is in a village in the County of Lancashire,
nine miles north of Liverpool. Before the funeral the Office of the Dead
was sung, and a solemn requiem celebrated in the oratory attached to
Mr. Blundell’s residence, four brothers of the deceased prelate assisting
at the service. The funei’al was attended by his Lordship the Right
Rev Herbert Vaughan, Bishop of Salford, and their Lordships the
Bishops of Liverpool, Newport, Leeds and Northampton, and other dig-
nataries. The President of the Anglo Benedictine College and Monastery,
and nearly 100 priests and other religious, assisted at the obsequies, and
there was a large assemblage of personal friends and the general public.
It is probable that the remains will be transferred from the vault to the
burial place of the Vaughan family in Herefordshire. The Arch-
bishop’s death has caused a painful feeling throughout England.
archbishop yaughan’s remains.
London, August 30.
The question as to where the remains of the late Archbishop
Vaughan are to be fin all} 7 interred has not yet been decided. The friends
of the deceased prelate are anxious to ascertain the wishes of the Catho-
lics of New South Wales before deciding upon the place of interment.;
and, should there be a generally-expressed wish for the remains to be
buried in Sydney, the wish will be complied with.
The Very Rev. Dr. Sheridan, Administrator, after a meeting of
the clergy and laity, communicated by cable with Dr. Herbert Vaughan,
Bishop of Salford, but no reply from England has been received up to
date.


THE ARCHBISHOP’S MEMORIAL.
On Friday evening, 24th August, a large and influential meeting
was held in the Town Hall for the purpose of initiating the Memorial
movement.
Sir Patrick Jennings, K.C.M.G.. M.L.ii., was voted to the chair,
and among the gentlemen present were Alderman D. O’Connor, M.L.A. ;
Alderman K. Butcher, M.L.A., Mayor of Wollahra; Mr. Thomas
Dalton, M.L.A. ; Mr. A. Loughnan, M.L.A. ; Mr. T. 0. O’Mara,
M.L.A. ; Mr. J. B. Ollifle, M.L.A. ; Dr. Donovan, John Hughes,
K.S.G., J.P. ; Mr. William Hughes, J.P. ; Mr. P. M'Mahon, JP.;
Mr. Patrick Hogan, J.P. ■ Rev. P. Le Eennetel, S.M., St. John’s College ;
Dr. Maurice O’Connor, Captain Byrnes, Mr. John Hourigan, J.P. ;
Mr. William Redmond, M.P. ; Mr. F. J. McCarthy, M.A. ; Mr, C. A.
Farrell, LL.B. ; Mr. J. J. Curran, J.P. • Mr. P. Sheridan, J.P. ;
Mr. M. E. Maher, B.A. ; Mr. F. B. Freehill, M.A. ; Mr. T. Curran,
Mr. E. F. Flanagan, Mr. E. Farrell (Henfrey and Co.), M. J. B.
Magney, Mr. J. Baxter, Mr. J. F. M'Donall, Mr. M. Shalvey, Mr. W.
J. Cracknel!, Mr, Henry Egan (President Central Council C. D.
Confraternity), Mr. C. Coveny, Mr. Thomas O’Neill, Mr. B. M‘Bride,
Mr. Fennelly, Mr. B. Mulroney, Signor Simonetti, Mr. JJ. Spruson,
Mr. P. O’Connor, Mr. J. Hughes, Mr. W. H. M'Carthy, Mr. W.
Hickey, Mr. J. M‘Evoy, Mr. E. Byrne, Mr. P. Callachor, Mr. George
Hurley, Mr. Watkins, Mr. A. J. Riley, Mr. P. T. Riley, Mr. E.
Hollingdale, Mr. Fred. Riley, Mr. Benbow, M. A. J. Brady, Mr. P.
Kirby, Mr. Hegarty, Mr. P. O’Doud, Mr. L. Foley, Mr. R. Sheridan,
Mr. Ramsden, Mr. J. G. O’Ryan, Mr. J. G. O’Connor and Mr. W. F.
Brennan,
Sir Patrick Jennings said he felt assured they all deeply deplored
with him, and as deeply as men could do, the melancholy occasion
which brought them together that night. He felt that if they were not
fortified with the hope that the spirit of God rested upon their Church
they might well despair at the loss of such a man. Having witnessed
what the Archbishop had done for them, and knowing that in his heart
of hearts his Grace had lived and even died for them, they might well
consider that in some way they should manifest their appreciation of his
Grace’s work.
Messrs. D. O’Connor, M.L.A., and F. B. Freehill, M.A., were
appointed Hon. Secretaries, and a large committee elected.
The Committee appointed at the preliminary meeting met at the
Town Hall on Tuesday evening, August 28. There was an attendance
of about thirty gentlemen, including Sir Patrick Jennings, M.L.A.
(Chairman), Messrs. D. O’Connor, M.L.A. (Hon. Sec.), J. P. Garvan,
M.L.A., T. M. Slattery, M.L.A., R. Butcher, M.L.A., Dr. Donovan,
Mr, John Higgins, Dr, O’Connor, and others. The Chairman explained
that the object of the meeting was to decide, if possible, the form which
the proposed memorial should take, so that they would have some
definite proposal to lay before a public meeting to be held on the date of
the Month’s Mind, 20th September. Dr. Donovan stated that one of
the strongest desires of the late Archbishop was to have the great


window iu the northern end of St. Mary’s Cathedral completed, and for
that purpose he selected the coronation of the Blessed Virgin as the
subject for the window. His Grace wished the window to be completed
by the school children of the colony, and the children subscribed £SOO,
It was ascertained definitely that the cost of the window, including
freight and all incidental expenses, would be about £1,750, and the
Archbishop, just before his departure, intimated his intention of con-
tributing the balance, about £1,200. Acting upon that expressed
intention, he (Dr. Donovan) had communicated with the artists, Messrs.
Hardman Brothers, and acertained that it could be completed within
about twelve months, and that the design, as it was proposed to be
carried oxxt, would make the window one of the grandest in the world. He
therefore thought that the primary purpose they should have in view should
be the completion of that window, and the surplus might then be applied
to the completion of the reredos, upon which about £1,500 had been
expended, leaving about £1,500 to complete it. The total amount,
therefore, that would required for the exaction of the window and the
completion of the rex-edos would be about £3,250. A general discussion
then followed, in the course of which various suggestions were made as
to the form which the memox-ial should take, including the ex-ection of a
memorial window and the completion of the rex-edos, the placing of a
statue in the Cathedx-al, the establishment of bursaries or scholarships ixx
Dr. Vaughan’s name, the ex-ection of a memorial pulpit in the Cathedx-al.
Sir Patrick Jennings stated that, as he xxxxdex-stood the situation, it was
agreed that the clergy and laity should act together in this matter, and
that whatever form of memorial should be adopted should be in the
Cathedral. Mx-. P. T. Riley (of the firm of Riley Brothex-s) stated that
it was the intention of himself aixd his brother to complete the reredos
(to which they had already contributed £1000) from their own private
purse—and they would be sorry to see any of the pxxblic sub-
scriptions applied to this purpose. After px-olonged discussion, the
following resolution was unanimoxxsly adopted : —“ That, in the opinion
of this committee, should the same xxieet with the appx-obatioix of the
administrators and senior clex-gy, a memorial shoxxld be raised forthwith
to perpetxxate the memory of oxxr late illustrious Ax - chbishop Vaughan ;
and that the funds contribxxted for such pxxrpose shoxxld in the first place
be applied towards the ex-ection of the principal north windowin St. Max-y’s
Cathedx-al, with a sxxitable and appx-opriate tablet aixd ixxscription ; and
that any surplus funds should be applied ixx establishing scholarships for
Catholic youths in connection with St. John’s College.”
THE ARCHBISHOP’S GREAT BOOK.
One of the highest tx-ibutes ever paid to the literax-y genius of the
late Archbishop was that contained in a notice of his celebrated book,
published in the London Athenceum, and we do not think any wox-ds
could mox-e fittingly close the memoir of one who was above all things a
scholar, and a disciple of the Angel of the Schools ; —“ St. Thomas of
Aquin; his Life and Labours. “Prior Vaughan is not deficient in


many of those qualities which give popularity to biography. He is an
enthusiastic admirer of St. Thomas, and an industrious reader of
mediaeval literature. He has laid under contribution whatever works of
early or of modern times could throw light upon his favourite subject.
The extent and catholicity of his reading are amazing. English
Protestant divines, the most latitudinarian authors of France and
Germany, the speculations of Lewis and Renan,’ hold peaceable
communion in his pages with the ancient fathers, and the most
uncompromising supporters of Roman orthodoxy. Those who might
expect to and in an orthodox professor of the Roman Catholic faith, and
still more in the superior of a strict religious order, that narrow bigotry
which industriously closes its eyes to modern progress, modern science,
and modern literature, will be as greatly' as they will be agreeably
disappointed. If the name and title were withdrawn, Prior Vaughan’s
readers would be puzzled to decide whether they were not perusing the
pages of some brilliant historian, who was discussing a great subject, not
indeed, without partiality, but with that freer and larger handling which
distinguishes the modern from his more precise and formal predecessor.
His pages are filled with animated description. With the force and life-
like fidelity of a master, he dashes off the portraits and peculiar cha-
racteristics of the great intellectual leaders of the middle ages. Beneath
his vigorous handling mere names start up into glowing and breathing
realities. The driest details of scholasticism, so repulsive to the imagina-
tion of the general reader, are invested with the interest of fiction. The
densest clouds which had settled down and obscured the page of history
are chased away. Mediaeval discussions, the most remote from modern
sympathy, are set before the reader- in a lively style, and with graphic
effect. Never does his narrative stand still for want of materials—never
does it loiter or languish for lack of variety and energy. Nor is Prior
Vaughan, as might have been anticipated, contented with presenting the
Angelical doctor of the schools in one aspect, or from one point of view,
or merely as a theologian, or in relation to his own times and his own
contemporaries. He is brought into contrast, not only with all the great
names of the middle ages—with St. Anselm and St. Bernard, with
Abelard and William of St. Amour—but with the Greek and Latin
Fathers—with St. Athanasius, St. Basil, and St. Chrysostom; St.
Anthony, St, Ambrose, and St. Augustine. Not satisfied with this
almost superfluous energy 7, our author compares the teaching of Aquinas
with that of the great masters of antiquity ; and we have such chapters
as ‘ St. Tomas and Socrates,’ of ‘ St. Thomas and Plato,’ ‘ St. Thomas and
Aristotle,’ and, finally, the relation of Faith to Reason, and of St.
Thomas to both. Our readers will be able to judge from these remarks
the wealth and variety of the field over which our author travels—al-
ways interesting, if not convincing; always suggesting some useful train
of thought, if not always strictly adhering to the main idea and purpose
of the subject. In fact, with the liveliness, variety, freedom, and in
genuousness of Prior Vaughan’s account of the life and labours of Sv.
Thomas we have no fault to find.”


PRESS NOTICES
“ He was a man, take him tor all in all,
We shall not look upon his like again.”
Hamlet, Actl, Scene 2.
(The Freeman's Journal, August 2,5 th.)
No element of human affliction in its completest form was wanting in the
intelligence which was received here on Sunday last, announcing the death of the
Archbishop. Its suddenness—its immense proportions derived from his commanding
intellectual powers and his unceasing activity—its disastrous effect upon the
diocese by the withdrawal of one who had so thoroughly mastered all the details
of administration —combine to make it a calamity at once gigantic and all-pervading.
It is not at the centre of spiritual authority alone, but in the most distant parts of
the colony, that the loss of his vigour, his forethought and his contempt of diffi-
culties will be felt as one simply irreparable. It would be at this moment a labour
which no one could undertake with any hope of performing it satisfactorily to
attempt an estimate of this supreme misfortune. It was remarked of a vast
conception of the first of poets that the greatness of its prominent figure was
to be found not in corporal dimensions but in intellectual. In our case the great-
ness of our sorrow is to be found not in intellectual dimension but in spiritual. It
is time alone which which will sadly and very slowly reveal all that has been lost.
There are afflictions which disclose themselves at once to heart and mind;
and touch our sensibilities tenderly without disturbing our imagination.
There are others which fall upon us like a blow and leave us stunned and
unequal to a just estimate of their proportions, their relations, and their
influences. These we discover as time passes—as occasions arise which
there is no hand to grasp to advantage—as opportunities of benefit and blessing
come without welcome and depart without a word of regret —when, in fine, hand
and tongue are but dust. Over such sorrows as this there is no place for imme-
diate and violent bursts of grief. The calamity becomes a subject of long
contemplation - it is drunk into the soul like the tranquillity of a holy place which
is associated with suffering long since past—it is more vivid in the future when it
is revealed at intervals by an ever fresh sense of loss than it is at the moment of
its happening. It is but natural that the awful suddenness of this removal should
oppress the imagination of all who so lately looked upon what seemed an image of
such splendid vitality. It is hard to think that within a few weeks since the
Archbishop left us apparently in such fulness of health and such hopeful gaiety of
heart he has been called away for ever. It is so difficult, as a sweet poet sang of
a lost love, to “be led to think upon the wormy bed, and him together.” But
this is but a momentary distress and a swiftly passing difficulty. What remains
is the terrible realization of our loss, never to be instantly understood under such
circumstances as those in which we find ourselves placed. Of the Archbishop
himself, it would not be too much to say that the suddenness of his call to his
reward was perhaps the crowning benediction of a singularly felicitous and glorious
life. That he should have used for the noblest purposes of human life every
moment that was entrusted to him ; that he should have fought so glorious a fight
—and have fallen in the midst of the conflict; with not an instant wasted—and
with no long and dreary interval between the battlefield and the grave—was
surely a happiness as complete for him in life as is our calamity in his death.


The Echo, August 20.
“ Our father is dead ! ” Like a flash of light the terribly sudden news swept
through the land last night. It sent a wild throb of pain through the great heart
of the Roman Catholic community ; preachers faltered with the fearful announce-
ment on their lips, church services broke down, and the house of prayer and praise
became the scene of an outburst of grief such as the death of few men ever caused.
It is a grief which will find a ready sympathy in the breast of every true man in
the community, for the blow which has fallen with such awful suddenness upon
the Church has robbed the country of one of its grandest men. His death is a loss,
not only to the Church and to New South Wales, but to Australia. He was a man
among ten thousand. By his commanding presence, by his culture, by his elo-
quence, by his impassioned appeals to the fidelity of his people, by his Herculean
labours, by his single-hearted devotion to his Church, by his untiring energy and
unswerving determination, by his hold on the affections of his own community, by
the respect and admiration which he compelled from those who were not of his
own community, by his great grasp of the predilections and prejudices of the people
he had to govern, by his singular capacity for moulding the will of his people to
his own will, by his heroic self-sacrifice of wordly advancement, by the purity of
his personal life, by the vast range of his influence—in short, by the hundred and
one characteristics which make a great churchman, he won for himself a position
which no other member of the same Church ever occupied in these colonies. He
towered head and shoulders above his brother prelates in Australia. Where will
they find a fit successor ?
The great public cause with which the name of Archbishop Vaughan has been
most closely associated is that of public education. He came amongst us deeply
imbued with the traditions and principles of his Church, and he fought long and
desperately to oppose those traditions and principles to the onward rush of modern
liberalism. Like the monarch who stood by the seashore and bade the waves
recede, with no more effect from his royal command than from the faintest whisper
of the passing wind so Archbishop Vaughan, with all the power of his individuality
and clothed in all the majesty of his great Church, strove just as vainly to force
back the flood of public opinion. Foot by foot, and inch by inch, he was driven
back into the stronghold of his own dominion only to feel that he was not safe even
there.
He failed to win State-aid in the dissemination of dogmatic religion through
the medium of the Public schools ; but he has raised, in the erection of St. Mary’s
Cathedral, a monument to his own earnestness and labours and the sympathy and
support of his people, which wall live long after his political failure shall have been
foi gotten. In season and out of season, on the platform, in the press, from the
altar, and in private life, he made constant and reiterated appeals for the means to
-erect a cathedral worthy of this archdiocese. During the past three or four years,
thousands of letters penned by himself have been forwarded to every part of the
colony and even to Europe, seeking money in aid of this gieat object. His efforts
met with such a large degree of success that he had the great gratification, not
long before his departure from the colony, of presiding at the opening ceremony of
the cathedral.
Just before Archbishop Vaughan’s departure he made a semi-public notification
of a great work in which he intended to engage immediately upon his return. He
recognised the utter uselessness of further opposition to the wdll of the country in
respect to public education ; but he pledged himself never to give up religion as a
part of the daily school curriculum of the children of his own Church. If the State
schools would not teach the children, nor give the denominations the means of im-
parting religious instruction in their own schools, he w'as determined that the
Catholic Church should, unaided, give that teaching to its own children. It was a
work which would have taxed all his powers, and none would have begrudged him
any measure of success he might have achieved. But the brain that planned amt
the hand that might have executed this work are still. Archbishop Vaughan un-
doubtedly fought against the progress of public opinion on many occasions, but he
fought with all the valour of a brave churchman and all the earnestness of a con-
scientious man. The death of such a man is a great public loss.


The Sydney Morning Herald , Monday, August 20th.
The news ran through the city yesterday, with a shock to every hearer, that
Archbishop Vaughan was dead. It is only about two months since he left us in
the prime of life, and apparently in the pride of health, full of zeal and activity,
with the prospect of a long life before him, and with a passion for long and
arduous labour. In the cause to which he had devoted himself he was not only a
believer but an enthusiast, and no dignities to which he might have attained
would have made him an idle man. He was essentially a worker, not only from
a sense of duty, but by temperament. His sphere of labour might have been
changed, but the passion of labour would have remained. But all is quiet now.
The once active brain is still, the eloquent tongue is silent, and the commanding
presence is laid low. There is nothing so worthy of effort as the production of a
noble man ; but the choicest product on earth is mortal, and sometimes very short-
lived. Some of men’s works live forages. The work of an architect may last
till the solid rock crumbles ; paintings may endure for generations till the colour
and outline have faded ; empires that have been founded may outlive generations
of kings ; books that have been written may last as long as scholars survive ; but
individual man, the producer of all that men cherish, is outlived by his work.
He, whatever his achievements, whatever his excellence, whatever may have been
his toil in self-culture, whatever his acquisitions—he passes away, and only very
indirectly can he bequeath the intellectual and moral treasure he has personally
amassed. New men succeed the old, but do not inherit their personal possessions.
■Gold and silver can be passed on, and land can be handed down from father to son,
but personality dies with the person. Napoleon once said, “My son cannot
succeed me ; nobody can succeed me ; I could not succeed myself.”
While he was with us Archbishop Vaughan was a power in the community —
a political as well as an eccleasiastical power. He was fond of power ; he grasped
it and he exercised it; he took it as the right of his position, and he never flinched
from wielding it, whoever might be offended. In many respects he was a great
contrast to his predecessor. He had not the same exquisite sweetness as
Archbishop Folding, but he had more vigour. He was not so fond of peace, but
he thought fighting a duty, and enjoyed the excitement of struggle. He was a
more vigorous preacher and a more popular orator. Whether he did more for the
Church, more for Christianity, and more for the country, is one of those open
questions on which people will differ. A writer in a recent London society paper
made a disparaging comparison between the two men, and represented that his
predecessors had allowed things to slide. Certainly Dr. Folding did as much as
possible avoid all causes of irritation, but it may be doubted whether the
attachment felt toward him by persons of all creeds was not as good for his
Church as the antagonism which Dr. Vaughan generated. The two men were of
different temperaments. Each had his ideal, each was conscientious and laborious,
and each worked out his own theory of an Archbishop’s duty according to his
light; but ample justice may be done to Archbishop Vaughan without in any way
disparaging the memory of his much-loved predecessor, and the London journalist
certainly did not hit the tone of Sydney sentiment when he tried to exalt the new
man at the expense of the old one.
Dr. Vaughan certainly made his people give as they had never given before.
He did not wring money from them to the extent to which the members of many
despised Protestant sects have given voluntarily and as a cheerful duty, but with
his vehement will he pushed them along. He made them feel what they could do
if they would, and that they ought to do what they could. He made them
conscious of their money power, and steered that power in the direction he thought
right He told them they were poor, but he made them prove they were nothing
of the kind, and he demonstrated that there was an abundance of wealth among
the Roman Catholics of this colony, more than sufficient to maintain all the
operations of that Church.
The late Archbishop had been a good student, and he was a large reader, and
he had a natural, which was also a cultivated, gift of expressing himself. He had
al ways something to say and something worth listening to, and he won his large


audiences by deserving them. We are not rich in great speakers in this Colony,
and whenever he stood on a common platform he was not distanced. But he was
more of the rhetorician than of the logician, notwithstanding that he had studied
in the school of Thomas Aquinas. His meaning was never lost in his words, but,
the sequence of his reasoning was often more obscured than made clear. His
argumentative efforts were his least successful ones ; he was better in persuading
than in convincing. He very often failed to see where his reasoning was taking
him to, and what uses could be made of the positions he took up. To some extent
his theological position generated an indifference to logical accuracy, for he was
fond of saying that as he was merely expounding the doctrines of the Church he
must be right. One who thinks and feels thus thinks more of enforcing the truth
than studying syllogisms. He can afford to be impetuous if he thinks he will
never have to call a halt.
Dr. Vaughan s action on the education question is so recent that it would be
almost premature at present to re-discuss it over his open grave. The controversy
with him has been part of our political history of the last few years. He fought
with all his might, and made himself a respected antagonist, and having for our
selves often had to cross swords with him, we acknowledge hi s vigour and his
address. Of course we thought him engaged on the wrong side, but we never
failed to recognise in him an English gentleman, a cultivated scholar, an earnest
politiciap, a preacher of the highest moral tone, and a great ecclesiastic, worthy of
the high dignity he had attained, worthy of the higher that was within his reach,
and fit to be enrolled amongst the illustrious men of his Church to whom the mitre
has only been the fitting outward symbol of inward merit.
(The Evening News , August 20th.)
There are few of us whose daily experience does not furnish, in one shape or
another, some striking illustrations of the frail and uncertain tenure of our exist-
ence here But the death of Archbishop Vaughan is among those mournfully
sudden events which at once bring home to the hearts of an entire community a
solemn sense of their common mortality. It is seldom indeed if ever, in the annals
of the colony, that a name which filled a larger space than his has been blotted
from the roll of its living celebrities, and under circumstances more painfully
calculated to awaken a wide-spread sentiment of generous appreciation and
unfeigned regret. It was but yesterday he quitted our shores, full of hope and, as
it seemed, of vitality, and with the prospect of a speedy return. Who that was
familiar with that stately presence —with that stalwart frame, would have hesitated
to predict for its possessor the blessings of continued vigour and length of days, or
could have dreamt that the moment was so near when he was to pass into the land
of shadows ? Alas, for the feebleness of human vision ! How dimly does it scan
the future, even of its finite career upon this little planet. Too often in the very
midst of its speculations the woof of which they were woven is rent asunder. We
only realize the real weakness of the thread when--
Comes the blind fury with th’ abhorred shears,
And slits the thin spun life.
The present melancholy occasion is certainly not one favourable for a critical
review of the life and labours of the distinguished man who has gone. Instead of
considering them in that spirit, we prefer to dwell briefly on those traits of
his character which people of all classes and creeds have regarded with equal
admiration. However strongly many of his fellow-colonists may have deprecated
what they believed to be the intemperate ardour of his opposition to our national
system of education, none of them have ever refused to acknowledge the steady
courage, the splendid talent, and above all the perfect sincerity which he brought
to that contest. An uncompromising champion of his church, still he never in any
of his sharpest tilts in her cause forgot the rules of honourable warfare, or
omitted to set a shining example of how the profoundest religious zeal could be
combined with the culture of a finished scholar and the courtesy of an English
gentleman. No matter how entirely one might differ from his conclusions, yet


what a rare intellectual pleasure it was to listen to, or read, a sermon or a lecture
of Dr. Vaughan’s. No learned smatterer was he, but essentially what Bacon
has described as “a full man.” His mind was richly fraught with the choicest
treasures of literature, both ancient and modern. It was, besides, a marvel to
see such constant proofs as he afforded of the readiness with which he absorbed
all that was worth knowing of the writers of our own day, in addition to the
varied stores of information which he had gathered in more classic fields.
Thoroughly acquainted with the languages of Greece and Rome, he commanded
the resources of his own tongue with wonderful facility and skill. The grace and
purity of his diction not infrequently recalled the style of some of the most
accomplished masters of English. The pity of it is that, when scarcely past the
prime of manhood, one in whom such manifold intellectual gifts and acquirements
were associated should have vanished from the world’s stage for ever.
The tidings of Archbishop Vaughan’s decease, while unquestionably a shock
to the general public, have fallen like a thunderbolt on the Roman Catholics of
New South Wales—we might say the whole of Australia. They were proud of
him, and justly so. Prelates as beloved have guided, and still guide, the destinies
of Catholicism in this country, but never has any of them exhibited qualities
which represented so much of mental brilliancy and force as his, or wielded an
influence so far reaching and impressive. Unspeakably sad must have been the
reflections which suggested themselves to the congregation that assembled last
night in the cathedral of St. Mary’s. Beneath that roof which his indefatigable
energy and eloquence had so largely helped to raise, the worshippers would, with
little effort of the imagination, picture the imposing figure of the great Archbishop,
hear again the accents of those persuasive lips on whose ixtterances they had so
often hung, and sorrowfully and affectionately they would recognise in the walls
around them the mute, but enduring record of that illustrious memory. And
assuredly to those among us who kneel at other altars than that of which he was a
minister, not the least salutary lesson conveyed by the untimely death of Dr.
Vaughan will be perhaps in its serving thus forcibly and feelingly—
To point the term of human strife,
And on the low dark verge of life,
The twilight of eternal day.
{Sydney Daily Telegraph, August 20th.)
Archbishop Vaughan is dead. ‘ ‘Know ye not that a prince and a great man hath
this “day fallen in Israel.’’ However much men may have differed from him in life,
no matter how mistaken we may consider his great zeal to have been, how mis-
directed his wonderful energy, how misapplied his genuis and his talents,
he was in every sense a prince of his Church, in every respect a great
man. For the faith that was in him he stood up and was bold.
There was little bending or yielding about him. Whilst he intensified
religious rancour and lowered political life by making a political engine of religion,
his work was not that of the politician who uses religion as a tool, or of the
professed religionist who climbs on bigotry to politicalpporer.w r er. For all he strove,
and no one can deny the earnestness with which he strove, his religion permitted
him to look for but one reward—that which he could not obtain in this life. He
would have been less than human had he hoped for no other, but even that other
could only come from the faith in whose army he was a general, and except from
members of his faith, could add little to titular distinction, nothing whatever to
general public respect. Had not sudden death overtaken him he would have
returned here with the Cardinal’s hat—with one great exception the highest
office in his church ; but, as a factor in our public life, his position would not
have been increased beyond that which his recognised power as a man had
already given him. His death, though of that “sudden” kind which the Anglican
litany prays deliverance from, was not the improvisa morte, which, according to the
interpretation of his church, his church’s litany invokes being spared from. If
instant and constant devotion to the greater glory of God as understood by the


creed he followed, could secure that death, no matter what moment it came, was
not “ unprovided for,” then .Roger Bede Vaughan was prepared at any moment to
test the truth of his professions by the final trial which all mortals must undergo.
As his church had taught him, he had always held aloft the cross, and would have
been lost in its radiance but for the prominence as a man, which his human attri-
butes of more than ordinary greatness gave him. For good or for evil, he had been
for years in New South Wales a power, with which men outside his church found
it necessary to reckon either for support or for opposition. But his support or his
opposition was measured by his church’s tenets, and depended upon how far the
general policy of the State was in accord with them or not. In this way he had
been an essentially disturbing power in the State for some years past But he
never went behind a hedge to fire off his anathemas. Polite and courteous gentle-
man as he was by birth and training, highly talented, and, as a Roman Catholic,
highly educated, he was, in his own way, as aggressive against all he opposed, as
is the sturdiest and most ungrammatical street orator of the moment. And yet he
was every inch a prelate. There was nothing tawdry or tinsel about him. At the great
triduum which less than a year ago celebrated his magnum opus, the realisation, so
far, of St. Mary’s Cathedral, he walked in purple and in gold, amidst the smoke of
incense, the waft of banners and the sweetness of music, bestowing his benedictions
to the left hard and to the right, a prince of his Church, to whom the adornment
of vestments seemed fitting, whose dignity was accompanied by gorgeousness, more
as a natural consequence than as a necessary addition. For us and the great
majority of the people who are outside his pale, who could never worship at the
altar before which he knelt, and who resented his political intolerance, nothing can
be said at this moment but words of regret for one who, if he was an enemy, was
at least a splendid one. When distance of time shall have deadened the first
sharp grief at his taking off, the public results for good or ill of his ministry in New
South Wales may be calmy counted up. But not now. The soldier of the Church
has fallen in his prime, with his harness on his back, full of fight and full of vigour.
He has been struck down in the plenitude of his strength and his might; and in
the churches of his faith, from mighty fane to humble sanctuary, the death-bell
tolls and requiems are said or sung. Yet those who most opposed his intolerance
in faith, his interference with liberty, can hope that, as a Christian combatant,
whilst he has gone down in the forefront of the battle, with Christian armour
buckled on, he has rendered
His pure soul unto his captain, Christ,
Under whose colours he had fought so long.
. ( The Echo,)
The remains of Archbishop Vaughan will be returned to Sydney. That is
good and acceptable news. Beyond doubt the body of the archbishop belongs to
Sydney. He did much for Sydney, but Sydney made him. Sydney found him
opportunities whereby he uplifted himself. His tomb will be in some sense a
shrine to his people—a shrine which we should desire to see glorified with all the
splendour that the funds raised by his mourning friends can purchase. It would
be a good thing if every great Australian would do as the Archbishop has done,
and, whatever he might do with his life and his wealth, bequeath us his bones.
They are a precious inheritance those bones ; they bind the memory of the man to
us more effectually than any written words ; and they, and they only, can lay the
true foundation of a Westminster Abbey in our city, “Victory or Westminster
Abbey !” How many a British heart has that watchword cheered and inspired
and sustained ; and what is Westminster Abbey ? The glorious arches and aisles
of stone? Ah no, something more than that —the true Walhalla, the regal restful
Avalon, the companionship of the lordly dead.
New Zealand Ireeman s Journal, August 24:th.
The death of Archbishop Vaughan in the midst of his days is a great sorrow.
But the sorrow of his friends is not the sorrow of those who mourn without hope.
It is one of those events some wonder, and others murmur at. Slain, they hastily


say, with his armour on ; without thinking that he may have fought all his
battles. Ours is the loss ; his the gain. And yet those he left behind cannot
help pining that he did not stay longer with them. It matters not, however, to
just man when he passes away, as death cannot come untimely to him who is fit to
die. The departed had fought a good fight, he had kept the faith, and his
removal showed that he had finished his course. The amount of good a man does
is not measured by the number of his days. The highest earthly testimony to
the services of the dead prelate rendered to his fellows is the sorrow that his
death has evoked. Those cut off in this manner in the summer of their days
convey a pregnant warning to all who live unconcerned as to what the morrow
may bring forth.
( The Bulletin, A ugust 25th.)
It is not the Roman Catholics alone of New South Wales who have reason to
bewail the untimely death of Roger Bede Yaughan. The colony at large must
lament the loss of a man who brought to his elevated station a degree of culture
which could not fail to have an influence upon society in this young community.
Archbishop Vaughan passed through ordeals here sufficient to test to the uttermost
the metal of any man. In his struggle to obtain for his flock what he regarded as
their rights in connection with educational facilities, he encountered an antagonism
which must have moved every depth of his disposition. His dignified manifestoes
and speeches, were criticised with a persistence and vehemence seldofn devoted to
any other themes. What to him were the most sacred and fundamental truths,
were flouted and dissected with a cool disregard of his feelings, and satirized with
a reckless abandon, which if exercised by Agnostics against Protestant revealed
religion would assuredly have occasioned prosecutions for blasphemy. That his
logic was assailed was nothing; but that his most cherised religious convictions
were trampled on, by implication in some quarters, and with brutal directness in
others, was sufficient to stir up all the bitterness in any man’s nature But
Archbishop Vaughan never flinched. He showed himself thoroughbred. The
altitude of his tone remained unaffected to the end. He was a gentleman, although
he was a polemic and an ecclesiastic The loss of such an example of dignity in a
high station is a serious one, and while Roman Catholics chant solemn requiems,
we others must also lament the death of this admirable man in our own fashion,
ut with no less sincerity,
[The Express, Saturday, August 25th.)
Our dear and great Archbishop is dead. As we write the words we can
scarcely realise their truth. It is of the nature of such a sudden and crushing
blow as this, that, though we know too well its meaning, and know that we shall
wake up and find that it is not a gloomy dream, it dazes us for a time, and produces
a sense of unreality. What ! he whom we saw but yesterday, the lines of whose
brave and noble face are still before our eyes, the tones of whose eloquent and
inspiring voice are still ringing plainly in our ears ; he whose hand we clasped and
kissed so recently as we bade him a short farewell; he whom we meant to welcome
back so joyfully, and to work with so zealously —is he indeed and in fact dead ?
Shall we never see him or hear him again ? Can we never welcome him back to
our shores ? Have we lost even his grave ? Alas ! it is even so. His warfare is
ended. “He has fought the good fight, he has finished his course, he has kept the
faith.” He has gone from us, and we are left with our memories and our tears.
If in this place we were to praise him, if we were even to praise him to a
manifest excess, who is there who would have the heart to blame us ? What can
we think of at this moment but our many causes of gratitude to him, his number-
less services, his greatness of character, his dauntless courage, his energy, his
toils, his burning zeal, his absolute self-devotion ? Is it whilst our eyes are wet
that we are are to discuss him with critical analysis, and distribute praise here and
blame there with calm impartiality ? Indeed, we cannot do it. It is not necessary"
we may say it proudly, that we should praise him. His work has been done
openly and in the face of day, it is stamped with his character, and so long as he is
remembered at all it will be his best panegyric. If we do dwell too fondly on all


bis goodness and his excellences, it is not that he needs it, but that our hearts are
full, and we must needs speak out of their fulness. Courage, zeal, devotedness —
these three words rise up at once to express the main features of our late Arch-
bishop’s character. There is a diversity of spirits ; the sterner work which he had
to do did not require the exquisite mildness, gentleness and urbanity of his saintly
predecessor. Every good man gives his successor a hard task to live up to the
standard that has been created, and it Mull be a wonderful thing indeed if the
prelate who may be next set over us does not, at first, in some respects, gives us an
impression of disappointment.
There was a phra&e frequently in Archbishop Vaughan’s mouth which most of
our readers must have heard him use, wdiich expressed most fitly the dominant
quality of his character and the leading thought of his spiritual life. It was the
phrase in which he expressed his wish and his determination to “spend and to be
spent ”in the service of his Master, He has achieved his desire. It cannot be
said of any man that he has fully realised his ideal; but we believe that Arch-
bishop Vaughan’s most cherished wish was to work without flinching and M'ithout
ceasing whilst it was yet to-day. Every ounce of work-capacity which was in him
we believe he vowed to his work, and M r e think that few men carry out their
resolves so faithfully as, with an heroic Christian will, he succeeded in carrying
out his. He worked to the last. He was well aware of the weakness of his
constitution, and that it was most improbable that he should be a long liver. Rest
was imperatively prescribed to him at the time when he left our shores. We have
seen what rest he allowed himself. On the voyage to America he set himself to
make the journey as bright and charming as possible to his fellow.passengers. On
his way across America he appears to have responded instantly to every appeal,
and by (he numerous sermons and lectures which he delivered to have made this
part of his travels more laborious than even his life here. This was the last work,
asked from the brave M-orker. A ehort trip across the Atlantic, a few days
amongst his brethren in his native land, and he was called home to his eternal rest.
To us it may seem hard that he was not spared at least to receive the reward from
the Holy Father which there is little doubt would have been bestowed. It is hard
to us, we admit it— for we should have rejoiced to see him honoured ; but for him,
what does it matter ? In a short time he fulfilled many years, and his Heavenly
reward has been hastened.
We have lost our Archbishop so completely that we may not have even his
body to honour or his grave to cherish But we have his work. St. Mary’s
Cathedral, associated imperishably with his name, and with that of his holy prede-
cessor, and hereafter, we trust, to be further hallowed by the labours of other saintly
and zealous prelates, remains to us. We saw him there on the glorious days ofthe
Triduum There we have heard his death announced and his funeral sermon
preached, and have prayed that his soul may rest in eternal peace and that our
deaths may be as blessed as his. The noble pillars and arches, the lofty walls and
the lovely adornments of that House of God will speak to us of his spirit- And
whilst we have the work which he accomplished we have also the solemn duty of
carrying on that M’ork of his which was uncompleted. The noblest monument to
his memory will be to make complete provision for the Catholic education of our
children. For that he fought with all his might. For that he spent himself and
was spent, and if we would show our gratitude to him indeed, we will follow
him in the same path We are Catholics, and know that death after all is not a
complete separation. He has not left us, he will not leave us without his
assistance. Let us then, in this solemn moment, form an earnest resplve that Me
will carry on this most cherished work of his in the spirit which he taught us, and
never flinch till we have brought it to a successful and triumphant issue.
(The Melbourne Australasian.)
The sudden death of Dr. Vaughan, the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Sydney,
makes a conspicuous gap in the front ranks of public life in these colonies. There
was no man who had more distinctly a place of his own, made by himself, and
which no one else could fill, than the late Archbishop. If on one side he derived
dignity and influence from his office, on the other he imparted to his office
elevation and the weight of his personalpporer.M r er. Dr, Vaughan was first and finally


a great churchman, and his whole public activity was stamped and coloured by
this character. But he was also a great deal besides a churchman, and many may
be disposed to think that in these side aspects of his individuality he was
successful than in his central and primary one. Doubts may be entertained
whether his church statemanship, if we may employ the term, has on the whole
resulted in an improved position of his Church as an influential part of the com-
munity, or whether it has not rather tended to isolate and segregate that church from
the sympathies of the rest of the people. But as to the social influence of the Arch-
bishop there can be no doubt whatever. There was something about his geniality of
nature, opulent scholarship, and rich, fluent elocpience which recalled the great
ecclesiastical churchmen of past ages, before they had so utterly lost touch of the
real life and movement of the time as they have in more recent days. It was
noticeable how largely the Archbishop lived in the past, and how great a share of
his inspiration was derived from that source. He had a happy power of reproduc-
ing the best elements of the life of the past, as in his admirable lecture on the
Schools of Athens, and using them for the guidance and help of the present, so as
to prevent us from losing, in what we call progress, qualities and ideals which
humanity can ill spare In addition to his fine literary and scholarly culture,
which those could heartily admire who differed wholly from his theological and
ecclesiastical views, the Archbishop afforded an excellent exemplar of lofty, high-
bred urbanity which is not always exhibited by the representative leaders of the
churches, and which was in itself a great influence for the elevation and refinement
of public life and public discussion So that, regarded on all sides, as a great
prelate, a prominent social and intellectual influence and a large cultivated
personality, Archbishop Vaughan was one of the most prominent and attractive
figures of the public life of these communities, and one which cannot be spared
without sensible loss.
{Sydney Punch.)
But few short weeks ago Punch grasped, in reverent-parting friendship, a
noble manly hand, now held and paralysed for ever by the sterner, stronger hand
of Death, And as he pictures to himself the stilly pallid clay, but erst so full of
life and high-souled energy, now biding its last earthly obsequies, his unnerved
finger scarce can hold the pen with which to lay his faltering, brief, elegiac lines
on the great Churchman’s bier.
The Archbishop was of that highly-tempered metal from which are made the
great men of the earth. Whatever might have been his path in life, he would have
been a shining light. Of ancient and right noble lineage, at least eight centuries in
traced descent, his very blood was instinct of truth and chivalry ; •* and trust in
all things high came easy to him. ’ His boyhood received that best of training (in
a goodly family)—the influence of the parental home ; and when the flush of
adolescence gave a keener sparkle to his bright, thoughtful eye, he acquired the
scholarly and high-toned culture that so distinguished his maturer years, among
the sheltered glades of Downside, near to the ‘ Ancient Waters of the Sun.” At
Borne, where he was ordained in the noble Basilica of “ San Giovanni in Laterano,”
he commenced to fathom the unplumbed depths of human nature, and sealed
for ever, his devotion to the Church of which he was so bright an ornament.
As a Benedictine monk, and as a missionary priest, he had further opportunities
of studying the follies, weaknesses, and vices of mankind ; and when, after holding
several high appointments in England, and acting here in Sydney for some three
years as coadjutor of the late Archbishop Bolding, he assumed the archiepiscopal
reins, he speedily evinced the deep hold that the doctrines of his Church had
taken on a mind pure as a crystal spring, trenchant and true as the Damascus
blade,’ yet soft and genial as the balmy spring-time breeze His enthusiastic
work in what he believed, firmly and conscientiously, to be the real cause of
education; his noble, unobtrusive efforts and general personal contributions
towards the completion of St. Mary’s Cathedral; and his unwearying interest in
all that could redound to the glory of his Maker, the promotion of religion, and
the happiness of his fellow-man, won him the grateful, devoted affection of
Catholics, and the respectful admiration of those who differed from his views.
And now, when the eyes that so lately rivited the beholder with looks of defiance,


mental power, or love, are closed in their last sleep ; when the majestic well-
known form is crumbling to dust and ashes ; and when the clear, rich tones that
charmed and softened, even where they failed to bring conviction, are hushed and
mute, Punch can but wipe the mantling tear drops from his eyes, and tender to
the Church’s orphaned children, in their first bitterness of sudden grief, the all-
consoling words, that
Though the body dies, the soul shall live for ever.
(The Tribune , Sydney, August 24th.)
The sudden and unexpected death of the head of the Catholic Church in New
South Wales will be keenly felt, even by many who do not belong to the ancient
faith of which he was such an earnest and unwearying supporter ; for although on
some subjects, especially that of popular education, his views were not in harmony
with those of the great mass of the community, they were none the less respected
as those of a large-hearted, liberal-minded, and conscientious man, who proudly
stood aloof from the numerous petty intrigues and miserable jealousies which so
frequently form the bane of public life in New South Wales. A scion of one of
the noblest families of the old country, and whose name is familiar to the students
of English history possessing a commanding and highly cultured intellect, and
imbued with a profound and undying devotion for the interests of his creed, no
fitter man could have been found to labour for the advancement of the Catholic
Church in Australia, and his judicious counsels no less than his ripe scholarship and
impassioned eloquence will be missed in a country where these combined qualities
are so rare. There is something pathetic in the story of his death within a few
hours’ ride of the ancient home where his boyish hours had been passed and which
he had so fondly hoped to behold once more before his final return to the land of
his adoption At the very moment the note of festive preparation was being
sounded at the picturesque family seat of the Vaughans, the expected guest was
lying cold and lifeless on his bed in the busy sea-port city at which he had landed
full of hope and joyous anticipation, and instead of a peal of welcome the bells of
Courtfield rang out a muffled dirge, but too sadly expressive of the widely spread
sorrow occasioned by the loss of Rome’s stoutest and noblest champion in sunny
Australia —Archbishop Vaughan.
(Brisbane Courier, August 28.)
Our New South Wales correspondent speaks in warmest terms of the deep
feeling evoked in Sydney among all classes by the news of the death of Archbishop
Vaughan. He says : —Rarely indeed is such a solemn touching sight witnessed
as was to be seen within the walls of St. Mary’s Cathedral on Sunday night, or as
that other sight on Thursday forenoon, when the magnificent edifice which Dr.
Vaughan’s genius and energy had so recently raised was thronged to overflowing
by a mourning mass of people singing in solemn strains their song of sorrow for
the loss of their beloved Archbishop, and whose only comfort was in the reflection
so beautifully expressed by the poet—
Dust thou art, to dust returnest,
Was not spoken of the soul.
If anything could emphasise the melancholy character of the occasion, it is the
circumstance that the Catholics of Sydney were on the eve of celebrating the
anniversary of the opening of their cathedral. Never, perhaps, since the remains
of poor butchered Commodore Goodenough were brought to Sydney for interment,
has anything so inexpressibly sad, so nationally lamentable, overtaken a people as
the swift and unexpected taking off of this distinguished man ; and the requiem
mass celebrated on Thursday in his memory was a touching expression, not only
of Catholic, sentiment, but of public sympathy, His Excellency Lord Augustus
Loftus attended it, as did also many other leading citizens not belonging to the
old faith. The ceremony was peculiarly impressive, ani will probably never be
forgotten by those who witnessed it. I suppose there must have been fully 8000
people present, and thousands went away unable to obtain admission. A splendid
testimony, all this, to the genius of Roger Bede Vaughan, and to the estimation in
which he was held by all classes,”


( Written for the Brisbane Courier, August 28th.)
Those who knew Rome a quarter of a century ago must remember to have met
not infrequently, when they extended their walks beyond the Porta San Paolo, a
body of Benedictine students on their way to or from the famous convent of their
order, which is situated a long mile beyond the city in that direction ; and if they
did, they are not likely to have forgotten a youth, in the vigour of early manhood,
of singularly beautiful countenance, on which refinement and intelligence were
stamped in unmistakeable characters, and whose tall and graceful figure towered
a head and shoulders over all his companions Few who saw him failed to
recognise in him the scion of a noble house, or to note the imprint of high
traditional qualities of virtue and of breeding, the mild and sweet expression,
mingled with a lofty and almost kinglike bearing, which seemed to mark him
already as a future leader of men—one whose influence was sure to be great and
good upon his generation. Nor will anyone who reads these lines deny that such
a forecast of his destiny was fully verified when we say that the name of the
humble yet magnificent Benedictine brother was Roger Bede Vaughan, the
announcement of whose death sent a thrill of grief within the last week from one
end of Australia to the other
No doubt the story of his great and useful life will some day be told with all
the fulness of detail which will bring into highest relief its special and noble
characteristics. His is a figure which will be handed down to posterity, and to
which after ages will turn with admiration and love as one of the heroes of our
early colonisation —a model and a teacher of the times in which he lived, worthy
to rank with the Mannings and the Newmans, the Borromeos and the Ximenes,
the lights and glories of his Church whether in his own days or in other periods.
Now that all the active movement of that life, the varied and multitudinous
labours pressed into its short duration, and the emotions and passions which the
vigorous exercise of his powerful intellectual capacities was sure to excite amongst
the people with whom he came in contact—both those who were with him and
those who were against him—are so close upon us it would be a hopeless task to
attempt to depict it in a manner worthy of so exalted a theme When the
mellowness of years has fallen over his memory, and time has thrown into their
due perspective the events of his career, no doubt some master-hand will limn it
for us in lines of enduring beauty, and the portrait will be hung up for ever in the
gallery of Australian worthies.
It were needless to speak of the gifts which he possessed. They have
received almost a world-wide acknowledgment. No one in Australia, no matter
what his creed, will refuse admiration to the energy of his convictions, the
affluence of his learning, the apostolic zeal of his episcopate, the generous devotion
of his life, his splendid preaching power, and the magic of his written words. No
one will deny that he had the Benedictine large and liberal spirit, the organising
faculty and love of culture which have ever distinguished that great order; and
those who came into personal contact with him will never forget the gracious
courtesy, the all-embracing charity, which marked the churchman of a high and
ancient race. In the prime of his years and the fulness of his fame he has left us,
but the memory of his deeds and the influence of his life will long abide upon these
Australian shores. MOESIUS.
(The Advocate, Melbourne,, August 25th.)
The late Archbishop of Sydney could have been no ordinary man to have made
his way so speedily as he did into the hearts of clergy and laity. In the several
great works which the deceased Archbishop completed or commenced during his
comparatively brief reign he has left evidences of great zeal and extraordinary per-
sonal resources of the highest character; but, though he should and will be remem-
bered with gratitude and affection for what he has accomplished, his death will be
most deeply deplored as a premature termination to a career of great promise. As
a writer, an orator, and an administrator, he has left his mark and a deep one, in
the annals of the Church in New South Wales, and though he has governed it but
for a few years, when hereafter its early history is being written, and the long and
toilsome career of those who levelled the ground, laid the foundations, and tho-


roughly organised a complete ecclesiastical system is being recorded with the
largest mede of praise, it will surely be acknowledged that the successor to the first
Australian Archbishop kept faithfully to the duty that devolved upon him, and
worthily emulated the zeal and earnestness of his predecessor. The bereavement
that would, under any circumstances, be a heavy one to the Catholics of New
South Wales is the more painful from the fact that their beloved Archbishop died
far away from them and his diocese. The loss is not therefore greater, but the
feelings occasioned by it are, under these circumstances, more acute. It should,
however, be an assuaging reflection to the deceased prelate’s flock that his Grace
died among friends, and that at his solemn obsequies several of his distinguished
relatives may have had the melancholy consolation of being present. His memory
will be honoured in two hemispheres, and not less here in Victoria than in the
sister colony. The death of Archbishop Vaughan is a loss to the Australian com-
munities generally, for the influence of a man of his ripe scholarship, power, culti-
vation, and liberal views in all that related to wide human interests, is neither local
nor sectional It extended far and wide in Australasia, and worked for good at all
times and in all places. R.I.P.
(The Australian , Brisbane, August 25.)
It is not necessary to say that his work has been great and splendid. His
name was in every mouth, and his magnificent talents were the object of universal
admiration. He was probably the finest orator in Australasia, and he was a fluent
and accomplished writer. He was quite as remarkable for his organising powers
as he was for his eloquence. The erection of the great St. Mary’s Cathedral in
Sydney in so short a period will probably be looked upon as his grandest and most
lasting memorial. During the past five or six years he waged war with the bigots
of New South Wales on the Education Question The brute force of numbers bore
him down, but could not conquer him. He certainly was triumphant in argument ;
he had a just and good cause, and pleaded it in burning words. Having built his
Cathedral, he had promised to devote all his powers and energy to the cause of
Catholic education. His people expected grand results from the campaign in which
he was V> engage on his return from Europe, and they would not have been dis-
appointed had his life been spared. We have lost a great and brilliant churchman.
His death leaves a gap in Australian society which will not readily be filled with
another figure of equal grandeur. The loss is not merely for the Church but for
society, and regret for that loss will not be confined to Catholics, but will, we
are sure, be shared by multitudes who did not acknowledge the spiritual sway
■of the great Archbishop.
(Bathurst Record. September 1.)
What that illustrious prelate has accomplished is too fresh in the memory of
ns all to need repetition here. He literally spent himself in doing good, for while
he was building up a mighty monument which will perpetuate his name for many
generations to come, he was, at the same time, pulling down, inch by inch, a
colossal frame and wrecking an apparently splendid constitution. His labours
were certainly herculean. His lectures, his sermons, his speeches—to say nothing
of the thousands of letters which he wrote, asking for and acknowledging the
receipt of sums which amounted, to tens of thousands of pounds towards the
■erection of what seemed dearest to his heart, the noble Cathedral of St. Mary’s.
When all this is considered, it is no wonder that the announcement of his death
came like a thunderbolt upon all who heard and read it. Yes, even hostile critics
forgot their former bitterness, and all united in sounding the praises of one who in
life gave them no quarter. That His Grac ; made political enemies there can be no
doubt. This is the inevitable result of doing one’s duty. That duty was clear.
There was no shirking it, and it was performed in a manner which wrung
unqualified admiration even from His Grace’s most determined opponents. But
his ready pen and eloquent voice will trouble them no more. As to who will be the
successor of the second Archbishop of Sydney, it would be foolish to speculate.
Let us only hope that he may be one in whom the piety of the first Archbishop
an the genius of the second will be united.


{Sydney Morning Herald, August 24th.)
The ceremony at St. Mary’s Cathedral yesterday morning had a double
significance. It testified to the esteem in which the deceased prelate was held by
his own people here, and to the love of the pompous side of religious display
inherent in them and in a very large section of their fellow-citzens. The scene, as
a spectacle, was extraordinary fine ; the decorations in good taste, of an imposing
yet not an extravagant grandeur; the music of a sort very rarely heard in
Australia; reminiscent in some minds of the cathedrals of older lands, suggestive
to others of heights and depths in what may very well be termed the science of
worship which before they had hardly suspected. The whole pageant reflects credit
upon the Church, and is a fitting close to the life of one about whom, as a Church
leader and man of strength, there could hardly be a conflict of intelligent opinion.
His life was only sensuous as his religion was sensuous—-his loves and his dreams
were of perfect clerical dominion and magnificent religious service. The one was
essential to the other. The Cathedral, as the natural home of that service, would
be a centre radiating influences throughout the length and breadth of the Ai’chie-
piscopal See, and those influences would ultimately become attractive powers,
drawing the affection the obedience, and the substance of the people to the
controlling power within the Cathedral, that through it and a thousand other
means would rule absolute and unchallenged, in perfect self-confidence, and with
earnest, however mistaken, desire for the welfare colony and the world. The
building up of such a Cathedral as St. Mary’s, in such a city as Sydney in such a
colony as New South Wales, was very much as the building of the temple in
Jerusalem of Israel. Catholic wisdom copied Judaism so far, and would doubt-
less have gone further, and commanded all good churchmen to present themselves
year by year within its courts, but for the utter impracticability of such a scheme
and the dread of forming a people too much apart from their fellows. The
Archbishop’s dream was great; he grasped the material that lay nearest to him,
and sought to mould it to the most glorious ends. He laid broad foundations,
he even reared lofty walls and shaped lordly aisles ; he failed we know to round
the sphere, to perfect the cross. His work, as his life, is closed when but half
completed ; yet the fragments are noble, fair proportioned, and worthy to endure.
Apart from his work, the man himself was gracious and courteous in mind as in
presence ; and to those who were privileged to know him personally his life will
live apart from his work, as the memory of that last scene within the Cathedral,
the solemn harmony shaking the incense clouds, and the crypt-like atmosphere
permeated with the fragrance of the recent spring flowers, apart from the huge
stone walls, the clustered columns, and the vastness that indicates rather than
expresses the grandeur which is to be.
(Melbourne Argus, August 23rd.)
In the death of Archbishop Vaughan the Homan Catholic Church in Australia
loses its brightest ornament and most distinguished ecclesiastic, Since his arrival
in Sydney, some nine years ago, up to his departure for Rome in April last, he was
regarded as one of the most polished and scholarly pulpit orators in the Austral-
asian colonies, As a practical worker and a talented organiser, he displayed the
greatest energy and zeal in his administration of the ecclesiastical affairs of the
archdiocese of Sydney. He threw himself heart and soul into the work of com-
pleting St. Mary’s Cathedral, and never rested until he saw it opened last year
with the grandest ceremonies of the Romish ritual. As a writer, his Life and
Labours of St. Thomas, of Aquin, in two volumes, has been recognised as a
standard work in the Roman Catholic schools and colleges of Great Britain. It
has been described as *• a book truly erudite in all the learning of the period of
which it treats, and is written with a fascinating freshness and brilliancy of
style ” Before his coming to Australia he was a regular contributor to the pages
of the Dublin Review, the leading representative organ of Roman Catholicism in
the old world. Dr. Vaughan paid but one visit to Victoria, in 1878, when he
delivered two lectures in Sandhurst at the invitation of the bishop of that
diocese, the Right Rev. Dr. Crane- He came on to Melbourne and made a brief
stay, during which he was waited on by the late Sir John O’Shanassy and other
leading Catholics, by whom he was tendered a complimentary banquet. This
however, he declined for private reasons.


In 1873 the late venerable Dr. Folding, first Archbishop of Sydney, being ad-
vanced in years, and feeling himself unable to effectively manage the ecclesiastical
affairs of the large archdiocese of Sydney, applied to Pope Pius IX. for an assistant
prelate who would relieve him of the more laborious part of his duties. The Pope
immediately responded to the request by nominating Prior Vaughan. When the
nomination was published in England objections were raised on the score that the
home Church could ill afford to lose the services of a man of such high character,
culture, and scholarly attainments. Nevertheless, Prior Vaughan determined to
accept the appointment, because, he said, he regarded Australia as one of the
noblest fields for Christian work in the world. The characteristics of I)r. Vaughan’s
eloquence were earnestness, simplicity, and logical power. He had a singularly
fine and impressive presence, and his manner was always cordial, gracious, and
easy. He has left an enduring mark on the social, intellectual, and religious life
of the parent colony.
(The Freeman's Journal, August 25.)
By the Flaneue.
Mors omnibus communis.
Tombs of the Coesars, your sad honours cry ;
“ Live little men for lo ! e’en gods must die.”
—Martial.
Be sure this hero who has passed
The human space—the outer vast—
Who worked in harness to the last.
Doth now a hallowed harvest reap.
Love sees his grave, nor turns awav—
The eyes of Faith are like the day.
And Grief has not a word to say—
“ He giveth His beloved, sleep. ’
—Kendall.
Br. Vaughan dead ! V hat an Iliad of woe can be pressed into three small
words. But yesterday, he stood before us full of life and hope, and the silver-
trumpet-like tones of his voice re-echoed the praise of the Great Lord God who
made him. To-day, he lies cold and still on the breast of his mother earth, and
we shall ne er look on his loved form in this life again. Never again will his kindly
smile cheer the fainting souls of his flock along that narrow thorny path
which leads to the gates of bliss ; never again will his helping hand be stretched
lorth to assist the wretched who faint by the way. and never again will his <mlden-
mouthed oratory enchant and enchain the countless thousands of all creeds and
countries who so loved to crowd around and hang with greedy ears on the inspired
words which fell from his loving lips. “If I lie down to sleep, ” cries the prophet
s ? a P sa y • When shal I arise,” and the dread meaning contained
in these divine words could never have a more terrible illustration than
in the death of our good Archbishop, Full of faith and hope he lay
down to rest, and then, swift as the lightning’s flash, his sainted spirit soared
aloft to God None on earth will ever know how, or when, the fatal moment
came; but I feel sure his last thoughts were for his children here, for in deaths
such as he died there is always one brief moment of a sudden awakening of all
the faculties ; one brief instant in which the whole of one’s life is photographed
before the mind s eye as it were ; and then in that fearful flash, he, our dying
father, thought of us for the spirit then is not where it lives, but where it level
this, and the certainty of his celestial happiness, now are the only consolations we
who are left behind can ever hope for, unless it be that we prepare to walk in his
God who macle™^!!^ 11111 ° nCB agam before the starr y throne of the Omnipotent
, we are not truly sensible of the great loss we have sustained (and I
i aV/v V f fOT We , mlss the P°mp a mortis- the dread array of the
deathbed which, as beneca truly says, has more terrors than even death itself
Our Archbishop requires no monuments to perpetuate his memory here for he has
left works behind that will last and bloom till the end of time Neither should


we grieve immoderately, for this is selfish ; but we should think almost with joy
of our illustrious champion who bravely fought the good fight and conquered
Peace and rest to his honoured shade.
(Australian Churchman , Church of England, August 30th.)
Believing with St. Paul, that no member of one body of Christ can suffer with-
out all the other members suffering with it, we deeply sympathise with our
brethren of the Church of Rome in the irreparable loss they have sustained. By
the untimely death of Archbishop Vaughan, a gap has been made in the ranks of
hierarchy which will not be easily filled. Indeed, he has for the past ten years
occupied so large a share of public attention, has compelled by sheer force of
character, so keen a consideration on the part of friend and foe, that it will be long
before his influence will disappear from the field of Australian politics. As to
what his decease means to the flock, over which he w r as their appointed overseer,
and for whose spiritual welfare he fought so bravely against overwhelming odds,
we are not presumptions enough to offer an opinion. They may well be dazed and
awestricken. But we do know that the loss is the loss of the whole Catholic
Church, Anglican and Roman alike. Whether from intensity of energy and
strength and will, or from force of moral suasion, or from the power of spiritual
influence, the late Archbishop was an admitted leader of men Prompt at the call
of duty, of iron resolution, and indefatigable industry, he swept away obstacles from
his path which would have daunted most men, lay or cleric. In the face of what
he believed to be a great evil, he stood up almost alone and unaided, and opposed
it in no half-hearted way, until he gathered round him the whole hearted devotion
of his people, as well as winning respect of the brave and true of all creeds.
( The Church of England Record, Sydney, September Ist.)
It is no wonder that the Roman Catholic Church throughout the colony
mourns the death of the late Archbishop. More faithful servant the Church never
owned than Dr. Vaughan. Whatever fortune may be in store for Roman
Catholicism in Australia, it can never attain a splendour sufficient to dim the
brilliant episcopate which has just closed. Looking at it, or striving at all events
to look at it, from his co-religionists’ point of view, and whilst widely differing
from them in doctrine, we should say there was nothing wanting to its perfection
but its continuance. But that lay in higher hands than his—all short of it he
attained.
( The New Zealand Tablet, August 25.)
The news of the Archbishop of Sydney’s death at Liverpool on the 18th inst.,
has been .received everywhere throughout these colonies with unfeigned regret.
By the Catholic community generally, we may say without exaggeration, there has
been uttered a wail of grief, and the feeling of personal bereavement prevails among
them. All through these colonies they loved and were proud of Dr. Vaughan ;
they followed his movements and hung upon his words, hailing in him a great
captain and champion of their cause ; one worthy to lead in the Church of Cod, or
if not worthy—for what man can be so ? than whom at least they knew none
And now when it falls to our lot to record his death we have no fear
of betraying an excesive sorrow, or of making an unbecoming lamentation—
“ Quis desiderio sit pudor aut modus
Tam cari capitis ? ”
But what have we here to do with the plaint of a pagan writer ? So much, that
human nature is common to us all, and that, while we lament the great and noble
prelate, we also grieve for the true and gracious man. Of what Dr. Vaughan’s
career was during the ten all too short years he had been among us in these
colonies, there is little need that we should speak. It has been before our readers
all along, and none of them will forget the many beautiful quotations we have
given them in these columns taken from the addresses and other publications of
his Grace. But, nevertheless, what could we say of Dr. Vaughan’s career that
would be too strong. How should we celebrate excessively his fearless
combat for the little ones of his flock—the wisdom, grace, and learning of
his pastorals—the scathing power of his denunciations—the copiousness, the*ease
and clearness with which the results of long and arduous research, of years of


deep and patient study, came flowing from his lips. How should we speak too
highly of his devoted and unceasing labours, which, as now, alas, we know too
well, were wearing out his life ? It was but the other day we heard with admira-
tion of his presidency at that great ceremony, full of joy for his archdiocese, and
of edification and sincere pleasure for us all, the consecration of St. Mary’s
Cathedral, and who could have anticipated that the grand figure so full of dignity
and beauty—so splendid as a prelate, so noble as a man, even then stood on the
brink of the grave and carried within him the seeds of death—that the Mass of
requiem would be sung so soon for him who was leading in the joyful singing of
the 7c Deum? The uncertainty, the deceitfulness of life is, indeed, the ever
present truth above all others —the truth that is hoary with the age of the world
yet ever new. We very deeply share, then, in the grief that His Grace’s death
has caused, and especially we desire to offer our most heart-felt condolences to
the flock who, as it were, yesterday parted with their beloved father—still in the
very prime of life, and apparently full of health and of the promise of a long
career, only to hear to-day that they must never hope to look upon his face
again.—But at the same time we would remind them, and never more fitly
or hopefully, of the homely, but pregnant old phrase—“ Our loss is his gain.”—ln
the words of the glorious poet, he was wont to quote, we may, indeed, now, most
appropriately exclaim—
“ Oh quanta 6 rubt-rta, ohe si soffolce
In quell’ arche riechissime, che foro
A seminar quaggiu buone bobolce 1”
GRACEFUL TRIBUTES.
At St. John’s Church of England, Glebe, on Sunday, August 26th, the Rev
E. M. Saliniere made the following remarks: —“I allude to the sudden and
unexpected death of one who recently figured in our midst as the head of a great
historic branch of the Catholic Church. We are not in a communion with that
Church—as we are not, alas, with other sections of Christendom—but whatever
doctrines and rite may separate us, as the members of two old historic churches, i
few amongst us did not receive a shock at the announcement which sent a deep
sorrow to the hearts of thousands of our fellow Christians and colonists, and were
not moved to sympathy for those who had lost so able and devoted a bishop. He
left our shores but recently for a short rest, after arduous labours, in the prime
and promise of manhood, and at the height of his popularity with the body of
Christians of whom he was the head; but his life and opportunities have been
suddenly cut short, and now he rests from his labours. It is not necessary on our
part to review here that life in the public aspects which has presented itself to
us during the comparatively few years he moved amongst us. But I claim the
privilege as a Christian minister and citizen to say that, amongst those whom I
have known as public men in this community, few have equalled him in his
loyalty to principles, his manliness and heroism in avouching and defending
them, and in his ardent devotioc to the cause of his Church, which had been
entrusted to his keeping And in his death we have lost from amongst us a
citizen who was an intellectual power of rare endowments and culture ; whilst
the Christianity of the country and the cause of Christian education have
lost a great champion. Indeed, few Christian men have made a greater impression
upon our society during so short a term of years, and the work which he has
crowded into a few years —more especially in connection with the religious educa-
tion of his own children and people must long serve as historic incentives and
encouragements to all other Christian Churches.”
Of religious instruction in State schools Mr. Shepherd Smith said in the
Anglican Synod—“ He believed the Church of Rome had taken the only course
which in the end would be found the efficient course for the Church of England to
take, and sooner or later the Church of England would be found following in her
footsteps. He, for one, would not be ashamed to follow that great leader so sud-
denly taken to his rest tke other day, w'ho was so bright an example to all those
who professed to be lovers of education.”
