

The. of
Wagga Wagga
and District 5*1^
'mb W
With the Compliments of the Murrumbidgee Co-operative Milling Co. Ltd. I


Dwn^1 j|
at a cost of 3 SHILLINGS “MITCHELL PLOWS”
tor Kepairs The Choice of Champions
"During my farminglife I have tried many I- STRENGTH is ensured by the free
new Implements. Disc Plows, Harvesters, use of steel of high grade and ample si .
Drills, etc., but nothing better t an the 20 but more, the design is such as places this
Hoe Drill I purchased from your firm six material in the right place to bear the great
years ago. I was advised then by my friends strain ot plowing.
that it was too big ; that it could not do the 2. DURABILITY is attained by the
work because the spread was too much. u»e of only the highest grade of material.
However. 1 took it on. and worked it each The chief wearing parts—the mouldboards—
year since, mostly in clay ground, and each are of the highest grade of soft centre steel,
year I have sown on the average over 600 with wearing surfaces chilled so hard that
acres, Wheat Oats, and Barley, with one you cannot file them. Wheels have remov-
4-horse team and one man. Before it took able chilled bearings
two drills, two teams, and two men to do the 3. LIGHT DRAUGHT is secured
same work. This means a great saving ot Ly correct design coupled with careful,
time, and wages, and feed. The extra cost accurate setting of the Feet, Mouldboards,
of the big drill is very little. and Wheels. Every Plow is set under the
After trying many drills. 1 have found supervision of expert men, who have made
ihe best make to be yours. Your drill is Plows all their lives.
a great saving in the cost of putting in crops. 4. PERFECT WORK. When a
The wear and tear is very little. This plowing match is on, we are rushed with
means you have something to crow about. applications for “MI1CHELLS.” 'ihe
JOHN COCK, Broadmeadows long list of prizes won by this Famous'low
Note.—This Drill only cost 3/- proves that it is the CHOICE OF CHAMP
for Repairs during six years IONA Ask for a copy of this prize li t.
The Mitchell is stronger to day than ever Other Plow-makers (so-called) think the
it was—less castings and more wrought fateel "Mitchell” is the best because they are
now on it than any other drill. imitating it—even to the colour of the paint.
Unerring Grain Feed; Strongest and Don’t forget that bile they can imitate die
Surest Manure Feed ; Quantities changed by paint, no one cm imitate "MITCHtLL” Flow Knowledge
Speed, not by inaccurate Gates; Everlasting and Experience. Fo instance, you can't get the
Steel Grain and Manure Conductors ; Draw- equal of our Mouldboards in shape, ret,
bars extra strong ; easy Centre Lift ; Main hardness, and scouring quality on any other
Frame is a Tower of Strength ; and the won- Plow in Australia,
derful Wheel Bushes (patented) that alone
make the ..Mitchell” worth £5, more than "MITCHELL" PLOWS not only withstand all
any othei Drill, yet the price is no more. ordinary tests, but have an Abundance of
———— — —"—~— Reserve Strength lor Emergencies.
Ask for Prices of harm and Dairy Machines
MITCHELL &
Co.
' ■!
--' ! i.ii i i ■■ 1! f '11*,..;'
Imitation is the
Sincerest Flattery”
Certain Drill makers are copying
the ‘ Mitchell” in as many ways as
possible. Three Drills of recent
make are straight out copies of the
“Mitchell.” A poor thing is
never chosen to be copied, but
always the best. As the imitators
chose the “Mitchell to copy
you see plainly what Drill they
think is the best.
Buyers she tld remember they
can’t get “Mitcbell” patented de- 1
vices, such as the Wheel Bushes
(which alone add £5 to the value
yet coH you nothing extra) nor
Mitchell experience, in any of the
imitations; that copies never equal
the original; and that the latest
improvements are found only in
the “Mitchell.”
We have the best of everything for the faim and
Dair Ask for prices and please say you saw
BAY ST., SYDNEY. W. J. WEBBER, Local Agent


f. : f JBj®&-- *h t f •
jjpg* ,* ■
'
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
The next step—larger premises.
The original primitive store.
THE RIVERINA STORES
W. G. HUTHWAITL & CO
Importers, General Storekeepers
and Produce Merchants,
Phone 76
Newtown. Wagga Wagga.
The present modern premises—Messrs. W. G. Huthwaite and Co.’s Stores, Baylis Street, Wagga.
F. Harris, Photos


||||& _ «- .iiMr _^——— — l ** <l>lllir * 1 *
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
DEPARTMENTS
Drapery and Millinery, Boots,
Clothing and Mercery. Grocery,
Ironmongery, Furniture, Produce.
1. The furniture department. 2. The men’s wear and mercery department. 3. The grocery department.
4. The ironmongery department. F. Harris, Photos
There are several large, modern general stores
in provincial New South Wales, rivalling in the
appointments, the comprehensive stock carried and
excellent manner in which they are supervised the
chief ones in the various cities of the Common-
wealth. And the one now under review is amongst
those rivals. ’ The record of the wonderful growth
of Messrs. Huthwaite and Co.’s important trading
concern is decidedly interesting, particularly on
account of the great strides made within a period
■of but a few years, or, to be accurate, it is only
■some eight years ago since Mr. W. G. Huthwaite
commenced in one of the smallest and most primi-
tive premises in Wagga. In fact, so insignificant
was it that many commercial travellers passed that
little shop by. However, it was the old adage again
regarding the judging of a book by the cover, inas-
much as that month by month the business was
growing steadily and surely, until larger premises
were acquired. Illustrations of the first store, the
second, and the present magnificent premises will
convey and emphasise the rapid growth and im-
portance secured within a few years. And that
success now enjoyed by Messrs. Huthwaite and Co.


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
club, which has a prettily situated and beautifully laid
out green overlooking the Murrumbidgee River. Every
necessary improvement has been made, and the gar-
dens at this particular time of the year are a blaze of
colour, and lend a pleasing contrast and effect to the
well-kept green. Matches are played with various
Riverina clubs, and the Wagga club have had a large
measure of success. The golf club is also another
very strong one, having a large membership. The
golf links are well laid out in every detail, and visit-
ing players always fully appreciate the conveniences,
comfort and sportsmanlike style in which the Wagga
club treats them. The fact of the links being adja-
cent to the town popularises this healthy, invigorating
pastime considerably, as the business man with but
thousands of people to their annual carnival. Why
should not the Wagga club emulate the feats of other
clubs? A beautiful lake is there, and the Murrum-
bidgee can be used for training purposes. The boats
can be purchased; there is any amount of young mus-
cular material in Wagga to fill them.
The Murrumbidgee Turf Club, which is in a strong;
position financially, hold several race meetings during
the year. The prizes offered are sufficiently liberal
to attract many of the best horses in the State, with
the result that good racing has always been a feature
at this club’s meetings. The racecourse, which is
ideally situated about a mile from the heart of the
town, is probably the most up-to-date in general detail
and appointments in provincial New South Wales.
(1) The handsome modern structure, Hammond Hall, of the Murrumbidgee P. and A. Association. (2) A
delightful view, Newtown Gardens. (3) Soldiers’ Monument at entrance in Newtown Gardens. (4)
Newtown State School. D. Mcßae, Photos
perhaps only an hour or two to spare can enjoy the
whole of the time actually on the links, not walking
there and then back again. There is also an angling
club. At this time of the year good fishing can be
relied upon in the Murrumbidgee. There is a magni-
ficent sheet of water just outside the town boundary
known as Lake Albert, and recently meetings were
held with the object of forming a rowing club. Those
meetings were well attended, and much enthusiasm in
the project was shown. The result is a rowing club
has been formed on a sound basis, and it is quite
possible before many years have passed that the Wagga
Aquatic and Rowing Carnival will become such a great
attraction that it will act as a magnet in drawing the
people of Riverina to an annual successful gathering.
The compiler remembers many clubs who commenced
in a small way, as it were, and to-day are attracting
The improvements comprise a commodious handsome
grand stand, stewards’ and jockeys’ rooms, ample stall
accommodation in the saddling paddock, and a very
conveniently and handsomely designed circular kiosk,
erected by the well-known builder and contractor,
Mr. John Gray, which can easily accom-
modate several hundred people at light re-
freshments, luncheon, etc. The interior on
race days is invariably artistically decorated with
choice pot plants, and in every way the comfort one
is able to enjoy is most pronounced and appreciated.
The lawns are splendidly laid out, and considerable
attention has been given by the committee to the
growing of flowering plants, with the result that at
the various meetings the grounds are beautiful in their
blaze of various colours. This club has proved a
most progressive one from every standpoint, and with


wre v F>«> yS^I^
*;| If Hfl'lmw { M *v® ffM |gp l.i jE3|lj sg»JS|»»-^—
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
such excellent and thorough committeemen, supported
by an enthusiastic chairman and energetic secretary
in Mr. J. McAlister, the importance of the fixtures
is bound to command continually increasing support
from both the public and owners of horses. Some
time ago several enthusiastic sporting men met to-
gether and decided to form a club to conduct pony
races and trotting meetings. The idea quickly assumed
concrete form. A decidedly suitable site was selec-
ted, being perfectly level and prettily situated, about
a mile from the railway station. A grand stand has
been erected, stewards’ and jockeys’ rooms, and other
appointments;, which indicate strongly that this club
intends to pursue a vigorous and energetic policy
that must eventually materially affect its efforts to
cater for the public and owners of ponies and trot-
ters in a far-seeing and generous manner. No reason-
able expense has been spared in preparing an excel-
lent racing track. The several meetings that have been
held have proved most successful from every stand-
work he carries out so well. He possesses that
adaptable, kindly, courteous and determined nature
that is a very necessary quality in a successful sec-
retary. That racing in Wagga has reached the
popularity it has is due very much to the manage-
ment and tact of Mr. McAlister.
The Wagga Wagga Amateur Picnic Race Club
was founded some seven years ago. Races for
“ grass feds ” only are held annually. One of the
leading social functions in the Riverina is the picnic
ball and dance. This successful club’s patron is
Mr. G. P. Wilson, of “ Big Springs,” while his
eldest son, Mr. G. Paterson Wilson, is president.
There are three vice-presidents, Messrs. A. H.
Raleigh, N. C. Clupperton and W. E. Bailey. The
hon. treasurer is Mr. H. L. Headley. Secretary,
Mr. A. F. D. White. The club’s membership is 181.
The annual races and dance are held in May, and
attract visitors from all parts of Riverina, as well
as Melbourne and Sydney.
The Bank of N.S.W., Wagga.
point. The attendances were capital, and the sport
clean and enjoyable. The further success of these
fixtures is assured, provided the committee maintain
the high standard of management so far exhibited.
The Licensed Victuallers’ Racing Club has been
so successfully and so capably managed that it now
ranks amongst the foremost in N.S.W., and, as far
as the Riverina is concerned, their principal meeting
ranks next in takings and prize money to the Al-
bury and Wagga Cup carnivals. Two two-day
meetings are held, and one on Boxing Day. The
prize money offered is decidedly liberal, and the
progressive committee are yearly increasing the
stakes as the club’s funds warrant. The success of
this club is principally and directly due in a large
measure to Mr. J. J. Scott, the chief and most
earnest founder, who has been president for several
years. This year the mantle has fallen on another
excellent president in Mr. J. F. O’Regan, who is
always enthusiastic in any public position he does
accept. While both Messrs. Scott and O’Regan
have worked hard to place the club on such a sound
and solid basis, yet much kudos is due to the inde-
fatigable secretary, Mr. T- McAlister. He is not
only a secretary, but an enthusiast in the arduous
Interesting view on Lake Albert, Wagga
Fox terrier coursing is a popular sport at Wagga.
The Riverina Coursing Club hold frequent meetings
on the sports ground. The breeding of a high-class
type of fox terrier has been considerably encouraged
through this club, and some of the finest fox terriers
in New South Wales will be found in Wagga.
The Wagga Wagga District Hospital is a hand-
some, imposing, modern and thoroughly equipped
one, standing on a healthy site adjacent to the
town, and has accommodation for 50 patients. The
hospital copes with not only the requirements of
the town, but the district for many miles around.
Last year 681 in-patients and 650 out-patients were
treated, the daily average of in-patients being 35.0.3.
The yearly cost of management is £2385/1/6. Fi-
nancially the institution is well supported by the
community. Some two or three years ago the com-
mittee appointed with success a ladies’ advisory
committee, who superintend such functions as the
annual hospital ball and the Hospital Saturday,
while also paying periodical visits to the hospital.
The president is Mr. J. J. McGrath; hon. treasurer,
Mr. J. H. Wilkins; secretary, Mr. A. F. D. White;
matron, Miss Ida G. Burton. The medical staff
comprises the six resident medical men of the town.


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
The new hospital was erected some four years ago,
at a cost of £16,000. and is one of the best equipped
from every standpoint in N.S.W. A septic tank has
been installed at considerable cost. The area ot
land surrounding the hospital buildings is some
six acres. ,
There are several Friendly Societies in Wagga, each
one with a large membership, namely, the Oddfellows
(M.U.), Foresters, Hibernians and Protestant Alli-
ance Friendly Society. The Masonic Lodge is also
a powerful one. The hall is a very fine and commo-
dious one indeed. The Oddfellows’ Hall, for a con-
siderable time past and at present, is that prin-
cipally utilised for concerts, theatrical entertain-
ments, etc. It is a moderately large hall, but it is high
time that the council or a company erected a more
LilllM Liiau me ‘ a A
commodious and thoroughly up-to-date one, m keep-
ing with the progress of Wagga and its requirements.
It stands to reason that the more important companies
strong following, and the respective adherents are
fortunate in having excellent shepherds to guide them
in their spiritual affairs.
Sales of farm produce are held every Satur la> a
Messrs. Skudder and Monk s and Mr. Bla s -
town) bazaars, while regular stock sacs arehekt
niehtlv and special horse sales periodically by Messrs
Wheatley and Cullen. Circuit and Quarter Sessions
Court are held periodically; ordinary police daily
debts on Monday, Mr. C. J. B. Helm is the district
PM and Mr J D. Walker chamber magistrate.
The advocacy of the town and district m all matters
for their welfare and progress is reflected in the
columns of two progressive newspapers-the E
( ' ; Waeea is well supplied with hotels. The principal,
where° the accommodation will be found excellent am
Enthusiastic supporters (fox terriers not excluded) at one of the Rlven ,. a H T nnil gham , photc
Coursing Club meetings held at wagg .
that would often pay that town a visit are prevented
on account of not being able to engage a hall suffi-
ciently large to accommodate “ a payable house
that is a company consisting of from 30 to 50 members
—and also a small stage prevents them from properly
staging a first-class opera. Hundreds of towns the
compiler has visited, not half the size of Wagga,
have splendid modern and well-equipped halls, and
this is one of the few disabilities Wagga is labouring
under. The religious instincts and tendencies of the
population find practical demonstration in the erec-
tion of several handsome churches, namely, Anglican,
Roman Catholic, Methodist and Presbyterian. The
Church of Christ services are held in the Masonic
Hall, and the glorious Salvation Army, who are nume-
rically strong, pulsate with enthusiasm for the good
cause in saving sinners. Each denomination has a
equal to any obtainable in the State, are Bellair’s
Commercial Hotel, Scott’s Australian Hotel, Martin
Wenke’s Pastoral Hotel, Mrs. Juppenlatz s Wagga
Hotel Sullivan’s Criterion Hotel, Devlin’s Carrington
Hotel, and the Union Club Hotel, recently acquired
by Mr. Slocum.
NEWTOWN.
The compiler knows several “ Newtowns m
various States, and conjures that the reason there
are so many is simply on account of the name being
decidedly appropriate. And, by coincidence, all
these Newtowns are progressive, go-ahead place*,
holding men with advanced and modern ideas, who
have forced themselves out of the stereotyped rut
and made a new one inlaid with modern ideas. It
is not a peculiarity—it is natural —that towns are


I
W r J JLuM* • *r > M fe^y
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
usually commenced near a river, if one be handy,
probably to secure water easily. Then as that town
grows it expands from the river bed. But later
on a railway is built, and thus we find the Govern-
ment has no respect for the situation of the town;
instead, builds the station most convenient to
various circumstances. This is • exactly what has
occurred at Wagga, where there is but one main
commercial thoroughfare, probably li miles in
length. The station is at one end, the earlier por-
tion of Wagga at the other. Therefore it fallows
that, as expansion could not go over the Murrum-
bidgee River bridge towards North Wagga, it went
towards the station, as it has invariably done with
hundreds of other towns. The main part of Wagga
is separated from Newtown by a lagoon and linked
up by a bridge. The development made by New-
town has been steady and solid, not only commer-
cially, but as a residential area. Nowadays it can
boast of many fine residences, with delightful gar-
dens. Practically all the industries are situate
within the southern portion of Wagga, notably the
Murrumbidgee Milling Co., Butter Factory, Hardy’s
and Gray’s Timber Mills, Wenk and Johnston’s En-
gineering Factory, Gelme Ltd.’s Waggon and Car-
riage Factory. Hardy’s Brick Yards, Watson’s Cycle
and Motor hactory, Newtown Motor Garage and
Factory.
Newtown’s business centre is within a minute’s
walk from the station; in fact, one practically steps
out of the train right into it. There has been a
vast expansion in building during the past twelve
months, many new, modern business premises
having been erected. The Wagga Hotel, conducted
so excellently by Mrs. A. Juppenlatz, has been
entirely rebuilt and refurnished at a cost of some
£BOOO. In general appointment and comfort it
is equal to the best city hotels. Messrs. Huthwaite
and Co. have also erected a very handsome modern
general store, equal to any from every standpoint
in provincial New South Wales.
I he residential portion of. Newtown is increasing
so rapidly that the erection of property is an ex-
cellent investment, and it is safe to say that of the
population of Wagga fully one-third are at present
residing in Newtown. Newtown also claims to
D. Mcßae, Photos
1. View of Lagoon, North Wagga. 2. View taken during Lord and Lady Chelmsford’s visit to
the Presentation Convent. His Excellency, who was one of the most popular and unassuming, perfectly
natural mannered Governors in Australia, is telling a few of the scholars, good humouredly, they are
to have a holiday. 3. View of Lagoon, Wagga. 4. Illustrating the happy and friendly style of the
Wagga farmers and families at show time. 5. Committee and enthusiastic supporters of the Wagga
Amateur Picnic Turf Club, whose fixture is one of the events of the year at Wagga.


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
have the sanatoria of this important town. On the
hill overlooking the railway station a new residential
suburb is gradually developing. In summer time
it is claimed that there the atmosphere is some
10 degrees cooler. It is only some twelve months
ago when land was selling in this new residential
suburb at 15/- to 20/- per foot. To-day it is
fetching £.i per foot—good business foj someone,
no doubt, if he sells enough. One great drawback
so far, though, is the absence of an overhead traffic
bridge. The Newtown Progress Association, which
is a live, active and progressive body, are agitating
for same, and, as they have a good, solid case, have
every likelihood of obtaining this much-needed re-
quirement.
The population of Newtown is now well over 4000,
and the improved capital value of property in New-
town is now £55,000 —a truly remarkable record
within a few years.
The Wagga-Tumberumba railway line is being
pushed on with fairly rapidly. When the connec-
state at present. Improvements will be made, no
doubt, at some future time. Still it appears to be
a more useful course to pursue on the part of the
Progress Association to confine ail their attention
and advocacy to still further beautifying the Bird
Park. Wagga has two brass bands; Newtown pro-
vides one of them. Both have won competitions,
and have exhibited considerable rivalry in endea-
vouring to play the better of the best music. New-
town Band is vastly ahead of the provincial bands
of New South Wales.
From every standpoint the progress of Southern
Wagga (Newtown), when one recognises that only
a few years ago the present commercial area was
hut a honeysuckle flat, is remarkable, and it is safe
to say that the progress already made in such a
brief period is a certain prediction of its vast
expansion during the next few years. While the
same cheerful spirit pervades its business men and
residents, that portion of Wagga must by the
natural order of things steadily and surely continue.
1. The President (Mr. J. G. Fletcher) and several me mbers of the Murrumbidgee P. and A. Association,
1911. 2. Enthusiastic members of the Wagga Golf Club. D. Mcßae, Photos
tion is made with that rich town and district con-
siderable benefit and increased business must go
to the business men of Southern Wagga. Practi-
cally every “ live ” man in Newtown is a member
of the Progress Association. It was formed on
account of the increasing importance of that end
of the town, and the necessity for collectively
securing certain improvements, such as banking ac-
commodation and postal facilities. A branch of the
Commercial Bank has been opened, and the resi-
dents intend to continue to agitate and keep on
doing so until they secure better postal facilities.
It is purely a matter of emulating the spider—
trying and trying again. It will come right enough.
Another matter worthy of mention is the erection of
the new High School structure on the hill adjacent
to the convent.
Newtown has two parks, known as the Bird
Park and Bolton Park. The former is prettily
situated, and is greatly appreciated by residents.
Full details have already been given. The latter is a
park, so far, in name only, being in rather a rough
THE WAGGA WAGGA DISTRICT.
A boom can be likened to a bubble—it soon bursts.
The purpose of this production is therefore not to
bubble, but to enable anyone in search of cheap
land, a fine healthy climate, with good probabilities,
also possibilities, an opportunity of securing solid,
sound information that may induce him to visit this
pulsating, progressive town —the commercial centre
of the Riverina—and grasp the opportunity this
wonderfully fertile district offers. The man in
search of land at a reasonable price during his
visit to the Wagga district will be enabled to con-
verse with brainy farmers who have made a big
success there, and he can inspect the happy results
of their labour. He will find their information is
given from practical experience, sound, solid and
reliable, based on the achievements accomplished.
And these achievements of Wagga farmers can be
also emulated by others. There is no monopoly.
The resources are so incalculable that the writer
questions if even half as much has heen done yet
as can and will be within another ten years. The


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
soil is rich, not in patches, but generally uniform
throughout the district, the rainfall regular and
sufficient, while the climate is a delightful one, ex-
cepting perhaps three months each year. The
climate—or, shall I say, heat? —is felt, though, from
November until January everywhere, even at the
coastal towns. Wagga’s industries are expanding
each year, becoming more diversified, both com-
mercially and agriculturally. The products of the
Wagga district occupy a high place in the. world’s
markets, and command top prices. Its wool and
wheat stand' pre-eminent; its wines have won high
honours at international exhibitions on the Con-
tinent, in India, and in Australia; in 1892 a vineyard,
now the property of Messrs. J. T. Fallon, won first
won the highest awards available in New South
Wales and Victoria; district bred thoroughbreds
have won many of the chief races of the Com-
monwealth; heavy horse breeding is highly pro-
fitable. Mixed farming has been proved a suc-
cess, and is growing apace. Diversity of crops,
cross-breeding for wool and mutton, poultry, fruit-
growing, dairying, etc., all find a profitable place on
Wagga district farms. Irrigation on the Murrum-
bidgee flats is increasing each year; corn, sorghum,
lucerne and other fodder crops growing luxuriantly.
The dairying industry is now making great headway,
and indications point to it being one of the most
profitable in the Wagga district, where small
of land are held. The Murrumbidgee flats are natu-
1. The Esplanade, Wagga, is one of the prettiest parts of Wagga. A walk in the shade of the
trees on the water’s edge is much, appreciated. 2. Distant view of Wagga from Willan’s Hill. 3. The
Hampden Bridge over the Murrumbidgee River, Wagga. 4. This handsome structure—the Presenta-
tion Convent—stands on a magnificent site overlooking the town.
prize, £5O, in a national competition for the best
vineyard in New South Wales; olive oil extracted
at the Wagga Experiment Farm has been proved of
the highest grade, and brings a better price than the
imported oil. In 1907 the first prize of £5O for best
farm in the southern districts was won by Mr. An-
thony Brunskill, whose estate is situated about eight
miles from Wagga, in a competition instituted by
the “ Sydney Mail.” This same farm at two previous
Wagga shows has won first prizes for farm collec-
tions, the exhibits comprising 430 varieties in 1907
and 732 in 1908. District sheep and cattle have
rally adapted for dairying, as it is possible to grow
green fodder during the whole year. Within a few
years there is no doubt thousands of acres will
be utilised for intense culture. Many sound, ex-
perienced remarks of Mr. G. M. McKeown, mana-
ger of the Wagga Experiment Farm, may be of in-
terest. These remarks might be presaged by men-
tion of the leading position this Government farm
takes in the States of the Commonwealth, and much
kudos is due to the manager, Mr. McKeown, who
threw off the many “ red tape ” methods Govern-
ment institutions are invariably burdened by and


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
with, and went straight ahead on a business basis
to make the farm a great practical institution and
popular one. The hundreds of farmers who are glad
to visit and secure knowledge each year is surpris-
ing. and not one leaves that farm without gaining
some valuable information. And so it is with the
students. They are moulded on businesslike lines
to become businesslike farmers. Their education is
not limited to toil only—or, in other words, the
muscles —their brains are trained as well, horesight,
method, individuality are instilled into them, and
thus, when they eventually leave the Government
farm, they are fully equipped to battle along in the
world. No one will gainsay that the farming of the
future will be guided by the farmer’s brains, and his
success will be according to the use and application
made. Mr. McKeown says:—
The soil of the district consists of various classes,
and the owners of land which embraces more than
one or even one of the best types will lind it possible
chinery, and the selection of varieties of cereals
have done much in not only compensating for such
decreased rainfall, but in actually producing better
farming conditions than those existing in what were
classed as better times. A comparison of the results
obtained in the years 1897 and 1898 with those of
the past two years, in which the rainfall almost >cor- •
responds, will bear ample testimony to the greatly
improved possibilities of success to the man on the
land. A close observation of the effects of deep and
thorough working of the soil and of the use of
small quantities of superphosphate sown with the
drill has convinced the writer that their action does
much towards counteracting the effects of reduced
rainfall by inducing a much more vigorous root ac-
tion, which enables the crop to feed in a deeper
stratum of soil than is otherwise available. The
benefit thus obtained appears to be equal to a ram-
fall of some inches. The farmer, therefore, may, by
close observation and well-directed efforts to meet
Wagga.
in ordinary seasons to raise profitable products in
fair variety. Arable land of all classes is suitable
for the production of wheat, barley, oats, fruits,
wine, oil, or fodder crops for live stock, while the
natural pastures on all types of soil are of nutritious
quality. Analyses of typical soils usually disclose a
very satisfactory proportion of potash. Nitrogen
and phosphoric acid are present in less proportion,
and, while the application of commercial nitrogen
has’resulted in loss rather than profit, the use of
moderate quantities of manures, consisting mainly
of phosphoric acid, have proved a powerful factor in
raising the wheat-growing industry from the posi-
tion of uncertainty which ten years ago it occupied
to one of safety in almost all seasons. The average
rainfall of a very large area of the Wagga district
is a little over 22 inches, with a tendency to higher
records in the vicinity of ranges, even where the
elevation is comparatively slight. 'I he rainfall dur-
ing the past ten years has heen, with the exception
of a couple of years, below the average, but im-
proved methods, including more thorough cultiva-
tion, the use of fertilisers and of improved ma-
any conditions which may arise, do much to com-
mand success even when our rainfall is far below
the average. . ,
Among the conditions conducive to such assured
success may be reckoned a greater diversity of ope-
rations, as several profitable branches of farming
are, so far, comparatively untouched by the majo-
rity of farmers. Naturally wheat-growing is the
leading industry, and it will remain in that position.
Owing to its forming the principal article of the
world’s food supplies, its sale will be practically un-
limited. Commercial hay-growing will add consider-
ably to the profits of settlers when carried out on
correct lines. At present large quantities of fodder
in the form of chaflf, etc., are being imported from
other States for consumption in our own State. The
trade should he retained for our own benefit, as the
raising of hay for the metropolitan markets, or for
the supply of less favoured districts, is one of our
most profitable rural industries. During a period
of nine years, which includes three in which the
rainfall averaged only 13i inches, and the annual
average for the whole period was less than 18


Mimmyr Ill— ■ ' > ( — > ' ___—
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
inches, the average yield of hay at the Wagga Ex-
periment Farm, from an aggregate area of 1500
acres, has been 41i cwt. per acre. The profit on the
sale of the surplus in seasons of plenty has been not
less than £l/10/- per ton, and reserved stocks in
times of general scarcity have reached a nett value
of £l6 per acre. Sales of chaff in the district have
been made at a profit of over £l3 per acre, from a
considerable area. For success in this branch the
essentials are special selection of the best varieties,
thorough tillage, the use of fertilisers, timely har-
and quality should be exceeded in the former condi-
tions. Sheep for mutton in the form of lambs should
have a place on every cereal farm. Apart from their
profitable nature as a sole industry, the combination
of the two branches greatly assists both, as sheep'
consume profitably the grain shed at harvest time,
which would otherwise be lost, in addition to its
fouling effect on cultivation paddocks. Weeds also
which are detrimental to the land are eaten by the
sheep, which return to the soil a proportion of fer-
tilising matter. Fruits, such as grapes, pears.
D. Mcßae,
Photos
1. An illustration of the wonderful fertility of the soil in the Wagga district. Stripping a heavy
wheat crop. 2. Harvesting on Mr. J. Bickett’s farm, six miles from Wagga. Mr. Bickett secured first
prize in the “Farm Competition,” 1911-12, for finest hay crop. The Scottish Commissioners, who
visited Wagga district, expressed their opinion that “this crop was the best inspected in New South
Wales.” 3. A fine flock of sheep on Mr. Norman Devlin’s estate (before selling out), at Ganmain.
4. A record load of wheat on its way to Wagga railway station.
vesting and judicious curing, and that careful pre-
paration for sale which is desirable with all produce.
Barley growing for malting or other purposes is a
neglected industry which in many parts of the dis-
trict may be made very profitable. The higher lo-
calities, where the soil is of lighter texture and the
rainfall more copious, are well adapted for the pro-
duction of grain of excellent quality in satisfactory
quantity. Even on the lower lands, in heavy soil,
during a series of years, our average yield from the
best varieties of barley exceeded that of the best
variety of wheat by 7 bushels per acre. Both quantity
peaches, apricots, plums, nectarines, apples, olives,
and cherries, of excellent quality, are grown in the
district, and profitable varieties of each may be
selected for commercial culture. Sultanas and
prunes afford a good field for profitable operations
in drying for the market, as a ready sale may be
found in the city, where their excellence is now
known. Pigs are also worthy of more attention
than they now receive, as they will amply repay the
care which is necessary and desirable with live stock
under any conditions.”


em- 1 " ■ ■
W .
. '
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
Commercial Bank.
With sporting men it would be considered folly
to put all one’s capital on one race, and equally so
is it foolish and unbusinesslike for the farmer to
place reliance and his whole capital in only one
branch of farming. With the gradual education of
the farmer he found that mixed farming was a splen-
did idea, and, even if there was no wheat to garner,
yet he had an income from the sheep, the fowls,
pigs, and perhaps a few foals he had reared. Mr.
Anthony Brunskill, probably the most successful far-
mer in the Wagga district, and the proprietor of
“ Allonby,” the finest farm in the district, gives
some good advice. He has proved himself in e\ery
way, and his remarks may be of interest to all far-
mers. Good live stock is necessary—absolutely —
on a farm, and more especially sheep, to keep down
the weeds and fertilise the soil. The successful far-
mer must purchase and breed the most profitable
class of sheep, using judgment in determining the
cross he intends to introduce by the climatic condi-
tions. and the suitability of the land for breeding
and fattening.
The breeding of good cattle and draught stock
should receive careful attention. Pigs and fowls as
a source of profit should not be overlooked. Every
attention should be given in the breeding and care
of all live stock, and of always aiming at the best
possible results. This branch of farming is in itself
calculated to awaken the liveliest interest of the
farmer. It is well to remember that the best are
as easily fed as the worst, and are infinitely more
profitable.
The improvident man, who, in plentiful seasons,
forgets that lean years sooner or later follow as
certainly as the sun will rise the day after this book
is published, is soon overtaken by what he looks
upon as cruel fate. Nothing of the kind. He forgets
to go on increasing his water storage capacity in
good seasons. And. while on the subject, it is
Bank of Australasia.
actually the adverse, seasons Australia has had that
have been the greatest factor in the success of the
country and that of the farmer. He has been taught
by severe lessons to lay a little away for a day when
there is no rain, and make provision for his stock.
Also, had we always had a plentiful supply of water,
and consequent good seasons, would farmers )e
working their land in the scientific manner they are
now doing? With fallowing, manures, and new
Union Bank
Bank of Commerce.


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
classes of cereals, one inch of rain can be utilised to
greater advantage than two inches ten years ago.
A substantial reserve of fodder should always be on
hand, ready for a dry season. If the “ dry” doesn’t
come, well- no farmer will regret having stored up
for it. In every walk of life to-day, when one’s path-
way is more strenuous, everyone should be prepared.
There is a quotation which we are all liable to re-
peat: “I’ve got a hard row to hoe.” In such cases
it is ourselves who make the “ hard row,” though.
Regarding methods of cultivation, of course, no
fixed rules can be laid down, but. generally speaking,
Wagga district. His largest stores are in Wagga,
and Mr. Collins is a firm believer, being a practical
man amongst sheep, of the splendid wool-producing
possibilities of the Wagga district. He says that
the Wagga district, even from its first settlement,
has been noted as one of the most reliable and best
in the State from a pastoral point of view. With
an area of 2,650,000 acres, the sheep and lambs shorn
in 1891 numbered 2,427,319, a record not surpassed,
if equalled, by any other district. From several
causes these figures have not been maintained, for,
whilst the country devoted to sheep has since been
1. “The Heart of Wagga.”—Bellair’s Commercial Hotel Corner, Fitzmaurice-street. 2. On the
Wagga Bowling Club’s splendidly kept green. 3. View showing some of the modern improvements to
Wagga Racecourse. 4. The Post Office, Wagga. d. Mcßae, Photos
it will be found that the ordinary forest land re-
quires fallowing or grazing every third year. In
drier parts, every alternate year. Apart from a
financial standpoint, mixed farming is decidedly in-
teresting. There is always something different to
occupy the farmer and his family’s attention. If
solely engaged in wheat-growing wheat is the only
topic; if dairying, cows; if sheep, mutton and wool.
But when mixed farming is carried on, the farmer
can be interested the whole year with sheep, wheat,
wool, poultry, horses, pigs and cows.
Mr. E. E. Collins, who conducts one of the largest
and most important wool and skin warehouses in
provincial N.S.W., is intimately connected with the
so improved as to give greater carrying capacity,
equalling 33 per cent., the area given to cultivation
has been increased even more largely. The frozen
meat trade, also, practically non-existent in 1891,
has tended largely to reduce numbers, lambs of both
sexes being slaughtered for export. Up to the last
few years merino sheep were raised almost exclu-
sively, but, with the demand for “ freezers,” different
breeds and crosses, more suitable as carcase sheep,
have been resorted to in greater proportion each
year, and, with the large extent of frontage country
and rich land suitable for lucerne growing and fat-
tening, further increase is certain as the export
trade develops. To meet this demand the Lincoln,


Y y ’
■*■ ,, 5 »^ ''■?
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
Leicester, Romney Marsh, Shropshire, and, quite
recently, the Dorset Horn and Cheviot have been
introduced. With few exceptions, district station
merino Hocks are typical of the sheep which made
Australian wool famous; a sheep which took keen
Hock masters, unsparing of money, generations to
evolve; big-framed, plain-bodied, robust, bright-
woolled, cutting a fleece soft-handling, and showing
a high spinning quality, which yields, when scoured,
a high percentage of “ clean ” wool. A continued
improvement without the great expense involved in
buying what is known as fashionable blood can be
made by careful selection, and the employing of a
competent classer to take unsuitable sheep out of
the flock. Wool has played a most important part
in the progress of the State, and, with the continued
improvement in quality and quantity from each
sheep, the day is far distant when wool will not
be the chief product of Australia.
entire year. As the mating of the rams and ewes
should be arranged so that the lambs shall be
dropped at the time that the most succulent pasture
is available, the full number of sheep will be carried
during the season when pastures, whether natural
or prepared, are at their best. As lambs
are in their most saleable condition while
receiving the benefit of their mother’s milk,
they should not be weaned before the time
of sale, the effect of weaning being a loss of
weight and the roundness and freshness of carcase,
which are essential features. The ewes which have
given the most satisfactory results as dams are the
first-cross Lincoln-merino. They are roomy, and,
therefore, the risk of loss at lambing time is far less
than is the case with the pure merino. They may
also be bred from at an earlier age than is advisable
with the merino. Comparisons of risks in lambing
have been carefully made, and the results have
Two beautiful views on the “ Wollundry,” at Wagga.
D. Mcßae, Photo
BREEDING SHEEP FOR MUTTON.
shown that, whilst the percentage of first-cross ewes
assisted reached no higher than 4i, it was necessary
to give help to 28 per cent, of large-framed merino
ewes when lambing to rams of British breeds in a
good season. In selecting rams for breeding cross-
bred lambs for market, care should be taken to ob-
tain only such as are pure-bred, as loss of time and
disappointment will certainly follow the use of grade
sires.”
As this publication will be circulated largely
amongst the farmers of the Riverina, the compiler
feels that the remarks of Mr. G. M. McKeown,
manager of the Experiment Farm, Wagga, will not
only prove of interest but of considerable value to
them. He has made a deep and thorough study of
the subject. He says:—“ For some time at the
Wagga Experiment Farm trials of crossbred sheep
have been carried out primarily with a view
to ascertaining the most profitable sheep for the
comparatively small landholder, and the best
methods of increasing the carrying capacity of his
property. The most profitable method of sheep-
breeding for him is undoubtedly that of producing
lambs for early sale as freezers for export or for
home consumption, as, at the age of 4 or > months,
the lambs are saleable at prices practically equal to
the value of their dams, and he has in addition the
proceeds of the wool of both ewes and lambs. As-
suming, therefore, that the lambing average is 90 per
cent.—and in any fair season there is no reason
why it should not reach, or even exceed, this figure—
a grazier needs only to provide pasture for half, or
a little over half, his full number of sheep for the
Mr. McKeown adds: —“In a paddock of 300' acres,
which is alternately cropped and allowed to return
to pasture, we have carried in a good season 1400
sheep and lambs for five months, and then so little
effect was apparent on the pasture that a large quan-
tity .of it was cut for ensilage. It was only possible
to operate on a limited area, as the grasses and
herbage ripened rapidly. In a later year the pasture
would have carried at least twelve sheep for four to
five months of the growing season, but it was not
possible to stock it fully. In a paddock wh ; ch had
borne eight crops in ten years, two of which were
fed off while green, we have fed within a fraction of
four sheep per acre for five months, the effect on the
pasture being hardly apparent. It is very desirable
in lamb-raising to provide cultivated pasture of a
succulent nature.”


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
The recognised authority on horses in the Wagga
district is Mr. J. J. McGrath, who has been prac-
tically connected with the horse-breeding industry
during the past forty years. His stud farm near
Wagga—“Wattle Vale”—is one of the finest in the
State. His remarks may, therefore, be of interest: —
The demand for horses of all kinds is greater
now than ever, and consequently decidedly remune-
rative. It pays to breed them, especially in a dis-
trict such as Wagga, which is so eminently suitable
for the raising of good horses under natural con-
ditions. The natural grasses and herbage in fair
seasons, and the practical freedom from horse di-
seases, makes the industry of horse breeding,
whether on a large or small scale, a pleasing and
shown by the vast number of eager purchasers, who-
pay up to £5O per head for them at Wagga. Every
farmer should breed his own horses, and occasionally
have one or more to sell. The chief advantage in
breeding one’s own horses is that uniformity is ob-
tained in the teams. The surplus horses he is able
to sell will also be found a very appreciable addi-
tion to the yearly income.
And, regarding the agricultural possibilities of
Wagga district, perhaps no farmer is more com-
petent to speak on that important subject than Mr.
George Lindon, who has proved himself one of the
most progressive and successful in the State. He
says that during his residence in the district the
progress made has been remarkable, more especially
The Churches of Wagga and St. John’s Hall
profitable occupation. In Mr. McGrath’s experience,
extending over forty years, and before the produc-
tion of wheat and wool were such large and payable
industries, he has seen mobs of beautiful, sleek-
coated horses running practically wild on Gumly
Gumly and other places. They were often run in,
and brought to Wagga and sold for a few shillings
per head. Such animals, if procurable to-day,
would average fully £l5. These animals were not
cared for in any way, but the natural suitability of
the country and the climatic conditions produced
horses of a fine, robust constitution, with well-
developed bodies, wiry legs, and good feet. The de-
mand for horses is now, and will be for many years,
very great, as India must always be a splendid
market, and the demand for draughts is clearly
in recent years. That progress has been brought
about by several factors, the chief of which are the
desire for profit, improved methods and modern
machinery, which naturally makes farming more
economical from every standpoint. Artificial
manures have also played an important part in the
development of the district. Even in exceptional
years, when only 10 and 12 inches of rain have
actually fallen while the crops are growing, splen-
did yields have been obtained on fallowed land—
from 30 to 40 bushels of wheat and from 2 to 3 tons
of hay. Without a doubt, the biggest “ profit giver ”
in the Wagga district is wheat. Purple straw and
Lamas varieties (white wheat) are greatly in evi-
dence. Farrer wheats are also profitable, and Fede-
ration, in particular, is a great wheat for yield and


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
weight. Bobs, a favourite with millers, who usually
offer extra for this variety, also grows splendidly.
While it is not claimed that the district is suitable
for the growth of Manitoba wheats, the fact that
the milling test prize for medium and weak floured
wheats at the Royal Agricultural Society’s Show
has on several occasions been gained by wheats
grown in this district, goes to indicate that Mani-
toba should do well.
Oats also rind a profitable place on many farms.
The brown species are most in favour, on account
of their early maturing qualities, which invariably
ensures a good return. From 40 to 50 bushels per
acre is not an uncommon yield, whilst heavy hay
crops are frequently obtained. The growing of oats
as a rotation crop has a beneficial effect upon the
land, greatly assisting in eradicating weeds and
wild oats.
Malting barley will probably be extensively grown
in the near future, as the market value of this
cereal should make it a profitable crop. The
climate of the district should be all that could be
prehension. The great resources of the soil had
not been understood sufficiently until recent years;
then the development of the fruit industry began in
earnest. No one is perhaps more competent to
speak than Mr. E. A. Fitzgerald, a thoroughly
practical orchardist. He says that the actual pio-
neers of the fruit-growing industry in Wagga dis-
trict were the late John Smith, who settled ar
Kyeamba about 1836, and planted an orchard; the
late J. B. Sharp, of Green Hills, near Adelong;
and Mr. C. D. Bardwell, of Oberne. -That was 70
years ago. From various causes the industry made
little or no progress for many years, but latterly,
especially in the past decade, there has been con-
siderable advance.
The Wagga Experiment Farm, established some
15 years ago, five miles from the town, has proved
that the best English fruits will grow luxuriantly
in the Wagga district without irrigation. The
orchard at the farm is a revelation, an object lesson
to Australia, and a convincing demonstration of the
district’s fruit-growing capabilities. Landholders
1. The Eight Hours procession is an annual and highly successful affair at Wagga. This view
depicts an incident in the gala. 2. The modern, natty club-house of the Wagga Bowling Club.
desired to produce grain of high malting value.
The barley crops already grown have given most
satisfactory returns, and each year will no doubt
see an increased area being sown.
The growing of rape for grazing and for cleaning
the land is now recognised as a profitable under-
taking. Its high fattening qualities can he utilised
for topping up sheep and lambs in the winter and
spring, and, if ploughed under, it makes an excel-
lent green manure.
The success that has been attained in this district
by agriculturists is acting as an incentive to others
to embark in similar pursuits. Hence large areas
are being cleared annually for the plough, but as
yet but a small percentage of the arable land has
been cultivated. The large amount of land still
available for cultivation when utilised fully should
make the Wagga district the granary of New South
W ales.
The possibilities of the Wagga district as a great
fruit-growing area are as yet beyond one’s com-
have profited by this work, and the consequence
has been the establishment of fruit growing on
sound lines. The orchards of Messrs. Thos. Hallo-
ran, G. C. Bellenger, Shoemark and Fitzgerald,
which are skilfully and nicely laid out, produce
large crops of luscious fruit, and would compare
favourably with any in the State. The fruit is free
from disease, finds a ready market at good prices,
and secures a certain amount of preference over
the products of many Other districts.
Soft fruits grow luxuriantly. Mr. Brown, of
Tarcutta, through industry, intelligent tillage, enthu-
siasm and by specialising, has achieved remarkable
success with strawberries. His fruit is eagerly
sought for, and commands top prices in the Sydney
and Melbourne markets. This district has
thoroughly demonstrated its fruit-growing capabili-
ties. The valleys and hinterland of the Murrum-
bidgee, and of the Tarcutta, Humula, Kyeamba,
Big Springs and Pullitop creeks contain large areas
of ideal land, exceedingly rich and protected by


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
ranges, in which all kinds, of choice fruits grow.
The completion of the Barren Jack dam will make
vast expansion possible by means of irrigation.
Wagga Wagga is, moveover, an ideal distributing
centre. The municipality contains some 10,000
people; the population of the surrounding
district is large, and is expanding rapidly, thus
creating a wide local market. But railways give
ready access to the wider, insatiable markets of
Sydney and Melbourne, and to the extensive fruit
consuming districts that can be reached by both
those lines, The branches of which penetrate in
every direction. The capabilities are unquestion-
able, the supply of first-class land is inexhaustible,
that anything that could be grown there should be
grown in Wagga district, more especially
wheat and fruit. Mr. Halloran’s experience
may be of interest. He says:—“As a proof
that Wagga can hold its own with California
in dried fruits, I might say that in 1909 I sold
my prunes at 6zd. per lb., whereas the American
article can be landed in the warehouse, duty paid,
at sd. Wagga thus won by Ijd. per lb. in the open
market. I cropped 5000 lbs. of dried prunes this
season from 250 trees, 12 years old, growing ninety
to the acre—an average of 20 lbs. per tree, or a
money value (gross) of £4B/15/- per acre. To
get this result intense cultivation is necessary. The
1. A magnificent oat crop, Wagga district. 2. The record load of wool—some 48 bales carted into
Wagga by “ Dock ” McFarlane’s fine team of horses. 3. A distant view of haystacks on Mr. A.
Erunskill’s estate, “ Allonby,” Wagga. 4. The record load of wheat, brought in by the late Donald
McKenzie, who lost his life in saving that of a foal on Hampden Bridge. D. Mcßae, Photos
and the climate highly suitable, so that it is only
a matter of time when the Wagga district must
become one of the chief fruit-growing centres of the
Commonwealth.
Mr. Thomas Halloran, another of the leading,
most thorough and successful orchardists in the
Wagga district, says that a practical and distin-
guished American once remarked to him that
Wagga district reminded him more of California
than any part he had seen in his travels; and added
climate is such that I have never had any trouble in
drying my fruit in the open. One of the largest
buyers of dried fruit in Sydney told me that the
best prunes he got came from the Murrumbidgee
district.
“ Cherries also pay well if the sorts suitable to
the climate are grown. I put in ten different kinds,
but only about four were ever productive. Those
suitable to the district, such as early St. Marget
(which ripens the end of October), Bigarreau,


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
Napoleon, Black Tartarian, and one or two others,
gave good returns. I have heard of other sorts
doing well with different growers, but 1 found the
varieties mentioned to be best suited to my soil. Ihe
whole of the productive trees gave a money return
of £l/5/- per tree. My best cherry tree in 1909
gave a gross return of 120 lbs., which realised od.
per lb., or £2/10/- for one tree. My best prune
tree gave a return of 16/-. But the prunes average
better, and there is always a sure market and a
growing demand for the fruit. Early peaches,
apricots, apples, pears and plums of all sorts do
well if proper attention is given them. The Wagga
Experiment Farm has provided striking and indis-
putable proof of what can be done in the way of
fruit growing. That institution has been an object
View of Wollundry Lagoon from Baylis-street
Bridge. D. Mcßae, Photos
lesson to me, and has apparently educated and in-
fluenced other farmers and fruit growers of the
Wagga and surrounding districts, for the improved
methods adopted in many flourishing orchards are
undoubtedly due to the practical demonstrations
made there.”
If one does not learn something by a visit to the
Wagga Experiment Farm, the fault is in the lack
of observation. The new American idea of Dry
Farming” has been practised there, and the results
have been surprising. Fruits that were never
thought of as suitable for the district are now the
leading crop in our orchards. The Experiment Farm
does not merely grow the fruit, however. Drying,,
canning and preserving are extensively carried on,
and are highly profitable. The fruit, whether fresh,
dried, canned or preserved, is eagerly sought after
in the markets, in which the choicest goods are
demanded, and the highest prices are freely paid
for it. The farm also extracts large quantities of
olive oil, which tests at a high standard and realises
a higher price than imported oil. It seems hardly
necessary to add that olives grow luxuriantly in
the Wagga district. Bottled cider from the Ex-
periment Farm won the only award at the Na-
tional Exhibition and Market of the Brewing and
Allied Trades, at Islington, England, in 1907.
The Wagga district is eminently adapted for suc-
cessfully carrying on bee-culture. Mr. Halloran
has made a great hobby—a profitable one of bee-
culture. He says that in a good season he has
averaged 180 lbs, from each hive. One swarm gave
30 lbs. of honey per week for many weeks during
the height of How. For quality, honey from the
Wagga distr et easily holds its own against the
best in the Commonwealth.
A visit of observation around the district is an
education in itself. Commencing with the Experi-
ment Farm, note what remarkable progress has
been made there. Visit the many fine orchards,
beautifully laid out. with healthy, strong, vigorous
fruit trees of innumerable kinds. I hink of the vast
resources of the soil and its possibilities; consider
the regular and plentiful rainfall, the increasing
population, and the tendency to settle on the land
which is gradually being reclaimed from the sheep
walk. Sum it all up with a mind free from pre-
judice, ripened by observation, fortified by experi-
ence, and the thought forces itself: “ 1 hough the
future is always problematical, the prospects are
splendid, and, with discoveries and new methods
that one must expect, the possibilities of fruit grow-
ing and bee-culture in the Wagga district are in-
calculable and practically unlimited.”
THE DAIRYING INDUSTRY.
Every branch of industry having gone ahead by
leaps and bounds in recent years, the compiler was
considerably surprised on interviewing the proprie-
tor of the Wagga Butter Factory to hear that the
support accorded him was so poor. He remarked
that “ some time ago I was turning out a ton of
butter per day; now I am only doing a ton per
week, and to make a profit I have to sell it around
the town.” From that statement it appears the
proprietor is not being supported to the extent
expected, because the one undeniable fact noticed
by the compiler was the manner in which the
dairying industry has gradually extended to impor-
tant proportions, and the great improvement in
methods and the high standard of the dairy herds.
The Mnrrumbidgee flats are eminently suitable for
dairying—quite equal to any land the compiler has
yet inspected. Possibly, though, many farmers are
despatching their cream to Sydney or factories m
the neighbourhood of Wagga, where they find the
price paid highly satisfactory. The proprietor of
the butter factory informed the compiler that his


- -•i-../-.xa a * 7^»**
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
principal asset was through the rabbit trappers.
Rabbits are received, frozen with skins on, and
labelled in crates for foreign parts. The practical
use of “ bunny ” in the Wagga district will, no
doubt, delight the farmers, whose natural enemy
he is. An industry of this kind assists slightly in
keeping down the pest, gives employment to the
rabbiter, and incidentally allows the poorer class
An old and remarkable identity of the Wagga
district—a typical type of tramp known as the
“ Murrumbidgee Whaler.”
on the Continent and the United Kingdom to secure
game at a reasonable price.
In the thorough and proper choice of his herd lies
the individual success of the dairy farmer. At pre-
sent the cross breeding of milking strain Shorthorns
with Ayrshires finds great favour—Shorthorns for
preserving the meat qualities, Ayrshires for milk-
propensities. For butter yield, the Jersey has as
yet to find her equal, and a cross with Ayrshires
is highly commendable.
There are two very necessary factors in the em-
phatic and great success of the dairy in the Wagga
district—organisation and application. Nature, on
her part, has given the most ideal conditions for the
carrying on profitably of this important industry.
Within a radius of 50 miles of Wagga it can safely
be said that no more cheerful farmers and families
reside, simply because they are in an exceptional
district, where nearly all the land will produce pro-
fitable crops, averaging about 14 bushels of wheat,
20 of oats, and U tons of hay, which, at 3/-, 2/-, and
£2/10/- respectively, gives a good margin of profit
to a practical, systematic farmer. In a good year,
of course, the j-csults would be far greater. The
average rainfall during the past quarter century has
been 22 inches. Su«h has been the opportunities
in Riverina during the past two decades that the
pioneer who cultivated 70 acres out of his 640 acres,
and sat on the fence for the remainder of the season,
has given place to the man of energy, system, and
new ideas, who ventured from other States to
exploit our arable areas, or has fallen out of the old-
time, orthodox rut into the paths of progress. And
as farmers worked their land by better methods,
and in a more brainy manner, so did the price of
land increase. Eighteen years ago first-class agri-
cultural land sold at £2 per acre on a freehold
basis. In 1909 that same land was worth £5 per
acre. In 1911 it was saleable at £7' to £9 per
acre, with an active demand. To-day, owing to
the stringency of the money market, and the ease
that land could be acquired under the Closer Settle-
ment Promotion Act, this demand by purchasing
on the usual terms has been temporarily checked,
but values have not slumped. Farmers are con-
tented to secure annual returns from their holdings,
which, capitalised, represents a range of values much
higher than were in the market two years ago.
History will repeat itself, and prices again im-
prove commensurate with the district’s productivity.
Prosperity for our district was assured in the year
1906, when several other estates were inspected for
the Government by Messrs. Jeremy, Fosbery and
Baylis, and were immediately acquired, viz.;—“ Gob-
bagombalin,” 61,485 acres 2 roods, at about £3/12/-
per acre, including the river frontages; “ Marrar,”
26,310 acres 2 roods, at £2/11/- per acre, for forest
land; and “ Walla Walla,” adjacent to the Great
Southern railway, and close to Culcairn railway
station, all rich, deep forest land, intersected by a
creek, especially suitable for farming, fruit growing
and all classes of intense culture, at £5/5/- per acre.
One of Wagga’s old historical spots—the Tichborne
claimant’s shop (Tom Castro). The modern Tich-
borne Buildings have since been erected in recent
years.


r ' * - /-if *jf" j~s0tr*~~ |
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
Two interesting views taken at the opening of the W agga Bowling Green Club’s season recently by Mr.
G. P. Wilson
These purchases by the Government at the time
introduced 305 new settlers under special condi-
tions, and the ballot attracted thousands of appli-
cants. It is a worthy advertisement for Wagga
district, and gave a great fillip to agricultural pur-
suits, which has been since then well maintained.
The land thus acquired represents to-day an asset
that is worth nearly three times the money paid
by the Government.
The farmer’s profits nowadays are much greater
(even capitalising the land at the latter price) than
it was years ago, when, under the Robertson Land
Act (subject to certain improvements) the farmer
could select at 20/- per acre, and obtain possession by
paying J down, and the balance in annual payments
of 1/- per acre. It was estimated .that it took at
least 20/- more per acre to improve the holding,
and this formed the basis of value, viz., 40/-, but
selections were often sold for less. To-day we are
more enlightened. These lands are worked on a
system, while reduced rail freights and land car-
riage, improved machinery and methods of cultiva-
tion, including superphosphates, enable the practical
and intelligent farmer to secure a more profitable
return.
Such prominent object lessons as the Government
Experiment Farm and Mr. Anthony Brunskill’s
“ Allonby,” speak volumes in showing what can be
done with our forest lands. The present value of
lands in Rivcrina is not excessive, in fact justified,
applying specially to properties where means of
quick and regular railway transit for the product is
assured. Five pounds per acre for forest lands on
a freehold basis, properties in good heart, with fair
improvements adjacent to rail, is a fair average
price, but in a few instances is exceeded, where the
special circumstances are, say, a creek frontage, or
a particularly good homestead on the estate.
The value of the river frontage (the Murrumbid-
gee) within two miles of Wagga is £2O per acre,
able holdings, with very large areas, are bound to be
brought under closer settlement with the comple-
and lessens as the distance from the town increases,
until just beyond the village of Carrcwarna,
about 23 miles, when the market price would be
from £7 to £8 per acre for good high river flats.
A splendid illustration of the enormous and enthusiastic crowd frem all parts of N.S.W. and Victoria
who attended the successful Wagga Cup Carnival, 1913. D. Mcßae, Photos


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
The cutting up of that splendid estate, Gobbagum-
balin, for closer settlement, opened up some magni-
ficent frontages, which were eagerly availed of, and
the results to the settlement purchasers are very
satisfactory. The dairying industry is strongly in
evidence through Messrs. Sheppard Bros. These
progressive young men have over 500 acres on
the river, 420 of which is utilised for dairying.
under the closer settlement schemes of the Govern-
ment, notably Gobbagumbalin, Marrar and Walla-
Walla, aggregating 138,711 acres Many other suit-
tion of the Tumberumba railway and other branch
lines. Mr. Jeremy, of Jeremy and Co., one of the
most capable and experienced valuers of land in the
Riverina, says very definitely: “ Land in the Wagga
district has not nearly reached its real and ultimate
value, judging by its wonderful soil, resource, and
SOME OF THE CHARMING RESIDENCES OF WAGGA.
1. Mr. H. S. Headley’s. 2. Mr. Mahon’s. 3. Mr. J. K. O’Reilly’s. 4. Mr. J. J. McGrath’s. 5. Mr. Frank
F. Copland’s. 6. Mr. L. S. Headley’s. D. Aicßae, Photos
This area carries all the year round 110 cows in
full profit, besides turning off annually 50 prime
bullocks, and their experiments in sorghum have
been very gratifying—2s acres used for this pur-
pose in connection with the dairying industry has
yielded 40 tons to the acre.
The opening for settlement is extremely bright,
and several large estates have been thrown open
productivity, and it is certainly not on a parity of
value with land in the other States.” These re-
marks are worthy of mention, because Jeremy and
Co. have had a lengthy and practical knowledge of
the district during the past 30 years. This firm
are staunch advocates of Wagga’s ultimate great
future, and are glad to supply and assist anyone
desiring full particulars of Riverina land.


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
spring water. Some was obtained of delightful
quality, but not in sufficient quantity. How seldom
both go together. However, the £4OOO went, and
the springs are still blessed. The supply still comes
from the Murrumbidgee, which after a heavy rain-
fall is liable to carry a lot of “bank” with the
aqua.
One of the most important events of the year
in Wagga is the Murrumbidgee Pastoral and Agri-
cultural Association’s Show, which now ex-
tends over three days. It is the recog-
nised largest and principal show in the
Riverina, and not only attracts thousands in that
W. Chapman, E. Ashcroft, J. Donnelly, M. H.
Devlin, W. Sinclair, J. H. Wallis, W. Rand, G.
Forsyth and H. Baylis. Only two of the above
are now living—Messrs. R. B. Wilkinson and
W. Rand. For many years in the early
days the show was held on the racecourse, but in
1879 several acres were granted by the Government
near the municipal yards, and many shows were
held there. The acreage was insufficient with the
gradual growth and popularity of the show.
Another site was therefore obtained far more suit-
able. Plans, etc., were drawn by Mr. George Shep-
pard for yards, tree-planting, sheds, etc., and to-day
Views illustrating the practical work carried out and activity at the Government Experiment Farm
Wagga.
D. Xicßae, Photos
province, but from all parts of New South Wales.
It was established in a very small, unostentatious
way in 1865 by a few squatters and townspeople
of Wagga. The late Mr. Henry Baylis, P.M., one of
the most esteemed and popular men of the early
days, acted as secretary for some time, until the
association had been formed on a sound, solid basis.
Mr. G. A. Elliott then became secretary. The first
president was Mr. W. O. Windeyer, of Wanta-
badgery, and the two vice-presidents were Messrs.
John Leitch, of Berry Jerry, and T. W. Hammond,
of Junee. The first committee consisted of the
following gentlemen:—Messrs. W. A. Cottee, J. S.
Lavender, R. B. Wilkinson, A. Davidson, senr.,
H. M. Paul, J. Cox, A. W. Rasch, R. J. Higgins,
this association has one of the most complete, con-
venient and modern grounds in the State. Each
succeeding year improvements have been carried
out, and will be continued as necessary to meet
the increasing support accorded. The 1913 show
was quite a record one, not only in the great atten-
dance (15,000 on the principal day), but
in the number and quality of exhibits. The
fact that the committee of this association are
so thoroughly imbued with the knowledge that
liberal prizes attract the finest class of stock, grade
of work and quality of farm produce is undoubtedly
a great factor in the success enjoyed. The annual
subscription originally was £5/5/-, but when the
population of the town and district increased suffi-


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
ciently to warrant it the name was altered to the
one it now bears, and the subscription lowered to
£l/l/-. Originally and for several following years
the show really only comprised sheep, cattle and
horse exhibits, but in 1884 agricultural and other
sections were introduced. Since then each year ad-
ditional sections have been added as necessary,
in keeping with the progress of the district. The
Wagga Show has always been noted for the high
standard of its sheep and horse exhibits, particularly
the former, and most of the breeders of the highest
class sheep in Australia are Riverina men, notably
Messrs. Austin and Millear (Wanganella), Falkiner
(of Boonoke), Parker (of Quiamong), Sam
McCaughey (now Sir, of Coonong), Horsfall (Wid-
giewa), Hebdens (of Gogeldrie), and many other
well-known sheep breeders. The committee gave
for several years a prize of £lOO for a sheep wool-
scouring competition. In 1904 a champion sheep
prize of £2OO for rams was given, Mr. J. S. Hors-
fall, of Widgiewa, being the successful competitor.
Wagga Show now lasts three days, followed by a
day on which stock sales are held. The area of the
grounds, which are splendidly situated on a natural
rise, with a magnificent view of the surrounding
country, is 44 acres. A railway siding, which is
a great convenience, connects Wagga with the
grounds. The president is Mr. J. J. Baylis; vice-
presidents, Messrs. G. Paterson Wilson, L. A. Fos-
bery and E. A. Fitzgerald; hon. treasurer, Mr. C. M.
Davidson. Mr. A. F. D. White is the present
energetic and capable secretary. In no small
measure can the present buoyancy, prosperity and
popularity be traced to his efforts and enthusiasm.
The president and committee are all live and prac-
tical men, who are both thorough and keen in their
efforts to forward and uphold the splendid name
and prestige the Murrumbidgee Pastoral and Agri-
cultural Association holds in the State of New South
Wales.
Another strong and noticeable feature worthy of
mention is the rapidly increasing place the Wagga
View of Baylis Street from Lagoon Bridge and Gurwood Street, showing the magnificent avenue o
D. Mcßae, Photos
Since the agricultural, industrial and other sec-
tions have been included in the schedule, and the
member’s subscription reduced, the association has
gone ahead by leaps and bounds, and the interest
taken in it by the residents of the district and town
and outside exhibitors is increasing yearly. At pre-
sent the number of members on the'roll is over 800,
and it is predicted that this number will be greatly
increased now that closer settlement is an estab-
lished fact. The catalogue for the year 1913 showed
a total number of over 4000 exhibits —by far the
largest ever recorded. The first special prize was
■donated by the late Mr. Henry Baylis in the year
1875; it was £5 for the best yearling shorthorn
heifer, and was won by Messrs. Watt and Thom-
son. The industrial section has developed wonder-
fully, and is now a leading feature of the show.
Last year the amount donated to the show as special
prizes was in the neighbourhood of £6OO. The
assets of the association, as shown by the last
balance-sheet, in the way of buildings, property,
etc., amount to nearly £5OOO. The amount offered
as prize money was some £l4OO, while the re-
ceipts at the gates amounted to' £.600. The
show has taken in its horse exhibits. At last year’s
show over 800 entries were received in the various
horse sections, and the display of draughts, espe-
cially young stock, was freely admitted by visiting
horse experts to be not only one of the best, but the
finest they had yet inspected in a show ring. The
M.P. and A. Association can justly and solidly
claim the honour of now having the best horse show
in provincial N.S.W. In sp.te of the thousands of
pounds spent during recent years in improvements,
the progressive committee have decided to erect a
handsome, modern grand-stand, which will be quite
the premier one of the State, at a cost of some
£BOOO. This stand will be completed in time for
the 1914 show.
I believe it is a true maxim—wherever there is an
enthusiastic sporting community is found a live,
happy, go-ahead town, surrounded by a bright and
exhilarating atmosphere. And Wagga stands alone in
New South Wales —possibly excepting Broken Hill—
in this respect. Sporting doesn’t mean racing pure
and simple; it embraces all kinds of recreation and
amusement. There are several cricket and tennis
clubs, each boasting a large membership, and a bowling
Oriental plane trees.


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
mayors and aldermen during the past sixteen yeais,
but that of the general community of Wagga and
district. He is at all times one of the most cour-
teous of town clerks, whose sole endeavour is to
assist and freely give his best efforts to one and
all. The area of the municipality is 5460 acres,
stretching three miles north and one and a half miles
south from the post-office. ihe 1913 valuation
was: —Unimproved capital value, £390,131; assessed
annual value, £57,683; improved capital value,
£897,621. Outside the municipality the Mitchell
plants. At the present time these grounds, which
will eventually be transformed into a very beautiful
park and recreation reserve, are surrounded by an old
and unsightly fence. The council have decided to
erect a new modern one, half of which is to be
completed this year, and the balance in 1914. The
Newtown Park is also interesting, especially to
mothers and children, on account of the nucleus of
a zoological gardens having been established.
Amongst the animals and birds noticed were the
kangaroo, native companion, ducks of seve-
Interesting views of the Government Experiment Farm, Wagga,
1. A pretty view. 2. Showing manager’s private residence across one of the large dams. 3. Mares
and foals. 4. Distant view of the main building.
D. Mcßae, Photos
Shire is on the north, with the Kyeamba Shire on
the south. Both are divided into ridings.
The Town Hall Gardens are one of the show
places of the town, and an enjoyable hour can be
spent in them amongst the beautiful roses and other
flowering flora, or in the shade of the magnificent
deciduous trees. The area of the Town Hall Gar-
dens is about 3j acres, the whole of which is artisti-
cally laid out with lawns, shrubs and flowering
plants. Band concerts are held there at frequent
intervals, and a neat and useful rotunda has been
erected. The Newtown Park comprises about 5i
acres, and contains some very fine ornamental trees
and shrubs, but so far not a great deal of attention
has been paid to the laying out of beds for flowering
ral species, peacocks, swans, etc. In the
course of time it will be a splendid idea
to gradually extend; the collection, and.
while the rose is a feature in the Town Hall Gar-
dens, the collection of animals might be made the
objective in the Newtown Park. The mayor and
aldermen can rest assured that money spent in
improving parks and gardens is never begrudged
•by ratepayers. There is also a municipal reserve,
with an area of some 20 acres, situated in a crescent
shape on the banks of the Murrumbidgee. This
reserve is ideally situated by nature, and could
be eventually made a beautiful park. There is a
possibility in the future of the council considering
this matter, and eventually making it the playground


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA V/AGGA AND DISTRICT.
of the people of Wagga. With the certain growth
of population and consequent increase in revenue, it
would seem a sane and far-seeing idea to at once
plant two or three hundred Oriental plane and elm
trees there at 'the earliest opportunity. They would
prosper exceedingly, and when the time arrives to
spend money- in earnest on beautifying the reserve
the trees will have grown to useful proportions.
Every visitor and resident admire the beauti-
ful and graceful willow trees on the Wollundry
Lagoon and along the river banks. They add con-
siderably to the picturesqueness of Wagga. Couldn’t
more be planted by the council along the river and
other selected spots? Generally speaking, though,
Wagga is exceptionally fortunate in having had
Aldermen who were seized with the necessity and
advantages of tree-planting; hence one finds some
magnificent specimens of the Kurrajong, elm,
Oriental plane, acacia, cedar and willow trees.
Much has been done in the past, but as
as ratepayers might be in “ ways and means,” but
believes very strongly that a large and important
town like Wagga should have better street lighting,,
and also, as an advocate of the superiority of elec-
tricity for many purposes and businesses overgga r
believes that within the next year or two an elec-
trical plant, costing some £6OOO, could be installed
on the river bank adjoining the gas works, and be
run in conjunction with them. Within three years,,
probably—in fact, most certainly—with the expansion
of the town and increase in population (and Wagga
will eventually double its present one), a consider-
able additional outlay will be necessary in the add-
ing to the plant and laying mains, so that, if the
people are the owners of both electricity and gas
illuminants, they have nothing to lose and every-
thing to gain. Without going into details and
names, the compiler could mention a score of busi-
ness men who would have electricity installed in
every room and suitable place in their establish-
_ 5-*^
A view of one of the several fine dairy herds in th e Wagga district.
much more can be done in the future. All the
above species liourish well, and their growth is
remarkable and quite in keeping with practically
every other form of plant life. The soil and climate
are there; the only requirement is water. Gas is
Wagga’s illuminant. The works are the property of
the people, which at first sight sounds like Socialism,
but it isn’t. When the people own their own
bank (Commonwealth) or ironworks it is. The
council grasped a large handful in 1888 when they
acquired from this private gas company certain pro-
perty, to say nothing of the rights for £15,000.
However, everybody had to have a light of some
kind, and most preferred gas. The result was the
works were successful from a financial standpoint,
and to-day the gas works, which have been kept
thoroughly up to date, on the bank of the Mur-
rumbidgee River, are a good asset to the town. The
price per 1000 feet is 8/- for lighting and 6/6 for
cooking purposes, etc., which is a reasonable and
fair price. Since the works have been taken over
by the municipality many improvements have been
made, and a considerable extension in the mains
has been necessary. The compiler is not concerned
ments. As it is, with gas, they merely have it laid
on where absolutely necessary. The sale of candles
in Wagga is really surprising. Probably the most
important scheme that has yet been authorised by
the council is the sewerage. This work is costing
the ratepayers some £29,000, or at least the first
instalment of same, and eventually, when completed
to the outlying portions of the municipality, the cost
will amount to some £45,000. The contractor is
Mr. William O’Brien, who has made great head-
way with the work. The majority of the main
streets have been sewered, and within a brief period
the system will be in full swing. A large concrete
collecting well is now nearing completion, whence
a pumping plant will convey to the treatment works
some considerable distance from the town.
The water supply is an ample one, and Wagga is
very liberally reticulated, over 20 miles of piping
having been laid. The supply is obtained from the
Murrumbidgee River. The pumping station is
situated about a mile from the town. The reservoir
can conserve a million gallons of water. Wagga is
situated on springs—blessed eternal springs. Four
thousand pounds was spent in seeking for the


i
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
was placed on the river at North Wagga by William
Brown (“Tinker” Brown) in 1851; a larger punt
was built about five years later.
From the early days of settlement the Wagga
district —which was then considered to embrace the
greater portion of the Lower Murrumbidgee, or
for about 200 miles, and the country out past Urana
and down the Billabong to the Edwards River—
was noted for the excellent quality of the fat stock
sent to the Sydney market. The wool produced as
far down as Toganmain, 140 miles below Wagga,
was carried on bullock drays to Sydney. The roads,
or tracks, were in those days most difficult to get
over with loaded drays. One squatter, who had
stations situated 60 miles below Wagga, started for
Sydney with three loaded bullock drays (driving one
of the teams himself), and was nine months on the
1854 the owner of Gillenbah Station (John Jenkins)
sold at Moama fat bullocks obtained from squatters
in the Wagga and Gundagai districts at £26 per
head. Wagga having become one of the chief
crossing places for stock, the need for a bridge in
place of the punt became obvious. In 1860 a
private company was formed, and a bridge was
erected which met requirements for the time being.
Punts were not allowed to ply for hire within two
miles on each side of the bridge. The Government
of the day gave this company a very favourable
charter (to the company), and heavy tolls were
levied. The structure was completed in 1862, and
was at that time the only one over the second largest
river in Australia. This private company had a
decidedly good innings, and eventually, after con-
siderable negotiations, the control came into the
D. Mcßae, Photo
road before he returned to big home. Still the
flooded state of the country had a great deal to
do with this particular case. To say the least, life
—or it might more aptly be termed “ toil ” —was
strenuous and laborious. With the gold rush, how-
ever, a considerable amount of new blood arrived in
the district, and a man had every chance of shaking
hands with fellow-man at least once every day.
Magnificent, big-framed, fat bullocks were driven
to Sydney oft times, to be sold from 20/- to 40/-
per head, while sheep hardly fetched then the mar-
ket value to-day of a pair of hares. In 1853-4,
however, prospects changed, owing to the success
of the gold discoveries, and prices improved, par-
ticularly in Victoria. Mr. John Gormly, M.L.C.,
one of the oldest and best-respected pioneers of the
Murrumbidgee district, says that in 1852 he took a
mob of horses over to Bendigo (Victoria). One
he bought for £2/10/- along the river and sold for
£5O; another he paid £7 for and resold at £l2O. In
hands of the Government,, the purchase price being
£lO,OOO. A fine modern structure has been erected,
-and is certainly one of the most handsome and solid
in the State. As previously remarked, the early
history of Wagga was uneventful, and the progress
from 1850 until recent years but decidedly gradual.
However, with the bursting up of the land —the
advent of new settlers with up-to-date ideas of
farming, impressed with the exceptional fertility
and productivity of the soil, which they have since
proved so thoroughly, and the utilising to greater
advantage of the rich Murrumbidgee flats—Waggz
and district have gone ahead wonderfully, and can
very aptly be termed the large garden of Eden. The
term is not extravagant by any means, because 1
shall later show and illustrate by photographs that
the Wagga district, soil and climate can grow and
make flourish almost any plant life if properly at-
tended to.
Typical rural view in the Wagga district.


j
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
THE PROGRESS OF THE TOWN OF WAGGA.
1 intend to, first of all, endeavour to ■convey to
the public of Australia the commercial activity and
commercial importance of Wagga. There is no
necessity to exaggerate in any detail—good wine
needs no bush. If one had ridden over the land
this town stands on to-day, and for ten miles around
same, in 1846, but one hut would have been seen.
In 1913—67 years later—one can view from the
hill overlooking Wagga the modern and comfortable
homes of over 11,000 people, surrounded by a dis-
trict with a population of 30,000. These are facts,
and spell progress. Not unnaturally, as the district
and town’s population increased, keen, energetic
business men from various parts of the Common-
wealth were drawn to this pulsating centre, with the
result that in the quality, quantity and price of
altitude is high for a Riverina town, being 607 feet
above sea level. The State electorate is now
Wagga; the Federal electorate is Hume, which the
late Sir William Lyne represented so stoutly,
honourably and faithfully. The Hon. James Gormly,
M.L.C., was the first parliamentary representative
for Wagga, in 1894. Wagga was proclaimed a
municipality on 15th March, 1870, the first mayor
being Mr. G. Forsyth. The Town Hall is a modern
building in Baylis-street, and, though not pre-
tentious by any means, yet is eminently suitable
for present requirements. The present mayor is
Mr. E. E. Collins, J.P., who is fulfilling his second
consecutive year of office. He has proved one of
the most energetic, if not the most, and popular
mayors the town has yet had; and, with the pro-
gressive spirit that exists in a go-ahead town like
goods the public recognise they are being well and
liberally served, and thus, comparatively speaking,
little trade leaves the town. And that is one
of the biggest factors in the success enjoyed by
one and all. Money being kept and circulated in
a town enables everybody to support social, sport-
ing, religious and other objects. In short, Wagga
is a loyal town to itself, and the compiler could
give, were it necessary, many instances.
Wagga is, geographically, excellently situated,
being right on the banks of the Murrumbidgee—
the second largest river in Australia—almost
midway between the two capitals (on the
main line), Sydney and Melbourne, being 315 miles
from the former and 267 i miles from the latter.
Wagga is actually connected by some 3000 miles of
railway from Longreach (Queensland) to Oodna-
datta (South Australia). The climate is a bracing
one, with practically—i.e., actually—only three
months of the year that can be termed hot. The
D. Mcßae, Photo
Wagga, it is very necessary to have a mayor who-
is a solid, level-headed business man and at
the same time one who is able to entertain right
royally as the occasion demands. Very important
and comprehensive works are now being carried out,
or will be in the near future. Some £27,000 is being
spent on the installing of the sewerage system, and
during the present and ensuing year (in the aggre-
gate) probably some £40,000 worth of progressive
works in various directions will be carried out by the
municipality. The mayor is assisted by a keen,
energetic body of aldermen, all of whom have at
heart the welfare of this great commercial and
agricultural centre. The present aldermen are
Messrs. Alick Smith, T. Dobney, F. J. McDonough,
Albert Hurst, R. J. Hurst, J. Cunningham, B. F.
Moin, D. S. Cameron, A. V. Booth, Hugh Oates,
and R. H. Blarney. The town clerk is Mr. Robert
Emblen, who is also engineer. He has now en-
joyed the confidence and esteem not only of various
Charming view of the Wollundry Lagoon, Wagga.


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
being not only modern to-day, but up to date in
20 years’ time. The total expense involved m
erecting this structure and furnishing it so luxu-
riantly throughout probably ran well on to £lO,OOO.
An exceptionally lengthy and wide balcony, 200 x
20 ft., surrounds this hotel, which adds considerably
to the comfort of patrons, more especially during
the summer months. The several parlours, both
private and public, are decidedly comfortable and
suitably furnished in every respect, while the menu
served in the tastefully decorated and laid out com-
modious dining room is of a very high standard
indeed. Commercial travellers are well catered for,
a quiet parlour being reserved for their use, also
several well fitted up sample rooms. .There are
some 50 bedrooms, all beautifully clean, airy and
well furnished. Hot and cold baths are provided,
and the sanitary arrangements, which were
carried out by the well-known firm of Ander-
son and Lament, are as perfect as present
conditions allow them to be. The increasing
support which is daily being accorded this hotel is
no doubt appreciated by the proprietress, who has
shown much creditable enterprise in rebuilding and
refurnishing the Hotel on such a liberal
The original Wagga Hotel.
scale. The finest wines, spirits and cigars only are
stocked by Mrs. Juppenlatz, who during her busi-
ness career, extending over 18 years in Wagga,
has gained a sound reputation in this respect.
1. The dining room. 2. The entrance hall of th a Hotel. 3. Portion of the commodious bar.
4. A section of the balcony. Hams, Photos


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
D. Mcßae, Photos
1. An afternoon tea party at the Wagga Races. 2. A glimpse of the crowd of enthusiasts. 3. A
long straight, providing an exciting finish. 4. Mr. E. G. Wilson, on Scarifier, winner of Picnic Cup.
5. Trotting meeting held on the M.T. Club’s course. 6. Attractive walk leading to the grandstand.
7. Mrs. G. P. Wilson, of “Big Springs” Station, decorating first and second horses in the Picnic Cup;
Scarifier winner, owned and ridden by the capable amateur horseman, Mr. E. G. Wilson. 8. Ready to
do the preliminary. 9. The Wagga Citizens’ Band playing on the lawn.


CT <3) =G) \ ,<S>
fip|p|| The Progress of
W Wagga and District wy
Mfy ft ILLUSTRATED THROUGHOUT WAS)Sf\\jT\
Comp led and Published by J. EDWARD ROBERTSON, 1914
Cq ==3g) Cq
II
1'. Harris, Photos >>.’;<
O convey to the community an
VjJ j| I adequate idea and enable them
\l I \y/ to firmly grasp the wonderful
V / I W rise and progress made by
II I \l Wagga Wagga and District
lljm ft 11 during the past four decades,
I the compiler feels it at least
mV vv necessary to give a brief and
concise outline of the early his-
tory. True, there has never been anything of a
very stirring nature to bring Wagga Wagga into
the limelight as far as the early days are con-
cerned. Perhaps, though, it became best known
and spoken of in connection with the memorable
Tichborne estates case, when a then Wagga resi-
dent in Tom Castro endeavoured to establish a
claim to the estates. It will be remembered by
many the several years of litigation that ensued,
and the outcome which resulted in Castro being
sentenced to 14 years’ imprisonment. • Castro, who
had been financed to forward his claim by several
Wagga residents to a considerable amount, was
before his death persuaded by a journalist to accept
payment for his confession, which was made. The
man must have had wonderful ingenuity and tenacity
to have withstood the keen cross-examination and
various x-rays’ processes that he was forced through
in those memorable years of law involved in the
The popular Mayor and Mayoress of Wagga Wagga, Mr. and Mrs. E. E. Collins


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
Tichborne case. Another feature that brought
Wagga prominently before the Australian public was
racmg. The Murrumbidgee Turf Club in the good
old days, some 50 years ago, gave rich stakes, which
attracted the best horses in New South Wales and
Victoria. Just 39 years ago an Intercolonial Cham-
pion Race the stakes being £lOOO, with a sweep-
stakes of £4o—was run over a distance of three
miles. The winner was P. Keighran’s Mormon
carrying 9 st. 10 lb., and ridden by a jockey named
Simpson. In 1868 the Wagga 10-Mile Race was
run. The placed horses were H. J. Bow-
ler’s Australian (11 st. 7 lb.), ridden by
Yeomans; R. J. Grovenor’s Comet (11 st. 2 lb.)
ran second, and W. J. Bowen’s Riverina (11 st. 5 lb.)
third. Both the latter horses carried their respec-
George Macleay, had considerable trouble in avoid-
ing bloodshed with the blacks. His path on more
than one occasion was blocked so effectively that
many detours had to be taken during the expedition.
Sturt’s party, travelling on the right bank of the
Murrumbidgee, passed over the spot where North
Wagga now stands. The pioneer settlers arrived a
couple of years later. In 1832 the Tompson family
stocked Oura station and Eunonyhareenyha, and
grazed two flocks of sheep where the town of
North Wagga is situated. In the same year Best
took up the Wagga Wagga station. The home-
stead was erected on the bank of the river, about a
mile west of the site of the existing grandstand on
the racecourse. Other pioneers who settled further
down the stream were Jenkins (who stocked
• View of the Murrumbidgee River from the Hampden Bridge.
i). Mcßae, Photo ’I
tive owners. The time was 23 min. 35 sec. It was
in 1873 the first Wagga Cup was run. In 1876-77-78
the stakes were £lOOO, with a gold cup, the first
one being donated by the late John Cox, of Mango-
pHh, one of the finest sportsmen of the many the
Riverina has ever had. The racing and sporting
features of Wagga as applied to-day will be dealt
with further on. I must now return to the early
history of Wagga. As far as can be gathered from
various records, the great explorer, Captain Sturt,
with his party, reached the Murrumbidgee on that
wonderfully successful and memorable expedition
which meant so much in those days towards the de-
velopment of a continent not much understood geo-
graphically; in other words, the interior was practi-
cally one big blank space. That expedition was in
1829-30. Sturt continued his expedition down the
Murray as far as Lake Alexandrina. The aborigines
were plentiful, and the explorer and his party, the
second in command being an Australian named
Tooyal) and his sons, John and Frank, who occupied
Gillenbah and Buckinbong.
The preliminary survey work in forming the
town of Wagga was carried out by Thomas
Townsend, the Surveyor-General at the time being
Sir Thomas Mitchell. The first residence erected—
a bark and slab hut—was for Michael Norton, chief
constable. A decidedly primitive lock-up was also
built. That was in 1847. Then followed the court-
house, a wooden building. The first magistrates
were John Gordon (of Borambola), John Peter
(Gumly Gumly), and J. G. Church (Borambola).
1 hen followed the inevitable—a public house—kept
by one Ginger Roberts. A blacksmith’s shop next
became an accomplished fact, and the nucleus of a
town was established. In 1849 Dr. Robert Davison,
who had a large general store at Gundagai, opened
a branch of his business in Wagga. There was no
other store down the Murrumbidgee until Balranald
(a police station then) was reached. A small punt


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
has not been secured by a fluke, as it were. It has
been gamed by business tact, knowledge, solid hard
work, and, above all else, the placing before the
public At grade of goods at fair market prices and
studying the interests of customers in every possible
manner.
To Mr. W. G. Huthwaite much credit is due to
the present prosperous and high position his firm
holds in the commercial world of New South Wales
to-day. The present commodious store, which is
centrally situated in Baylis-street (Newtown.),
Wagga, is the outcome of considerable thought and
deliberation. Huthwaite and Co. recognised that
the southern end of Wagga, with its rapidly in-
creasing population, required such an establishment
as they have erected, and it was merely a question
of catering for Newtown thoroughly and the trade
would be transacted there. The wonderful business
growth proves undeniably and practically how well
founded that judgment was. One of the principal
tionaliy large quantities; in fact, a vast turnover
is done yearly in the wholesale trade. Large orders
are despatched to various stations and farms
throughout the Riverina. The produce branch is
also an important and increasing one, so much s-o
that only recently this firm purchased a valuable
corner block opposite the Wagga Hotel, adjoin-
ing the railway station. It is proposed to erect m
the near future a modern and commodious gram
and produce store, with a number of offices. The
idea is undoubtedly a sound and progressive one, as
much labour and consequent cost will be saved m
the handling of produce. The present store,
although of considerable size, is insufficient in space
for the steady growth of that branch.
Some twelve months ago Mr. Kirby entered
into partnership with Mr. Huthwaite, and his
lengthy practical experience as a commercial travel-
ler has undoubtedly been of great advantage to the
firm. Mr. Kirby is one of the most energetic and
F. Harris, Photos The drapery department and show-room at Huthwaite and Co.’s
features of this concern, which covers an area of
nearly an acre, is the several fine glass windows,
which give an excellent reflex of the quality of the
thousands of pounds’ worth of drapery, boots, shoes,
millinery, ironmongery, crockeryware, groceries—
in fact, every article required on the farm and in the
home —which awaits inspection at the various de-
partments. The premises are so designed that one
can pass on through the various departments with
the minimum of inconvenience and comfort.
Another noticeable feature is due to the commodious
nature of the premises and the excellent manner in
which goods are laid out, which enables the pur-
chaser to buy in comfort from a varied range, and
to the best advantage.
Huthwaite and Co., who employ a large staff of
courteous and capable assistants, buy in excep-
progressive business men of Wagga, and has already
assisted considerably in a practical manner and
by enthusiasm in forwarding the interests of Wagga
generally and Newtown particularly. Both Messrs.
W. G. Huthwaite and Kirby are much esteemed,
not only in private life, but as townsmen. It is to
such men of ability and enterprise that towns pro-
gress solidly and soundly. From a commercial
standpoint, their share has been given by the erec-
tion and stocking on such a large and thorough
scale the establishment under review—one of the
best in the State. By doing this they have assisted
to keep the trade in Wagga, with benefit to the
general community. When a big of trade
leaves a town for city goods, that town is invariably
a poor, unprogressive place, whereas Wagga is
to-day the most pulsating and principal commercial
centre of New South Wales.
All Descriptions of Farm Produce Bought and Sold


~
IITIi m Mts/kj
m MPI/ is^mm.
. JH I ** w C 11WW Mb
Mk -.. .
WB ’ i •;. 2I&< - : Mp ‘* IW ' ..
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
r T v U£ > ddz: i J— Corner EDWARD and COLLINS
1 VV JIIOLcI STREETS, adjoining Railway Station
Recently entirely rebuilt. Now one of
the most Modern, Lavishly Furnished
and Best-appointed Commercial Hotels
in the State. Over 50 Well-ventilated,
Airy Bedrooms, Commodious Bar, Sit-
ting Rooms, both Private and Public ;
Smoking Room, Commercial Room;
Drawing Room for lady guests; Two
First-grade Pianos. Liberal and excel-
lent Menu.
I REFURNISHED THROUGHOUT.
Conveniently situated. Travellers have
only to step out of the train into an
invigorating 4Hot Bath if required. A
splendid Meal, and then the most com-
fortable of [Beds in a large, airy Bed-
room. Wide Balcony, 200 ft. in length.
Under the Personal Supervision of the Proprietress,
Mrs. a. juppenlatz.
The part of Wagga leading towards the railway
station, known as Newtown, has. gone ahead won-
derfully during the past eighteen months, particu-
larly in respect to the modern buildings and up-to-
date improvements, which everywhere have been
and are being erected. And foremost amongst
these great improvements, perhaps, the recently
reconstructed structure—the Wagga Hotel—stands
out most prominently. Some eighteen months ago
a decidedly primitive building stood in place of the
fine, handsome brick building, which to-.day is quite
one of the chief ornaments of Newtown. The pro-
prietress is Mrs. A. Juppenlatz, who is not only one
of the most courteous, kindly-natured and business-
like of women, but at the same time thoroughly
imbued with a progressive and energetic spirit,
which means such a great deal in the sound and
solid conduct of a large and important hotel.
The Wagga Hotel is a two-storied brick struc-
ture with white facings. The building holds a
commanding position on the corner of Edward and
Collins streets. The position is a most convenient
and suitable one, being practically almost on the
railway station steps. In erecting this commodious
building no expense was spared in ensuring its
One of the commercial parlours.
The drawing room.


C01UH5
aii7T>r ' >l ■—*>.
i nrm•TnT^^^^?^^J' , !P*^^if** aiil>ftK, * 1 fliTrfTfr a ** x '*'~ — v —*■ & --
* 1 *3WB^ip*^ w ,y
•*: * - *?■ ■ - IIM
Li h plBf i v
IS ~ ■ ■ m
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
E. E. COLLINS, Wool, skin, and Hide Warehouse,
Telephone 45. KINCAID STRLLT, WAGGA. Private Residence 8.
Branches at GLRMANTON, YASS, and MURRUMBAH.
Local Agent for Australian Alliance Assurance Company, Fire, Accident, and Marine.
The largest and best-equipped wool warehouse in provincial N.S.W
One of the most important and extensive wool,
skin and hide warehouses in not only provincial
N.S.W., but provincial Australia, is that which has
now been conducted during the past ten years by
Mr. E. E. Collins. Unlike most progressive con-
cerns, the one under review did not commence in a
primitive style. Right from its commencement the
proprietor secured a large and influential connec-
tion, chiefly, no doubt, through his then recognised
commercial popularity and the high prices he then
offered and has since been able to maintain. Cash
has always been paid when desired, and there are
no charges for freight, commission, classing, etc.
The whole of the wool purchased is shipped to Lon-
don and the Continent direct by Mr. Collins. An
idea can be gained of the commodious nature of the
warehouse when it is mentioned that the floorage
space is 7920 feet. An enormous quantity of wool,
skins and hides can be stored. This warehouse is
quite the largest and best equipped in N.S.W. otn-
side Sydney. All classes of skins, hides, tallow, etc.,
are purchased at highest market rates. great
commercial success Mr. Collins has made in life
is reflected in his record as a good citizen of
Wagga. No man probably has given up more of
his time during recent years to public life. Mr.
Collins has been an alderman of the council over
a period of five years. He is now fulfilling the
onerous position of second consecutive year of office
as mayor—a position occupied and marked with
zeal, judgment and attention to the many duties
expected and required from the chief magistrate of
a progressive town. Mr. Collins has also been
closely identified with the M.P. and A. Association
and Hospital as a committeeman; in fact, there is
probably hardly an institution (inclusive of all
sporting clubs) that Mr. Collins has not been actively
connected with. And, when one analyses the mat-
ter, kudos is due to the public-spirited men, for,
without them, the progress of a town would be con-
siderably retarded —that is, if there was any pro-
gress to retard.
Interior view of this modern wool, skin, and hide
warehouse. Floorage space, nearly 8000 feet.


Ipaw0cr~
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
’PHONE 57. BOX 85
THE. UP-TO-DATE. STORE.
Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga.
Also at Germanton, Culcairn and Walwa,
Victoria.
GRIMWOODS,
Hardware Merchants
and importers.
Grocery, Confectionery, General
Hardware, Crockery, Ironmongery,
Oils, Colors, Lime and Cement,
Furniture, Produce, etc.
One of the most important commercial firms in
the Riverina is that of “ Grimwoods,” which was
established some 16 years ago at Germanton by
Mr. Grimwood, senr. As business increased so did
the firm expand, and large and successful branches
were opened at Culcairn and Walwa (Victoria).
The window display is quite a feature at
“ Grimwood’s.”
General view of this handsome establishment.
The most recent acquisition is the Wagga business,
which, although the latest branch, yet is probably
already the most important, chiefly on account of
the determination by this firm to cater thoroughly
and liberally for a town and district with a vast
population. The manner in which they have suc-
ceeded is most strikingly reflected in the manner
in which the trade has grown to the present won-
derful proportions. “ Grimwoods ” are importers
on a large scale in hardware, groceries, confec-
tionery, crockeryware, oil, colours, furniture, lime,
cement, etc. Having so many large stores, they are
enabled to buy on an exceptionally big scale, and
thus secure liberal discounts, which naturally en-
ables them to place their goods before the public at
lower prices than many competitors. And, after
all, prices, quality and assortment are the principal
stones required in laying the foundation of a sue-


fe y* 'i J Wgmt \'% gfl
" m*** B
JHL f |.A..' SB * It1 H Q$%\
| 4 ■* 1
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
Excellent illustrations of the grocery and confectionery departments.
cessful business. “ Grimwoods,” being such a pro
gressive firm, naturally have modern, commodious
premises, which are situated in Fitzmaurice-street,
near the Wollundry Lagoon. The accompanying
illustrations will enable the public to appreciate the
up-to-date appointments and vast range of stock
carried. A large staff is employed, and the manage-
ment of this successful concern is in the capable
GRIMWOODS,
The Noted House for
Groceries,
Ironmongery,
Confectionery,
Paint and
Oils
Everything will be found
obtainable at Bedrock Prices.
Give us a trial. We’ll convince
you.
hands of Mr. L. R. Grimwood, one of Wagga s most
enterprising commercial men. Many members of
the community who have not as yet visited “ Grim-
woods’ ” establishment can be recommended to call
and inspect this splendidly-stocked and modern
store. Their visit may not be only one of interest,
but of profit, for “ Grimwoods ’ are a noted house
foi bedrock prices.
View of the crockeryware and general hardware department.
DIRECT IMPORTERS
OO DS,
GRIM
Wagga, Germanton, Culcairn and Walwa, Victoria


■ *——, —-
—~—— iuf ■■
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
f C HARDY & CO. 1
0
Timber Merchants, Builders, Contractors,
BAYLIS STREET (NEWTOWN),
AGGA WAGGA
Illustrations of Hardy and Co.’s sawmilling industry. This firm, in addition to owning the largest
timber yards in the Riverina, are also contractors on a big scale, and the majority of the public buildings,
private residences, business premises, etc., have been erected by them. f. Harris, Photos


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
The prosperous and important establishment of
C. Hardy and Co. was founded by the late
Charles Hardy in 1862, and it is one of the few
remaining pioneering firms of the early days. Budd-
ing contracts were then carried out, not only
throughout the Riverina, but as far tis Euston. And
nowadays a similar extensive business is being un-
dertaken —buildings are being erected all over the
Riverina, from Albury to Tumut, It is only appro-
priate that the connection Hardy and Co. have had
with the progress of W agga should be recorded in
this book, for they have not only been the pioneer
commercial importance of this firm are that they
have their own modern saw-milling plant, import
largely all building material, and are thus enabled
to contract at a reasonable price, which undoubtedly
inclines the business man to erect a private resi-
dence, a balcony around his hotel, knock down the
old shop front and put a modern one in its place-
improvements he has long contemplated. Another
factor, though, that must not be overlooked is the
style, finish, and solid nature of all work carried out
by Hardy and Co. Ihe best grade of material is
used in every contract, and the firm under review
The exterior of the timber yards and offices, Baylis
street, Wagga Wagga.
contractors of Wagga, but have, since 1862 until the
present time, probably built half of that town. Prac-
tically the whole of the banks, hospital, churches,
court housfe, hotels, and private residences were
erected by this firm. Recent contracts completed in-
clude the handsome Wagg? Hotel for Mrs. Juppen-
latz, rebuilding and designing the front of Sulli-
van’s Criterion Hotel, and the erection of the South
Wagga Church of England structure—a handsome
and striking edifice. The average number of trades-
men employed is in the neighbourhood of <O, who
are distributed over the various contracts through-
out the Riverina. And reasons for the success and
Messrs. Charles and W. H. Hardy and their
employees.
hold an unusual record in the class of workmen they
employ. Several have been with the firm over 40
years, many from 20 to 30 years, and most several
years. The fact that men retain their billets over such
a long period tends to impress one with the manner
this firm treat and study their men, and vice versa.
The partners in this flourishing industry are Messrs.,
Charles and W. H. Hardy, who are both highly
respected, not only in the commercial sphere, but
as good citizens of Wagga, to whose energy and
enterprise much of the progress Wagga and district
have made in recent years can be both directly and
indirectly traced.


; v«>aUHfev
I ... , . -.^.
dL i
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
’PHONE. 67.
BOX 70.
Wollundry House, Wagga Wagga
KLLLY & CUNNINGHAM,
THE BUSY DRAPERS
The Progress of a Young Enterprising Firm.
One very noticeable and favourable feature of
Australia is the continually expanding sphere it of-
fers to younger commercial men to commence in
business on their own account, and work that busi-
ness up to important proportions within a brief
period. Necessarily the man must possess both
grit and experience, and, above all, strenuous appli-
cation of those qualities. And, apropos the above,
the firm’s record now under review is a strik-
ing and most creditable one. In 1906 Messrs.
A. G. Kelly and R. J. Cunningham, who had
been connected for several years with the commer-
cial life of Wagga, decided to start in business on
their own account. Commodious premises were se-
cured, known as “ Wollundry House,” and not one
business man would then have expected the young
firm to succeed. Many said it was too far away
from the commercial pivot; still, they were not then
to understand the manner in which Kelly and Cun-
ningham intended to cater for the public. They
commenced in an unpretentious way, with but four
employees; to-day some twenty-eight capable hands
are employed in the various branches of the busi-
ness. As a matter of fact, on Wagga’s busy days,
one will observe a constant stream of people hurry-
ing towards the Wollundry Lagoon. But they are
not bent on viewing the beauty of that lagoon.
They are on their way to “ Wollundry House,”
where, under that large roof in that commodious
building, thousands of pounds’ worth of up-to-date
stock is sheltered, ready to be transferred to the
purchaser at reasonable, fair and square prices.
Kelly and Cunningham are keen buyers—they have
been in this line of business all their lives, and un-
derstand the requirements of the Wagga commu-
nity. ” Wollundry House ” might almost be termed
the “ Farmers’ House,” so popular is it with the
farming community. Handsome, olate-glass win-
dows to an imposing structure impress one, as it
turns out, rightly. .A visit of inspection through the
various departments—drapery, men’s wear, haber-
dashery, tailoring, millinery, dressmaking, etc. —
serves to confirm that first pleasurable impression.
Regarding special features at “ Wollundry House,”
it is really hard to decide which does stand out over
the other—each one carries such a varied, complete
and comprehensive range of high-class goods, of un-
“ Wollundry House.” Many familiarly term it “ The
Always Busy House.”
deniably superior quality. The compiler, in his
judgment, though, was rather inclined to award the
millinery department pride of place. Messrs. Kelly
and Cunningham claim one of the finest, best


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT,
The showroom, in charge of Miss Carroll, is quite a feature of Wagga.
equipped, and most up-to-date showrooms in the
Riverina. and that claim certainly appears justifiable.
The different hats are delightful, dainty and cle-
verly designed. It certainly reflects very creditably
on the artistic skill and ingenuity of the head milli-
ner Miss Carroll, one of the recognised leading de-
signers of Melbourne. The trimming room, which
is a separate department, is in charge of a Mel-
bourne milliner of considerable experience. Dress-
making is another branch of this pulsating estab-
lishment that is forging rapidly ahead. Hundreds
of dresses are now being sent out from there, and
many of the best-dressed ladies of Wagga are cus-
tomers of “ Wollundry House.” Is there anyone in
the Wagga district who has not heard of Kelly and
Cunningham’s suits? This firm have secured a
really remarkable trade in the tailoring department,
which is well supplied with the latest styles in pat-
terns, etc. The prices charged are comparatively
low, and on this account suits must be turned out
without delay. The “K. and C ” suit will be found
a good, durable one, artistically cut, and we
finished. Yes, from every standpoint the splendid
record of this young firm is highly creditable and
dearly demonstrates what can be done within a
period of seven years in Australia by men of tie
right stamp, who are prepared to cater for the pub-
lic liberally, genuinely and faithfully. Though both
busy men, yet the partners find time to take an
active interest in the welfare of the town and dis-
trict. Their practical support can always lie relied
upon in any public movement. Amongst other posi-
tions held by Mr. Cunningham is that of alderman
of the Wagga Municipal 'Council.
The heavily stocked and well-appointed drapery and men’s wear departments.


i muy u
& ' * 7 "3*% as»' - . , :
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
’Phone 196.
Anderson & Lament,
<^lp
BAYLIS STREET, WAGGA.
Agents for the Pasteur Germ Filter, Rosen-
berg Motor Fans, Gas and Chip Bath Heaters.
Plumbers, Gasfitters, Iron
and Zinc Workers, Tinsmiths
and Bellhangers.
Baths, lavatories, basins, etc., fitted with hot and
cold water, and gas laid on ; beer engines fitted up with
the latest designs.
Sole agents in VVagga for "Ewart’s ■‘ Supreme” Gey-
ser, the most simple, complete, satisfactory and econo-
mical hot water heater yet invented. Call and inspect
this machine at work.
The above business, established in 1886, is the recog-
nised leading one of its kind in Wagga. Some eight
years ago it passed into Mr. J. Anderson, jun.’s, hands,
and the reputation for sound and excellent work has
been maintained. The premises are up-to-date ones n«
Baylis-street (Newtown), Wagga. The showroom
carries a complete and attractive stock of baths, heat-
ers and a full range of sanitary goods. The factory
Portion of the Heavily-stocked Showroom.
is at the rear, with the yards and sheds for bulk goods.
Messrs. Anderson and Lament find it necessary on
account of the many big contracts they usually have
in hand at the some time to carry a heavy stock to
safeguard the inconvenience of waiting for goods on
order or in transit. This firm has secured a large
number of orders for laying on the sewerage connec-
tions, and it is just as well to remind the public that
each notification regarding sewerage connections is
taken in rotation; therefore the earlier the request,
the better for themselves. The installing of hot and
cold water connections and lavatories, baths, etc., is
one of this firm’s leading features. The splendid
modern lavatory and bathing conveniences at the Aus-
tralian, Commercial and Wagga Hotels have been
carried out recently in their entirety by Messrs.
Anderson and Lament in a most creditable manner,
and to the thorough satisfaction of the owners of
the properties above mentioned. A large staff of
competent men are engaged on the various plumbing
contracts and other works throughout the Riverina,
where this firm’s business extends. Not one of the
best, but the best water-heater the compiler has so far
inspected is Ewart’s “ Supreme ” Geyser. This heater
uses gas, and is so designed that the gas cannot light
until the water is actually turned on; the moment it
is turned off the gas goes out. A small pilot light
supplies the ignition. The “ Supreme ” (well named,
too) is automatic in action, the burners lighting from
a single pilot light when water is being drawn from
any tap to which it is connected. The “ Supreme ”


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
Geyser will supply hot water to bath, lavatory and
kitchen sinks or other taps as may be required. The
hot water is delivered under the same pressure as
that of the cold water service. Hot water is obtain-
able in ten seconds, either shower, plunge or for
The compiler was interested very much in this machine,
and intends to purchase one himself. An inspection
can be very genuinely and strongly recommended.
Judging by the leading position this firm hold ■ in
public estimation, they" have well fulfilled their ex-
A Corner of One of the Workshops.
kitchen purposes, at the rate of three gallons per
minute. The price of the machine is low, and the
cost of gas used infinitesimal, simply because one
can’t burn that illuminant unless one wants the water.
View Illustrating the Yards and Bulk Stores.
F. Harris, P'hoto
pressed intention of carrying out ail work entrusted to
them promptly, economically, and in a thoroughly sound
manner, using the best of material only in every con-
tract.
«a»io»iooeio»B9»je»iec©*6»io»io»i9»i9ceie»iB®ie»i6cei9»«B»(Bc©i9»i9»i9»!ec©!93©ißaHe^i9»Kooaoc©i6c©*oCo!e3fsi9»iecejoasioceK
«?MB^KCB!9mB!Bme!omia9mei9»l9mBlomeiem^!9»ie»l6Ce«9mei9mBi9m«9meio»lome!ome!9m^
The handsome, commodious, well-appointed bar —one of the best in the State—of
the Wagga Hotel. Mrs. Juppenlatz, proprietress.
The Sanitary, Lavatory and Lighting Arrangements were carried out in their entirety by
Messrs. Anderson & Lament.


j9H
iW'i i jgiiiHiciijjoj^jtiiiiuiijiyjijjM^^MB^
- .1 HMhhHP^^
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
Riverine Saddlery Establishment
’ =s WmS s:
’PHONE 79. Awarded First Prizes at Wagga, Goulburn, Melbourne and Chicago.
J. J. M'GRATH 8c CO..
(Chas. H. Rake and S. A. Palazzi.)
Manufacturers and Importers of Saddlery and Harness
of Every Description.
Patentees and Sole Manufacturers of Improved Steel Rim Buggy Collar.
FITZMAURICE STREET, WAGGA
This well and favourably known business was es-
tablished by Mr. J. J. McGrath in the seventies, and
was successfully carried on by him until 1894, when
he disposed of same to Messrs. C. H . Rake and
S. A. Palazzi, who, though sole proprietors, carry
on the business under the name and style of
J. J. McGrath and Co. The present proprie-
tors are both thoroughly practical men, having
been connected with the saddlery trade all
their lives, and it is quite a coincidence that Mr.
Rake commenced with Mr. McGrath thirty-four
years ago, and later became foreman. Mr. Palazzi
joined as a boy after leaving school. They were
first-class employees, and aye now proving them-
selves equally good employers. To-day, as partners in
this flourishing and extensive concern, one can say
very genuinely that the fact of having worked their
way gradually up the ladder, every rung of which
meant an insight into the various departments of a
large harnessware establishment, has well fitted them
to cater on thorough and practical lines for the towns-
people and farming community. They thoroughly un-
derstand Riverine requirements in every phase, and
this factor is one of the chief ones in the success that
has attended their efforts. The manufacturing part
of the business is under Mr. Rake’s direct supervision,
and every piece of work—whether saddles, bridles, col-
lars, harness sets, or repairs—is passed by him before
being sent to its destination. The principal work at-
tended to by Mr. Palazzi is keeping the books of the
firm, prompt attention to customers, and the incoming
and outgoing of parcels. One is impressed with the
smoothness with which the whole of this veritable
beehive is conducted.
It is quite a revelation to most people on inspecting
the factory of this enterprising and progressive firm,
and a visitor is at once struck with the industry with
which every mah seems imbued, the large stocks of
raw' material, and the completeness of the different
branches of the trade, the whole of the requirements
for the business being manufactured on the premises.
Saddles, harness, collars, etc., are to be noticed in
various stages of manufacture.


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
The factory upstairs is divided into two rooms as
illustrated, the front portion being occupied by some
eight tradesmen engaged in the manufacture and re-
jjairing of harness of every description. The other
room is occupied by five busily engaged on saddle mak-
ing and repairing. The cutting out for all the depart-
ments is also done there.
At the rear of the premises is the collar factory,
which is a very modern, well-equipped one, constructed
•of iron, with a concrete floor. It was specially built
To give some idea of the extent of this firm’s opera-
tions, it might be mentioned that they supply custo-
mers in all parts of New South Wales, Queensland, and
Victoria, and it was only quite recently they sent a
consignment of goods to New Zealand. Every day
goods may be seen going to various places—Young,
Wyalong, Urana, Germanton, Ganmain, and interme-
diate stations.
The excellence and quality of their manufacture are
demonstrated by the confidence reposed in them by
1. A portion of the heavily stocked showroom. 2. Mr. Palazzi and seme of the employees in one of the
workrooms. 3. Another workroom for repairing work, etc. 4. The collar-making factory—this firm
dees an extremely extensive trade in collars. 5. Entrance to one of the showrooms. F. Harris, Photos
by the present firm for the purpose, making it possible
for them to cater properly and well for their excep-
tionally extensive collar trade. Collars are made there
for all classes of horses, and this firm pride them-
selves on the fact that, no matter how peculiarly shaped
a horse’s neck may be to fit. they undertake to do it
and invariably succeed.
The number of employees engaged is 18, and during
the busy time of the year it is generally found neces-
sary to augment the staff to 23 or 25, to cope with the
increased business.
their clients, many of whom have been customers ever
since the present firm commenced in business; also by
the diploma and bronze medal which was awarded
them at the Chicago Exhibition, and the silver medal
awarded at the Melbourne Exhibition. They have also
secured numerous first prizes at all the surrounding
shows. While the firm under review continue to cater
for the public in the creditable manner they have done
in the past, their present great connection is not only
sure to be sustained, but very considerably increased
each successive year.


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
TELEPHONE 82
P.O. BOX 41.
VICTORIA HOUSE. WAGGA
J. K. O'REILLY
The Noted Firm for Drapery, Clothing, Millinery and Boots
Mr. J. K. O’Reilly, his son, Mr. C. P. O’Reilly, and
employees of the firm.
A few facts concerning the progress of Mr. J. K.
O’Reilly’s present extensive business may be of in-
terest Seventeen years ago it was an unimportant
s’-op; to-day this concern is one of the largest and
strongest in provincial N.S.W. Its strength lies in
the fact that the proprietor and his son have
given their undivided attention to practically one
Yea—that was to clothe man, woman and child
d to foot. T 1 e commodious nature of the
: the really extraordinarily large stock car-
I). Mcßae, Photo
After a busy day at “O’Reilly’s,” delivering orders.
ried for a town Wagga’s size; the popularity of the
business and continual expansion, all definitely and
conclusively indicate how thoroughly and soundly
Mr. J. K. O’Reilly has treated the public. A large
staff of competent hands is employed serving out
the quality goods this firm have built their reputa-
tion upon. Several thousands of pounds’ worth of
stock are carried, and arrangements are so perfectly
made that “ O’Reilly’s ” can always be relied upon
for the latest styles and fashions.


Two Leading
Lines from
]
K. O’REILLY’S
Men’s
0
Ladies’
Suits to
Measure.
Ready-to-Wears.
Our %
gH
ALSO
Whal
we will be
%
r chit
Showing for the
£2/2/- \
A
/
J
u
Millinery
Coming Season.
s A.
sk.»k\\
X
1 \
Underclothing
%
ll
I
A Jin
N
G
m
Dress Goods
Hosiery
jnjm
&
P
a 1
\\
$>, \\
w V.
Novelties
m
1 L\f \
yhAt
Jtf.
t
Manchester
li
1
\fl /
; * ,.\
IU
•I l|
».
lc
*■ J
Sheetings
1 I
i m
0 V'
M
Mercery
If I
ImI
Pi
K
L
I
Juvenile Clothing
_
II
Jf /ir
I
J
Boots and Shoes
¥ J
ill I
r
|
General Draper
To Country Orders we give
SPECIAL A1TLN1 ION !
Box 4
j.
1.
K. O’REILLY, Wagga Wagga.
r cz-i ’Phone 82.


SL, ' ■ ’ v > - * v**
I
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
NEWTOWN TIMBER YARDS.
ESTABLISHED 1872
JOHN GRAY, Timber Merchant and Builder
BAYLIS STRE.LT, WAGGA.
Building Material of all kinds kept in stock. Galvanised Iron Tanks Made to Order
Baltic Lining a Speciality. Cheapest Place on Larth.
District Agent for the Caledonian Insurance Company—Established over 100 years.
Agent for Christisen s Baltic Timber—Direct from Scandinavia.
v
A
The name “John Gray” boldly outlined over a
large, expansive and progressive business would
stand out even if only for its simplicity. In fact
many would, no doubt, being aware that that busi-
nes was established in 1872, be inclined perhaps to
alter one of the vowels in the name to spell “ Grey.”
But that would only spell “ bad judgment,” for not
one commercial establishment in Wagga has pro-
gressed and kept ahead of the times greater than the
business under review. It is one of those large
concerns that assists in a very practical manner
to build a town and district up. Inasmuch as im-
proved innovations and patents have been consum-
mated from the brain of man, so has this firm
secured and adopted many of them. Nowadays, at
John Gray’s timber yards and galvanised iron tank
factory the public can inspect the frame of a resi-
dence being sawn and practically modelled. It is
then carted to the desired destination, and the resi-
dence can be occupied within a week or two. John
f
A
Gray possesses a first-class sawmilling plant, which
saves much expense to the man who desires a resi-
dence erected. Then a great and varied range of
timber is carried at the commodious timber yards,
which is sold to the citizen and district resident at
very reasonable rates, owing to direct importation.
The middleman’s profit is saved, and that is an im-
portant item.
A fair idea can be gained of the extensive support
accorded this establishment when it is mentioned
that on an average over 40 experienced tradesmen
are engaged on the various contracts, at the saw-
milling plant, and in the timber yards. Of course
during the busy time of the year a greater number
are employed. Mr. Gray has been the successful
contractor for many of Wagga’s most hand-
some and artistic private residences and modern
commercial and public buildings. Amongst scores
that could be mentioned is the recently erected
magnificent private residence for Mr. Frank Cop-
General View of John Gray’s Newtown Timber Yards, Wagga.


» ’■ v f - M
JOHN MYilW-aEDWL^SlJ
, H mm —
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
Illustrating the large and well-appointed factory, where an enormous
number of tanks are manufactured.
C. Blarney and Sanderson’s build-
land, Messrs
ings in Baylis-street, Newtown. Another important
branch of this business is the manufacture of gal-
vanised iron tanks, oat bins, cream cans, baths, etc.
Same are made promptly to order in any required
size, and if one thing stands out more prominently
than another it is the sound, solid and genuine
work that characterises the whole of John Gray's
manufactured goods. They can very definitely be
relied upon to be of the superior and durable quality
promised and expected. And another important
point that must not be lost sight of is the prices
quoted. Mr. Gray invites comparison with any
genuine quotation, either for timber, house and shop
building, and galvanised iron work. The motto that
has always been this firm’s is, “When T quote I
mean business.” That practically implies that John
Gray is determined to secure the contract if com-
mercially possible on a business basis. If requiring
alterations to your premises, a large tank, a mansion
built, consult John Gray. You will find him at once
sincere and earnest in endeavouring to meet your
requirements and desires in every reasonable way-
on a commercial and sound basis, which is prac-
tically the foundation of successful and lasting busG
ness relations between fellow-men.
Two distant views of John Gray’s Timber Yards, showing the Sawmills and a load of timber
leaving for the country.


C H.KINC BUTCHER. WCR* J ■'
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
C. H. KING’S Butchery Establishment
BAYLIS STREET (NEWTOWN). WAGGA
One of the Most Complete and Up-to-date Butchjry Premises in the Riverina
One of the principal butchering businesses in Wagga
is that which has been carried on so creditably, soundly
and on modern hygienic lines by Mr. C. H. King at
Baylis-street during the past thirteen years. As might
be expected from a man with Mr. King’s progressive
nature, his premises are up-to-date in every detail, and
there the public will always find the primest of meat
and the finest quality of small goods. Three years ago
the proprietor installed a refrigerating plant, and had
a cool chamber erected from his own design and ideas.
It is one of the simplest and yet most efficient the
compiler has so far inspected. To convey an idea of
the commodious nature of the chamber, it might be
mentioned that six bodies of beef and over forty sheep
can be hung at one time. And that is an important
factor in the success of the business under review,
because trade has increased through the quality and
tenderness of the meat supplied to the public. Mr.
King, who has now been connected w' f h Wagga and
district during the past forty years, is one of the most
progressive men of Newtown, and was elected presi-
dent of that enthusiastic body, the Newtown Progress
Association. Nowadays the proprietor spends most of
his time in outside affairs,, and the butchering business
during his absence is ably managed by his son. Orders
are called for, while the delivery is prompt.
A Corner of this Well-managed Business.


I v jj j* J '* *''' /
ffiipiiPP \.
f "Sbb.
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
Some Delightful Views of one of Wagga’s Most Charming Homes, the property of Mr. H. Oates
D. Mcßae, Photos
WM F fftllFY ! (D ' pop,ical
™ ll • Lj ' v»l/LLL I , College, Michigan),
Practical Watchmaker, Jeweller and Scientific Optician,
FJTZMAURICE ST (Near Lagoon Bridge), WAGGA. p
Watches, Clocks and Jewellery of Every Descrip- VY
tion stocked. All Work Guaranteed. fwi
Every Modern Optical Appliance. iTj
Orders by Post promptly Attended to. W
Sight Tested Free.
The jewellery, watch and clock repairing business (UJ
carried on by Mr. W E. Colley at Wagga is a most frh
successful one. An excellent range of first-class
jewellery is carried. The special features of this JJ\j\
establishment, however, are practical watch repair-
ing and optical work. Mr. Colley is both a thorough UL i
and exceptional tradesman, and an optician with vf 7
many years’ experience, gained in his connection kJJ
with such well-known firms at Messrs. Denny Bros., /q)
Newman’s (of Melbourne), and Swift and Co. (of
Brisbane). A most complete optician’s plant has AyA
been installed, and those suffering from defective kyj
eyesight can rely on reliable advice from Mr. Colley,
who also himself superintends the watchmaking and hA
repairing department of the establishment.
I
\w/


Jl » * <■; \ ' *]
| ( ... ____JL*
Bellairs
Commercial Hotel
(Under Vice-Regal Patronage)
Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga
’PHONE 13.
Centrally Situated. C.T.A. House.
Over 100 Rooms. Lighted Throughout.
Electric Fans in Diningroom, Bar, etc.
Well-appointed Billiard Room. First-
class Table. Nine Spacious, Well-lighted
Sample Rooms. Hot and Cold Water
Service. Eight Bathrooms. Modern
Sewerage System.
BELLAIR BROTHERS
Proprietors.
Probably not one hotel in provincial New South
Wales is more entitled to the hononr of being
classed amongst the best six commercial houses
than Bellair’s Hotel, Wagga, which has been con-
ducted so splendidly and creditably by the Messrs.
Bellair Bros, for many years. Even from the time
when their name first became associated with it a
sound reputation was gained for the exceptional
manner in which it was conducted. That was in
1885, when the late Thomas S. Bellair secured this
' property, which has remained in the hands of the
family ever since. With the gradual growth of
Wagga so did this hotel keep pace. From time to
time considerable improvements, alterations and
additions have been made for the convenience and
comfort of patrons.
A description of this noted commercial house
may be of interest to the public. Right in the heart
of Wagga, in the main commercial thoroughfare,
one finds a handsome modern three-storied brick
and cement faced structure. An interior view im-
presses one, especially on observing the handsome
costly cedar staircase recently completed, and the
commodious, exceptionally beautifully fitted up bars,
private and public. Even the latter is more artis-
tically designed and fitted up than many of the best
saloon bars in Melbourne or Sydney
A well ventilated and equipped billiard saloon
was noted, and some nine sample rooms, all large
and exceptionally well arranged with shelves and
other conveniences, including plenty of natural light
by day and artificial by night. Upstairs on the first
floor were found several drawing-rooms, private
sitting-rooms, and reading rooms, and a comfort-
able parlour for the sole use of Commercial Travel-
lers’ Association- members. All were most ele-
gantly furnished, with a distinct appeal to one’s
artistic taste. A well-toned piano is also provided
Tllustraticns of the Artistically Designed and Modern Well-appointed Bar at Bellair’s Hotel. f. Harris, Photos


—: — 1
JfBKtKKKf .■ f * \ « 'r?**** 1 *'
for guests. The bedrooms are without exception
beautifully clean, airy, neat and comfortably fur-
nished. The third story is used wholly for bed-
rooms. Several finely fitted up bathrooms have
been provided, and the lavatory accommodation is
perfect at this hotel.
Although the proprietors have been almost
continually building and improving their hotel,
yet they intend to still further extend, with
the ultimate objective of eventually making “ The
Commercial ” complete from an architectural stand-
point. And while the general excellence and man-
ner in which it is conducted has had much to do
with its success, yet the personality of the proprie-
tors, Messrs. Ernest and George Bellair, has also
been a strong link in that success. They are not
only ideal commercial men imbued with much kind-
ness of nature and forethought, but good progres-
sive citizens, who have always been amongst the
first to encourage and support in a practical man-
ner any object for the welfare of Wagga and dis-
trict.
1. A Splendid Illustration of an exceptionally well appointed Dining-room. ‘I. A Glimpse at the
Modern and Handsome Staircase recently completed. 3. The Arrival of Lord Chelmsford at the
private entrance to Bellair’s Hotel. The most notable people all make their headquarters at Bel-
lair’s. 4. A Corner of the artistically arranged Drawing-room. 5. View of the latest additions
to the Dining-room. 6. A Glimpse of the Rcsery. Mr. George Bellair is an enthusiastic horticul-
turist. 7. A Corner of the spacious Smoking-room. F. Harris, Photos


' ' ‘ i’ i
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
HOGAN & MAHON.
Brewers * ilto v
Aerated
Water
Cordial
Manufacturers
FEDERAL
BREWERY,
WAGGA
Telephone No. 42.
The recently completed Handsome
The present prosperous and important brewing
concern of Messrs. Hogan and Mahon is one of
Wagga’s earliest industries, having been established
by Messrs. Martin Treacy and Son in 1881. It was
then known as the Murrumbidgee Brewery. Since
it passed into the possession of Messrs. Hogan and
Mahon, some 15 years ago, it has been styled the
41 Federal Brewery.” And what a remarkable trans-
formation there has been in recent years, when
thousands of pounds have been spent in improve-
ments to machinery, equipment, etc., and in the
Additions to the Federal Brewery. A Harris, Photo
gradual extension of the buildings. During recent
years there has been a phenomenal expansion and
growth of trade—so much so that it has been found
absolutely necessary to considerably increase the
production plant. A handsome, modern brick struc-
ture has been recently erected for offices, store-
rooms, and the new aerated water and bottling plant.
The illustrations should enable the public to gain
an idea of the commodious nature of this industr}'.
The area occupied by the various buildings is now
over an acre. And, when one learns of such pro-
F. Harris, Photos
Loaded Waggons leaving the Federal Brewery, where the highest quality of Sparkling Ale is brewed.


' * SSL i iii i j r-r-«
BHL ■ I n ’ • I |gi
8| ' _gh» I p • - - ■BJ
*• •> gjiB flL-... «*. | ». * »> f '*>'
mm y . (^; I 1 '
H k :■ J
*** ; ’M
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
gress, he not unnaturally seeks for the reasons.
They will be found in the fact that a progressive
and liberal policy has been followed, and the quality
of the article is there, whether beer, aerated water,
or cordials. It is not only in Wagga, however, that
the Federal Brewery’s products are so popular; it
Aerated Water and Bottling Department.
is the same right throughout the Riverina, wherever
the trade extends. And when one actually analyses
the quality of sparkling ale brewed by this concern,
why should it not be equal to the best and better
than the most, because the purest of water only is
utilised, and the Federal Brewery use nothing else
but the finest quality of English and Australian
malt, and the highest grade Californian, Kent, and
Saaz hops? Compare the Wagga beer with many
breweries of the city, and you will find that it has
no equal for purity, clearness and flavour. One can
with the greatest safety indulge in many glasses of
Federal Brewery ale without feeling the slightest
effect —excepting the joy and gladness that an in-
vigorating drink brings to the tired, worried, or
happy man. With continued increase of business
the proprietors decided to cope with it thoroughly,
and they have now such a large and complete plant,
spacious cellars, and thorough equipment that Some
150 hogsheads (about 10,00 n gallons) per week of
ale can be manufactured. The capacity of the cellars
is 120 hogsheads. Messrs. Hogan and Mahon’s cor-
dials and aerated waters have become so popular,
and iiot only asked for, but demanded, that it was
decided to erect an up-to-date, commodious brick
structure. This factory, recently completed, has
been equipped with the most moderr plant obtain-
able. The machinery comprises a Hayward-Tyler
aerated water machine and Ferguson bottler, which
can manufacture 100 dozen water= per hour. A
Crown Seal filler has also been installed. The
bottles are simultaneously capped by machinery. A
powerful Gl h.p. Crossley gas engine supplies the
required motive power for the whole of the ma-
chinery. Another feature well worthy of mention
is the “ Federal ” bottled ale, which can always be
relied upon to be of the first grade quality, and ex-
cellent as an appetising tonic. Hundreds of dozen
are kept in the cellars to mature, and thus, when
despatched to order, can be guaranteed to be “ full
of life.” rich and creamy. A trial of “ Federal ”
bottled ale can be strongly recommended. Since
the demise of Mr. Hogan, the sole proprietor is Mr.
Mahon, who is one of Wagga’s most prominent citi-
zens—prominent in everything that has its objective
for the commercial, social and public welfare of the
town and district his interests are in. He is assisted
bj’ a large and thorough staff of tradesmen in the
various departments. The high
standard of article the “ Fede-
ral ” is manufacturing and plac-
ing before the public fully en-
titles them to the continued
wide and solid support accord-
ed. In articles such as ale,
waters and cordials it is very
necessary, for public health rea-
sons, that they should be abso-
lutely pure, and the name of
Hogan and Mahon on same is a
sound, solid guarantee in every
respect.
A view of one of the commo-
dious cellars at the Federal
Brewery.


I mm ■
■ n |i iiiillailt “JPliPl | «■ f ]
I ■ '
w • ■ •
Ipi? -
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
Appointment to His Excellency Sir Harry Rawson
WALTER
McKELNZIL,
House Decorator,
Signwriter, Picture Framer,
Upholsterer
FURNITURE REPAIRED
BA YU 5 STREET, WAGGA.
Telephone 159.
An immense assortment of wallpapers to select
from, combining the richest shades with most beau-
tiful designs.
Walter McKenzie's House of Decoration appeals
to these with an artistic eye in search of something
exceptional and but rarely found in provincial New
South Wales.
His special and one great effort has been directed
to gradually inducing the community to have high-
class decorative work carried out in their homes.
Large staff of competent tradesmen employed.
Designs and estimates submitted promptly. All
work personally supervised by the proprietor.
Expert artists only are employed in the sign-
writing branch, in which a great reputation has
been gained.
The Artistically Designed Showroom, Baylis Street,
Wagga.
For many years past in country towns, not only
in New South Wales, but throughout Australia, it
has been very noticeable that the inhabitants were
quite satisfied with the most ancient and unromantic
class of decorative work in their homes; not, prob-
ably, because the large majority were unable to
appreciate artistic and beautiful work that would
make those homes a greater pleasure and comfort
to them, but simply because no business man ever
arrived to bring before them samples illustrative of
the improvements in wallpapers and decorative
work in recent years. But Wagga is more fortunate
in this respect than most other provincial towns,
inasmuch that since the arrival of Mr. Walter
McKenzie, who had previously been for a consider-
able time connected with the commercial life of
Sydney, where his lengthy and practical association
with the decorative business enabled him to thor-
oughly and capably superintend his extensive trade
in the Riverina. And when Mr. McKenzie com-
menced in Wagga's commercial life he found some
difficulty in raising the tone of decorative and artis-


f r " j[l RHHHHF * gHHa
HE.. I <&£— .... rr,;, :, ■■■--■■■
y ' 'K. H
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
Mr. McKenzie’s Staff c£ Signwiiting and Decorating Artists at work
in the spacious Studio.
tic work, simply on account of the community being Everyone knows that the brighter and happier the
so used to the very commonplace and ordinary home the more one is attached to it. and no pro-
decorations that were no doubt excellent and up- gressive business man fails to recognise t eva ue
to-date thirty years ago, but not so in 1914. The
fact that Wagga residents have been waiting for
an energetic business man who would cater for
them on modern ideas as far as decorative work
of an artistic and modern business sign. As an
instance—and a good illustration too —of the class
of work carried out by Mr. McKenzie’s signwriting
staff is that over Mr. Mark Mougan’s tobacconist
and hairdressing saloon. It is rather a small though
- .11 , , , , r cIIIU lidll Ul CSSiug aauiun. i l is lamvi ci suiau unwugn
was concerned naturally assisted Mr McKenzie wonderfully popular establishment, but the sign
considerably. Since his advent one will find some
of the most artistically papered and decorated
homes, also striking “business getting” signs on
the commercial houses, equal to those of any city.
Mr. McKenzie and Family on the Lawn at their
comfortable private residence, Wagga.
stands out so vividly and the colours are so artisti-
cally and brightly blended that no one can pass
along the principal thoroughfare without observing
and studying it. A good sign is a sure index of the
progressive nature of that business man. When the
compiler observes that certain commercial men are
too negligent to even put a sign up and renovate
same he rarely calls on that business. It is gene-
rally waste of time. Work entrusted to Mr.
McKenzie will be carried out expeditiously, and
the public have found conscientiously, and at a
fair price.
At his establishment in Baylis-street a large stock
of high-class wallpapers is carried. Picture fram-
ing is carried out at the factory, where furniture
repairing and upholstering are also executed on a
'big scale A large staff of competent tradesmen are
employed in the several departments and on the
various contracts which are secured in every part
of the Riverina. For high-class work there is no
doubt the business under review excels, and those
requiring to repaper, redecorate artistically, and at
the same time at a reasonable figure, should con-
sult Mr. McKenzie, who is glad to give estimates
and submit samples of the proposed work. He pos-
sesses not only the artistic temperament, but also
the practical experience, extending over many years,
so that his advice will be found well worthy of
appreciation.


’ BAYLIS STREET (Newtown), WAGGA.
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
THE NEWTOWN MOTOR HIRE CO
Large Variety of Motor Tyres and Accessories Stocked
TELEPHONE NO. 328.
Repairs Expeditiously carried out by our First-class Mechanics are a Special Feature,
Sound Material of the Highest Grade and Reliable Workmanship is fully Guaranteed
by us.
The Spacious Modern Newtown Motor Hire Co.’s Garage.
We carry Full Stocks of Benzine, Oils and all Motor Car Accessories obtainable
at City Prices.
Our Cars are at your disposal from 7 a.m. till 11 p.m.
As our title indicates Hiring is a Special Feature.
Reliable Speedy Cars and Reliable Experienced Chauffeurs.


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
During recent years no trade probably has deve-*
loped so rapidly, not only in Australia, but through-'
out the world, as the motor car business. Pros-
perous, energetic progressive firms have come
forward into the limelight of the commercial world
all within a brief period. And one of those meteoric
firms is the one now under review. It seems but
a short time ago since the Newtown Motor Hire
Co. became established in Wagga. They commenced
well, and are at the present time continuing to make
rapid expansion in the purchase of more cars of the
latest type, installing the latest machines to enable
and ease, so great is the space. The workshops are?
at the rear, and the machinery comprises every up r
to-date appliance necessary in an important concern
like the one under review. Mr. Sanders, who per-
sonally supervises the business, is a thoroughly prac-
tical mechanic himself, and on his staff will be found
workmen equal to the best in the Commonwealth.
Cars for hiring purposes are kept in the best of
condition to ensure safe and speedy running.
The Newtown Motor Hire Co. are never afraid of a
breakdown, even on the toughest of journeys, for
their chauffeurs are all practical men, who can soon
1. View showing portion of the modern motor car repairing machinery in one of the workshops.
2. Illustrating the commodious nature of the Newtown Motor Hire Co.ls Garage, showing office and
entrance to the
them to carry out the increasing repair and over- 1
haul work which is rushing in. The Newtown*
Motor Hire Co. is nowadays a name only. It com-*
menced as a company, but Mr. A. G. Sanders is l
now the sole proprietor, he having purchased the*
other members’ of the company’s shares. No better,
more convenient and central site for a motor garage*
could have been decided upon, it being right in the'
centre of the main thoroughfare in Baylis-street.
The garage is a spacious modern brick structure, spe-
cially designed for the purpose it is now utilised for.
Some 20 cars can be garaged at one time with safety
workshops.
F. Harris, Photos
put anything out of gear in again, and off again-
without delay. Also spare tyres are carried as a
precaution against accident. The fact that this busi-
ness has grown so rapidly op a solid basis reflects
the greatest credit on Mr. A. G. Sanders, who has*
worked exceptionally hard to secure the high posi-
tion he holds to-day in the commercial world of
the Riverina. His maxim has always been to study
the interests of the client in every detail, and never
find anything too much trouble; also to at all times,
and in all contracts, charge reasonable and fair
prices.
THE NEWTOWN MOTOR HIRE CO.
... FOR ...
All Kinds of Oils and Motor Car Accessories. Cars Washed, Overhauled and
Repaired Promptly at Moderate Prices.


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
W. W. WATSON,
National Motor and Cycle Works,
Bay lis Street, Wagga
Catalogues Forwarded on Application. Correspondence Promptly Attended to,
A SPLCIAL FEATURE.
NATIONAL MOTOR CYCLES,
fitted with PRECISION ENGINES,
are recognised throughout the world
as the most reliable, comfortable
and durable machines obtainable.
Every National Motor Cycle in use
in the Riverina is giving the greatest
satisfaction.
CALL AND INSPECT THESE
MACHINES.
Mr. W. W. Watson and a portion of the National Motor Cycle Co.’s Exhibition Stand at the M.P
and A, Association’s Show, Wagga. D. Mcßae, Photos
The reopening of Mr. W. W. Watson’s motor
and cycle establishment in Baylis-street (Newtown),
Wagga, will no doubt be welcomed from many
standpoints, and the record of business should at
once again be maintained. The business is still
being carried on in Baylis-street, Wagga, in the
same spot where the recent disastrous fire occurred.
The cycle factory has been entirely renovated and
improved, while many structural alterations have
been made, which will enable Mr. Watson to show
his large stock of National motors and cycles to
the greatest advantage. Mr. Watson, in addition to
being a first-class mechanic himself, has secured
a staff of competent workmen, so that the public
can rely on motor and cycle work entrusted to this
firm being carried out thoroughly and in an expert
manner. A special feature is the National motor
cycles, which are fitted with Precision engines, pro-
bably the most reliable and noted engine in the
world. On the Brooklands track—the one of such
renown —it has proved the conqueror over all
others. The new premises, at the corner of Baylis
and Tomson streets, are now splendidly equipped
with a great range of sundries, various motor oils,
tyres, etc. Any member of the community could
not do better than visit this establishment and in-
spect the National cycles and L.M.C., Peerless and
National motor cycles before buying elsewhere. A
full guarantee is given, and a satisfactory trial.
Catalogues are forwarded on application, and cor-
respondence promptly attended to.


r * '' V % *
I „ ■ hSy S? \ti ij Ipty
i
■ ■
. a- ■ '
- I I
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
ILLIAM W. WATSON’S
National Motor and Cycle Works,
Three Famous Makes of Motor
Cycles obtainable at Watson’s;
L.M.C., PEERLESS
and the
NATIONAL MOTOR CYCLE
(fitted with the world-renowned
Precision Engine).
The above are obtainable on
Cash or Easy Terms.
Repairing Department in
charge of a mechanical expert.
The National Motor and
Cycle Works will now be found
the most up-to-date in the Rive-
rina.
Inspection invited.
Now Renovated and brought
Up-to-Date with the most Mo-
dern Improvements,
Corner
Baylis and Tompson
Streets
(Newtown), WAGGA.
A new complete Stock of Motor
Cycles, Cycles and Sundries.
D. Mcßae, Photos
Mr. W. W. Watson, on his Natio lal motor cycle, fitted with a Pre-
cision engine. This machine was photographed after completing
2000 miles over rough Riverina roads without taking the engine
down and minus a single mechanical stoppage.
National Cycles are very popular in Wagga and District,


m-'z .
in -— 1 |,, " n
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
T. DOBNEY & CO
Wholesale and Retail Drapers, Grocers, Ironmongers,
and Furniture Warehousemen.
Established 15 Years.
FITZMAURICE STREET. WAGGA WAGGA
D. Mcßae, Photo
“ The Commercial House,” that has always held
its own well for quality, quantity and price.
It is often said that a commercial traveller, some-
times styled “ the man on the roads,” makes an
excellent business man when he does settle down,
and in the case of Messrs. Dobney and Co. it has
proved only too true. The principal of this flour-
ishing, solid concern had 23 years’ experience as a
traveller prior to settling in Wagga, when he
purchased the stock, now some 15 years ago, from
Mr. A. P. Thomson. Mr. Dobney soon disposed of
that stock and purchased a new one, confining his
attention solely to drapery. However, with the
arrival of new settlers and the opening up of the
Wagga district Mr. Dobney gradually extended his
sphere of operations, and the various departments
that a first-class country store should have were
incorporated in the business. Then, with the pro-
gressive spirit animating this firm, a still further
expansion was made some six or seven years ago
by the opening, on a large scale, of a furniture
emporium, which carries a splendid stock of every
class of furniture; and probably there are few
homes in the Wagga district at the present time
that are not being adorned by furniture from Dob-
ney and Co. dhey judiciously pushed this depart-
ment forward, and have reaped the advantage. It
appears to have been merely a question of the
public finding out the value of and the compre-
hensive nature of the stock to make a certain suc-
cess of this department, which is perhaps nowadays
the leading feature at Dobney and Co.’s. This
firm’s establishment is probably the most deceptive
in Wagga, inasmuch that, although the exterior
is a good bold one, yet no one could possibly have
even a vaguely correct idea of the commodious


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
nature of the interior and the huge stock that is
carried. To any reader of this article the compiler
invites his or her inspection; they will be pleasantly
surprised. It must not be supposed, though, that
Dobney and Co. do not cater for the community
on a large and liberal scale. They do, and carry
a very fine high-grade and well-assorted stock of
drapery, groceries, crockery ware, ironmongery, and
every requisite for the home and farm. This firm
don’t make a great fuss about “we indent,” “ we
import largely,” etc. They just get the right kind
The staff have been with the firm many years, and
their noticeable unostentatious courtesy must be an.
asset to this business. The drapery is in charge of
Mr. A. H. Greenfield, an old and respected resident
of Wagga. Only recently spacious bulk stores have
been erected, with a specially designed platform,,
which -facilitates greatly the,loading and unloading
of goods. Mr. Dobney, the head of the firm, is one
of the most straight dealing business men one could
wish to meet. He has gained the esteem of the
community, both commercially and as a good citi-
1. A distant street view of Dobney and Co.’s Pre
mises.
2 and 3. The Grocery Departments
of stock, and get the trade too. They can sell any
article as cheap as any firm in the Riverina. If
they did not their trade would soon fall away. But
it doesn't; it not only maintains old customers, but is
continually breaking ground with new ones. The
trade, though, is not only limited to Wagga and
district; it extends further afield—as far as Coota-
mundra, Coolamon, Henty, Lockhart, and other
Riverina towns.
4. The Drapery Department,
D.. Mcßae
Photos
5 The Furniture Department
zen. Amongst the public positions occupied with
credit might be mentioned Mayor during two con-
secutive years, and alderman of the Wagga muni-
cipality during the past nine years. Mr. Dobney
is also a Justice of the Peace and Returning Officer
for the Wagga State electorate. He is vice-president
of the hospital, and in fact is identified with prac-
tically every public and social movement where the
welfare and progress of Wagga are concerned.


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
AIR’S
Horse Bazaar and Produce Mart,
Baylis Street, W'agga
’Phone 301.
STOCK AND GENERAL SALESMAN
An interesting view, taken at Blair’s Horse Bazaar, of several valuable stud horses, notably Mr. Blair’s
pure-bred Suffolk Punch stallion, Neotsfield Quartermaster. He is descended from one of the old
imported mares of the Neotsfield stud, and, like all the family, is staunch, a steady worker and quiet
to handle. He has proved a sure foal-getter, and his stock are very promising. He has also proved
successful in the show ring. The trotter, Pride of Wilks, by Black Wilks, is also shown, and the
blood stallion Royal Irish (by Vengance—Elsie), Bonnie Carmichael (draught stallion), and Malebo
(14.1, by Gabian). The above are the property of Mr. C. E. Boswell. D. Mcßae, Photo
Auction Sales of Farm Produce, Furniture, etc., every Saturday, at 2.30.
Clearing Sales conducted tFirougFiout tFie Riverina.
Some 40 well ventilated and modern Loose Boxes. Farmers’ horses can be
stalled.


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
BLAIR’S Horse Bazaar and
Auction Mart
The extensive business carried on by Mr. J. Blair
at Baylis-street (Newtown), Wagga, has now been
established some two years, during which period
considerable progress has been made, both struc-
turally and from a business standpoint. Blair’s
Horse Bazaar covers an area of nearly an acre. In
fact, so spacious is the building (135 feet in length
are well patronised by both sellers and buycis..
Clearing sales are carried out according to arrange-
ments throughout the Riverina. The proprietor’s
special feature is stock and general salesman. He
possesses a wide experience in the former, particu-
larly horses, and is the owner of some first-class
animals.
Illustrating the great length and commodious nature of Blair’s Bazaar, Baylis-street (Newtown),
Wagga.
by 68 feet width) that it probably nearly approaches
the area of Kirk’s Bazaar, Melbourne, Stalls for
40 horses have been erected on the best improved
and most modern style. The first impression one
gathers on viewing this bazaar is its resemblance
to one of the principal racing stables of the Com-
monwealth. The produce and general auction mart,
where sales are held every Saturday afternoon, is
altogether separate from the horse bazaar.
Gradually and solidly Mr. Blair has worked up
his connection so well that produce sales held there
The bazaar where both buyers and sellers are
assured of satisfaction.
Blair’s Bazaar and Auction Mart is noted for the
quantity and quality of goods offered at auction.
Brisk bidding. Farmers are invited to send in their
farm produce for sale.
Remember the population of Newtown is now
some 4000, and a big percentage attend Blair’s
Bazaar and Auction Mart, so farm produce always
is in ready demand, and brings good prices to the
producer.
BAY LIS STREET, WAGGA.


HBfc • •j«bb*^ w * r wjpp» ife jf S
J i / i| \ *jS.
>v^;,/;’.• £J
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
1. A view of the Homestead at Big Springs. 2.
view of the Lake, showing side of the New Swimmin
the estate. 7. A very pretty view of the well laid out
9. Mr. G. Paterson Wilson, junr. 10. A view of the
The Duck Pond. 3. Mr. G. P. Wilson. 4. A
r Baths. 5. The Stables. 6. A flock of sheep on
Garden. 8. A corner of the Drawing-room.
Dog’s Kennel now in course of construction.
il. A view of O’Brien’s Creek, running through the estate. 12. The Homestead. Big Springs


ft >>a ifljsSife I “
* - *•* ,^^^^lm^ m^ammmm ~ Jr
» • > - "I IK. ■ w .. : ;••
tuns;
“BIG SPRINGS” ESTATE..
The Property of Mr. G. P. WI
SON, Wagga Wagga, N.S.W.
1. A splendid view cf “Big Springs” Homestead and Mr. Ncrma n Wilson’s residence, across the
large artificial lake, some 8 acres area, over 8 feet deep in parts. This lake was filled from the
natural springs. The new modern, beautifully and artistically equipped and decorated bath in ro-
tunda shape is shown. 2. Distant view of the homestead. 3. An illustration typical of the
splendid class of sheep on Big Springs Estate. 4. Mr. Anthony Brunskill’s harvesters at work
on Mr. G. P. Wilson’s estate (half-share system). 5. A typical view illustrative of the suitability
of portion of Big Springs Estate for wheatgrowing. D. Mcßae, Photos
“ Big Springs ” Estate, appropriately named on
account of the many fine springs that are found
on the estate giving a constant stream of beautiful
clear water, highly mineralised, is situated some 19
miles north-west from Wagga. This estate com-
prises some 25,000 acres of land, and has been con-
siderably improved since Mr. G. P. Wilson became
proprietor in 1886. Some 35,000 sheep on an ave-
rage are carried, approximately the present sheep
capacity of the indigenous grasses being li
to the acre. During recent years though the pro-
prietor has gone in extensively for wheat growing,
principally on the share system. The yields from
“ Big Springs ” have proved highly satisfactory.
When Mr. Wilson took over this fertile estate 28
years ago the produce raised was but 20 tons; to-day
proba.bly some 15,000 tons of produce is obtained.
The homestead is delightfully situated, with the
most perfect and beautiful surroundings possible.
Modern improvements have been carried out every-
where on the estate, clearly and unmistakably illus-
trating the progressive, artistic and liberal nature
of Mr. G. P. Wilson, who is prominently identified
with the progress of Wagga and district and its
many institutions. He has occupied the position of
president of the M.P. and A. Association with dig-
nity and distinct credit. He is senior magistrate of
the Wagga district, and takes a keen interest in the
Wagga Picnic Racing Club and the Wagga Bowling
Club, which he has liberally supported. Mr. G. P.
Wilson is also president of the St. Kilda Bowling
Club.


•
wfyS
id
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
The Wagga Wagga Brewery and Aerated Water Manufactory.
H. S. HEADLEY.
Brewer, Maltster, Aerated Water and Cordial Manufacturer, Wine and Spirit Merchant,
JOHNSTON STREET, ■ WAGGA WAGGA.
A busy day at the Wagga Wagga Brewery. The ('Mr. H. S. Headley) will be noticed in the
foreground driving his Ford car. D. Mcßae, rhotos
Tt is seldom one finds an important, thriving, and
tnoroughly progressive brewing industry in a pro-
vincial centre of Australia. There have been many
in years gone by that, like hundreds of flour mills,
have become defunct, not through the quality of
the article manufactured, but through the lack of
support accorded same. Years ago it was more
apparent than nowadays that Australians gave their
own goods no opportunity to gradually improve in
quality, for the simple reason that anything imported
was preferred to that made by their own country-
men. And, to contrast the simile, it was exactly
the same where local industries were concerned.
They withered through lack of support that should
have been accorded them to the advantage of big
city concerns. But, if one thing stands out more
predominant in Wagga than another, it is the
loyalty to themselves, inasmuch that an endeavour
is made to keep the trade in the town and district,
to everyone’s ‘mutual advantage. As an instance,
the firm now under review employ some 40. hands,
which yearly means a considerable wages’ sheet m
the aggregate; and the Wagga Brewery employees
circulate their money in their own town. That is
but one aspect of the value of a local industry.
Bendigo, Ballarat, St. Arnaud, Albury, Wodonga,
and thousands of other towns have gone back—
some quickly, others slowly; many are quite
dead—because have no industries. And
Headley’s Brewery is one of Wagga's most
progressive and pulsating of several in Wagga.
It lingered in the early days, when an
infant, 50' years ago; but since the day Mr. H. S.
Headley took over the reins of administration the
record has been one of steady, solid progress, on
liberal and businesslike lines. The Wagga Brewery
is situated in Johnston-street, and the various de-
partments cover an area of over an acre, so exten-
sive are they. The machinery is of the latest pat-
tern, and every modern device possible has been
installed to assure the finest product being manu-
factured. To convey an idea of the output from
this industry, it might be mentioned that some
1500 gallons per day of ale can be manufactured’
if required. But this firm arrange their business
so systematically that huge quantities are always
on hand, maturing in their commodious, cool cellars.
The same system is followed with the bottled ale,.


jHHHV H ■MHM <nMk
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
and the fact of not rushing the article straight out
for consumption by the public is one of the strongest
factors in the popularity of Headley’s Sparkling Ale.
Only the highest grade malt is used—Australian and
English—while large quantities of Kent, Bohemian,
Tasmanian and Californian hops are used solely.
The proprietor is a firm believer in obtaining the
best quality of ingredients, knowing full well that
that has been one of the principal reasons he com-
mands such a wonderfully extensive and sound con-
nection. But there is also another point that must
be mentioned. Allowing that the finest ingredients
are used solely, and that there is an ample supply of
is a distinctly high-grade brandy, and it has rapidly-
proved itself and become a great favourite with
the Community. It is well worth a trial by anyone
requiring a high-class brandy for medicinal or other
purposes. There is a great demand for Headley’s-
aerated waters, cordials, hop beer, etc. Great as
the demand is, yet the modern plant is well able
to cope with same. Crown seal and capping
machines have been installed, and practically the
whole of their aerated waters are despatched in
this up-to-date style of : capped bottle. The pro-
prietor, Mr. H. S. Headley, who has recently re-
turned from Great Britain and the Continent, is
Another view of that important industry—the Wagga Wagga Brewery. Two views illustrating the
spaciousness of the cellars. The aerated water and cordial factory, and portion of the scouring and
cooperage department, J. Mcßae, Photos
beautiful, clear, pure water to draw on, yet a great
deal rests with the chief brewer; and kudos must
be extended to Mr. August Trudge, who has now
been connected with the brewery some 10 years.
Mr. Ludge has had considerable experience with
several of the principal breweries in various States
of the Commonwealth.
The Wagga Brewery also supplies every brand
of soirits, cigarettes, cigars, etc., arid have placed
on the market an excellent whisky, mellow, and yet
delightfully rich and palatable, known as “ Head-
ley’s F.A.H.” They are also district agents for
Marie Brizzard brandy and liqueurs. The former
one of Wagga’s foremost and most progressive men,
For years past there is probably not one public,
social and progressive movement that he has not
been actively connected with. He is a citizen
Wagga is proud of, and a citizen who is proud of
Wagga. To such men of his force of character
and energy, mingled with that of other citizens of
similar qualities, can be traced the expansion, pro-
minence and progress o'f many other towns besides
Wagga. In the management of this industry Mr.
lieadlev is assisted by his sons, Messrs. H. S. and
E. A. Headley,' and Mr..A. J. Kenneally, who is the
accountant. . T *’


■
« ,
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
THE PASTORAL HOTEL
f ;T U f
Fitzmaufice Street, :: :: Wagga.
•• -- ■ —--<5) MARTIN WENKE, Proprietor, -=CS)(Q^
Noted for the splendid manner the Farming Community and Travelling Public are catered for,
Every Modern Improvement.
A Hostel that combines comfort with convenience
The “Pastoral” Menu and Tables are a special feature.
Spacious wide balcony.
Be£t of Wines and Spirits.
Centrally situated
Motor Cars obtainable at the Pastoral Motor Garage.
Telegrams, etc., promptly attended to.
Delightfully airy, cool bedrooms
Recently Entirely Renovated Throughout. -^3^


.. ■’ % a Jib i S
* m,' W iHlffittiwniA m jr f,y«ji .
' '*** ' |* j ~' ■
•- Igflql £|JhJ[ :£Sg£mj&
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
The reputation of the Pastoral Hotel, Fitzmaurice-
street. has always-been a high one, and since Mr.
Martin Wenke, one of Melbourne’s well-known
Bonifaces, purchased the property at a high figure,
he has well maintained that reputation. The Pas-
toral, although a great favourite with the farming
and squatting community, is not altogether appro-
priately named, as it caters for everyone, being a
popular meeting house amongst both sporting and
commercial men, so that "I he Pastoral can be
termed a versatile house, where everyone speedily
appreciates the excellent manner in which he is
received and treated in every respect. This hostel
is a two-storeyed structure, situated right in the
ever, well worthy of mention above all others, and!
that is the exceptionally excellent manner in which
the domestic duties are arranged and supervised by
Miss Wenke, particularly the culinary department.
The menu is not only well thought out, but cleverly
arranged, and the patron has little choice dishes-
placed in front of him, so different and diverting to-
the very orthodox menu brought to him at quite-
ninety per cent, of the houses of accommodation.
The fact that the Pastoral is different to the majo-
rity of hotels is one of the principal reasons it has
such a sound reputation as a commercial house. No-
one leaves there without feeling he has been
made not only conifciLable, but welcome, and:
1. A Corner of the Diningroom. 2. One of the
and Well-equipped Bar. 5V The Dining-room at
heart of Wagga’s commercial activity, convenient
to post office, law courts, banks, etc. The appoint-
ments are excellent in every respect, and patrons
appreciate the comfort of the various parlours, sit-
ting-rooms, and large circular bar. Motor cars are
obtainable at the Pastoral garage. During the hot
months the exceptionally wide balcony can be ap-
preciated, and many of Mr. Wenke’s patrons are
enabled to sleep outdoors in mosquito-proof mov-
able cabinets, provided for their convenience and
appreciation, no doubt. There is one thing, how-
Entrance Halls. 3 and 4. Views of the Modern
this Hotel is always delightfully cool and well
D. Mcßae, Photos
treated in the fullest possible meaning of the word.
So, while Mr. Martin Wenke, who has already
proved himself one of Wagga’s most liberal and
popular citizens, is engaged in the general super-
vision of this popular establishment, his sister, Miss
Wenke, is equally doing her share in managing the
domestic and culinary duties so thoroughly and
capably, knowing patrons are leaving happy and
soon return again—with others. And thus the popu-
larity of the Pastoral continues an illustration of
the value of liberality and good management.
arranged, in every detail.


THE PROGRESS OF-WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
WATTLE VALE ESTATE.
The Stud Farm of the Riverma
THE HOME OF THE THOROUGHBRED.
PROPERTY OF MR. J. J. McGRATH.
Wattle' Vale Stud Farm, the property of Mr. J.
J. McGrath, comprises some 1400 acres of beautiful,
rich, picturesque, and gently undulating country,
situate some two miles from Wagga, very much ad-
mired by travellers on the Jjunee road and visitors
to the Government Experiment Farm. This estate
embraces both ‘undulating and Murrumbidgee river
flats country, very rich in natural grasses, and some
300 acres of lucerne is grown, which is utilised in
keeping brood mares and young stock in first-class
condition during the dry months. This property
has been in Mr. McGrath's hands some 28 years,
and during that period has been improved and de-
veloped so systematically and thoroughly that to-
day it ranks amongst the best, most complete and
modern stud estates devoted to the breeding of
blood horses and Jersey cattle in the State dj New
South Wales. Mr. McGrath is the well and widely
known judge of horses whose services are so fre-
quently sought by the principal A. and I*. Societies
of Australia and New Zealand. He is an enthusiast
in the breeding and improvement of blood horses,
and a conversation is always pleasurable and inte-
resting when devoted to his favourite—the horse.
Being an Australian of the third generation, and for
years a member of the Ist Cavalry Regiment of
New South Wales, he has - naturally a thorough
knowledge of the stamp of troop horse required,
and realises that under our system of compulsory
training we should have 240,000 trained men ready
for service within ten years. Unfortunately there
is a possibility that the horses to mount them may
not be obtainable.
Australians have so far enjoyed perfect freedom
and immunity from war that its people have lost
sight of the fact that its magnificent heritage may
some day have to be defended. Should that evil
day arrive, we would all desire to see our sons
properly equipped and efficiently horsed; and this
can only be done by taking up the question of
light horse breeding with vigour.
In order to give 'this view practical effect Mr.
McGrath has adopted the plan of allowing a certain
number of half-bred mares to his horses at a mode-
rate fee, as he recognises only too well the value
of the blood horse in the production of troop horses.
I f other stud masters would Only do likewise the
result must be a great and much needed improve-
ment in the light horses produced in the Common-
wealth. We have numerous breeders of draught
horses, and the vast improvement apparent during
recent years is striking proof of what may be done
when enthusiasm is put into the work.
The proprietor is now ably assisted by his two
sons, Ernest and Rixon, who, like their father, are
lovers of the horse, and adopt the same humane
methods, which assure willing servants and not
vicious slaves. The dominant note in handling the
horse is kindness. No animal responds more will-
ingly than a well-bred horse.
The several paddocks at Wattle Vale are all
cleared, excepting trees for shade and shelter. Acci-
dents are but rare, and the system of water supply
in each paddock, with windmills.and small overflow
dams, ensures a plentiful supply of beautiful fresh,
clear water, without dangerous banks or lagoons
for foals to gallop into.
For many years pAst some excellent animals have
been reared at Wattle Vale^—horses that have won
great distinction in Australia and India. The prac-
tice followed of closely culling the mares, which
number about 40, ensures a steady improvement
each succeeding year. The Jersey stock at this stud
are cattle descended from the herd of the late Hon.
James White, of Kirkham. The principal prizes at
the Murrumbidgee P. and A. Association and other
Riverina shows are invariably won by stock bred
at Wattle Vale. Mr. McGrath is nowadays ably
assisted by his sons, Messrs. Ernest and Rixon,
who practically superintend the work at this estate.
They are naturally proud of their surroundings, and
are imbued, like their parents, with a progressive
and humanitarian spirit. Wattle Vale stud is likely
to continue to progress, expand and still further
improve, to the great advantage of Wagga and
district.


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
ATTLE VALE ES I ATE
PROPERTY OF MR. J. J. McGRATH.
1. Mr. J. J. McGrath, family, and friends at his
modern town residence, “ Athalie,” Kincaid-street,
Wagga. 2. A number of well-bred brood mares with
foals in one of Wattle Vale’s rich grass paddocks.
3. At the daily muster. As there are about 200 brood
mares during the season, they are mustered and
carefully inspected daily. Mr. McGrath and his sons
recognise thoroughly the need for great and con-
stant watchfulness and care where brood mares and
foals are concerned. 4. A typical view of Wattle
Vale (in the distance), now the home of Mr. J. J.
Mctlrath’s sons, Messrs. Ernest and Rixon
McGrath. 5. A group of blood mares with foals at
one of the large dams. 6. The successful stallion,
"“Little Toy’’ (in the foreground), a symmetrical,
I). Mcltae, Photos
well proportioned, and speedy son of Positano
(imp.), from Bangle (imp.). Little Toy was a first-
class racehorse, winning a large aggregate in stakes.
His young stock have shown that they possess the
speed, grit, symmetry, and courage of their sire, and
are commanding high prices. 7. Two of the stallions
in use this season. Roycroft, in the foreground, is
a handsome dark brown horse of splendid and per-
fect proportions—a true son of Grafton (imp.) and
Etra-Weenie. This stallion is bound to still further
improve the breed of horses in the Riverina. In
the background .Kyeadgerie, the son of defunct
Sir Foote (imp.) and Witchery, will be noticed. He
proved himself a sterling racehorse, though some-
what unlucky. He is stoutly bred,,and his success
at the Wattle Vale stud is assured.


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
F. J. MALONEY,
Men’s Complete Outfitter
and Tailor
Footwear, Hats, Shirts, Ready-Made Clothing, etc.
Maloneys Corner. FITZMAURICE
ST.
AGGA.
Before the advent of Mr. F. J. Maloney in 1910
no firm then specialised in men’s wear on thoroughly
modern lines. Being a keen, progressive business man,
he saw his opportunity, secured one of the best busi-
ness positions in the town, at the corner of Gurwood
and Fitzmaurice streets (more popularly known as
“Maloney’s corner”), and established a business solely
confined to men’s wear. That that business was des-
tined to grow to the importance it has to-day no one
would have forecasted. And it was not by any means
the popularity of the proprietor solely that success
came along; it lay more through the sound and Credit-
able manner in which he catered for the public irr
every detail. While Mr. Maloney stocks the most
fashionable of hats (John B. Stetson’s renowned
American make, Woodrow’s, Borselino. Christie’s and
Tress and Co.’s), English, American and Australian
boots and shoes, the latest patterns in shirts and ties,
the newest ideas in collars, etc., mostly direct from
the noted manufacturers, Welsh, Margetson and Co.,
a splendid range of pyjamas, Jaeger’s underwear and
other leading makes, he also caters for the public on
a comprehensive scale in men’s wear suitable
for the shearing shed, the harvest field—in fact, every-


- ** JjlP . ° i JK JSBg| f-^®
I * it W&m & 8 yW 5HJ*k .ja *®i
is i\K«uttm« «%»* -■" •" / ’.«i,*>w JSSUnt, 1
jBffi 73%* l| I }> . ff y . f f
IP jj*. ’ * 1 a <®
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
F. J. MALONEY
Specialist in Men’s Wear.
Tailoring a
Special Feature.
MALONEY’S Suits are
Noted for
Fit, Style, and Finish
Artistically dressed windows are a striking feature at “ Maloney’s Corner.”
thing man requires on the farm and for navvying
-work.
The tailoring department of this business has been
considerably increased, no doubt, owing to the
popularity of the suits supplied by this firm. They
are noted for their style, finish, artistic cut, and,
more important still, the manner in which they wear.
Those requiring a satisfactory suit can with confi-
dence entrust their order with Mr. Maloney.
Mr. Maloney is a keen buyer of goods, as he
is a firm believer in placing articles before the public
at the lowest possible market price, and if a business
man buys well he can always sell to the best advan-
tage to his customers. His turnover yearly since
commencing has more than doubled each succeeding
year, and that appears to speak volumes for the in-
creased popularity of and general support accorded
his enterprise and progressive spirit.
Sole Agent in
Southern New South Wales
for Stetson’s Famous
Hats,
Also other Leading Lines.
Welch, Margetson & Co.’s
Ties, Collars, and Shirts.
Jaeger’s Underwear,
And other well-known and
recognised makes.
Large Stock of
Australian, English, and
American
Boots and Shoes.
Interior of one of the departments.
F. Harris, Photos


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA V/AGGA AND DISTRICT.
WILLIAMSON & HARRISON
AUCTIONEERS.
STOCK AND STATION ACCENTS
The members of this Progressive Firm leaving the Head Office with Buyers to inspect a Riverina
Property.
We Specialise in Land and Finance.
Our Motor Cars are at your disposal for Stock and Land Inspection.
Full particulars supplied of various Valuable Properties on our books for Sale.
We give Straight Outspoken Advice. We Finance.
CLEARING SALES HELD IN ANY PART OF N.S.W.
Correspondence receives Prompt Attention.
WILLIAMSON 8c HARRISON.
OFFICES: FITZMAURICE STREET. WAGGA.


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
f
A
Messrs. Williamson and Haniscn (in the background) discussing Business in one of their Offices
When an energetic partnership is established, and
both partners possess a wide and thoroughly practi-
cal experience, a hrm g"asp of the purposes on
which they have set their minds, and, in addition,
enjoy the respect and popularity of the whole dis-
trict, it is only to be expected that success must
crown their efforts. This is exactly the case of
the firm now under review.
The business of the above firm has worked up
to, and still strongly holds, the position of one of
the leading auctioneering, stock’and station, land
and financial institutions in the Riverina. The per-
sonal esteem of the above partnership is due, not
only to a genial disposition, but also to solid busi-
ness methods.
Messrs. Williamson and Harrison specialise- in
land and stock sales, and financing large and small
estates. Their annual business in stock and land
sales would probably amount to a quarter of a
million sheep and about 30,000 acres, in addition to
their other avenues of business. The spacious offices
are situated in the mainystreet of Wagga, in the
business heart of the towffi and their motor cars
are always available for inspection of stock or
land.
Energy is distinctly noted in the business, and
■correspondence is always attended to promptly.
The compiler can, with every confidence, recom-
mend the public generally to entrust their business
to the capable hands of this firm, feeling confident
that the trust will be well fulfilled, and result in
both speedy and successful business.
An excellent illustration of Messrs. Williamson and Harrison’s Business, which they are so inseparably
and largely connected with—land, cattle and sheep.


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
i JOHN GELME Ltd. !
I j
I Established some 16 years. ~ I
• ♦
♦ T
4 »
| GOAGHBUiLDLRS, :: WHLLLWRIGHTS
I I
♦ ... AND ... t
1 5
I GLNLRAL SMITHS. [
I F
♦ ?
l === . - : =
4 »
i j
The Largest Industry of the kind in Riverina. •
1 . " I
J . f
? Buggies, Sulkies and Waggons built promptly from first- ]
1 L t
! class and thoroughly seasoned Timber. r
1 \
2 Large Stocks Held. Quotations Reasonable. [
4 f
1 I
2 The Finest Class of Work and Highest Standard Material [
2 \
| are Guaranteed. i
t
I r
I i
j GELME LTD., I
i i
i TOMPSON ST.. WAGGA WAGGA. I
1


i
f
1
•
I
♦
•
i
GELME LTD.
1
I
1
•
\
9
>
]
•
i
•9
J
|
Our Reputation is still (irmly identified with only the most
«
i
•
♦
•
durable of Vehicles.
1
•
5
•
I
«
1
•
|
<•
Repainting and Repairing Work carried out Expeditiously.
•
♦
•
#•
f
]
i
#
j
Shoeing Forge. Expert Tradesmen.
O
•
*
•
i
•
for the Riverina on a large scale.
I
9
f
♦
9
t
9
\
Large staff of Competent Tradesmen Employed.
•
|
•
1
•
•
♦
f
•
1
]
9
i
9
i
9
Business inquiries Invited. Prompt Attention.
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
• |
| Our spacious, modern factory is equipped with the latest
\ ... 1
| and most extensive Machinery, which enables us to cater
GELM E LTD.
Coachbuilders, Wheelwrights and General Smiths,
| TOMPSON STREET, WAGGA WAGGA
i


1 — • ' |5 ' ~~m
fy*Sf - . ■...:.-/, y
i * • ,.. {t * *
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
TOM J. HANSON,
Proprietor
H anson’s Co-operative
Butchery and Refrig-
erating Chambers,
Tichborne Buildings,
Gurwood 5t., WAGGA.
ARE
COUNTRY ORDERS RECEIVE.
PROMPT AND CAREFUL ATTENTION
TELEPHONE 128
The fact of Mr. Joseph Hanson being born at
Kirkham Estate, on the Cowpasture River, in 18-3
seems eminently appropriate to the occupation he
early in life took up. He arrived in Wagga in
1863, and became associated with the butchering
trade. His first employers were Charles Bnfifrey
and John Brooker. who leased the same premises
afterwards occupied by Tom Castro, the lichborne
Interior of the Butchery Establishment with the
large country connection. r. Harris. Photos
Hanson’s Butchery stands on the original site occupied by Tom
Castro, the notorious Tichborne cla'mant. F. Hams, Photos
claimant, later on to be, and now, occupied by the
prosperous and progressive Co-operative Butchery
Establishment controlled for several years by Mr.
Joseph Hanson, but now handed down to his son,
Mr. Tom Hanson. The original building, of roughly
hewn slabs with stringy bark roof, was pulled
down in 187 when the present commodious
and modern -Two-storied structure was built
in its stead. TBie splendid reputation enjoyed by
Hanson’s Co-operative Butchery has not been won
easily, nor in a brief period, but over a space of
42 years, and to this firm must be extended the
credit of being the butchering pioneers of Wagga.
Also they were the first to install an up-to-date and
large refrigerating plant—the well-known “ Her-
cules ” dry SHESnd battery system. Their chambers
are so spaeffiOS that some three bodies and thirty
sheep can be easily hanged in same. The motive
power for machinery is derived from an 8 h.p. gas
engine. Small goods from the best materials are
manufactured on the premises, and in every detail,
from both an hygienic and modern appointed stand-
point, this business will hold its own with any in
the State of New South Wales. Orders are called
for, and three carts are necessary for the delivery
of goods from this extensive business, which is now
capably managed by Mr. Tom Hanson. Regarding
the quality of meat, the Co-operative has always
been noted for the quality of same. If there is
anything exceptionally prime in stock to be secured
Hanson’s are invariably quickly seeking it. ready to
purchase at top prices.


l<’l
A busy centre, Fitzmaurice Street, the main thoroughfare of Wagga.
i 1
S i
I WILLIAM SCHADEL, |
© Builder and Contractor, S
'2 d-
5< FORSYTH STREET, WAGGA. 5?
$ Mr. William Schadel, who is w r ell known in the
iC Wagga district, has recently commenced in business 5!
H on his own behalf as a builder and contractor. He
is at present carrying out an important contract, on %
55 which several of his men are engaged, for the pro-
S prietor of Big Springs Station. Mr. Schadel is a 5'
contractor the public can have every confidence in ~y
f5 and he guarantees to carry out any work actually
55 undertaken by him promptly, with best workman-
ship, and at a moderate price. Quotations will be S
gladly given for any class of building work.
J r*
S i
D. McRae, Photos
1 he magnificent display of prod.icc from the Riverina, exhibited
at the Royal Show, Sydney, through the instrumentality of the
M.P. and A. Association (Mr. A. F. I) White, secretary). This
splendid exhibit aroused the enthusiasm of show visitors and de-
monstrated practically not only the wonderful fertility of Riverina
soil, but also its versatility.
. . •


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
MR. GEORGE SHEPHERD, J.P., Architect
The compiler feels that “ The Progress of Wagga
Wagga ” would not be complete without mention
of the close association its oldest established archi-
tect, Mr. George Shepherd, J.P., has had in the
progress of this town and district. He has been
identified with the laying out of innumerable streets,
culverts, bridges, etc., during his term of office as
surveyor to the Wagga Municipality, over a period
of fifteen years. For many years Mr. Shepherd,
who arrived in Wagga in 1875, held the position
of architect to the N.S.W. Council of Education,
during which time he designed and supervised
the erection of over 10 Government schools in the
Riverina. Since his retirement from that position
to commence on his own behalf as an architect
many of the most handsome private residences,
public buildings and commercial houses have been
built according to his design and under his super-
vision, notably, recently, Mr. hrank Coplands mo-
dern private residence, Mr. C. M. Davidson’s, altera-
tions and improvements to Bellair s Hotel, Heath
and Mitchelmore’s handsome building, “Big
Springs ” homestead and recent improvements, also
practically the whole of the extensive M.P. and
A. Association's buildings. The fact that the citizens
of Wagga are enabled to enjoy the shade of such
line deciduous trees, and that the town has been
made so attractive, is due in a great measure to
Mr. Shepherd’s advocacy and application in carry-
ing the work out of tree planting during his con-
nection with the municipality years ago. Recently
modern offices have been erected in Gurwood-street,
where Mr. Shepherd, who is now assisted by his
son, Mr. Everard Shepherd, can be interviewed daily.
Plans and specifications are prepared promptly, and
building work is supervised in any part of the Rive-
rina. Mr. Shepherd’s reputation is on a high plane,
and is such that his many clients have always found
that the greatest care and supervision are exercised
on any matter entrusted to him.
Madam Maddocks
o##
A. '
DYEING and
CLEANING WORKS.
BAYLIS STREET
WAGGA.
And at ALBURY
Everyone can’t afford a new suit, hat, coat or skirt,
feathers, etc., every month of the year, and that is
■exactly why Madam Maddock established her mo-
dern dyeing and cleaning works at Wagga, where
garments are made to look bright, fresh and equal
to new in appearance by the latest and best improved
French process. Madam Maddock is a thoroughly
practical business woman, who has only recently
visited the Continent with a view to keeping in
touch with the latest developments in the dyeing and
cleaning process. Charges are decidedly reasonable,
and having a competent staff of experienced dyers
and cleaners, the proprietress is enabled to turn out
work promptly and in first-class style. A trial is
invited; satisfaction is guaranteed.


~' mm '^^^^^^^ f^* ay " * u * : 'iw-**^^'*
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
Letters-Box 63
Telephone 179.
JAS. DONAGHY & CO
STOCK AND STATION AGENTS, PROPERTY SALESMEN
LAND AND FINANCIAL AGENTS
FITZM AU RICE STREET, WAGGA WAGGA.
To be successful nowadays one needs to specialise.
And the word “ specialise ” means nothing more nor
less than the concentration of one’s business ability,
energy and thought on one particular feature.
Donaghy and Co. have done this for several years
past, and that is the reason why they have such
a splendid aggregate land sale record in the Wagga
district. As quickly as they dispose at satisfactory
terms to buyers and sellers of properties others are
placed in their hands. That is why anyone desiring
thereby ensuring the right of acquiring a property
never before listed or hawked about.
Donaghy and Co. have farming areas to offer equal
in quality to the best farms in the famous Goulburn
Valley and other parts of Victoria at prices which
range exceedingly low when compared with the cost
of similar lands in the most favoured portions of
the other States. This firm are always glad to fur-
nish the fullest sound information required regard-
ing the properties they have for sale. Financial
Interior view of Donaghy and Co.’s office. “ Mr. Jas. Donaghy at work.”
information concerning land on the market generally
writes to this firm for their advice, and a list of
pj*Qpgj*ties they have on theii sale list. A few
principal factors in their great success is their
lengthy personal knowledge of the district, which
enable's and justifies them in placing properties be-
fore prospective buyers with confidence and to the
best advantage. Wagga district offers exceptional
opportunities for farmer's and land seekers to acquire
first-class holdings either in large or small areas,
and as they are sole agents direct from owners in-
tending buyers would do well to note this fact,
assistance can be arranged, and a member of the
firm is always pleased to drive the land seeker
around the district and show him what a wonderfully
fertile and resourceful district it really is. Wagga
land still wants hundreds more settlers—men who
are capable of working it thoroughly and obtaining
out of the soil the wealth that lies there. Donaghy
and Co., as a oractical and businesslike firm, are
also there to give all information necessary regard-
ing values, soil productivity and the possibilities.
Correspondence receives prompt attention, and al-
ways remember that nothing is ever too much
trouble to Donaghy and Co.


. ji• »' Hi ***::. -.1r' — « m ii
N V DEVLIN.
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
CARRINGTON HOTEL
Baylis Street (Newtown), Wagga
FIRST-CLASS ACCOMMODATION.
Spacious Balcony.
Large Airy Bedrooms.
EVERY COMFORT AND MODERN CONVENIENCE
Patrons of “ The Carrington ” always speak highly of the comfort and attention received there.
D. Mcßae, Photos
THE CARRINGTON HOTEL,
NORMAN V. DEVLIN, Proprietor.
Adjoining Wagga Railway Station.
My Motto;—“A Welcome and Every Comfort.”


——
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
The Carrington Hotel, Baylis-street, Wagga,
which is so conveniently situated adjoining the
railway station, has been very capably and excel-
lently conducted by Mr. N. V. Devlin during the
past three years. Previous to entering into the
commercial life of Wagga, the proprietor had been
intimately connected with the district as a large
landowner at Ganmain. “ The Carrington ” is a
handsome two-storied structure, embracing all the
conveniences and comforts a first-class commercial
prietor will no doubt find it absolutely necessary to
make considerable additions to “ The Carrington,”
At the present time the bar is being completely
reconstructed on the latest and most modern ideas,
and several other improvements are contemplated
in the near future. Mr. Devlin is one of Wagga’s
most esteemed citizens and commercial men, and
the splendid manner in which “ The Carrington ”
Hotel is conducted in every way is a distinct credit
to both Mr. and Mrs. Devlin. It is pleasing to
1. A Corner of one of the Bedrooms. 2. View o: Baylis-street (Newtown), Wagga, with “ The
Carrington ”in the foreground. 3. One side of the Balcony, where one may spend pleasant evenings
amongst the beautiful pot plants. 4 and 5. Illustrating the Dining-room Accommodation at “ The
hotel should have. An excellent table is kept, the
bedrooms are decidedly comfortable and airy, and
the several parlours (private and public) enable
patrons to fully secure the convenience, quietness
and ease expected. In fact, everything com-
bined is so satisfactory from every stand-
point that the trade during Mr. Devlin’s tenure
has increased wonderfully, and if it continues, as
there appears to be every probability, the pro-
D. Mcßae, Photos
record the extensive patronage extended to them
and the success achieved. Mr. Devlin has been inti-
mately connected with racing many years, and has
been the owner of numerous good horses. Recently
he was appointed one of the stipendiary stewards
to the Southern District Racing Association. His
knowledge and integrity fitted him admirably for
the position, which he has carried out so satisfac-
torily and successfully.
Carrington.”
m The House of Excellent Accommodation.


mr — . T ; W “
The Murrumbidgee Co-operative Milling Co. Ltd.
WAGGA’S MOST IMPORTANT INDUSTRY.
ITS WONDERFUL SUCCESS AND PROGRESS.
It is only to be expected in such a magnificent
wheatgrowing district as Wagga that there would
be found flour mills. And in that matter one is not
disappointed, for the huge modern pulsating concern
of the Murrumbidgee Co-operative Milling Co. Ltd.
is not only the largest, but the best and most thor-
oughly equipped in provincial New South Wales.
Their history is interesting, for it illustrates how
an industry, well managed, can be built up, until
to-day it is at the zenith of its success. Founded in
of milling and turning out from 12,000 to 13,000
tons of flour yearly. Or perhaps it will be better ap-
preciated—the immense capacity of their machinery
—to mention that an acre, on an average wheat crop,
can be treated every six or seven minutes. The
reasons that actuated the original founders—Messrs.
J. J. Peadon, J. P. Wilson, J. D. Norman and the
late Richard Cox and Robert Dunn—in establishing
this concern were to secure a solid and steady
demand for wheat produced in the Wagga district,
and to manufacture a high-class grade of flour that
could compete successfully, not only in the Austra-
tralian, but in the markets of the world. And how
well that has been done is reflected in the wonderful
progress this industry has made within a period of
25 years. To-day “Wagga Lily” flour commands
Two Distant Panoramic Views of the Murrumbidgee Co-operative Milling Co.’s Mills and Grain
1889 on a small scale—in fact, with but a 12 sack
plant—it grew and prospered exceedingly, not only
on account of the great individual efforts of Mr.
John P. Adkins, but more on the quality of the
flour and other mill products. The trade name
“ Wagga Lily ” flour became a household one, and
consequently to meet increasing orders and extending
selling operations further afield it became necessary
to increase the plant considerably. This has been
done, and to-day this company have a plant capable
D. Mcßae, Photo
the highest price on the market, simply owing to
the splendid quality; and it is in general use and
a prime favourite with the majority of the larger
baking firms in provincial New South Wales, Syd-
ney and Queensland.
But the trade operations of the company under re-
view do not extend throughout Australia only. Huge
quantities of flour are exported to the Continent,
South Africa, Egypt and other countries where the
demand for flour exists. And it is well worthy of
Stores.
Flour loaded on Trucks for export to Foreign Parts. This Company have an important and continually
increasing trade with other countries. D. Mcßae, Photos


'•• *^m*' r B ■BIB K ?f v >*' :
- V Ta# > PP^iBr^i^^SsI ..^SjjiS
'* jrr. ll^^' , m f
' ' I - ; V n ;V ;,/ • ■^■f
mention, for it is creditable to both the Wagga
district and the company that, pitted against the
best flour exhibits of the world at the Franco-
British Exhibition in 1908, this company gained the
gold medal diploma for general excellence. That
diploma is one that requires the greatest merit to
win, especially against the world’s manufacturers of
flour. The highest price is offered for wheat, and
while such a large quantity is secured in the Wagga
district, still their scope for wheat buying knows
no limit. As illustrating the progressive policy that
is still being pursued, the directors recently installed
a Wolfe compound condensing superheating steam
engine, at a cost of some £4OOO. This machine will
still further add to the status of the company’s pro-
ducts. A large staff is employed at the mills. The
present directors are Messrs. Alick Smith (who
has been continual chairman since 1892), J. J.
McGrath, J. D. Norman, H. T. Davidson and R. F.
L. Horsley. To the manager, Mr. John P. Adkins,
much of the credit is due for the success that has
attended the satisfactory position and expansion of
the Murrumbidgee Co-operative Milling Co. Ltd.
He has at all times been imbued with progressive
ideas, which have been solidly and judiciously ap-
plied. Mr. C. W. Adkins is in charge of the manu-
facturing department, and in a great degree is the
high-grade quality of flour responsible to his judg-
ment and experience;
Both Messrs. John P. and C. W. Adkins have
ben closely ■connected in milling all their lives, part
of which was gained in English mills. In fact they
might be termed part of a milling family, for their
ancestors were all millers as far back as 300 years
ago.
The mills cover an area of some seven acres,
adjoining the railway, from which sidings are con-
nected. Mr. Richard H. Blarney, jun., A.1.1.A., is
the capable and energetic secretary to this industry
—the chief one of Wagga.
Distant View of the Murrumbidgee Co-operative Milling Co. Ltd.’s important and progressive
concern, and several interesting interior illustrations, demonstrating the modernism of the machinery,
which comprises the latest and most up-to-date apnlDnces necessary in manufacturing the highest grade
of flour.


If % ir •
9 '' I d&utfSUssllBp v . j w| j9|
iJBPn^K^RSB^E^7 * -.:JE rS* **6* 1
UK, if -*>i
% v *gt laKp '^y ", |^R
Hr , ! $*mMm!L £.. jBfcoOK; jfCfrvI B
% ‘ ■ flB vK l,
■■P*# -. *,#■. y.^Bj^WLr-t.-■ ■* ; \ tNtwPi
W0^ ; fK-lA ~ * r,' y|t|g; IF
» ■" mm ■' » | — ■ MM ■ 1 <*■!!!■!•:!'•!>!;•!#iWSWW8888BS!&IS:!-W’*tiBWMB8|MBHMB|| HUM i|EMM|B||BM ' '
p*» m-'.
I ' j| biLj
The Mayor and Aldermen of the Wagga Wagga Municipal Council.
(Photographs were specially taken for this production by Mr. E. Henningham, of Henningham’s
studio, Wagga.)
; J. JEREMY & CO,
Established 25 Years,
Auctioneers, Stock, Station and Financial Agents, Wheal Buyers
Offices: FITZMAURICE. STRLE.T. WAGGA WAGGA
Agents for Goldsbrough Mort, Sun Insurance Office,
Norwich and London Accident Insurance Association,
Brunton & Co., Flour Millers, J. J. Donnelly, Shippers,
' The important firm of Jeremy and Co., estab-
lished some 25 years in Wagga, has been intimately
connected during that period with its progress and
prosperity, inasmuch that through their instrumen-
tality a very large acreage of land has Teen sold by
them, and innumerable settlers have been brought
to the district through this firm’s strenuous advo-
cacy.
Jeremy and Co. hold several important agencies,
and have a list of many valuable blocks of land
and properties placed in their hands for disposal.
For some time past a great deal of attention has
been paid by this firm to land on the Wagga-
Tumberumba line, and those desiring, information
should communicate with Jeremy and Co., who al-
ready have held some important sub-division sales
there. Correspondence is invited and promptly
attended to.


CHAS. TANNER,
Wholesale and Retail Fruiterer and Greengrocer. Fresh F Dd°ve^ r My r ° ceries
EDWARD STREET, :: :: WAGGA.
(OPPOSITE PUBLIC HOSPITAL.)
D. Mcßae, Photo
It would surprise many Wagga residents even, if
they were to see the rapid growth that is being
made in Southern Wagga, and the great progress
in the erection of residences. The compiler means
the portion that stretches towards and past the
Public Hospital. And, naturally, with the residen-
tial expansion so has there been a commercial one.
Some twelve months ago Mr. Charles Tanner estab-
lished a well stocked greengrocer’s business on the
corner of Edward-street, and, owing to the highly
creditable manner in which he conducts same, cer-
tainly merits the big support extended to him. The
building is a neat modern one, and the grade of
fruit, vegetables and confectionery is fully equal to
the largest establishments in Wagga proper. Mr.
Tanner,- however, also has an extensive outdoor
trade, and a fair proportion of his business is done
on wholesale lines. As illustrating his progressive
nature, it might be mentioned that he has recently
purchased and installed probably the most modern
soda fount, "The Hippo,” in Wagga, at a cost of
over £lOO. Still he certainly does a wonderful
trade in soft drinks, and eventually the outlay will
prove a profitable one.
Views of Mr. Tanner’s progressive business, Wagga.
1 group of progressive members of the M.P. and A. Association. 2. Wagga in 1871. Procession
of the Brass Band and M.U.1.0.0.F. Lodge, the first one in Wagga. (This view is rather historical,
showing the spot where the Bank of N.S.W. is to-day and the area where Newtown has risen).


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
The Wagga Motor Garage Co
Motor Engineers,
etc.
GARAGE. REPAIRS.
CARS FOR HIRE.
Kincaid Street,
Wagga.
’Phone 308.
P.O. Box
Open 7 a.m. to 11 p.m. Daily.
Private Cars Garaged and
Attended to.
Manager’s Private Residence :
'Phone No. 68.
The Wagga Motor Garage Co. is a locally owned
one, managed ably by Mr. E. G. Fitzgerald. No
one could possibly have anticipated that such suc-
cess and progress were to be made within such a
brief period. Still the fact remains that this com-
pany ha,s gone on continually expanding, increasing
the number of cars, installing modern machinery,
and employing each year a larger number of skilled
mechanics. Certainly this company commenced
under favourable circumstances, more especially
from a financial standpoint, and in purchasing the
commodious garage, which is so centrally situated
in Kincaird-street, they certainly made a decidedly
judicious move. Being the Wagga Motor Garage
Co.'s own property has naturally induced them to
make it one of the most modern and best equipped
in New South Wales. Then another important
factor in the progress .pnade is the high-class grade
cars they hold the agency for, cars such as the
Brack, Austin, Daimler, E.N., Ford, which are high
up m the list of first-class motor cars of the world.
A heavy and well assorted stock of tyres, oils and
every car requisite is carried, which this company
offers at city prices.
To merely state that the garage is spacious would
hardly convey a .sufficient impression. As a matter
of fact, 35 cars can be 'accommodated with ease
and comfort. The accommodation yards—probably
over a quarter of an acre in extent —can easily hold
G. FITZGERALD. Manager.
This illustration speaks loudly of the great progress made by the
Wagga Motor Garage Co. F. Harris, Photos
over 100 cars. These fine yards are naturally a
great convenience both to the firm and their clients.
The largest cars can be lifted bodily to the repair-
ing factory on the first floor through the medium
of a strong lift. The workshops are fitted with a
h.p. Crossley gas engine, which provides power for
all requirements. The repairing machinery will be
found equal to that in any up-to-date garage, and
comprises the most modern equipment for the work.
Electric light is on hand upon flexible cords, so
that any part of a car under repair may be fully
illuminated to allow of the best work being done.
The dynamo is further utilised for charging accu-
mulators of cars. This spacious workshop, which
is capable of easily accommodating ten cars at
once, is further fitted with a vulcanising machine.
The factory is well stocked with bolts, small parts
and accessories generally for motor cars. Another
convenience in evidence is gear for raising or lift-
ing right out the engines from cars. This is a
distinct advantage, as it does away with the neces-
sity of taking the engine wholly to pieces, and thus
makes the work much quicker and safer than when
executed by personal power.
The workmanship of and material used in every
repairing job undertaken are guaranteed to the extent
that the company have a very excellent reputation
at stake in that guarantee. Their men are all prac-
tically trained and skilled men, and, as the manager
remarked to the compiler, “ I wouldn’t ask one of


n 4 ','* v x J
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
Illustrations of the Commodious Interior of Wagga Motor Garage Co.’s Premises, Kincaid-street,
Wagga.
F. Harris, Photos
my men to tinker with a job. Makeshift jobs never
yet built up a reputation, though they may have
pulled many down.” A large stock of tyres is car-
ried, fresh and reliable (any manufacture), though
this company find the Continental wear splendidly
on their own fleet of cars, namely, five, ranging
from 15 to 35 h.p. Each one is in charge of a
competent chauffeur, who is not only a driver,
knowing every yard of the district, but a mechanic,
who, in case o f the car’s mechanism getting out
of order, can take off the -chauffeur’s insignia and
crawl under the car to put matters right again, to
continue on a safe, speedy journey. The company’s
charges are distinctly reasonable, and they make it
a practice never to send a car on a journey unless
it is thoroughly reliable, and as proof of this they
have to their credit that since their inception, some
18 months ago, their cars have covered practically
90,000 miles without a mechanical breakage which
would necessitate abandoning a car on the road.
To men who have had experience with cars this
must appeal as a wonderful record. The excellent
management of this business has no doubt meant
everything towards its progress, and in securing
Mr. E. G. Fitzgerald as both a member and manager
the company were fortunate. He possesses a
thorough grasp of every detail connected with the
company’s affairs, and his courtesy and tact could
not fail to have their effect «n the staff and with
the public.
For a safe, Reliable,
Speedy Car.
Ring up ’Phone 308.
For Repairing, Overhaul-
ing of Cars expeditiously
and thoroughly visit
The
Wagga Motor
Garage Co.,
The Best ELquipped Gar-
age Outside Sydney,
KINCAID STRtLLT,
Illustrating the commodious accommodation yards for motor cars.
WAGGA.
F. Harris, Pholcs


VP i|n f .v % ' 1 l I Lpi ■ fi’J
■H WBHBBBiBfei flr * ■ jL I f rff
. i k ■*» Be J& /i* .'■' viln £
The Criterion Hotel.
CELNTRALLY SITUATLD.
Wagga.
Fitznr.aurice Street,
A Feature—An exceptionally large
and Wide Balcony.
Portion recently Renovated and
Reconstructed.
Spacious, airy, comfortable, mod-
ern Bar.
Commodious Billiard Room.
Motor Garage.
A First-class Ffostel for tFie Ac-
commodation of the Travelling
Public and Farming Community.
P. Sullivan, Proprietor.
Late of the Lockhart Hotel.
Some three months ago that well-known property,
the Criterion Hotel, passed into the hands of Mr.
Peter Sullivan, who gained an excellent reputation
as both a genial and business-like Boniface during
the four years he conducted the leading hotel at
Lockhart—•“ The Lockhart.” That hostel was the
head-quarters of commercial travellers, and Mr. Sul-
livan, who has been some ten years connected with
Wagga district, intends to cater fo** them very
thoroughly at “ The Criterion.” An excellent menu
is placed before one at this hotel, satisfying both in
daintiness and quality to the most exacting. It is
Mr. Sullivan’s intention almost immediately to have
two tables—No. 1 and No. 2. only practical
difference will be the charge. However, the pro-
prietor believes in popularising his hotel, and, in
catering for the district community at a reasonable
price, is sure to find it is greatly appreciated. The
‘ The Criterion,” showing the frontage improvements recently
carried out by Mr. P. Sullivan.
bedrooms at “ The Criterion ”, are nicely and com-
fortably furnished, and are scrupulously clean and
delightfully airy and conveniently situated. ' The
various parlours are well appointed in every detail,
and nothing has been neglected by Mr. Sullivan to
cater thoroughly and liberally for the community.
An excellently appointed and equipped billiard room
is attached to the hotel, also a commodious motor
garage. A special feature at “ The Criterion ” is the
splendid, unusually wide balcony, which is much ap-
preciated by patrons during the summer months.
Recent structural alterations include the enlarging
of the bar, which is now one of the largest, best
appointed, and comfortable in the Riverina. Under
Mr. and Mrs. Sullivan’s supervision everything is
carried out in the best style, and on a liberal and
creditable scale. The success already attained by
them is well merited.
“The Criterion” has an exceptionally large and well-appointed dining-room. A first-class menu is
1-. Harris, Photo provided, and fully appreciated by patrons.


The Australian Hote
J. J. SCOTT,
Proprietor.
THE LARGEST AND MOST MODERN APPOINTED IN PROVINCIAL N.5.W.
Recently Erected. First-class Accommodation. No. I and No. 2 Tables. Furnistied at a cost of several thousand
pounds. Magnificent, spacious, excellently equipped circular bar. Bill ard Saloon in basement. Two first-class
new Alcock Tables. 7 Lavatories. 8 Bathrooms, Ffot and Cold Water. Stabling Accommodation. Situated in the
most central part of
FITZMAURICE STREET. :: :: WAGGA.
Mr. J. J. Scott, to whose energy and determina-
tion against many difficulties must be extended
the honour of controlling probably the largest and
most modern, well-equipped hotel in provincial
New South Wales, was some twelve years ago the
landlord of the Wagga Hotel, and later became pro-
prietor of hotels at Junee and Loftus. Returning
to the town he is one of the most esteemed and
prominent men in, he purchased the Australian
Hotel. Some sixteen months ago he decided to
rebuild, and the present magnificent building illus-
trated above is the result.
The bar, which cost over £lOOO to equip, is mag-
nificently appointed in every detail. There are 120
large airy single bedrooms. The Australian is
three-storied, and has two fine large balconies, from
which a delightful view of the surrounding country
for miles is obtainable. Mr. W. J. Monks was the
architect, and the lavatory, lighting and bathroom
work was carried out in its entirety by Anderson
and Lament. There are innumerable public and
private parlours, sitting rooms and drawing
rooms. The domestic arrangements are most
capably supervised by Mrs. Scott. An excellent
menu is provided in both the No. 1 and No. 2
dining rooms. The commodious cool cellar
covers an area of 1600 feet, and Mr. Scott sup-
ports in everything possible both local industries—
Hogan and Mahon’s and H. S. Headley’s breweries.
The frontage to the Australian is TJO feet.
There are four modern shops attached to this
hotel, also a first-class, well-equipped, delightfully
cool billiard saloon, containing two tables. Mr. R.
Phelps is in charge. The Australian will shortly
be appointed a C.T.A. in all probability, and sample
rooms are being erected almost immediately. Every-
one in the community who admires pluck and energy
must wish Mr. J. J. Scott the -greatest success in
his enterprise, for it proved a very big contract
indeed, and he well deserves substantial reward.


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
THE PRINCE OF WALES HOTEL
Fitzmaurice Street, :: Wagga.
NOW UNDER THE MANAGEMENT OF
MR. THOMAS DAVIS.
RLCLNILY RLNOVATLD THROUGHOUT
WIDL SPACIOUS BALCONY.
Exterior view of Davis’s Prince of Wales Hotel.
Visitors and the general community will find this Hostel now one of the Best Conducted
from every standpoint in the Riverina
Modern Improvements have been carried out everywhere.
DOMESTIO'ARRANGEMENTS PERSONALLY SUPERINTENDED by MRS. T. DAVIS.
TOOTH’S WELL-KNOWN BEER ON DRAUGHT.
Only the Highest-Grade Brands of SPIRITS, WINES and CIGARS Stocked.
The Public are invited to call, inspect and appreciate the manner in which the Prince of
Wales Hotel is now being conducted by the new proprietor.


SllWW"'" V 'Wbr~' ja
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
Mr. Thomas Davis is only a new hotel proprietor
as far as the Prince of Wales Hotel is concerned,
for he has been for some 13 years connected with
the commercial life of Wagga and district. He is
both well known and well respected. Previously he
conducted hotels at Tumberumba and Batlow. The
Royal Hotel, Baylis-street, Wagga, was the last con-
cern he was connected with in Wagga. until the op-
portunity came to purchase the goodwill of “ The
Prince of Wales.” This property is excellently
situated in Fitzmaurice-street. and a keen, progres-
sive business man of Mr. Davis’ calibre could see
add to comfort and appearance, while the various
sitting-rooms have been, as elsewhere right through-
out the house, thoroughly renovated and repapered,
also refurnished to a considerable degree. A first-
class cook is engaged, and the tables have improved
wonderfully under the skilful and judicious manage-
ment of Mrs. Davis. With the advent of the sewer-
age system in Wagga, this hotel will be completely
sewered, and hot and cold baths, with the most
modern lavatory appointments, will be installed.
Mr. Davis has made it a strict rule to secure the
best of everything for his bar. and there the com-
munity can run their eyes over all the world’s recog-
1. A view of the well-stocked bar.
3. A view of the dining-room.
A cosy corner in one of the sitting-rooms.
A very pretty view of the Murrumbidgee at the
side of Davis’ Hotel.
that it only required the efforts of a sound business
man, with an experienced wife, the spending of
several hundreds of pounds, and the “ Prince of
Wales ” could be brought up to the tone and level
of a first-class hotel. No time was wasted as soon
as the property was secured. Several old outbuild-
ings were razed to the ground, ready for modern
structures to be erected. Plans were drawn for a
fine, wide balcony, some 200 feet in length, extend-
ing right around the property, and the contract is
promptly being carried out by the well-known con-
tractor, John Gray. The bar has been altered to
nised brands of spirits, wines, etc., while a sparkling
glass of Tooth’s beer will always be found palatable
and satisfying. This beer is kept beautifully cool
in the hot months, and, owing to the great demand
for “ Tooth’s,” a hogshead never has time to become
stale or flat. Although only proprietor of this pro-
perty under review such a short time, yet Mr. and
Mrs. Davis have quietly, firmly, and judiciously con-
siderably altered the tone of the hotel, and greatly
raised its standard. With such a policy continued,
the present success obtained will not only be well
maintained, but he considerably added to.


"{HL’
'-•- || - jri .
m . -
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
The Leading and Largest Carrying Firm of Wagga.
WRIGHT, HEATON & CO. Limited
iT" '
Goods Forwarded to Any Part of the World
Carrying and General Forwarding Agents.
A General View of the Interior of Wright, Heaton and Co. Ltd.’s Commodious Goods
Depot, recently entirely demolished by fire. F. F
Storage
F. Harris, Photo
In spite of a temporary set back recently, when
a serious conflagration occurred, which practically
gutted Wright, Heaton and Co.’s offices and com-
modious stores, the firm have continued their large
and important business uninterrupted, almost as
though nothing unforeseen had occurred. Other
premises were quickly acquired, which enabled them
to carry on, and, as in the past, attend to their
clients’ requirements with the celerity and ability
they have hitherto done. Wright, Heaton and Co. s
business in Wagga has gone ahead wonderfully in
recent years with the progress of the town and
district, and no doubt their great expansion will
be the chief factor in prompting them to erect
most commodious, modern, fireproof bulk stores,
offices, etc.
The services of their many teams, delivery carts,
etc., were in no way damaged, fortunately, and thus
their trade was uninterrupted. Goods are received
and stored, also forwarded to any part of Aus-
traTiaTand foreign parts. The extensive firm under
review have offices and agents in various parts, so
that the public can always rely on goods being re-
ceived and attended to properly. The local manager
at Wagga is Mr. H. A. Hansard, who has under him
a most competent staff, strict in their attention to
every detail connected with business placed in
their hands to execute. Mr. Hansard has been for
several years connected with the firm he represents
so capably at Wagga, where lie is highly held in
esteem by his fellow-citizens.


View of Mr. E. Field’s teams at work on Wave
Hill Estate, Marrar. He secured, in 1913, the
first
{1Ki y, ~ ' Mr. W. G. Huthwaite,
,1; : V V.:... —- of Huthwaite and Co.
Church of England, South Wagga. recently com-
pleted by Hardy & Co., the well-known contractors
The above views are an illustration of the fine quality of bullocks raised in the Wagga district. They
were purchased by Mr. C. H. King, of the well-known butchering firm, Baylis Street, Newtown.
L). McKac, rhotos


HI ?% w [ T : 1
I iHEv ||
■■■■I k v WjtB; ' 'SgcHp 1‘iiXrf* . n\
Hfii ■'. > &.f. , £ j m ji_.\ J
r — Vj J g JW ' — S *^ fc^"^^«ssss=saH
■ jwfcw* MMMi Hi - 9/tr m&\ flg j^g||[HKpd^n^i9BS S JBB |H^^H
Wickham & Scribner,
H. P. Wickham W. H. Scribner
Men’s Wear
Specialists.
School of Arts Corner,
FITZMAURICE ST
WAGGA.
The artistic window display.
A fine and full range of Hats, Ties, Shirts, Ready-to-wear Clothing, Boots and Shoes (Aus-
tralian and imported manufacture)
A LEADING FEATURE
TAILORING.—We are working up a splendid reputation for the quality, artistic cut and
finish of our suits. The value is right, and before
of patterns.
One of the most recent firms to join in the com-
mercial world of Wagga is that of Messrs. Wickham
and Scribner, who have both been practically con-
nected with the men’s wear trade for many years.
When they decided to open in Wagga their inten-
tion was to place before the community a high-class
stock, generally termed “ the from head to foot
stock,” which means that one can step into the
establishment at the School of Arts corner in a
bathing suit and come forth fashionably clothed in
boots, socks, underwear, suit (fancy waistcoat, if
inclined), collar, tie, short, hat and a happy expres-
sion—the latter because you’ll be glad W. and S.
purchasing elsewhere call and inspect our range
had been visited. # A glance at their shop windows
is sufficient to indicate how well their intentions
have been carried out. And this young firm are
going ahead fast, and are making new customers
daily. They are confident, because they've got the
right kind of goods at the right price, and know
that the Wagga community will support a progres-
sive firm who cater for them liberally and in a
large and sound manner. Wickham and Scribner
invite cordially a visit of inspection to their well-
stocked with fashionable, high-grade goods estab-
lishment, School of Arts corner, Fitzmaurice-street,
Wagga.
Two interior views of the well-stocked Tailoring and Mercery Department.


♦ i*-
- H~£fe^«
wTf r -j mS i »if
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
TELEPHONE 11 2.
Mclntosh bros.,
Undertakers, Embalmers
and Funeral Directors,
BAYLIS STREET, WAGGA.
State and Reform Funerals Furnished.
Cedar, Oak, or other Polished Wood and
Leaden Coffins at Shortest Notice.
Memorial Cards a Speciality, Printed as
Required.
1 he above business was established in 1858 by the
late Mr. John Mclntosh, who was for many years one
of the largest builders and contractors in the Riverina.
Amongst one of his early contracts was the erection
of the first public school in Wagga. This was also
the original undertaking firm of that town. This ex-
tensive business is now being carried on by the sons,
Messrs. John and J. T. Mclntosh, whose reputation as
funeral directors is excellent. They have a first-class
Illustrating the Modern and Complete Funeral Plant.
plant, and funerals are carried out in any part of the
Riverina, as far as Coolamon, Cootamundra, The
Rock, and Tumberumba. If requiring Mclntosh Bros.'
services, ring up telephone 112.
Wreaths, Crosses, and Every
Funeral Requisite.
Headstones, Railings and Mon-
uments Supplied.
Letters and Telegrams receive
Prompt Attention.


The “ BIG” Merchants Fitzmaurice St., Wag£a
of Provincial New South Wales
£0»o>
’ * iUVJu sar>i;iiv,i i; y.
R.. COPLAND EC? j|
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
David Copland & Co
The “ BIG ” Merchants
Importers direct from the Worlds Manufacturers
COMPLETE STOCKS FOR
WINE and SPIRIT MERCHANTS.
TITE HOME and FARM.
“The Big Store” of Provincial New South Wales.
F. Harris, Photos
«The Big House ” for the large, varied and comprehensive range of goods
“The Big House” conducted to educate the public in everything that spells of the latest
in style.
“ The Big House ” managed to satisfy one and all.
The big, pulsating business, always busy, always bright, because “ Copland s claim to have
one of the best lighted “houses” in provincial New South Wales. -
Their reasons for going to considerable expense in this important matter were so that ALL
could see, understand and appreciate the quality of the goods placed before them.
“ Copland’s ” don’t care whether a searchlight or an X rays is turned on to their goods, for
quality and price are predominant, and they will stand any test.
Various departments comprise;— Drapery, Millinery, Costumes, Ribbons, Haberdashery, Mens
Wear, Furniture, Linoleum, Manchester, Grocery, Ironmongery, Crockery Ware, Glassware, Fancy
Goods, Boots and Shoes, Tailoring and Dressmaking.


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
The important and extensive business of David
Copland and Co. is one of the oldest established
in New South Wales. Wagga in 1872 was then an
unimportant town, when two men made their en-
trance into its commercial world. Business was
commenced under the style of Roberts, Copland
and Co., and from that primitive commencement
to-day one finds the large and important concern of
David Copland and Co., often styled the “Anthony
liberal lines. Architectural improvements have been
carried out to such an extent that to-day “ Cop-
land’s ” is one of the most imposing in Wagga, with
its magnificent plate glass windows over a frontage
of nearly 100 feet.
Improvement and enlargement have been carried
out to such an extent that this fine store now covers
an area of nearly one acre. Its position is also ideal,
centrally situated right in the heart of Wagga’s
A Glimpse at the Interior of “Copland’s/’ the Big Merchants. p. Harris, l hoto,-
1. The Drapery Department.
2. The Handsome Showroom on the First Floor.
Hordern of Provincial New South Wales.” On
the death of Mr. Roberts Mr. Copland carried on
the business, and during recent years has handed
over the management to his son, Mr. F. F. Copland,
although he still takes an active interest in super-
vising the management to a certain extent. The
history of this firm is similar to that of several
of the most successful and largest in Australia.
No rapid growth marked their steps; it was one
gradual, solid expansion on sane, progressive and
3. A Portion of the Commodious Furniture De-
partment in the Basement.
4. The Men’s Wear Department.
busy thoroughfare. To adequately gain an insight
into the wonderful trade this firm controls it is
necessary for one to visit the various departments,
which run hack several hundred feet, and contain
many thousands cf pounds’• worth of stock. Some
GO hands are employed, many of whom have been
with the firm over 20 years. The building is actually
three-storied from one standpoint, inasmuch as, in
addition to the handsome and commodious show-
room on the first floor, the basement, splendidly


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
Illustrating the exceptional length and splendidly appointed Grocery Department, also the Boot and
Shoe Department at “ Copland’s.” f. Harris, Photo
lighted, is utilised for the storage of bulk goods
and marking off of same. Several hundred feet,
however, have been set apart for the furniture
department, when an exceptionally heavy stock of
high-class beds, chairs, wardrobes, sideboards, per-
ambulators, go-carts, bedding, etc.—in fact, every
article one could find in the most noted city furni-
ture emporiums. And regarding the lighting ar-
rangements at “ Copland’s” considerable expense
was involved in assuring a plentiful and satisfactory
natural light by day and an artificial one by night.
This establishment is certainly one of the brightest
the compiler has yet inspected. In every depart-
ment and in every corner one has amp 1 " opportu-
nity of studying and judging the «’ de. qua'ity
and texture of the article required
The observant man would hardly t r 1 it neces-
sp’-y to hold such a large for V -'gga and
district, and he would be quite right. But “ Cop-
The Ironmongery Department at “ Copland’s.”
land’s ” business extends further afield—right
through the Riverina. Young towns have sprung
up everywhere in recent years, and this firm have
assisted to build them. It would be really interest-
ing to know, to be able to find out, how many hun-
dreds of settlers “ Copland’s ” have put on their
feet in standing by them in times of adversity.
Regarding prices—an important aspect —“ Cop-
land’s ” invite any competition. They import direct,
and having such an immense turnover can afford
to conduct their business on a small margin of
profit. “ A small profit on a big turnover pays
you better t’ an a large profit on a small turnover”
is “ Copland’s ” maxim.
Mr. David Copland, the head of the firm, lives a
great deal on his estate near Wagga, “ Pominga-
larma.” This property is one of the most beautiful
and splendidly improved estates in the district.
Mr. Copland has sold a large portion for closer
settlement, but still retains some 3000 acres of rich
river flats land, which is fully utilised for raising
export lambs and wheat-growing on the share sys-
tem. “ Pomingalarma Estate ” is in charge of Mr.
S. R. Copland.
Mr. David Copland for over 50 years has been
one of the leading public and commercial men of
Wagga, and during that period has fulfilled many
important public positions. He was member of
Parliament for the constituency 1899-1901, and has
been an alderman of the Wagga municipality. He
has always given financial and personal assistance
to any charitable cause and object concerning the
progress and welfare of the town and district in
which he is so highly respected and much esteemed
for bis many good qualities. Mr. Frank F. Copland is
a Bachelor of Arts and President of the Wagga
Storekeepers’ Association, and has proved himself a
most capable, progressive and courteous manager,
who is following well in his father’s footsteps.


THE PROGRESS OR WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
THE TERMINUS HOTEL,
/y?v\
*0 (Jj
I r F Hu/arrl anrl II (\ a /
Cr. Edward and Peters
Sts. (Newtown), Wagga.
CONVENIENT TO RAILWAY STATION.
For a Sparkling Glass of Ale. :: Best Wines and Spirits.
MRS. F. G. OREGAN.
PROPRIETRESS
This well-known hotel—The Terminus—which i
very conveniently situated, being only two minutes’
walk from the railway station, has been excel-
lently conducted by Mrs. O’Regan during the past
four years. She has proved an ideal manageress
in every way, with the result that the large trade has
been not only well sustained, but considerably in-
creased each year. “The Terminus” is a solid brick
structure. There are several comfortable parlours for
the use of patrons. The dining-room is also a featu e
at this hostel. Hogan and Mahon’s sparkling Wagga
ale is drawn, and the best of wines and spirits only
are stocked.
One of the comfortable sitting-rooms at the
Terminus.
The neat and well-appointed bar, where only “ the best ” is stocked, and view of the always nicely
arranged dining-room, where an excellent meal is assured and can be enjoyed.


Catering
on a
LARGE
SCALE
A Few Facts. —After catering liberally and most
satisfactorily during the past 15 years, Mrs. M.
Moore’s reputation ranks amongst the foremost in
the Riverina. The catering plant is a most complete
and thoroughly modern one, consistent with the *
progress of a town and district of th,£ importance
of Wagga. Over 400 persons can be accommodated,
tempted with a most excellent and liberal meal, at
one sitting. It is the largest in the Riverina.
During the past three years a few of the principal
functions catered for are the Wagga Show Com-
mittee, and also the large public luncheon, banquet
to Lord Chelmsford, Masonic banquet, M.U.I.O.O.F.
banquet. In addition to these over fifteen weddings
(including both golden and silver), various lodge
socials, hospitals and sporting club balls, and over
100 private functions have been successfully catered
for by Mrs. Moore, who is fully deserving of the
great measure of success that invariably crowns her
efforts. Afternoon teas are a special feature. Com-
v;
■‘jjf
mumcations addressed to
diate attention.
uiemoan receive imme-
Banquet tendered to Lord Chelmsford by the
©
— vc.
IVld&UlilC Ijliugc UUIlIlg liio Vlbll III iOli IU VVdgga.
Mrs. M. Moore catered most satisfactorily.
;
iM
k
1
: •
f ' !
| ; if\ A •
j
Hfg
IrtS. m.
If 1
I
WK£>T.*”~ „ ,
; ,E
%
1 •
L
M fjm
jL
Illustrating the first-class style in which Mrs. Moore
The Breakfast at the Golden Wed ding of Mr. and Mrs. Heydon.
The catering was excellently carried out by Mrs. M. Moore.
£
carries out catering arrangements. The above is
/ a view of banquet, Caledonian Society’s annual
meeting, 1911.
®
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.


“ ULEMBAH ESTATE,” the property of Mr. W. Moore.
A Practical Monument to the Suitability of the Wagga District as a GREAT FRUIT-GROWING CENTRE.
A smaL area and considerable energy, much in-
genuity (another name for brain activity), sound
judgment, tempered with a sporting instinct to take
a chance in experimenting, are exactly the deduc-
tions the compiler made after inspecting the healthy,
vigorous, well-kept orchard, the property of Mr.
W. Moore, of “ Ulembah Estate,” comprising 61
acres, situate eight miles from Wagga. Many mem-
bers of the community may merely connect the
word “ estate ” with a large area of land (improved
or otherwise; generally the latter); but the compiler
believes that an estate of 20 acres is a greater credit
to the owner when brought to a state of perfection
during the past ten years, though the trees are of
some 15 years’ growth. A large cpiantity of fruit is
sold locally, while some is despatched to the Sydney
market. The surplus is treated by the sun-drying
process, on similar lines to that carried out so suc-
cessfully at the State Experiment Farm. Mr.
Moore is thoroughly experienced in sun-drying, and
his is done on the most modern and approved
system. The best criterion of his skill is reflected
in the high prices he obtains invariably for his
sultanas, raisins, dried apricots and prunes. The
proprietor of “ Ulembah,” who has a most com-
fortable home, situated under ideal circumstances, is
1. A V : fw of Portion of the Orchard.
4. Mr. Moore at Work in his Orchard.
than that of many thousands when not improved to
the value of 1/ per acre. Well, Ulembah Estate
now has over twenty acres under fruit cultivation,
the principal species being plum, apricot, apple,
prune, cherry trees, etc. A large area is also
planted in Sultanas and Gordo Blanco vines, which
yield most prolifically. The soil is rich and quite
characteristic of the district, though of course it
has been worked both thoroughly and systemati-
cally. This orchard is delightfully situated on a
gentle slope, and the approach to it from the hill
is magnificent. Mr. Moore has now been the owner
3. Distant View of Ulembah Estate.
5. Mrs. Moore is most successful in Poultry Raising.
D. Mcßae, Photos
a firm believer in the great future success of Wagga
for fruit-growing. He is a regular and large con-
tributor in the southern district exhibit at the
Sydney Royal Show, and has carried off many first
prizes for the excellence of his products at various
shows, including the M.P. and A. Association, Al-
bury, Lockhart, Junee, etc. Without a doubt much
kudos can be extended to Mr. Moore for his energy,
perseverance and management in having brought his
orchard to the state of perfection that makes it an
object-lesson as to what actually can be done with
the soil in the Wagga district.


f g JjlBI* %» I
_ j; ,. '*•_— *r-~ -
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
THE PREMIER CAFE
GATEHOUSE & POTTER,
Proprietors,
(Centrally Situated, adjoining Scott’s Australian Hotel),
FITZMAURICE STREET, WAGGA
The Cafe for High-class Lnglish, Continental and Australian Confectionery
The invariably attractively dressed windows at the Premier Cafe.
(Messrs. Gatehouse and Potter, Proprietors.) F. Harris, Photos
Daily Supplies of the Choicest Fruits in Season
Fresh Vegetables on Hand
A GOOD SOLID MEAL CAN ALWAYS BE RELIED UPON AT
THE PREMIER CAFE.
Afternoon Teas and Light Refreshments are a Speciality.
Delightful Cool Refreshing Soft Drinks. Ice Cream, etc.
Our speedy, spacious Motor Bus is for Hire. Arrangements can be
made for picnics, sporting parties, etc. Our terms are reasonable.


m- ifi /. <
H i 'v m v( I * ’I ■ Sfe
I • , g«- ..* ‘ ■ jS/m ~JB m 7 ■ jL 4 4 ; ■ jF*' f jfgPWI
Jv i I»w «• Js«k -SHe?!s^bmpQK
* * «P3
SmM i x jc- -
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
The commodious Premier Cafe, with its up-to-
date appointments, has now been carried on by
Messrs. Gatehouse and Potter during the past four
months, and they are securing much sound patron-
age from the community. This large cafe is ex-
cellently situated in Fitzmaurice-street, and the
public can always rely on finding there a good assort-
ment of fruit, vegetables and confectionery, while
a substantial meal or an invigorating cup of tea
can be relied upon. Practically any kind of soft
Mr. Gatehouse (part pro-
prietor), some of the staff
and general interior view
of the PRE.MIE.R CAFE.,
Wagga.
F. Harris, Photos
drink is procurable, which is served up in the warm
months delightfully coed, and consequently refresh-
ing. This firm are also the proprietors of a hand-
some motor bus., which can seat comfortably over
a dozen people. It is a very popular conveyance
with cricketers, tennis players, picnic parties, etc.
This bus is hired out very reasonably, and those
desiring a speedy and pleasant journey in the Wagga
district cannot do better than consult Messrs. Gate-
house and Potter.
Messrs. GateFiouse and
Potter’s large, modern
Motor Car, whicfi is in
great demand for picnic
& concert parties, tennis,
cricketing, football, bowl-
ing, and golf clubs, etc,
D. Mcßae, Photos


. &'' SSS > IfcfiB
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISIRICT
Phone 80.
Estab. 1868.
Newtown Butchery.
J.F. O’REGAN
Wholesale and Retail
Butcher.
Small Goods a Speciality.
Orders by Post Promptly Executed.
Baylis Str6ot, Waggcl Mr. J. F. O’Regan’sUp-to-date Premises, where Big ” Business is done,
The fact that a business man being before the
public catering for their requirements over a period
of 12 years, during which time the trade has yearly
increased, indicates very strongly that he must be
giving entire satisfaction. And such a position is
that achieved by Mr. J. F. O’Regan, who so liberally
conducts the well managed Newtown Butchery
Establishment in Baylis-street, Wagga.
From time to time, in accordance with the general
progressive movement which is everywhere mani-
fest. Mr. O’Regan kept his premises thoroughly
up to date. A large refrigerating plant has been
installed, comprising a Warner compressor and a
powerful gas engine. The refrigerating chambers
can hold comfortably some five bodies of beef and
over 30 sheep. It is only by exceptional manage-
ment that the great trade done can be conveniently
carried out expeditiously in the present premises,
which are always so scrupulously clean and well
appointed in every detail. Therefore with the con-
tinued expansion of business the proprietor has
decided to considerably enlarge the butchering pre-
mises, giving an additional entrance from Tompson-
street. When these contemplated improvements are
consummated Mr. O'Regan will then possess one
of the best appointed and most convenient estab-
lishments in provincial New South Wales.
The whole of the small goods, so noted for their
quality and reliability, are made on the premises
with the most modern appliances. It is hardly
r cessary to add that nothing but the best ingredi-
ents, specially selected, are utilised. Probably the
greatest factor in Mr. O’Regan’s success is that he
strenuously endeavours and does secure the primest
stock in the Riverina—a high price for good quality
of stuck never stops him from becoming a buyer.
And it is also worthy of mention—the corned meat
obtainable at the business now under review. The
tenderness and exceptional flavour which are always
noted by customers are simply due to the fact that,
through the agency of the refrigerating plant, it is
possible to keep the brine tubs at any required
temperature, and that is really the secret in suc-
cessful pickling of meat. Yes, O'Regan’s corned
meat and reliable small goods are well worth a
trial; they will be found quite exceptional.
Portion of the interior of O’Regan’s Butchery
where the primest meat is always obtainable.


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
STERRY'S HUGE FURNITURE ARCADE.
NEAR LAGOON BRIDGE
E. Mclnnes
Every Description of New
and Second-hand Furniture,
Linoleums, Prams, Go-Carts,
Stoves, Cooking and Laun-
dry Requisites; all kinds of
Tools, Tents, Tarpaulins,
Harness, Saddlery, Vehicles,
Clothing.
Anything and Everything
Bought, Sold or Exchanged
and for Hire.
CASH OR TERMS.
Sterry’s huge furniture arcade is rather a high-
sounding title, but, after a visit of inspection through
the numerous departments, where one can inspect
thousands of pounds’ worth of furniture and furnish-
ings of every discribable kind, one is forced to
admit that this prosperous and old-established (eighteen
years) concern is not only aptly but correctly named,
for it carries not only an exceptionally large stock,
but both varied, modern and of good quality. This
arcade is centrally situated in the main thoroughfare
of Wagga, near the Lagoon Bridge. The building has
a lengthy frontage, and the arcade is divided into
various sections. Ihe great difficulty the proprietress
(-Mrs. Mclnnes) has to contend with is where to find
WAGGA.
space for the huge stock they always hold. The pro-
prietress has always made it a feature to give the
public a wide range of furniture, linoleums, furnish-
ings, etc., to select from. The finest quality of goods
are there, as well as cheaper makes. Still this estab-
lishment caters for everyone. Furniture can be ob-
tained on most liberal terms to suit everybody's pocket.
I his arcade is just the place for your pram, go-cart,
stoves, etc.—in fact, t© furnish the mansion or the
cottage. A visit of inspection is recommended, for
one is always liable to see some article at Sterry’s Ar-
cade for which he had been searching a long time,
in the management of this big concern Mrs. Mclnnes
’s assisted by Miss Terry, who is glad at any time to
show the public through the Arcade.
Illustrating two of the Principal Departments at Sterry’s Arcade.
F. Harris, Photos


0 " t ‘
■mm
I Traill Street, Wagga Wagga. |
S. SULLIVAN. PROPRIETOR. |
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
The exterior of
the modern
“Daily Advertiser”
Premises.
»ueeioeeieo9BoO6»9oe»eee«eeieeeieoßweei»>«eaioewoeewssieeeiBOWWoiBeeifleBiaoweaeieeeiee«eeß»weteeeieoH«e*6OB»Meiwe«e»iBeei^
"DAILY ADVERTISER, I


fgtgsu Jr _^ 1 "V °*% -r ■ ■ yjK
L _, ■ i ■«r** , j * ' ISSpf?
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
v *
• ?
I I
| “Daily Advertiser” f
t i
I TRAILL STREET, i
1 i
* * * * ***** *** mo *** m *** m ’****‘*^ 9 ‘\** , &' 9, K* ,9 ’*****K?‘ 9,i &**Kp 9 *K^ m ’Kf 9 ’^' m *K**‘K* m, ***’ m ’Kf*'Kf m *Kf*'^'** 4 & 9 *fy* mm *** 9mi %** m ' i %** 9mi %** m **%*’** i %**‘*%* 9, *t** 9 * 4 % i
The Monoline Machines, etc
The Proprietor, Mr. S.. Sullivan, in his
private office.
*** ***** ***** ** 4 * *** , * , ** 4 *****V , **V’*‘^^*‘^‘*'^'*^^’*'^*'*’^ 4 ‘*‘^'*'^‘*’^‘*’^'*' # t** <i ‘^ 4 ‘*‘^'* , *t*’* ,4 t*** ♦^♦ , •*♦♦♦*•*♦*♦*••♦♦♦• •■*♦*'•'••**•*♦♦•*•**♦•*•**♦•*•*
T I
I WAGGA WAGGA. i
X •••
I - t
| |
J S. SULLIVAN, Proprietor.'. i
X *
t •
• i 4


JjjSfSaiL .-■ ~*~ f | I ByJBjjpSM^^v-^^ll
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
Telephone 100
Central Fruit and
Refreshment Cafe
MEAGER’S
Wholesale and
Retail Fruiterer,
Fitzmaurice St., Wagga
(Opp. Oddfellows’ Ha'li
progress this business has made is a solid
tact, courtesy and liberality in the treatment
of the public. F. Hams, Photos
The rapid and sound
testimony to energy
SPECIAL FEATURES.— Fresh fruit and vege-
tables daily. Customers waited on for orders.
Goods delivered to any part of the town. Country
orders a speciality. Hotel requirements thoroughly
understood. Choicest imported and Australian
confectionery only stocked. A choice selection of
fancy boxes always on hand. Cool drinks and ices.
Afternoon teas and light refreshments. Orders
taken for Loughnan’s Corunnan dairy.
The old established business, the Central Fruit
and Refreshment Cafe, has during the past thiee
F. Harris, Photos
Meager’s Cafe is now the generally recognised
place for an enjoyable cup of tea, with light
refreshments, or a delightfully cool drink.
years, under Mr. Hubert R. W. Meager’s manage-
ment, forged ahead so greatly that it now occupies
a foremost position in the commercial world of
Wagga. This establishment is appropriately styled,
being centrally situated right in the heart of the
business thoroughfare. The cafe is splendidly ap-
pointed in every detail, and no effort is spared to
cater very thoroughly for the requirements of the
community. Mr. Meager is ajceen buyer, and being
in touch with all the principal fruit centres, is en-
abled to obtain a daily supply of the finest grade of
fruits and vegetables in season. A special feature
of this business is the soft drinks branch.
A very handsome soda fountain, costing some
two hundred pounds, has been installed, and is
giving the greatest satisfaction to both the owner
and his customers. Fruit salads, delightfully made,
and ice cream can always be relied upon during the
warm months; while those in search of a refresh-
ing, invigorating, freshly brewed cup of tea, with
light refreshments, can rely on same at The Cen-
tral.” There they will also find comfort and quiet-
ness. A large stock of imported and Australian
confectionery is carried, and a speciality is made of
confectionery in beautiful boxes suitable for pre
sents. Mr. Meager, who personally supervises his
business, is universally esteemed for his liberal,
straight methods in business and the natural cour-
tesy extended to the numerous customers. Those
who have not yet visited “ The Central ” might do
so with advantage from more than one standpoint.


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
Phillips’ Motor Garage
Journeys undertaken to any part of Victoria and New South Wales,
ADDRESS: PASTORA
HOTEL.
AGGA
Two Modem and Powerful Russell Cars
Agent for Goodrich Motor Tyres,
Ring up Telephone No,
An illustration of Mr. Phillips’ “ Russell ” Cars, which ensure comfort, reliability and speed
In an up-to-date, pulsating town like Wagga, it is
not at all surprising to find that motor cars are in
such great demand. And one of the most successful
of the several garages is that conducted by Mr. H.
Phillips, who has two of the most powerful and up-to-
date, easy-running cars in provincial N.S.W. They
are the Russell 30 h.p. Mr. Phillips makes a special
feature of motor car hire work, and consequently his
cars are always kept in splendid condition for light
and easy running. The proprietor, who is a thorough
mechanic, having been olid df the leading men at the
Sunshine Motor Garage, Melbourne, before settling in
Wagga, is assisted by Mr. Ken. Gardner, who is
thoroughly well and popularly known as a careful and
competent driver throughout the Riverina. Since Mr.
Phillips’ advent in Wagga he has gradually increased
his business, until to-day it is high on the wave of
popularity. The general public desiring an easy-
running, speedy car can be strongly recommended to
call in at Phillips’ Garage, Pastoral Hotel, or ring up
'phone No. 39.


I
I **' . -
THE PROGRESS OF NEWTOWN.
\ sign of the times right enough. Handsome modern building recently erected for Mr. J. Sander-
son chemist, and occupied by the progressive firms of Carew and Sons the leading footwear firm
of Albury, who have put nearly £2OOO worth of boots, shoes, etc., into their M agga premises, and
the London and American Tailoring Company, who have opened up a highly creditable
selected stock of high-grade goods. Both firms are receiving solid, substantial support tiom Wagga
residents generally and Newtown’s population in particular.
I Thf CANBERRA I
* §
I The New Boot and Shoe Store,
f* 'S
I WAGGA WAGGA (Nearly Opposite Oddfellows’ Hall) |
nr
5?
**‘r
nr
~'r
5? Agent
i
I for
| MARSHALL’S
jr
f Boots.
i
s
nr
jfS
|
Men, Women,
Children.
I DIIXIV . M .. „ THE CANBERRA. WAGGA WAGGA. I
x W. BUNYAN, Manager. |


> ' ' ' . 1™"' < . ' ""
■ ____ ~~ " ’ / -^1
1 | r *l r Jli •jju VJpBp* jjMBI iP^v
WH<m
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
R G. NESBITT.
Wholesale and
Retail
Furniture
Warehouseman,
BAYLIS ST„
WAGGA.
Opposite C. HARDY & CO,
The large and prosperous furniture warehouse con-
trolled by Mr. R. G. Nesbitt has now been established
some four years. The proprietor made it his aim
right from the commencement to serve the public libe-
rally and thoroughly. The consequent and gradual ex-
tension of trade and increasing patronage have demon-
strated to him very plainly that he adopted the right
course. The business under review is both wholesale
and retail, the proprietor being enabled to do this on
account of the large quantities of furniture he is able
to buy and store at his commodious warehouse lit
Baylis-street. The following are some of the leading
features, large stocks of which are heldDrawing-
room suites, bedroom suites, dining-room suites, side-
boards, overmantels, lounges, pictures, extension tables,
chairs, linoleums, carpets and rugs, fenders and irons,
bedsteads and bedding, mirrors, washstands and ware,
kitchen furniture, hanging meat safes, summer blinds
and prams, etc., etc. In fact, every possible article one
requires in furniture and furnishings will be found at
Mr. Nesbitt s warehouse. The prices are equitable,
and consistent with the high-class goods only that he
stocks. Mr. Nesbitt is always glad to show old and
new customers over his fine, up-to-date warehouse.
Interior views of the warehouse.
F. Harris, Photos


w& ' Engineers r on,
R ° N ' C
t ►, . * "
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
Wenk and
Johnston,
Engineers,
Brass and Iron
Founders,
TOMPSON ST
WAGGA.
f LLLPHONE No. 318
The iron and brass foundry carried on so success-
fully by Messrs. Wenk and Johnston has been es-
tablished some seven years, and great headway is
being made by this progressive firm, both members
of which are thorough mechanics, and take an active
part in the supervision of the work entrusted to
them. A large staff of competent tradesmen is em-
ployed, which enables work to be turned out ex-
peditiously. And promptness is a great factor in
the success or otherwise of a business like the one
under review. The foundry in Tompson-street is
an exceptionally commodious one, and covers a
large area. The latest types of machinery have been
installed, and any class of engineering contract can
be carried out. A feature of this foundry lies in the
fact that it is self-contained. By that is meant that
every part and mould, etc., is made on the premises.
Wenk and Johnston supply all classes and patterns
of builders’ ironwork, a particular article manufac-
tured on a large scale being iron frieze for veran-
dahs and balustrades. This firm are manufacturers
of plummer blocks, pulleys, shafting, saw benches,
horseworks, chaffcutters, bagfillers, grain crushers,
plough shares, and brick making machinery. Other
leading features are: —Repairs to oil, gas, steam,
traction, and portable engines, and all kinds of ma-
chinery. Engineering and agricultural castings sup-
plied on the shortest notice. Duplicate parts of all
agricultural machines on hand. In stock: Boiler
tubes, steam pipes and fittings, bolts and nuts, fin-
ished shafting, Munz and white metal, leather belt-
ing, lubricating and cylinder oils, gauge glasses,
rubber rings, packings of every description, and all
kinds of engineering requisites on hand. Best ma-
terial and workmanship can be relied upon, and
charges are equitable. Correspondence is promptly
attended to.
F. Harris, Photos
Interior views of the foundry, showing moulding and engineering workshops.


It, j"-*
L*
‘ BUTCf^^^.
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
Central Butchery and Refrigerating Works
McGARRY 8R05.,
Wholesale and Retail Butchers.
Small Goods a
Specialty.
TELEPHONE 226
Baylis Street,
WAGGA.
If in any certain trade Wagga stands out more
fortunate it is in regard to the splendid service,
quality of meat and well equipped, hygienic but-
chery establishments. And one of the principal of
these is that now under review. Same was established
some 45 years ago by Mr. M. McGarry, who,
feeling he had done his part well, handed over the
Better than words—an illustration of interior.
F. Harris, Photos
prosperous concern to his sons, Messrs. H. E. and
F. McGarry, some two years ago. And they have
followed well the principles and business-like
actions of their father, with the result that to-day
one finds at Baylis-street (Newtown), Wagga,
business premises as well equipped 1 and up-to-
date in every detail as the best in any
city of Australia. It might sound extrava-
gant, but it is not. There are certainly city
shops more commodious, but not better ap-
pointed. White tiles have been inset into the walls,
and marble slabs and butchers’ blocks are so clean
that one could at any time enjoy a meal on same.
Neatness and scrupulous cleanliness are everywhere
manifest. All meat is kept in the large refrigerat-
ing chambers, and this is one of the factors in the
tenderness of McGarry’s meat —they are able to
kill on a large scale and hang the meat under the
best conditions, and to any required degree. Small
goods, which are a special feature for which
McGarry’s have secured a great name, are all made
on the premises under the best hygienic conditions,
and with the very finest ingredients. Meat is de-
livered daily and orders called for. Yes, from every
standpoint McGarry’s well deserve the success
gained; in fact, every business main does when he
caters thoroughly, liberally and fairly in the inte-
rests of the community.


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
J. C. BLAMLY & CO.,
Boots and Shoes. Drapers, Milliners, Mercers, Clothiers, etc.,
BAYLIS STRLLT (NLWTOWN), WAGGA.
SYSTEM OF BUSINESS; Ist—Selling at the Smallest Possible Profit; 2nd—Giving the Best Attention to Customers.
3rd —Selling only Reliable Goods.
Messrs. J. C. Blarney and Co.’s modern and splendidly stocked establishment, Baylis Street (New-
town), Wagga.
When the head of any large establishment has had
a varied and lengthy practical experience in any
certain class of business, he generally succeeds, for
the simple reason that he possesses not only the
experience, but he knows “ the ropes ” from A to Z.
And in the success of Messrs. Blarney and Co. that
fact is very much in evidence. The principal, Mr.
J. C. Blarney, although Wagga born and educa-
ted. wisely left his native town to gain experience
with leading firms in Sydney and the principal pro-
vincial towns of New South Wales. Experientia
docet ” is not a good maxim when applied to
racing, but it is when applied to business. With-
out experience—and the more varied it is so much
the better —one would need a gilt-edged father to
back him up.
Messrs. Blarney and Co. commenced business
some three years ago, and since that time their
progress has been sound, solid and emphatic. T hey
started off well, though, by purchasing a valuable
block of land centrally situated in Baylis-street, and
erected a handsome modern building, designed and
fashioned to enable the customer to inspect their
thousands of pounds’ worth of stock with the maxi-
mum of comfort and advantage and the minimum
of inconvenience. And to-day a visit to the fine
establishment will prove a surprise to one—a feel-
ing of pleasure. Drapery might be termed a lead-
ing feature, but by the time customers have visited
the clothing, tailoring, ladies’ ready-made costume
and footwear departments and the showroom,
which is in charge of a lady of lengthy city experi-
ence, they really feel that Blarney and Co. make
a leading feature of every department. In the
clothing department will be found a fine range of
suits, suitable for young and old. There is also a good
selection of the latest patterns of tweeds and suit-
ings. Blarney and Co. have secured a splendid
reputation for the excellence, fit and style of their
tailor-made suits. The boot and shoe department
is exceptionally well supplied with a stock that illus-
trates strongly that Blarney and Co.’s buyer knows
his business well. Dressmaking is carried out on
the premises. This firm have just opened up some
of the latest styles in ladies’ ready-to-wear cos-
tumes. An inspection should prove both payable
and satisfactory. In every possible manner Blarney
and Co. are catering well for the public, and it is
indeed pleasant to know that their efforts are being
appreciated, and have been solidly rewarded.


'
■ gj ||l
life •
m$?m i |||!
,w -~ : | I
mm ' v 'i" jpOi. i *■" x
lsm Wf< *. Jtm& v * pMB^^st^v^l
>. ..Jam I
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
Code: CAHILL’S STOCK and STATION. Telephone Nos.: OFFICE 303. PRIVATE HOUSE 294, P.O. BOX 84.
Thomas Flanagan & Co
Principal, T. M. FLANAGAN (30 Years Resident in the Wagga District.)
STOCK AND PROPERTY SALESMEN,
Local Agents—State Insurance Co., Live Stock, Lightning,
Bush Fires, Motor Cars, Stacks, Crops, Accident, etc.
Fitzmaurice Street.
AGGA
The firm of Thomas Flanagan and Co., which was
established in 1912, has made one special feature
of their business —land and stock—right from the
commencement, believing that it was better to con-
centrate their whole energy and lengthy experience
in that particular feature. The idea proves to have
been a wise one, as this firm have been distinctly
successful from every standpoint. In land trans-
actions quite a £lOO,OOO worth has changed hands
through their agency, and in live stock sales the
record is a splendid one. Flanagan and Co.’s busi-
ness extends over a wide area, both throughout
the States of New South Wales and Victoria.
A point worthy of mention is the manner
in which the scores of clients still continue
to transact their business, whether in land or stock,
through Flanagan and Co. That in itself is an
excellent and sound testimonial to the solid
and earnest manner the firm under review have
studied their clients’ interests. The principal of the
firm is Mr. T. M. Flanagan, who has been connected
with the Wagga district some 30 years. He has
always taken a keen interest in the welfare of the
Wagga district, and has certainly done his share
in forwarding its interests. The office is in Fitz-
maurice-street, almost adjoining Sanderson’s Phar-
macy. Correspondence is invited, and any infor-
mation concerning the district, land and stock
available, etc., will be cheerfully given. And if this
firm do give advice concerning the buying and sell-
ing of land and stock, that advice can always be
relied upon as sound and solid.
Messrs. T. Flanagan and Co.’s office


ppx ■“ ' ' ——^-T—
' >
. I -H $
■
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
CORONATION BAKLRY
Established 1900.
’Phone 263.
FITZMAURICL STRLLT, WAGGA.
D. F. COYNE
Wedding and Christening Cakes
made to Order.
Balls and Parties Catered for.
The progress of Mr. D. F. Coyne’s bakery business
is of chief interest, because it serves to demonstrate
what it is possible to do in the Riverina within a period
of three years by constant and judicious attention to
business, and supplying the public with a first-class
article. Less than three years ago Mr. Coyne was
carrying on business in small, unpretentious premises;
to-day he has one of the most modern dwellings and
finest equipped bakehouses in provincial N.S.W. The
new building is in Fitzmaurice-street, and is one of
the few modern buildings at the upper end of that
thoroughfare. The present extensive trade has not
been secured by the proprietor’s popularity—it is in the
splendid quality of the bread and small goods he sup-
plies to the public. Many may wonder why Coyne’s
A corner of the commodious, well-equipped bakery.
The recently-erected modern premises.
F. Harris, Photo
bread is always so beautifully white, spongy, and keeps
fresh for the whole week —even in the hottest weather.
The reason lies simply in the fact that he employs
first-class tradesmen, and has built one of the largest
and most up-to-date ovens, fitted up with the latest
improvements for those skilful bakers to work with.
The best men in the universe cannot bake properly
with an inferior oven, and many bakers unfortunately
have them. This exceptional oven for a country town
of Mr. Coyne’s is one of Thomas T. Kitchen’s make.
Seven hundred 2 lb. loaves can be baked in one batch,
and the reason that Coyne’s bread doesn’t crumble and
remains spongy even fully a week is simply because
he has installed his oven with spraying generators,
which can be regulated to spray the dough while being
baked. The compiler has watched the apparatus at
work, and it is undoubtedly a splendid idea. Two carts
are engaged delivering bread daily. Regarding the
bakehouse installed by Mr. Coyne, he is to be com-
plimented on the well-ventilated, scrupulously clean
bakery, where everything is carried out on the best
hygienic principles possible.


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
A. LEWIS & CO
Ladies’ and Gentlemen’s Fashionable
Tailors, Hatters,
Men’s Mercers, and General Outfitters,
Fitzmaurice st, Wagga.
Messrs. A. Lewis and Co., who have now been estab-
lished some 26 years at Wagga, rank amongst the fore-
most ladies’ and gentlemen’s tailoring firms of N.S.W.,
and a fact worth mentioning is that, after being before
the public for such a lengthy period, their business has
never been in a more flourishing state than to-day.
That undoubtedly demonstrates that this firm must
have treated their customers liberally and in a satisfy-
ing manner. Judging by personal knowledge, the com-
piler firmly believes that not one person in Wagga and
district can say that Lewis and Co. didn’t make them
a highly satisfactory suit or costume. They employ
a first-class cutter, and thoroughly experienced tailors,
tailoresses, and pressers to execute the large and ex-
tensive trade throughout the Riverina and as far as
Sydney. It may sound like exaggeration to say that
suits are frequently forwarded to Sydney (of course,
to one-time Wagga residents, who still stitch their
faith to Lewis and Co.). The compiler saw a quite
natural, unsolicited testimonial which Lewis and Co.
might well be proud of. It was post-marked from
Paris, and the writer mentioned:—“l am now wearing
one of the several suits you made so well and artistic-
ally for me, and, although Paris is recognised as the
Beau Brummel for fashion, I really believe, any way
I feel, and am sure I look, just as fashionable as the
best in this little village.” Yes, that’s an excellent
testimonial, but if all of Lewis and Co.’s cus-
tomers were to express their high opinion on paper,
the principal (Mr. A. Lewis) would become tired of
opening the letters. Lewis and Co. have invariably a
F. Harris, Photos
Messrs. Lewis and Co.’s modern premises, Fitz-
maurice Street, Wagga.
large and first-class ra*ge of suitings to select from,
d hey import all cloth themselves direct, and have so
arranged that the most artistic cloth is selected by
their agent, suitable for a high-class trade, which has
always been their forte.
F. Harris, Photos
Interior view, illustrating the heavy and fashionable stock carried by Messrs. Lewis and Co., the tailors
who have for 26 years given such satisfactory results to their numerous customers.


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
HOVE & COLBECK,
Funeral Directors and Lmbalmers,
Head Office: GURWOOD ST., WAGGA.
TELEPHONE. 72.
BRANCH: COWABBIE ST., COOLAMON
WreatFis, Crosses, and Cards. Headstones and Monuments Supplied.
Cabinet Makers and UpFiolsterers. Venetian Blind Makers. Picture Framers
1 and 2. The picture framing departments. 3. The most complete of funeral plants. 4 The monu-
mental yards—Hoye and Colbeck is the recognised leading monumental firm m the^verma.^^
The above establishment is one of the oldest
in the Riverina, dating back to 1857. The
present firm, Messrs. Hoye and Colbeck, have con-
ducted same successfully since 1893, and their name
has always been associated with the best class of work
and an earnest desire to carry out contracts promptly
and in first-class style. Both partners are actively con-
nected in the concern, assisted by a large staff of
competent employees. Their plant for funerals is a
modern one in every detail, and, as funeral directors,
Messrs. Hoye and Colbeck are noted for the manner
necessary arrangements are made, and the style and
way in which same are carried out. Their business
to-day is very extensive, and one that has been
secured by sheer sound and solid merit. Correspon-
dence is invited and promptly attended to.


' ~ jj| ,♦ . , * - - \ , J
«I|l»jsjb§SbBBBm^.js^K.Hr'ijys •■ j
I . fs i iwwyyS^
—Jftu r*'\ ;;„r ' - *»■ X? Si
-TM*w— ——■— .
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
The business of Messrs. Hunter Bros, is one of the
oldest in Wagga, having been established in
1866. This prosperous and important concern of
to-day has been through many vicissitudes, hut out of
each one it continued to grow and progress. The
three accompanying illustrations may prove of interest
athlete can require that will not be found at Hunter's - ,-
excepting a rowing boat, perhaps.
At the newspaper and stationery department will be
found all daily and weekly newspapers, magazines,
ladies’ journals, etc. Several thousands of books to se-
lect from—historical, scientific and fiction. In the sta-
The premises a few years later,
to the public, as they demonstrate the primitive build-
ing of early days—the first structural improvement and
the last one, which has given Hunter Bros, perhaps
one of the most modern and well-equipped business
premises between the two cities, Melbourne and Syd-
ney. Sound foresight was shown by the proprietors in
deciding upon such large and fine plate-glass windows,
which certainly stand out predominant in Wagga. The
reason the firm decided upon this idea was simply be-
cause carrying, as they do, some thousands of pounds’
worth of high-class quality stock, they desired to enable
the public to view a fair sample, in passing, of goods
that are lying on the shelves awaiting purchasers.
“ Hunter’s on the Hill ” is the recognised leading
house for jewellery in Wagga. They pay particular
attention to this branch of their business, and a vast
stock and splendid range of the latest styles in
jewellery are carried. They specialise so thoroughly
in this department that it is questionable if the public
of any town in New South Wales is better catered
for. Then a point worth noting is that the sound
reputation of Hunter Bros, is a solid guarantee
that every article sold is of the quality guaranteed.
Prices for jewellery, electroplate ware, etc., are low,
for the simple reason that the firm’s turnover is such
a large one. Watchmaking is also executed promptly
by competent tradesmen. “ Hunter’s on the Hill ”
also make a great feature of sporting goods—games,
ammunition, boxing, golf, tennis, cricket, football,
croquet goods; in fact, there is not an article the
tionery department a great feature is made of school
papers and books (particularly for presentation pur-
poses). Hunter Bros, do a considerable trade in
prize books, suitable for Sunday-schools and
picnic presentations. A circulating library on a liberal
scale has also been established. It contains thousands
The original premises, 47 years ago.


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT,
of volumes, including all the latest literature, and
each successive quarter Hunter’s library is increasing
in public esteem and popularity. Postcards of every
describable kind are stocked in galore, and the agency
for Anderson’s seeds, which have proved so reliable,
is held by this firm. There is no gainsaying the fact
that the liberal and up-to-date manner in which “Hun-
ter’s on the Hill ” have catered for the Wagga and
district community during the past 47 years well
merits the extensive support accorded them from the
public. They have always had one sound business
purpose in the foreground, and that has been to give
the public a fine assortment of high-grade goods to
select from, and offer them at a fair and reasonable
price. And to-day they have a sound, healthy repu-
tation as commercial men, and are certainly one of
the most prosperous and progressive concerns in New
South Wales.
Their huge special New Year stock has recently been
opened up. The public should not fail to call and
inspect. A visit will prove both interesting and profit-
able.
SOME INTERESTING INTERIOR VIEWS OF “HUNTERS ON THE HILL.”
1. Illustrating the splendid stock of jewellery, watches, clocks, electroplate ware carried. 2. The
musical instrument, postcard, and sporting goods department. 3. The music, sewing machine, port-
manteau, book, and another portion of sporting goods department. 4. The stationery, newspaper,
and magazine department. F. Harris, Photos
HUNTER BROS.,
FITZMAURICE STREET, WAGGA.


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
The land that has been sold through this firm's
instrumentality in the' Wagga district probably
amounts to between £300,000 and £400,000 in value.
In 1885 Mr. Fosbery was appointed by the Minis-
ter for Lands a member of the first Land Board for
the districts of Wagga Wagga, Narandera, Gun-
dagai, Urana and Cootamundra, a position he occu-
pend upon the latest and most reliable information
respecting Crown lands to be- thrown open for
selection, and forms, plans and personal descrip-
tion of available lands are forwarded gratuitously
on application. As a land valuer Mr. Fosbery has
been entrusted with many important matters by
some of the' largest financial institutions of the
Commonwealth.
Mr. Fosbery, the principal of this progressive firm, at work in his private office
pied for several years. After having closely studied
and made himself thoroughly acquainted with the
land laws of this State and methods of administra-
tion, he resigned and settled in business as a land
agent and general adviser on all matters connected
with the intricate land laws of New South Wales.
The firm now occupies a premier position in that
respect, and the opinions given are valued with the
attention and .respect that so wide and lengthy an
experience justifies. Land-seekers can always de-
While the land department is undoubtedly the
strongest feature of Messrs. Fosbery and Co.’s
business, yet they have a wide and influential con-
nection in the auctioneering, property and insurance
department. The fact that the business under review
is at the present time still a leading firm, enjoying
the confidence and respect of a large clientele,
obviously demonstrates how well and genuinely
their various transactions have been conducted and
carried out over a period of two decades.


■
' '
V-
y-. • % •., ■
t S < '«- '♦
r I i ti . i ''■&'■* '®* j ptffi *rtji'i iffi*
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
ESTABLISHED 1866.
TELEPHONE, No. 73.
HUNTER BROS.,
FITZMAURICE STREET, WAGGA
Silverware, Watches, Clocks. Stationery, School Books,
Prize Books, Post Cards.
Jewellery,
Tobacco,
Cigars, Pipes. Fancy Goods, Optical Goods,
Table -Cutlery, Pocket Knives.
f
7
Various Departments.—Guns, Rifles, Ammunition,
Cricket Materials, Golf, Tennis, Football, Sewing Ma-
chines, Pianos, Phonographs, Gramophones, Records,
Violins and Fittings, Accordeons, Concertinas, Blow
Hunter Bros.’ Magnificent Premises, Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga, 1914.
Vegetable Seeds, etc.
Harris, Bhotos
Accordeons, Mouth Organs, Flageolettes, Toilet Requi-
sites, Crockery, Fancy Glassware, Toys, Flowers, Bas-
ketware, Leatherware, Travelling Bags, Pictures, Pic-
ture Frames, Photo Frames, Hampers, Flower and


x. : ■ ' ; r | |J||IM |' inni'nnrnnji-
•t Jf I. 111 * W k \w\ 91 "I k I » ■
• Jk v « B I" M k i "hI
■a,j
t ; r *
■
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
E. H. FERGUSON,
tobacconist, Stationer, anb
3fanq> (3oofes,
Agent for—Madame Weigel’s Paper Patterns,
American and English Fashion Journals.
Latest Books and Periodicals.
Yates’ Fresh Vegetables and Flower Seeds
Always in Stock.
CIRCULATING LIBRARY.
’Phone 268.
Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga
One of the most flourishing and prosperous busi-
nesses in Wagga is that conducted by Mr. E. H.
Ferguson. It is an old established one, dating-
back to 1893, but during the past three years, since
Mr. Ferguson’s advent, increasing trade in every
department has marked its progress. The main
reasons are on account of the liberal manner the
public are catered for and the popularity of the
proprietor, who is assisted by a decidedly courteous
staff, In the news agency department will be found
all the various daily papers, magazines, illustrated
weeklies, etc., while a varied range of stationery,
post cards (including Wagga views), etc., is always
on hand. The fancy goods department is heavily
stocked with a great variety of toys, bags, novel-
ties, etc., suitable for birthday and other various
presentations. Mothers should not fail to take their
children on a visit to Ferguson’s fancy goods de-
partment. A special feature is made of fishing
tackle, guns, ammunition—in fact, all kinds of
sporting goods. Good quality is very necessary
in such goods, and the public can rely on their
purchases thoroughly in that respect at Ferguson’s,
The hairdressing saloon is well lighted, and ad-
mirably appointed in every detail, the comfort of
the customer having evidently been made a first
consideration. A quick, easy shave, under
thoroughly hygienic conditions, an exhilarating
shampoo or an artistic haircut can always be relied
upon at Ferguson’s, justifiably noted as one of the
best in the Riverina.
The up-to-date shaving saloon, and the interior of the news agency and fancy goods department. F. Harris, Photos


mm
~ y MTb^WHWPBbi
. ■ ■ y-s. afe -ioEL TI i J a m A k’ B|
JK I i H i
•'•"«<• "’ l * l “—**’**' ‘*1
'"* ir r w j
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
The offices, Wagga.
The extensive stock and station business of
Wheatley and Cullen’s, at Wagga, is one of the
largest and most important in the Riverina. Their
stock sales, which are held at the municipal yards
or alternate Thursdays, are invariably successful,
both buyers and sellers recognising that heavy
yardings are always assured at Wheatly and
Cullen’s. There is always a' large attendance,
and keen competition naturally follows; in
fact, the one prevailing and noticeable feature is
the spirited bidding and vim that attend these
sales. It is not only with the stock sales though;
it is just the same when their special horse sales
are held in the spring and autumn. Each succeed-
ing one has proved a greater success, with a gradual
increase in the number of horses yarded. At the
last one, illustrations of which appear above, splen-
did prices were realised; but it is only fair to add
Wheatley & Cullen
Stock and Station Agents,
Land Salesmen,
and Wheat Buyers
FITZMAURICE ST.,
AGGA.
D. Mcßae, Photos
An illustration of one of the large stock sales
transacted through Wheatley and Cullen.


l£!R8«a»®SP3We®' '. ! '***' » L, ' V * » ' ***** J
I^^Ji 1 ''' 1 !* <J^|P^^ i »
* * | || |[ffi-iff | rr^ > iiiii |ll |[|' '"'“” M *X 1
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
that the horses yarded were of a distinctly high
order, especially in the draught class. Clearing
sales are held in any part of New South Wales,
while their own cars, kept in order by their own
first-class mechanic, are provided for stock and
property inspection by intending buyers. This
the State with prospective buyers. This firm are
also large buyers of wheat each season; they are
prepared to offer the highest possible price. The
prosperous Wagga business is ably managed by
Mr. I. Cullen, who for many years was deeply in-
terested in the commercial and public life of Moss
Interesting views of a most successful horse sale recently held by Wheatley and Cullen at Wagga
firm have an excellent and experienced staff, who
are imbued with the principal’s idea—guarding and
furthering each client’s interests in every detail.
The feeding of stock in yards and trucking of same
are supervised by the firm under review.
It might be advisable to mention that Wheatley
and Cullen, when required, travel to any part of
Vale. Since his advent to Wagga the business of
the firm has not only been well maintained, but
considerably increased in every department—stock,
land and wheat buying. Those entrusting their
business to the firm under review can rest assured
that it will be capably attended to in every detail.
HEATLEV
8c CULLEN,
STOCK AND STATION AGENTS.
FITZMAURICE ST., WAGGA.


.
\fW *' -y ■ -j| ■:■. " '
p> mw 1 9vmmmmmm
[■ <: ,-.
p" ' ■ . -aj^
I -
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
'PHONE 158.
H. OATES,
Merchant Tailor, Hatter, Mercer, and Men’s Outfitter,
Specialist in Boots, Hats, and all Men’s Wear,
GURWOOD STREET,
AGG A.
V
A
F. Harris, Photo
The modern and splendidly stocked (with high-grade goods) tailor
ing and mercery establishment of Mr. Hugh Oates.
By sheer merit has the present large and important
business been brought to its present high standard and
opinion in the public mind. No one can gainsay that
the proprietor has worked assiduously to succeed, and
the greatest kudos is due to him for so successfully
working up the present extensive and influential con-
nection. It is just fourteen years ago since Mr. Oates
commenced on his own account in the main thorough-
fare of Wagga in a quiet, unassuming style. But, al-
though that first shop was small, good tailoring work
went out of same. As trade gradually increased, Mr.
Oates moved into larger premises in Gurwood-street,
which he stocked with a heavy, high-class quality of
Ijats, mercery, boots and shoes—in fact, every article
of men’s wear. And, as Wagga progressed, so did
this business —so much so that eventually the adjoining
shop was taken, and both made into one, with the re-
sult that to-day Mr. Oates possesses one of the most
modern and best equipped establshments in Wagga,
carrying a stock of suit lengths in the latest fashions,
high-class articles of men’s wear equal to that fo any
similar firm in provincial N.S.W. “ Oates’ Building ”
is a two-storeyed structure, and all tailoring is carried
out in its entirety in the workrooms on the first floor


/ : iiHMHKi - |i|l?IP\ | rn—Taf . ®SR / m/ a K
i- .aii»ir~~*^~IJ * J» If \ f jf : ; 'i j» «Jpl«fr3Ml» *' Bk _,*
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
by a large and competent staff of tailors and tailor-
esses The proprietor personally supervises the busi-
ness, and does the cutting of suits himself, which is a
big f a ctor in the success he has gamed. He measures
himself, takes into consideration any physical pecu-
liarity of a customer and his desires in any certain
direction, and thus is enabled to use judgment in cut-
received from various Riverine towns, notably The
Rock, Coolamon, Junee, Lockhart and Cootamundra.
Naturally orders from far-away Riverina towns are
always pleasing, because each one is a very practical
testimonial, as it were, of his ability and skill in suit-
ing everyone. Although a decidedly busy commercial
man, yet Mr. Oates finds time to assist in various pub-
F. Harris, Photo
Illustrating the boot
department. A very extensive trade is transacted in footwear
ting out. Also another point worthy of mention is
that Mr. Oates, with his many years of expreience
and natural artistic taste (which is really necessary in
a successful cutter), ranks amongst the leading men
in N.S.VV. But the business under review is not limited
to Wagga solely. Every month scores of orders are
lie affairs. He is one of the most energetic and cer-
tainly fearlessly outspoken aldermen of the Wagga
council, and is also a member of the hospital commit-
tee. In fact, he can be termed a public-spirited man
in every way, who does just what is expected of a
good, sound, progressive citizen.
F. Harris, Photos
Where Oates’ noted suits are made. The tailoring Illustrating the commodious, heavily stocked tailor-
staff at work. ing and mercery departments.


,%*». -• ■ * a
-I I d li i -. a Ite - “ :
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
“CURLEY’S”
Newsagency and First-class Hairdressing Saloon,
Fancy Goods and
Sporting Goods Depot,
aylis Street (Newtown), Wagga
#
#
#
#
m
#
$
Curley’s modern and heavily stocked premises, Baylis Street, Wagga
Newtown can nowadays claim some fine, up-to-
date business premises, and one that is well worthy
of mention is “ Curley’s ” newsagency depot and
fancy goods emporium. It is centrally situated in
Baylis-street, but two or three minutes from the
railway station. Established some seven years ago,
the growth has been consistent and solid. The first
w
#
F. Harris, Photos
shop opened was of rather a primitive nature, but
to-day this modern one carries a stock running well
into thousands of pounds, while the trade has in-
creased a hundredfold. The newsagency depart-
ment is well stocked with daily papers, weeklies,
periodicals, and magazines published in Australia
and England. In fact, any paper “Curley’s” do not


«L ■■ mk ■^:' ...
Im It m ' i|Ji • fry •- • .? »|B
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
CURLLY’S Newsagency and Hairdressing saioon
NEWTOWN.
Curley’s well-equipped and appointed hairdressing saloon
happen to stock will be obtained specially for a
customer. A large and varied range of fancy goods
can be inspected, and in this department one will
find it hard to ask for anything that is not obtain-
able. hishing tackle, English imported, is a special
feature at “ Curley’s.” A great trade is done in
this line, and an inspection by those interested in
fishing can be recommended. The hairdressing
saloon is splendidly equipped and well appointed in
Harris, Photo
every detail. Scrupulous cleanliness is one of the
most important factors in the success of “ Curley’s ”
saloon, coupled with the fact that the barbers em-
ployed are not only splendid workmen, but smart,
courteous, and capable. To those who have not yet
inspected “ Curley’s ” progressive, up-to-date pre-
mists, a visit can be strongly recommended. They
will find quality, price, and a fine, varied range to
choose from that is really surprising.
Views of the news agency, stationery and fancy goo ds departments. F Harris, Photos


— — irwy V * ' " ' A ' ' —
i> It,-
•* • | \ .. r~ i r \ * m *4 ****
a >**✓ J
(P- jr Jv U •£/ j ' jm
J
m*
s *‘ j ** ■ • 'tm y* Iiii
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
A. ROSS,
FITZMAURICE ST.. WAGGA.
Baker and Pastrycook
small Goods a Special Feature.
Birthday and Wedding Cakes any Desired Design
One of the leading bakery businesses of Wagga is
that established by Mr. A. Ross some ten years ago.
The proprietor commenced well by turning out a splen-
did quality of bread and small goods, which has been
well maintained up to the present time, with the con-
sequent and natural result that trade expanded with
the growth of Wagga, and to-day Mr. Ross, who is one
of the best bakers and pastrycooks himself in the
State, controls an exceedingly prosperous business. The
bakehouse is excellently equipped in every detail,
everything being so arranged that scrupulous cleanli-
ness can be observed, and the work carried out with
the minimum of lost time and inconvenience. Several
competent men are engaged, but, all the same, Mr.
Ross still assists and actively superintends the w'ork.
He is a strong believer in retaining a good reputation
for goods if you once obtain it. Catering is under-
taken and the supplying of small goods, and a fact that
might be very genuinely emphasised is that small
goods from the bakery under review are ..made from
the best-material only, and the public can rely on
same with every degree of comfort. Bread is delivered
daily, two carts being utilised. Tt is pleasing to record
the success Mr. Ross enjoys as a business man, for
8
m ;
W>
he not only supplies the public with a first-class article,
but as a citizen is one of the first to support and per-
sonally assist in any good cause where the public
interests of Wagga are concerned.
USD
U
Exterior view of Ross’s splendidly-equipped bakehouse.


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
L. J. Tonkin & Co
Fruit Merchants, Confectioners,
etc.
Baylis Street (Newtown),
Wagga
there is no doubt that Messrs. Tonkin and Co.,
when establishing their present prosperous business
some twelve months ago, were imbued and fully
seized with the importance of launching, it off on
thorough and first-class lines. Those factors have
been the principal ones in the success attained. Their
modern premises, heavily stocked with the choicest
fruits and English, Australian and Continental con-
fectionery, various kinds of summer drinks and power-
ful modern soda fount, are one of the features of
Newtown. Messrs. Tonkin and Co. have a great ad-
vantage in possessing their own orchard at Adelong.
The area is some 30 acres, planted with cherry, lemon,
plum, peach, apricot, pear, gooseberry, etc., trees.
This orchard is now some fourteen years' old, and is
quite in the full bearing stage. Fruit is received
daily from Adelong, but in addition a considerable
amount is obtained from the best markets of the prin-
cipal centres of New South Wales and Victoria. Ton-
kin and Co. control an extensive and high-class trade,
which is continually increasing. Regarding the
premises, they are excellently fitted up to
the minutest detail, and no expense has
been spared in catering for the public liberally. On
Saturdays their window display is equal, in both quality
of goods and style, to the best shops of a similar kind
in the cities. 1 hose who have not yet visited Tonkin
and Co.’s might do so with advantage to themselves
D. Mcßae, Photos
These premises are noted far and wide for the ex-
ceptional quality of fruit, confectionery, etc., stocked.
They will find their prices reasonable and fair; in
fact, chiefly because Tonkin and Co. import confec-
tionery direct largely, and receive fruit from their own
orchard, they are thus enabled to sell at bedrock prices.
Tonkin and Co.’s premises adjoin the Empire Hall,
Baylis-strcet.
interior views, illustrating the style and splenlid appointments at Tonkin and Co.’s. n. Mcßae, Photos


|||k a
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
J. WEBBER
Wool, Skin,
Hide and Tallow
Merchant,
BAYLIS STREET.
WAGGA.
Agent City Mutual Fire Insurance
Company,
Fire, Accident and Marine. ’
PATON, BURNS’ FERTILISERS.
Agent for Mitchell & Co.’s
Farm Implements, Drills, Ploughs,
Harvesters, Cultivators, etc.
James Smith’s Chaffcutters.
Wood’s Binders.
The remarkable and rapid progress of Wagga
district in recent years is reflected naturally in many
of its commercial houses. And the one under re-
view is a striking illustration of the value of energy,
perseverance and application of knowledge judi-
ciously applied. Mr. W. J. Webber, although only
established some three years, is to-day one of the
largest locally resident wool and skin buyers in
provincial New South Wales. His commodious,
modern wool and skin warehouse, which can ac-
commodate many hundreds of bales of wool and a
vast quantity of skins, hides, tallow, etc., is con-
veniently situated in Baylis-street, adjacent to the
railway station. While it was a far-sighted idea
on the proprietor’s part to build on such a large
scale some three years ago, yet, with the gradual
and enormous increase of business during the past
eighteen months, still further additions are con-
templated in the near future. The area of the
business has grown so greatly that wool and skins
are purchased not only in Riverina, but practically
throughout New South Wales. A great factor in
the success of this pulsating establishment is that
the farmers and squatters have found Mr. Webber
a sound, solid business man, possessing a remark-
ably accurate value of wool and skins. He pays
cash, and there is no commission or other deduc-
tion of any kind, and that is a great and favourable
point in the success of local wool warehouses over
the larger city ones.
Mr. Webber, with that energy and perseverance
which is inherent in his nature, is also proprietor
of a fine, up-to-date butchery establishment at The
Rock; and there it is just the same as at Wagga—
no reasonable expense has been spared in thoroughly
equipping the business wth the latest and most
modern improvements. The compiler questions if
any town the same size as The Rock can boast of
such a modern butchery establishment conducted
on such ideally hygienic conditions as Mr. Webber s.
Correspondence is invited and promptly attended to.
The agency for Mitchell and Co.’s well-known
farm implements is held by the firm under review,
and a great success has been made of same. Prac-
tically the whole of the wool purchased by Mr.
Webber is exported to the Continent. Another
agency held worthy of mention is for the Scott Bail
cutivator. There are hundreds in use in the Rive-
rina, and farmers are practically unanimous in their
opinion as to its durability and suitability, also the
satisfactory results obtained from this cultivator.
View of the wool, skin and hide Warehouse.


i
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
FOOT’S PHARMACY,
AYLIS STREET, WAGGA.
Established over Twenty Years.
The well-known and splendidly-stocked pharmacy,
popularly known as “ Foot’s Pharmacy,” in Baylis-
street, Wagga, was established some 20 years ago.
Mr. J. H. Foot, the proprietor, many years ago
secured a sound reputation for his pharmacy work,
which is really the special feature of the business
under review, and that reputation has been admir-
ably maintained. The proprietor is one of the
oldest members of the Pharmaceutical Society, es-
tablished in 1876, having been almost one of the
foundation members. Prescriptions are made up
promptly and from the purest of drugs only. The
public may possibly not know that it is of great
importance—the dispensing of medicine accurately
and with skill. Accurate dispensing of drugs is a
more important matter than the public might think,
and that is merely the compiler’s reason for men-
tioning the success and reputation, extending over
30 years, secured by Mr. J. H. Foot. His premises
are centrally situated in Wagga on a commanding
corner block. They are up to date, well appointed,
and a varied and carefully selected stock is carried.
It is questionable whether a better appointed and
more modern pharmacy could be found in the
various States. There are certainly larger ones,
but not more up to date. Mr. Foot, having made
such a thorough study of pharmacy, is enabled to
place before the public several valuable prepara-
tions, which his numerous clients prefer to many
of the proprietary boomed medicines. They are to
be complimented on their wisdom, for in this mat-
ter the reputation of Mr. Foot is, metaphorically
speaking, labelled on each bottle as a guarantee of
its efficacy. Amongst many preparations manu-
factured at Foot’s Pharmacy might be mentioned
“ Benzalmo ” face cream, a splendid and soothing
cream for the complexion; “ Kosine,” a corn cure
that stands unrivalled for the cure of corns.- This
progressive business is not confined to Wagga only.
Medicine is despatched, securely packed, to prac-
tically every portion of the Riverina, and the postal
department is a ■continually growing one. Per-
sonally, Mr. hoot is one of Wagga’s most un-
assuming and yet progressive commercial men, who
takes a keen interest in the welfare of a town and
district he is so well respected in.
Interior of a corner of the commodious, well-
appointed pharmacy.


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT
BYRNES BROS
“Marble Arch”
Butchering Establishment
FITZMAURICE STREET, WAGGA
The Noted House for Prime Frleat and
First-Class Small Goods.
One of the leading butchery establishments in the
Riverina is that of Messrs. Byrnes Bros., Fitzmaurice-
street, Wagga. For the past twenty years this firm
have been supplying the public with the primest of
meat and high-grade quality of small goods. And
as a matter of fact their great reputation has never
been more pronounced and higher than it is to-day.
Their premises in Fitzmaurice-street are centrally
situated and equipped with all the latest ideas from
a hygienic standpoint—marble slabs are so predomi
nant that the establishment is generally known as
the “ Marble Arch.” The proprietors are both prac-
tical tradesmen and sound judges of quality in stock,
which is the principal reason this firm are enabled
to secure the primest Quality available. I hey make
it their business and practice to attend the various
markets of the Riverina, and, provided the quality is
“The Marble Arch,” where the prime meat is sold, Wagga.
D. Mcßae, l*hc;o
there, the price never prevents Byrnes Bros, from
acquiring a line of sheep or bullocks. A fiist-class
plant has been installed for manufacturing small goods,
which are made solely from the’best ingredients. Two
carts are engaged in the delivery of orders. It is
pleasant to record the success that has attended the
efforts of the firm under review, as no expense has
been spared in catering for the requirements of the
public on a liberal scale. Every care is taken in
the handling of meat, and an inspection of the killing
yards demonstrated that the same scrupulous pre-
caution in cleanliness is taken there as in the estab-
lishment in the main thoroughfare of Wagga. Apart
from their commercial life in Wagga. the proprie-
tors have in every possible way freely given their
assistance to any object for the welfare of \\ agga
and district.
1 Interior view of “ The Marble Arch,” illustrating the quality of meat that has built up Byrnes Bros.’
great reputation. 2 and 3. Byrnes Bros, driving prime bullocks to their yards after a Wagga sa.e,
secured at a high price.


&
¥
a .
Trrrn . » • * ■'jfW
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
GEORGE SHA
General view of Mr. George Shaw’s Produce Store and Woodyard
Baylis Street, Wagga. D. Mcßae, Photos
Wood and Produce
Merchant,
BAYLIS STREET (Newtown),
WAGGA
TELEPHONE, 160.
Crushed Oats, Chaff, Corn and
Wood Supplied Promptly.
Personal Attention Given to alt
Orders.
The thriving wood and produce business in Bay-
lis-street, Wagga, has now been controlled by Mr.
George Shaw some five years. The wood yards
cover a large area,' and the extensive trade con-
trolled necessitates the holding of hundreds of
tons of wood. The cutting mill is a modern one,
and can easily keep pace with requirements. The
produce store is a commodious one, and can accom-
modate a vast quantity of hay, chaff, corn, etc. Mr.
Shaw is a big buyer of produce in quantities, and
this enables him to retail at favourable prices to
his hundreds of customers. Orders are promptly
attended to. This expanding business is under the
personal supervision of Mr. Shaw, who is one of
Wagga’s most enthusiastic trotting men, he being
both an owner of several good horses, and one of
the most capable drivers in the Riverina. At the
last trotting meeting held at Wagga he was suc-
cessful as reinsman in three out of four starts.
Interior view of part of the produce store.
]). Mcßae, Photos
Mr. Shaw is an enthusiastic owner of trotting horses.
The illustration shows Lady 8., Mr. Fred. Lovell
driving Winnie, and Marvin Wilkie.


'm w
HHHHHI 9MHb It
• ™ 1 aBgEpjf §| « 1 ■HHMyHHI I
. * ,.„*“ *~ s
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
THE. STATE. STORES LTD.,
General Merchants,
GURWOOD STREET, WAGGA.
All Goods at Sydney and Melbourne Prices.
View of the State Stores, one of the largest concerns in N.S.W. Their trade, with Mr. Barham’s
advent as manager at Wagga, is still steadily increasing. D. Mcßae, Photo
Manager Wagga branch : R. A. BARHAM.
LEADING FEATURES:
Drapery, Grocery, Crockery, Ironmongery, Glassware, Beds and
Bedding, Boots and Shoes, Ladies’ Ready-to-Wear Costumes.
Lvery possible requisite for home and farm supplied.
STORES AT:
COBAR, REDFERN, TAMWORTH AND WARREN.
Inspection ot our thousands of pounds’ worth of stock cordially invited


'^ tjg.L, '' M 1 ""' 111 1, i| SKwi^p^
~TBi$' m **$$&& »ii li ?aL.
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
That successful company, the State Stores Ltd., has
made wonderful progress since entering the commer-
cial sphere of N.S.W. some three years ago, when
existing stores at Cobar, Tamworth, Redfern, War-
ren and Wagga were taken over by them. And the
principal factor in that great progress is because the
buying for all their stores, with a turnover of over
i 300,000 per year, is consolidated, and, by purchasing
in such large quantities, and importing most of their
and never intend to do so. It’s not good 'business. A
dissatisfied customer is the worst asset one could have,
You lose his custom, and he influences others.”
The compiler, after his inspection, could not fail to
notice and appreciate the high-class, first-grade quality
of goods, whether in the boot and shoe, drapery, gro-
cery or ironmongery departments.
Mr. E. J. Heydon, who is so favourably and well
known in Wagga and district, recently resigned his
I. The Mercery and Men’s Wear Department, showing the Footwear Department in the distance. 2.
A glimpse of the Show Room, illustrating the style and up-to-dateness of that department. 3. /*
corner of the Drapery and Fancy Goods Departments. 4. Where a large number of Wagga’s well-
dressed women folk secure their millinery.
goods direct, they are enabled to launch them out to
the community in a retail manner at practically whole-
sale prices. And this company recognise that their
gradually increasing trade is solely due to that cause,
together with the fact that a good high grade quality
of goods can always be relied upon at the State
Stores Ltd. As the Wagga manager, Mr. R. A. Bar-
ham, expressed himself to the compiler, “We have
never yet made a practice of stocking shoddy goods,
position as manager, although he has not altogether
severed his connection with the business. The manage-
ment of this pulsating concern has now been placed
in Mr. R. A. Barham’s hands, who was for a con-
siderable time in the company’s servce at the Cobar
branch.
The drapery and allied departments of the
business are under the supervision of Mr. Madden
(late of Inverell), whose knowledge and lengthy


THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
The heavily stocked Crockery-ware Department.
experience of the trade enable him to see that custo-
mers receive the best value for their money.
The State Stores emphasise the fact that all goods
supplied from their branches are charged at Sydney
prices. All goods are marked in plain figures, and
the State Stores have one price only—the lowest pos-
sible consistent with the maintenance of quality. Their
buying staff is composed of men of undoubted ability
and training—men who thoroughly understand trade
conditions, and from years of experience are ever
ready to secure the best possible offers of a varying
market.
They invite your confidence, and shall be pleased to
answer any inquiry or furnish any information re-
quired.
The Wagga branch carries a very well assorted
stock of general drapery, household linens, dress
materials, fancy goods, etc.
The State Stores specialise in ladies’ ready-to-wear
costumes, one-piece robes, blouses, skirts and dust
coats. They pay special attention to infants and chil-
dren’s clothing, and stock everything required for the
little ones.
The millinery department is one of the special
attractions. They always have a first-class staff of
milliners.
Men’s clothing, hats, shirts, ties, etc. Men’s suits
to measure a speciality. Smart American cut suits,
made in Australia from Australian all-wool tweeds,
A view of the Grocery Department, illustrating the
great length and splendid stock—a special feature
at the State Stores.
all hand-stitched, 70/-, 84/-, 90/-. Other suits to
measure, 50/- and 63/-. Vicar’s pure all-wool Aus-
tralian tweeds are their leading line.
Boots and shoes for children, men and women. All
reliable makers’ goods are sold by the State Stores.
Crockery, ironmongery, glassware, netting, beds and
bedding. Grocery and produce.
The State Stores have probably the largest and
most conveniently situated accommodation yards for
farmers and others. Their policy is a broad-minded
one, inasmuch as they are available for one and all,
no matter whether a customer or not.
The State Stores Ltd., Gurwood St., Wagga


w ■ ■■ . * ' 5 - v - ,.. ’ y- •■ it i!ll
E ' ’«> «i s* j ’•'war pMS^us
I 'I ’$ itm S ’ ;;j | |S| j
.■»» ..*' „*»:•. ■$ r ‘.c, ;■ HTl^Tfe #•:■ ? j
L „ -jLlirf ■ -»S? '■ .- .' I m‘ ( ; | '.;/ v *'''Jfe-''’
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
SANDERSON'S
Central Pharmacy,
FITZMAURICE STREET. WAGGA
A Special Feature-Pools Concentrated Bronchitis and Cough Linctus.
The exterior view of Mr. F. Sanderson’s pharmacy
It is always interesting to describe the progress
of a go-ahead business man, who has secured suc-
cess both through personal effort and by offering a
stock to the public that would make many a subur-
ban chemist envious. Still it is one thing in having
that stock—it is quite another in disposing of same
at lowest prices. Many chemists sell a little and
charge a great deal. In Mr. Sanderson’s case he
went for the big turnover —not the big profit. And
that is one of the main factors in the success he
enjoyi to-day. From early morning until closing
time one rarely finds him disengaged; inces-
santly as customers file out, others take their place.
Certainly the high reputation he has gained for the
purest of drugs, finest qualities of perfumes, soaps,
and thousands of other lines, together with a quick
service, has also had a share in that success en-
joyed. And it is a relief to find city prices prevail-
ing in Wagga. At one time, judged by the prices
charged by chemists, they treated their goods as
a luxury; nowadays they are more equitably disposed
of as a necessity. In addition to a comprehensive
stock of drugs, a fine range of photographic mate-
rial and cameras is carried, obtainable, like all other
goods Mr. Sanderson sells, at city prices. The pro-
prietor, in addition to being a first-class chemist, is
The far-famed Pool’s
Cough and Bronchitis Linc-
tus has undoubtedly brought
Mr. Sanderson’s name more
before the public than any
other mixture he dispenses.
During recent years quite
half Wagga’s population has
been cured almost imme-
diately by this powerful and
sedative linctus. There is no
brag in this statement that
Pool’s Linctus is actually the
most remarkable, certain and
reliable compound on the
market. And Mr. Sanderson
is prepared to stake a very
creditable reputation on its
curative qualities. Next time
a cold comes along, visit his
pharmacy and secure a
bottle.
also a consulting and scientific optician. In the lat-
ter capacity Mr. Sanderson has been most success-
ful, and those afflicted with eye troubles might with
advantage consult him. Straight, outspoken advice
is given with pleasure.
Interior view of the well-stocked pharmacy.


Sl*ri 4 Son ion 4 fffnu V
of ISrr South ffahs) I
tf~n.invirrr.-n,, J
■ '*>)■>> r AW/ pnitirnUr. nT mil I
CUT# //p W MA
% % Sodffinf MUtUofo toHrnUrti
*> «MM, CUHDACAt, d
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
FOSBLRY’S” Fire Locator. A. 5. and P. Code No. 2. Telegrams: Lafco, Wagga.
L. A. FOSBLRY & COMPANY,
AND AGENTS.
Stock and Station Agents,
Auctioneers and Valuers,
AGGA,
ESTABLISHED IBV4
'PHONES 66 8c 109.
Probably no firm has-been more prominently con-
nected with the progress of the Wagga district than
Messrs. L. A. Fosbery and Co., who have during
a period of forty years been closely identified with
the commercial life of Wagga as land, stock and
station agents, etc. The firm under review almost
from its inception became a remarkably successful
one in every respect, and it is due in many direct
and indirect ways that the district has progressed
so greatly and become one of the principal wheat-
growing centres of New South Wales. They at
all times energetically and doggedly advertised and
emphasised to the community the possibilities of
the Wagga district. Certainly this firm had a
motive, a commercial one. But at all times in their
earnest endeavour to attract settlers on the land
they, with their expert and sound knowledge of
the value of the soil and its wonderful fertility,
felt justified and thoroughly satisfied that the settler
must become a successful and prosperous one.


— “ -
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
JOS. F. SIMPSON,
Produce Merchant, V Machinery Agent,
Fruiterer, Confectioner and Tobacconist,
AGGA.
BAVLIS STREET (NEWTOWN),
Exterior view of Mr. Simpson’s up-to-date premises,
Baylis Street, Wagga.
. D. Mcßae, Photos
This well-known and prosperous firm was estab-
lished in 1900 in somewhat primitive and unpreten-
tious premises by Mr. Jos. F. Simpson, who, by
prompt attention to business, strict, impartial treat-
ment, and by invariably supplying the best quality
of goods to his customers, has built up the present
large and flourishing business he commands to-day.
But Mr. Simpson has always been a live, energetic
business man, and, as Wagga progressed, so did he.
The result is that one finds the present modern,
well-equipped premises illustrated above capable of
easily dealing with the yearly increasing trade.
There are two distinct features of the business un-
der review. The produce department carries a
heavy stock of hay, oats, wheat, chaff, etc., in fact,
every line a well-managed produce store should
contain. Mr. Simpson buys in large quantities,
some times in 60-ton lots (chaff) and 500 bags of
oats. The other is the fruit, confectionery, and
tobacconist’s department. A splendid stock of every
fruit is carried, a wide range of Australian, Eng-
lish and Continental confectionery, and a full supply
of smokers’ requisites. Although Mr. Simpson has
at the present time such commodious premises, yet
he has recently purchased the adjoining block at
probably the record price for land in Newtown —
i.e., £2O/10/- per foot—with the intention of mak-
ing further additions to his property. He is evi-
dently a man who not only believes in progressing
with the times, but ahead, if possible.
A glimpse of the produce department and Mr. Simpson in his office. Interior of the daintily arranged
and well-stocked fruit, confectionery and refreshments department.
. ' ' D. Mcßae, Photos


GR 966
THE PROGRESS OF WAGGA WAGGA AND DISTRICT.
L. Boswell & Sons
Nurserymen,
E3AVLIS ST., WAGGA,
It is seldom one finds in a provincial town such a
splendidly laid out and heavily stocked nursery as
that which has been so successfully carried on
by Messrs. Boswell and Sons during the past few
years in Baylis-street, Wagga. The various hot
and glass houses are fitted up on the latest methods,
and shelter many thousands of the choicest seed-
lings, ferns, various kinds of pot plants, palms, etc.
The whole makes up a decidedly interesting and
pretty show, which can be judged from the accom-
panying illustrations. A hot water pipe installation
is laid on, and thus the houses can be kept to any
required temperature in winter time. At Baylis-
street about half an acre is utilised for seedlings
and striking young trees, such as shrubs, rose trees,
etc. Boswell and Sons have also another well laid
out nursery in Peters-street, where thousands of
young trees are grown ready for distribution
throughout the Riverina, where this firm have a
wide and solid trade. Pot plants, young trees, seed-
lings, etc., are securely packed and despatched to
any address in N.S.W. This firm have secured a
good and honourable name for the liberal, straight,
and prompt manner they attend to their thousands
of customers’ requirements. They have always
made it a strict rule to send well developed and
sound flora, and this factor, coupled with the rea-
sonable prices charged, has been the greatest in the
popularity and success enjoyed and so well re-
tained. Correspondence is quickly attended to.
Orders receive prompt and careful attention. Visi-
tors to Wagga interested in horticulture should not
fail to inspect Boswell and Sons’ nursery. The plea-
sure derived will amply compensate them.
Two pretty views of the well-stocked glass-houses at Boswell and Sons’ Nursery. F - Harris * rhotos
NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
v6 /VR ■*' • ion/-


II 1 I ISI& WKU ‘ Z,# f
£ —~ — —: —"" - ■; " :
»
1. View of the Wagga Hospital, one of the most handsome and well-equipped in N.S.W. 2. An inte-
resting photo.—droving sheep—taken at the lagoon, North Wagga. 3. Arrival cf timber boats at the
old jetty, Murrumbidgee River, Wagga. 4. An illustration of the great attendance at the M.P. and A.
Association annual shows.
Wagga Choral Society, although only estab-
lished in May, 1910, through the instrumentality of
Mr. Fred. Barnard, in its inaugural year had over
100 voices. Mr. W. G. Philpott is the present con-
ductor, Most successful -concerts are given at fre-
quent intervals, and through the Wagga Choral
Society’s initiative many first-class singers have
been invited to Wagga, notably most recently
Madame Mary Conly. This society has done much
to bring out latent local talent, and has incidentally
Riven much pleasure to the Wagga community, who
are lovers of good music. Mr. Hubert R. W.
I). .McKac,. Photos
Meager, the treasurer, has been one of its most
enthusiastic and hard-working founders.
J. Edward Robertson trusts this illustrated book
will serve well the purpose intended—to advertise
the resources and wonderful fertility of the district,
also the commercial importance and progress of
Wagga Wagga. No reasonable expense, fore-
thought and energy have been withheld in its con-
summation, and he thanks one and all for their
spontaneous and generous support.
The Government Experiment Farm photos, were
kindly lent by Mr. Crane, the popular housemaster.
Harvesting in Wagga district—the granary of N.S.W.


WAGGA’S
Leading Department Store
SPACIOUS SHOWROOMS
Present an UP-TO-DATE EXHIBITION. New, fresh, and ever
changing display of Fashionable Wares, Novelties and Specialties,
Grocery.
Produce.
Drapery.
Millinery.
Confectionery.
Crockery.
Clothing.
Manchester.
Mercery.
Glassware.
Ironmongery.
Electro-Ware.
Dressmaking.
Haberdashery.
i
t
?
i
e
i
♦
Boots and Shoes.
Ladies’ and Gentlemen’s Tailoring.
Farm and Garden Supplies. 1
Paints and Oils.
Soaps and Perfumes.
Furniture and Furnishings.
Builders’ and Contractors’ Requisites.
DEPARTMENTS
;• ■ ;
W. G. HUTHWAITE & CO.
. .
Merchants and Importers,
BAYL.IS ST. (Newtown), WAGGA WAGGA. |
Wilka. Mitchell and Co., Print. 7 Flinders court. Melbourne.
