

The Pastora homes of Australia








THE PASTORAL HOMES
OF
AUSTRALIA
NEW SOUTH WALES, QUEENSLAND,
SOUTH AUSTRALIA & NEW ZEALAND
COPYRIGHT.
Published by “The Pastoral Review Proby. Ltd.,” Melbourne, Sydney and London.
1914


Printers :
JOHN ANDREW & CO.,
SYDNEY-
-1914


CONTENTS.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
PAGE
Introduction .. . . .. .. . . .. . . .. • • • • v., vi., vii., viii.
Auburn Vale . . . . . . . . A. N. Stirton . . . . .. .. .. 227
Balarang .. . . .. . . A. N. and P. E. Stirton .. . . . . .. 227
Baroona .. .. . . .. A. A. Dangar . . .. . . .. .. 183
Booberoi . . .. . . . . A. T. Haley .. . . . . . . . . .. 121
Breakfast Creek .. . . . . J. H. and R. J. Fagan . . .. .. .. 81
Bundemar .. . . . . .. Exors. late F. E. Body .. .. .. .. 133
Carwoola .. .. . . • • J. F. Maslin
Coonong .. . . .. • • Sir S. McCaughey . . .. .. . . .. 29
Cooyal .. .. G. Raffan .. .. 171
Coree . . . . . . ■ . ■ • Exors. late D. McCaughey .. . . . . . . 45
Currah . . . . • • • • P. E. Stirton . . . . .. . . . . .. 227
Errebenderie .. .. •• A. T. Haley .. .. .. .. •• 121
Goolgumbla Sir S. McCaughey 29
Gostwyck .. ~ .. .. Capt. C. C. Dangar .. .. .. • • • • 203
Groongal R- S. Falkiner 57
Juanbung .. . . • • • • A. T. Creswick . . . . . . . . .. 1
Liewah A. T. Creswick 1
Lue . . . . ■ • • ■ ■ • G. Raffan .. . . . . . . . . ■ ■ 171
Melrose Plains W. W. Bucknell 145
Milton Park A. Hordern 105
Moolpa A. T. Creswick 1
Mulyan J. H. and R. J. Fagan 81
New Merrigal T. H. Lowry 157
North Yanco Sir S. McCaughey 29
Quiamong . . . . • • ■ • P- Landale .. . . .. .. • • ■ • 13
Sunny Ridge J. H. and R. J. Fagan
Tupra .. .. • • • • • • A. T. Creswick .. . . ■ ■ • • • • 1
Wallabadah J. M. L. Macdonald 215
Waugoola A. W. Whitney 93
Woodlands Farm . . • • • • E. G. Blume . . • • ■ • • • • • 287
QUEENSLAND.
Alhilhah . . • • Exors. late J. D. Macansh . . 263
Ashgrove '.! ’ W. B. Slade 239
Barambah . . • • • ■ • • Moore & Co. . . . . .. . . .. ■ ■ 251
Barcoorah E - Jowett 303
Bexley E. G. Blume 287
Bunda Bunda .. •• •• E. Jowett .. .. •• •• •• 303
Coongoola A - T - Creswick I
Dunrobin E. G. Blume 287
East Glengallan W. B. Slade 239
iii.


PAGE
Eurella D. Fletcher 275
Forrester . . E. G. Blume 287
Kankania E. G. Blume 287
Kynuna E. Jowett 303
Manningham E. Jowett 303
Mount Marlow .. .. .. E. Jowett .. .. .. .. .. .. 303
Murweh .. .. . . . . Exors. J. D. Macansh . . .. .. . . 263
Nappa Merrie J. Conrick 331
Needlewood E. G. Blume 287
Oakleigh Park E. G. Blume 287
Quambetook E. Jowett 303
Thorby E. G. Blume 287
Valley of Lagoons .. .. .. L. O. Micklem .. .. .. .. .. 319
Yanburra E. G. Blume 287
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Bungaree H. C. and R. M. Hawker 399
Canowie . . . . . . . . Canowie Pastoral Co.. Ltd. . . .. . . 343
Cappeedee .. .. . . . . Murray Bros. .. . . .. .. .. 379
Mount Crawford .. .. .. A. J. Murray .. .. .. .. .. .. 367
Pitcairn E. D., R. W., K. P., and R. Sawers .. .. 391
Rhine Park . . . . .. . . Murray Bros. . . .. . . .. . . 379
She Oak Hills .. .. .. Mrs. R. M. Sawers .. .. .. .. .. 391
The Gums T. H. Pearse & Son 355
NEW ZEALAND.
Castlepoint Mrs. W. W. Johnson 431
Crissoge .. .. .. .. G. P. Donnelly .. .. .. .. .. 411
Highden . . . . . . . . Mrs. W. W. Johnson . . . . .. . , 431
Longlands .. .. .. .. E. J. Watt .. .. .. .. .. .. 159
Mangaohane .. .. . . . . G. P. Donnelly . . .. ~ . . . . 411
Ngatarawa .. .. .. .. E. J. Watt .. .. .. .. .. .. 159
Ohurukuru .. .. . . . . G. P. Donnelly .. . . . . . . . . 411
Okawa . . .. . . . . T. PI. Lowry .. .. .. . . ~ . _ 157
Oruamatua T. H. Lowry and E. J. Watt 157
Otatara .. . . .. . . G. P. Donnelly . . . . . . , . 41 j
Tamumu J. Goring Johnston 431
iv.
CONTENTS— Continued.


INTRODUCTION.
A FITTING preface to this volume is an explanation of its purpose. It is no
mere picture book arranged to please the eye ; neither does it lay claim
to be a standard history. It is, in brief, an effort to place on record for
all time a conception of Pastoral Australasia as it is in this year nineteen
hundred and fourteen. It has been a task of no mean proportions to procure such a
variety of photographs. Immense distances have been traversed. The railway
train, the motor car, the station buggy, the tedious coach, camel teams and pack
horses have all been requisitioned, and these pages illustrate New South Wales,
Queensland, South Australia, and a little of New Zealand. Change everywhere is
persistent, but in comparatively young countries like the Commonwealth and the
Dominion, the present merges into the past so unobtrusively that one is inclined
to overlook the fact that history is being made even out of the ordinary circum-
stances of life. The necessity for a work like this is a veiy real one, because already
too much that has counted in the growth of these countries has been allowed to slip
away, quite unrecorded.
As a rule, when new landmarks arise the old ones are swept away. Though
little more than a century has passed since settlement became established in New
South Wales, the Mother State, a huge development has taken place. No one dare
predict the changes that the next half-century may bring to pass. There are still
with us- —God bless them ! —a few of those courageous men who faced the bush when
it was as the first white men found it. Their endeavours will stand for all time, and
it is because of them that the pastoral industry, as depicted in these pages, came to
be. It is to these venerable pioneers that the Editor is indebted for such glimpses
of the past as are weaved into the descriptions of the present. As before stated,
this work does not pretend to be historical, but it will not require many generations to
make it so. All too quickly the pioneers are passing from us, but they have lived to
witness a development of which they hardly dreamed. They have actually seen,
or have heard their forbears tell of the days before railways pierced the bush. They
know of the rough and tedious journeys on bullock drays and carts, when it took six
weeks to do what the steam horse does in but as many hours. They know of the
lonely homesteads and the joy experienced in entertaining passing friends, because
that privilege was so oft denied. They know how they got their stock together


and penetrated a lonely land, building their humble homes where water could be
found. There are also those amongst us who have had long acquaintance with the
huge territory of Queensland, in which State even to-day overlanding mobs of cattle
travel for months on end, the distances are so great. Though no noise of warfare
dins the early pages of Australia’s history, a conquest was none the less achieved,
but it was an obtrusive one, against nature’s silent forces. The native blacks, for a
brief period, caused much suffering and trouble, but they quickly faded away before
the white invader. The text books tell of the exploration of these States, and
numerous works pay tribute to the early settlers, and so it is left for these few lines to
touch upon factors oft lost sight of, but which, nevertheless, have contributed to the
present conditions of our pastoral life.
Of all the products that have made Australia’s greatness, the Merino Fleece
stands out in strong relief. The gold digging chapters in this country’s history are
alluring in their way, but the steady lever of development has been the golden fleece.
And the history of the fleece is very largely the history of these Pastoral Homes.
The first houses were crude enough, but they were loved as homes will always be.
The main problem then in life was to raise the means to support such homes, and in
the Merino sheep the solution lay. But the land had to be prepared for it, and the pro-
gress from the wooden home to the brick or stone mansion has been a most fascinating
evolution, the underlying forces of which were necessity and experience. Necessity
mocked the early settlers, but experience often came to their assistance and pieced
together the pastoral industry of to-day. The first pastoralists were not daunted
by the obstacles they met, but they were forced to overcome them. The well-filled
dams and lagoons, the windmills, tanks, and troughing, and the artesian bores
illustrated in these pages, are not of mushroom growth, but were evolved by stages
from the waterholes beside which many pastoral homes had their small beginning.
Lack of water was one of the early obstacles to be overcome, and this volume
bears witness to the success achieved. Then there was the bush, the heavy gum trees
which would not permit grass to grow underneath them. But they were in time
replaced by grass, not by hewing down each tree, as is necessary in nearly every
other country, but by simply nicking out a circle of bark from around each trunk.
When the timber died, grass and nutritious herbage at once appeared, and the
carrying capacity of the country was increased immeasurably. Since the first tree
was ringbarked, the custom has swept throughout the land, and while it has been
of untold benefit it has also been responsible for vandalism, from which the land will
always suffer.
Pastoralists, therefore, made important progress towards the present homes
when they discovered how to place water convenient to their stock, and when they
learned that by ringbarking the bush fine pasture took its place. These are now
simple everyday matters, but, like many other things, they came to be out of pure
necessity.
vi.


There will be noticed in these pages frequent reference to subdivision, also an
ordinary topic, but, like the other two, it has been one of the things which have
counted in the game. There are very few countries on this earth where such rich
pasture grows so naturally as in Australia. No laborious cultivation or costly
sowing—pastures of the most nutritious kind cover the face of the land, just on the
magic touch of rain. The various plants and grasses, hardy as they are through
fighting centuries of droughts, require artificial help when browsed upon by stock.
So, when fencing wire came in, the process of cutting vast paddocks into small ones
enabled grazing to be regulated, which has meant the salvation of this country’s
pastures. In the “ far out back,” where paddocks still are measured not by acres
but by miles, when seasons fail, the stock, wandering where they list, cut up the
shallow soil and it is carried off by the first hot winds that blow, leaving only barren
claypans.
The Merino sheep was looked to to support the homes of the early days and to
provide for the homes which were to come. And while water was being provided
for him, while bush was being killed for him, he was not neglected as he stood. When
the Merino first came to Australia he was a miserable specimen compared with his
descendants of to-day. Captain Macarthur, who imported the first sheep to this
country, wrote in 1808 that his rams’ fleeces had increased from 3 lbs. to 5 lbs. in
weight, but to-day rams have been known to cut over 40 lbs., and the face of the coun-
try has been changed in consequence. To the lay mind a sheep’s fleece is neither
here nor there, but many of the Pastoral Homes of Australia would not be what these
pages show them now to be if.stud rams’ fleeces had not increased in weight since
Macarthur’s time.
It has all gone on so quietly that one can hardly realise how it happened. Men
classed their sheep in Macarthur’s time, and saw five-pound fleeces carried through
the drafting gates. Men have stood at drafting gates through all the intervening
years, and have come to see sheep with jackets weighing 40 lbs. passing through
the gates. Thus, in the dusty sheep yards, untold wealth has been given to this
country by controlling nature’s underlying law that like must beget like. Stately
Pastoral Homes have been reared upon this law intelligently directed, albeit by
dusty, sweating sheepmen hidden in the Australian bush. And those who have
toiled in the cattle yards of Queensland round the cattle camps, and behind the
overlanding mobs, they, too, have left their marks on the landscape depicted here.
The breaking in of the outlying districts of Australia and New Zealand required
stout hearts and heavy purses, and it may perhaps be a matter for relief that these
pages do not portray the havoc wrought among those who failed.
So the change has come about, and so it still goes on. While cattle and horses
have played no small part in the pastoral development of this land, the real burden
has been carried by the sheep. He, himself, has been so changed that he has changed
the face of everything. When his fleece is twelve months old the idle woolsheds
VII


throughout the land awake to life ; glittering machines peel off his fleece, wool teams
come in to the Railway from far off parts, and in due time the wave of keen activity
reaches the ocean’s side. This wool is sold for gold, and these pastoral homes
have cost much gold. They are beautiful in design, and stand in beautiful sur-
roundings. They are intended to be homes. They are modern in their appointments,
and most of them possess telephones and motor cars which defy the obstacle of
distance, which was, to the first pastoralists, one of the hardest things to face. Surely
such homes are an asset to the nation ? Surely they are a tribute to the country
and to these who solved its problems ? If so, then they are worthy of being placed
on record, before inexorable change lays its finger on them. For change must go
on and no one can prophesy how quickly. Already the Merino has been pushed
off large tracts of country to make room for wheat, which, in its turn, brings cross-
bred sheep. How far this wheat belt can encroach upon Merino land must yet be
proved, but it seems as though, as time goes on, the Merino must go further and
further west. Then will the solution of the knotty problem of the huge territory
“ out back ” become a necessity more urgent than it is at present, and who can
tell the class of homes that such necessity, aided by experience, will evolve out there ?
But when that time comes, if it ever does, what will be the appearance of the country
illustrated in these pages ? The Pastoral Homes described herein may still be there,
ever growing dearer as old age creeps o’er them, but, if change should not spare
them, then will these pages recall things as they were. As old Omar Khayyam said —
“ The moving finger writes ; and having writ
Moves on ; nor all thy Piety nor Wit
Shall lure it back to cancel half a line,
Nor all thy tears wash out a word of it.”
“ CAMDEN.”
Sydney,
August , 1914.
viii.


The Liewah, Tupra, Moolpa, and Juanbugn
Estates, New South Wales, and
Coongoola Estate, Queensland.
The property of Mr A. T. Creswicr.
THE name of Mr. A. T. Creswick is very largely identified with pastoral work in the
South and West of New South Wales. His large stations, Liewah, Moolpa, Tupra,
Juanbung, Ulonga, Manfred, Tnda, Conoble, Ken Ken and Coongoola, represent a
vast undertaking.
Some of these properties have required huge expenditures in improvements, but, as
they stand to-day, they represent fine examples of how that western country can be profit-
ably handled.
Liewah comprises about 40,000 acres, situated 28 miles from Swan Hill. It consists of
red and grey salt and cotton bush plains, with rich river flats covered with box timber,
which, however, has been nngbarked for several years. The Edwards River runs on the
northern boundary, and the Wakool River constitutes the southern boundary. The Yarrien
A GROUP OF BROOD MARKS AT LIEWAH.
s


THE LIEWAH HOMESTEAD FROM THE SANDHILLS.
Creek passes through the centre of the property, so that there is an ample supply of water
for the stock.
Liewah was pur-
chased in 1873 by the
late Mr. Henry Cres-
wick, father of the
present owner, from
Messrs. G. A. and P.
Mein, it then forming
part of Moolpa run.
Since it has been
in the hands of Mr.
Creswick very exten-
sive improvements have
been carried out. With
the first invasion of the
rabbits in that Western
PENDIL, BY BOBADLL FROM PENITENCE.
winner of Prominent Races.
2
2
Tho Pastoral Homos of Australia.


EW ES AN D LAMBS ON SALTBUSH AT LIEWAH.
3
3
The Liewah, Tupra, Moo!pa and Juanbung Estates,
New South liVa/es, and Coongoo/a Estate, Queensland.


THE LIEWAH HOMESTEAD.
country, Mr. Creswick immediately enclosed the run with wire-netting, consequently he was
never seriously menaced by the pest. The station is subdivided with six wire fences into
thirty-two paddocks, and all the box timber on the flats has been ringbarked. This latter
work was done soon
after Mr. Creswick as-
sumed control at Lie-
wah, and it was a cost-
ly undertaking, because
of the scarcity of la-
bour. Some 50,000
acres were thus treat-
ed, and though the ex-
penditure was great, it
has proved amply justi-
fied, because the ring-
barked country is now
heavy carrying. The
improvements gener-
THE PUNT ON THE EDWARDS RIVER NEAR LIEWAH
4
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE SHEARING BOARD, TUPRA.
THE WOOL ROOM, TUPRA.
5
The Liew/ah, Tupra, Moo/pa and Juanbung Estates,
New/ South I Vales, and Coongoola Estate, Queensland.


THE TUPRA WOOLSHED FROM THE CACHLAN.
ally are up to date. There are convenient sheep yards at various parts of the run to facilitate
working, whilst extensive horse and cattle yards have been constructed near the homestead.
Substantial bridges
have been erected over
the various creeks.
The homestead is
prettily situated on the
banks of the Edwards
River, and is surround-
ed by a lovely garden,
which was designed
and laid out under Mr.
Creswick’s personal
supervision. A plenti-
ful supply of water is
obtained from the river
by means of a steam
LOADING WOOL, TUPRA.
6
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


engine and pump.
Offices, stores, men’s
quarters, overseer’s
house, and stables are
adjacent to the home-
stead, which is con-
nected by telephone
with Moulamein.
Mir. Creswick has
been an enthusiastic
racing man all his life,
and the Liewah stabLs
are particularly good.
They include six loose
boxes and six stalls,
THE BRIDGE ON THE LACHLAN AT TUPRA.
with hay loft above, whilst a stable for stallions is provided a short distance away.
Mr. Creswick has a remarkably fine lot of thoroughbreds running at Liewah, and he re-
THE MOOLP A HOMESTEAD.
7
7
The Liewah, Tupra, Moolpa and Juanbung Estates,
Mew South Wales, and Coongoola Estate, Queensland.


BROOD MARES AT LIEWAH.
cently acquired the racehorse Pendil as his principal sire. He was an amateur rider in his
day, and still rides straight to hounds.
The flock is, of course, the business portion of the run. It now comprises 20,000 sheep.
Mr. Creswick has all along been a firm believer in the plain-bodied type of Australian merino,
and has from time to time brought into his stud just what was necessary to maintain the wool
to a fixed standard of excellence, and at the same time preserve the mutton qualities of the
carcase for which the Liewah sheep are noted. The general quality of the wool may be
judged from the prices it brings, up to 13Td. last season. It is important to mention that
Mr. Creswick breeds at Liewah all the rams required for his other stations.
In average seasons Liewah produces an abundance of feed comprising trefoil, barlev
grass, white top and swamp grasses, while cotton bush and salt bush do well on the higher
country. Moolpa is opposite to Liewah, and comprises 88,000 acres of freehold land, and
carries about 30,000 sheep. Ken Ken comprises 32,000 acres of freehold, and is all salt
bush and cotton bush country.
Tupra and Juanbung, which comprise 650,00 c acres (of which 127,000 acres are free-
hold) on the Lachlan, were acquired by Mr. Creswick in 1900, and he immediately com-
menced a heavy expenditure in improvements, chiefly in the way of ringbarking and water
o
O
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE JUANBUNG HOMESTEAD.
supply. The water improvements include an extensive pumping station on the Lachlan
River at the top end of the run, and the water is conducted by gravitation into numerous
tanks on various parts of the run. There is thus ensured a regular and plentiful supply
of water which makes the station supply independent of the rainfall. The excavation of
tanks and channels on Tupra necessitated the removal of 2,000,000 cubic yards of earth.
Over 70,000 acres of the freehold land have been ringbarked, with the result that all the
country has now a heavy carrying capacity. On the Juanbung end of Tupra is situated the
famous reed bed country on which over four or five thousand head of cattle are fattened each
year. About 100,000 sheep are carried.
The property has a wire netting boundary fence, and is subdivided by substantial fences.
It has frontages to the Lachlan and Murrumbidgee Rivers, and has also lakes which are
filled by means of deep cuttings excavated with scoops, costing many thousands of pounds,
and made by the late J. lyson. A new homestead was built by Mr. Creswick in 1906, and
9
9
The Liewah, Tupra, Moo Ipa and Juanbung Estates,
New South Wales, and Coongoola Estate, Queensland.


in 1909 he put up a
new woolshed with 5°
stands of machines.
The sheep are all
bred from the Liewah
flock, and they appear
to be particularly
suited to the country.
The wool is conveyed
by team from the shed
to the Murrumbidgee
(where approaches 3
miles long with the
necessary culverts and
bridges have been put
OLD MAX SALTBUSH AT JUANBUNG.
in to give access to the landing) and is taken by steamer to Echuca.
Tarwong, the northern part of Coorong,containing about 300,000 acres, has lately been
added toTupra, Mr.Creswick having purchased it,together with the sheep,cattle, and horses,
from Mr. A. E. Tyson, of Coorong.
Mr. Creswick’s Ulonga Station is on the Lachlan, near Hay. It consists of salt bush
plains with grass and trefoil on the river flats. The country has now ample water, Mr. Cres-
wick having constructed a water scheme similar to that at Tupra, and it is now an ideal
breeding station for merinos. It is situated only 28 miles from the Hay Railway Station.
Manfred, containing about 550,000 acres, formerly owned by the late Hon. Wm. Taylor,
is situated about 100 miles north of Balranald. It is principally grass country, with a fair pro-
portion of salt bush. It
is well watered by
tanks of much above
average dimensions,
and there are also
numerous wells, some
of which are inexhaust-
ible, and carries about
70,000 sheep.
Trida and Conoble
are worked as one pro-
perty, and are about
60 miles to the east of
of Manfred. They con-
sist of open plains with
THE JUANBUNG LAKE.
10
10
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


ridges of yarran, apple bush, and other edible trees, and the country is heavily grassed.
I here is a good sprinkling of salt bush, which is of value in keeping the stock healthy. The
water supply comes from ample tanks and wells, the latter being pumped by windmills. the
whole properties are wire netted on the boundaries, and are subdivided with six wire fences,
and carry about 60,000 sheep. They are highly improved and the sheep grown on them have
acquired a great reputation as heavy cutters
THE HAWTHORNS.
The birthpalce of Mr. A. T. CRESWICK.
Yarrara, another property of Mr. Creswick’s, is situated close to Germanton. It was all
scrub country when purchased by Mr. Creswick, but is now, through large expenditure in
ringing and clearing becoming good grass country.
Coongoola, near Cunnamulla, Queensland, also one of Mr. Creswick’s properties,
has lately been purchased from the Bank of Victoria. It consists of 52,000 acres free-
hold and 487 square miles leasehold, and has 70,000 sheep, 300 horses, and 200 cattle on
it It has a frontage to the Warrego River, and is watered by four artesian bores with flows
of between three and four million gallons. For 15 miles back from the river it is all
Mitchell grass plains of the best description, whilst the back portion is good mulga country.
11
11
The Liewah, Tupra, Moolpa and Juanbung Estates,
New South Wales, and Coongoola Estate, Queensland.


As a sheep-breeder, Mr. Creswick has
achieved great success. He breeds all the
rams required on his numerous estates, and
the progress he has made as a wool-grower is
practical testimony to his skill as a ram
breeder. When he bought Tupra in 1900, the
sheep averaged 5| lbs. of wool, and that was a
good year, feed being plentiful. They now
average 11 lbs. 8 ozs. all round, which is a
wonderful achievement. It is sufficient evi-
dence that Mr. Creswick understands the
sheep that suit his country. For many years
the flocks were classed by Mr. Denbeigh Hall,
but during the last twenty years this work has
been done by Mr. Creswick himself. As for
the wool grown on the properties here
MR. A. T, CRESWICK.
described, the following information, supplied by the brokers, is high tribute: —
“The three letters H Ck, when appearing under the various brands of Liewah, Tupra
Ulonga and many others, are recognised by the trade as representing a standard of excel-
lence of few equals, and certainly no superior, for the size of the clips.
“These wools have established an all-round reputation, the mam features which ap-
peal directly to the manufacturer, no matter of what country, being their length and soft-
ness, combined with fineness and general good breeding.
“Their appearance in the saleroom is the signal for the keenest competition, and the
general handling and preparation for market leaves nothing to be desired.”
Mr. Creswick’s wethers are eagerly sought after, and for many years large numbers have
been regularly purchased by the Melbourne Metropolitan Board of Works.
Mr. Alexander dhomson Creswick was born at “The Hawthorns,” Creswick St., Haw-
thorn, Victoria, on the 28th July, 1853, and is the only son of the late Henry Creswick, who
arrived in the colony in ibqo, and somewhere about 1843 went to Creswick, then
known as Creswick’s Creek. He went to the Wimmera in 1846, and purchased Liewah in
1873. Mr. A. T. Creswick went there the same year. His mother was a daughter of Dr.
Alexander Thomson, who sent over cattle from Tasmania in 1835 and sheep in the beginning
of 1836, arriving himself with his wife and daughter on March 13th, 1836. Mr. Creswick was
educated at the Melbourne Grammar School, and studied law at the Melbourne University
for a year or so before going to Liewah. He married Miss Helen Forbes, a daughter of the
Rev. James Forbes, first Presbyterian minister of the Scotch Church in Collins Street.
Mr. Creswick has one son, Mr. Henry Forbes Creswick, now the owner of Liewah, and three
daughters, one of whom is married to Dr. Roland Wettenhall.
I 2
12
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


The Quiamong Estate.
The Property of Mr. Percy Landale.
MR. PERC\ LAhJDALE’S Quiamong property is situated in the heart of one of the
most famous Merino sheep districts of Australia, if not the world. It adjoins the
little township of Conargo, about 22 miles from Deniliquin, and on its boundaries
are such well-known properties as Mundiwa, Hartwood, Wandook, and Puckawidgee.
Quiamong comprises about 34,000 acres, and it is characteristic of Riverina country, be-
ing level open plains, intersected by belts of timber. It is rich fattening country, and is ideal
STUD EWES ON QUIAMONG.
for the development of frame in sheep. Riverina Merinos are among the biggest m Australia,
and the district has evolved the type that is most suitable for the general requirements of
Australia. The average rainfall is about i6in. With the exception of a lew creek frontages,
the country was once badly off in the way of water supply, but Quiamong is watered by the
Billabong on the north, and has the Forest Crreek running through the centre, so that it is
I


2
14
The Pastorai Homes of Australia.


THE HOMESTEAD.
3
15
The Quiamong Estate, New South Wales .


4
16
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


QUIAMONG STUD RAMS.
better off than many properties in the district. In addition to these sources of supply, large
sums of money have been expended in constructing dams on the creeks, excavating tanks
and putting down wells. Quiamong as it stands now is a very highly improved property.
The water supply question has been
solved, the whole estate is surrounded by
rabbit-proof fencing, is subdivided by wire
netting, the whole area is cut up into
about thiry-four paddocks. All these have
been very considerable items of expendi-
ture in bringing Riverina properties up to
their present large and comparatively
safe carrying capacities. They have been
costly, and have taken many years, but
on Quiamong everything is now in splen-
did order, and Mr. Landale runs upon it
from 22,000 to 25,000 sheep. He works
Quiamong in conjunction with another
property he has on the Wakool, called Tal-
kook, comprising about 11,000 acres,
which were once part of Cobran Station.
A SHADY CORNER,
5
17
The Quiamong Estate, New South Wales.


THE STATION TEAM.
A GROUP OF MILKERS.
6
18
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


BREAKING IN A YOUNGSTER.
7
19
The Quiamong Estate, New South Wales.


20
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE VEGETABLE GARDEN.
9
21
The Quiamong Estate, New South Wales.


i'alkook is also wire netted, and is watered for five miles by the Wakool River and numerous
sub-artesian bores and earth tanks and dams. Mr. Landale purchased this property in 1909
and he uses it for running his dry sheep and young cattle.
The improvements on Quiamong are solid. The homestead, which is very prettily
situated, was built by the present owner in 1904, and is of bungalow design, with all mod
ern appointments, while the woolshed is a modern structure, fitted with sixteen stands of
machines driven by a 12-h.p. oil engine.
MR. PERCY LANDALE.
Quiamong was purchased in 1894 by the late Mr. Robert Landale, who purchased old
Demliquin Station from the late James Tyson in 1861. Mr. Landale took his brother, the
late Mr. Alexander Landale, into partnership, but in 1891 they dissolved, Mr. Robert Landale
taking Mundiwa, which has already been described in this series, and Mr. Alexander Landale
taking what is now known as Wandook. As before stated, Mr. Robert Landale purchased
I o
22
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A CORN OF THE GARDEN,
11
23
The Quiamong Estate, New South Wales.


THE MOUSE AND GARDEN.
I 3
24
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


TWO GARDEN VIEWS.
'3
25
The Quiamong Estate, New South Wales •


THE VERANDAH.
A PINE RIDGE.
26
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Quiamong in i 894, it then being in the hands of the executors of the late F. L. Parker. On
the death of h.s father in 1903, Mr. Percy Landale, the present owner, came into possession.
The property is essentially sheep country, though Mr. Landale runs a few good cattle.
He has a stud Merino flock, in which Tasmanian and Rambouillet blood was used until 1904.
Since that year the stud has produced its own sires. Special characteristics of the sheep
are their big frames, placed on short legs; they have hardy constitutions, and return from 75
per cent, to 80 per cent, of lambs. Mr. Landale breeds all the rams he requires for his own
THE WOOLSHED.
use, and generally has a good number over for sale, which he readily disposes of, principally
to Queensland and Western Australian buyers. He favours a fairly robust type of wool, and,
of course, the plain-bodied type of sheep.
Some very fine Shorthorns are bred on Quiamong, Bohnda Vale blood predominating.
The herd was established by the late Mr. Parker, and was taken over by Mr. Landale when
'5
27
The Qulamong Estate, New South Wales.


THE OVERSEER'S COTTAGE, STABLES AND HUT.
he purchased Quiamong. Mr. Landale also breeds the horses required for station use, hav-
ing a very good stamp of Arab stallion, which he mates with big-framed, well-bred mares.
Mr. Percy Landale is the second son of the late Mr. Robert Landale. He was educated
at the Hawthorn Grammar School, Victoria, under Professor Irving, and later on went to
Trinity Hall, Cambridge. While at college Mr. Landale figured prominently in rowing, being
a member of the University crews that won in 1887, 1888, and 1889.
i 6
28
The Pastoral Homes of Australia


Coonong, Goolgumbla and North yanco.
The Property of the hon. Sir Samuel Mcdaughey, M.L.c.
NO work dealing with the pastoral homes of Australia would be complete without re-
ference to the great estates owned by the Hon. Sir Samuel McCaughey. Sir
Samuel’s name holds one of the very highest places among the leading pastorahsts
of Australia, and his operations in the sheep and wool industry have perhaps been on a
larger scale than any other Australian pastoralist’s, and his interests are still extensive.
The career of Sir Samuel McCaughey is closely associated with the last half-century of
pastoral development in New South Wales. He was born in 1835 near Ballymena, County
Antrim, Ireland, being the son of the late Francis McCaughey. He was educated at Bally-
mena, and came out to Australia in 1856 with his uncle, Mr. Charles Wilson, who was return-
ing to Victoria, where he had been associated with his brothers, John and Alexander, for
about fifteen years previously, and later with his brother, Sir Samuel Wilson. Mr.
McCaughey, as he was then, went on to one of his uncle’s properties, Kewell, in the Wim-
mera in Victoria, and he remained there four years, two years as overseer and two years as
manager. He showed an aptitude and great energy in pastoral work, and in 1860 he pur-
A GROUP OF GOOLGUMBLA STUD RAMS.
I
29


chased a property of 43,000 acres called Coo-
nong (near Urana) in New South Wales, and
also an interest in Singorimba, comprising
40,000 acres, adjoining Goolgumbla. His
other partners in these properties were the late
David Wilson and John Cochrane. At that
time Coonong was a cattle station with only
one boundary line fenced, but immediately the
partners purchased they decided to dispose of
the cattle and put on sheep. At that time there
was a great slump in cattle, and the Coonong
herd was disposed of at ruinous prices.
Shortly after this, Mr. Wilson sold his share to
SIR SAMUEL. MCCAUGHEY.
Mr. Cochrane, and left the firm. Mr. Cochrane continued on with a two-thirds share for a
year longer, and eventually sold out to Sir Samuel McCaughey. Finding himself now the
sole owner, Sir Samuel continued, in the face of great financial difficulties, to effect the neces-
sary improvements in the way of fencing and water supply, and it was some considerable
time before the run was stocked up with sheep and put into a profitable condition. The
water improvements consisted of tanks and dams on the Colombo and Coonong Creeks. At
the time the estate was purchased the Colombo Creek often did not run for several years, only
running occasionally, and had been known to be dry for twelve years at a time. The Colombo
Creek is a branch of the Yanco, and Sir Samuel McCaughey, in conjunction with the late Sir
Samuel Wilson, first started to deepen the intake of the Yanco from the Murrumbidgee, but
subsequently the owner of Coonong continued to persevere, and, principally at his own ex-
pense, greatly improved the supply of water obtained from the Murrumbidgee. The Gov-
ernment of later years rendered some assistance in this work, and it was found possible to
secure a practically permanent water supply. In view of all that has been done in this
respect, it remains to be seen what effect the Burrinjuck irrigation scheme will have on
these creeks.
At a very early date Sir Samuel recognised the necessity of improving his flock, and he
purchased rams from the late N. P. Bayly, of Havilah, N.S.W., and the late R. Q. Kermode,
of Mona Vale, Tasmania. The original ewes on Coonong were purchased from Mr. James
Cochrane, of Widgiewa, and they contained a strong infusion of Camden Park blood. The
Havilah and Mona Vale rams got such good stock that the best young ewes were selected
to form a stud flock.
For some years Sir Samuel continued to purchase rams from the leading flocks in New
2
30
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE COONONG HOMESTEAD.
3
31
The Coonong, Goo/gumbla and North Yanco Estates, New South Wales,


THE STATION BUILDINGS AT COONONG.
South Wales and Victoria, and, though well to the front as a breeder, he was not satisfied,
and in 1883 he made his first purchase of American pure Merinos. His energies up to that
time had all been in the direction of producing a more profitable sheep, and he had spared
no expense in working towards this end. He was not entrammelled by the prejudices so
often found in sheepmen, and being very struck with the covering and density of the Ameri-
can sheep, he purchased in Sydney in 1883 ten Californian rams, three of which were of the
large Rambouillet strain and the rest of Vermont blood. He was so satisfied with the re-
sults that he made what perhaps was the most costly experiment ever made by a sheep-
breeder. In 1886 he visited America, and selected 120 ewes and 40 rams from the best of
the registered flocks in Vermont, and six months later he again visited the States and pur-
chased 210 ewes and 92 rams. These two shipments landed at Coonong cost Sir Samuel fully
Then a period of great progress set in for the Coonong stud. Sir Samuel’s stud
flock each year attained more and more success at the leading shows, until eventually it
became practically invincible. But at this time another aspect presented itself. Weight of
wool generally carries with it a lighter carcase, and as mutton became a great factor in
profitable sheep-breeding, Sir Samuel saw that a larger carcase must be grown, and to this
end purchased rams from several breeders who bred large sheep, and now his sheep will
compare favourably for size of carcase, length of staple, and plain bodies with the best flocks
4
32
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A TYPICAL COONONG STUD RAM.
Ist prize Ram under 2½ year in Smooth-bodied Class, Sydney Show,1912.
A TYPICAL COONONG FLOCK RAM.
33
The Coonong, Goolgumbla and North Yanco Estates, New South I Vales,


A TURBINE WINDMILL AT COONONG.
in the Commonwealth. He has for many years bred all the rams needed for his own require-
ments, and this has been no small task, for on his various estates he has had an average of
about 10,000 rams working annually, and as rams only last four years, it has necessitated
breeding at least 2400 rams to supply the annual waste.
Coonong, which has always been the centre of Sir Samuel’s sheep-breeding operations, is
situated on the Riverina plains, 10 miles from Urana and 30 miles from Jenlderie. It is a
lovely property, improved with all the care and expenditure one would expect from one pos-
sessing such exceptional ability and experience as its owner. The house, which was built
over 30 years ago, is a tribute to his foresight, for it could easily hold its own among the
most modern houses of to-day. It stands in beautiful grounds, and is approached through
plantations of willows and elms and other trees, which offer a delightful contrast to the bare
plains of Riverina. The buildings round the station, comprising blacksmith’s shop, engine
sheds, machinery houses, &c., give the place the air of a small township, and the irrigation
channels in every direction are a tribute to one of the principal objects of Sir Samuel’s life,
viz., to get water on to fertile soil.
Passing from Coonong we once again refer to Sir Samuel McCaughey’s progress as a
pastorahst. In 1872 he purchased Goolgumbla, comprising 120,000 acres, from Sir Samuel
6
34
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


TWO VIEWS OF THE FIRST PRIZE PEN OF TEN FOUR-TOOTH STUD RAMS AT THE SYDNEY SHOW, 1912.
These Rams were all Coonong Bred.
7
35
The Coonong, Goolgumbla and North Yanco Estates, New South I Nates.


A TYPICAL GOOLGUMHLA STUD EWE.
Wilson. This property lies about 40 miles north-west of Jerilderie, and it may be described
as about one-third open plains, the balance being red soil lightly timbered with pine, box, and
boree. There are also various loamy pine ridges, from which all scrub and useless timber have
been cleared. The principal grasses are barley, trefoil, and whitetop. A great quantity of
useful herbage, together with a fair amount of saltbush, also grows well in any average
season.
There are no permanent creeks on the property. Water is provided for stock by means
of large excavated tanks, sub-artesian bores and wells. The water is raised from these by
means of windmills, of which there are eleven on the estate. Ihe excavated tanks, which
are very numerous, vary in size from 3000 to 15,000 cubic yards. The tanks are mostly
dependent on the rainfall for the supply of water, but as no expense has been spared to pro-
vide suitable drams to the tanks, there is always a good supply of water for stock. A
further big supply of water can be obtained from two wells, one situated on the north-east
portion of the run, the other at the home station. On the former is a 5-in. centrifugal
pump, with a capacity of 26,000 gallons per hour; the latter is provided with a 4-in. water-
lifter, which gives a supply of 10,000 gallons per hour. Eighteen tanks can be filled from
these two wells. The average rainfall for the past seven years is 14 in., but for a longer
period the average is about 18 in.
8
36
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE GOOLGUMBLA HOMESTEAD.
V
37
The Co onong, Goolgumbla and North Yanco Estates, New South Wales.


STUD EWES AT THE GOOLGUMBLA WOODSHED.
The homestead is nicely situated in the centre of the run. The house is built in two
portions, one being of brick and the other a wooden building. There is ample accommo-
dation for all requirements. The garden, containing about two acres, produces splendid
grapes, oranges, and vegetables of all sorts. Water supply for both house and garden is
raised by means of a windmill into large overhead tanks, with a capacity of 10,000 gallons.
The supply of water is permanent, as the large excavated tank can always be filled from a
well alongside.
The whole of the boundary is enclosed with rabbit-proof netting, and is again subdivided
into fourteen netted blocks. The number of paddocks on the estate is eighty-six, varying
in size from 40 acres to 6100 acres. Eleven sets of sheepyards have been erected at con-
venient places. By this means sheep can be worked without having any long distances to
travel.
The area cultivated annually is from 200 to 300 acres. The ground is prepared for
seed by ploughing with three and four-furrow ploughs, after which the seed, principally
wheat, is drilled in. The yield of hay in average seasons is about 1 \ tons to the acre.
Only a small herd of milking cattle is kept on the run, but these cattle are of the best
Shorthorn breed. Only the best bulls have been used for years.
10
38
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE NORTH YANCO HOMESTEAD
i:
39
The Coonong, Goolgumb/a and North Yanco Estates, New South Wales.


THIS MEN’S QUARTERS AT NORTH YANCO.
The flock numbers 82,000 sheep. Originally they were of Vermont strain, but of later
years rams have been purchased from Boonoke and Wanganella. These rams were intro-
duced because it was found that the original flock were carrying fleeces of such great weight
that they became too much of a burden. The introduction of fresh blood has been found of
great benefit. The sheep now bred in the stud and flock produce splendid fleeces of beau-
tiful character and great length. The tops of the stud ewes cut as high as 20 lbs. of wool,
rams 31 lbs. The average weight of wool is from 10 to 11 lbs. Of course, this is during
average seasons. The highest price obtained last year for fleece wool was The aver-
age lambing percentage is from 75 to 80 per cent., but some flocks have marked as high as
94 per cent. (Since the above was written 43,000 acres of Goolgumbla have been sold.)
In 1 880 Sir Samuel purchased Toorale and Dunlop, on the Darling, together with other
leases in that district, amounting in all to 3,000,000 acres. These places he stocked up to
260,000 sheep, and erected woolsheds, complete wool-scouring plants, and other necessary
improvements. Sir Samuel held these properties for thirty-two years, and this year (1912)
he sold them to Messrs. Robinson and Vincent for £250,000 on very liberal terms, these
gentlemen having managed the properties for Sir Samuel for many years.
In 1881 Sir Samuel, in partnership with Messrs. Henry and James Stuart, purchased
I 2
40
the Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE WORKSHOP, NORTH YANCO.
',5
41
The Coonong, Goolgumbla and North Yanco Estates; New South Wales.


ONE OF THE NORTH YANCO HAY SHEDS.
Rockwood Station, on the Landsborough, in Queensland. This property comprises, with
Barenya and Antrim and Tower Hill, which were subsequently purchased, over 600,000 acres.
When the firm bought
this station it was un-
fenced and unimproved,
and there were very
few waterholes on the
Landsborough which
would last more than
nine months, so they
set to work to construct
tanks and dams, but
found that in times of
drought they always
failed. At last artesian
water was discovered,
and the firm put down
A STATION TEAM, NORTH YANCO.
‘4
42
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE TEAMS AT NORTH YANCO.
numerous bores, and watered the property permanently from this source. Rockwood has
since been sold, a Sydney syndicate having purchased it for about in iqii.
In 1882 Sir Samuel McCaughey purchased Coree, a property of 140,000 acres, near
Deniliquin, and about eight years later he sold it to his brother, the late David McCaughey.
In 1900 Sir Samuel purchased the famous North Yanco Estate from Messrs. H. and C.
Douglas. This property is situated about 15 miles from Narrandera, and it comprises
100,000 acres. Sir Samuel recognised its suitability for irrigation and the production of
lucerne, and with characteristic energy set to work with irrigation. Altogether he con-
structed about 200 miles of channels, and was practically able to irrigate about 40,000 acres
when there was a good supply of water in the Murrumbidgee, and he generally had sufficient
water to flood from 10,000 to 20,000 acres each year during spring months. Sir Samuel’s
success with irrigation at Yanco induced the Government to decide on the Burrinjuck reser-
voir and the Northern Murrumbidgee canal scheme. In consequence of this the Government
have resumed Yanco from Sir Samuel, granting him the use of 30,000 acres south of the
railway line at a rental during his lifetime. On this portion of the estate stands the North
Yanco mansion, which the owner built a few years ago. It is a noble mansion, built on a
solid and generous scale, and it is placed in the midst of beautiful surroundings. Sir Samuel
•5
43
The Coonong, Goo/gumbta and North Yanco Estates, New South Wales.


McCaughey intended
Yanco to be his home,
and he spared no ex-
pense to make it pleas-
ing to the eye and most
comfortable. About 8
acres surrounding the
house were carefully
graded for irrigation,
and the ornamental
grounds, garden, and
orchard have made ex-
traordinary progress,
and are now most
lovely.
COB STALLION AT YANCO.
Sir Samuel McCaughey, by his work at Yanco, proved the district to be admirably
adapted to wheat, oats, and lucerne, and that the two former crops can be grown there with-
out irrigation in most years.
It has been impossible in the space available to more than touch upon the fringe of the
pastoral undertakings of Sir Samuel McCaughey. In addition to the properties mentioned
in this article, Sir Samuel also owned about 200,000 acres north of Narrandera, and now
owns Bonus Downs, in the Mitchell district, Queensland. Since the Federal land tax came
into force he has sold eleven station properties, and now has only four left, viz., Coonong,
Goolgumbla, Singorimba, and Bonus Downs. He intends to gradually retire, and will dis-
pose of Coonong and Goolgumbla in the near future.
Sir Samuel McCaughey was called to the Legislative Council of New South Wales in
1899, and he was created a Knight Bachelor in 1905. For many years he has been a vice-
president of the New South Wales Sheep-breeders’ Association.
i 6
44
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Coree Estate.
The property of the Erecutors of the Late David Mcdaughey.
COREE Station, one of the best known in Riverina, lies about i i miles west of
Jerilclerie Railway Station, 418 miles from Sydney. It is easily accessible, as one
can leave Sydney at 10.5 p.m., and with the aid of a motor car from Jenlderie
Railway Station, be at the Coree homestead at 5 p.m. the next day. But the station lies
out on the vast Riyerina plains, and it was a notable property long before it became so
accessible. It was one of the very first stations formed in Riverina, and has from the earliest
A GROUP OF COREE STUD RAMS.
days been renowned for the standard of the flock reared on it. This great district has
since acquired a wide reputation as sheep country, and nowhere in the world are finer flocks
to be found than on the vast, dead level, sparsely-timbered plains of Riverina.
The history of Coree is wrapped up in the history of Riverina. This rich portion of New
South Wales was first settled by a little coterie of pioneers, who started from Tumut. They
were the Kennedys, Broughtons, Brodribbs, Broughams, De Saillys, and the Carnes, and
I


THE COKEE HOMESTEAD.
they at one time practically occupied all the
country along the Billabong and light to Bal-
ranald. It was in the early fifties that Messrs.
Frank and George De Sailly purchased Coree,
which was at that time one ot the largest single
holdings in the district. It comprised 220
square miles, and was used as a cattle station.
A few years later the De Saillys sold out to
Messrs. Mackinnon and Lydiard, and in 1865
they sold to Sir Samuel Wilson, who converted
the property into a sheep station, though at
the time it had one of the finest herds of cattle
in the country. In 1872 it was acquired by
his brother, Mr. John Wilson, and his nephews,
Messrs. Samuel and Alexander Wilson, jun.,
and they held it for nine years. Subsequently
a vast amount of improvement was done.
About 140,000 acres were in that time secured,
A VIEW FROM THE GARDEN.
2
46
The Pastoral Homes of Australia .


THE VEGETABLE GARDEN AND ORCHARD
A GENERAL VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD.
3
47
7 he Coree Estate, New South Wales.


BLACKSMITH’S SHOP, TIMBER SHED AND WINDMILL.
and an adjoining hold-
ing, Tongaboo, com-
prising about 40,000
acres, was purchased,
and made part of Coree.
Upwards of 170 tanks
and dams were con-
structed, and great
lengths of fencing were
erected. A large wool-
shed was also built,
and extensive yards.
Thus in a very short
space of time Coree
was converted from an
THE MEN’S QUARTERS.
4
48
The Pastoral Homes of Australia .


open cattle station into a large and
very highly-improved sheep run. A
feature of these improvements was
the numerous yards placed in various
positions on the run, which enabled
sheep to be drafted hand}’ to their pad-
docks, and obviated the necessity for
driving them long distances to one or
two sets of yards.
During this time about 90,000
sheep were carried, and the whole of
SHORTHORN BULL—BOLINDA DUKE OF DERRIMUT 258.
the clip was spout washed. This method of treating wool has long since passed
out of date, but it is interesting to mention it in connection with this estate, because
Coree was noted for its extensive sheep-washing plant. The Wilsons sold out in 1881, and
Sir Samuel McCaughey became the owner, and in 1 890 he sold to his brother, the late David
McCaughey, who, on his death, in 1899, appointed as his executors his brothers, Sir Samuel
McCaughey, of Yanco, Mr. John McCaughey, of Yarrabee, and Mr. Alfred H. Cell, who is the
managing trustee. By the time Coree came into the possession of the late David McCaughey,
it had been converted into a freehold estate of about 138,000 acres, with about 7000 acres of
Crown lands in the way of stock routes and reserves, which have since been alienated. At
one period of its history no less than 170,000 sheep were shorn on Coree, but since that time
the area has been considerably reduced. In IQII about 65,000 acres, which comprised the
southern half of the run, were sold in blocks averaging 2000 acres, and the trustees propose
to sell a further 20,000
acres. Coree will then
have an area of about
50,000 acres, on which
Mr. Cell expects to
shear between 35, 000
and 40,000 sheep. Coree
has thus shared the
same fate as other great
pastoral holdings. The
pioneering days from
this particular district
have passed for ever,
and by means of prox-
imity to railways, tele-
phone connection, and
THE HAYSHED.
5
49
The Coree Estate, New South Wales


THE BLOOD STALLION, “INDICATOR.”
THE DRAUGHT STALLION, “FEDERATION.”
6
50
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


motor cars, Coree
life and management
are quite a different
proposition to what
they were when
Messrs. Mackinnon
and Lydiard owned
the estate, when a
great deal of the
station business was
done with Echuca,
100 miles away. At
that time the furthest
THE WOOLSHED.
ONE-YEAR-OLD STUD EWES.
extension of the N.S.W. Railway system was Goulburn. But all that is changed, and Coree
now lies I i miles from Jerilderie railway, 36 from Tocumwal and 43 miles from Deniliquin,
both the latter connecting with the Victorian railways. A line is now in the course of
construction from Finlay to Tocumwal, which will connect Sydney and Melbourne with a
direct line. Finlay is only 21 miles from the Coree homestead.
51
51
The Coree Estate, New South Wales.


Coree is typical Riverina country —rich red and black soil plains, dead level, stretching
away as far as the eye can see. Here and there the estate is intersected with belts of tim-
ber, comprising box, pine, bull oak, and boree. It has a double frontage to the Billabong and
Yanco Creeks, from which a good deal of the water supply is derived. Supplies are, how-
ever, augmented from wells and tanks, but Mr. Cell is giving up the latter, and is going in
for single shaft wells, with windmills, supply tanks, and troughing. The wells can also be
worked by a single whip, lifting water at any time the wind may fail to keep the supply up.
There are some fine Shorthorns at Coree. The cows bred from are decended from those
purchased from Yarrabee Park in the nineties, and at that time, when Mr. Robertson had Yar-
rabee Park, his herd was a very noted one. He purchased a noted bull called Rapid Redi-
vious in 1876, and some cows from the late Mr. McCullough, of Victoria, and the cows pur-
chased for Coree were descended from these. After the Rapid bull Mr. Robertson used one of
his own breeding, called Earl of Bingegong, and succeeding him were Alvies Duke, bred by
Mr. S. Gardener; 14th Duke of Bridgewater, bred by Mr. J. Horwood; then two very good bulls
bred by Mr. C. B. Fisher, of South Australia; and at the time the Coree cows were purchased
from Yarrabee they were in calf to a bull bred by Mr. J. J. Baylis, of Wagga. In 1899 Mr.
Cell purchased Count of Summerton, bred by Mr. George Tweedale, of Gisborne, Victoria,
from Mr. C. L. Griffith, and in 1902 he made a fresh introduction by purchasing Derrimut
Duke 2nd of Homewood, bred by Mr. John Garland. In 1905 Belinda Duke of Derrimut 219
was purchased from Sir Rupert Clarke, of Belinda Vale, Victoria, and in 1908 Belinda
Duke of Derrimut 258, the sire at present used, was purchased from the same stud. In 1910
the pure herd was increased by seven cows purchased from Mr. Mitchell, of Colbinabbin,
Victoria. It will therefore be seen that the Coree Shorthorns are kept up to a high standard,
and they comprise some of the best blood in Australia.
Coree has been largely in the public eye because of the Merino sheep produced thereon,
but it maintains a high standard as regards all the stock bred there. Mr. Cell turns out some
very fine horses, and has from time to time introduced several high-class sires. The Coree
mares contain a strong fusion of Arab blood, which still shows out in their carriage and
general style, and shortly after Mr. Gell took charge of the estate he purchased the stallion
8
52
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A GROUP OF SIRES.
ONE-YEAR-OLD STUD RAMS.
9
53
The Coree Estate, New South Wales.


Newmarket, by Rouge et Noir out of Vester.
A few years later he purchased larquin, by
Xeckersgat from Tarpeia, and the thorough-
bred stallion at present in use is Indicator, a
handsome dark bay horse, standing over 16
hands, by Diogenes out of a mare by Pro-
pellor. Mr. Geli also breeds from about
twenty-five draught mares, and the stallion
he uses is Federation, a stout, active Clydes-
dale, of a splendid type. Federation is by
Lord Palmer, a horse imported from New
Zealand, out of a mare called Lady Mar-
shall, going back to imported stock.
Now we come to the most important
section of the live stock on Coree, i.e., the
sheep. For very many years the Coree
sheep were well spoken of throughout the
State, and steady progress has been the
history of the flocks. In the early days of
THE LATE DAVID MCCAUGHEY
Coree the sheep, which were chiefly of Havilah blood, almost doubled their weight of fleeces;
in other words, they increased from an average of 2 lbs. 10 ozs. of spout-washed wool to
5 lbs. 2 ozs. But later on there came a time when the Coree sheep were to cut even heavier
fleeces. When the
late David McCaughey
bought Coree he en-
deavoured still further
to increase the weight
of fleeces, and he pur-
chased some registered
American Merinos im-
ported by Messrs. Ir-
vine, Hay, and Mark-
ham. The result of this
introduction was that
in Igo I the whole of
the flock ewes (60,000
head) and 6000 stud
A GOOD ARM.
IO
54
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


ewes cut an average weight of 10 lbs. 3 ozs. unwashed
wool. At different times very carefully-bred, high-class
sheep were purchased from Sir Samuel McCaughey’s Coo-
nong stud, and the Coree flock figured very prominently
at the Sydney, Melbourne, and Wagga Shows. But in
breeding for such density it was the custom to use the
most wrinkly and folded rams and ewe's, and when Mr.
Cell took charge of Coree he foresaw that a limit would
soon be reached if this style of breeding were continued.
It produced great heavy fleeces on sheep that could have
special attention, but it placed too much of a handicap
on ordinary station sheep that had to hustle for a living.
Satisfied on this point, Mr. Cell lost no time in changing
9
the character of the Coree flock. About the year 1904
he culled severely, and threw out all the wrinkly pure-
SAMUEL MCCAUGHEY
bred American sheep. He then looked round for high-class plain-bodied rams, and eventually
purchased from Mr. James Richmond’s Haddon Rig stud flock. When the area of Coree was
reduced the opportunity occurred of getting rid of the old stock, and everything over 4-tooth
was sold. In 19 1 Ino less than 54,466 sheep were sold, and as only the 4-tooth and 2-tooth
ewes remained, they were practically all of the Haddon Rig strain. I hese are the lines Mr.
Cell is now breeding on, and the Coree stud fiheep are now characterised by plain, deep
bodies and well-developed fronts. They are reared under natural conditions entirely, and
develop great size and length of staple. The writer of this article had an opportunity of see-
mg them before shearing in July last (1912), and they
had then passed through the severest possible test. They
had been through months of one of the worst droughts on
record. During the whole period the wool was growing
the sheep were on drought-stricken country, and just be-
fore shearing they were subjected to nearly 4 in. of rain
within less than a month. But in spite of this the wool
on the backs stood up well, and showed that they could
keep out dust and weather to a remarkable degree. An
idea of what the Coree flock is to-day can be gained from
the figures of the 19 n clip. The ewe hoggets averaged
10 lbs. 9 ozs., and 38,583 ewes of all ages cut 11 lbs. In
1909 98,493 sheep were shorn. All the ewes, stud and
flock, averaged 12 lbs. 5 ozs., ewe hoggets cut 10 lbs.
1 oz., 4-tooth wethers 13lbs. 14 ozs., and wether hog-
gets 11 lbs. 2-| ozs.
ROY MCCAUGHEY
11
55
The Coree Estate, New South Wales.


A GROUP OF TWO-YEAR-OLD STUD EWES.
pcrsonaL
The late Mr. David McCaughey came out to Australia in the early seventies, and for a
number of years lived with his brother, Sir Samuel McCaughey, and became a partner in
all his undertakings in New South Wales, having a share in Toorale, Dunlop, and his
Riverina properties. He eventually disposed of his share in these properties to Sir Samuel,
and bought Coree. Mr. McCaughey married in 1887, and died in 1899, leaving a widow and
four children, two daughters and two sons.
I 2
56
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Groongal Estate.
The property of Mr. R.S. falRiner.
THE famous Groongal Estate, owned for so many years by the Groongal Pastoral
Company, changed hands last year, when it was purchased by Mr. R. S. Falkiner,
a member of F. S. Falkiner and Sons, Limited, Boonoke. It is a magnificent sheep
property, stretching in a compact block north of the Murrumbidgee. It is situ-
ated about half way between Narrandera and Hay, and is bounded on the east by Wyvern
Station, and on the west by Howlong.
A MOB OF EWES AND LAMBS.
Groongal, when originally taken up in the fifties by Mr. O’Brien, of Yass, comprised, in
addition, the stations now known as Wyvern, Bringagee, and Benerembah, totalling in all
about 350,000 acres. This was all held under lease from the Crown. In 1865 Messrs
Thomas and Somerville Learmonth, of Ercildoune, Victoria, in conjunction with their younger
I
57


brother Andrew, purchased Groongal, and in 1870 Mr. George Mair was appointed manager.
During his management 3 10,000 acres were secured and made freehold in one solid block, and
extensive improvements were carried out. The run was stocked with some high-class sheep
from Ercildoune. Also the pick of the famous stud flock was brought there. The first drop
of the young rams averaged 17 guineas in Hay at auction. In 1899, on account of the death
of Mr. Somerville Learmonth, the partnership was dissolved, and the estate was divided into
three blocks now known as Groongal, Wyvern, and Bringagee. The brothers drew lots, and
Groongal fell to the estate of the late Somen ille Learmonth. In 1906 the Groongal Pas-
toral Company was formed.
MR. R. S. FALKINER
The estate has always been noted for a very high class of sheep, also stud Shorthorns,
of which a fine herd is still on the property. Mr- R. S. Falkiner purchased
the property in September, 19 11, and, with his reputation as a sheepbreeder, it is
not likely that the Groongal name in the wool world will show any falling off, though most
likely the character of the clip will be changed.
Groongal is ideally situated. The railway siding is on the property within a little over a
mile from the house, and the woolshed is only a few hundred yards from the rail. The home-
stead is beautifully situated in the midst of an old rambling garden right on the banks of the
2
58
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE HOMESTEAD
3
59
The Groongal Estate, New South Wales•


M urrumbidgee, and Mr. Falkiner has commenced improvements which will greatly add to the
attractiveness of the place. The tall river gums form a fine background to the house, while
ornamental trees, some of great age, surround it. Round about the house are situated ideal stud
paddocks, which are irrigated for natural grasses, making Groongal a most suitable pro-
perty for stud breeding. The estate consists of wide open plains of red and black soil,
interspersed with sand ridges covered with Murray pine, and well sheltered with Myall and
Kooba trees and clumps of other timber. It has a good frontage to the Murrumbidgee,
and water is obtainable anywhere by means of wells, the water rising to a uniform depth of
from 70 to 80 ft. from the surface. In addition to wells, there are numerous tanks and
dams.
THE MURRUMBIDGEE FROM THE HOUES
Shearing happened to be in progress during the writer’s visit to Groongal, and it pro-
vided the opportunity for witnessing one of the latest inventions in regard to the pastoral in-
dustry, viz., electric shearing machinery. The Groongal shed is fitted with twenty-four
stands of electric shearing machines, known as the Falkiner 8011. These were invented by
the present owner of Groongal, and they are the outcome of his great experience among sheep
and machinery. Mr. Falkiner devoted much time and money in endeavouring to improve on
the shaft-driven machinery, and, with the assistance of Mr. P. 8011, an electrical engineer, he
4
60
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


THE GARDEN
5
61
The Groongal Estate, New South Wales-


6
62
Tthe Pastoral Homes of Australia,


THE MEN'S QUARTERES
63
The Groongal Estate, New South Wales.


8
64
Thm Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A GROUP OF EWES.
9
65
The Groongal Estate, New South Wales.


solved the problem of applying the driving power directly to the shearer’s cutter by means of
electricity.
The Groongal shed carries no heavy shafting or pulleys. At every shearer’s stand along
the board a small motor and tube with steel core is suspended from a hook, and insulated
wires convey the current from the dynamo. The total weight of each stand is only 34 lbs.,
and it is thus easily transported. The machines are driven with a minimum of power, and
one is struck on entering a shed in the middle of a run at the absence of noise. At first there
is a feeling that something is missing, but after a while one becomes aware that the only
noise to be heard is the thrashing of the cutters. There is no vibration or noise of friction
MUSTERING FOR SHEARING
wheels and shafting, and this fact has caused shearers working in an electric shed for the
first time to imagine they are not getting sufficient speed. However, they soon get used to
the difference, and appreciate the quieter work done by the electric machines.
Those who have never seen an electric shed at work will be struck with the simplicity of
it all. It has become fashionable in this district, Bringagee, Benduck, and Eurogabah also
being fitted with these machines.
It was a dull afternoon when the writer was in the Groongal shed, and the light was after
4 o’clock getting bad. It was dull on the shearing board, and in the woolroom particularly
10
66
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE ELETRIC SHEARING MACHINES
11
67
The Groongal Estate, New South Wales.


so. Mr. Falkmer touched a switch, and the whole shed become brilliantly lighted, and the
result was so great that even the shearers raised a cheer. This opened the wide possibili-
ties of electricity in the pastoral world, and there is little doubt that this great force will be
far more widely used in the near future. Those who possess an electric shearing plant can
not only drive machines, but they can light their board, their wool-room, their men’s huts,
and, of course, their own homestead. They can convey the power to any distance, and use
it for a variety of purposes.
The Groongal shed has been in use for many years, and it is on the cards that Mr. Fal-
kiner will build another, or, rather, that he will convert the buildings of the Carrathool Meat
Works, which are now lying idle in one corner of Groongal, into a thoroughly up-to-date
woolshed. Mr. Falkiner has designed a horseshoe shearing board, with the wool tables, &c.,
in the centre. This would greatly expedite work at shearing time. No wool table being
more than 10 ft. from a shearer, the pickers-up. instead of having to run up and down long
distances in a straight shed, would only have to pick the fleece off the board and throw on
to the table. Another advantage of this design is that the man over the board can survey
the whole scene from one spot, which is of immense advantage. This design of Mr. Fal-
kiner’s has not yet been put into operation, but it is worth referring to here on account of it
being made feasible through the introduction of electrical shearing machines. A semi-
circular or circular shearing board is not possible where shafting is used. The economy
and convenience of working is apparent.
A very fine lot of crossbred ewes were being put through the Groongal shed at the time
of our visit, and Mr. Falkiner proposes to continue this type of sheep. The cross is an Eng-
lish Leicester one, and it seems to suit the country well.
A little while ago Mr. Falkiner purchased Kilfera Station, comprising 440,000 acres, in
the Ivanhoe district. At the time he bought it the Merino ewes had been mated with Rom-
ney rams, and the progeny looked well, but the new owner is stocking the run with Merinos
of Boonoke blood, and will do all his crossbreeding at Groongal, where the fats will be
handy to the rail and market. Toogambri, 25 miles down the river from Flay, is another
property recently acquired by Mr. Falkiner.
Mr. Falkiner is importing an electric train to cart the wool in the out-back country. The
main features of the train are that every wheel is a driver. It has a capacity of from 30 to
50 tons, and a speed of from sto 10 miles per hour. Mr. Falkiner expects to have this
machine out in time to cart next season’s Kilfera clip.
1 2
68
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Carwoola Estate.
The property of Mr.J.F. Maslin.
CARWOOLA, the property of Mr. J. F. Maslin, is one of the best-known stations in
the Queanbeyan district. It is situated thirteen miles from the town of Bungen-
dore, and the same distance from Queanbeyan. Mr. Maslin purchased the estate
from the executors of the late Thomas Rutledge in 1907, it having been in Mr. Rutledge’s pos-
session for over sixty years.
Carwoola is essentially grazing country, and Mr. Maslin devotes it to producing a high
quality of wool, South Australian-bred rams being used. The estate comprises 30,000 acres.
A GROUP OF CARWOOLS EWES.
and the major portion of it is hilly and well timbered, with the exception of the river flats,
which are devoid of timber. The soil is a light loam, and the rich flats are of a sandy nature.
The average rainfall is twenty-five inches, and the property is watered by the Molongo and
T
69


A GENERAL VIEW OF THE RICER FLATS.
Queanbeyan Rivers and numerous springs. The timber comprises red and yellow box, brittle
and white gum and peppermint.
Since Mr. Maslm took possession
extensive ring-barking operations have
been carried on, and now quite three-
quarters of Carwoola have been ring-
barked and suckered, with the result
that the carrying capacity has been
doubled. The improvements made are
of a substantial nature, and Mr. Maslm
is replacing the old log and post-and-
rail fences with wire and netted fences.
The property is divided into forty-five
paddocks, and it is now being netted
into small areas for the purpose of rab-
THE DRIVE UE TO THE HOMESTEAD.
2
70
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A GENERAL VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD.
3
71
The Carwoola Estate, New South Wales,


4
72
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE HOMESTEAD.
5
73
The Car woo let Estate, New South Wales.


CATTLE ON MOLONGLO RIVER.
ST. THOMAS’ CHURCH ON THE ESTATE.
6
74
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A MOB OF FOUR-TOOTH EWES AND LAMBS.
75
The Carwoola Estate, New South Wales.


SOME CARWOOLA BRED HORSES.
bit destruction. Mr. Maslin adopts the only permanent and effective measures against the
pest, he., netting into convenient areas, burning-off all over, and digging out the burrows.
This is costly work,
but it pays in the
long run.
The Carwoola
homestead is a two-
storey stone building
of most convenient
design. It is fitted
with modern appli-
ances, including ace-
tylene gas. It is con-
nected by telephone,
and has the unique
advantage of having,
in close proximity,
MR. MASLIN’S CAR ON THE ROAD TO CARWOOLA.
8
76
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A GENERAL VIEW OF THE COUNTRY.
9
77
The Carwoola Estate, New South Wales,


CATTLE IN FATTENING PADDOCK.
post, telegraph, and money offices, also Savings Bank. The house is surrounded by a fine
flower and vegetable garden.
As before stated, Carwoola is purely grazing country, and Mr. Maslin goes in for very
little cultivation, all that he does is for station use. The stock, in the main, depend upon the
natural grasses.
Mr. Maslin makes a speciality of his flock, which comprises about 25,000 sheep. Being
a South Australian, he naturally inclines to the South Australian type, and when he took up
Carwoola, he brought with him 2,000 ewes. The sheep are large-framed, carrying a big fleece of
bright, robust wool. The staple is long and broad in character, and it finds a ready sale in
the Sydney market. This year’s clip (1911) sold up to 13d. and 13id., and when it is borne
in mind that the Carwoola sheep have averaged 10J lbs. for the last three years, it is easily
seen that Mr. Maslin is breeding a very profitable flock. The average mentioned above in-
cluded 5000 breeding ewes. The lambing season is in August and September, and from 80
per cent, to 90 per cent, of lambs are marked. Mr. Maslin has had some wonderful lamb-
ings. In 1909 a mob of 800 ewes marked 102 per cent. This is very largely the result of the
big frames and well-put-on-fleeces. The sheep are not handicapped with heavy jowls or ab-
TO
78
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


normally developed thighs and arms, which are drawbacks
to sheep which have to scratch for a living. As regards
the quality of wool produced on Carwoola, an idea can be
obtained from the fact that for the last three years the
whole clip, including fleece wool, pieces, bellies, locks,
and lambs’ wool, has averaged Qd. per lb.
Mr. Maslin has been associated with pastoral life ever
since leaving college, and as his work has chiefly been in
South Australia, a short reference to his property in that
State must be given here. It is named Bundaleer, and is
situated 30 miles north of Clare. the estate comprises
37,000 acres of open hilly land, lightly timbered, and per-
manently watered by the River Broughton and Bundaleer
Creek. Many of the paddocks have frontages to these
sources of water supply, but those not so situated are
MR. J. K. MASLIN.
fully served by tanks and dams. The property is well fenced, and so subdivided as to en
able it to be worked with the minimum of trouble and expense.
MUSTERING CATTLE.
11
79
The Carwoo/a Estate, New South Wales,


Bundaleer is noted
for its valuable Merino
flock, which numbers
about 35,000. The
foundation was laid
many years ago by the
purchase of sheep from
the well-known flock
belonging to the late
C. B. Fisher. Since
that time valuable Tas-
manian and Wangan-
ella rams have been
introduced, but of late
years Mr. Maslin has
THE AVENUE.
only used rams bred by Messrs. Hawker Bros., of Bungaree. The Bundaleer sheep, like those
at Carwoola, are of a hardy, profitable type. The flock cuts an average weight of between
10 lbs. and I I lbs., and the wool is always among the top prices ruling.
Mr. J. F. Maslin is the fifth son of the late John Maslin, of Bundaleer, South Australia,
and was educated at Prince Alfred’s College.. On completing his studies he returned to
Bundaleer, and assisted his father in the management. He continued in this position until
1898, when the estate was divided between himself and his brother. Realising that there
was more scope for pastoral work in New South Wales than in South Australia, he purchased
Carwoola, in the mother State, in 1907.
I 2
80
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Sunny Ridge, Mulyan and Breakfast
Creek Estates.
The properties of Messrs. J.H. & R. J. fagan.
A DESCRIPTION of the Sunny
Ridge Mulyan. and Break-
fast Creek Stations involves
a reference to the career of one of
those interesting pioneers who lived
on the outskirts of civilisation, and did
so much to settle the inland districts of
Australia. These properties were owned
by the late Mr. John Fagan, who died in
September, 1912, after a most success-
ful life, and they are now the property of
his sons. His eldest son, Mr. J. H.
Fagan, resides at Mulyan, and the other
son, Mr. R. J. Fagan, lives with his
mother at the old station, Sunny Ridge.
Sunny Ridge, as it now stands, is a
remarkably well-improved station. It
comprises about 13,000 acres, situated
about one mile from the township of
Mandurama. It was originally part of
Coombino- Park, then owned by the late
o •'
Thos. Icely. The late Mr. Fagan pur-
chased Sunny Ridge, now one of the
best-known properties in the Carcoaf
TINE SUNNY RIDGE AVENUE.
X
81


district, in the seventies, and it was then fairly heavily timbered, principally with red gum and
box. ft is undulating country, with belts of good agricultural land. The late Mr. Fagan gradu-
ally improved the property, and its productive capacity to-day is the result of the work and expen-
diture that the late owner put into the property during his lifetime. This is a point that is
never taken into consideration hy those who show such a vindictive spirit against the owners of
large estates. It was the work of men like the late John Fagan that rendered settlement in the
interior possible, and that made it possible to build railways inland, and it is largely the results
LOOKING DOWN THE RIVER FLATS. SUNNY RIDGE.
of their pioneering energy that have kept the railways going ever since. Sunny Ridge is being
managed by Mr. R. J. Fagan in a progressive spirit. Though it carries a large flock of
sheep it is not entirely a grazing property. The agricultural belts are devoted to the cultivation
of crops, principally oats.
, Sunny Ridge is well watered by the Belubla River and creeks and artificial supplies. The
average rainfall is about 28m. It is nearly all wire-netted on the boundaries and subdivisions.
The flock comprises about 18,000 Merinos, which are of a good-cutting, big-framed type, being
all of Boonoke strain.
The woolshed is an up-to-date building, situated about a mile and a half from the homestead,
and it is fitted with nineteen stands of machines. The numerous out-buildings include men's quar-
2
82
Thc Pastoral Homes of Australia■


THE SUNNY RIDGE HOMESTEAD.
.)
83
The Sunny Ridge, Mulyan and Breakfast Creek Estates, N.S.W.


ters and garage. The homestead is a comfortable building of the bungalow type, fitted with
modern appliances, which include telephonic communication. The agricultural work on Sunny
Ridge is clone on the share system. About 300 head of beef Shorthorn cattle are run on the
property.
Mulyan comprises about 3500 acres, situated close to Cowra. Here there are about 1000
acres under crop, also on the share system. The property is watered by the Lachlan River, and
comprises some very rich flats. It is good fattening land, and the sheep run are chiefly crossbreds.
HARVESTING ON SUNNY RIDGE.
Mu Ivan was once part of the old Redfern Estate, purchased by the late Mr. Fagan in the
seventies from Mr. Wm. Kite, one of the most prominent of the Bathurst and Carcoar pioneers.
It is now all cleared and highly improved, and, being worked on the share system, supports quite
a large number of people.
Breakfast Creek comprises about 13,200 acres, in the Young district. It was purchased by
the late Mr. Fagan in 1910 from Captain Panter. When purchased, the property needed a
good deal of improvement, and this work is being undertaken in the thorough manner which
4
84
Tho Pastoral Homes of Australia.


characterises Sunny Ridge and Muiyan. It is stocked with about 14,000 sheep, chiefly crossbreds,
and a considerable area is devoted to wheat farming on the share system. Out on the run, timber
is being picked up and burnt, and rabbits are being dug out. On Muiyan the rabbit warrens have
been entirely dug out, and this work is being vigorously proceeded with at Sunny Ridge and Break-
fast Creek. It is costly work, but it pays in the long run, for once the rabbits are got down the
carrying capacity of the properties is increased enormously. Digging-out. combined with netted
fences, is about the most permanent method of dealing with the pest. The Carcoar and Young
SUNNY RIDGE GARDEN.
districts have been particularly bad with rabbits, but if all landholders adopted the thorough
methods of Messrs. Fagan liros. and one or two others in the district, the pest would soon be
reduced to a minimum. On the other hand, it is very hard on the man who spends money fighting
the pest to be surrounded by people who are careless in this respect.
The late Mr. John Fagan, who purchased these three tine properties, was one of the best
known and most interesting pastoralists in the Carcoar district. Fie was a connecting link with
the early days, long before railways went there. Of Irish parentage, he was born at sea while
5
85
The Sunny Ridge, Mu/yan and Breakfast Creek Estates, N.S.W.


his parents were voyaging to Australia. As a young man. for a very considerable period, he
drove Cobb and Co.’s famous coaches from Parramatta to Penrith, across the Blue Mountains.
Those were rough, stirring days, and Mr. Fagan in later years loved to chat about them. An
incident of bis coaching days worth recalling is the time when the bushranging gang, headed by
the notorious Gardiner, stuck up and robbed the Eugowra coach he was driving, his hat being
pierced by a bullet.
From driving coaches, Mr. Fagan eventually became an owner of coaches running the
lines between Carcoar, Blayney, Cowra, Forbes, and Grenfell. His natural shrewdness and sound
THE WOOLSHED AND MEN'S QUARTERS AT SUNNY RIDGE.
judgment stood him in good stead. Success attended his ventures, and he made money and
acquired property quicker than most men.
With the completion of the railway from Blayney to Cowra, Mr. Fagan’s coaching
enterprises ceased, and he sold the Royal Motel at Carcoar, with which he had been so long
identified. He then concentrated his attention and energies on pastoral pursuits. Tenandra, one
86
86
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


DISTANT VIEW OK AVENUE AND HOMESTEAD, SUNNY RIDGE.
HARVESTING AT SUNNY RIDGE.
7
87
The Sunny Ridge, Mulyan and Breakfast Creek Estates, N.S.W.


RIVER FLATS ON MULYAN.
A MOM OF FATS ON MULYAN.
88
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


CLEARING OPERATIONS ON BREAK PAST CHEEK.
0
89
The Sunny Ridge, Mulyan and Breakfast Creek Estates, N.S.W.


THE MULYAN HOMESTEAD.
10
90
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


of liis favourite properties, was almost the first
resumed by the compulsory legislation brought in
by the Liberal Government. He was one of the
first aldermen of the Carcoar municipality, a
councillor of the Lyndhurst shire to the time of
his decease, a prominent member of the various
stock and pastures boards, a trustee of the Car-
coar Hospital, and a justice of the peace. The
squire of Sunny Ridge, as he was familiarly
called, was at the time of his death seventy-three
years of age. He was very highly esteemed by an
unusually large circle of acquaintances, and he
THE LATE MR. JOHN FAGAN.
was a splendid judge of live stock, often officiating in show rings. lie left a widow and two
sons. Mrs. Fagan lives at Sunny Ridge with her younger son, Mr. R. J. Fagan.
The elder son, Mr. J. H. Fagan, lives at Mulyan, from where he also manages breakfast
Creek. He was horn near Bathurst, and was educated at St. Ignatius' College, Riverview, Sydney.
MR. J. H. FAGAN
MR.R.J.FAGAN
On leaving school he took up architecture, and served five years in the profession in Sydney. He
then went to Sunny Ridge and entered pastoral pursuits, and subsequently moved to Mulyan. In
1 1
91
The Sunny Ridge, Mulyan and Breakfast Creek Estates, /V.S. W.


PLOUGHING OUT RABBITS ON BREAKFAST CREEK.
1902 he married Miss James, of St. Kilda, Melbourne, and has a family of two boys. Mr. R.
|. Fagan was born at Carcoar, and received his education at St. Stanislaus’ College, Bathurst.
Immediately on leaving school he went to Sunny Ridge, and has been assisting his brother in
the management of their various properties ever since. Like his brother, he is a keen sheep-man
and farmer, and is also an enthusiastic motorist.
1 2
92
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Waugoola Estate
The Property of Mr. A. W. Whitney .
WAUGOOLA, the propertyof Mr. A. W. W hitney, is one of the best-known pastoral
properties in the Carcoar district of New South Wales. It belongs to a son of the
late W. F. Whitney, one of the pioneers of the district, and owner of Coombing
Park, one of the oldest holdings west of the Blue Mountains. The late Mr. Whitney purchased
Coombing, as it was once called, from Mr. Thomas Rothery Icely, whose father, the late Hon. Thos.
THE APPROACH TO WAUGOOLA HOMESTEAD
Icely, M.L.C., took it up in 1826. The late Mr. Icely was the first man to take up country in those
parts, and shortly after he formed the station of Coombing he went to England and married, and
immediately returned to Australia. Coombing was an immense tract of country in those days.
Bathurst was the nearest town, and the journey to Sydney had to be made by saddle, cart or
1
93


A VIEW OF THE GARDEN
-t
94
The Pastoral Homes of Australia ,


THE WAUGOOLA HOMESTEAD.
-7
6
95
The Waugoola Estate, New South Wales.


bullock dray. The country was once heavily timbered, but during the years that have intervened,
large sums of money have been spent in judicious ringbarking, so that the country now presents
an open, park-like appearance. The original homestead at Coombing Park was built by the late
Mr. Icely in the twenties, and it served as a residence for the Icely family, and subsequently
the \\ hitney family, until 1900, when the old structure was pulled down and the present modern
building erected. Coombing Park has always been a sheep station. The late Thos. Icely first
stocked it with what sheep he could get from Macarthur at Camden Park and elsewhere. In
1840 he imported some Leicester sheep, and crossed them with the Merino, but the cross did not
suit the conditions that then existed, and a return was made to the pure Merinos. The first
blood mare to foal in this country was imported by Mr. Icely. In those days the country was
not fenced, and the sheep were shepherded. On the death of Thos. Icely the property passed
THREE PROMISING YEARLINGS
to his son, who in 1880 sold it to the late W. F. Whitney. Mr. Whitney went in for very sub-
stantial improvements, and when he died, in 1894, Mr. A. W. Whitney managed on behalf of
the executors, and in 1907 the estate was merged into the Whitney Pastoral Company.
Waugoola, the property illustrated herewith, was originally one of Cobb and Company’s pro-
perties, and was purchased by the late W. F. Whitney. In 1907 the present owner sold his
Coombing Park interests and purchased Waugoola, which had previously been worked in con-
junction with Coombing Park. The property comprises 17.000 acres, situated close to Wood-
stock. The country ranges from undulating to hilly, though there are portions comprising rich
flats. The principal timber is white box and apple tree. It is all beautiful, healthy sheep country,
and the present owner has brought the property up to a high state of productivity, and this is
largely due to the determined and thorough manner in which Mr. Whitney tackled the rabbi i
problem.
4
96
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A FAMILY GROUP AT THE HOMESTEAD.
5
97
The Waugoola Estate, New South Wales.


6
98
Tho Pastoral Homos of Australia.


A VIEW FROM THE VERANDAH
7
99
The Waugoola Estate, New South Wales.


Waugoola was once very heavily infested with rabbits, but it is now completely rid of
the pest. Mr. Whitney had no faith in poisoning as an efficacious remedy against the rabbit
pest, and when he acquired Waugoola he saw that there was only one thing to do, and that was
to fence off the country and completely destroy all burrows and rabbit harbours. This required
no small degree of pluck and confidence, because previous to Mr. Whitney’s attempt no one in
that district had attempted to net and dig out. Many viewed the costly work Mr. Whitney
embarked upon as money thrown away, but he persisted in his methods, and it is due to his
determination and courage to spend the money, that Waugoola is the fine property it is to-day.
It is probably one of the most productive wool-growing properties in New South Wales.
The whole estate has been enclosed with wire netting, and this has been no easy task on
account of the broken nature of a lot of the country. It has necessitated Hood gates galore, and
Mr. Whitney’s knowledge of netting, flood gates, and rabbit extermination is great, and is fre-
THE THOROUGHBRED STALLION, GABY.
quemlyof use to others. Not only is Waugoola surrounded by a netting fence, but it is subdivided
into forty paddocks by means of wire netting. In addition to this, all rabbit burrows have been due
- 1 u o
out and all harbour has been destroyed. This work has involved a great expenditure of money,
but the present productive state of Waugoola is an example of how pastoral problems can be
solved, if security of tenure is undoubted. There are no doubt many station owners who would
attack the rabbit question as Mr. Whitney has done, if they were not constantly threatened with
resumption. The result is that on a great many properties the rabbit question is not thoroughlv
tackled. and not only is the carrying capacity of considerable areas of the best country material-
ly reduced, but when drought comes along the mortality among stock is very much heavier than
it should be.
100
100
ihe Pastorat Homes of Australia.


A MOB OF FATS.
9
101
The Waugoola Estate, New South Wales-


The extent to which Waugoola has been improved is shown by the fact that the 16,000
acres, devoted to sheep, return a clip of from 600 to 650 bales per annum, and it carried all its
stock through the 1912 drought without any loss, whereas other places in the district lost very
heavily indeed.
Waugoola is well watered by the Waugoola Creek, and by means of wells and dams. At
the homestead a windmill raises the supply. The fences and general improvements are sub-
stantial and well maintained, and the woolshed is up to date in design and fitted with twenty-six
stands of machinery. It will hold 3000 sheep, and has water laid on throughout.
The Waugoola Hock is bred entirely from Boonoke blood, Boonoke rams having been
used for many years past. The sheep are big, heavy cutters of long, bold, high-yielding wool.
The quality of the flock can clearly be estimated from the figures quoted above.
Mr. Whitney breeds a few stud Shorthorn cattle, his herd being an offshoot of the
famous Lee cattle of Bathurst. He does very little in the way of cross-breeding with sheep,
and does not go in for much in the way of cultivation. Me has some lucerne patches, from
which he makes hay and ensilage, and he has found the latter a good stand-by in drought times.
He uses both pit and stack.
IPersonaL
Mr. Arthur William Whitney is the son of the late William Franklin Whitney, late
owner of Coombing Park, and one of the original partners of Cobb and Co. The late Mr. Whit-
ney died in 1894, but his widow still resides at Coombing Park, and though close on seventy
years of age, she is still very hale and hearty.
Mr. A. W. Whitney for many years managed Coombing Park and Waugoola Stations
for the executors of his father, but in 1907, as before stated, he sold his Coombing Park
interests and purchased Waugoola. All the above-mentioned improvements have been carried out
since he took possession. Mr. Whitney married, in 1900, the daughter of Mr. S. R. Wilson, of
Wellington, X.S.W., and has a family of six, three girls and three boys.
I o
102
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A GROUP RBOOD MARES AND FOALS.
11
103
The Waugoola Estate, New South Wales.


Mr. Whitney is a keen sportsman, and
keeps a few aristocratic horses on Waugoola, As
a matter of fact, Coombing Park has claim to
much attention as far as the Australian turf is
concerned. The mare referred to at the be-
ginning of the article was Manto. bred in Eng-
land, 1817. by Soothsayer, and imported by late
Hon. Thos. Icely. From this old mare comes the
dam of Flora Mclvor, considered by many the
mother of the Australian Stud Book, and when
we see such horses as Trenton (sire of the great
mare Wakeful), Havoc. Niagara, Zalinski,
Cuirassier, Lancaster, Cissy, Siege Gun. etc.,
coming from this tap, we should realise w hat we
owe to the pluck and judgment of our old
pioneers.
Mr. Whitney breeds from about twenty mares, and is at present using the blood stallion
Gaby, by Gossoon out of Mab. Up to the present Gaby’s stock are not yet old enough to race.
I 2
104
The Pastoral Homes of Australia


The Milton Park Estate.
The Property of Mr. Anthony Hordern.
MILTON PARK, the property of Mr. Anthony Hordern, is destined to become very
much more widely known on account of the fine pedigree stock its owner is
getting round him. Situated about five miles out of Bowral, within easy distance
of Sydney, the Estate, which comprises about 1200 acres, is being converted into a model
stud farm.
THE WELSH MOUNTAIN PONSY STALLION, GREYLIGHT,(IMP)
I
105


Milton Park is divided into numerous paddocks suitable for stud purposes, and pasture
of English grasses has been laid down wherever possible. A very fine system of water
supply is in operation, the water being pumped from a dam to a reservoir on the summit
of a hill, from which it reticu l ates throughout the estate. Mr. Hordern is installing an up-
to-date irrigation plant to grow root crops, lucerne, and other forage.
Mr. Hordern keeps only pedigree stock, and his stud farm contains beef Shorthorns,
Guernseys, Welsh Ponies and Clydesdales. The Clydesdales are kept at Wilton Park, which
Mr. Hordern’s father used as his stud farm. This property lies a few miles out of Picton.
THE BULL HOUSE
Mr. Hordern intends to transfer the pony foals when weaned to Wilton Park. Money has
not been spared in laying the foundations of these various studs, and the illustrations ap-
pearing herewith will give some idea of the high quality of the stock. The Shorthorn stud
was started in 1910, and in the same year Mr. Hordern made a very valuable addition by the
importation of the bull Duke of Hampton and two Shorthorn heifers—Pretty Fattie and
Shenstone Rowena 2nd. Duke of Hampton was bred by Mr. J. T. Hobbs, and as a yearling
he won first and champion at Bath and West, first special and Shorthorn Society’s prize,
2
106
The Pastoral Homes of Australia ,


THE HOMESTEAD.
3
107
Milton Park Estate f New South Wales.


Gloucester, and hrst and reserve champion Hereford and Worcester Show; sired by Hampton
Bowling, a great winner, including first and Shorthorn Society’s prize at Gloucester, 1908,
and second at Royal Counties, from Fanny 108th, by New Year’s Gift 77323; second Royal
Show and first Bath and West. Since Duke of Hampton has been in New South Wales his
progeny in the Old Country have been distinguishing themselves at several leading shows.
Pretty Pattie was bred by Messrs. Game and Son, and she is a beautiful cow of true Short-
horn type. Her sire was the Duthie-bred bull Violet Flavour, 97567, by Scottish Fancy,
A GROUP OF SIRES
7560 i, a Marr-bred bull by Sittyton Pride, 6/939, her dam, Shipton’s Pan-
cake 2nd, being by Bourton Pride, 88001, bred by Mr. G. Freeman, by Pride of the
Hills, 81890, a son of Bapton Consul, 78287, bred by Mr. Deane Willis. Shenstone Row-
ena 2nd was bred by Sir R. P. Cooper, of Shenstone Court. She is also a beautiful roan of
the Bates-Charrner family. She is by Ashlyns Councillor, 78671, from Shenstone Rowena,
by Rox Victor, 821 14. Shenstone Rowena 2nd came out in calf to the prize bull Silver Mint
2nd. Pretty Pattie also came out in calf, and both calved at Milton Park.
In 191 1 Mr. Hordern made a further valuable addition to the stud by the importation of
the three cows, Martha V., Marden Lady Waterloo, and Ruby Campania. Martha V. and
4
108
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A GENERAL VIEW OF THE HOUSE AND GROUNDS.
5
109
Milton Park Estate, New South Wales.


Ruby Campania both dropped calves at Milton Park to English bulls.
The Guernsey herd was founded on very select cattle. In igio Mr. Hordern imported
the famous bull Hayes Coronation 3rd, and the then 2-year-old bull Golden Dream, and ten
heifers. Hayes Coronation 3rd, 1936, was bred by Sir E. A. Hambro, and he is looked upon
as the best specimen of the breed ever seen in Australia. He was by Coronation King,
1556, out of Hayes Olive, 5838 (a great dairy cow), and is a typical Guernsey of good colour
and robust constitution. He was a noted prizetaker in the Old Country, having won, among
other prizes, first and champion Royal Show, England, 1910; first and champion Bath and
MILTON’S LADY SURPRISE, BY DUKE OF HAMPTON (IMP.)
West of England, 1910; first and champion Royal Agricultural Show, Sydney, 1911. Golden
Dream was bred by Sir H. Lennard, Bart., and he won second prize at Bath and West Show,
and first and champion, Sydney, 1912. He is by Goldseeker (a son of Golden Secret). Gol-
den Dream’s dam, Wickham Fancy 2nd, was an exceptionally deep milker, and a winner in
the butter test classes at the recent Bath and West Show. The females imported included
a beautiful yearling, Hayes Empress 4th, bred by Sir E. A. Hambro. She won first at the
Royal, Bath and West, and Royal Counties Shows, and is from the prize cow Hayes Express
3rd, first Royal, first Bath and West, and first and reserve champion Royal Counties; also
110
110
The Pastoral Homes of Australia ,


MARTHA 5TH.
MARDEN LADY WATERLOO.
IMPORTED SHORTHORNS.
DUKE OF HAMPTON
7
111
Milton Park Estate, New South Wales .


Hayes Olive sth, second Bath and West, and third Royal Counties, by Coronation 2nd, first
Bath and West, Royal Counties and Oxford, from Olive Branch, first butter test class, Tun-
bridge Wells, third Royal, first Croydon, &c.
Sir E. Hambro also furnished two good heifers in Hayes Lilly du Preel sth, breeding to
Gay Boy, by Itchen Royal, 1756, from Hayes Lilly du Preel 3rd, by Hayes Prince 2nd and
Hayes Fussy 3rd, in calf to Golden Dream, by Itchen Royal, 1756, from Mrs. Dreyfus, by
Massachusetts, 293, F.S.R.G.A.S.
A GROUP OF GUERNSEY CALVES SIRED BY HAYES CORONATION III.
From Mr. Toogood Parsons’ herd Mr. Hordern imported two nice heifers in Manor View
Golden Cloud 4th and Manor View Golden Cloud sth, both bred from great milking strains,
and sired by the prize bull Roderick the Great, 1708, and both tracking back to the famous
cow Golden Cloud 3rd, a great winner in inspection, milking, and butter test classes.
The balance of Guernseys in that shipment comprised four heifers from Mr. Smail’s
herd, viz., Romana 32nd, champion Sydney Show, 19 11, by Reliance of La nande 2nd, 1706,
8
112
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


DUKE OF HAMPTON (IMP)
9
113
Milton Park Estate, New South Wales.


A GROUP OF STUD SHORTHORN COWS
10
114
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


MR. HORDERN’S BUGGY MAKE, BELLE.
: i
115
Milton Park Estate, New South Wales.


an exceptionally good milking strain; Stella of Warren Wood and Winonah 2nd of Warren
Wood, both sired by Benbow of Warren Wood, 1801, first Croydon Show; and Dame 2nd of
Warren Wood, by King Cup, 1850.
Mr. Hordern’s Guernseys are noted prize winners, and have won a wide reputation for
being deep milkers. Special importance is attached to butter fat production, and the Milton
Park herd test splendidly in this respect. Another important fact to be mentioned is that all
CLYDESDALE STALLION, BARON RUPERT (IMP.), BY BARON’S PRIDE.
the Milton Park Guernseys have passed the tuberculin test. A complete record is kept of
the milk yield, the milk being weighed night and morning.
Mr. Hordern makes another specialty of Welsh ponies, and he started this department on
just as thorough and high-class a foundation as the Guernseys and Shorthorns. At the head
of the stud is the wonderful little stallion Greylight, imported by Mr. Horaern in 1911. He
I 2
116
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


DUCHESS.
QUEEN.
TWO STUD CLYDESDALE MARES.
*3
117
Milton Park Estate, New South Wales.


was the champion pony of his breed in Europe. He is a perfect model, and is full of intel-
ligence and very active. He is mated with high class mares at Milton Park, Mr. Hordern
having imported no less than sixteen pure mares during the last few years. The pick of the
stud are Topsy (W. 5.8., vol. 12), Norma (W. 5.8., 2955), Little Queen (W. 5.8., 2622), and
Gwyndy Flyaway (W. 5.8., 3019). In 1913 Mr. Hordern imported another Welsh pony sire
PURE WELSH MOUNTAIN PONY.
in Cream of Eppynt (W. 5.8., 344), foaled in 1900, and bred by Mr. Wm. Robert, of South
Wales. He was by Llew Llwyd (W. 5.8., 162) out of Jolly (W. 5.8., 3328).
Mr. Hordern has about eighteen pure Clydesdales, and at the head of the stud is the
imported horse Baron Rupert, by the famous old Scottish sire Baron’s Pride. Mr. Hordern
has taken a number of prizes at various shows with his Clydesdales. The mare Queen at
two years old was reserve champion, Sydney, 1912.
14
118
The Pastoral Homos of Australia,


WELSH MOUNTAIN PONY BROOD MARES.
>5
119
Milton Park Estate, Now South Wales.


No expense has been spared in laying the foundation of the Milton and Wilton Park
studs, and the estates are destined to be the headquarters of some of the most valuable stock
in Australia. The various studs have only received brief notice here, but what has been
written is sufficient to show that Mr. Hordern is working on very sound lines, and is finding
room for only the very best. In addition to his pedigree stock, he has some good saddle
and harness horses.
PURE WELSH MOUNTAIN PONY MARE (IMP).
The Milton Park house was completed a little over a year ago, and it is surrounded by
beautifully-laid-out grounds. The house is on a hill about 2600 ft. above sea level, and it
commands a glorious and extensive view of the surrounding country.
Milton Park is named after the town of Milton, on the south coast, which was founded
by Mr. Hordern’s grandfather, John Booth.
i 6
120
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Booberi and Errebenderie Estates.
The Property of Mr. A. C. haley .
A BOUT 38 miles to the west of Condobolin lies Booberoi, the property of Mr. Alex-
/ \ ander Thomas Haley. It is situated in a district noted for its pastoral, agricul-
A. tural, and mining resources, and for the production of cereals it is particularly
well known. Nature’s bounteous gifts have been generously lavished throughout most of
the Lachlan district.
WEIR ON THE LACHLAN RIVER.
Booberoi Station comprises about 16,000 acres of freehold and about 100,000 acres of
leasehold. This area is composed almost wholly of gently undulating country, with occa-
sional plains. The timber consists of kurrajong, box and yarran, practically all under-
growth having been cleared away, leaving sufficient for shelter purposes.
I


THE HOMESTEAD AT BOOBEROI.
The rabbit trouble has necessitated very rigorous measures being taken to check its
spread, and to a very large extent the pest has been reduced. Fumigation, trapping,
poisoning, and digging out have all contributed to the practical extermination.
The property, which is all wire netted into nine blocks, and subdivided into about fifty
paddocks, has a frontage to the Lachlan River, and the Booberoi Creek runs through the
property, fed from a Government weir on the river, and derives from this source a splendid
water supply. Numerous tanks and dams are on the station for the watering of stock.
Booberoi was for-
merly owned by
Messrs. Robert
Smith and Co., from
whom Mr. Haley pur-
chased it in 1880.
It had then very few
improvements on it,
and had been used
as a cattle run,
upon which Messrs.
Smith and Co. de-
pastured about 7000
GROUP OF DRAUGHT MARES AND FOALS ON BOOBEROI.
2
122
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE LACHLAN RIVER, NEAR THE HOMESTEAD.
3
123
The Booberoi and Errebenderie Estates, New South Wales.


ANOTHER VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD.
head of cattle. Mr. Haley, however, soon after his purchase, converted it into a sheep
station.
He established the
flock by the use of
Boonoke rams on se-
lected ewes, and bred
on these lines for
twenty years, when
stud rams were intro-
duced from Esk Vale
and Winton, Tasmania.
Of late station-bred
rams only have been
used. The surplus he
finds a ready sale for
each year, and dis-
poses of several hun-
dreds annually.
A VIEW OF THE WEIR FROM BELOW.
4
124
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


WATER FLOWING OVER WEIR ON RIVER.
5
125
The Booberoi and Errebenderie Estates, New South Wales .


A VIEW OF BOOBEROI COUNTRY.
The flock consists of about 50,000 sheep of fairly large frame, and with a fleece
of long staple, dense
wool, and very much
of the character of the
Boonoke. Mr. Haley
sells his wool in Lon-
don, and invariably
realises good prices.
The woolshed is a
weatherboard struc-
ture, containing 26
stands of sheep-shear-
ing machines driven by
a 12-h.p. oil engine.
Hand shears were
originally used, but
SHEEP ON BOOBEROI CREEK.
6
126
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A VIEW OF BOOBEROI COUNTRY.
machines were introduced six or seven years ago. Adjoining the woolshed is a
sweating shed, with a housing capacity of 3000 sheep. This shed can be filled with sheep in
ten minutes.
The homestead was
originally erected sixty
years ago, but Mr.
Haley has improved
and enlarged it con-
siderably.
In addition to Boo-
beroi, Mr. Haley owns
Errebenderie, a pro-
perty situated about 10
miles from Booberoi.
It comprises about
23,000 acres of free-
ENTRANCE TO SWEATING SHED.
7
127
The Booberoi and Errebenderie Estates, New South Wales.


YARDING LAMBS FOR SHEARING.
EXTRA ACCOMMODATION FOR KEEPING SHEEP DRY.
8
128
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A VIEW OF ONE OF THE DAMS.
hold and leasehold country. This property consists of slightly undulating land, timbered with
box, pine, and yarran. The sheep on Errebenderie are all shorn at Booberoi.
personal.
The late Cornelius Sharpe Haley, father of Mr. A. T. Haley, arrived in Sydney in 1838.
Shortly after his arri-
val he drove overland
to Melbourne, and
took up Sugarloaf Run
in the Kilmore district.
In the early forties, he
also took up Allwood
Run, on Diamond
Creek. He sold these
properties, and in
iB6O bought consider-
able land at Lancefield
at the Government
sales. Later on he cut
this land up into farms,
A TANK WATERING TWO PADDOCKS.
9
129
The Booberoi and Errebenderie Estates, New South Wales.


MR. C. ALEX. HALEY.
MR. BARCLAY S. HALEY.
MR. A. T. HALEY.
MRS. A. T. HALEY.
MR. W. T. BELMONT HALEY.
MR. EVELYN A. F. HELLY.
IO
130
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


WOOL TEAM LOADED.
WOOL TEAM ON RIVER
i r
131
The Booberoi and Errebenderie Estates, New South Wales.


THE WOOL SHED
which are now considered to consist of some of the best farm land in Victoria.
Mr. Alexander Thomas Haley, his eldest son, bought Nelvambo Station, on the Dar-
ling, in 1868, and used is as a sheep and cattle station. He sold Nelyambo in 1873, and
in 1874 bought Upper Moira and Yeilma, on the Murray, in Victoria. Five years later he
found it necessary, owing to the advance of closer settlement, to sell out, and make a
further move to the Lachlan River in New South Wales, where he bought Booberoi Station.
Mr. Haley, who is a Justice of the Peace, married Isabel, daughter of the late Mr.
Robert Barclay McPherson Stevenson, of Melbourne, and has a family of four sons, all of
whom are engaged in pastoral pursuits in New South Wales.
I 2
132
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Bundemar Estate.
The property of the Erecutors of the late Mr. F. E. Body.
MANY who have seen the Bundemar stud sheep at the Sydney sales have been im-
pressed with their generally high standard as commercial sheep, and a brief
description of the property on which they are bred will be of interest not only to
Australian breeders, but to stockowners in South Africa, where the Bundemar sheep are
gaining a good reputation.
BUNDEMAR EWES AND LAMBS.
The property, which belongs to the estate of the late F. E. Body, lies about nineteen
miles from the Trangie railway station, and it is all fine healthy sheep country. In area it
comprises about 40,000 acres, principally Myall plains and black soil, with stretches of open
box country.
I
133


THE GROUNDS AROUND BUNDEMAR HOMESTEAD
2
134
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


BUNDEMAR 2-TOOTH SELECTED RAMS
Rabbits have always been a source of trouble, and in consequence the boundaries of
Bundemar are all securely netted. Ihe country was never very heavily timbered, and
wherever clearing has been done the myall and other valuable trees have been preserved.
A considerable amount of subdivisional fencing has been done, the estate being divided
into about thirty paddocks. The water supply is good. There is a fourteen mile
frontage to the Ewenmar Creek, and there are numerous tanks and wells where required.
Sub-artesian water can be obtained at from 300 ft. to 350 ft.
What is now Bundemar was in 1859 held by Major Lowe as a cattle station, but he
subsequently sold it to Mr. William Kite, of Bathurst. After holding it for several years,
Mr. Kite sold it to Mr. Joseph Penzer, who in 1879 sold it to Mr. F. E. Body, the father
of the present owner. The estate was then a ten-mile block, and previous to Mr. Kite’s
possession a portion of what is now Bundemar was called Mullingindry, and was owned by
the late Mr. Robert Vernon Dulhunty. On his death it was sold to Mr. William Henry
Gwynne (brother of Dr. Gwynne, who practised in Parramatta when it was the seat of
Government) and George Bather. Eventually this property came into the possession of
Mr. Kite, and the old name of Mullingindry E forgotten.
BUNDEMAR AGED STUD EWES,
3
135
The Bundemar Estate, New South Wales.


BUNDEMAR HOMESTEAD AND GROUDS.
BUN DEM AR STUD EWES AND LAMBS.
4
136
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


When in 1879 the late Mr. F. E. Body purchased Bundemar, the estate was a ten-mile
block. Subsequently he increased it to 1 50,000 acres. The largest number of sheep ever
shorn on Bundemar was 100,000.
1 hough a fine pastoral property in every way, and good woolgrowing country, it is
to the stud flock that Bundemar owes its chief prominence at the present time. For many
years a very profitable type of Merino has been produced, and Mr. F. I. Body, who now
manages the estate, is following in his father’s footsteps as regards sticking to a strictly
commercial type of sheep. He has not been set off the track by the sudden craze for
A MOB OF 300 FLOCK RAMS.
folds and grease which characterised the demand for Merino rams a few years ago,
and the result is that the Bundemar sheep are now big-framed and hardy, carrying a good
quality of robust wool.
The flock was originally pure Tasmanian blood, but when the late Mr. Body pur-
chased the estate he went in entirely for Wanganelia sheep, purchasing large drafts from
Messrs. Millear and Austin. In all, he purchased about 1500 ewes and 40 rams from Wan-
ganelia, and since that time no outside blood has been introduced. A careful system of in-
breeding has been practised, and the result is a big robust type of sheep, with great pre-
5
137
The Bundemar Estate, New South Wales.


THE GROUNDS AROUND BUNDEMAR
6
138
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


TEH LATE MR. F. E. BODY.
potent powers. Bred as they have been, the
Bundemar rams cannot but get even pro-
geny. The class of wool aimed at is a strong
combing of good length and quality, which
is a very profitable kind to grow in the hot
districts of New South Wales and Queens-
land. From 30,000 to 35,000 sheep are shorn
each year at Bundemar, the sheaung tak-
ing place about August. The lambing is very
satisfactory, generally about an average of 80
per cent. Mr. F. I. Body finds Queensland
one of his best markets for his flock rams,
though he sells a large number in New South
Wales. About 1905 a demand sprang up in
South Africa for the Bundemar sheep, and
increasing numbers are sold there annually.
Mr. Charles Mallinson, recently appointed
sheep and wool expert in the Transvaal,
classed the Bundemar flock for over thirteen
MR. F. I. BODY.
MR. C. MALLINSON.
years, and it is largely due to him that the present high standard has been reached.
7
139
The Bundemar Estate, New South Wales.


CATTLE ON EWENMAR CREEK.
?
140
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


SPECIAL STUD RAM. GRASS-FED-AT NINE YEAR OLD CUT 22 LBS.
A 4-TOOTH STUD EWE
9
141
The Bundemar Estate, New South Wales.


BUNDEMAR STUD EWES SOLD TO THE TRANSVAAL.GOVERNMENT
The general improvements on Bundemar are up to date. The woolshed is built of
wood, with a corrugated iron roof, and is fitted with twenty-four stands of shearing-
machines, driven by a 12-h.p. steam engine.
In addition to Bundemar, the Exors. of the late Mr. F. E. Body owned for many years
Terramungamine Station, about eight miles from Dubbo. On this station about 20,000
sheep were shorn annually, and the flock rams used all came from Bundemar. The estate
has, however, been sold to a company and will shortly be sub-divided into small areas.
THE EWENMAR CREEK.
io
142
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


SPECIL STUD RAM, “SIR CHARLES.” 3 years old, bred by Mr. F. I. Body, and sold for 1000 guineas.
11
143
The Bundemar Estate, New South Wa/mm.


A BUNDEMAR STUD RAM.
IPersonal.
Mr. Frederick Irving Body, who supervises both properties, is the eldest son of the
late Mr. F. E. Body. He was born in Mudgee in 1879, and was educated at King’s School,
Parramatta. On leaving school he took up station work at Bundemar under his father’s
guidance. At his father’s death, he took command, and has managed both properties ever
since. He is one of the most prominent men in the district, being a member of the Stock
and Pastures Board and of the Macquarie Picnic Race Club. He is also on the committees
of both the Dubbo and Warren A. and P. Societies, and takes a great interest in the fur-
therance of the frozen meat business.
I 2
144
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Melrose Plains Estate.
The Property of Mr. W. W. Bucknell .
MELROSE PLAINS, the property of Mr. William Wentworth Bucknell, is one of the
well-known pastoral stations out west. It comprises an area of 89,500 acres,
situated within fourteen miles of Condobolin, and fifteen miles from Tullamore
railway station. It is essentially a wool-growing property, and though cross-breeding has
been given a fair trial it has not been successful, and the flock now consists of pure Merinos.
The estate as it stands is a good example of what the expenditure of money has done in
breaking in land for the use of sheep. The country on Melrose Plains presents an interesting
variety; parts of it are undulating, intersected by high stony ridges, covered with un-nng-
barked timber. The timber on the estate is chiefly box, pine, yarran, myall, belar and kurra-
jong, and there is a strip of Mallee scrub running across the north-east corner of the run,
WOOLS LEAVING MELROSE PLAINS FOR TULLAMORE.
covering about 2000 acres. The variation of soil follows the variation of timber, and though
much of it is suitable for agriculture, and the rainfall averages about nineteen inches, the
country has proved unsuitable for wheat-growing on account of the rain falling at the wrong
season of the year. The principal natural grasses are corkscrew, whitetop, umbrella grass,
kangaroo grass, star grass, barley grass, crowfoot, dandelion, clover, &c.
The history of the pastoral occupation of the central west and western portions of
New South Wales, savours greatly of the alluring romance of exploration that drew adven-
turous spirits from towns and cities. The work of forming a station in the early days was a
formidable task, fraught with dangers, difficulties and disappointments, and those heroic
pioneers of the plains deserve a niche in colonial history.
I
145


In the sixties that
vast stretch lying be-
tween the fringe of
the settled country
situated between the
Lachlan and Cobar was
vacant Crown land, un-
explored and unex-
ploited. During this
decade the pastoral
fame of the colony be-
came widely known,
settlement was advanc-
ing into the wilderness,
and speculators fin-
A FRONT VIEW OF THE WOOLSHED.
anced projects to secure big holdings. A Scottish firm, the principals being Messrs. Brown
and Walker, after negotiation with the Lands Department, secured an area of about 700,000
acres, a huge block, which included the following stations: —Melrose (the headquarters), Mel-
rose Plains (Block D), Boona, Burra Burra, and Jumble Plains. This firm retained this area,
though not employing it too advantageously till 1870, when the culmination of a succession
of lean years, coupled with the burden of heavy rentals, compelled them to abandon the
four last-named blocks, leaving them in possession of Melrose only.
Two Lachlan squatters, Messrs. Twaddel and Shaw, thereupon took up Melrose Plains
block, retaining it unstocked till 1872, when they disposed of it at a profit to the late Mr. Job
Fowler, of Monteagle, in the Young district. This gentleman was the first to depasture stock-
on Melrose Plains, having despatched some 5000 sheep from his Monteagle property to winter
there. A lack of water prevented its utilisation during the summer months, a fact which,
being at once perceived, prompted the owner to make provision for the necessary conserva-
tion. Immediately two dams were constructed of 1500 and 800 yards capacity, and two
tanks excavated of 1500 yards each. This was the first permanent water secured.
In August, 1874, Mr. Fowler determined to dispose of Melrose Plains, and it was readily
purchased, together with 5000 sheep, by Messrs. James and Thos. Tout, members of an old
Young squatting family, who had but recently sold their own property, Ungane Station, be-
tween Condobolin and Wyalong. The block contained an area of 64,000 acres, was totally
unimproved, with the exception of the afore-mentioned tanks and dams, unfenced, with no
buildings, yards, or sheds, and only about three months’ supply of water. An expanse of
open, thinly-timbered country, undulating plains, studded with a few rocky hills, such was
Melrose Plains in 1874, when the Messrs. Tout Bros, assumed occupation.
2
146
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE LATE WM. BUCKNELL,
of Elms Hall.
THE LATE W. W. BUCKNELL
MR. W. W. BUCKNELL.
DOUGLAS WENTWORTH BUCKNELL.
MR. W. W. BUCKNELL, JNK.
n
o
147
The Melrose Plains Estate, New South Wales.


In September, 1874, the new proprietors commenced the task of improving their hold-
ing. A temporary residence was erected at the “double dams” on Mudda (now called
Murda) Creek, some four miles south-west of the present homestead. Additional tanks were
sunk, and the necessary work of fencing undertaken. The north-western portion of the run
was first enclosed, an area of 16,000 acres being surrounded by a five-wire fence that cost
per mile to erect. This was finished in 1875, and all the sheep were tinned into this
paddock.
The following year setting in dry, the owners were compelled to remove their sheep
to an adjoining holding for grass, but a few weeks after they had been “tailed” propi-
TYPICAL COUNTRY ON MELROSE PLAINS.
tious storms filled the tanks on the fenced block, and a return was made. The work of
fencing was continued, and the run was subdivided into five paddocks, exclusive of horse
paddocks, in 1880.
In 1877 two comfortable homesteads were erected for the families of the two partners,
while woolshed, stables, and other out-buildings sprang up to lend an aspect of importance to
the little settlement. Each partner took up 640 acres under Sir John Robertson’s Act for the
purpose of securing the homestead areas, Mr. James Tout later increasing his to 2650 acres.
From this year to 1880 the seasons were fairly good, and 18,000 sheep, 100 head of cattle,
and a few horses were grazed till 1879, this being considered the full carrying capacity of the
country at the time.
4
148
The Pastoral Homes of Australia .


The commence-
ment of 1880 was
very dry, and the
numbers of the sheep
were slightly reduc-
ed. The adjoining
holdings had been
eaten out, and kan-
garoos in vast hordes
swept on to the run
and completely de-
nuded it of grass.
THE, MELROSE PLAINS HOMESTEAD.
During 1881 and 1882 between 30,000 and 40,000 kangaroos were killed, 10,000 being
destroyed during 12 months on a quarter of the run. This terrible blow at the pastur-
ages produced a disastrous result, and great numbers of sheep perished miserably of
hunger during this period. Rain came at the end of 1882 and 6000 sheep, principally
ewes, were purchased for restocking purposes. With typical Australian uncertainty the
weather entered on another dry stretch before the country was recovered, and these sheep
were hurriedly disposed of, though fortunately with a small margin of profit.
After this prolonged dry spell the characteristics of the country underwent a complete
metamorphosis. What, during the seventies, had been open park-like spaces covered with
luxuriant grasses, now became covered with a dense undergrowth of pine. What caused this
radical and undesirable
change—which was
not, however, confined
to one run alone —can
only be conjectured at,
but early settlers think
that an absence of bush
fires and the sheep
trampling the pine
cones into the soil were
responsible factors. Be
that as it may, the be-
ginning of the eighties
marked the inception of
an era, in which the
THE BACHELORS’ QUARTERS.
5
149
The Melrose Plains Estate, New South Wales.


costly work of scrub-
bing figures first on the
station expense ac-
count. Finding that
there was but little
chance of profitably
carrying on the run
with so much scrub in
the paddocks, contracts
were let to Europeans
to destroy inis under-
growth. Unsatisfactory
progress was made,
and at a high cost, and
Messrs. Tout Bros, then
A BACK VIEW OF THE WOOLSHED.
engaged gangs of Chinese, who, during 1883 and 1884, had cleared some 35,000 acres.
Under Parnell’s 1884 Act the run was subdivided, and secure tenure obtained for one-
half of the run for a period of ten years. The area thus secured included that portion of the
run which had been ringbarked and scrubbed, and the remaining portion was held under pre-
ferential occupation license. From 1885 to 1893 a run of good seasons followed.
In 1890 the number of sheep depastured on the run was increased to 42,000, the
highest number yet grazed there. In January, 1891, a most disastrous bush fire, sweeping
in from the north-west, devastated the run, completely consuming 40,000 acres of the best
grass land, destroying miles of fencing, and burning to death 4000 sheep. Rain, fortun-
ately, followed within a few weeks, and the remarkable recuperative powers of the country
A MOB OF EWES AND LAMBS, MELROSE PLAINS.
6
150
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A DAM ON MELROSE PLAINS.
A MOB OF MELROSE PLAINS WEANERS.
7
151
The Melrose Plains Estate, New South Wales.


EWES AND LAMBS ARRIVING AT WOODSHED.
soon proved that it had completely recovered. From this period till 1895 the season was
satisfactory,and between 30,000 and 40,000 sheep were shorn each year. In 1895, however,
a wave of wallabies came in from adjoining holdings, and taking shelter in the rough and un-
improved portions of the run, inflicted serious damage on the paddocks, and impoverished
the feed. During this year the occupation license was subdivided by the Crown into three
blocks, and offered at auction on a twenty-eight years’ lease. The only bidders were Tout
and Co., and thus gaining fixity of tenure, they immediately called tenders, and had the whole
area nngbarked and
scrubbed. Two selec-
tions adjoining the
south boundary of the
run, comprising 4640
acres of C.P. and C.L.,
were purchased from
Messrs. Bouffler and
McMurray and added
to the total area. Three
selections on the run
taken up by Messrs.
Collis, Lewington and
Overton respectively
were also acquired,
LOADING WOOL.
8
152
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


thereby considerably increasing the total acreage of the secured land.
In 1896 the tide of advantageous seasons commenced to ebb. Dry weather set in. A
wa\e of rabbits overran the property, and on top of these misfortunes a plague of grasshop-
pers swarmed over every square yard. The result was that the place was completely de-
nuded of every vestige of herbage. Not a particle of vegetation that could be eaten by sheep
was spared, and a black year closed seeing many sheep perish in the paddocks. The first
step towards recovery was the initiation of a campaign of extermination against the rabbits,
and this work was commenced at once, and with good effect. For the purposes of restocking,
a line of 10,000 mixed sheep was purchased from Mr. Brown, of Brigalow Station, and a
change of seasons made matters better. Another area of country was also added to the run,
when two improvement leases on Jumble Plains, three miles from the north boundary, com-
prising some 19,000 acres, were purchased from Mr. A. Witts. The station then carried till
about 1901 between 20,000 and 30,000 sheep, fair seasons prevailing during the interim. To-
wards the end of 1901 there commenced that drought of evil recollection which devastated
the back country during 1902 and portion of the following year. During this dry spell the
losses of sheep were heavy. When the rains came, however, the country made a rapid re-
covery, and good seasons followed, continuing in unbroken succession till Mr. W. W. Bucknell
purchased the property.
The run was enclosed with netting during the years 1903-4-5, and at the end of the lat-
ter year the rabbits were completely in check. Incessant warfare was waged against them
with poison carts and traps, while the kangaroos and wallabies were completely extermin-
ated.
In 1903 the woolshed was enlarged, and twelve machines were installed. As years went
on this number was found to be inadequate, and in 1909 a further enlargement was made,
and twelve additional machines introduced, bringing the total to twenty-four. Steam power
was also connected with the wool-press.
With a view of testing the agricultural possibilities of the place, 600 acres were cultivated
at Springvale on the share system, and in 1905 a yield of sixteen bushels of wheat to the acre
was returned. Near the homestead about 300 acres were cropped, but mostly for hay.
During the 1903 drought a disastrous fire completely destroyed the homestead of Mr.
James Tout, nothing being saved from the conflagration. This was replaced by a new and
commodious home on the site of the old edifice, and to-day constitutes one of the most
comfortable station homesteads in the district. There are also bachelors’ quarters and a
manager’s house, also three other homesteads on different parts of the property. Round the
head station house there is a beautiful garden, and improvements, such as stables, &c., are of
a most substantial character.
Though Mr. Bucknell goes in principally for Merino sheep, he has about 200 head of Short-
horn cattle, the bulls having been obtained from the stud of the late Hon. George Lee. The
9
153
The Melrose Plains Estate, New South Wales.


THE DRIVE AT ARGREAH.
TIM ARGREAM HOMESTEAD.
1 o
154
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


country is now amply watered by tanks and dams, which aggregate about 200,000 yards in
all. Ihe boundaries are fenced with substantial wire netting, and the whole property is
subdivided into four wire-netted areas. From thirty-five to forty thousand sheep are shorn
annually. Mr. Bucknell is going in for the Wanganella strain. Ihe type he breeds has large
frames, with plain bodies, but with bold folds on the neck. Ihe wool is inclined to be strong
combing. As regards weights, hoggets average loi lbs., 4-tooths lbs., which brought
in September, 1911, ioid. first combing, gid. second combing.
THE ARGREAH FLATS.
In 191 1 Mr. Bucknell purchased Eurona Station, near Bathurst, from Mr. N. L. Suttor.
This property, which Mr. Bucknell has since renamed Argreah, comprises 2664 acres, situated
32 miles from the Kelso Railway Station. It is a very highly improved property. Practically
the whole estate is suitable for agricultural purposes; 380 acres are now being irrigated, the
water being obtained from the Winburndale Creek. The flats are very rich, producing as
much as 3 tons of wheaten hay per acre, and as high as 50 bushels of wheat per acre have
been harvested off the hillsides. It is the intention of the present holder to clear and, if pos-
sible, share-farm the whole estate.
I I
155
The Melrose Plains Estate, New South Wales.


personal.
Mr. William Wentworth Bucknell comes of a family intimately associated with the
pioneering work of Australia. His grandfather, William Bucknell, married Martha Wentworth.
In about 1822 they came out to New South Wales. Before leaving England, through the in-
fluence of his wife’s relations, he obtained some pure Merinos from Spain, and was given
the promise of two grants of country land of 2560 acres each and an allotment in the city of
Sydney as a home. One grant was issued for land on the Hunter River, and the other on the
Paterson River. Most of the sheep perished on the voyage. After residing at Parramatta
for some time, Mr. Bucknell and his family went to the Paterson River property, and finally
settled at Newtown, where they died. Their eldest son, William Wentworth Bucknell, father
of the present owner of Melrose Plains, at different times owned many stations in New South
Wales and Queensland. He was one of the first to go out to the Namoi and the Barwon Rivers,
taking up Burren and Yarrawa Stations, on the respective rivers, and Mongyer and Coly-
mungle on the Mihi River.
Mr. W. W. Bucknell was educated at the Sydney Grammar School, and matriculated at
the Sydney University. He spent some years on his father’s stations, and then entered the
Registrar-General’s office, from which he resigned to again engage in pastoral pursuits. For
many years he was engaged in an equity suit with the late Ebenezer Vickery for the recovery
of Mongyer and Nowly Stations, situated in the Gwyder and Liverpool Plains districts, and
was successful in the various appeals that came before the Privy Council. The suit was even-
tually settled by Mr. Vickery purchasing the equity of redemption.
He, with Messrs. James Marsden and Norman C. Bucknell purchasedMuttama Station from
the trustees of the late Thomas Broughton. This was the first large property in New South
Wales cut up for closer settlement, and proved such a financial success that many others fol-
lowed.
With his former partner, Mr. James Marsden, he then purchased, subdivided, and sold
the Big Mimosa Station, which is now held by many prosperous and successful farmers,
mostly from Victoria.
It might be mentioned that both these estates were refused by the Government, and it
is interesting to know that no Government subdivision has been so successful or settlers so
prosperous as those who have purchased blocks in these subdivisions.
Mr. Bucknell married Fanny, daughter of the late Isaac Fox, formerly an officer in the
service of the East India Company. Mr. Fox owned Jarara Station, and subsequently lived
in Goulburn.
Mr. Bucknell has two sons, William Wentworth and Douglas Wentworth, and four daugh-
ters, Fanny, Dorothy, Muriel, and Gwendoline. He and his family reside at Argreah.
1 2
156
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The New Merrigal Estate
also Okawa, New Zealand
The Properties of Mr. C. H. Lowery
Also Oruamatua,
The Property of Messrs. C. H. Lowry and E. J. Watt .
NEW MERRIGAL is situated in the land district of Coonamble, 17 miles from Curban
Railway Station, and 26 miles from Gular and Gilgandra. It is the property of
Mr. T. EL Lowry, and was purchased in 1908 from Mr. J. Patrick, of Myall Park,
who was the first owner of New Merrigal. It consists of 16,543 acres, of which more than
FATTENING BULLOCKS ON NEW MERRIGAL.
two-thirds are freehold. The country consists of myall plains, interspersed with open plain,
pine scrub, box, and a large area of belah, and is practically level right throughout the
estate. A large tract has been burnt off and cleared up, but the edible trees have nearly
I
157


all been preserved, imparting a pleasing and picturesque appearance to the otherwise
somewhat monotonous landscape. It is very high-class fattening country, and at any sea-
son of the year will respond readily to a fall of rain. The grasses for the most part consist
of umbrella, which does especially well, barley, crowfoot, and clover, with a fair sprinkling
of blue, Mitchell, and other species. With the exception of the shade clumps already men-
tioned, the whole estate is nngbarked, leaving a few convenient shelters for stock during
the hot summer days.
DRAFTING YARDS, NEW MERRIGAL.
The exterior boundary of the property, a distance of 24 miles, is fenced with rabbit-proof
netting, and two subdivisions are also netted off. The whole estate is subdivided into six
large paddocks. Nine large tanks, with an aggregate capacity of 55,000 yards, and a pump-
ing supply bore, which has not yet been utilised, constitute the present water supply. The
bore is a bin. cylinder, and is sent to a depth of 312 ft., the water rising 125 ft. in the cas-
ing, when it was struck at 296 ft. Another bore was sunk to 300 ft., but proved abortive.
2
158
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE NEW MERRIGAL HOMESTEAD.
3
159
The New Merrigal (New South I Vales) and Okawa (New Zealand) Estates.


NEW MERRIGAL WATER SUPPLY FOR STOCK.
A large area of the estate is good wheat country, but no crops are grown, and the stock
depend entirely on natural grasses.
Two windmills supply water for 700 head of cattle. It is pumped into supply tanks, and
thence gravitates to troughs. The ground tanks and dams are all fenced in in such a way
that they are secure from cattle, and yet leave free access for sheep.
Zbc Stock,
New Merrigal carries over 12,000 sheep, 4000 of them breeding ewes. The ewes are
of Myall Park (an adjoining property on the east) blood, and the rams used in 1908 were
from Bullagreen, adjoining on the north, and in 1909 from Quanda. The shearing shed was
erected in 1908 on the centre-board principle, and is a wooden building, with a wool room at
the head of the board, and is fitted with ten stands of shearing machines, driven by an 8-h.p.
portable engine. Shearing takes place about September, and the average number of sheep
put through runs to about 10,000, cutting 296 bales. The wool, which is sent to Sydney for
4
160
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE NEW MERRIGAN WOOLSHED.
5
161
f/ieiJ/Vew Merrigal (New South I Vales) and Okawa (New Zealund) Estates


sale, is clean and free from dust, of a dense medium quality. There are two floors in the
woolshed, both grating, the top one being 8 ft. above the ground floor. The former is
used for shearing and the lower for night pen accommodation, having a capacity for 1000
sheep. The advantage of loading wool from a raised floor is that one man can do all the
work. The bales are thrown down from the loading stage on to the waggon, and only the
last bales have to be lifted, even then only the height of about half a bale. Station bullock
THE MANAGER’S HOUSE, NEW MERRIGAL.
teams cart the wool into Curban, a distance of 17 miles, and the average load of one team
is about 25 bales. There is storage space in the woolshed for seven times that number.
The shearers’ quarters are of quite recent construction, as there were no improvements
in that direction at all when Mr. Lowry first bought the property from Mr. Patrick in 1908.
The timber used in the building of the shed and shearers’ quarters was all grown on the
estate, with the exception of 2000 ft. The pine was found to be very good, and the only
drawback was its brittleness, necessitating every hole for nails being bored. The only
building on the estate when the present owner first purchased it was an old hut, and the
6
162
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


TEH OKA WA A HOMESTEAD.
7
163
The New Merrigal (New South Wales) and Okawa (New Zealand) Estates.


TEH GARDENS, OKAWA
manager was compelled by force of circumstances to take up his abode in it till the new house
was built, which is connected by telephone with Ciular and Quambone.
In addition to the
sheep, Mr. Lowry runs
about 700 bullocks on
New Merrigal.
Okawa is Mr. Lowry’s
New Zealand property,
and is situated in the
proximity of Napier, on
the east coast of
the North Island. Mr.
Lowry is a keen racing
man, and a fine judge
of horseflesh. Bobri-
koff (by Finland out of
Gossip), the thorough-
bred illustrated in this
BOBRIKOFE.
8
164
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


work, was bred by Mr. Lowry, and has won, among other races, the following:—ln 1908,
Hawkes Bay Stakes (Hawkes Bay), Cornwall Handicap (Auckland), Canterbury Jockey Club
Handicap (Christchurch), Geo. G. Stead’s Memorial Gold Cup (Christchurch), Auckland
Plate (Auckland). In 1909, George G. Stead’s Memorial Gold Cup (Christchurch), Auck-
land Plate (Auckland), and, in 1910, Summer Handicap at Wellington.
In partnership with Mr. E. J. Watt, of Longlands, Hastings, Mr. Lowry is interested
in Oruamatua, a property on the main trunk line. This estate was taken up with Messrs.
Birch Bros, in conjunction with their present estate, Erewhon, over thirty years ago, and it
THE OKAWA SPRING.
then comprised about 120,000 acres. The estates were divided about twelve years ago,
and in 1906 Omamatua was purchased by Messrs. Lowry and Watt. In its original state
the country was very rough, being covered with flax and toetoe, and improvements have
involved a large expenditure. Oruamatua now comprises an area of 9700 acres freehold and
47,000 acres leasehold. It is high cold country, being under snow most of the winter. It
carries about 30,000 sheep, principally crossbreds.
The estate lies about six miles from Moawhango and seventeen miles from Taihape.
There is a very comfortable homestead surrounded by a beautiful garden, which was the
9
165
The New Merrigal (New South Wales) and Okawa (New Zealand) Estates.


ORUAMATUA WOOLSHED.
VIEW FROM FLAGSTAFF HILL, ORUAMATUA.
IO
166
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


TEH OKUAMATUA HOMESTEAD.
11
167
The New Merrigal (New South Wales) and Okawa (New Zealand) Estates.


MUSTERING SHEEP, ORUAMATUA.
special pride of Mrs. W. J. Birch when Messrs. Birch Bros, owned the estate. Mr. W. J.
Peacock manages Oruamatua for Messrs. Lowry and Watt, and he goes in for a small amount
of cultivation, having usually about 200 acres under turnips and about 50 acres under oats.
Mr. E. J. Watt, Mr. Lowry’s partner in Oruamatua, is a well-known pastoralist of New
Zealand and Queensland, and a successful breeder of thoroughbreds. Lie lives at Ngatarawa,
in the Hawkes Bay province of New Zealand, but his name has for many years been associated
with Longlands, which used to be a fine property of 9,000 odd acres, situated about three miles
from Hastings. While leased, years ago, to the late Alexander McHardy, Longlands became
noted for its Shorthorn cattle of Derrimut strain, and its fine Lincoln sheep. The needs of
closer settlement have now caused the property to be subdivided, and Mr. Watt now only
retains about 700 acres. Thos. Borthwick and Sons’ Paid Paki freezing works are now on
part of the original Longlands, and last year the Hastings Golf Club laid out a course on
another portion.
Longlands is now farmed chiefly for oats, chaff and fat lambs, and Mr. Watt also has a
stud of about twenty thoroughbred mares and a few Border Leicester stud ewes.
The thoroughbred stud was really started when Mr. Watt purchased Merriwee from
Victoria. Lie proved to be a most successful sire, his stock having won numerous races in New
Zealand. Merriwee died in 1910, and to fill his place Mr. Watt purchased the imported
12
168
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


English horse All Ldack, who is shewn with some of his yearling progeny in the accompanying
illustrations. All Black is by Gallinule out of Vortex, and was one of the best handicap horses
of his year in England, winning several important races.
Mr. Watts stud includes the following mares: —Pa Notte (dam of Noctuiform, Night-
fall, and Midnight Sun), Barley Tree (dam of Royal Scotch), and numerous young mares by
M end wee, Positano, Kilcheran, Stepniak, and others. The stud also includes a notable dam in
Scotia, the dam of Bridge.
YEATLING FILLY, NAIVASHA: ALL BLACK —BULE RIVER.
YEARLING COLT : All BLACK —LA NOTTE.
Yearling Colt : ALL BLACK —FLOAT.
YEARLING COLT: ALL BLACK—KILINDINI.
Mr Watt purchased Ngatarawa a few years ago from Mr. G. P. Donnelly. On it are
situated what are probably the best private training stables and race track in New Zealand.
The homestead is situated in a beautiful garden, watered by means of a water race.
Mr. Watt is part owner of Darr River Downs, a large property in Queensland which has
already been described in a previous volume, and he now spends a considerable portion of the
year in Australia.
n
169
Longlands and Ngatarawa Estates, N.Z.


1 THE IMPORTED THOROUGHBRED STALLION-ALL BLACK.
2 NGATARAWA HOUSE.
M
3. GROUP OF 2-TOOTH BORDER LEICESTER RAMS.
4. BORDER LEICESTER EWE HOGGETS.
170
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Cooyal and Lue Estates.
(The properties of Mr. George Raffan.
THE well-known properties of Cooyal and
Lue in the Mudgee district of New South
Wales, owned by Mr. G. Raffan, are per-
haps two of the best known station hold-
ings in the State. They are separated
only by that other well-known property Havilah, the
famous home of fine-wool sheep. Cooyal is distant
about g miles from the town of Mudgee, Lue being
20 miles on the Sydney side of same town, with the
railway station and trucking yards of Lue in the
middle of the property, and 170 miles distant from
Sydney.
Cooyal.
Cooyal first became famous in the days of the
MR. GEORGE RAFFAN.
late Samuel Blackman, a well-known and popular figure in the pastoral world of forty
years ago. He devoted considerable attention to horse-breeding, and the best thorough-
breds of the day were bred and trained on Cooyal. Among others may be mentioned Waxy
and Sting, sold in Sydney for 2300 guineas and 1600 guineas respectively.
Mr. C. S. Murray, who succeeded Mr. Blackman, gave his attention to the production
of first-class wool, and handed over to the present owner one of the finest flocks of fine-
wool ewes in Australia, and as a rule for years back the Cooyal wool has topped the
market. The sheep are from Havilah blood, and are peculiarly adapted for the Cooyal
class of country —granite and limestone. When Mr. Raffan became owner rabbits were
rampant, eating half the feed. In conversation with a rabbiter he learnt that he had just
sold 23,000 skins from Cooyal rabbits, and had got the record price for Australia for them—
2/kI. per lb., demonstrating the fact that there was something specially suitable in the
Cooyal soil for the production of the very finest quality of either fur or wool. Immediately on
I
171


THE COOYAL HOMESTEAD.
2
172
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


possession the present owner set about netting in the boundaries and subdividing into a
number of netted areas, then burnt off all lying timber or hollow trees, and put on a gang
of men to dig out burrows and destroy all vermin. The result of this has been that the
young sheep have had a so much better start in life that they have grown into bigger sheep
and cut 2 lbs. more wool. Cooyal has
been improved to a wonderful degree
in the last few years, and is now one
of the most attractive holdings in the
State. Where formerly there were
patches of scrubby and sour grass
country, instead of the never-ending
suckering, the scrub, stumps, and
roots have now been dug out and the
land put into cultivation for a couple
of years, and then given up again to
THE COOYAL WOOLSHED
the growth of the sweet and wholesome grass that follows cultivation. Almost any kind of
crop can be grown successfully on Cooyal. Lucerne, maize, wheat, and barley are now
favoured. The lucerne flats of Cooyal are second to nothing in the Mudgee district. Dur-
ing the dry period of this year, when the Mudgee flats had ceased to grow, the lucerne was
COOYAL RAMS ON LUCERNE.
173
Cooyal and Lue Estates, New South Wales.


A GLIMPSE OF COOYAL COUNTRY AND HOMESTEAD
being cut just as usual; the roots are down to underground moisture, and do not depend on
the rainfall. Cooyal is splendidly watered by a number of perpetual springs and dams, and
a double frontage to Cooyal Creek, which has never ceased to run. The area, about 10,000
acres, has practically no waste land, and carries over a sheep to the acre. The home-
CUTTING LUCERNE FOR HAY ON COOYAL
stead is a very attractive and comfortable home, surrounded by beautiful trees and shrubs,
well laid-out paths and flower beds. An endless supply of splendid water is laid on, and
vegetables, flowers, &c., are in constant supply. The woolshed, stables, and all necessary
outbuildings are up to date. The climate is equal to any in Australia, while the distance
from Sydney is so convenient that nothing more can be desired from a residential point of
view. Leaving Sydney by 10 p.m. train enables you to have breakfast at Cooyal at 9
o’clock the next morning.
4
174
The Pastoral Homes of Australia -


Hue.
This well-known property was acquired by its present owner some years ago from the
Irustees of the late Vincent J. Dowling, one of the most popular pastoralists ever known
in New South Wales. After a very considerable experience in this colpny and Queensland,
Mr. Dowling acquired Lue, and during the forty years he held it he was responsible for the
putting together and making of Lue one of the best and most desirable pastoral holdings in
Australia.
A MOB OF YEARLINGS ON LUE
Lue consists of 22,000 acres, and is divided into seventy-two paddocks. Three-
quarters of the area is very highly improved, and more resembles an English park than an
Australian sheep and cattle station. About 3000 acres has been under cultivation, mostly
for a few years in wheat, and then sown with lucerne. At present about 2000 acres are
abetted to this king of all fodders, and about 700 acres are under wheat. A great portion
of the run is undulating and hilly country, pre-eminently suited for grazing, being noted
for its sound and healthy carrying of either sheep or big stock.
All the improvements on Lue are of a very substantial nature. The homestead is an
extensive one, provided with every convenience, and surrounded with well-kept drives, orna-
mental and shelter trees, shrubs, orchard, vegetable and flower garden, &c., with water laid
on throughout. The stables, stallion and loose boxes are a striking feature, and much above
the ordinary provision of a station, while the coach-houses, machinery sheds, blacksmiths and
carpenters’ shops, engine room, chaff-house, granary, &c., at the homestead are all of the
best.
5
175
Cooyal and Luc Estates, New South Wales.


THE LUE HOMESTEAD
6
176
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


CLIMPSE OF LUE COUNTRY AND HOMESTEAD
7
177
Cooya / and Lue Estates, New South Wales,


STUD RAMS AT LUE
The shearing shed and shearers’ accommodation, as seen by the pictures, are also much
ahead of all regulation requirements, and are perhaps the best appointed in the State. Ex-
cepting the hilly country, the whole area is netted and subdivided with netting into separate
blocks; all timber, with the exception of shade trees and kurrajongs, has been burnt off, and
rabbits dug out.
The stock consist of about 300 horses,
about 500 cattle, and about 18,000 sheep.
Lue has been a long time famous for the
quality of its mountain-bred horses, as
nothing but the best of sires have been
used. Among the stud horses doing present
service at Lue may be mentioned the im-
ported English Hackney horse Skeffling
8.P., and the imported Oldenburg stallion
Gilbert, and the draught stallion Westward
Ho, bred at Mudgee from imported stock.
Skeffling B.P. has been twice shown in the
Royal Agricultural Show, Sydney, and on
each occasion gained first prize.
THE IMPORTED HACKNEY STALLION, SKEFFLING B P.
The cattle are all of the Shorthorn breed, and the best of their kind.
8
178
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE LUE STABLES.
The Lue flock which is well and favourably known throughout Australia, was founded in
1823 from imported sheep, descended from the pure Merino flock owned by King George 111.
With these sheep were used rams descended from the pure Merino flock bred by the Elector
of Saxony. In 1856 additional rams were imported from Germany, and again in 1891 fresh
blood was introduced into the flock by the purchase of several rams and ewes from the
famed Saxony flocks of Gadegast and Steiger. Since then a strain of Havilah blood has been
successfully introduced. Lue stud rams have repeatedly cut up to 2if lbs. of wool, which
is a splendid weight of fleece for high-priced fine wool. Great care has been exercised in
producing the present standard of high-class sheep, and perhaps no better exist in the State
for that class of country.
The fame of Lue sheep is not confined to New South Wales. Some years ago Mr. Wil-
loughby Dowling sent a shipment of stud sheep to South Africa. In local exhibitions there
the Lue sheep successfully competed against all comers, and through Mr. Dowling a further
shipment of Lue stud ewes left for South Africa in May, 1913.
9
179
Cooyal and Lue Estates, Ateiv South Wales ,


Lue, like Cooyal, has an abundant water supply in every paddock, having many miles
double frontage to Lawson’s Creek and tributaries, never known to be dry, also a number
of dams, tanks, and never-failing springs. The average annual rainfall of the district for the
past twenty-five years is 29 in.
THE WOOLSHED. LUE
PERSONAL.
Mr. G. Raffan is a northern Scot, born in the county of Banffshire. He left the paren-
tal roof at the age of seventeen years, spent two years in England, and then, leaving the
Homeland, arrived in New South Wales in 1874. After a few months, when he had become
familiar with local conditions, he commenced business as a building contractor, and within
five years he became and remained one of the leading contractors of Sydney, until he retired
from that line of life in 1896. About this time he became the proprietor of the first cement
factory in Australia, and in connection therewith opened the Ivanhoe Coal Mine on his land
at Piper’s Flat. After running this successfully for a few years, he sold out the factory
and his coal lands to the present Commonwealth Portland Cement Co., now one of the largest
concerns in the State. On his return from a trip to the old land, he became identified with
iO
180
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


pastoral pursuits, and during the long drought of 1901, when many people lost faith in the
future, his sanguine and optimistic nature dictated to him, “Now is the time to get interested
in the staple industry of Australia.” He argued, there is nothing new under the sun; what
has been will be, and good seasons will come again. He acquired about this time three
properties in the Forbes-Parkes district—lnchgower, Bogabigal, and Nelungaloo—and a
few years later purchased North Berembed, in the Riverina country. One by one he was
forced out of these properties by the march of progress in the shape of the wheat farmer,
THE SHEARE'S QUARTERS, LUE
who compelled him to sell out and make room for the plough. We now find him, as he says,
settled down for life in the beautiful and healthy district of Mudgee, where the land, on ac-
count of its undulating to hilly nature, is unsuitable for modern wheat-farming appliances,
but pre-eminently suited for the production of the finest quality of wool.
Mr. Raffan is a frequent traveller, and has made seven trips to the land of his birth.
He has journeyed by all the popular routes between the old land and the new including
* £■>
Japan, India, China, three times through America and Canada, and each time paid a visit
to the Continent of Europe. He wrote two very interesting books of his travels, one “A
Trip, Sydney to London, via Japan and America”; another “A Motor Ride through England
and Scotland, and a Cruise in Norway.” His last trip was with the New South Wales
•bowlers, who toured Britain in 1912. Being president of the team, a good deal of speech-
I I
181
Cooyal and Lue Estates, New South Wales.


making fell to his lot, and he never missed an opportunity to extol the Land of the Golden
Fleece to the highest pedestal. He claims the members of the team were the best emigra-
tion agents that ever left Australia.
His favourite pastime, bowling, he claims is the king of all games for business men.
However harassing your troubles, they are immediately forgotten on reaching the green,
and after a friendly game, with all its chit-chat and banter, he says, you go home quite re-
freshed, and your worries and troubles have dwindled to half the former size. No other
game, he reckons, is so adapted to promote good fellowship among its members, or to
drive dull care away. Evidently he is held in high esteem by his fellow bowlers, as, hang-
ing in the smoke room of his Randwick home there is a life-sized oil painting of himself as a
bowler, that had been presented to him by the bowlers of N.S.W. in appreciation of his good
services as president of the N.S.W. Bowling Association. Mr. Raffan’s family consists of two
daughters—Mrs. J. Beresford Grant, of Warrawee, and Mrs. Herbert H. Manning, of Billaah
Station; and two sons—Walter Douglas, who is in charge of Lue Station, and George, who
is a doctor practising in Harley-street, London.
I 2
182
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Baroona Estate.
The property of Mr. A. A. Dangar.
THE original “Baroona” house, at Whittingham, near Singleton, New South Wales,
known as "Rosemount,” while in the hands of the Larnach family, was built by
John Larnach in the early thirties on part of the Castle Forbes grant of 4000
acres, then held by James Mudie, one of whose daughters (Emily) Mr. Larnach married, and
no doubt when he settled down, acquired a portion of the grant from his father-in-law, and
built the original house, a photo, of which, as it existed in the sixties, still hangs at Baroona.
SUFFOLK MARES AND FOALS
Mr. Dangar acquired the property in 1869 from Mrs. J. Larnach, on his and Mrs. Dan-
gar’s return from a three years’ trip to England, where the former in 1868 met with a bad
accident in the hunting field which lamed him for life, and caused much trouble in later years.
The house was in a very dilapidated state when bought, hardly habitable; thus he was com-
pelled to renovate and build, which he did with the aid of the late Benjamin Backhouse, archi-
tect, who carried out the work very successfully, making the nucleus of a comfortable home,
I
183


THE LATE HENRY DANGAR, OF NEOTSFIELD
N.S.W.
bevond, with “Neotsfield,” the old home of the Dan-
gar’s about two miles away right in front, not far
from the river.
Nearly the whole of the rich flats when first oc-
cupied were covered with heavy gum timber (Mr. Dan-
gar remembers seeing this), which, curiously enough,
died of its own accord, before sapping was thought
of, and was then burnt off by the different owners, im-
THE LATE WILLIAM DANGAR, OF TURANBVILLE,
N.S.W
2
which the place now is. The square of the old mam
building, with its 18-in. walls, was retained, and it
has since been practically built all round, with two
new wings, and from time to time since 1871, when
the renovated house was first occupied and named
“Baroona” (from Geoffry Hamlyn), many other addi-
tions and improvements have been made, as the ac-
companying photographs will show, Messrs. Horbury
Hunt, F. B. Maukens, and his successor, F. G. Castle-
dew, being the architects employed.
The site is almost a unique one, overlooking the
Great Northern-road and railway, and commanding
an extensive view of the Hunter Valley, and mountains
MR.A.A. DANGAR.
proving the appearance of the country, and adding
much to its value. This, as time went on, has been much
enhanced at “Baroona” by the planting of deciduous
and other trees, notably the avenue, with its double
line of elms and pines, backed up by oleanders, and
the tennis courts, surrounded by a pepper-tree hedge,
and shrubberies on the top of the hill at the back of
the house, where long years ago stood the Larnach
windmill, a great landmark in the old days (it is said
that the Larnach’s lived by it for years), well remera-
184
The Pastoral Homes of Australia


ABROON HOUSE
3
185
The Baroona Estate, New South Wales.


THE LAKE,ISLAND, AND WINDMILL BAROONA.
4
186
Tho Pastoral Homes of Australia.


bered, no doubt, by many olu residents, and those who passed up and down the Great Nor-
thern-road, before the advent of steam flour mills and the railway. The mill was unwork-
able in 1869, and, being struck by lightning soon after, that was thougnt a sufficient hint
to take it down, which was then and there done, proving it to have been a splendid piece of
carpentering work, done no doubt by assigned servants. It must have been well built to
stand the westerly gales that tear over the hill. A pavilion dividing the two tennis courts
now stands in its place. I here are also many circles, and lines of trees, which have been
forced to grow under difficulties, and are always well looked after. Mr. Dangar never allows
a year to pass without doing some tree-planting, and he thinks be has had his reward, for
they are pleasant to look upon, as they make a better show year by vear, besides affording
shelter and shade for the stock. Though often windy on top of the hill, the pepper-tree
hedge and shrubberies form so ample a protection that tennis can be played in a gale without
feeling its effects.
The house stables at “Baroona,” designed by Mr. H. Hunt, and built in 1886, are rather
a feature of the place, the plan being an admirable one for the health and comfort of the men
and horses, and convenience of working. The Suffolk stallions and colts, when brought in,
are accommodated in 16 separate boxes, backed up by small paled-in paddocks (9), in which
there are shelter sheds, with water
laid on to each. Four windmills,
pumping from wells and a dam on to
the hill form the water supply, back-
ed up by an enormous underground
tank, which has never failed to sup-
ply the house.
In 1905, that portion of the rich
Hat part of the New Freugh Estate
known as “Castle Forbes’’ (so
named by Mr. Mudie), was bought
from Mr. P. J. C. McDouall, followed
immediately by the purchase from
Dr. W. Irwin, of “O’Brian’s farm, of
145 acres, with valuable frontage
to the river, it being surrounded on
three sides by the land acquired
from Mr. McDouall, thus adding al-
together I 126 acres to Baroona, and
thereby increasing the value of the
original estate, as the bulk of it is
of inferior quality, some of it very
bad, though it now fattens fairly
THE TENNIS HILL AND FLAGSTAFF.
5
187
The Baroona Estate, New South I Vales.


FRONT ENTRANCE TO HOUSE STABLES.
from being so long cleared, and chain-harrowed after rain as opportunity offers. The Suf-
folk colts have for years past been practically reared in what is known as the “front pad-
dock, with its little artificial lake, in which they revel, and in spite of the inferior quality
of the soil, grow to fine horses, the hard and undulating ground being good for their
feet and action. “Baroona,” now on both sides of the Great Northern-road and railway,
comprises a total area of 2631:2:25 acres, about 200 acres of which is cultivated, lucerne,
Indian corn, oaten and wheaten hay, pumpkins, &c., being principally grown, a stock of
lucerne hay always
being kept on hand
in case of drought.
Since 1872, the es-
tate has turned off a
remarkable number
of fat and purebred
stock of various
sorts and breeds, re-
presenting alto-
gether, to the end of
1912, a total return
PURE JERSEYS.
6
188
The Pastoral Hornes of Australia .


THE IMPORTED ARBA STALLION "FRAHAN"
of ,£86518, which, allowing for the
very limited area of the property up
to 1905 (1505 acres), and the poor,
hard land, indicates that it was work-
ed to the best advantage.
Zbc Stock.
In 1869, when in England, Mr
Dangar purchased the pure Arab
stallion Farhan for 500 guineas. This
handsome animal —a pure bred Ara-
bian, a bright bay in colour, with
black points—was bred in the Syrian
Desert, near Aleffo, by Sheik el Mes-
rab, a noted character in his day, who ran away with Lady Ellenborough, wife of a Governor-
General of India. The colt was bought by a Captain Spiers, with the assistance of Consul
Rogers, of Damascus, and brought by him to England when quite young. While at Baroona
he sired many good colts and fillies, and eventually died in Queensland, at Durundur. A
painting of the little fellow can be seen at Baroona.
Also was acquired from the King of Wurtemberg another grand old white Arab named
Bournou, and, in conjunction with Hon. James White, M.L.C., the Gladiateur yearling colt,
afterwards named Grandmaster, was bought at Middle Park (Blenkirons), for 450 guineas, Mr.
Dangar subsequently purchasing Mr. White’s share of the horse. Also three thoroughbred fil-
lies were acquired at Middle Park, and two pure Durham cows were bought, one, Venetia (she
afterwards made a great name for herself), at Brakes House sale, in Warwickshire, the
other, Duchess of Essex, privately from Mr. J. Glayden, Littlebury, Essex; and a beautiful
Hereford cow, Minerva, second prize at the Royal, was bought, and afterwards, with her
female produce, sold to Mr. F. Reynolds, of Tocal. Glenlee, one of her bulls, was bought by
the late Mr. C. Lumley Hill, and it helped in the founding of his Belle Vue Stud in Queensland
Mr. Dangar saw all these animals shipped, and arduous work it was, as he had not
then long recovered from his hunt-
ing accident. However, they even-
tually reached “ Baroona,” all but
two Dundee fillies bought at Middle
Park, which died on board the
“Middlesex” on the voyage out.
The remaining filly, named Sun-
shine, was by old Weatherbit, and
grew to a fine mare, her first foal, Sun-
set, selling as a yearling for 330
guineas to Sir Hercules Robinson,
but what races he won Mr. Dangar for-
gets; he only remembers that in after
years, when racing in Queensland, it
THE TENNIS COURTS AND PAVILION.
7
189
The Baroona Estate, New South Wales.


was said that he could carry a “bale
of wool,” the right sort of thorough-
bred to breed. Sunset was by Haw-
thornden. Later, another most pro-
mising filly from the same mare,
smashed one of its forelegs all to
pieces, and had to be destroyed,
soon after which the mare was
bitten by a snake and died. Grand-
master stood for three seasons at “Ba-
roona,” with a good deal of success;
then Mr. R. Rouse, jun., of Biraganbil,
bought him for 600 guineas. Thus
“ BAWDSEY VOLUNTEER” (IMP),
exeunt the thoroughbreds from “Baroona,” Mr. Dangar concluding his luck did not lay
with them.
The Arabs were kept, and Shanghai, from India, at a cost of guineas, was added
to the sires. A number of select mares were brought to mate with these two Arabians, and
were bred from for some years, with more or less success, but not being able to obtain
remunerative prices for the best colts, which were kept up and fed and trained as if they
were thoroughbreds, Mr. Dangar, though believing in the Arab as much as ever, reluctantly
gave them up, and sold off most of the mares and young stock in 1882 and 1 886, keeping
a good deal of the blood, some of which he still has.
Prior to this, about the year 1876, Messrs. W. J. Dangar and A. A. Dangar despatched
Major R. D. Upton, late of Qth Lancers, author of ‘‘Newmarket and Arabia,” and a great
authority on the Arab, to Syria, to endeavour to purchase an Arab horse and mare. The
Major was engaged the best part of a year over this business, and, reluming to England
with a stallion and mare, shipped them out to Australia, W. J. Dangar taking the former
and A. A. Dangar the latter, the two
animals costing together something
over They each produced
stock; but it is needless entering into
details, they were not a success.
Messrs. Dangar had their doubts as to
the purity of the horse, and the mare’s
stock were very weedy and not attrac-
tive. Evidently they left their country
for their country’s good, the wily
Arab being too much for the Major.
In 1873, two more Durham cows
“LEADER,” A TWO-YEAR-OLD CAROONA SUFFOLK.
8
190
The Pastoral Homes of Australia .


were imported from England at a cost of £667, while in 1878 Roan Butterfly was purchased
from Mr. J. C. Irving, of the Clarence River, for 305 guineas, and in 1880, three cows and
two heifers, descended from the Colac studs, were bought at a cost of £945. From these
ten cows that have been mentioned, the Baroona herd of pure Shorthorns was bred up,
the young males making rather a name for themselves, being readily bought at the time
by Queenslanders and others, at good prices. Mr. Dangar for several years bred his own
stud bulls from the cow Venetia, using them for one, two and three years, according to
their merit, and then selling them; altogether she produced eight bulls, which, after siring
many others for the herd, sold for a total of £1787. The old cow died in 1885, having had
fifteen calves (two born dead) —not a bad record. Venetia and the old Arab stallion, Bour-
nou, were properly buried at Baroona, and lie side by side, the latter, though he never sired
anything, having an engraved brass plate placed over him, to mark the last resting place of
THIS PURE JERSEYS, BAROONA.
a noble old animal, admired by everyone who saw him, and shame on the Germans selling
him for two figures. In 1880, the Durham bull calf Hillhurst’s 6th Duke, was purchased
from Hon. W. McCulloch, M.L.C., of Victoria, for 500 guineas; he grew to a remarkably fine
specimen of a Durham, and was first prize and champion in Sydney in 1882, and presided
over the herd for seven years, making his mark.
In April, 1891, the pure herd having increased beyond the compass of the property, a
clearing sale of 112 females and 33 bulls was held in Singleton, and on a lowering market
realised close on £6OOO, and that was the end of the pure Shorthorns at Raroona (except a
few odd ones that were afterwards sent to Mooki Springs), the produce of the ten cows,
over about a period of eighteen years, returning altogether some £lB,OOO. Prior to this
sale, a few pure Jersey cows were purchased (there was always an outcry and scarcity of
milk in the winter months), and they and their picked descendants form a choice little milk-
ing herd, being now the only breeders kept on Raroona, their bull calves, or the best of
9
191
The Baroona Estate, New South Wales•


them, having already made some name for themselves, are meeting a ready sale under the
increasing number of dairy farms in the district, they seemingly being appreciated as
milkers. At any rate, they are at Baroona, the outcry has ceased, and there is plenty of
milk and cream, summer and winter.
Suffolk HMmcbes.
The breed being established at Neotsfield for over fifty years, and Mr. A. A. Dangar
having had contact with it at Gostwyck, New England, so early as 1858, it was only natural
he should desire to have some of them, therefore in 1882 he commissioned his brother Wil-
liam, who was then in England, to purchase two mares, and that resulted in Reading
Duchess and Lady Jane, purebred Suffolk mares, arriving eventually at Baroona. Thus
these two imported mares founded the stud, which has since prospered greatly i and is now
about at its zenith in quality. Several other importations of mares followed from time to
time, and in 1891, upon the dispersion of the Neotsfield stud, after the death of William
Dangar in 1890, the pick of the mares there, nearly all descended from imported stock,
were bought and divided by Hon. H. C. Dangar, M.L.C., and Mr. A. A. Dangar, the lat-
ter, with this addition, then having the larger stud, which soon became so numerous that
another was started, principally from it, at Mooki Springs, Liverpool Plains, and from the
two studs all the D over A and HD conj. colts sold in Sydney at the annual sales have come.
The Baroona stud now consists of forty very select mares, only the very best being
kept, as breeders. Seven stallions have been imported at different times, all bought from
noted Suffolk breeders, the last being Bawdsey Volunteer (first prize and champion, Sydney,
1912 and 1913) who now, with Baroona Maxim, presides over the stud. This horse, bred by
the late Sir Cuthbert Quilter, M.P., of Bawdsey Manor, Suffolk, is without doubt a fine speci-
men of the breed, a whole coloured dark chestnut, active and vigorous, combined with good
action and an excellent temper, a characteristic of the breed; likewise his small ears, another
characteristic, and on account of which Mr. Dangar has often been heard to call them the
“Arabs of the draughts’’; at any rate, from his experience of the chestnuts, extending now over
fifty-five years, he has always thought, and still believes them to be exceptionally useful
animals for the country work of Australia. They also cross well with light, well-bred,
and even weedy mares, producing most useful stock, as is being proved over and over again;
four so bred are now being worked on Baroona.
One hundred and three colts, nearly all 3-year-olds, bred on Baroona, have been sold
since the stud started, one going to India, two to New Zealand, one to Fiji, one to New
Caledonia, and the balance to the Australian States, all taking their quota; thus the breed
has been distributed over a large area. A well-grown, whole-coloured lot of eleven 2-vear-
10
192
Tho Pastoral Homes of Australia,


FRONT OF HOUSE WITH BILLIARD ROOM WING, CONSERVATORY, LAWN AND WALL.
11
193
The Baroona Estate, New South Wales.


olds are now to be seen in the before-mentioned front paddock, making their own living. In ad
dition to the 103 colts, a large number of geldings, mares, and fillies have been sold, in con-
junction with the drafts from Mooki Springs, at quite remunerative prices, besides which
all the working draughts on the stations are Suffolk Punches, and have been so for many
years past.
personal.
Mr. Albert Augustus Dangar, fourth son of the late Henry Uangar, was born at Neots-
field, N.S.W., Bth June, 1840. His father, arriving in New South Wales in 1822, in connec
THE LODGE AND AVENUE,
tion with the Australian Agricultural Company, had afterwards, as an active Government
surveyor, much to do with the early pastoral settlement of the colony, with which the family
has been largely identified ever since, still holding the two principal stations, Gostwyck
and Yallaroi, that were originally taken up, stocked and settled upon as leaseholds, with
others acquired by Mr. A. A. Dangar for himself and Messrs. Dangar Bros., while he was
general manager, viz., Noorindoo, in the Maranoa district, Queensland (1873); Mooki
Springs, on Liverpool Plains (1882); Waterloo, near Walcha, New England (1899). These
r 2
194
Thm Pastoral Homes of Australia.


five stations, practically converted into freeholds during Mr. A. A. Dangar’s management,
and comprising an area of 226,000 acres, are now held by the third generation of Dangars
(6), a performance of which Mr. A. A. Dangar and his brother, Hon. H. C. Dangar, M.L.C.,
are not a little proud, it only being accomplished by sheer hard work and close attention to
business. Ihe former is likewise proud in being able to say that during all that long period,
while employing thousands of men he himself has never been in a court of law with a single
one of then, nor they with him.
BAROONA HÒUSE AND DOMESTIC WING.
A large map (4ft. 31m by 3ft. gin.) embracing all the country from Newcastle, north to
the Liverpool Range above Murrurundi, in fact the whole valley of the Hunter River, was
engraved and published in London in 1828, from the surveys of Henry Dangar, evidently on
the face of it a most arduous piece of work in those days, for then the country must have been
heavily timbered with but few open spaces, making the work difficult ana tedious. The
waters, roads, and grants then existing are wonderfully correctly shown on this map, and
the parishes as they now exist are delineated A copy of the map—the only one known -
T 3
195
The Baroona Estate, New South Wales.


is carefully preserved at Baroona. It is dedicated by Henry Dangar to “Lieutenant-General
Sir Thomas McDougall Brisbane, K.C.8., late Governor of New South Wales, and its depen-
dencies,’’ and the writer is of opinion the credit that was his due was never given to Henry
Dangar for the compilation of that map in those early days; it is only lately that its existence
was known of by his son.
Mr. A. A. Dangar’s schooling began early, he being packed off to Newcastle when only
eight years of age and, after a few years spent there, he accompanied his parents to Eng-
THE VERANDAH.
land in 1852, and was educated principally at the Truro Grammar School, in Cornwall (then
under the head mastership of a relative, the Rev. S. Andrews), and at Hamburg, in Ger-
many. Conceiving a liking for the sea—probably acquired on the voyage home—he was
sent for a few months to Mr. Eastman’s Naval School at Southsea, Portmouth, with the in-
tention of entering the Royal Navy, but his parents, failing to secure in time a nomination
to a cadetship (limit of age then fourteen) he at fourteen and a-half, went into the mer-
J 4
196
Tho Pastoral Homes of Australia.


chant service, and served three years as a midshipman in Dunbar’s, making two voyages in
the ‘‘La Hogue” to Sydney, and one to Calcutta in the “Octavia,” which ship took out one
of the first detachments of troops for the Indian Mutiny. While in Calcutta he saved the life
of an English soldier, who tried to drown himself, and witnessed the landing (from steamer
and river barges) of the rescued Lucknow and Cawnpore Garrisons, a sight to be remem-
bered. He was also down in the lower hold of a sailing ship with eighty head of elephants
THE LAKE AND FRONT PADDOCK
on board, brought round from Kurrachee to draw the heavy guns up country; also saw them
being landed on rafts specially constructed, a sight not to be forgotten either.
Leaving the sea at the wish of his parents, who had then returned to Australia, he, in
1858, at the age of eighteen, was sent to the stations, and worked for four and a half
years under the late Sir Arthur Palmer, who was genera] manager of his father’s proper-
ties. During that time much solid hard work was gone through, and a thorough knowledge
of squatting, stock, and men who had to do with them, acquired.
*5
197
The~Baroona Estate, New South Wales.


Gostwyck, in New England, and Yallaroi, near Warialda were headquarters, but many
months, from time to time witli much rough experience, were spent upon two western
cattle stations, one, Boombah, on the Balonne River, then almost the limit of settlement.
In February, 1863, after a six months’ tour in North-west Queensland, Mr. Dangar took
over all the stations (6) from Sir Arthur Palmer, and became general manager of same for
his mother; thus, when not quite twenty-three, he had charge of 100,000 sheep and 22,000
head of cattle, with the usual outfit of horses on each property.
“ WELLINGTON,” GRAND CHAMPION RAM SYDNEY SHOW 1903, BRED BY MR. A. A. DANGAR.
Since that time, with the exception of four trips to England (first when married, in
1866, for three years, then in 1884, and 1899 during the Boer War, and lastly in 1902, to
bring back the family to Baroona, Mrs. Dangar and daughters having been absent m
Europe for six years), the subject of this notice has been closely identified with the family
properties managing the stations, firstly for his mother as before indicated, then in 1870
becoming managing partner of Dangar Bros., which continued to 1897, when the properties
were divided, that being made easy through the acquisition of Mooki Springs in 1882, the
buying of which Mr. A. A. Dangar considers the best day’s work of his life. The last-
i 6
198
?/io Pastoral Homes of Australia.


named station fell to him in the division, with a small portion of Gostwyck, known as Pal-
merston, upon which he has lately built a handsome bungalow for a summfer residence.
He then leased Gostwyck from Mr. F. H. Dangar, and in 1901 bought the old property outright
from his brother, transferring it to his son, Capt. C. C. Dangar, late 13th Hussars, in Decem-
ber, IQ I I. The 1912 chp from the station has averaged for fleece and pieces Isjd., greasy
fleece bringing in Sydney up to 18id., a record for the last thirteen years; this, too, with
VIEW FROM VERANDAH.
a cut of from 9 to 10 lbs. of wool speaks for itself, and makes the late owner regret just
a little that he does not now possess a single sheep, after working among them for fifty-
four years, and breeding up such a stud of pure Merinos, that on Gostwyck he
produced the grand champion ram (Wellington) at the Sydney Show in 1903,
and many other noted winners, including pens of 10 since. Fifteen thousand
*7
199
The Baroona Estate, New South Wales,


acres of Gostwyck, the best of the land, on the Armidale side, has been cut up and sold to
local buyers, thus contributing its share towards closer settlement; therefore the late owner
thinks that if the welfare of the State and the great wool industry, which contributes so
much to it, is fairly studied, this old-established flock will not be interfered with further, for
to work such a flock to advantage some scope of country is required.
Eschewing politics and public gatherings generally (one of the family, a brother, was
always in Parliament), Mr. Dangar, nevertheless, took an active part in the early Labour
troubles, sparing neither time nor money in the matter, and having much to do from the very
THE BAROONA HOUSE STABLES, BACK ENTRANCE.
first with the formation of the now powerful Pastorahsts’ Union of New South Wales, of
which he was vice-president for three years and president for five years. No man in Aus-
tralia has more sympathy with the real, honest, straightforward worker, as thousands can
testify, while few have worked harder than he himself, thus it naturally follows he is no friend
to the socialist agitator, and such like, who, he thinks, are the bane of his native country, and
too many of whom abound and fatten on their misled fellows. Mr. Dangar is also a J.P. of
Queensland and vice-president of the Union Club, Sydney, being the oldest member of that
body living in New South Wales.
Mr. Dangar has always been an exhibitor at the local and metropolitan shows, years ago
a very large exhibitor, as his books will testify, helping them now too with trophies and dona-
i 8
200
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


tions. He also gives much encouragement and substantial aid to rifle-shooting, which for
valid reasons he thinks should be encouraged above everything.
Many hospitals and similar institutions benefit by his liberality, while the “Uangar Cot-
tage Hospital,” with its eighteen acres of land, tree-planted, and partly endowed, was in
1907 presented to the town and district of Singleton by himself and Mrs. Dangar, and it is be-
lieved the gift is thoroughly appreciated by the residents.
He has also had much to do in connection with the new All Saints’ Anglican Church,
now approaching completion, and which promises to be a noble structure.
INTERIOR OF HOUSE STABLES.
Mr. Dangar and all his family spent the year 1908 in India, and during his stay there he
took a keen and active interest in hunting. At Ootacamund he hunted and rode hard for six
months, after being practically out of the saddle for six years. It was at this place he con-
structed, with the object of opening up a difficult bit of country for the hunt, a five and
a-quarter mile ride, a large portion of it being through dense woods and the balance over hill
and dale. This piece of work is now known as ‘‘Dangar’s Ride.”
»9
201
The Baroona Estate, New South Wales.


GROUP OF SUFFOLK MARES AND FOALS IN YARD.
In 1866 Mr. Dangar married Mary Phoebe, third daughter of the late Edwin Rouse, of
Rouse Hill, near Windsor, one of the old families of the State, and the family consists of three
sons and four daughters, one of the former and two of the latter being married.
202
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Gostwyck Estate
The property of Captain C. C. Bandar.
GOSIW\'CK, the property of Captain Clive Collingwood Dangar, merits inclusion among
the Pastoral Homes of Australia for many reasons, but especially for the fact that
it is the home of one of the most beautifully-woolled Merino flocks in the Common-
wealth, and, secondly, because it is typical of a very highly-improved sheep station; indeed,
Gostwyck is one of the best improved pastoral holdings in the Commonwealth. Situated
IN THE AVENUE.
about 3300 ft. above the sea level on the New England tableland, Gostwyck is fine, open,
healthy country. It is principally of basaltic formation, the surface consisting partly of un-
dulating, well-grassed plains the carrying capacity of which has been added to by sapping
I
203


A VIEW FROM THE VERANDAH.
and burning off unnecessary timber, and also to the fact that all the low-lying land in the
property has been drained, and a large proportion of it has been broken up and laid down in
grasses.
Gostwyck was originally taken up in the early thirties of the last century by the late
Henry Dangar, grandfather of the present owner. It subsequently became one of the pro-
perties owned by the firm of Dangar Bros., and on the dissolution of partnership it passed into
the hands of Mr. F. H. Dangar, who afterwards sold it to his brother, the late Mr. A. A.
Dangar. In 1911 the property was transferred to the present owner.
The Gostwyck Merino flock is noted for the high quality of wool, and the stud flock is one
of the oldest in New South Wales, it having been in possession of the Dangar family for over
sixty years. It is not on record where the foundation of the flock originally came from, but
Merino sheep were first taken on to Gostwyck in the thirties of last century, and at once
proved themselves to be the type of sheep best suited to the New England tableland. It is
on record that 59,654 Gostwyck sheep shorn in 1858 gave an average yield of 2 lbs. 8 ozs.
clean spout-washed wool. Washing was discontinued in 1882, and the whole flock that year
averaged 6 lbs. 2 ozs. in the grease. Since that time greater attention has been paid to
studbreeding, with the gratifying result that in 1912, 30,200 Gostwyck-bred sheep averaged
8 lbs. 12 ozs. In some specially favourable seasons they have cut up to 10 lbs. average.
This result has been achieved by continuous use of only Saxon Merino blood for the last sixty
years, accompanied by steady, systematic culling of the whole flock, which is rigidly carried
2
204
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


THE ELM TREE AVENUE.
205
The Gostwyck Estate, New South Wales


GOSTWYCK EWES WHICH WON THE FIRST PRIZE FOR BEST PEN OF TEN EWES, SYDNEY SHOW, 1909.
out to the present day. No ewes of outside breeding have been introduced into the flock
during the period mentioned.
The foundation of the Gostwyck stud flock dates from 1854, when the late Henry Dan-
gar, the founder, selected 28 rams from Herr Gadegast’s well-known stud near Oschatz, in
Saxony, and sent them out to the late Sir A. H. Palmer, who was then general manager of
his stations in New South Wales. Some of these sheep proved extremely good sires, and
left their mark on the flock, where they and their progeny, with other imported Gadegast and
Steiger rams that followed, were used for many years in the stud. It was in 1878 that Tas-
manian blood was first introduced, and since that date no other rams have been used in the
stud save those of Tasmanian origin. The first Tasmanian rams used were two bred by
Mr. David Taylor, of St. Johnstone, one of which cost 76 guineas, considered a high price
at the time. They were followed by rams bred by Messrs. W. Gibson and Son, of Scone;
Mr. Thomas Gibson, Esk Vale; Mr. David Taylor; Mr. James Gibson, Belle Vue; and Mr. W.
H. Gibson, Fairfield. In was in 1897 that the famous ram Waterloo, by President, and
bred by the late Hon Jas. Gibson, was purchased by the late Mr. A. A. Dangar for 580
guineas. This ram proved to be a magnificent sire, probably the best President ram ever
imported into New South He proved of inestimable value to the Gostwyck flock,
adding year by year to the weight of the clip. Those who have had an intimate connection
with the management of the stud give a large amount of credit to Waterloo for the present
high standard of the flock. He was used in the flock for nine years, and got something like
800 lambs. Since igoo such rams as Loyalty 11. and Amberite were introduced, the latest
purchase being Patron IT. bred at Belle Vue, secured at the Sydney Sales, 1910. One of the
leading sires at present at Gostwyck is Woolly Legs a direct descendant from Waterloo.
He is by Togo, by Napoleon by Waterloo out of a Gostwyck stud ewe. He has been used in
the stud for four years, and is getting excellent stock.
Gostwyck stud sheep have established a good record in the show pens. They have for
4
206
The Pastoral Homes of Australia


VIEW OF HOMESTEAD—SHOWING STUD SHEEP PADDOCK.
5
207
The Gostwyck Estate, New South Wales


many years past taken their share of
prizes at the principal New England
shows as well as at the Sydney Sheep
Show. The Gostwyck stud has been
particularly successful in competitions for
pens of ten, which, in Captain Dangar’s
opinion is a finer achievement than win-
ning in the single classes.
The Gostwyck stud sheep are robust
and large of'frame, size being specially
kept in view. They are bred to produce
wool of fine combing of good quality
and character, with as much weight
and length of staple as can be
obtained without loss of density.
WATERLOO.
Excessive wrinkle, the fashion only a few years back, has been, to a great extent,
bred out of the stud flock, enough development being retained to ensure density and to guard
against any tendency in the direction of lighter fleeces, which is Ukely to Happen if a fair
amount of fold development is abandoned in stud sheep.
The Gostwyck clip has, from its earliest days, been sold in London, the brand D.R. over
G. over New England being well and favourably known. Last year (1912), however, the
whole clip was offered in Sydney, and topped the market by bringing iBid., the highest price
obtained for the last thirteen years. In justice to the quality of the clip it should be men-
tioned that the Gostwyck wool topped the market at four consecutive sales, making iBjd.,
iBid., and i6d., which constitutes a record the owner is justly proud of. The fol-
lowing figures are of interest concerning the wool-bearing capacity of the Gostwyck flock.
In 1912, 30,212 grown sheep cut an average of 8 lbs. 12 ozs., and 286 bales of greasy
fleeces averaged 15.39 b. per lb.
As before stated, the type of Merino
bred at Gostwyck is ideal for the New
England district, and the estate being
suited by nature to the production of
high-class wool, and extensive im-
provements having facilitated the work
very largely, it is no wonder that the
Gostwyck stud flock and station wool clip
have come so prominently to the fore.
At the same time a fair proportion of
credit for the steady progress is due to
those in charge of the stud in the past
WELLINGTON—GRAND CHAMPION RAM, SYDNEY SHOW, 1913.
BRED BY THE LATE A. A. DANGAR.
6
208
The Pastoral Homes of Australia


THE HOMESTEAD AND ORCHARD.
209
The Gostwyck Estate, New South Wales"


8
210
The Pastoral Homes of Australia ,


THE GOSTWYCK CREEK,
9
211
The Gostwyck Estate, New South Wales.


GOSTWYCK FLOCK RAMS.
and to the present manager of the stud, Mr. A. C. Cox. Mr. Cox comes of a family noted
for stud sheep-breeding in the Mudgee district in the old days. He is a son of the late
Charles Cox, of Broombee, and he has been in charge of the Gostwyck stud since 1897.
A feature of Gostwyck that makes itself most apparent to a visitor is the system of
tree-planting that has been carried out for many years past. The visitor approaches the
homestead through a lovely avenue of elm trees, which the late Mr. A. A. Dangar planted
himself. There are very few similar sights in Australia to this avenue in spring, summer,
and autumn foliage. It can be considered a beautiful natural monument to the late Mr
Hangar. Shelter belts have been planted on various parts of the estate, a particularly fine
belt being convenient to the woolshed, so that sheep can find plenty of shelter should a cold
snap eventuate immediately after shear-
ing. d hese plantations chiefly comprise
pmus insignis, and very fine shelter they
make. There is a very fine woolshed on
Gostwyck, and fences, gates, and build-
ings are all of a substantial nature, and
are kept in a good state of repair, the
flat country round the house is cut up
into small stud paddocks and cultivation
lots, though no cultivation, except for
station requirements, is indulged in.
The homestead is beautifully situ-
ated on rising country, overlooking
WOOLLY LEGS. - ONE OF THE LEADING SIRES
BY TOGO, BY NAPOLEON, BY WATERLOO.
I o
212
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE WOOLSHED CROSSING.
11
213
The Gostwyck Estate, New South Wales,


GOSTWYCK CREEK, SHOWING SUSPENSION BRIDGE.
Gostwyck Creek, the picturesqueness of which has been added to by the erection of a
graceful and useful suspension bridge.
Captain Dangar is a keen enthusiast in athletic games, particularly the game of racquets,
which is little known in this country. He is doing his best to popularise it, and has built a
squash racquet court at Gostwyck, in the hope that it will induce others to take up the game
and establish courts.
In connection with Gostwyck Captain Dangar works a property of 6000 acres called
The Durables, situated on Liverpool Plains. It was originally part of Mooki Springs, being
that portion nearest Quirindi.
Captain Clive Collingwood Dangar is the son of the late Mr. A. A. Dangar, of Baroona,
near Singleton, N.S.W. He was born at Baroona in 1882, and was educated at the Armi-
dale School, New England. In 1900 he went to South Africa with the Third Duke of Welling-
ton’s West Riding Regiment, in which he held a commission. He served through eighteen
months of the South African war, was mentioned in despatches, and received a commission
for special service. He subsequently served with the 13th Hussars in England and India for
eight years. Captain Dangar retired in 1909, and returning to New South Wales, married
Nora Dangar, daughter of the Hon. H. C. Dangar, M.L.C. They have two daughters, Nancy
Noreen and Phoebe Patricia. Captain Dangar takes a keen interest in pastoral matters,
and in the affairs of his district, especially as regards his old school. His keen interest
in Merino sheep augurs well for the future of the Gostwyck stud flock and the station wool
clip, both of which his father brought to such a high standard.
I 2
214
Tho Pastoral Homes of Australia


The Wallabadah Estate.
The Property of Mr. J. M. L. Macdonald.
WALLABADAH is a well-known pastoral holding, situated on the western slope of
the Main Range, on the edge of the Liverpool Plains, about ten miles from Qui-
rindi. It belongs to Mr. John M. L. Macdonald, and the particulars of its early
history and the pioneers connected with it are of great interest. One of the first settlers on
Liverpool Plains was Mr. George Loder, a son of Sergeant Loder, who arrived in the very
early days of Australia, and on leaving the army received a grant of land on the Hawkes-
bury. George Loder formed one of the party with Mr. Howe when he discovered Patrick’s
Plains, and he received a grant of land of Wylie’s Flat, near Singleton. Some years later
THE HOMESTEAD.
i
215


he again accompanied Mr. Howe in search of country, and, proceeding up the valley of the
Hunter, which had by degrees become settled, they crossed the Liverpool Range, and
Mr. Loder settled with his stock on the bank of the Quirindi Creek, on what is now the site
of the town of Quirindi. It was also known as Cuerindi, and was called by the blacks Qui-
warrindi.
The country taken up by George Loder may have included Wallabadah, which is, so to
speak, the back country of Quirindi; but it was rough, and, being less accessible and away
from the track of the pioneers, it was not occupied until 1835, when it was settled on by
Mr. Peter Brodie, afterwards of Glenalvon, and became a holding.
TWO-YEAR-OLD STEERS.
Thalabuburi was the aboriginal name of the place. The blacks were numerous, and
caused trouble by killing stock. They were also in the habit of coming from the surround-
ing district to a place on the mountains to obtain a supply of red-coloured earth, or rock,
which, when ground up, they used for personal adornment. Kangaroos, wallabies, and din-
goes were very numerous.
2
216
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


Mr. Broclie did not remain long at Wallabadah. The next holders were Messrs. Martyn
and Coombes, merchants in Sydney, who held it for sixteen or eighteen years, and it was
they who formed it into a station in the usual sense, which is perpetuated in the fact that
their horse and cattle brand, which was M.C., is still the station brand on large stock.
In the early days, the main northern road from the Hunter to New England ran past
Quirindi, but after the gold discovery and the rush of miners to the diggings at the head of
the Peel River, a new road was opened from Willow Tree, past Wallabadah, and Goonoo
Goonoo, along which the mails and light traffic went, and this led to the formation of the
township of Wallabadah. It is said that Messrs. Martyn and Coombes would not allow the
THREE-YEAR-OLD HEREFORD HEIFERS,
mail horses to be kept at Wallabadah, and the late Mr. John Gill, who at the time, and for
many years afterwards, had the mail contract for the northern line, applied for a township
reserve to be surveyed, and obtained permission to erect mail stables there. The re-
serve was surveyed, between two and three miles down the creek from the homestead, and
nearer Quirindi. The boundary of Wallabadah and Quirindi Stations had before this been
arranged, and in that direction, was about two miles below the township.
1
217
The Wallabadah Estate, New South Wales.


In the middle fifties Messrs. Martyn and Coombes sold Wallabadah to the late Mr. R.
G. Higgins, who afterwards owned Kickerbell, Warren Downs, and many other stations.
During Mr. Higgins’ time there was a very heavy snowstorm, which broke down the trees
and branches all over the station, and littered the ground to such an extent that the shep-
herds had great difficulty in getting their flocks about to feed. A similar snowstorm
took place in July, 1904, when nearly every green tree on the station was surrounded by
broken branches.
VIEW OF THE HORSE PADDOCK.
In 1861, Mr. Higgins sold Wallabadah to Mr. James V. Parnell, formerly of Tyreel,
near Moree, who held it till i 869, when it was purchased by its present owner.
In 1867, the neighbourhood of Wallabadah was the scope of some of the exploits of the
bushranger Thunderbolt, who, it is known, used to harbour with one of the shepherds in the
4
218
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


rough country at the head of the creek near
the range; and on more than one occasion the
mail coach was stuck up on the Black Ridge on
Colly Creek.
In 1869, the WaUabadah township had,
from its small beginning with a mail stable, be-
come a thriving centre. It had three good
bush hotels, and stores, butchers, and black-
smiths’ shops, &c. It was also a police sta-
tion, and a Court of Petty Sessions was held
twice a month. The town of Quirindi was still
in the future. All the traffic between the Hun-
ter and the north passed through WaUabadah,
and carriers with loading were numerous. The
mail coach passed daily up and down, and this
traffic went on increasing for six or seven
years, till the railway was m course of con-
MR. J. M. L. MACDONALD.
struction past Quirindi, after which WaUabadah decayed, and Quirindi became a town; but
WaUabadah is again recovering, though without the bustle of former days.
In 1869, the stock on the station consisted of 21,000 sheep, and some cattle and horses
for working the place. The sheep were shepherded in Uocks of about 1200, which were as
many as the shepherds could look after in broken, and mostly thickly-timbered country, and
even then it was a matter of very frequent occurence for part of the flock to be dropped, and
looking for lost
sheep was every-
day work.
The station
had all the im-
provements con-
sidered necessary
at the time. The
homestead and
buildings were
sufficient. A small
area was cultivat-
ed for hay for sta-
tion use. The
woolshed was
A PORTION OF THE GARDEN.
5
219
The WaUabadah Estate, Now South Wales,


good of its kind, and there were the ordinary shepherds’ huts, scattered over the run, with
log or bough yards for the sheep at night.
In 1871, Mr. Macdonald became associated in partnership with Mr. David A. Miln, a friend
of his youth, with whom he had come to Australia. Mr. Miln had returned to Scotland for a
visit in 1869, and came back to Australia in 1871, when he joined Mr. Macdonald. Mr.
Miln died early in 1873, and a few months afterwards Mr. Macdonald purchased his interest
in the station, and since then he has been the sole owner.
Ringbarking began in 1873, a start was made in fencing sheep paddocks in 1876, and the
improvement of the property has been going on since. The country is hilly and broken, with
small flats on the creek, and the timber is white and yellow box, red gum, apple tree, and a
VIEW FROM WOOLSHED HILL, WALLABADAH.
good deal of stringy bark on the high country near the main range. The two principal creeks
are Wallabadah Creek, or Quirindi Creek as it is lower down, and Jacob and Joseph Creek,
which derives the name from two large mounds of loose stones near the creek, at the old
boundary between Wallabadah and Quirindi. The area of Wallabadah now is between 30,000
and 40,000 acres, most of which is freehold. It has been ringbarked, but this has been
done in such a way as not to give the property the desolate appearance so frequently seen in
ringbarked country. Sufficient trees have been left for shade and shelter, and for fencing
purposes for the future. Timber has also been preserved on the more prominent ridges
6
220
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


BROOD MARES AND FOALS ON WALLABADAH.
7
221
The Wallabadah Estate, New South Wales,


which are features of the landscape. Many thousands of acres have been cleared, giving the
paddocks a park-like appearance, and increasing the grazing capacity as well as improving
the landscape. Fencing has been extensively carried out, and the property has been sub-
dixided into about seventy paddocks. The subdivisions have been made to get the benefit of
the natural water supply in creeks, gullies, and springs, but some tanks and numerous wells
have been made throughout the station to ensure safety as regards water during a drought.
The station was formerly almost entirely a sheep property, but for the last ten years it has
been considered advisable to keep more cattle and fewer sheep, in order to keep down the
coarser grasses, which the latter will not eat, and which were not to be seen before ringbark-
ing was done.
FATTENING BULLOCKS ON THE YELLOW PLAIN, QUIRINDI.
In 1896, Mr. Macdonald acquired what remained of the old Quirindi Station, including the
homestead and about 4000 acres, part of the area being the Yellow Plain, so called from a
yellow-flowering plant which grew on it and gave it that appearance. The Yellow Plain is
well known in the district for its fattening qualities. A small flock of pure Shropshire sheep
is kept at Quirindi for breeding crossbred lambs, which, with surplus sheep and cattle from
Wallabadah, are fattened there.
In September, 1900, Wallabadah was in a state of excitement on its being reported that
the two Breelong blacks, Jimmy and Joe Governor, whom the mounted police and many
8
222
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


HEREFORD BREEDING COWS ON WALLABADAH
9
223
The Wallabadah Estate, New South Wales,


civilians had been pursuing for weeks, were in the vicinity, and had got food at the cottage
of a boundary rider. A party of civilians had come on them, and had exchanged many shots.
The shooting done by the blacks was accurate, several bullets having cut through the outer
edge of the bark of a big red gum, behind which one or more of the civilians had taken cover.
The shooting caused the horses of the civilians to bolt, and when they were being secured the
blacks made off, and, following the bed of the creek down for three miles, broke into an-
other place, which was unoccupied for the afternoon. They took what they wanted, and went
off to the mountains. Though a hundred or more police, with the Queensland black trackers,
were surrounding the locality, and a large number of civilians were in pursuit next day, the
outlaws made their way through, and it was not till some weeks afterwards that one of the
outlaws was shot, and the other captured, on their way to the coast.
WOOLSHED.
The improvements on the station are good. The present homestead is close to the site of
the old one of seventy years ago, on what is now an open flat country near the creek. The
hcuse, which was built in 1900, is of stone, with slate roof, stands in tine grounds planted with
ornamental shrubs, trees, and flower-beds. The house is fitted up with acetylene gas, and has
telephone communication with the township. The view of the surrounding hills, and up the
valley to the Liverpool Range, is pretty, and on fine evenings the light and colouring on the
mountains, as the sun is setting, present a fine sight. Near at hand are the usual station
10
224
The Pastoral Homes of Australia t


store, stables and sheds. The cottages for the men are a short distance away, and the wool-
shed three miles up the creek. It was erected in 189/, the walls and roof being of galvanised
iron, there are twenty machines installed, the motor power being an 8 h.p. oil engine. The
number of sheep shorn is from 30,000 to 35,000, and, with the exception of the few Shrop-
shires and crossbreds at Quirindi, they are pure Merino. The stud flock was founded by a
draft of stud ewes, purchased, in 18/2, at the disposal sale of Mr. C. C. Cox, of Brombee,
who was then one of the most noted of the Mudgee sheepbreeders. Tor a few years only
Broombee rams were used, but in 1877 a fine ram, a son of Magenta, was purchased from
Mr. Da\id laylor, of St. Johnstone, Tasmania, and since then the stud rams have been of St.
Johnstone or of Winton blood. The flock rams used are station bred. The sheep are of the
POLO PONY MARKS AND FOALS.
short-legged and nuggety type, densely covered with wool of fine quality.
On Wallabadah and Quirindi, in addition to the sheep, there is a herd of 1200 to 1500
Hereford cattle, including some pedigree cows for breeding bulls for the herd. The stud
bulls used are of local blood. A few horses—draught and saddle—are bred, but only for sta-
tion requirements.
IPersonal.
Mr. John Mackenzie Lindsay Macdonald was born in 1842 in Arbroath, Forfarshire, Scot-
land. He is the second son of Mr. John Macdonald, solicitor and town clerk at Arbroath, was
I T
225
The Wallabadah Estate, New South Walom.


THE WEATHER SHED ON WALLABADAH.
educated at the Royal High School, Edinburgh, and was for several years in his father’s office
after leaving school. He left Scotland for Australia in November, 1864, in the “Granite
City,’’ one of the Aberdeen Clipper Line, and arrived in Sydney in March, 1865. After a
fortnight’s stay there, he went by steamer to Brisbane, and on to Retreat Station, on the
Weir River, as a jackeroo. He remained there for four months, and then went to Eton Vale,
on the Darling Downs. Mr. Macdonald was at Eton Vale till January, 1867, when he went to
New South Wales, and in 1869, after having inspected several other places, purchased Walla-
badah, where he has been settled ever since. He was appointed a magistrate in 1870, and as
long as Wallabadah had a court of petty sessions, he took an active part on the bench, and,
being the nearest magistrate, was frequently called on to exercise magisterial duties. He
was a Sheep Director, a member of the Pastures Protection Board for over thirty years, and
has been the president of the Quirindi Polo Carnival since its beginning. He married in 1871,
Miss Marion Lindsay, a daughter of Mr. Thomas Lindsay, of Branxton, an early settler on the
Hunter, well known in the Maitland district forty or fifty years ago.
I he family consists of three sons and two daughters, all of whom, with the exception of
the youngest son, who is a merchant in London, reside at Wallabadah. The eldest son, Mr
Herbert Lindsay Macdonald, manages the station.
I 2
226
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Balarang Estate.
The Property of Messrs. A. N. and P. E. Stirton.
AMONG the best-known wool-growing properties in the north-west of New South Wales
is Balarang, the property of Messrs. Stirton Eros. The station comprises about
35,000 acres, and is situated about 60 miles north of Moree, adjoining the well-
known Bunaba and Welbondongah Stations. About sixteen years ago Messrs. Stirton Bros,
purchased four selections of 10,000 acres, and subsequently bought Bunaba North and Currah
Stations adjoining, and these properties together now constitute Balarang. All the country in
this part of the State owes its present success from a wool-growing point of view to the
TYPE OF COUNTRY ON BALARANG.
X
227


BROOD MARES.
money which has been spent in improvements; especially as regards artesian bores. Bala-
rang is principally black soil plains with belts of timber, comprising belah, box, white wood,
wilga, &c. A good
deal of the timber has
been nngbarked, so
that the estate is now
practically open plain,
with shelter well dis-
tributed throughout.
In anything like a fa-
vourable season, the
country carries rich
natural feed, the
grasses comprising
blue grass, Mitchell
grass, clover, crowfoot,
&c.
THOROUGHBRED STALLION.
2
228
The Pastoral Homes of Australia


THE BALARANG HOMESTEAD.
3
229
The Balarang Estate, New South Wales.


BULLOCKS BRED ON BALARANG.
During Messrs. Stirton Brothers’ ownership, extensive improvements have been carried
out. There is now bore water in every paddock, and water has been laid on to the home-
stead, garden and
men’s quarters, also to
the shearing shed and
sheep yards, where it
is used to keep down
the dust when the
sheep are being work-
ed. The boundary fence
is all rabbit netted, and
the station has been
subdivided into forty
paddocks by six-wire
fences. The home-
stead is connected with
Garah by telephone.
DRAUGHT STALLION.
4
230
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE BALARANG WOOLSHED
5
231
The Balarang Estate, New South Wales.


A BALARANG STUD RAM.
One of the most interesting and important features on Balarang from a stock point of view, is
the stud Merino flock, which comprises about 800 ewes. This stud was originally started
with the purchase of
cast for age ewes from
the Collaroy Company,
Limited, Merriwa, and
specially selected stud
sires from the same
flock. This strain has
been kept up without
any departure from
Collaroy blood, and a
very fine lot of rams
are now produced.
Messrs. Stirton
Brothers shear about
30,000 sheep annually
BUAUGHT MARE AND FOAI
6
232
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A MOB OF FLOCK EWES, BALARANG.
7
233
The Balarang Estate, New South Wales.


ANOTHER VIEW OF BALARANG.
A MOB OF HOGGETS, BALARANG.
s
234
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


AUBURN VALE—MR. A. N. STIRTON.
9
235
The Ba/arctng Estate, New South Wales.


1 o
236
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


at Balarang, all of pure Collaroy blood. The sheep have been carefully culled and classed,
and the following figures, representing the igi 1 averages for twelve months’ growth, speak
for themselves. Flock ewes, 6 years old averaged 8 lbs. 10 oz., 5 years old 9 lbs., 4 years
old 9 lbs. 3 ozs., ewe hoggets 9 lbs. 2 ozs. The flock ewes, 4-tooth, averaged 10 lbs. 6 ozs.,
the 22-months-old ewes 1 1 lbs. 2 ozs. Four-tooth wethers averaged 10 lbs. 4 ozs., and 22-
months-old wethers 11 lbs. 6 ozs.
The Balarang sheep have won a good name throughout the country, and Messrs. Stirton
Brothers have no difficulty in selling their surplus stock for forward delivery. Balarang is
splendid sheep country, and as the owners exercise great care as to the rams they use, and
cull heavily, it is not to be wondered at that such a profitable wool and sheep are produced.
The cattle on Balarang are Shorthorns. The cows are an excellent lot, showing plenty
of quality, and the stud bulls used have been obtained from time to time from Mr. J. R. Fornax
and Mr. A. G. F. Munro, of Weebollabolla. Altogether about 800 head of cattle are run
on the estate.
The horses number about 130. For many years
Messrs. Stirton Brothers bred from a Welsh pony
Stallion, but they now use the thoroughbred stallion
Cobham, by Armidale (5) out of Corinth (3). They
have a number of high-class thoroughbred mares,
purchased from Messrs. Barnes Bros., of Dyraaba,
Casino, N.S.W., and also some well-bred draught
mares and a Clydesdale stallion. Though the an-
nual rainfall at Balarang is about twenty-four inches
very little cultivation is done. About 100 acres are
cultivated, and at the present time Messrs. Stirton
Brothers have about 350 tons of ensilage and 100
tons of wheaten hay stored on the property.
Fersonal.
Messrs. A. N. and P. E. Stirton, the owners of
Balarang, are the sons of the Rev. Dr. Stirton, late
MR. A. N. STIRTON.
of Inverell, N.S.W. Mr. A. N. Stirton gained his pastoral experience on various stations, and
he now resides at Auburn Vale, Inverell. In the year 1900 he visited England.
11
237
The Balarang Estate, New South Wales.


Mr. P. E. Stirton for many years practised
as a solicitor at Moree, but he has now retired,
and lives at Currah, Inverell. He went as a
private with the second Australian Contingent to
South Africa during the Boer War, and after being
on active service for six months, received a commis-
sion. He remained in South Africa for twelve
months, and received a medal and six clasps. About
five years ago he travelled through England, Egypt,
India, and Japan, the tour occupying about sixteen
months. Messrs. Stirton Brothers have been asso-
ciated together in several properties. They owned
East Lynne on the Barwon, and worked it in con-
junction with Balarang, also Woodvale, near Nar-
rabn.
MR. P. E. STIRTON.
12
238
The Pastoral Homes of Australia


The East Glengallan, Ashgrove, Longway.
and The Glen Estates.
The Property of Mr. W. B. Slade.
EAST Glengallan, the property of Mr. W. B. Slade, is perhaps more closely identified
with the pastoral progress of Queensland than any other holding in that State. It
has the distinction of being the home of the oldest and purest Merino flock in
Queensland, and one of the oldest, and for many years the biggest, Shorthorn studs in that
State.
The estate originally comprised 42,000 acres, but from 1895 to 1904 the late owners,
Marshall and Slade, reduced the area by three separate sales to the Government of Queens-
land, the last comprising 25,000 acres. Mr. Slade retained a portion of his share, over
GLENGALLAN STUD SHORTHORNS.
3000 acres, and repurchased 2000 acres from the Government, reselling the Glengallan
homestead, with an area of 482 acres, to Mrs. Clara Gillespie, and Mr. Slade built another
residence on the portion of the estate now known as East Glengallan.
The estate, which now comprises 5000 acres, is situated on the Darling Downs, 8 miles
from Warwick, 6 miles from Allora, and 7 miles from Hendon.
The country comprises black soil, undulating plains, with rich alluvial flats, with creek
frontages, admirably suited to lucerne growing. Indeed, Mr. Slade has now about 2000
acres under this crop.
T
239


GLENGALLAN RAM HOGGETS.
The estate is surrounded with a dog-proof fence, a considerable portion of which is
also rabbit-proof. The subdivisional (chiefly netting) fences cut the estate into small areas
of from 30 acres upwards, and water is supplied from wells and bores, being raised by
windmills into tanks. As a rule, each tank is made to supply four troughs in four separate
enclosures.
Glengallan is splendidly adapted for the raising of stud stock, and limited space cur-
tails our description of the property, for so much has to be said of the stud flock and herd.
£be Stub jflocfc.
The Glengallan Merinos stand forth as a flock that has been bred up solely and entirely
within its own blood for over eighty years as far as its Australian history is concerned, but its
GLENGALLAN STUD EWES.
2
240
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


GLENGALLAN RAM, 219-6.
Exported to Cape Colony in 1888
history is also that of the Saxony Merinos,
from which it can prove an absolutely pure de-
scent.
The foundation of the Glengallan flock was
laid in 1855 by the late John Deuchar, who then
owned the estate. He obtained the founda-
tion ewes from the flock belonging to the
North British Australian Investment Company’s
Rosenthal Estate, near Warwick. The Rosen-
thal sheep were the progeny of sheep brought
out from Europe in 1828 by the late Frederic
Bracker for Mr. Bettington, of Brindley Park, New South Wales. These sheep came from the
stock owned by Prince Lichnowsky, in Silesia, which was at that time one of the best and
most famous flocks. So the Glengallan flock
was started on a very sound foundation. The
ewes were all by an imported Silesian ram, and
the sire Mr. Deuchar purchased was by the
above ram from a specially selected Brindley
Park ewe. This ram, which was called “Billy,”
became one of Queensland’s historic sires. He
was a ram of grand proportions, having a
splendid masculine head, strong spiral horns,
great density of wool of a bright colour, and of
greater length than the Saxon Merinos of that
A GLENGALLAN STUD RAM.
period. He carried no wasty wool on any of his points. He had a grand collar (neck folds),
and the corrugations of his wool fibre were regular and close, extending to the tips. In 18^
KING BILLY 39TH, CHAMPION GLENGALLAN RAM.
At 2 year old cut 32½., and averaged
27lbs. for 4 years
Mr. Deuchar personally selected in German}
ten rams and ten ewes from the flock of Baron
Von Maltzahn, and the ewes of that importation
were mated with “Billy” and the rams put to
some of “Billy’s” get. The result of this in-
fusion was such as to induce Messrs. Marshal!
and Deuchar to repeat the experiment, and in
1862 the late Mr. C. H. Marshall made a further
selection of ten rams and fifteen ewes of the
same flock. This was the last occasion 01:
which any extraneous blood was introduced
J)
241
East Glengallan, Ashgrove, Longway, and The Glen Estates, Queensland.


into the flock. In 1873 Mr. W. B. Slade joined the late Mr. Marshall as a partner in the Glen-
gallan Estate, and from that date to the present has had sole direction of the flock. Under
his management it has achieved a success, not only in the showyard, but also at inter-
colonial wool shows and European wool sales, which has fallen to comparatively
few flocks in Australia. Mr. Slade, unlike many Merino breeders, has never been
induced to follow transient fancies, such as those that have resulted in excessive
body wrinkles or great length of staple. His constant aim has been not only to maintain
the flock in absolute purity, but also to preserve its distinctive type. His careful system of
registration ensures the identification of every lamb in the inner or select pedigree flock,
with its sire and dam, while careful culling is rigidly practised. Of course, the character of
the wool has undergone considerable modification, due to the influence of the climate, and in
no other respect, perhaps, has that been more noticeable than in the great increase in the
weight and length of fleece. The average weights of rams’ fleeces in the flock have varied
from 15 to 25 lbs. One remarkable sire—King Billy 39th —cut 32J lbs. at two years—twelve
months’ growth—and for four years averaged 27 lbs. The ewes cut from Bto 18 lbs.
The sheep are remarkable for their aristocratic appearance, having very compact, sym-
metrical bodies, standing on short legs. The rams are noted for their fine masculine heads,
and both rams and ewes for the remarkable evenness of their covering. That they are of
remarkably robust constitution there have been many practical proofs. The number of the
stud ewes varies from 6000 to 8000. The wool of the flock, as is well known, has well
held up its reputation at the English and Continental wool sales. At two of the principal
intercolonial wool shows Glengallan fleece wool carried off principal honours in competition
with wool from all the colonies, including Tasmania. At the Queensland Intercolonial Wool
Show, held at Brisbane in January, 1882, wool from the flock secured grand champion prize
and two gold medals. At the Grand Centennial Exhibition, held in Sydney in January, 1888,
two first prizes—silver medal and the Centennial Champion Gold Medal—were awarded to
Glengallan wool for six fleeces, unskirted in grease. The above prizes were won by wool
from sires in use in the flocks. During the last twenty years large numbers of Glengallan
sheep have been purchased by South African woolgrowers, and the flock has firmly estab-
lished its popularity in that country, having proved to be admirably adapted to that climate.
One ram —219 —6 —named in South Africa Marshall, sold by Mr. Slade to Mr. George Blaine,
sen., Kei Road, Cape Province, proved a remarkable success, and created a strong South
African demand for Glengallan sheep. He carried off many of the principal prizes in Cape
Province, beating all other importations, and in other ways Glengallan stock have won many
distinctions in South Africa, including the Government prize for the best bale of 300 lbs. of
4
242
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


wool in the grease, also at East London a prize for the best 1000 lbs. of greasy wool of
twelve months’ growth.
Being the oldest flock in Queensland, and having been bred on such consistent lines for
so long a period, it was quite natural that Mr. Slade should wish to place the famous old
Glengallan strain beyond any chance of the dispersal which, sooner or later, overtakes old
stud flocks and herds. He therefore, in a most patriotic spirit, presented the Queensland
A GENERAL VIEW OF EAST GLENGALLAN.
Government with a flock of fifty picked ewes, which have been placed on the State Farm at
Hermitage, near Warwick, and the Agricultural Department, in order to ensure the same
course of breeding that has brought the flock to its present high state of perfection should
be adhered to, and not subject to change in the managers of the farm, appointed a board,
consisting of Messrs. W. B. Slade, Henry Bracker, Aubin Dowling, and P. R. Gordon, to
advise the department from time to time on the course of breeding to be adopted
5
243
East Glengallan, Ashgrove, Longway, and The Glen Estates, Queensland.


This flock will form an admirable object-
lesson to wool growers, and will, in the
future, afford an excellent means, by the
sales of stud sheep, of improving the
flocks of the State.
Amongst others of the numerous hon-
ours won by the Clengallan flock apart
from those awarded at local shows, may
be mentioned: —Grand champion prizes,
12; Jubilee Shield, 1; championships,
113; reserve championships, 11; first
prizes, 433; second prizes, 345; specials
(carrying Jubilee Shield), 36.
GLENGAI.LAN STUD RAMS—FLEECE 8 MONTHS’ GROWTH.
£be Stub Shorthorns*
As with the sheep, the Clengallan Shorthorns represent the oldest stud herd in Queens-
land, and at one time it was so extensive as to number over 1000 pedigree females. The
foundations were laid by the late John Deuchar in 1856, when he personally selected some
cows from the pure-bred herd of the Australian Agricultural Company, at Port Stephens, New
South Wales. These were mated with the bull Marmaduke (14897, C.H.8.), imported by
him from England in 1856. Marmaduke was by Duke of Gloucester, dam Minerva IT, by St.
Martin, her fourth dam being the celebrated Wellington (2824, C.H.8.). At the same time
he imported the cow Charlotte, bred by the Hon. Col. Pennant, by Lovemore (10476 C.H.8.),
dam Dewberry by Hurricane. In June, 1859, the herd was strengthened by the importa-
tion of three bulls, Baron Renfrew, Marmion, and Forest Monarch. Baron Renfrew was by
Speculator (13775 C.H.8.), dam 6th Clara by Grand Duke (12964 C.H.8.). Marmion
was by Bosquet (14183 C.H.8.), dam by Red Knight. Forest Monarch was by Speculator,
dam 6th Wantin by The Hero, g.d. by Favourite. In 1863 Mr. Deuchar imported two bulls
—Viscount Booth and Amphytryon—and a cow, Bonny Belle. Viscount Booth was by
Booth’s Prince George (10097), the best bull ever bred by Richard Booth. Amphytryon
was by Royal Oak (16873), dam Amphytnte, by Sir Edmund Fyons, g.d. by Nabob. This
last-named bull traces back through a long line of distinguished ancestors to one of the
earliest entries in Coate’s Herd Book. Bonny Belle was the dam of Viscount Booth 2nd and
3rd, and was by Cardigan (12556) of Booth’s Favourite Blossom tribe. In 1871 the late
Mr. C. H. Marshall, senior partner of the firm, imported two bulls (Winsome Duke and Bar-
den) and a cow (Red Duchess 13th) by Wellesley, of the Bright Eyes tribe. The latter was
bred by Mr. Fadds, of Huntingdonshire, a tenant of the Duke of Manchester. Winsome
Duke was by 3rd Duke of Wharfdale, dam Winsome Eyes of the Wild Eyes tribe. He was
awarded four first prizes prior to his leaving England while still under sixteen months old.
In the Clengallan herd he obtained first prize in the aged class at the Show of the Royal
a
244
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Agricultural Society of
Queensland in 1857,
and championship of
all bulls exhibited. His
first grand sire, Grand
Turk, won sixteen first
prizes, having only
once been beaten, and
then by Master Butter-
fly, who was sold to
Mr. J. B. Ware, of Vic-
toria, for 1200 guineas.
Grand Turk was a
Booth-Bates bull, and
was sold at a very
“THEODORE” (IMP.) TRIPLE CHAMPION SHORTHORN BULL, N.S.W.
high figure to go to America. Red Duchess 13th visited Nepean Towers, and returned to
Glengallan in calf to Theodore (imp.), the late Dr. Jenkins’ celebrated triple champion bull.
The offspring, Lady Theodora, was champion cow of Queensland for many years, beating
in open competition Lord Wilton’s Dam (imp.). Lady Theodora’s son, by Winsome Duke
(imp.), viz., Theodora’s Duke, won championships on several occasions in Toowoomba and
Brisbane, appropriating on one occasion at the latter show the President’s Silver Cup.
Mr. W. B. Slade assumed full direction of the herd as managing partner with Mr. Mar-
shall in 1873. Main-
valuable and high-
priced bulls have been
added to the herd since
it came under his sole
direction. His first im-
portant addition was
made in 1876, when he
purchased for 1000
guineas the two-year-
old bull, Royal Purple
Ist, at the show of
the Agricultural (now
Royal) Society of New
South Wales of that
CHAMPION COW “LADY THEODORA.
7
245
East Glengallan, Ashgrove, Longway, and The Glen Estates, Queensland.


“ ROYAI. PURPLE 1ST."
Purchased in 1876 for 1000 guineas.
year, where he gained the first prize in
the class competitions and championship
of the show against all ages. He was
bred by the late Mr. E. B. Woodhouse of
Mount Gilead, New South Wales, and was
sired by Imperial Purple Qth, by Mr.
Walter Lamb’s Imperial Purple, bred by
the late Mr. Robert McDougall. Ihe
dam of Royal Purple ist was Lucy 3rd,
by Marquis of Bute, bred by Messrs.
Degraves and Co., Coliban Park, Vic-
toria. The amount realised by the sale
of bulls by Royal Purple ist was 11s. qd. net.
1881 a highly-bred bull, Master Butterfly, bred by the Hon. John Eales, of Duckenfield,
was introduced, and later on Matilda’s Double Brunswick, from the same stud, was purchased
from Mr. Eales. In 1883, two remarkably handsome young bulls—Knebworth and Ashby—
were added. They were bred by Mr. A. A. Dangar, of Baroona, their grand dams having
been imported cows. Both these bulls were got by the celebrated bull, Hillhurst’s 6th Duke,
bred by the Hon. W. McCulloch, of Glenroy, Victoria.
The next important introduction to the herd was Prince Rugia 21st, purchased in 1897
from Mr. Walter Douglas, of Goulburn. This bull was the sire of Rugia’s Prince ist, born in
1898. He was perhaps one of the handsomest bulls ever seen on any Queensland show
grounds. He took rank as champion five times, including best bull of all breeds.
The latest additions to the herd, which were personally selected by Mr. Slade in 1906,
were Royal Duke 14th, purchased by Mr. Holmes, of Bathurst, from his breeder, the late
Archdeacon Williams, of le Ante, New
Zealand, and secured by Mr. Slade at a
high figure. His sire was Count Water-
loo Ist, dam Royal Duchess Ist, by Duke
of York 2nd. From the Belinda Vale
Herd Mr. Slade secured at a high figure
Royal Emperor 16th (imp. 84609 C.H.8.),
prize winner at the York Show, England,
1903. This fine animal was bred by
Sir John Swinburne, Bart., and is by
Chieftain (75588), dam Royal Princess
“ RUGIA’S PRINCE 1ST” (roan).
Champion Shorthorn Bull of Queensland.
8
246
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


CHAMPION COW" LADY COLLING 6TH."
Descended from Imported Cow “ Charlotte.” “ Lady Colling 6th” was winner
of 15 first prizes, 8 championships, 2 reserve championships, carrying 2 gold
medals and 3 silver ones. She was dam of the handsome rich roan bull
“ Ashby 16th,” who won 9 first prizes, 2 champonships and 3 specials.
Oxford by Royal Shape (66287), 3rd dam
Grand Duchess of Oxford 104th. Mr.
Slade was so impressed with the progeny
of this bull that he purchased a heifer b}
him, the heifer being Rolinda Duchess of
Derrimut 223rd.
Ihe descendants of the celebrated
cow, Roan Summerton (imp.) so impress-
ed Mr. Slade that he followed it up to
another herd of the same line, that of
Mr. A. J. Webb, Rathfarnham, Gippsland
from which he purchased Lindenow Duchess of Derrimut 16th. This heifer won first prize
in the yearling class in Melbourne, and has since won two championships in Queensland.
He also secured from the same herd Lindenow Duchess of Derrimut 21st.
The following is an abstract of show yard honours won by the Glengallan herd since it
came under the direction of Mr. Slade:—Championships, 69; reserve championships, 14; first
prizes, 206; second prizes, go; special prizes (including 2 Jubilee Shields and 4 gold medals)
20. In addition to the above numerous group, prizes have been secured by the herd.
(The Clip.
The Glengallan wools always command a high price. In November, 1906, I4jd. (top
price) was realised for five bales of AAA Co. In October, 1907, the prices were I4fd. (top
price) for seven bales AAAAE, 13d. for nine bales of AAAA and AAE, I2|d. for eleven bales of
AAAE, and 1 ojd. for nine bales of AAAE. I2jd. per lb. was realised from seventy-three
bales of fleece.
Ashgrove, another property owned by Mr. Slade, comprises 38,000 acres upon which
permanent water has been secured by bores, windmills, tanks, and troughings, and a reser-
ASGGROVE WOOLSHED.
9
247
East Glengallan, Ashgrove, Longway, and The Glen Estates, Queensland-


voir. There are about 20,000 sheep on this property, and the wool from this station has
figured conspicuously for years in the Brisbane market. In 1909 it fetched as high as i6|d.
per lb. greasy, and in the November sales in 1911 reached the highest figure realised in
Queensland for the season. The following register of prices indicates the position Ashgrove
wool occupies on the market:—
November, 1907. —AAAW, 1 sTel. (top price); AAW, r4^d.; AAAW, I4^d.; 89 bales fleece
averaged I3|d.
November. 1908. —13d. (top price).
November, 1909. —7 bales, i6fd. (top price); 12 bales AA Co., I3jd.; 11 bales AAW.
13id.; 22 bales AW, 13d.; 52 bales averaged I3fd.
November, 1910. — (top price).
December, igio.—s bales AA Co. W., izjTd. (top price); 4 bales A Co. W., I4|d.; 20
bales AAW, 14M. (29 bales at 14M.); 48 bales AA and AW, AW, 13Ad.; 77 bales aver-
aged 13fd. per lb.
November, igir.—Bl bales averaged 13d.; 12 bales, (top price).
In 191 1 Mr. Slade purchased a western property to which a large portion of the pure
Clengallan flock could be removed, and which would do as a depot for rams bred at Glen-
gallan. This property is Longway, five miles from Longreach, comprising nearly 24,000
acres. He has already landed there 2200 stud ewes and 100 sires, conveyed by two special
trains, and another draft will shortly be sent up by a third special train.
IPersonal.
Mr. W. B. Slade was born at Yeovil, Somersetshire, England, on sth December, 1843. He
was first educated by private tutor, and at the age of twelve years proceeded to Sherborne
King Edward VI. Public School. After studying for the legal profession for two years, Mr.
Slade left for Australia, owing to the fact that he was not constitutionally fitted for a seden-
tary life, and arrived in Sydney late in 1861. After spending a few weeks with his brother,
the late G. P. Slade, afterwards one of the leading Sydney solicitors, he went to gain his
colonial experience on Waverley, on the Isis and Page Rivers, near Scone, and travelled with
the several drafts of sheep that were brought to Waverley, one lot of which being a draft of
rams from Havilah, personally selected by Mr. Nicholas Bayley, of whose judgment and flock
Mr. Slade formed a very high opinion. After eighteen months on Waverley, then an estab-
lished sheep station, Mr. Slade left for Sydney, to take charge of a mob of horses for the
Marthaguy and Merri Mern, crossing Bell’s line en route, after which he took charge of
1200 store bullocks, which he took through Quambone and Coonamble to Gideon, near Wal-
gett, the only losses on the trip being three drowned at Coonamble when swimming the
Castlereagh in flood. During a short stay in the Walgett district Mr. Slade had charge of
10
248
Tho Pastoral Homos of Australia


Bogera for a brief time, then took charge of
a draft of fat cattle to Sydney, again cross-
ing Bell’s line with the aid of a guide and
well-trained dogs. Later, shipping his
horse for the Clarence, he proceeded to the
Richmond River, and took a draft of horses
for Queensland. This was during the 1864
floods. While mustering the horses all were
reduced to living on maize pounded fine in a
stone mortar and baked in small scones. He
sold a large number of these horses in Ips-
wich, and then took the remainder to War-
wick, passing through Cunningham’s Gap.
From the Gap he first viewed the Darling
Downs, where so much of his life has been
MR. W. B. SLADE.
spent, and the impression then formed was never forgotten. From Warwick he proceeded
past Glengallan, the only fence then on this station was the horse paddock, some of which
is still standing and in use, passing Toowoomba, Rosalie
Plains, Cooyah, Gayndah, and The Prairie, “Morton’s”
(where horses were rested), then, via Gladstone, made the
Dawson, and instead of taking up country on the Barcoo,
owing to the high price of sheep, took over the management
of Cockatoo Creek Station, where he remained four years.
In 1868 Mr. Slade resigned in order to take up land on the
Downs, having been much impressed by the appearance of
Glengallan and the Darling Downs, through which he passed
with horses in 1864. After managing the properties of the
late B. C. Parr, of Chiverton, he bought into partnership with
MR. A. E.. SLADE.
MR. O. C. SLADE.
the late C. H. Marshall, in Glengallan, in 1873. At that date
owing to the drought of 1872, the stud flock and herd only
numbered a few hundreds, and from this small beginning Mr
Slade, as managing partner, built up the stud of pure Merinos
and herd of pure-bred Shorthorns to the large numbers reached
in 1900. In 1904 on the repurchase of the estate by the Go-
vernment, the partnership was dissolved, and Mr. Slade bought
his partner’s share in the studs, and obtained 5000 acres ot
the Glengallan Estate. In addition to this estate, under the
name of East Glengallan, where the best of the stud Glengallan
Merinos and Shorthorns are kept, Mr. Slade owns The Glen, to the south of Warwick, com
prising about 4000 acres, and also formed the Ashgrove property, near Gore on the Ingle
1 i
249
East Glengallan, Ashgrove, Longway, and The Glen Estates, Qugfygsland.


wood railway line, by the purchase of various grazing farms, the area of which aggregates
about 38,000 acres.
Mr. Slade visited England in 1878 with Mrs. Slade, returning by America, railed from
New York to San Francisco, visiting Niagara en route. He again went to Great Britain in
1892, and returned in 1893, spending some months on the Continent. In 19°3 he toured
Japan with his wife and daughter, spending some days at Hongkong going and returning, and
visited Canton and Macao. In 1909 he again journeyed to the Old Country with the family,
and visited the Continent, Norway, Egypt, and India.
Mr. Slade was sworn 111 as a magistrate of Queensland in 1871. He joined the first
cavalry corps raised in Queensland, the head-quarters of which were at Warwick. This
corps was commanded by the late Captain A. C. Heathcote, V.C., an Indian veteran who had
distinguished himself on many occasions at the Siege of Delhi. He was one of the first
members of the Q.I.Z. Cricket Club, formed at Warwick in 1868, and continued to play with
the club until 1907, almost an unbroken period of forty years, captained the team for thirty
years, and during such term he presented the club with a completely fenced cricket ground
in the centre of the town of Warwick, and close to the railway station, and is patron and life
member of the club.
In 1873 Mr. Slade married the youngest daughter of Mr. William Thompson, manager of
Bank of New South Wales, at Warwick. Three children survive this marriage—two sons and
a daughter.
The eldest son, Mr. Oswald Carey Slade, was born in January, 1882, and received his
education at Church of England Grammar School, Armidale, from 1894 to 1899, then pass-
ing to Sydney University, he obtained his B.A. Degree in 1903, and LL.B. in March, 1905,
and was admitted to New South Wales Bar in 1906. He now manages his father’s estates,
which position he took up in 1906, residing at East Glengallan. In January, 1910, he mar-
ried the eldest daughter of the late Dr. Phillips, of Warwick.
Mr. Adrian Ernest Slade, the second son, was born in September, 1887, and also received
his education at Armidale School, from 1899 to 1905. He captained the school first eleven
cricket team during the latter part of his term, and passed the Sydney University Junior Ex-
amination. He had a short experience in a mercantile office, and afterwards joined his
brother at East Glengallan. In 1909 he visited Great Britain and the Continent, Norway,
Egypt, and India, and returning in March, 1911, took charge of Ashgrove Estate and stock,
where he now resides.
Mr. W. B. Slade also organised the first open field coursing on Darling Downs, and when
coursing clubs were formed at Allora and Warwick, provided the ground for the clubs to run
off the various events. Mr. Slade is patron and life member of the Warwick Coursing Club.
He and Mrs. Slade are life members of the Royal Agricultural Society of Queensland, of
which society he acted as President for very many years, but continued absences from the
Downs necessitated his recently retiring from this position. He was associated in the earlier
davs with the Eastern Downs H. and A. Association, acting at one time as President, and
put in many laborious seasons’ work in the interests of the society of which he is now patron.
He gave the ground to build the Church of England at Glengallan, and materially assisted in
its erection. He took a large number of shares in one of the first co-operative dairy com-
panies on the Downs at Allora, and acted as chairman of directors for many years. The
factory was eventually destroyed by fire, but the movement firmly established the commence-
ment of this industry in that part and paved the way for its rapid development, coupled with
the advancement of the surrounding district.
12
250
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Barambah Estate.
The Property of Messrs. Moore & Co.
SITUATED about 170 miles by rail, or 150 by road, from Brisbane, Barambah Station,
in the Burnett district, owned by Messrs. Moore and Co., is probably one of the best
known cattle-fattening properties in Queensland. The railway line to Nanango
makes a half-circle round the run, and Kinbornbi railway station is about 8 miles from the
eastern portion, while Goomeri and Murgon railway stations are each 1 1 miles from the
homestead, and Nanango railway station 19 miles from the southern boundary.
FAR BULLOCKS ON BARAMBAH.
The property was first taken up by Messrs. Ferriter and Jones in 1850 or thereabouts,
and managed by Mr. C. Mason, who, as his tombstone attests, died on the station in 1867.
Thereafter Mr. Jones himself managed the property successfully for some years. Mr.
George Clapperton, at that time the owner of Tarong and Nanango Stations, almost adjoin-
ing, acquired Barambah from Messrs. Ferriter and Jones. On his death in 1874 the sta-
-1
251


tion was sold by auction in Sydney by Messrs. Mort and Co. to Messrs. Hugh and Isaac
Moore at £$ is. per head for the cattle (about 7000 head), 150 horses at £7, 17,920 acres
freehold land at 15s. per acre, and 289 square miles pastoral lease at Crown rental. Dur-
ing 1877 a large area of the lease was resumed, and thrown open for selection, when the late
Mr. Wm. Baynes became a partner. The title of the firm was altered to Moore Bros, and
Baynes, and so continued until Mr. Baynes’ death in 1901. His interests were purchased by
the Moore Bros.
Mr. Isaac Moore managed the property from 1875 to 1900, when he retired from active
life, leaving his sons, Messrs. Hugh and Isaac J. Moore, to manage. The elder, Mr. Hugh
Moore, died in 1909, and the estate has since been managed by Mr. Isaac J. Moore. Both
the original partners, Messrs. Hugh and Isaac Moore, sen., died in 1903, and the title of the
firm has since been altered to Moore and Co.
THE BARAMBAH HOUSE.
When Mr. Isaac Moore, sen., took over the management of Barambah in 1875 it was
practically unimproved. Marsupials were in thousands, brumbies were to be counted by the
score, and the scrubs on the boundaries of the run were infested with ‘'scrubbers,” i.e., wild
cattle. Mr. Moore set a small army to work ringbarking, clearing for cultivation, erecting
buildings, &c. The marsupials, wild cattle, and horses were either trapped or shot out.
To-day marsupials are scarce; the last of the brumbies and scrubbers were wiped out about
1902. When Barambah was purchased it was considered well stocked with 7000 cattle, but
by ringbarking, fencing, and the extermination of pests, the carrying capacity was greath
increased, so that in the nineties 18,000 to 20,000 cattle and a considerable flock of sheep
2
252
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE COW PADDOCK WATERHOLE, BARAMBAH.
253
The Barambah Estate, Queensland.


were depastured. The expense of im-
proving the property was, of course,
tremendous, yet that it was money well
expended is proved by the fact that
country which once would only carry a
beast to 25 acres now fattens a beast
to 6 acres. The extermination of the
pests and subdivision, equally with
ringbarking, did their share in increas-
ing the carrying capabilities of the
country.
All the original lease has been
selected, but Mr. Moore and his sons
added a further 40,000 acres freehold
to the 17,920 acres acquired when the
station was purchased. The area of
YELO.— Maltster—Grafton Lass.
the property is now over 60,000 acres freehold, and about 7 000 acres leased lands, practi-
cally all broad-leafed ironbark country, and highly fattening. Most of the run consists of
high, well-grassed ridges, good appletree creek flats, and well-protected hollows, affording
ample shelter to stock in the winter.
Iwo large creeks—the Barambah and Mondawamba —divide the property, whilst Bar-
ker’s Creek forms the south-western boundary for some 10 miles. All three contain big
MARES AND FOALS ON TYPICAL COUNTRY.
4
permanent water-
holes, well stocked
with fish and black
duck. Since the re-
cords have been kept
—dating back to
1896 —the average
rainfall has been
about 30 in. per an-
num. On the ranges
at the head of the
Barambah and Mon-
dawamba Creeks it
is estimated to reach
40 in. per annum,
consequently these
254
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


FAT BULLOCKS
5
255
The Barambah Estate, Queensland.


A MOB OF HEIFERS.
TYPICAL RICH BLACK SOIL FLATS.
6
256
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


BARAMBAH
Simmer —May Moon. Showing Loose Box.
creeks are flowing about six months out
of the year. Previous to the ringbark-
ing much of the leased country, now all
selected from the property, was badly
watered, but after the country was rung
permanent springs broke out all over the
run. As a general rule cattle rarely
have to walk more than a mile to water.
The earlier fences mostly consisted
of a top rail and two barbed wires, 8 ft.
6 in. panels; but latterly three wires,
centre barbed, top and bottom plain,
posts 24 ft. apart, with two hardwood
droppers between, have been used. For
quiet or fairly quiet cattle this makes
an excellent subdivision fence. The
property is subdivided into thirty-three paddocks, varying in size from 5 000 acres down to
a few hundred.
The present station house was erected in 1905, but many of the buildings surrounding it,
such as the hay sheds, &c., were built years before. The garden produces vegetables and
fruits of various kinds. The grape, peach and pear especially do well.
Practically every acre, a few shade belts of sound mill timber and cattle camps excepted,
was ringbarked years ago.
The country is almost en-
tirely free of suckers and
undergrowth t which have
been kept down by the
cattle, but most of the
dead timber is still stand-
ing. When the spring is
favourable the old glrass
is burned off. This burns
a considerable number of
logs and stumps, and also
clears out disease and
pests to a great extent.
After a good burn ticks
are not nearly as plenti-
ful as otherwise.
CUTTING LUCERNE FOR HAY.
7
257
The Barambah Estate, Queensland.


THE HALL.
THE DRAWING ROOM.
8
258
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


1 TEH LATE MR. HUGH MOORE, SNR.
3 THE LATE MR. HUGH MOORE, JNR.
2 TEH LATE MR. ISAAC MOORE.
4 MR. ISAAC J. MOORE, MANAGER.
9
259
The Barambah Estate, Queensland.


Although ticks and redwater have decimated the herds north of Barambah, and caused
considerable losses south, on the station ticks are scarce, and losses from redwater have been
very small so far. Whenever ticks are noticed in a paddock every beast is mustered and
dipped. The paddocks being small, care is taken that no cattle are missed when mus-
tering, and as a rule they can be mustered, dipped, and returned by sundown. By this
means ticks are prevented from increasing and spreading, and the cattle are not unduly
knocked about.
The natural grasses are sweet, and cattle fatten quicker on them in the summer
months than on the Western Mitchell and blue grasses. A moist winter brings up trefoil
TEH DIP.
and self-sown prairie grass. As the weather becomes hotter these are succeeded by wild
carrot and other herbage, followed in turn by summer grasses of various kinds.
About 40 acres of lucerne, barley, oats, and panicum are cultivated to provide winter
feed for working horses and milking cows. All these crops do well, and just recently a good
crop of Algerian oats was har\ested.
Cattle have always been kept on the run, but from 1880 to 1890 up to 20,000 sheep
were shepherded, and eventually were disposed of.
The first cattle on the property were Shorthorns. A Shorthorn stud was kept, and bulls
from England were frequently imported. But experience proved that the big-framed, thin-
-10
260
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


skinned Shorthorn could
not stand the severe Bur-
nett winter, nor could he,
when the country was un-
improved and badly water-
ed, travel in and out to
water as could the Here-
ford. Where equal num-
bers of each breed have
been paddocked together,
as a rule it has been found
that the Hereford is fit
for market earlier in the
spring. Good Hereford
bulls were introduced into
the Shorthorn herd years
A TYPICAL WORKMAN’S COTTAGE.
ago, and Hereford bulls have been used ever since. The heifers were culled each year, and
all bad colours or inferior cattle speyed. To-day the station fats top the Brisbane market
weekly. The Barambah Hereford has the true Hereford markings and the thick Hereford
hide, which enables him to withstand a severe winter. He shows Shorthorn characteristics
TEH POULTRY YARD.
11
261
The Barambah Estate, Queensland.


THE MEADOW WATER HOLE.
in the breadth of back, the well-rounded hams, small neat horns, and quiet temper. He
lacks the lean flank and light bone noticeable in many Hereford herds. In igi2 a draft of
thirteen bullocks won every prize for which they entered in the Brisbane Exhibition; whilst
for many years previously they have scored heavily in the winning classes.
As before mentioned, only about 7000 cattle were carried when the property was pur-
chased in the seventies on about 200,000 acres. In the nineties 20,000 cattle were carried,
as well as a large flock of sheep, on a lesser area. At present gooo to 10,000 cattle are
carried on about 70,000 acres.
Since the resumption by the Government of the leasehold the owners have gradually
lessened the breeders, and now store cattle are being purchased and fattened for the Brisbane
market. The country carries a beast to 6 acres. About s°°° f a ts are turned off annually,
but now that breeding has been discontinued, A larger number could be turned off yearly.
Good stallions have always been used. One of the first was Jutland, a son of Penman
(imp.). Penman was by Ely, winner of the Ascot and Goodwood Cups, and of the same
descent as Panic. After him came two sons of Archie—Gardez-vous and Sandy MacGregor.
Archie was by Rapidity, son of Tim Whiffler out of Eugenia (imp.), by the English Derby win-
ner Thormanby. The present sire is Basileus, a son of Little Bernie, and blood brother to
Ivan, Czarevitch, &c. There are also on the station at present Barambah, by Simmer—May
Moon; and Yelo, full brother to Kwasind, by Maltster from Grafton Lass. Barambah has
several good performances to his credit, notably the Grantham Stakes, Members’ Handicap,
and third in the Clibborn Stakes (Sydney), whilst in Brisbane he has seldom been out of a
place.
A portion of the estate has recently been subdivided and thrown open for closer settle-
ment, and other portions will in due course be made available.
J 2
262
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Albibah and Murweh Estates
The Albilbah and Murweh Estates
ALBILBAH, the property ot the Exors. late J. I). Macansh, is the home of one of the
oldest stud Merino flocks in Queensland; in fact, the history of this flock has a
place in the history of New South Wales.
It was formed in 1843 by the late John Donald Macansh, in partnership with the late
STUD SHORTHORNS AT ALBILBAH.
Severin Kanute Salting, on Bouyeo Station, on the Cunningham Creek, near Murrumburrah
Mr. Salting, a Dane, was a London merchant of some standing, who came to Australia in
the thirties, and traded in Sydney as Flower, Salting and Co., general merchants. A mem-
ber of this firm was the late John Henry Challis, who retired before Mr. Salting’s death. He
I
263


left a large fortune to the Sydney University. Flower,
Salting and Co.’s premises were on the site now occupied
by the Hunter-street portion of the Union Bank buildings.
The late J. D. Macansh came out about the same time,
and when Mr. Salting purchased Bouyeo, Mr. Macansh
was sent up as manager. Before the end of the forties
Mr. Macansh was taken into partnership on a half share,
and together they purchased other properties which were
known as Beggan Beggan, Cumbarmurra, Demondnlle,
country which at the present time could carry a quarter
of a million sheep. The stud flock was formed in 1845
by the purchase of a few choice ewes from the flocks of
Messrs. Edward Cox and Nelson Lawson, of Mudgee.
TEH LATE MR. J. D. MACANSH.
From 1849 to 1851 only Lawson’s rams were used, but in 1852 rams were imported from
Rambouillet, and they came out with three ewes bred by a farmer in France. Though these
ewes were pure Rambouillets, none of their female progeny went into the flock, as they
seemed to breed only males. After this importation no ram of any other family was used
until 1859, when a pure Spanish Merino ram called Napoleon was imported, and to this ram
the flock derived its present excellent standard of size and constitution. He was a very large
framed sheep, showing the type of the Rambouillet, with a fleece that was tolerablv fine, re-
markably even, and of a true combing character. Napoleon showed great prepotency, and
out of his progeny, which numbered nearly a thousand, old records show that there was not
one indifferent sheep. It should be mentioned that Mr. Salting came of a wool manufac-
turing family, and in his young days he acquired a sound knowledge of the business, which
enabled him to amass a large fortune by woolbuying in connection with his Sydney business.
When he retired he took up his residence in England, and personally selected all the sheep
that were sent out to Australia. On one occasion Mr. Salting saw four rams and some
ewes that were being shipped by a Mr. Donovan from England to Natal, and he was so
taken with them that he purchased one, which was the ram Napoleon above referred to.
Other rams and ewes were imported between 1852 and 1866, all the rams and some of
the ewes being from the Imperial flock of France, and the other pure Merino ewes coming
from French farmers. Among the rams imported three named Rambouillet, Louis Phillip,
and Prince Imperial did good service in building up the flock
Early in 1867 Mr. Macansh, having some time before sold out of Bouyeo, purchased
Curley Station, in the Gwydir district of New South Wales, with Messrs. W. and G. Salting,
sons of his previous partner. Mr. S. K. SaUing was then dead, and his sons consented to
a sale of Bouyeo stud rams and ewes to Mr. Macansh. The imported ewes and their
female descendants were reserved from sale, but Mr. Macansh was allowed to pick any of
2
264
77ie Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE MURWELL HOMESTEAD DARDEN.
the other ewes, and he secured a good lot, numbering about 500. He imported three rams
from Rambouillet, and these formed the foundation of the Gurley flock, from which the Albil-
bah Merinos are directly descended. The three imported rams did not turn out at all well,
but some young rams, the progeny of Louis Phillip and Prince Imperial, did a great deal
towards maintaining
the standard of the
flock.
After the Franco-
Prussian War, Mr.
Macansh endeavoured
to get a further impor-
tation from Rambouil-
let, but was told that
the Germans had eaten
the whole flock during
the war. In 1869 at
the first show held in
Sydney by the Agricul-
tural Society of New
CHASE & FRAZER'S TANK, ALBILBAH.
3
265
The A/bilbah and Murweh Estates, Queensland.


TANK SINKING, ALBLLBAH.
South Wales, the Bouyeo Estate exhibited three ewes, which were awarded the highest
honours. These were bred by Mr. Macansh before he relinquished his management of
Bouyeo, and after the show he succeeded in purchasing them from Mr. David H. Campbell, the
new manager. On their way to Gurley these ewes remained for some time at Mr. Andrew
Coder's Colley Creek
Station, near Quirindi,
and they were mated
with a very fine comb-
ing ram called Broken
Shoulder, bred by Mr.
Coder from a Leth-
bridge ram. Two rams
that resulted from this
mating were very large
sheep, with even fleeces
of long soft combing
wool, and they were ex-
tensively used in the
Gurley stud. One of
MUSTERING ON THE BARCOO.
4
266
iiomes of Australia.


SHORN SHEEP AT THE MURWEH SHED.
them, named No. 2, was sent to Canning Downs, Queensland, which was purchased by Mr.
Macansh in 1875. At nine years old he cut 10 lbs. 8 ozs. of greasy wool, which was a good
weight in those days.
In 1872 Mr. Macansh purchased five rams kom the late Dr. Traill, of Collaroy, but only
one ram proved good enough to use.
After purchasing Canning Downs,
near Warwick, Queensland, in 1875,
Mr. Macansh sold his share of Gurley
to his partners, one of the conditions of
sale being that he should pick 750
ewes and 10 rams from the whole of
the Gurley studs. A portion of this
flock, known as the “Gurleys,” has
been inbred ever since, and is now
run at Murweh Station, another pro-
perty of the executors. They are par-
ticularly good sheep, being very large
ALBILBAH RAM.
first prize in special class for sheep bred within 150 miles of
Longreach, and Reserve Champion of Longreach Show, 1912.
5
267
The Albi/bah and Murweh Estates, Queensland.


ALBILBAH FAT SHEEP AT BRISBANE SHOW, 1912.
framed, even in character, and carrying heavy fleeces of a medium quality combing wool.
There was a small stud ttock of German origin at Canning Downs when Mr. Macansh
took possession, and Gurley rams were used with them and their progeny until 1887, when
the bulk of the stud rams and 300 stud ewes were drowned in a flood. Mr. Macansh was
therefore compelled to purchase a few
stud rams, and he bought three from
Glengallan, one from Talgai, and three
from Tasmania. No other rams were
purchased until 1897, when three Tas-
manian rams, sons of Vice-President,
were purchased in Melbourne. Owing
to the ravages of worms at Canning
Downs in 1 892 and 1 894, the whole of
the studs —over 7000 head —except
eighty ewes, were sent out to Albilbah
Station, on the Barcoo, where the stud
flock has ever since been located. The
eighty ewes (some were extra good
ALBILBAH EWE.
First Prize Longreach Show, 1907 And 1908, 2½ Years Old and over.
ones, but aged, others in lamb, others lame and unfit to travel) that remained at Canning
Downs, with their progeny, were sold in 1897 to Messrs. Macansh, Windeyer and Cadell, of
Deepwater Station, N.S.W 6
268
The Pastoral Homes of Australia .


I he Exors. of the late J. D. Macansh now have three properties, viz., Albilbah, on the
Barcoo; Murweh, on the Warrego River; and Ihundah, near Windorah, Cooper’s Creek. At
Murweh the pure descendants of the old Gurley stud flock are kept, and there, in September,
1911, a pure Gurley ram cut 35 lbs. of wool for a twelve months’ growth, and he was worked
most of the time. Ihe Murweh homestead is situated on the Warrego River, 45 mile's south
of Charleville. The garden is one of the best in the district. Water is laid on to it from a
large tank filled from the river by a pump driven by an oil engine. The house is built
bungalow style, and contains seven rooms and spacious verandahs, all of which are
lighted by acetylene gas. There are numerous outbuildings, a very large stable and machine
shed. Murweh homestead is justly considered to be one of the most up to date in that part
of Queensland.
The woolshed at Murweh is worthy of special note, because the twenty stands of
machines installed there are driven by a Pelton wheel worked by the force of water from the
artesian bore. The bore is 2000 ft. deep, and gives from 3,000,000 to 4,000,000 gallons per
day. It is estimated that the bore would drive 50 stands or more. The bore was sunk and
the shed erected by the present owners, who, with Messrs. Fletcher Bros., of Elmina, were
the fir’st in those parts to harness the bore water. No. 1 bore on Murweh, about 1900 feet
deep with 6-inch casing, was sunk on low land by previous owners years ago, when bore
drains were unknown. The overflow, 1,500,000 gallons a day, made a great lake, covering
an area of about 3000 acres. Several years ago the bore pipe broke off about 3 feet above
the ground, and the present owners consulted engineers, with the result that they decided
to capture all this great flow of water by erecting over the broken pipe a box of Baltic pine
planks clamped together with bolts and nuts. From this they carried all the water away in
a 6-in. pipe to a site about 6 feet higher and 300 yards away. Open bore drains carry the water
a beautiful clear stream —away to the west and north of west to a distance of 16 miles
crow fly, but about 40 miles of curves,
bends, and twists, some of them quite
doubling back In this manner the
water goes through four large pad-
docks which can now be subdivided.
The survey work in connection with
these drain's was done by Mr. H. Yadg
(pronounced Yacks), a Dane, who has
carried out a lot of excellent work in
the district. He kept the water in
these drains almost level, there being
only a fall of 6 inches to the mile.
The accompanying illustration
shows the wooden box with scaffold
ALBILBAH EWE.
First Prize, Longreach Show, 1912 2½ year old and over
7
269
The Albilbah and Murweh Estates, Queensland.


THE MIRWEH WOOL SHED. VIEW OF BORE
poles, &c., and a large lake of water. This has all disappeared, and the wooden box is now
covered with concrete cement, which gives it the appearance of a huge white ants’ nest. The
water in the lake ha's vanished, and instead of being a boggy death trap for animals there
now exists a vast plain of dead trees and soda, without a vestige of grass, making the place
SHED OF MITCHELL GRESS, ALBILBAH.
Stud Maiden Ewes in Foreground.
8
very weird looking.
At Albilbah the
main stud flock is situ-
ated. The sheep have
a long established re-
putation for good cut-
ting and hardiness, and
the conditions under
which they are reared
fit them for the hot, dry
districts of Australia. At
the 19 1 i shearing 1603
stud ewe weaners cut
an average of 5.36 lbs.,
4633 2-tooth maiden
ewes 8.36 lbs., 3313
6-tooth stud ewes 10.3
270
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


271
The Albilbah and Merweh Estates, Queensland,


lbs., 3533 aged stud ewes 9.77 lbs., 105 stud rams 2-tooth to aged 18.1 lbs., 1167 rams
(including 139 shorn by machines in Mayprevious) 15-64 lbs. In all, 63,224 sheep were
shorn at Albilbah in 1911, and the total average was 8.88 lbs. This includes 14,5 1 5 weaners
and lambs, and rams with from six to nine months’ wool on. In January, IQI2, after an
exceptionally severe season, 1171 rams, including 237 shorn by machines in May previous,
averaged lbs. At the general shearing in this year 56,566 sheep were shorn, includ-
ing 10,456 weaners, and the whole flock averaged 8.07 lbs. Considering the hard condi-
tions under which the sheep are run, in the way of heat and scarcity of water (in some cases
there is only salt water)
these weights are re-
markably good. The
year was very dry, the
wool very light, the wet
season having failed
altogether. Albilbah
fat wethers have a wide
reputation for size and
weight. It is on record
that 3100 6 - tooth
wethers, after travel-
ling 100 miles on the
hoof to the railway, and
400 miles by rail to
THE PELTON WHEEL AT THE MURWEH SHED, DRIVING SHEARING MACHINERY.
1 o
NO. 1 BORE AND LAKE AT MURWEH.
Rockhampton, weighed
52 lbs. when dressed.
Albilbah is situated
on the Bar coo River, 30
miles below Isisford,
and 90 miles from the
central railway at Ilfra-
combe.
The country is prin-
cipally timbered with
gidyea, interspersed
with patches of more
open boree country. A
few sand ridges occur,
timbered principally
272
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


with dead finish, sandalwood, whitewood, vinetree, and leopard wood. The soil is principally
of a reddish colour, except on the Barcoo frontage, where a grey chocolate exists. With
tae exception of the frontage the country is very stony, principally red gidyea stones, with a
few outcrops of sandstone. A few high hills are found on the south-east end. but they are
rough and of a scrubby nature, and the grasses on them scattered and poor. Mulga grows
on the tops of these hills, which are fairly level, being of tableland formation. A few springs
al so head in these mountains, but they are small, and have to be piped a long way down on
to more level ground. The average rainfall is about 13 in., the bulk of which falls, or is sup-
posed to fall, during
the wet season—from
January to April.
Apart from the
river frontage, the
natural water is not of
much import. There
are numerous creeks,
but they have not any
big holes in them. A
few last from four to
six mo'nths. The best
holes on the frontage
are in the outside chan-
nels of the river, which
TYPICAL COUNTRY.
are filled when the river is in a fair flood. These holes last from twelve to eighteen months,
and an odd one or two are permanent. The back country is watered by tanks, dams, sub-
artesian bores, and wells.
Until recently all water conservation was by means of ring tanks, averaging from 8000
yards to 26,000 yards, and generally from 18 to 21 ft. deep. These are fenced in, and a
windmill supplies the water to two 20,000-gallon galvanised iron tanks. About 100 yards
of troughing are laid on to each tank, and the troughs are always kept full by self-acting
ball taps. The tanks are made by ploughs and scoops and horses and bullocks. The
bullocks generally do the ploughing. A tank costs from about Bd. to is. per yard, gravel
and stone being often met with. One very good well is equipped with windmill and horse-
works, and lately six sub-artesian bore's have been put down, and stock water struck,
at an average depth of about 55'-* ft., and which rises to about 100 ft. from the sur-
face. Some of these have been equipped with windmills and large storage tanks and
troughing, but as yet have not had the test of a hot summer. The water as a rule is
brackish, but in two instances it appears to be almost fresh. When pumped the water
1 I
273
The Albilbah and Murweh Estates, Queensland.


generally stands at 200 to 250 ft. from the surface, and rises again quickly when pumping
ceases.
Ihe run is enclosed with rabbit netting fence, and is also bisected by a similar fence, and
subdivided into numerous paddocks by six-wire and five-wire fences. Most of the fences
are six-wire, 12-ft. panels, strainers every 88 yards, or twenty to the mile. Altogether
there are forty-five paddocks on Albilbah, nine being over 20 miles in area, two being be-
tween to and 20 miles, and the balance smaller, for horse paddocks and stud purposes.
There are about 170 miles of six-wire fencing, about 12 miles of five-wire fencing, and 92
miles of rabbit netting, and 8 miles of marsupial netting existing at present on Albilbah.
The marsupial pest is now a thing of the past; dingoes are not very prevalent, but the blow-
fly seems as if it had come to stay.
The grass is principally Mitchell, and, except on the frontage, of the curly variety. The
coarser species, or bull Mitchell, predominates on the frontage country. Umbrella, star,
blue, and other grasses also exist, and if winter rains fall, the usual herbages grow, such as
crowfoot, pig weed, mustard, and carrot.
Shearing generally takes place in April and May, and lambing in July and August, the
lambs being shorn at general shearing as weaners. The rams for use in the ewes are shorn
by hand in January, and joined off shears.
In conclusion, it should be pointed out that the Macansh Merinos have been bred on
consistent lines from the middle of the forties until the present day. The late J. D.
Macansh never deviated from the big-framed, plain-bodied sheep, and always looked out for
a strong constitution, and culled to the fattening paddock any sheep that looked delicate
His successors have followed on the same lines, with the result that they now possess about
10,000 stud ewes and 20,000 flock ewes, all pure Macansh blood, being nearly as good as
the studs.
I 2
274
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Eurella Estate.
The property of Mr. Donald Fletcher.
S HUAI ED between Mitchell and Roma on the Queensland south-western railway line
is Eurella Station, the property of Mr. Donald Fletcher.
The estate occupies a fine site, comprising about 80,000 acres of downs and gently
undulating country splendidly suitable for sheep-raising, and which gives excellent results.
It was originally taken up by a Mr. Hunter in the early days of Queensland settlement, and
passed through the hands of various owners. At one time Sir Thomas Mcllwraith owned it,
MOB OF HOGGETS ON EURELLA.
and from him it passed to Messrs. Menzies, Dunsmore and Co., and in 1907 it was pur-
chased by Mr. Fletcher.
Well grassed with blue grass, Mitchell, and the natural grasses of the district, Eurella
is an ideal pastoral property. The boundaries of the estate are all wire netted, and the
whole property is subdivided into thirty-three paddocks. A fine supply of water is obtained
1
275


2
276
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


NO. 2 BORE—DAILY FLOW, 120,000 GALLONS.
-1
0
277
The Eurella Estate, Queensland.


from three bores. Water was struck in the first bore at 1700 ft., in the second at 2700 ft., and
in the third at 3000 ft.
The railway line goes right through the property, and the Eurella Railway Station is
located on the estate, about four miles from the homestead.
The Eurella flock consists of 68,000 pure Merinos of the Uardry and Haddon Rig strains,
and which is renewed from time to time. Mr. Eletcher has a very good stud, which he keeps
for use in his flock. The lambing starts in November, the percentage being about 75. So
STATION TEAM WITH WOOL FOR THE RAILWAY.
far very little trouble has been experienced with the fly, although in some parts of the dis-
trict the pest has reached serious dimensions. Shearing starts about September, and the wool
is sold in Brisbane at a good figure.
The woolshed, which is new, is up-to-date, and spacious, being built of wood and iron,
and contains sixteen stands of shearing machines driven by a io-h.p. steam engine. The
homestead is constructed of wood, and has a wide verandah running all round it.
Mr. Fletcher runs a small milking herd on Eurella, and breeds a few horses. The stallion
he uses is a fine Clydesdale imported from New Zealand.
4
278
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


DISTANT VIEW OF MTS. BINDANGO AND BINDEGGO.
STATION TEAM LEAVING EURELLA.
5
279
The Eurel/a Estate, Queensland.


SHORN SHEEP IN PADDOCK.
STATION HANDS' NEW QUARTERS."
6
280
The Pastoral Homes of Australia ,


SHEARERS’ KITCHEN AND QUARTERS.
LOADING WOOL.
7
281
The Eurella Estate, Queensland.


MR. DONALD FLETCHER.
MR. PETER FLETCHER.
(Personal.
Mr. Fletcher was born in Argyleshire, Scot-
land, in 1849, an d came with his parents to
Australia when a lad. After completing his
education he gained pastoral experience on his
uncle’s property in Victoria. He then entered
into partnership with his brother, and worked
a station named Glenglesson, near McArthur,
in Victoria. Upon the dissolution of this part-
MR. MILES FLETCHER.
nership in 1877, he went to Queensland, where
he purchased Dalmally, a property about 20
miles from Roma, consisting of 24,000 acres.
He retained possession of Dalmally till 1908,
when he sold it, and confined his attention to
his other property, Eurella.
Mr. Fletcher has always taken an active
part in furthering the interests of his district,
8
282
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


NO. I STUD PADDOCK.
TANK IN PADDOCK.
9
283
The Eurella Estate, Queensland.


MR. PETER FLETCHER AND MR. MILES FLETCHER
MANAGER’S HOUSE,
io
284
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


EURKLLA RAILWAY SIDING.
11
285
The Eurella Estate, Queensland.


MANAGER, CLERK AND STUDENTS ON EURELLA.
and has been a strong advocate for everything that made for progress and development.
As a member of the Roma District Council he has had many opportunities of assisting in im-
proving that portion of Queensland. He is a member of the council of the Agricultural
Society, and in that capacity has done excdlen t work for the past thirty years. He is a
Justice of the Peace for the territory of Queensland.
Mr. Fletcher married in 1884 Miss Norah Johnston, who died in 1892. In 1896 he
married Miss Georgina Watt, a daughter of the late Mr. Alexander Watt, of Parramatta, New
South Wales. There are three sons of the first marriage, who are engaged with Mr. Fletcher
in the management of Eurella.
12
286
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Berley, Aeedlewood, Rankania, Chorby, Oakleigh
Park, Yanburra, Forrester and Dunrobin Estates,
Queensland, and Woodlands Stud Farm, A. S. W.
The Property of Mr. E. G. Blume.
QUEENSLAND is essentially the land of big pastoral holdings, and the history of those
holdings is one of deep interest to those who have watched the development of
sheep and cattle raising in Australia. Bexley, Needlewood, Kankania, ihorby,
Oakleigh Park, Yanburra, Forrester, and Dunrobin, formerly owned by various pastoralists,
but now the property of Mr. E. G. Blume, are typical Queensland stations.
Bexley first came into the possession of Mr E. G. Blume in 1890. Ihe property was
originally a portion of Bowen Downs, and when first acquired comprised 40,000 acres. In
1898 Mr. Blume purchased Needlewood, comprising about 40,000 acres, situated on lower
A MOB OF FLOCK RAMS ON YANBURRA.
Hill Creek, midway between Muttaburra and Prairie, and adjoining Rockwood, Tower Hill,
and Caledonia Stations. In 1899 he purchased Kankania, a property of 20,000 acres, located
about 40 miles from Wmton, and adjoining Vindex and Darr River Downs. In 1907 Mr.
Blume purchased another property, Thorby, comprising 19,000 acres of resumed por-
tion of Bowen Downs. Thorby is situated about 13 miles from Muttaburra, and has
a frontage to the Thompson River. He made a further purchase in
I
287


ARRIVAL OF COACH AT THE NEEDLEWOOD HOMESTEAD.
HEAVY DRAUGHT MARES AND FILLIES AT YANBURRA.
2
288
The Pastoral Homes of Australia


A DISTANT VIEW OF THE BEXLEY HOMESTEAD.
THE YANBURRA BORE, SHOWING DRAINS RUNNING IN THREE DIRECTIONS.
3
289
Bexley, Needlewood, Kankania, Thorby, Oakleigh Park, Yanburra, and Dunrobin Estates, Q'land.


CATTLE WATERING ON THE THOMPSON RIVER, YANBURRA.
4
290
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THOROUGHBRED HORSES. WATERING AT BEXLEY DAM.
1908, when he acquired Oakleigh Park, a property containing 17,000 acres of freehold, situ-
ated about 40 miles from Toowoomba and 6 miles from the Bowenville Railway Station. Oak-
leigh Park has a double frontage to Oakey Creek, and is considered to be one of the best areas
of farming land on the
Darling Downs. Good
water in large quanti-
ties has been struck on
this property at from 50
to 70 ft. in wells put
down by Mr. Blume. In
1909 Mr. Blume pur-
chased Yanburra, a pro-
perty containing 40,000
acres, situated on the
Thompson River, and
adjoining Bexley. In
addition to Bexley and
Yanburra he holds three
DRAUGHT MARE AND FOAL, BEXLEY.
5
291
Bexley, Needlewood, Kankania, Thorby, Oaklcigh Park, Yanburra, and Dunrobin Estates, Q’land,


6
292
The Pastoral Homes of Australia


HOMESTEAD BUILDINGS AT WOODLANDS.
RICH ALLUVIAL FLATS ON WOODLANDS, HUNTER RIVER, N.S.W.
THE WOODLANDS HOMESTEAD.
293
Bexley, Needlewood, Ka.nka.nia, Thorby, Oakleigh Park, Yanburra, and Dunrobin Estates, Q’land.


adjoining agricultural
farms, which make a
compact property of
about 100,000 acres.
On these properties
there is a magnificent
supply of water, de-
rived from two good
flowing bores and from
numerous dams, and
the permanent water of
the Thompson River.
In igio Mr. Blume
purchased Dunrobin,
comprising an area of
SHORTHORN BULL, ROYAL BRILLIANT.
257 square miles, about 50 miles from Aramac and 70 miles from Jericho. The stock on
this property consists of about 5500 cattle and 150 high-class draught horses. Dunrobin is
being subdivided into sheep-proof fenced paddocks, and it is Mr. Blume’s intention to stock
it with 50,000 sheep, and remove the cattle to Forrester, a recently-purchased property on
the Belyando River. Forrester is located about 1 1 miles from Dunrobin, and contains about
205 square miles. The water supply of this property is exceptionally good, and is obtained
from the Belyando River, Sandy Creek, and Lake De Galle, a fine sheet of water situated on
the run. This lake,
which is 2\ miles in
length, has a depth of
more than 28 ft.
Mr. Blume commenc-
ed stocking Bexley by
purchasing ewes from
Darr River Downs,
Stainburn Downs, Ky-
nuna, and East Talgai.
At Bexley and Yan-
burra, besides the ordi-
nary flock, there is a
stud flock. Mr. Blume
purchased the whole of
SHORTHORN BULL, ROYAL CALEDONIA.
8
294
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


MOB OF 2400 BEXLEY CATTLE EN ROUTE FOR DUNROBIN.
9
295
Bexley, Needlewood, Kankania, Thorby, Oakloigh Park, Yanburra, and Dunrobin Estates, Q’land.


SATELLITE, Bron Mare, by out of marama. Winner of seven races in
succession in Brisbane. Bred by Mr. E. G. Blume.
Mr. Fairfax’s Dalmore
Stud, representing some
very high-priced ani-
mals. He has also pur-
chased largely from Mr.
Slade, of Glengallan,
and at the Sydney
Sheep Sales, and has
always had a leaning
towards Wanganella
blood plain - bodied
sheep.
Mr. Blame has also a
stud herd of Shorthorn
cattle, additions to
which have been made by purchases of first-class Dalmore (Victoria) bulls, Angas (South
Australia) bulls, and Lyndhurst (Queensland) bulls.
He has also a stud of thoroughbred horses, and has owned such well-known sires as
Martini-Henry, Marvel, Downfall, and Zodiac, all since dead, and has now Bonnie Prince, by
Lochiel from Majesty, by Trenton, and Flying Machine, by Ayr Laddie, from Mersey’s
Daughter, by Trenton; also Matador, Sundial, and All Trumps, the latter by Abundance from
Turquoise. In addition to the thoroughbred stud, Mr. Blume goes in largely for the breeding
of draught horses, and
has six stallions in use
on his various stations.
He is about to purchase
two more high-class
sires.
Mr. Blume shears up-
wards of 130,000
sheep, and the wool al-
ways finds a ready
buyer, commanding a
very high price, both
scoured and in the
grease. The Brisbane
buyers go out to the
DRAUGHT MAKES AND FOALS.
IO
296
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


MRS. E. G. BLUME.
At Oakleigh Park there are about 100 stud
cows, and on Bexley about 200. The bulls
in use at present are Royal Brilliant, Royal
Caledonia, Duke of Bapton, and Bonnie Lad,
and others, sons of these bulls.
IPersonal.
Mr. Edward Goddard Blume was born at
Mount Gambler, South Australia, in 1865,
and is a son of Mr. C. A. Blume, a shrewd
business man, and an early pioneer of Mount
Gambler and Victoria, who acquired much
landed property in Victoria and South Aus-
tralia. Mr. Blume was educated at Hamil-
ton, Victoria, and having been born into the
pastoral industry, as it were, his young ex-
perience amongst stock has stood him in
good stead. Nothing is better than good
and early practical experience. At the age
station to buy fat sheep, and it can be said
without fear of contradiction that some of
the primest fat stock in Australia comes off
Mr. Blume’s properties, both from Central
Queensland and Darling Downs. He has
had a wide experience in the sheep and wool
industry, his father having taken a share in
pastoral pursuits in Victoria and South Aus-
tralia, which enabled him to give his son a
thorough grounding in the elements of that
industry. The shearing is done by con-
tract, going on practically all the year
round. Scouring is carried on at the same
time, and lambing, like the shearing, is not
confined to any fixed period, but is spread
over the year. Up to a few years ago Mr.
Blume sent his wool to Sydney, but since
1908 he has sold in Brisbane.
MR. E. G. BLUME.
I I
297
Bexley, Need/ewood, Kankania , Thorby, Oakleigh Park, Yanburra, and Dunrobin Estates, Q’land•


MASTER JOHN C. BLUME.
MASTER EDWARD C. BLUME.
of about eighteen he had full charge of a
sheep station for his father. A few years
later he wanted to go in for wool-growing,
and thought Queensland the most promis-
ing place to go to, as there was plenty of
room for expansion and good country beg-
ging. He therefore set out by himself at
MISS FLORENCE B. C. BLUME
the end of 1889 for Brisbane. From in-
formation he obtained there he decided to
go to the Mitchell district. Arriving at Bar-
caldine, then the terminus of the Central
Queensland railway, he took coach to Ara-
mac, then on to Muttaburra, and from this
12
298
The Pastoral Homes of Australia


STANLEY HALL, ASCOT, BRISBANE, MR. E. G. BLUME’S PRIVATE RESIDENCE.
>3
299
Bexley, Needlewood, Kankania, Thorby, Oakleigh Park, Yanburra, anti Dunrobin Estates, Q’land.


place he set out to in-
spect much of the re-
sumed portion of Bowen
Downs. That inspec-
tion resulted in his
choosing Bexley for
himself, and Camoola
Park for his brother.
He has never since re-
gretted going to
Queensland and sett-
ling where he did. Mr.
Blume lost very heavily
in the drought of 1900
LADY MEDALLIST, Winner of ,£10,376 in stakes.
—viz., 35,000 sheep and a lot of horses and cattle, and he had to agist country, cut scrub,
and buy fodder.
As an owner of racehorses he is especially well known, the colours of black jacket,
white sleeves and red cap having been well to the fore for many years on the turf; and his
mare Lady Medallist won the Craven Plate, 1911; won Caulfield Cup, 1911; second in Met-
ropolitan Handicap, 1911; won October Stakes, 1912; won Eclipse Stakes, 1912; 2nd Caul-
field Cup, 1912. He was himself a good amateur rider, and as such took part in numerous
picnic races. On one occasion at Longreach he established a record by winning all the
races on the programme-all the flat races on his own horses, and the other, a hurdle race,
on a horse he trained
and rode for a friend.
His many interests
of necessity make him
a very busy man, and
he has little time to de-
vote to public affairs in
a practical way. His
town residence at Bris-
bane is situated at As-
cot, overlooking the
Eagle Farm Race-
course, and the view
embraces the river and
Moreton Bay. The
ST. SAVIN (imp.), by st. Simon.
‘4
300
The Pastoral Homos of Australia


house, or Stanley Hall,
as it is called, stands in
12f acres of ground.
Mr. Blume also owns a
seaside property —Mor-
ven —at Sandgate, for-
merly the residence of
one of the early (Gov-
ernors, which is consid-
ered to be the pick of
the residential sites in
that locality. He mar-
ried in 1899, Florence
Lucy, daughter of Mr.
THOROUGHBRED MARE, ORA BAILEY (imp.), by Hanover.
E. F. Craven, Roma, Queensland, and his family consists of two sons and one daughter.
Mr. Blume has recently acquired as a thoroughbred stud farm, the well-known property
Woodlands, situated on the banks of the Upper Hunter, and adjoining several other large
breeding studs.
The place is specially adapted for Mr. Blume’s purpose, for it is not only one of the
richest and soundest bits of country in the State, but it has long been noted for the produc-
tion of good sound horses, no less a turf celebrity than P; ns, a dual Caulfield Cup winner,
among other first-class horses, having been bred there.
Mr. Blume, as a result of his extensive breeding operations at Bexley, had got together
a stud of very high-class mares, and wanting a high-class horse to mate these with, pur-
chased the imported St. Simon horse St. Savin at the disposal sale of the St. James Stud last
March, for the sum of 3,000 guineas. St. Savin, who was a good performer on the English
turf, is bred in a similar way to the great Persimmon, both being sons of St. Simon out of
mares by Hampton. It is certain at the present time in England that it would not be pos-
sible to purchase a son of St. Simon possessing the individuality that St. Savin does for any-
thing like the sum that Mr. Blume gave for the horse. St. Savin is already represented in the
English winning sires’ list, having got two winners of good races from the few mares put to
the horse by his late owner, Mr. Arthur James, before being sold to go to America. Mr.
Blume, being of the opinion that a stallion requires time to acclimatize, and come to his full
powers before being asked to take up arduous stud duties, wisely fixed St. Savin’s service
fee at 100 guineas for last season, so that his list of visiting mares should be a choice, and
not a large one. In spite of the high fee, outside breeders liberally patronized the horse,
such mares as Sweet Alice (dam of Charles Stuart), Ringlet (full sister to the flying Armlet),
Amera (dam of Malthusian), Lancaster Rose, Acrasia (Melbourne Cup winner), and some
*5
301
Bexley, Needlewood, Kankania, Thorby, Oakleigh Park, Yanburra, and Ounrobin Estates, Q’land.


beautiful mares belonging to Mr. McGill, the breeder of Fitz Grafton, being sent to him. Next
season St. Savin’s fee will be probably fixed at 50 guineas, at which figure he must be
accounted an exceedingly cheap sire.
Mr. Blume has some beautiful mares at Woodlands, among them being such well-bred
and good individuals as Ora Bailey (imp.), one of the finest daughters of the successful Han-
over at the stud, Marvelette (18), and Essie (18), daughters of the flying miler Marvel,Lady-
like by Martini Henri, Alma Dufour, Gowrie, Lady Wilgamere, Lady Woodlawn, Windfall,
Heiress, and other equally high-class mares.
Among the mares at present in training destined in the near future to join the ranks of the
stud matrons at Woodlands are: Lady Medallist (1), one of the best mares in Australia;
Llaunt, by Challenger (imp.)—Andalusite (imp.), Gold Clasp (5), by Llavus (imp.)—Gold Grip,
and consequently an own sister to Llavimus; and Malt Lily, by Malster from Lilymea—all of
whom were bought by Mr. Blume with regard to the stud as well as racing value. With
regard to Lady Medallist, the following is a list of her performances since she was purchased
by Mr. Blume:—
At syrs.
First, Rosehill Rydalmere Mile £lOO
Second, A.J.C. Aletropolitan 500
Won, A.J.C. Craven Plate 1531
Third, Caulfield Stakes 50
Won, Caulfield Cup 2500
Second, Rosehill Rawson Stakes 35
Second, Doncaster Handicap 300
Second, A.J.C. All-aged Stakes 400
At 6yrs.
First, V.R.C. October Stakes (approxi-
mately) 270
First, V.A.T.C. Eclipse Stakes 500
Second, Caulfield Cup 500
Total £6686
In New Zealand Lady Medaldst won £3590,
which, with the £lOO for third place in the
A.J.C. Autumn Stakes before going into her
present ownership, brings her total earnings
during her career up to £10,376 —an excellent
record for a 90gs. yearling.
i 6
302
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Mount Marlow
and other Queensland Properties
of Mr. Edmund Jowett
A DESCRIPTION of Air. Edmund Jowett’s pastoral operations in Queensland throws a
very interesting light upon the way a great deal of that large territory is worked, and
it is also a tribute to men like Mr. Jowett, who have gone far out back and have
converted unimproved places into good sheep and cattle stations. There have been, and still
are, great risks attached to such ventures, but these risks only make the pursuit more fascinating
to both the principals and the onlookers, especially when the industry is carried on single-
handed on such a vast scale as it is by Air. Jowett.
BUNDA BUNDA HOMESTEAD
It is well to mention a feature of Mr. Jowett’s investments in Queensland, namely, that
almost without exception he has purchased properties with very little stock or improvements,
and has improved and stocked them himself.
Mr. Jowett took up pastoral work in Queensland twenty-eight years ago by the pur-
chase, in 18(86, of Kynuna and Helkate Stations, then an area of about 1000 square miles,
situated half-way between Winton and Cloncurry. The property was then owned by Messrs.
I
303


A. K. Finlay and Co., and the price paid was £15,000. Kynuna then carried about 12,000
sheep, but Mr. Jewett at once went in for improvements, which have cost to date over £70,000,
and the result is that though the estate had been reduced in area to 668 square miles, it carried
in 1912 about 120,000 sheep. The improvements, which are typical of those required for breaking
in Queensland grazing country, included nine large dams, seven artesian bores, subdivision into
thirty-three sheep paddocks, erection of wool-shed with forty stands, also a scouring plant
which put through 220 bales per week. In 1912 this plant turned out 4213 bales of scoured
wool. It is one of the largest and most complete in the Commonwealth, and has since been
removed to Yorkshire Downs, about 8 miles from Quarrell's Siding on the North Queensland
Railway line.
The next Queensland purchase made by Mr. Jowett was in 1899, when he bought
Ouambetook Station, then an area of 167 square miles, situated between Kynuna and Rich-
mond, but since reduced by selection to 125 square miles. It was then unstocked, but there
was a good cattle fence round it, also a bore. It cost £12,000, and Mr. Jowett stocked it with
sheep from Kynuna. Ouambetook in 1913 carried about 40,000 sheep.
In [902, the great drought year, when he went out to Camooweal seeking grass, Mr.
Jow'ett purchased Flora Downs, an area of 400 square miles. It carried very good grass, but
had no improvements. He immediately put a bore down, and as luck would have it struck a
supply almost the very moment a large mob of sheep from Kynuna arrived on the property.
Mr. Jowett subsequently in 1908 bought Yelvertoft Station, immediately adjoining Flora Downs,
consisting of 300 square miles. Four years later a boring plant was placed on Flora Downs
under contract to put down six more sub-artesian bores on this group, namely Flora Downs.
Yelvertoft and Chad. This group consists of 1280 square miles, and is being stocked with
Shorthorn cattle from the Bunda Bun-da herd.
Mr. Jowett’s next purchase was in 1905, when he bought Barcoorah Station, near
Aramac, comprising an area of about 200 square miles, since reduced by selection to about
150 miles. Barcoorah was then very slightly improved and had on it only about 4.500 sheep
and 300 cattle. It is now very fully improved, and in 1913 carried about 40,000 sheep and about
300 Stud Shorthorn cattle. Barcoorah Station is watered by Lake Barcoorah and by a number
of sub-artesian bores, the water being lifted by windmills. In the same year Mr. Jowett also
purchased Eastmere, about 30 miles from Barcoorah, further in towards Clermont. Eastmere
has proved a very valuable property, and at the time of writing carries about 45,000 sheep.
Since 1905 Mr. Jowett has acquired several adjoining leases, viz.: Labona, Doongmabulla,
Shuttleworth. Langlands, Finnigan, Tungi and Mount Tutah. These, with Eastmere and Bar-
coorah, have a total area of 1463 square miles. The whole of this group in 1913 carried
about 130,000 sheep. 8,000 cattle and 600 horses.
Despite these extensive purchases, Mr. Jowett launched out still further in 1905. and
purchased Mount Marlow Station, an area of about 1000 square miles, on the Barcoo, near
Isisford. This property was also minus stock and improvements, but Mr. Jowett put down
several very extensive dams, sub-artesian bores, pumped by windmills, and a very large number
of other improvements. Mount Marlow has a double frontage of 30 miles to the Barcoo and
1
304
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


SAWYER'S WATER HOLE, MOUNT MARLOW, WILD DUCKS IN THE FOREGROUND.
.5
305
Mount Marlow, Queensland


several large and permanent waterholes. The country is a mixture of well grassed plains and
belts of gidea scrub and scrub-covered ridges, bounded by a line of isolated low mountains. At
the present time the improvements on Mount Marlow are very extensive, a large tank-sinking
plant owned by Mr. Jowett having been at work for some years. This dam-making plant,
comprising Macmaster's patent scoops and about 100 draught horses, has already made three
very large and deep excavations on Mount Marlow, and several more are contemplated.
In addition to this a boring plant, owned by Mr. Jowett, has put down nine sub-artesian
bores on Mount Marlow, the water from most of which is pumped by windmills. The boring
plant is still at work putting down more bores. The principal grasses are Mitchell, blue and
Flinders, with the usual summer grasses and herbage. The property carries about 100,000
sheep at the present time, and in 1908 Air. Jowett made the unique sale of 40,000 fat wethers
in one line to the Gladstone Meat Works, all fattened at Mount Marlow.
Mount Marlow Station, however, though it is splendid fattening country, is, in Air. Jowett’s
opinion, still better fitted for breeding sheep. It is, therefore, now principally stocked with
breeding ewes.
At Alount Alarlow Air. Jowett is concentrating the whole of his valuable stud flock, consisting
of about 10,000 Alerino Stud Ewes, principally of Wanganella blood. This stud flock was com-
menced at Kynuna Station in 1887, when Air. Jowett purchased a large number of cast for age
ewes and heavy cutting Alerino rams from the Deniliquin and Hay districts of Riverina.
In 1894 he purchased from Alessrs. Austin and Alillear 21 picked Stud rams bred in
their Wanganella Double Stud flock. These 21 Stud rams were mostly by the celebrated sires
“Premier IV.” (1272) and “Warrior IV.” (1339). They proved remarkably successful sires,
and a large number of stud ewes and flock rams were bred from them.
Numerous further purchases of stud rams and stud ewes have since been made from
both Air. Albert Austin’s Wanganella Station arid from Air. Thomas AI illear s Wanganella
Estate, and very large numbers of flock rams have also been purchased from other stud
flocks of pure Wanganella blood.
In 1908 the whole of the stud flock was removed from Kynuna and divided between
Manningham and Alount Alarlow, and Mr. Jowett has now decided to concentrate them all at
Alount Alarlow Station. The number of stud ewes now consists of about 10,000. and in order to
accentuate as far as possible the Wanganella type, which is already dominant in his stud flock,
Air. Jowett purchases every year about 50 pure Wanganella stud rams, the greatest care being
taken to select the large framed, long stapled specimens of that blood.
In 1908 Mr. Jowett went after more country, and purchased Bunda Bunda. an area of
587 square miles, near Richmond. His attention was drawn to this property because when there
in the 1902 drought he found magnificent grass when there was no feed anywhere south of
the Flinders. In fact, he estimated that the property could easily have carried 100,000 sheep
during that dry period. The property was purchased from Alessrs. Burns and Johnstone for
£50,000, and it was then stocked with 20.000 sheep and it,ooo head of cattle.
4
306
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE LILY HOLE, MOUNT MARLOW.
5
307
Mount Marlow, Queensland


Later on Mr. Jowett acquired nine leases in the Forest country to the north of Bunda.
These new leases comprise 2129 square miles of what has proved to be splendid cattle-breeding
country. Mr. Jowett has already put down 6 flowing bores on it, and is erecting a considerable
amount of fencing. A new head station has been established in this Forest country, and the
whole property is now named Pontefract.
The Bunda Lease itself is now being entirely devoted to sheep—of which it carried in
1913 about 70,000 —and all the Bunda herd of cattle is being removed to Pontefract, which it
is estimated will carry about 40,000 head of cattle when the artesian bores and fences are
completed. In 1913 these leases carried about 17,000 cattle and 360 horses.
The next large purchase was made at the end of 1908, when Vergemont, an area of 1200
square miles, near Longreach, was purchased from Mr. Thomas Field, with between 8000 and
CATTLE IN LAKE GALILEE, EASTMERE STATION.
Qcoo cattle and 300 horses. It has 70 miles double frontage to the Vergemont Creek, which
provides a splendid supply of water. Mr. Jowett has since improved the property very exten-
sively for sheep, and water is obtained from wells at various depths.
Subsequently Mr. Jowett acquired a very large area of country to the west of Vergemont.
in both the Mitchell and North Gregory districts. These consist of twelve leases aggregating
2762 square miles in all, including Vergemont itself. They are all being gradualy improved
under the Vergemont management, and are being each lightly stocked with breeding cattle.
Vergemont itself is now mainly devoted to sheep, but the whole group in 1913 carried about
50,000 sheep and 16,c00 head of cattle.
6
308
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


It would require a man of more
than ordinary capacity to control the
immense properties held by Mr. Jow-
ett up to this time, but his enterprise
had not yet reached its limit. In
1910 he purchased Palparara, un-
stocked, from Mr. S. Kidman. This
property comprises 2566 square miles
on Farrar’s Creek, west of Long-
reach. It is mostly beautifully open
country, and is being stocked up with
cattle, the number at the time of
writing being about 11,000 head and
150 horses. Since purchasing it Mr.
Jowett has gone full steam ahead with
improvements on Palparara. He im-
mediately put together a large dam-
making plant, which has been continu-
ously at work, and there are now 4
very large, dams on the property. A
good deal of the country has also been
fenced in for sheep, there already
MR. JOWETT'S BOOKPLATE.
being several large sheep proof paddocks there, but so far no sheep have yet been sent there.
In December, 1910, Mr. Jowett purchased a very valuable freehold estate called Wyobie,
on the Darling Downs, near Dalby. Wyobie consists of about 12,000 acres, and was bought
without stock, and is being principally used for fattening wethers bred on Mr. Jowett’s Western
properties. On Wyobie and on rented country adjacent about 32,000 sheep are kept.
About three years ago Mr. Jowett bought the whole of the celebrated Jimbour Stud herd
of Shorthorn cattle, and now carries them on Wyobie. The bulls bred in this stud are used
at Fairylands, Palparara and Vergemont.
In 1911 Mr. Jowett bought Foxborough Station, with a frontage to the Moonie River be-
tween St. George and Goondiwindi. This property was entirely unimproved, and had to be
surrounded with an expensive dog proof fence. Also prickly pear had to be eradicated and a
considerable area ringbarked. Several dams had also to be made in the back country. Fox-
borough consists of 139 square miles, and has proved itself to be splendid sheep country. In
1913 it carried 40,000 sheep.
Early in 1913 he purchased Westbank Station, consisting of 505 square miles of country
to the west of Cloncurry, together with 5000 head of Shorthorn cattle and 50 horses. West-
bank immediately adjoins his Glcnroy property.
7
309
Mount Marlow, Queensland


In 1913 he also bought three small cattle stations near Chinchilla, namely, Fairyland,
Canaga, and Stockyard Creek. These three stations carry about 2000 head of cattle.
In 1912 Mr. Jowett sold Kynuna Station with 120,000 sheep and 300 horses, but he still
retains all his other properties. Besides those mentioned above are several properties in course
or development, viz.: —
Armraynald and Floraville, near Burketown, 102 S square miles of country, with about
2000 head of cattle and 130 horses. Blairathol, on the Cape River, 316 square miles, with about
1000 cattle and 30 horses. Batheaston, between Clermont and St. Lawrence, 617 square miles,
and 4000 cattle and 75 horses. Glenroy, between Camooweal and Cloncurry, 824 square miles,
and 3000 cattle and 37 horses. Rutland, near Springsure, 127 square miles, and 2300 cattle and
100 horses. Drunimondslope, near Alpha, 273 square miles, and 2000 fattening bullocks and 20
horses. Mount Howitt, on Cooper’s Creek, 1297 square miles, which carries 9000 bullocks of
fattening ages. Berrimpa, 152 square miles, near Jundah, which carries about 15,000 sheep.
The mere mention of Mr. Jowett’s extensive properties has taken up too much space to
allow of any detailed description of them. Every property he handles he knocks into shape, and
works in a practical manner. He has not bought for speculation purposes. At the present
time, 19[4, he holds about 16,725 square miles of leasehold, 395 square miles of occupation
license and 12,000 acres of freehold. He has owned at one time as many as 600.000 sheep, and
in conjunction with property held by his wife, at the present time runs about 600,000 sheep.
85,000 cattle, and 3000 horses.
Nearly all Mr. Jowett’s cattle are Shorthorns, there being fine stud herds of that breed
on Barcoorah and Wyobie, and nearly all his sheep are pure Merinos of the Wanganella strain
of blood.
personal.
Mr. Edmund Jowett is descended from a very old Yorkshire family, who have been land-
lords in that county for many centuries. As the name was originally spelt Jouet, the family
has always been understood to be of Norman origin. For instance, in the Coucher book of
Kirkstall Abbey is the record of a plea in the reign of Edward HI., in 1364, between the Abbot
of Kirkstall and John, the son of Thomas Jouet, of Derthyngton (now Harrington) as to ser-
vices due regarding John Jouet's property at Derthyngton. From the fourteenth to the sixteenth
century the name was variously spelt Jouet, Jouett, Jouette, and finally Jowett. The definite
records of Mr. Edmund Jowett’s branch of the family go back to the reign of Henry VIII.,
when in 1545 Edward Jowett was a landholder at Idlethorpe, in the Parish of Calverley, was
a seatholder in the Calverley Parish Church, and was also a Cloth Merchant of Leeds. Later he
held from Sir Ingram Clifford a lease dated 1568 of a tenement and lands at Idlethorpe called
Southroydes, Thorpe Garth, Nether Garth, Faltis, Brownroyd, Hangingroyd, Southflatts, High-
field and Idlaw. The line of descent flows from Edward through his son William, born at
Calverley in 1577, and his son William, born in 1612. This William Jowett (1612) was twice
married, his first wife being Maria Starkey, and his second wife being Dorothy Murgatroyd, of
Greenhills, near Bingley. By his second wife this William (1612-1680) was the father of John
Jowett (1646) of Allerton, and also of Nathan (1650-1739), who was the ancestor of the
Clockhouse Jowetts.
8
310
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Nathan’s son Samuel (1693-1774) acquired in 1743 the celebrated Clockhouse Estate.
Dying unmarried, he bequeathed it to his nephew, Nathan Jowett (1732-1789), from whom
it eventually came to Sarah Jowett (1803-1840). She died unmarried, and left it to her first
cousin, George Baron, the only surviving descendant of Nathan Jowett. Fourteen years later
George Baron died unmarried, and desiring that all the great possessions which had come to
him from the Jowetts should go back to that family, he by his will left the Clockhouse and his
other Estates to the heir male of Nathan Atkinson, whose mother was a Jowett of Clockhouse,
on condition that he assumed the name of Jowett in addition to his own.
The heir was discovered in the person of Nathan Atkinson (1790-1861), of Bolton, who
took the surname of Jowett by Royal license.
Some slight obscurity in the wording of the will encouraged a claimant of another branch
of the Jowett family to dispute the title. The will had left the Estates to the heir male of
Nathan Atkinson, whose mother was a Jowett, of Clockhouse. It was contended on behalf of
the plaintiff—one Joseph Jowett —that Susanna (1690-1771), the mother of Nathan Atkinson
(1726-1782), although born a Jowett, was never a Jowett of Clockhouse, because her brother
Samuel Jowett, had purchased the Clockhouse Estate, in 1743, when she was 53 years old, and
there was no evidence to show that she had ever lived there or had ever anything to do with it.
In the first suit the claimant, Joseph Jowett, was unsuccessful, whereupon in 1857 he applied to
the Lord Chancellor and Lords Justice to vary the Chief Clerk’s second certificate, but this
was again refused. Finally Joseph Jowett appealed to the House of Lords, who, however,
dismissed the appeal, and Nathan Atkinson Jowett was established in possession. The estate
was a very valuable one, consisting of Town property at Manningham and Bradford, and also
145 farms, with a very large rent roll.
William Jowett (1612-1680) was also the father of John Jowett, of Allerton, born 1646.
John married Ann Stead, of Stead Fould, Barkerend, and was the father of Henry, born 1686;
John, born 1697, and Benjamin, born 1698. Henry Jowett lived for some time at Alanningham.
Yorkshire, and then settled at Camberwell, near London. He was the ancestor of several emin-
ent Divines and Scholars. His son Henry (1719-1801) had four sons, of which Joseph (1752-
1813) and Henry (1756-1830) became distinguished Churchmen, while John (1743-1800) and
Benjamin (1754-1837) were the fathers of great Churchmen.
Joseph Jowett (1752-1813) was admitted to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1769, when
17 years old. Four years later he migrated to Trinity Hall. In 1775 he was elected Principal
Tutor at Trinity Hall, and in 1782 was appointed Regius Professor of Civil Law. He remained
Principal Tutor at Trinity Hall until 1795, when he accepted the Vicarage of Wethersfield, in
Essex. It was of him that Wrangham wrote the well known Epigram:
“A little garden little Jowett made.
And fenced it with a little palisade;
But when this little garden made a little talk,
He changed it to a little gravel walk.
If you would know the mind of little Jowett,
This little garden doth a little show it.”
This is in reference to a garden laid out by Jowett in the angle between the two divisions
of the east front of his College (Trinity Hall).
9
311
Mount Marlow/, Queensland


Joseph’s younger brother, Henry Jowett
(1756-1830), was also a distinguished divine.
After passing several years as Lecturer and
Tutor at Magdalene College, Cambridge, he be-
came the Rector of Little Dunham, Norfolk, in
1792. He is described as a faithful pastor, a
tutor of young men, a keen lover of music, and
an active and observant traveller. He assisted
in starting the Norfolk branch of the Bible
Society, and is known to have been the founder
of the first of many Clerical Societies. He was
a genial parish priest, who, upon occasion, as at
the Peace of 1814, knew how to organise a
village festival, with dancing, &c.
Their eldest brother John (1743-1800),
though not himself in Holy Orders, became the
father of several eminent divines. One of
these, John, was the Rector of Hartfield, and
MR. ARTHUR CRAVEN JOWETT.
held for a time an evening lectureship at Clap ham. Another son, Joseph, became the Rector
of Silk \\ illonghby, and applied the musical skill which he inherited to the composition of
hymn tunes, which were much appreciated by
persons of religious feeling and fine taste. His
Musae Solitariae, a Collection of Original Melo-
dies, adapted to various measures of Psalms
and Hymns (4th Edition, 1826), was much
valued by James Martineau, and used in his
family and congregation in connection with his
own selected hymns.
A third son was William (1787-1855). He
was twelfth wrangler at Cambridge, 1810, a
Fellow of St. John’s, and the first Cambridge
graduate who volunteeered for the Foreign
Service of the Church Missionary Society. He
was a great missionary in the Mediterranean
from 1815-1820. He ended his days in the
Rectory of Chapham Rise, where he succeeded
his friend, John Venn, as Incumbent in 1851,
and died in 1855.
MR. ERIC CRAVEN JOWETT.
I 0
312
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


MR. EDMUND JOWETT.
11
313
Mount Marlow, Queensland


But one of the most renowned scholars and theologians that modern England has pro-
duced remains to be dealt with, namely, the Rev. Dr. Benjamin Jowett, the great Master of
Balliol College, Oxford, from 1870 until his death in 1893. lie was the son of Benjamin
Jowett, of Camberwell (1788-1859), whose father, Benjamin Jowett (1754-1837), married his
cousin, Anne Jowett of York. Her father, Henry Jowett, was Sheriff of York in 1784-5, and
owned an estate at Birtswith and Telliscliffe, in the Forest of Knaresborough. d his Henry
Jowett’s father was the Benjamin Jowett (born 1698) referred to earlier.
Benjamin Jowett —the future master of Balliol —was born in 1817, and in 1829 was ad-
mitted to St. Paul’s School, London. He was placed high on entrance, and rose rapidly in the
school. In his nineteenth year, 1836, when he was head of St. Paul’s School, he won an open
Scholarship at Balliol College, Oxford. In 1838 he gained a Fellowship, and he graduated with
first class honours in 1839. In 1855 he became Regius Professor of Greek. Fifteen years later
he became the Master of Balliol. a post which he retained with distinguished success until his
death in 1893. Of him the Encyclopaedia Brittanica says:—
“If ever there was a beneficient despotism it was Jowett's rule as Master
Meanwhile the tutorships in the other colleges at Oxford, and some of the
also, were being filled with Balliol men, and Jowett’s former pupils were prominent in
both Houses of Parliament and at the Bar.’’
And of his general influence upon the mind of the nineteenth century the same authority
writes: —
“Theologian, tutor, university reformer, a great master of a college, Jowett’s best
claim to the remembrance of succeeding generations was his greatness as a moral teacher.
Many of the most prominent Englishmen of the day were his pupils, and owed much of
what they were to his precept and example, his penetrative sympathy, his insistent
criticism and his unwearying friendship.”
It was of him that the following epigram was satirically written: —
“I am the Reverend Benjamin Jowett,
I am the Master of Balliol College;
Whatever there is to know, I know it,
And what 1 don’t know is not knowledge.”
John [owett, of Allerton (1646), had (in addition to Henry, 1686, and Benjamin, 1698)
another son, namely, John, who was born at Calverley in 1697. John's son Edmund was born at
Thornton in 1737. He married Hannah Robertshaw in 1767, and died in 1777.
His son loseph was born at Thornton in 1772, and died in his ninety-first year, in 1862.
Joseph, who married Mary Hill, was a landholder, and also a Worsted Manufacturer in Bradford.
Early in his career he employed hand loom weavers, and later on he was one of the first manu-
facturers to introduce power-looms. Joseph, though himself an only son, had a large family,
and his descendants are numerous. His son Edmund (1792-1869) of Manningham Old Hall, was a
Worsted Manufacturer, and also a Worsted Spinner and Wool-stapler on a large scale. He married
in 1821 Elizabeth Hargreaves, the daughter of Robert Hargreaves, of Shipley Hall. They had
eight sons, among whom was Joseph, born 1824. Joseph Jowett, who was a large Worsted
1 2
314
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Spinner, and who owned Waterloo Mills, Bradford, married in 1847 Sara, the daughter of Jonas
C raven, of 1 hornton. Jonas Craven and his partner, Mr. Harrop, were large manufacturers
employing hand-loom weavers in the old days, but when steam was introduced they built Dole
Mill, at I hornton. where they employed a large number of hands for very many years. Sara
Craven’s mother was Deborah, a daughter of Francis Drake, of Black Carr, and granddaughter
of brands Drake, of Horley Green Hall, near Halifax.
Joseph Jowett (1824-1905) and his wife Sara had a very large family, of whom Edmund,
the subject of this sketch, was the fifth son. Edmund Jowett was born at Manningham, Yorkshire,
in 1858, and was educated at a private boarding school at Clapham Common, near London, kept by
Mr. James Ward, an establishment of very high repute in the sixties and seventies. Among the
A TRINTY COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE EIGHT ON THE CAM, MR. ARTHUR CRAVEN JOWETT
great scholars turned out by Mr. Ward was Mr. James Knowles, the founder and first Editor of
the Nineteenth Century. Kir. Jowett’s schoolfellows have since become distinguished in the
House of Lords and the House of Commons, and in other responsible positions in the literary
and political world of Great Britain.
After leaving school Mr. Jowett was brought up in the wool trade by his relatives in
Yorkshire, and arrived in Australia at eighteen years of age, when he entered the wool trade in
Melbourne. Mr. Jowett was married in 1883 to Annette Rose, the daughter of John McCallum.
a well known Melbourne Merchant and Pastoralist, who owned Brymedura and Bumble Stations,
near Molong, N.S.W.
'3
315
Mount Marlow, Queensland


MANNINGHAM—MR. EDMUND JOWETT’S RESIDENCE AT TOORAK, MELBOURNE.
'4
316
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A CORNER OF THE MANMNGHAM GARDEN.
i 5
317
Mount Marlow, Queensland


Mr. Jowett’s family consists of three daughters and two sons. II is eldest daughter.
Dorothy, was married in 1912 to Mr. James Stanley Hurston, the eldest son of Colonel James
Hurston, of Hawthorn, who was Lord Mayor of Melbourne from November, 1908, to November,
1910.
His second daughter, Nancy, was married in 1910 to Mr. Ronald Vanneck Powell, of the
Cambridge Eyot, near Dalby, Queensland, and of Escrick, Undera, in the Goulburn \ alley,
Victoria. Mr. Powell’s father is a cousin of General Sir Robert Baden-Powell, of Mafeking
fame, and Mr. Powell’s uncle, Mr. David Powell, was a Deputy Governor of the Bank of
England in 1889. Mr. Powell’s younger brother, Mr. Eric Walter Powell, is a Master
at Eton College. He won the Diamond Sculls at Henley (England) in 1912. Both Mr. Ronald
and Mr. Eric Powell were one after the other Captains of the Boats at Eton, and afterwards
Presidents of the Cambridge University Boating Club. Mr. Ronald V. Powell has two children,
Clive Walter Edmund, born December 28. 1911, and Annette Mary, born December Ist. 1913.
Mr. Jowett’s third and youngest daughter, Marjorie, was married in January, 1913. to
Mr. Clive Prell Fairbairn, of Calimo Station, near Deniliquin. N.S.W., where they reside. They
have one child, George Anthony Fairbairn, born on March 6th, 1914. Mr. Clive Fairbairn
is the son of Mr. George Fairbairn, of Dunraven, Toorak. Greenlaw; Mount Martha, Peak
Downs, Magenta and Wolfang Stations, near Clermont. Queensland, Barcaldine Downs, in the
Central District, and Bimerah Station, near Longreach, Queensland. ATr. George Fairbairn
represented Toorak in the State House of Victoria from 1902 to 1905, and represented Fawk-
ner in the Australian Commonwealth House of Representatives from 1906 to 1913.
Mr. George Fairbairn is a nephew of Principal Patrick Fairbairn (1805-1874), the great
Scotch Scholar and Divine. In 1853, he was Professor of Divinity at the Aberdeen University,
and in 1856 he became Principal of the Glasgow Free Church College. He was also one of the
company for revising the Old Testament.
Mr. and Mrs. Edmund Jowett’s home is at Manningham, Albany Road, Toorak, near
Melbourne. Mr. Jowett is a member of the Melbourne Club. Melbourne; Australian Club.
Melbourne; and the Queensland Club, Brisbane. He is also the Vice-President and a playing
member of the South Yarra Lawn Tennis Club, and a member of the Melbourne Polo Club,
and a playing member of the Melbourne Royal Tennis Club. He is a Justice of the Peace for
the State of Queensland.
Mr. Jowett’s elder son. Mr. Arthur Craven Jowett, born 1889, is at present at Trinity
College, Cambridge. He has rowed for two years in one of the Trinity College Eights, and in
1913 won the Club Sculls at the Lents. He is a member of the Bath Club, London, and is
also a Justice of the Peace for the State of Queensland.
Mr. Jowett’s younger son. Mr. Eric Craven Jowett, born 1892, was until latelv an Under
graduate at Trinity College, Melbourne University. He also is a Justice of the Peace for the
State of Queensland, and is entered for Trinity College, Cambridge.
Both Mr. Arthur and Mr. Eric Jowett were educated at the Church of England Grammer
School, Melbourne. They each became Undergraduates of the Melbourne University, and
were 5 years in residence at Trinity College, Melbourne University. Each of them passed all
the examinations entitling them to obtain the Degree of Mining Engineer.
The Arms of Mr. Jowett’s branch of the family are:—Azure, a lymphad sails furled, or.
flags flying gules, and in chief a decrescent between two mullets in Arch argent. Mantling
azure and or Crest on a wreath of the colours a demi-pegasus, regardant argent, supporting
with the forelegs a staff erect proper flowing therefrom to the dexter a banner gules. Motto.
“Animo ct prudcntia.” Livery; Blue with gold lace and yellow facings.
16
318
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Valley of Lagoons and Lake Lucy
Estates.
The property of Mr. L. O. Micklem.
THE northern parts of Queensland teem with nature’s bounteous favours. Animal and
vegetable life thrive as such things invariably do in tropical climates, and the pas-
torahst whose lot is cast in that portion of Queensland usually finds a satisfactory
response to .his labours in the development and expansion of his herds. Much of the explora-
tory work done in the north* and north-western parts of Queensland was done by the early
A MOB OF ANGORA GOATS.
pioneers, who led the van of pastoral enterprise. Through their efforts the wonderful pro-
ductiveness of the north was proved over and over again, until at the present moment that
portion of Australia is regarded as one of the most valuable cattle-raising pastoral districts
in the Commonwealth.
I
319


THE HOMESTEAD VERANDAH.
THE LAKE IN FRONT OF THE HOMESTEAD
2
320
The Pastoral Homes of AustraliOa


THE VALLEY OF THE LAGOONS HOMESTEAD.
A PANORAMIC VIEW OF THE LAGOONS.
3
321
The Valley of Lagoons and Lake Lucy Estates, Queensland.


MUNDY POCKET, VALLEY OF LAGOONS.
The Valley of Lagoons and Lake Lucy properties, owned by Mr. L. 0. Micklem,
are two cattle stations characteristic of the North Queensland districts, and are
situated about 100 miles due west of Ingham, and 180 miles north-west of
Townsville, on the Burdekin River. The two properties combined have an area
of nearly 1000 square
miles of leasehold
country. They con-
sist of basalt table-
lands, box, and ironbark
ridges and black soil
plains.
The property em-
braces a stretch of
country which was
named Valley of La-
goons in the very early
years by Sir Thomas
Mitchell, the eminent
surveyor and explorer.
THE WINDMILL SUPPLYING HOMESTEAD AND GARDEN.
4
322
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


ONE OF THE LAGOONS.
5
323
The Valley of Lagoons and Lake Lucy Estates, Queensland.


RAPIDS ON THE BURDEKIN
He gave it that name when, crossing the basalt range, he suddenly came upon a panoramic
view which revealed to the eye a valley composed of numerous lagoons.
The stations are exceptionally well watered, and derive an uninterrupted supply from
the Burdekin River,
Wyandotte Creek,
Reedy Brook, Expedi-
tion Creek, etc., ano
numerous lagoons. The
rainfall, which occurs
principally in January,
February, and March,
averages about 27 in.
There is an extinct
volcano on the pro-
perty, the crater of
which has a diameter of
half a mile, with a
depth of about 2500 ft.
BROOD MAKES AND FOALS.
6
324
the Pastoral Homes of Australia.


In the days of its activ-
ity there was a steady
discharge of lava, and
now there is a network
of hardened lava de-
posited all over the run
in lines varying from
200 yards to 800 or
goo. This lava divides
the run into a number
of paddocks, and forms
a natural fencing.
1 hose portions of the
CANDIDATES FOR A PICNIC RACE MEETING
station not separated in this manner are divided with a three-wire fence.
The Valley of Lagoons Station was originally owned by Messrs. Scott Bros, and Dal-
rymple. Later on the Scott Bros, acquired the interest owned by Mr. Dalrymple. In
1896 Messrs. Scott Bros, sold the property to Messrs. Fenwick and Ramsden, who
owned Kangaroo Hills Station. Soon after purchasing the Valley of Lagoons, Messrs.
Fenwick and Ramsden exchanged Kangaroo Hills Station for Lake Lucy, which, with the
Valley of Lagoons, became one property. A couple of years after Mr. Fenwick bought out
his partner, Mr. Ramsden, and in 1906 Mr. Micklem purchased the property from Mr.
Fenwick. For twelve years the station was successfully managed by Mr. C. B. Craig, who
has just retired, and
has been succeeded by
Mr. J. Mackenzie Shaw.
The homestead of the
Valley of Lagoons is
built on a ridge over-
looking a large lake,
and consists of two
houses (constructed of
weatherboard), kitchen,
bachelors’ quarters,
stockmen’s hut, and
black boys’ quarters.
A well-kept garden is
supplied with water by
TYPE OF COUNTRY ON LAKE LUCY.
7
325
The Valley of Lagoons and Lake Lucy Estates, Queensland.


A FINE REACH ON THE BURDEKIN RIVER.
THE OUTSTATION, LAKE LUCY.
8
326
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A MOB OF CATTLE AT ENTRANCE TO CRAIG'S PCCKET VALLEY OF LAGOONS.
a windmill connected with the Burdekin River.
The live stock on the properties consists of about 14,000 Shorthorn cattle, with a cross
of Devon, and 300 horses. A branding of about 4000 cattle takes place each year.
Great interest has al-
ways been taken in
horsebreeding by the
various owners. The
following is a list of
some of the thorough-
bred sires that have
been used on the sta-
tion:—-Vanquish, by
Sir Hercules—Vanish;
Beauclerc, by Yatten-
don —First Tady (imp.);
The Dean, by Yatten-
don—The Nun, by New
Warrior (imp.); Cum-
BLOOD MARES AND FOALS.
9
327
The Valley of Lagoons and Lake Lucy Estates, Queensland.


♦
O
o
o
-1— >
♦ A
ct
ci
m
o
o
o
♦ .
jo
o
r^_
SAN MARTINO (1902).
Martagon
Bend Or
Doncaster
, by Stockwell
Rouge Rose
by Thormanby
'Tiger Lily
Macaroni
by Sweetmeat
Polly Agnes
by The Cure
Santa Maura
St. Simon
Galopin
by Vedette,
out of Flying Dutchman
St. Angela
by King Tom
U
a;
&
Q
"ZI
The Palmer
By Beadsman
E
C3
Jenny Driver
by Buccaneer
berland (imp.), by Mun-
caster--Carpet Slipper,
by Speculum; Gil Bias,
by Trenton Paquita,
by Epigram (imp.);
Rougemont (imp.), by
Exile lE--Kookaburra,
by Glen Arthur; Vulpio
(imp), by Curio —Vul-
picula, by Melton; San
Martino (imp.), by Mar-
tagon —Santa Maura,
by St. Simon.
The last-named, San
Martino, is a fine up-
standing bay horse, and
SAN MARTINO (IMP.)
was imported in 19 11 by Mr. Micklem. He won seven times on the flat and over hurdles
in England, including the Liverpool Handicap Hurdle Race.
His breeding is:—
I o
328
The Pastoral Homes of Australia-


■Personal.
Mr. L. O. Micklem was born in London in
1873, and was educated at Winchester Col-
lege, where he played in the cricket eleven
against Eton. He first came to Queensland in
1894 to get experience on Kangaroo Hills
Station, of which he afterwards became the
owner. In 1906 he purchased the Valley of
Lagoons from Mr. R. L. Fenwick, and two
years afterwards sold Kangaroo Hills to Mr.
C. G. Barnes. Mr. Micklem married in 1903
the youngest daughter of Mr. F. A. Bevan,
chairman of Messrs. Barclay and Co., bankers,
London, and they have one son and one
daughter. They reside chiefly in England, but
make frequent trips to Australia.
MR. L. O. MICKLEM.
SPRING HOLE AT HEAD OF REEDY CREEK, VALLEY OF LAGOONS.
11
329
The Valley of Lagoons and Lake Lucy Estates, Queensland.


THE OWNER, MANAGER AND STAFF.
Mr. Micklem is a
Justice of the Peace
for the territory of
Queensland. He served
in the Boer War with
the 4th Queensland Im-
perial Bushmen Con-
tingent. He is a keen
sportsman, and during
his visits to England
does a lot of fox
hunting and fishing.
A GROUP AT THE BLACKS" CAMP.
1 2
330
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Nappa Merrie Estate
The Property of the Nappa Merrie Company, Limited
NAPPA MERRIE, the property of the Nappa Merrie Pastoral Company, Limited, is
one of the real out-hack stations of Australia, situated on Cooper’s Creek, in the
south-west corner of Queensland. Cooper’s Creek has a large watershed, and its
tributaries include the Thompson, Barcoo, Alice, Aramac, Darr, and Wilson Rivers, besides
innumerable large creeks, which in flood time form quite an inland sea, being in places up
to forty miles wide. After the flood-waters subside, a splendid growth of herbage takes
place, which is very fattening for stock, and some magnificent cattle are turned off for the
AFGHAN CARRIER AND HIS FAVORITE.
different markets. Cooper’s Creek runs into South Australia, and in a big flood empties into
Lake Eyre. Lying back from the frontage there is some splendid downs country, which
grows good wool and fattens well. The nearest post town is Innamincka, in South Aus-
tralia, 30 miles distant. Thargomindah, in Queensland, 200 miles away, is the nearest
telegraph station.
“Fort Wills,” near Nappa Merrie homestead, is the historic spot where Burke, the ex-
plorer, formed his far-out depot on the occasion of his ill-fated trip across the Australian
T
331


STUD SHORTHORNS WATERING.
VIEW OF COOPER’S CREEK FROM THE HOMESTEAD.
2
332
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


TEAM OF DONKEYS CARTIN BUSH TIMBER.
CAMELS CROSSING THE COOPER WITH NAPPA MERRIE WOOL.
3
333
The Nappa Merrie Estate, Queensland.


continent in com-
pany with Wills, King
and Gray in the year
1861.
Mr. John Conrick,
managing director
of the company, is
the only one now liv-
ing in this territory
of those who pion-
eered it. He went
out there in 1872,
taking stock with
THE MANAGER CROSSING THE RIVER IN SMALL FLOOD.
him from Victoria. On Cooper’s Creek there is a large water-hole, called by the blacks
“Nappa Merrie,” and from this the station derives its name. In the Cooper there is an
abundant supply of fish, the principal varieties being bream, perch, and catfish.
The area of Nappa Merrie was originally about 800 square miles, and was worked con-
jointly by Mr. John Conrick and Mr. George Ware. About three years ago, however, Mr.
FLOCK OF SHEEP BEING DRIVEN TO THE NAPPA MERRIE SHEARING SHED.
4
334
The Pastoral Homes of Australia ,


THE WOOLSHED.
VIEW OF COOPER’S CREEK, SHEWING HOMESTEAD.
5
335
The Nappa Merrie Estate, Queensland.


6
336
The Pastoral Homes of Australia .


MR. JOHN CONRICK.
MR. J. W. CONRICK.
Conrick purchased his partner’s interest, and added more country, so that the station now
comprises about 2000 square miles. The country is principally stony downs, well covered
with Mitchell grass. Away from the water there is very little timber, but along the creeks
gums, bloodwood, beefwood, and other timbers flourish. There is also gidgee and mulga
on the station. The climate is a very healthy one, although a bit warm in summer time.
Diseases in stock are practically unknown.
Nearly the whole of the property is fenced. Alongside, for about 50 miles, there runs the
wire-netted boundary fence between Queensland and South Australia. There is also a
MARES AND FOALS.
7
337
The Nappa Merrie Estate, Queensland.


ABORIGINAL NATIVES WOOLPICKING.
8
338
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


STOCKYARDS, SHOWING HOMESTEAD AND BLACKSMITH’S SHOP.
pumped from the river
Apart from Cooper's
draws its water supply
the deepest of which is
there are numerous
the Cooper, which give
water for all require-
Nappa Merrie is
fourteen paddocks,
about 6000 head of
sheep. It would easily
cattle and 40,000
BURKE’S DEPOT, NEAR HOMESTEAD.
Showing remains of Fort Wills—the spot where Burke and Wills returned to after
crossing the continent of Australia, arriving at the depot a few hours after the
relief party had left.
9
check fence, which extends to Thargo-
mindah on the east, and to the State
boundary fence on the west. These
fences are under the supervision of the
Queensland Government, and bound-
ary-riders, each having a length of 30
miles, regularly patrol it and keep it
in repair.
The homestead, which was built by
Mr. Conrick, is a stone structure, situ-
ated in a fine orchard and vegetable
garden. W’ater is laid on, being
by a windmill.
Creek the station
from three good wells,
about 185 ft., and
creeks running into
a plentiful supply of
ments.
divided into about
and it is stocked with
cattle and 16,000
carry 15,000 head of
sheep, and so is very
lightly stocked. The cattle are all of
the Shorthorn strain, and the sheep are
Merinos of South Australian blood.
The Nappa Merrie wool always com-
mands a top price in the markets.
There are about 300 horses on the
run, the chief thoroughbred sire used
being a horse by Mo-styn out of Fid-
alma. Very fine ponies are bred from
a Tam o’ Shanter stallion bred by Mr.
H. Whitehead, of the Western District
of Victoria. The Nappa Merrie ponies
are well known in Sydney, Broken
Hill, and South Australia.
AFGHAN AND CAMELS IN CAMP, READY TO LOAD.
339
The Nappa Merrie Estate, Queensland.


IO
340
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


CATTLE MUSTERING, SHOWING NAPPA BERRIE RANGE IN THE BACKGROUND.
I 1
341
The Nappa Merrie Estate, Queensland.


GENERAL VIEW OF THE STATION BUILDINGS.
IPcrsonal.
Mr. John Conrick was born at Geelong in 1852, and is the eldest son of the late Mr.
Patrick Conrick, of Warrnambool. He was educated at the latter place and at St.
Patrick’s College, Melbourne. After leaving school, he spent some years in a merchant’s
office in Melbourne. He then took up pastoral pursuits, and was quite a young man when
he made the adventurous trip from Victoria right up into Western Queensland. He opened
in 1875 the present stock route from Queensland to Blanchewater, in South Australia, and
travelled for over 200 miles without seeing a white man. In 1885 Mr. Conrick married
Agnes Jane, the fifth daughter of Mr. Joseph Ware, of Minjah, Victoria, and he has four
sons. The eldest, John, assists his father in the management of Nappa Merrie.
I 2
342
The Pastor at Homes of Australia „


The Canowie Estate
Soth Australia
The Property of The Canowie Pastoral Company Ltd.
CANOWIE, the property of The Canowie Pastoral Company Limited, though only 125
miles from Adelaide, represents the “farthest north” of the original group of
Merino stud stations in South Australia.
The property is situated about midway between the railway stations of Hallett and
Jamestown, the homestead nestling in the midst of the ranges running about parallel to and
about 10 miles west of the main north railway. In 1909 the freehold comprised over 68,000
acres, but sales of agricultural lands have reduced the area to about 34,000 acres, and
correspondingly altered the annual shearing tallies from sixty thousand to about thirty-five
thousand.
SUFFOLK MARES AND FOALS.
Canowie is one of the “old time” settlements, the country having filled the eye of pioneer
flockmasters, whose keen foresight and rare judgment have never had to be revised, no
matter how severe the season or how hard the times have proved to land-users in other parts
of the States. Canowie to-day contains some grand agricultural land and well-grassed
range country, having an elevation of over 2000 ft. above sea level. Extremes of climate
meet here, and provide the most natural tests to the flocks. With severe frosts and falls
of snow in winter and heat in summer, the law of the survival of the fittest has a local appli-
cation, thus providing the stud master with a relentless system of selection from lambing
time to maturity. Ihe country is sound and healthy, and stock diseases aie unknown.
T
343


2
344
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


SHEARING IN FULL SWING.
'J
v)
345
The Canowie Estate, South Australia.


4
346
/The Pastoral/ Homes of Australia.


CANOWIE WETHERS AT THE ADELAIDE YARDS.
200 Canowie Wethers averaged 33S. per head, top pice 485., at the Adelaide market, September, 1908.
There is no-
thing approach-
ing a policy of
pampering at
Canowie, neither
housing nor stall-
feeding being
resorted to on any
consideration, all
the stock being
reared under na-
tural conditions
Immediately the
show sheep are shorn they are sent to the highest points of the range, and are kept there
until the March-Apnl rains fall, when they are removed to clean paddocks on a lower level.
There is a small area of plain country in the vicinity of the homestead, of which about 500
acres have been put under lucerne. This fodder grows well without irrigation, and is utilised
for fattening purposes. Farm-bred steers are bought from time to time to eat off the spring
feed. These cattle fatten readily, and are topped off on the lucerne.
The character of the country, the variety and nutritive qualities of the natural herbage
Combine to make Canowie an ideal sheep-breeding and wool-producing area.
Canowie wool is well regarded as one of the features on the Adelaide wool floors, and
each year the brokers who sell it report keen competition and highest market prices.
(The Stub.
This was commenced in 1857, when about 200 ewes were selected from the station
flocks by the then manager, Mr. Thomas Coode, and mated with four imported iNegretti
STUD SHORTHORN CATTLE.
5
347
The Canowie Estate, South Australia.


SELECTED FLOCK WEW HOGGETS.
STUD EWES, MIXED AGES.
6
348
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


CANOWIE STUD WWES, YEARS OLD.
STUD RAMS DAVID, DANIEL AND CRONJE.
David, 1st ,& Champion, Adelaide, 1910; Duiel, sold for 550 guineas; Crouje 1st & Champion, Adelaide, 1911.
7
349
The Canowie Estate, South Australia.


CRONJE, CAHMPION RAM, ADELAIDE, 1911.
DAVID, 2-YEAR OLD CHAMPION RAM, ADELAIDE, 1910.
PRIZE SUFFOLK STALLION, WEDGEWOOD’S PRIDE (IMP.)
8
350
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


rams, which were used for two seasons only. Then five Rambouillet rams were imported,
and mated in 1859, the special stud then numbering 700. The advantages derived from
the latter importation are highly satisfactory. One of these French rams, specially prepo-
tent, was retained in the stud till twelve years old, and his last fleece weighed 13 lbs. The
Rambouillets supplied large frames and excellent combing wool, with long staple of bold
type.
Since 1864 all rams used in the stud were produced within the stud until 1906, when
the now famous Donald Dinnie was purchased by the directors of the company on the re-
commendation of their manager at a cost of 1200 guineas. The stud now numbers 7500
breeding ewes.
In 1875 Canowie sheep were exhibited at the Australian Sheep-breeders’ Show in Mel-
bourne, and notwithstanding the severe test of travelling such a long distance by waggon,
sea, and train, necessitated by the Victorian quarantine regulations, they occupied pro-
minent positions on the prize list. When submitted to auction, the consignment of twenty-
three averaged 150 guineas per head. This consignment of rams by the Canowie proprietors
was the first introduction ot South Australian stud rams to Victorian, New South Wales,
and Queensland pastoralists, and has been the means of opening up a great market for
South Australian rams, they being highly appreciated in the neighbouring States. Later
on consignments of Canowie stud stock were forwarded to Sydney and Brisbane with equally
satisfactory results.
In 1882 the sale of Canowie rams totalled no less than .£24,000 for the twelve months.
Scouring tests applied to leading South Australian wools supply the most convincing
testimony to the high yielding qualities of the Canowie flock, as its exhibits always occupy
a very prominent
position in the
prize schedule.
In 1906,
shortly after Mr.
McDonald, the
present manager,
was appointed,
Donald Dinnie
was purchased,
the object being
to introduce more
body and density
to the covering,
without undue
PRIZE SUFFOLK STALLION, WEDGEWOOD’S PRIDE (IMP.)
9
351
The Canowie Estate, South Australia.


Born 1904. “ DONALD DINME” at Canowie, 1907. Price, 1.200 Guineas.
1907 Sired 11 5 lambs. Cut fleece, 33lb. 8ozs. Live weight, 258lbs. 1910 Sired 199 lambs. Cut fleece, 33lb. Live weight, 257lbs.
1908 ,, 192 ,, ,, 33lb. 80zs. ,, 248lbs. 1911 ,, 153 ,, 30lbs ,, 246lbs.
1909 ,, 193 ,, ,, 32ls.80zs. ,, 260lbs. Has served 200 ewes to drop 1912.
Time of service : 8 weeks following 15th October, each year.
I o
352
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


sacrifice of the staple. This ram was mated with pure-bred Canowie ewes of similar spinning
quality, but of lighter condition (55 per cent, to 57 per cent, yield), longer in staple, and
more pronounced in character and lustre, of super bo’s to 64’s quality. So far as the
Canowie ewes were concerned, the manager considered there was little to be gained in
character and brightness of the wool.
Ihe manager, whose acquaintance with the Canowie flock goes back to the eighties,
was so impressed with certain characteristics of the South Australian Merino, that he put
it on record at the time Donald Dinnie was purchased that he intended to keep the best of
the Canowie flock absolutely pure, and breed them up from within. This policy has been
carried out by aid of wire-netting paddocks and separate ear-marks. The result obtained
by the introduction of the Stud Park ram has fully justified the judgment displayed. Donald
Dinnie has stamped his characteristics on his progeny into the third generation, but the
general improvement in the Canowie-Dinnie infusion is not confined to that flock. The pure
1½ YEAR OLD STUD RAMS.
Canowie flock has also been moved up to a higher level, and the manager has a very fine lot of
direct descendants of the original stud.
After an absence of a few years from the show ground, where their exhibits always
occupied a high position, Canowie was again represented at the Royal Show of Adelaide in
iqio, and once more Canowie representatives came to the front as prize-winners, winning
champion for ram, and first, second, and third in under two-and-a-half-year-old rams, and
other honours in every class exhibited. Success on that occasion was quite eclipsed, how-
ever, at the Royal Show in September, igii,when the sheep exhibited took champion for
ram, supplied the runner-up for champion, and all the first prizes in all ages for rams, and
a full measure of prizes in other classes. This constitutes a record for the Royal Show. It
was a fine win, and the company have been warmly congratulated on the triumphant vindi-
cation of the policy inaugurated since the present manager took charge. There is a strong
and increasing demand for Canowie rams from all parts of Australasia and South Africa, and
individual rams are selling from 100 to 300 guineas, and in one instance 550 guineas was
paid for the second prize two-year-old ram of 1910. The policy of the management is not
11
353
The Canowie Estate, South Australia.


to attempt to unduly increase the available supply without steadily raising the standard of
all-round quality also.
The characteristics of the Canowie breed are large frames, straight, broad back, deep-
bodied sheep, with strong, hardy constitutions, able to travel long distances to water, and
hustle for food in dry regions. They have good fronts, carry bulky, profitable fleeces of over
q-in. staple of good character, fair density, bright, and of about 6o’s to 64’s quality.
©ther Stoch.
There are very few wethers kept on Canowie except for advertising purposes. These
are generally sent to the Adelaide market during Show week as “fats,” topping the market,
and always realising special prices. Canowie wethers, in September, iqii, averaged 265.
per head in the saleyards. Similar consignments have brought 335. and up to 48s. per
head. The surplus wethers are sent to the company’s saltbush property, Curnamona, in the
north-east, comprising 750 square miles, over which the Canowie manager has the super-
vision. The average lambing at Canowie is about 88 per cent.
About 500 to 600 head of cattle are run on Canowie, and about 300 horses, amongst
them being a select stud of Shorthorn cattle and a fine stud of handsome Suffolk Punch
horses.
IPcrsonaL
Messrs Sanders, James and Co. purchased the property in 1869, since which date it has
been managed by Messrs. H. and F. Rymill on behalf of the proprietors, who mostly reside
in England. In 1894 the holders converted their interests into a limited company, Messrs.
H. and F. Rymill continuing their supervision of the property, Mr. Frank Rymill being manag-
ing director. Recently he transferred these duties to his nephew, Mr. Arthur Rymill, upon
the latter’s appointment to a seat on the board, Mr. Frank Rymill relinquishing the active
administration of the affairs of the company, but retaining his seat as chairman of the board
of directors.
Mr. A. J. McDonald is station manager, and the policy of the company is to lean greatly
on the advice of the “man on the spot,” who is not only a practical flockmaster, but is excep-
tionally gifted with that intuitive genius which is essential for a stud breeder. He was born
in the South-east of South Australia, his father owning Glen Roy Station. He was born and
bred among Merinos, and as a boy took a keen interest in studs and shows. After gaining
practical experience he classed wool, including the Canowie clip, twenty years before he took
over the control. For thirteen years he was managing for the Beltana Pastoral Company,
and subsequently was four years manager for Captain Chirnside at Werribee, Victoria.
Mr. McDonald regards his experiences in the arid regions of the north and western
border 01 Queensland as the most valued demonstration of the right class of sheep required
on commercial lines for what will always remain the great wool and mutton producing areas
of the Commonwealth.
I 2
354
Tho Pastoral Homos of Australia.


The Gums Estate
The Property of Messrs, Thomes H. Pearse & Son
THE Gums, the property of Messrs. Thomas H. Pearse & Son, is situated about 30 miles
east of Burra, and comprises 80,000 acres of salt and blue bush country. Though
lightly timbered, there is a considerable quantity of sandalwood on the property,
which has at times proved most useful. During one heavy drought—that of 1891-2 —3000
lambing ewes were kept alive by feeding them on sandalwood. Spear grass, barley grass,
native prairie grass, wild oats, and geranium prove an excellent variety of feed. The Burra
Creek runs for seven miles through The Gums, and the estate is, in addition, well watered
by dams and wells, and Mr. Pearse is so well satisfied with the possibilities of obtaining
STUD EWES.
a sub-artesian supply that he is putting down bores in various parts of the property,
and doing so wholly at his own expense without any Government assistance. In addition to
these improvements, practically the whole of the estate has been enclosed with vermin-proof
fencing at a cost running into thousands.
Mr. Pearse is not afraid to undertake large expenditure in the improvement of coun-
try if circumstances appear to warrant it. He considers that the grandest thing that ever
happened for the eastern country was the passing of the perpetual lease with right of
purchase laws, for this has been the means of settling this country by allowing pastoral-
I
355


THE HOMESTEAD.
THE HOMESTEAD, SHEARING SHED AND (QUARTERS.
2
356
The Pastoral Homes of Australia .


ists to effect costly improvements without fear of ultimate resumption, for the district,
admirably adapted as it is for woolgrowing, is absolutely unsuited for farming, except in
exceptional seasons. So disastrous have farming operations proved in the past that the
attempt has been practically abandoned. Mr. Pearse bought out no less than thirty-
three farmers in the district, and it is a fact fully demonstrated by experience that, were
it not for men of his stamp, this outside country would be given over entirely to the rabbit.
The flocks on Ihe Gums may be said to have originated only during the past decade,
for during the first few years of his ownership of the estate Mr. Pearse continued with
the sheep taken over with the property, but having become impressed with the possibili-
GARDEN AT HEAD STATION.
ties of stud breeding, he determined to establish a stud flock on a somewhat large scale.
With this object in view, all the sheep on the place were, with characteristic thorough-
ness, cleared off, and a large number of Petherton ewes purchased, these sheep being of
pure Canowie blood, with which Mr. Pearse used Koonoona and Murray rams, bought at the
same time. Since these first purchases were made no outside blood has been used beyond
an interchange of sires between Caroona and Grasville Stations, held by Mr. Pearse’s
3
357
The Gums Estate, South Australia.


DAIRY CATTLE, AT THE GUMS.
4
358
The Pastoral Homes of Australia .


MR. T. H. PEARSE.
MR. N. H. PEARSE.
sons, and The Gums. In this Mr. Pearse is endeavouring to follow the course so long carried
out by the Murray family in the production of their famous studs. Like the Murray sheep,
too, the stud flock at The Gums are fed on natural herbage only, and are not housed or
artificially treated in any manner. The object Mr. Pearse has had in mind since he founded
the stud has been to obtain a large-framed, strong-constitutioned sheep, with large well-folded
necks, well covered on the points, and carrying a long-stapled bold wool, with plenty of
character, and having a nice dark tip—a sheep which, in his opinion, will prove an ideal
animal for the saltbush country. He has already made great strides towards attaining this
end, for he is able to report the average clip as about 12 lbs. per grown sheep The highest
cut yet obtained from a stud ram has been 30 lbs.. with which ram and two ewes
Mr. Pearse won a cup at the 1905 Burra Show for salt-bush grown sheep. The highest
cut from a stud ewe has been 24 lbs. In addition to these exceptionally good weights, the
MR. R. W. PEARSE
MR. H. L. PEARSE.
5
359
The Gums Estate, South Australia.


2½ YEAR OLD STUD EWE.
3½ YEAR OLD STUD EWE.
6
360
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


owner of The Gums two shearings ago
cut i lbs. of wool per head from 150
2-tooth stud ewes, which realised gid.
per lb. in an ordinary market, and last
season, which was a light one at The
Gums, 200 stud ewes cut an average of
i6h lbs., while 52 stud ewe lambs re-
turned 6 lbs., and 50 stud ram lambs
/lbs. each. Mr. Pearse finds that the
tendency of wool grown in the east-
ern country is to run to too great fine-
ness, with consequent loss of boldness
SPECIAL STUD RAM, YEARS OLD.
of character. This he is endeavouring to counteract, and in doing so finds it an advantage to
rely mainly on strong, bold-woolled sires of Koonoona and Murray type. Though The
STUD POLLED ANGUS CATTLE.
Gums stud has not been largely ad-
vertised, the quality of the sheep is
becoming known, and many inquiries
are being received for rams, especi-
ally from the river and northern dis-
tricts.
Messrs. Pearse and Sons were
awarded a gold medal at the Roubaix
Exhibition for two fleeces of wool
from 4-tooth ewes. The fleeces
weighed lbs. and 18 lbs., and were
sent to Roubaix by the Adelaide
STUD RAM,1½ YEARS OLD.
7
361
The Gums Estate, South Australia.


8
362
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


School of Mines. At the iqio shearing at The Gums, 3800 lambs cut an average of y\ lbs. of
bright, clean wool. 500 of same cut an average of 8| lbs.
The breeding of pure-bred Black Polled Angus cattle has recently been begun at The
Gums, Messrs. Pearse and Son having purchased the stud formerly owned by the Hon.
John Lewis. These cattle are proving a great success, both from the milking and beef
points of view. They are very quiet, and essentially utility animals.
" CORRA LYN," MR. NORMAN PEARSE'S RESIDENCE AT THE GUMS.
Mr. Thomas H. Pearse was born at Holne, in Devon, on the banks of the lovely River
Dart, and within sight of the celebrated Tors of Devon, being one of a family of nine boys,
whose ancestors had lived in the district for centuries. Mr. Pearse received his education
under the Rev. John Gill, vicar of the parish, who is still alive, and, though ninety-two
years of age, still preaches every Sunday, and carries on all the duties of his parish with
the zeal and vigour of a much younger man. The Rev. Charles Kingsley, of “Westward Ho”
fame, was his predecessor, and one of the rooms in the old ivy-clad vicarage is still
9
363
The Gums Estate, South Australia


HORSES WATERING AT THE DAM.
xo
364
77»e Pastoral Homes of Australia .


known as “Kingsley’s” room. Mr.
Pearse came to South Australia in the
year 1877, being barely twenty years
of age, doing so chiefly on the advice
of Sir Robert Torrens, who originated
the well-known set of land laws which
bear his name, and who, on his return
to England from South Australia,
bought a property and settled down in
the district in which Mr. Pearse was
born. Mr. Pearse had not been many
years in the State before he turned his
STUD EWE, 1½ YEARS OLD.
attention to sheep, and in the year 1884, in conjunction with Mr. W. Cockrum, pur-
chased The Gums from Mr. R. J. Mcßride. The partnership was, however, dissolved by
mutual consent in the year 1895, and Mr. Pearse retained the property on his own account.
The owner of The Gums, who takes a sincere interest in all that pertains to the wel-
fare of his district, and the State in general, is a member of two district councils, member
of the Morgan State School Board of Advice, and for many years has been a Justice of
the Peace. He is also a member of tne Burra and Morgan Racing Clubs, and has in addi-
tion always been a strong supporter of local rifle clubs, in which he thoroughly believes.
Mr. Pearse has been three times married, firstly, to Emily Elizabeth; secondly to
Adeline (both daughters of Mr. George Hiles, of Petherton House, Hallett, a gentleman
upon whose judgment Mr. Pearse largely relied in the early days of his pastoral work);
and, thirdly, to Eveline Mathilda, daughter of Mr. C. Meinck, of Jamestown and Round
Hill, Quorn. There are three sons and one daughter of the first marriage. Mr. Pearse
and his family are great believers in
the capabilities of Australia, especially
South Australia, and they believe there
is no country in the world where men
of brain and energy have a better
chance of success. The three sons are
already engaged in the same calling as
their father. The eldest son, Mr. B. W.
Pearse, educated at Whinham College,
was until recently owner of Caroona
Station, situated 40 miles N.W. of The
Gums, comprising about 40,000 acres
STUD EWE, YEARS OLD.
11
365
The Gums Estate, South Australia.


of good saltbush country, which he has splendidly improved, his fruit garden especially being
the talk of the district. Cocker spaniel breeding is a hobby of his of which he has made a
great success, numbers of animals from his kennels having been sent to various parts of the
Commonwealth, where they have taken numerous prizes whenever shown. Mr. N. H. Pearse,
the second son, was educated at private schools in Adelaide, finishing up at Roseworthy
under Professor Cowrie, where he took his diploma. Following this, his father took him
into partnership, and he is now part owner of The Gums Estate. In his work on the station
lie finds that the experience gained at Roseworthy has been invaluable.
50 BALES OF WOOL—8 TONS.
Mr. H. L. Pearse, the youngest son, is the owner of Grassville, which adjoins The Gums.
He was educated at St. Peter’s College, and at the School of Mines and Roseworthy Col-
lege. He also received a thorough training in wool-classing under Mr. George Jeffrey.
Grassville is a property of about 15,000 acres, consisting of country similar to that met with
on The Gums, and it is worked in conjunction with it. The sheep are also of a similar type,
growing heavy fleeces carried on big frames.
Mr. Pearse and his sons have always had a keen eye for a good horse, and during the
last few years have bred some excellent stock, chiefly of the station hack and polo pony type.
At present they are breeding from The Dervish, who is throwing some grand stock. The
Dervish is a dark brown horse, with tan points, by The Ameer out of a mare by Furreed, and
a perfect model of a station sire.
I 2
366
■?#»© Pastoral Homes of Australia ,


The Mount Crawford Estate.
The Property of Mr. Alick J. Murray.
MT. CRAWFORD, beautifully situated in the Barossa Ranges, South Australia, is
the property of Mr. Alick J. Murray, and the original home of the Murray Merinos.
Although separately owned and managed, the famous South Australian studs are
known as “the Murray Merinos.” They had one origin, and have been closely associated
for many years.
It is nearly seventy years since the late Mr. John Murray laid the founda-
tion of the Murray Merino stud flock. To-day they are known throughout Aus-
tralasia and South Africa. The history of sheep-breeding in these States pro-
vides many striking examples of patient, determined work, over a series of years, to at-
tain some desired result, but it would be difficult to find anything to equal the half-century’s
unassuming consistent labour of Mr. John Murray and the determination displayed by him in
achieving such great results as a breeder of high-class Merinos. Since the death of Mr.
Murray his policy has been continued by his sons and grandsons. The founder of these
flocks possessed a resolute will, a remarkably clear conception of the type of sheep he de-
sired to produce, and throughout the period of his work of construction proceeded on well
defined lines. He knew exactly what he wanted, and went quietly and resolutely to work to
attain the object constantly kept in view. Mr. Murray practised in-breeding from the outset,
and this has been continued. There has only been one foundation in the creation of these
flocks, which exercise a great influence throughout Australasia at the present time. They
have been in-bred for sixty-nine years, no other blood having been introduced into the flocks
since the first foundation in the early forties. This of itself gives to the “Murray” Merinos
an importance which is not shared by any other flock in South Australia. Apart from that,
it is well known that the influence of these sheep for many years past has been very con-
siderable throughout Australia, New Zealand, and in South Africa. Then the high prices
paid for the Murray sheep at public and private sales, and their phenomenal success at the
Royal Show in Adelaide year after year attaches to them a very wide interest.
I
367


THE LATE MR. JOHN MURRAY
Founder Of The Murray Merinos.
{The foundation of fix' Stnd.
It was in 1843 that Mr. A. B. Murray bought
100 ewes from Mr. McFarlane, of Mount Barker,
which were said to have come from the flock import-
ed by Mr. John Macarthur, of Camden Park, New
South Wales. As these sheep were not purchased
direct, Mr. Murray, who was exceedingly particulai
about pedigrees, would not say that these ewes
were from the famous Macarthur flocks, although
there was not wanting evidence that this was the
case. These 100 ewes were divided amongst Mr.
A. B. Murray and his sister-in-law, Miss Scott
(afterwards Mrs. P. M. Murray, of Glen Turritt,
Truro), and Mr. John Murray, Mount Crawford.
One hundred ewes, in lamb to a Tasmanian ram,
were afterwards purchased from a Mr. McVittie, of
near Blumberg, and Mr. A. B. Murray had a Tasmanian ram which he purchased from the
South Australian Company. From the blending of the above blood the famous Murray
Merinos have been evolved. That the original sheep were high-class is shown by the fact
that a ram bred the year after Mr. Murray formed his flock took champion prize at the Ade-
laide Show, although imported rams were placed
against it. This feat rather put South Australian
flockmasters on their mettle, and several fresh im-
portations were made, but Mr. Murray’s ram took
the championship for six consecutive years. Mr.
Murray applied the science of in-breeding with con-
summate skill, gradually increasing the density of
the fleece and the size of the carcase. His motto
was—(i) constitution, (2) constitution, and (3)
again constitution. The pronounced type of the
sheep he bred soon brought them into repute, and
a strong demand for sires from this flock came from
various parts of Australia. Those who had pre-
viously made purchases and proved the sheep re-
turned for more. The demand has steadily in-
creased, and was never stronger than it is now, pas-
toralists, in their anxiety to secure rams, making
MR. ALICK J. MURRAY.
2
368
The Pastoral Homes of Australia .


contracts several years in advance. New South Wales, Victorian, Queensland, New
Zealand, West Australian, South Australian, and South African squatters have been exten-
sive buyers, and their reports in praise of the results obtained by using the Murray Merino
rams would fill several volumes. From the outset the Murray sheep have cut heavy fleeces
of bold, robust, profitable wool. The judges’ remark at the Sydney Show, as far back as
1 873, was: “Mr. Murray’s wool is a remarkable combination of softness and strength; a
bright lustrous wool, exceedingly clean.” An expert in South Africa, after carefully ex-
amining some Murray sheep imported there, officially gave a most favourable report on the
sheep and the splendid quality of the wool they carried.
{Testimony of Mod dualities.
London woolbuyers of the highest repute have reported on “Murray” wool with equal
praise, and it is interesting to note that both the experts whose words we quote refer to the
fleece, that of the well-known ewe The Queen, as perfect. They write as follows: “We have
examined the prise fleeces with the greatest interest, and may at once say that of this class
of wool it is the most beautiful specimen we have ever seen. The growth is deep and sound,
the staple clear at the root, and evenly and compactly formed —a picture of vigour and
MOUNT CRAWFORD COUNTRY.
3
369
The Mount Crawford Estate, South Australia.


MOUNT CRAWFORD CHAMPION RAM, LION II.
MOUNT CRAWFORD CHAMPION EWE, STELLA.
4
370
The Pastoral Homes of Australia


strength. The fibre is of strong quality, es-
pecially towards the skirts, but its is not too
coarse considering the great depth of the
staple. The condition is light (about 55 per
cent, yield), and the appearance bright and
lustrous. Such wool as this will always com-
mand attention, for of its kind it, is a perfect
article.” And, again: ‘‘We had the greatest
pleasure in viewing this fleece, as we have
never had such a perfect specimen under our
notice before. Our report on same is that it
is a marvellous fleece, and perfect in its kind,
good length, and remarkably even of staple, of
good lustre, and of a yield of about 54 per
cent, when the skirts and pieces have been re-
moved. The quality, though near 56, the best
quality of crossbreds, is all the same a desir-
able and useful one, and is at all times con-
sidered by the trade a favourable quality. The
MOUNT CRAWFORD STUD RAM, ELECTRIC LIGHT.
fleece is of immense size, and weighed close upon 18 lbs., and it was a pleasure to look at
it. It was examined by brokers, spinners, and manufacturers, both English and Continen-
tal.”
Brefc anti reared nnfcer natural conditions.
The founder of the flock would never under any consideration artificially feed or house
his sheep. He believed in the doctrine of the “survival of the fittest” in regard to sheep-
breeding, ana an animal which did not do well under natural conditions, and justify his or
her presence in the flock, paid the penalty. This policy is rigorously observed by the present
owners. They cull with a severely critical eye and a judgment which reflects the genius of
knowing exactly what a sheep will develop into. The 2-tooth must give promise of some-
thing good or out he goes. No Murray sheep has ever been artificially fed, housed, or other-
wise pampered. “Utility” is the object steadily in view, the idea being to breed an animal
which will reproduce strong characteristics when subjected to the trying conditions of dry,
semi-desert country in the interior of Australia.
It is because these sheep have never been unnaturally developed and artificially prepar-
ed that they are not sent to compete at the shows in other States. If artificially fed, some
of the prizetakers which have been at the Royal Shows in Adelaide would fill out to a won-
5
371
The Mount Crawford Estate, South Australia,


A PRETTY VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD.
THE GARDEN.
6
372
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


RED GUMS.
7
373
The Mount Crawford Estate, South Australia.


derful size, and with their robust constitutions, grand fleeces, and generally aristocratic car-
riage, would take a lot of beating in any sheep show in Australasia. But the Messrs. Murray
have no desire to depart from their policy by artificially improving their sheep in order to com-
pete on equal terms with breeders elsewhere. This would be “pampering” to their mind,
and that is what they have never done even to the slightest extent. It is because of their
natural robustness and this vigorous upbringing that the sheep have done so remarkably well
when exposed to the trying climate of some parts of Australia,
Brccfcmg from within.
I he science of line breeding, with patience and mathematical precision, and that best of
all knowledge, intuition, has been followed by the most eminent breeders in Europe and
Australasia with wonderful results. Professor Wallace, the well-known authority on live
stock, says: “The most prominent advantage of ‘in-and-in-breeding’ is the stamping of
family characters of type, and it cannot well be dispensed with in the formation of new
breeds or the improvements of old ones.” The late Mr. John Murray, and, in later years, his
sons and grandsons, have been remarkably successful in maintaining a high standard of ex-
cellence in their flocks, and no better testimony in favour of “in-breeding” could be found
than the condition in which we find the Murray Merinos to-day after over sixty-nine years of
breeding without the introduction of fresh blood. There are many people, and amongst
them sheepbreeders, who cannot comprehend how such continuous breeding within the flock
has been carried on without deterioration. The movement, however, in the Murray flocks has
THE HOMESTEAD.
8
374
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


PANORAMA OF THE STATION BUILDINGS.
PANORAMA OF THE HOMESTEAD.
9
375
The Mount Crawford Estate, South Australia.


been all the other
way, being one long
record of improve-
ment built upon pro-
gress. But if only
one man in a thou-
sand, as Darwin
maintained, has the
required accuracy ot
eye to make a breed-
er, only one in ten
thousand possesses
the necessary pa-
LOG-HAULING—RED GUM.
Bence and skill to line breed with good results. There is no royal road to successful sheep-
breeding—not even a short cut or so much as a by-path. A good many breeders attempt
to cut off corners by the frequent introduction into their flocks of fresh blood, but they rea-
lise in course of time that this means the loss of everything in the shape of a distinct type,
their sheep embracing the various characteristics of the “fresh blood” brought in from time
to time. It is easy to secure a good foundation for a flock; it is quite another matter to
keep up the quality year after year. Patience, fine discriminating powers, continuity of
purpose, and the love of hard work are essentials and of the truth of this the Murray
Merinos may be quoted as a striking example. “In-breeding” is a two-edged weapon to the
flockowner who is not in the front rank of his profession, and it is hardly a system to be fol-
lowed without due consideration. Mr. John Murray succeeded because he laid down lines
of procedure with mathematical precision, based upon natural laws, and worked upon them
with the knowledge of an expert. Though “in-bred” in the sense that they are all lineal
descendants of one ram, the Murray Merino sheep are by no means “close bred.” Every
care is taken to avoid this, and many hundreds of lambs are annually mothered, and the
lambs labelled with a number, and marked down in the stud books. The sire and dam of
sheep for generations back are thus known. The rams are used in small paddocks singly,
and an elaborate system of line breeding is practised in the matter of mating a type of ram
with a type of ewe to produce some desired characteristic in the progeny. Some of the
most successful show and stud rams in these flocks have at times exhibited remarkable ten-
dencies to throw their stock better in either the male or female lines. As an instance of this
tendency, mention might be made of the champion ram Trophy, which was also the winner
of the Old Colonists’ 150-gumea trophy in 1873. His stock were stronger in the female line
than in the male line in a most pronounced degree. On the other hand, a ram that sired a
IO
376
The Pastoral Homes of Australia


number of fine ewes, but was specially
strong in the male line, was the double
champion winner, Duke of Edinburgh. His
progeny also were particularly prepotent in
their males. This indicates what skill is
required in mating the sheep so as to breed
up to a certain standard and fix dominant
types. As has been mentioned, the Messrs.
Murray carefully pedigree the different
families, and sires are only used upon such
families as are considered sufficiently pre-
potent in the male line. Another important
A CORNER OF THE GARDEN.A CORNER OF THE GARDEN.
factor which has doubtless had considerable influence in the development of the remark-
able strength of constitution possessed by the Murray Merinos may be found in the
fact that for many years, first under the ownership of Mr. John Murray, and afterwards
under that of his four sons, the late Messrs. John, T. Hope, and W. A. Murray, and the
present owner of Mount Crawford, Mr. Alick J. Murray, the flocks were bred on four estates
situated in areas where climate and soil vary to some extent, so that an exchange of sires,
practically an outcross, yet within the flock, could be effected when thought desirable.
m>ount Crawforb Stub.
Mount Crawford, known throughout the Commonwealth as the birthplace of the Murray
Merinos, takes its name from the hill Mount Crawford, which stands out boldly on the
estate, and forms a conspicuous feature of the landscape. The native name was Tetaki, and
its present designation, so says local tradition, is derived from the fact that an early over-
lander named Crawford used to make his
camp at its foot. The origin of the Mount
Crawford Estate dates from 1841, when Mr.
A. B. Murray purchased section Q 1 8, Hun-
dred of Para Wirra, part of the Barossa Sur-
vey, of which he was a pioneer. In 1841
his brother, Mr. John Murray, came to South
Australia, and, after two years at Bull’s
Creek, purchased half of it (section 918,
Hundred of Para Wirra) from him, and, al-
though each had his own ewes, they worked
together and used each other’s rams until
THE DRIVE.
I I
377
The Mount Crawford Estate, South Australia.


Mr. A. B. Murray left Mount Crawford for Tungkillo. It formed, together with the sheep,
one-fourth of the estates and flocks bequeathed by him to his four sons, the others being the
well-known properties Rhine Park, Cappeedee, and Mount Beevor. It is situated just seven-
teen miles to the east of Gawler, in the Barossa Ranges, and, with its splendid timber, well-
grassed hills, and shady valleys, makes a very beautiful pastoral home; The homestead,
which is approached from the main road by a fine avenue of well-grown English trees, is a
one-storied building of considerable extent, surrounded by well-arranged fruit and flower gar-
dens. Special interest attaches to the large central hall, for it covers the site of the whole
of the original house occupied by the founder of the Murray flocks, nearly seventy years ago,
the extensive additions—which have from time to time been made —having been built around
this relic of the early days, which was purchased from Mr. Mitchell, who had originally built
it. Both Mr. A. B. Murray and Mr. John Murray first built and lived on their respective
halves of section 918, Hundred of Para Wirra, until Mr. John Murray purchased from Mr.
Mitchell the section on which the Mount Crawford homestead now stands.
Mr. Alick J. Murray, the present owner of Mount Crawford, was the third of the four bro-
thers who so ably continued their father’s life work. He was born in 1859, and educated at
St. Peter’s College. Mr. Murray is well known as one of the foremost breeders of Merinos
in Australia, and is, moreover, one of the keenest judges of stock generally in the State.
His interest in pastoral and agricultural work has been constant and practical. He was for
years a member of the Roseworthy Agricultural College Board, and twice president of the
Royal Agricultural and Horticultural Society of South Australia. He is a director of Elder,
Smith and Co., Limited. As honorary commissioner he has reported on the purchased stock
for the State Government, and on more than one occasion has made liberal gifts to the
Roseworthy College Farm. Mr. Murray’s work as a stockbreeder has not been confined to
Merinos, for, as a breeder of polo ponies, he earned an enviable reputation for the Mount
Crawford stud. Bones (classed by Mr. Murray as the best of his day), Ladybird, Pearl,
Ruby, and others will long be remembered by polo players as some of the smartest ponies
seen in South Australia. For many years he owned a high-class stud of Jersey cattle, but
that herd was recently dispersed, the leading bull having been presented to the Roseworthy
College.
It is, however, as the original source of the plain-bodied South Australian Merino, and as
the home of such splendid examples of the type of Constitution, Johan lE, Lion, and his
great son Lion lE, Fame, the 500-guinea ram (whose purchaser classed him as the cheapest
animal he ever bought), Portsea, sire of five out of six champion sheep in three years, and
many others which may be said to have made history in the Merino world, that Mount Craw-
ford will long be remembered by Australian sheepmen, and the name of Murray take rank
with the great originators and masters in the records of stock breeding. Probably no
more convincing evidence of the standing ofthe Murray flocks in South Australia could be
quoted than the fact that Murray rams gained the championship in Adelaide on all but
fifteen occasions during sixty-seven years.
I 2
378
The Pastoral Homes of Australia-


The Rhine Park and Cappeedee Estate
The Property of Messrs. Murray Bros.
RHINE Park and Cappeedee, South Australia, are owned by J. L., W. S., and J. E.
Murray, the sons of the late Mr. John Murray, eldest son of the founder of the
Murray Merinos. The famous South Australian studs known as “the Murray
Merinos” had one origin, and have been closely associated for many years.
It is nearly seventy years since the late Mr. John Murray laid the foundation of the
Murray Merino stud flocks. To-day they are known throughout Australasia and South
Africa. The history of sheep-breeding in these States provides many striking examples of
patient, determined work, over a series of years, to attain some desired result, but it would
be difficult to find anything to equal the half-century’s unassuming consistent labour of Mr.
John Murray and the determination displayed by him in achieving such great results as a
breeder of high-class Merinos. Since the death of Mr. Murray his policy has been continued
by his sons and grandsons. The founder of these flocks possessed a resolute will, a remark-
ably clear conception of the type of sheep he desired to produce, and throughout the period of
his work of construction proceeded on well-defined lines. He knew exactly what he wanted,
and went quietly and resolutely to work to attain the object constantly kept in view. Mr.
Murray practised in-breeding from the outset, and this has been continued. There has only
been one foundation in the creation of these flocks, which exercise a great influence through-
STATION BUILDINGS, AT RHINE BARK -BACK VIEW.
]
379


A RHINE PARK 4-YEAR-OLD RAM.
A RHINE PARK 2-YEAR-OLD RAM.
380
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


out Australasia at the present time. They have
been in-bred for sixty-nine years, no other blood
having been introduced into the flocks since the first
foundation in the early forties. This of itself gives
to the “Murray” Merinos an importance which is
not shared by any other flock in South Australia.
Apart from that, it is well known that the influence
of these sheep for many years past has been very
considerable throughout Australia, New Zealand,
and in South Africa. Then the high prices paid for
the Murray sheep at public and private sales, and
their phenomenal success at the Royal Show in Ade-
laide year after year attaches to them a very wide
interest.
Zbc jfounhaticm of the Stub.
It was in 1843 that Mr. A. B. Murray bought
THE LATE MR. JOHN MURRAY.
Founder Of The Murray Merinos.
100 ewes from Mr. McFarlane, of Mount Barker, which were said to have come from the
flock imported by Mr. John Macarthur, of Camden Park, New South Wales. As these sheep
were not purchased direct, Mr. Murray, who was exceedingly particular about pedigrees,
would not say that these ewes were from the famous Macarthur flocks, although there was
not wanting evidence that this was the case,
these 100 ewes were divided amongst Mr.
A. 13. Murray and his Cster-in-law, Miss
Scott (afterwards Mrs. P. M. Murray, of
Glen Turritt, Truro), and Mr. John Murray,
Mount Crawford. One hundred ewes, in
lamb to a lasmanian ram, were afterwards
purchased from a Mr. McVittie, of near
Blumberg, and Mr. A. B. Murray had a
l asmanian ram which he purchased from
the South Australian Company. From the
blending of the above blood the famous
Murray Merinos have been evolved. That
the original sheep were high-class is shown
by the fact that a ram bred the year after
THE LATE MR. JOHN MURRAY.
3
381
The Rhine and Cappeedee Estates, South Australia.


ON RHINE PARK.
4
382
The Pastora/ Homes of Australia .


Mr. Murray formed
his flock took cham-
pion prize at the
Adelaide Show, al-
though imported
rams were placed
against it. This feat
rather put South
Australian flock-
masters on their
mettle, and several
fresh importations
were made, but Mr.
POLO PONIES.
Murray’s ram took the championship for six consecutive years. Mr. Murray applied
the science of in-breeding with consummate skill, gradually increasing the density of the
fleece and the size of the carcase. His motto was —(i) constitution, (2) constitution, and
(3) against constitution. The pronounced type of the sheep he bred soon brought them into
repute, and a strong demand for sires from this flock came from various parts of Australia.
Those who had previously made purchases and proved the sheep returned for more. the
demand has steadily increased, and was never stronger than it is now, pastoralists, in their
anxiety to secure rams, making contracts several years in advance. New South Wales, Vic-
torian, Queensland, New Zealand, West Australian, South Australian, and South African
squatters have been extensive buyers, and their reports in praise of the results obtained by
using the Murray Merino rams would fill several volumes. From the outset the Murray
sheep have cut heavy fleeces of bold, robust, profitable wool. The judges’ remark at the
Sydney Show, as far back as 1873, was: “Mr. Murray’s wool is a remarkable combination of
softness and strength; a bright lustrous wool, exceedingly clean.’’ An expert in South
Africa, after carefully examining some Murray sheep imported there, officially gave a most
favourable report on the sheep and the splendid quality of the wool they carried.
{Testimony of Mod dualities.
London woolbuyers of the highest repute have reported on “Murray” wool with equal
praise, and it is interesting to note that both the experts whose words we quote refer to the
fleece, that of the well-known ewe The Queen, as perfect. They write as follows: “We have
examined the prize fleeces with the greatest interest, and may at once say that of this class
of wool it is the most beautiful specimen we have ever seen. The growth is deep and sound, the
staple clear at the root, and evenly and compactly formed a picture of vigour and
strength. The fibre is of strong quality, especially towards the skirts, but is not too coarse
5
383
The Rhine and Cappeedee Estates, South Australia.


considering the great depth of the staple. The condition is light (about 55 per cent, yield),
and the appearance bright and lustrous. Such wool as this will always command attention,
for of its kind it is a perfect article.” And, again: “We had the greatest pleasure in view-
ing this fleece, as we have never had such a perfect specimen under our notice before. Our
report on same is that it is a marvellous fleece, and perfect in its kind, good length, and re-
markably even of staple, of good lustre, and of a yield of about 54 per cent, when the skirts
and pieces have been removed. The quality, though near 56, the best quality of cross-
breds, is all the same a desirable and useful one, and is at all times considered by the trade
a favourable quality. The fleece is of immense size, and weighed close upon 18 lbs., and
it was a pleasure to look at it. It was examined by brokers, spinners, and manufacturers,
both English and Continental.”
Bred and IRcared Under IRatural Conditions.
Ihe founder of the flock would never under any consideration artificially feed or house
his sheep. He believed in the doctrine of the “survival of the fittest” in regard to sheep-
breeding, and an animal which did not do well under natural conditions, and justify his or
her presence in the flock, paid the penalty. This policy is rigorously observed by the present
owners. I hey cull with a severely critical eye and a judgment which reflects the genius of
A 2 YEAR-OLD CAPPEEDEE EWE.
6
384
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


knowing exactly what a sheep will develop into. The 2-tooth must give promise of some-
thing good or out he goes. No Murray sheep has ever been artificially fed, housed, or other-
wise pampered. “Utility” is the object steadily in view, the idea being to breed an animal
which will reproduce strong characteristics when subjected to the trying conditions of dry,
semi-desert country in the interior of Australia.
It is because these sheep have never been unnaturally developed and artificially pre-
pared that they are not sent to compete at the shows in other States. If artificially fed,
some of the pnzetakers which have been at the Royal Shows in Adelaide would fill out to a
wonderful size, and with their robust constitutions, grand fleeces, and generally aristocratic
carriage, would take a lot of beating in any sheep show in Australasia. But the Messrs.
Murray have no desire to depart from their policy by artificially improving their sheep in
order to compete on equal terms with breeders elsewhere. This would be “pampering,”
to their mind, and that is what they have never done even to the slightest extent. It is be-
cause of their natural robustness and this vigorous upbringing that the sheep have done so
remarkably well when exposed to the trying climate of some parts of Australia.
Brccbino jfrom Mitbm.
Ihe science of line breeding, with patience and mathematical precision, and that best of
all knowledge, intuition, has been followed by the most eminent breeders in Europe and
Australasia with wonderful results. Professor Wallace, the well-known authority on live
stock, says; “The most prominent advantage of ‘in-and-in-breeding’ is the stamping of
family characters of type, and it cannot well be dispensed with in the formation of new
THE RHINE PARK HOMESTEAD.
7
385
The Rhine and Cappeedee Estates, South Australia.


RHINE PARK 1-YEAR-OLD EWE.
RHINE PARK 3-YEAR- OLD RAM.
8
386
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


breeds or the improvements of old ones.” The late Mr. John Murray, and, in later years,
his sons and grandsons, have been remarkably successful in maintaining a high standard of
excellence in their flocks, and no better testimony in favour of “in-breeding” could be found
than the condition in which we find the Murray Merinos to-day after over sixty-nine years of
breeding without the introduction of fresh blood. There are many people, and amongst
them sheepbreeders, who cannot comprehend how such continuous breeding within the flock
has been carried on without deterioration. The movement, however, in the Murray flocks has
been all the other way, being one long record of improvement built upon progress. But if
only one man in a thousand, as Darwin maintained, has the required accuracy of eye to
make a breeder, only one in ten thousand possesses the necessary patience and skill to line
breed with good results. There is no royal road to successful sheep-breeaing—not even a
short cut or so much as a by-path. A good many breeders attempt to cut off corners by
the frequent introduction into their flocks of fresh blood, but they realise in course of time
that this means the loss of everything in the shape of a distinct type, their sheep embrac-
ing the various characteristics of the “fresh blood” brought in from time to time. It is easy
to secure a good foundation for a flock; it is quite another matter to keep up the quality
year after year. Patience, fine discriminating powers, continuity of purpose, and the love
of hard work are essentials, and of the truth of this the Murray Merinos may be quoted as
ANOTHER VIEW ON RHINE PARK.
9
387
The Rhine and Cappeedee Estates, South Australia•


a striking example. “In-breeding” is a two-
edged weapon to the flockowner who is not in
the front rank of his profession, and it is hardly
a system to be followed without due considera-
tion. Mr. John Murray succeeded because
he laid down lines of procedure with mathe-
matical precision, based upon natural laws, and
worked upon them with the knowledge of an
expert. Though “in-bred” in the sense that
they are all lineal descendants of one ram, the
Murray Merino sheep are by no means “close
bred.” Every care is taken to avoid this, and
many hundreds of lambs are annually mother-
ed, and the lambs labelled with a number, and
marked down in the stud books. The sire and
dam of sheep for generations back are thus
known. The rams are used in small paddocks
singly, and an elaborate system of line breed-
ing is practised in the matter of mating a type
A GIANT TED GUM.
of ram with a type of ewe to produce some desired characteristic in the progeny. Some of
the most successful show and stud rams in these flocks have at times exhibited remarkable
tendencies to throw their stock better in either the male or female lines. As an instance of
this tendency, mention might be made of the champion ram Trophy, which was also the win-
ner of the Old Colonists’ 150-guinea trophy in 1873. His stock were stronger in the female
line than in the male line in a most pronounced degree. On the other hand, a ram that sired
a number of fine ewes, but was specially strong in the male line, was the double champion
winner, Duke of Edinburgh. His progeny also were particularly prepotent in their males.
This indicates what skill is required in mating the sheep so as to breed up to a certain stan-
dard and fix dominant types. As has been mentioned, the Messrs Murray carefully pedigree
the different families, and sires are only used upon such families as are considered suffi-
ciently prepotent in the male line. Another important factor which has doubtless had con-
siderable influence in the development of the remarkable strength of constitution possessed
by the Murray Merinos may be found in the fact that for many years, first under the owner-
ship of Mr. John Murray, and afterwards under that of his four sons, the late Messrs. John,
T. Hope, and W. A. Murray, and the present owner of Mount Crawford, Mr. Alick J.
Murray, the flocks were bred on four estates situated in areas where climate and soil vary to
some extent, so that an exchange of sires, practically an outcross, yet within the flock, could
be effected when thought desirable.
10
388
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A SCENE ON SOUTH RHINE.
11
389
The Rhine and Cappeedee Estates, South Australia.


IRhmc IParft Stub.
Rhine Park lies within easy reach of Adelaide, from which it is distant only forty-five
miles in a north-easterly direction near Eden Valley, where the headlands of the Ba-
rossa Range sink to the wide plain which borders the Murray River. The country is hilly,
with good valleys and plains, and is well grassed all over. Sheoaks grow in the ranges, and
large gums in the lowlands. The average rainfall is about 20 inches. It is a matter of his-
torical interest that the nucleus of this property was purchased by Mr. John Murray, the
elder, from the Crown in or about 1859. It was afterwards largely added to by further pur-
chases from the Government, and from various small holders of the district. Of the late
John Murray, who succeeded his father (whose'eldest son he was) in the ownership of Rhine
Park in 1886, and who died there on 4th July, 1908, it may be justly said that his name is
writ large in the history of the pastoral progress of the State. Quiet and unassuming, kindly
and helpful to any in need, carrying out his social and such official duties as he undertook
with quiet dignity he earned the warm admiration and genuine respect of all who knew
him. He was an excellent flockmaster, and developed the flock along lines laid down by his
father, taking numerous prizes at the Royal Show. On his death Rhine Park and Cap-
peedee passed to his sons, Messrs. J. L. and J. E., who directly manage the former, and
Walter, who is in charge at Cappeedee.
Cappeebec Stub.
The late Mr. W. A. Murray, the youngest son of the founder of the flock, was born in 1 862,
and educated at St. Peter’s College. On taking up his future calling, he came rapidly to the
front as a breeder of high-class Merinos. Amongst other special sheep owned by him was the
well-known ram Cappeedee, which was said to be one of the very best stud sires ever bred in
Australia, and almost, if not quite, equal to the well-known sire Premier IT, or the world-
famous ram Sir Thomas. Mr. Murray died on 3rd December, 1901, and in accordance with
his will the Cappeedee stud sheep were in 1902 equally divided among his three brothers.
Mr. A. J. Murray and the late Mr. T. Hope Murray took theirs to Mount Crawford and Mount
Beevor respectively, but the owner of Rhine Park left his at Cappeedee, which property he
leased. Cappeedee Estate, which lies about five miles north-west of Hallett Railway Station,
and almost on the borders of the saltbush country, would not be considered an ideal spot for
the establishment of a stud, neither would it be a suitable place for coddling delicate ani-
mals of any description. The wire fences which subdivide the estate into handy paddocks
are the only protection against the strong bleak winter winds which sweep up from the
south, and the scorching north-easters in the summer. The owners of Cappeedee, however,
have always believed in the “survival of the fittest,” and in allowing natural conditions to
have full sway, the result being the production of an unusually bold robust sheep. In com-
mon with all Murray Merinos they are known for their fine carriage, heavy and shapely
frames and fleeces of great strength and character. Constitution has been from the com-
mencement, and still is the first point considered, and as an indication of the grand frames
and robustness of Murray sheep, which it should be remembered are unhoused and grazed
at large on natural grasses only, it need only be remembered that several of the rams,
typical illustrations of which will be found reproduced in these pages, have weighed over
200 lbs. when in breeding condition.
I 2
390
The Pastoral Homos of Australia.


The Sheoak Hills Estate
The Property of Mrs. R. M. Sawers
and Potcairn Estate
The Property of Messrs. E. D.. R. W., R. P. and Ross Sawers
A LTHOUGH separately owned and managed, Sheoak Hills, in the middle north, and
/ \ Pitcairn, in the north-east, are “in the family” of that fine type of veteran pas-
-1 toralist, Mr. A. U. Sawers. The former is owned by Mrs. R. M. Sawers, and
managed by Mr. K. P. P. Sawers, while Pitcairn has been transferred by Mr. A. U. Sawers
to his four sons, Messrs. E. 1)., R. W., K. P., and Ross Sawers.
Sheoak Hills is situated about two miles from Yarcowie Railway Station, on the main
north line. It was formerly a portion of the well-known Canowie Estate, and is eminently
suited for the purpose for which it is used —the raising of high-class Merino sheep. It com-
PITCAIRN CATTLE.
prises about 10,000 acres, is about 2000 ft. above sea level, and in favourable seasons there
is a splendid growth of various grasses and herbage. The oroperty is well watered and
wire-netted all round.
cTbc Stub jflocfc.
The Sheoak Hills stud flock was formed in 189; by Mr. Thomas Goode by the blending
of Bungaree and Canowie blood selected by Mr. Goode, for many years manager at Canowie
and Hill River. The flock was continued by Messrs. Goode Bros., sons of the founder,
and taken over with the property by Mrs. R. M Sawers. Since Mr. K. P. P. Sawers took
over the management no expense or care have been spared in improving the flock. Mr.
Sawers holds the diplomas of the South Australian School of Mines and Industries for wcol-
I
391


classing, having been a student a f Mr.
George Jefferies’ wool classes. He nas
been engaged in pastoral pursuits all his
life, and his objective is to produce a large
plain-bodied robust sheep carrying a heavy
fleece of high value. Mr. Sawers has class-
ed the Sheoak Hills clip for some years, and
has had the satisfaction of seeing in it the
company of the leading clips at the auction
sales. Rams sent to Western Australia and
elsewhere have given every satisfaction.
SIX-TOOTH STUD RAM, SHEOAK HILLS.
The Sheoak Hills homestead is in the heai t of some of the finest sheep country in South
Australia, having Canowie and Cappeedee as near neighbours. There is a splendid view of
the surrounding
country devoted to
stud sheep-breeding,
wool and wheat. The
district is favoured
with a good rainfall.
The homestead is
connected by tele-
phone with Yar-
cowie.
TWO-TOOTH RAMS, PITCAIRN.
Iphtcmrn.
r\t the .end of the 1888 lease the old Paratoo Run was cut up into smaller runs, and relet
by the Government. Some of the best
portions of the No. 4 lot, or Pitcairn
proper, were surveyed into small blocks
at the expiration of the lease in 1888,
and let to farmers and graziers, but
this was a failure, and proved conclu-
sively the folly of cutting up places in
an uncertain rainfall for agricultural
purposes.
Pitcairn Station is situated 10 miles
south of Nackara railway, on the Broken
PITCAIRN TWO-TOOTH STUD RAM.
■»
392
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


MR. E. D. SAWERS
MR. K. P. P. SAWERS.
MR. A. D. SAWERS.
MR. R. L. W. SAWERS.
MR. ROSS SAWERS.
3
393
The Shcoak Hills and Pitcairn Estates, South Australia .


STUD EWES AND LAMBS, SHEOAK HILLS.
PITCAIRN STUD EWES.
4
394
Th® Pastoral Homos of Australia.


Hill line, and 30
miles‘from Terowie,
and was purchased
in 1 896 by Mr. A. U.
Sawers.
The improve-
ments at the time of
purchase were in a
deplorable condition;
water was scarce on
the best portions of
THE HOMESTEAD, SHEOAK HILLS.
the run, there only being four dams, which were nearly full of silt, and four wells, two of
which were partially in order.
The run then consisted of nine paddocks. The drought of 1896 made it practically im-
possible to fully stock during the first six years of the lease, and dingoes helped still more to
make the country difficult of tenure. Rabbits had the whole of the country destitute of feed,
and the former lessee had his stock away paddocking 40 miles north of Pitcairn.
During the first few years some good sheep were kept shepherded. These were pur-
chased from Canowie Estate, and sires were brought from the same property. The whole of
the stud ewes from the late A. B. Murray’s Wirrabara property were also added to the
stud. The Pitcairn flocks have practically been bred up from these, with the introduction
of suitable sires from Koonoona and Nalpa.
At the commencement ot his lease Mr. Sawers began a vigorous campaign against dogs
and rabbits, and money was liberally expended in fencing and water improvements. At the
present time the whole run, about 1 18,000 acres, of perpetual lease, has been enclosed by a
substantial dog-proof fence, wells have been put down and repaired, windmills erected,
and tanks have been
made in suitable
places to ensure the
carrying of the pre-
sent flocks, now
numbering about
10,000
During Mr.
Sawers’ lease eleven
new dams have been
made, while the run,
SHEOAK HILLS WOOLSHED.
5
395
The Sheoak Hills and Pitcairn Estates, South Australia,


which was originally nine paddocks, is now
divided into eighteen sheep-proof paddocks.
Two of the wells are fitted with en-
gines and pumps, also windmills, while
three more of the wells are fitted up
with windmills and large tanks made
of stone, with a holding capacity of 60,000
gallons.
During the last six or seven good years
the saltbush, which was the principal
standby, has been attacked by a species of
STUD RAMS, SHKOAK HILLS.
grubs. Some attack the roots and hollow them out, thereby killing the plant; others attack
the branches and leaves from above with equally disastrous results. Should a drought come
PITCAIRN STUD EWES AND LAMBS.
along, Messrs. Sawers Bros, realise that the carrying capacity of Pitcairn must be reduced
considerably. Messrs. Sawers Bros, pur-
chased Pitcairn from their parents early in
1907, together with sheep, cattle, and ef-
fects. Messrs. E. D. and R. W. Sawers man-
age the property. The sheep are nearly all
plain-bodied, large frames, carrying a
dense fleece of long medium strength wool,
carrying plenty of condition. The country
is absolutely free from diseases.
The woolshed is fitted with the latest
labour-saving appliances—nine stands of
machines, driven by a 6 h.p. oil engine.
WOOLSCOUR, SHEOAK HILLS FOUR-TOOTH STUD RAM.
6
396
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


GENERAL VIEW OF PITCAIRN.
/
397
The Sheoak Hills and Pitcairn Estates, South Australia.


£hc Country.
The country, which is of an undulating
nature, is covered by saltbush and grass. A
good portion of the former is dead, and
the grass is coming as a substitute.
personal.
Mr. A. D. Sawers was born in Stirling,
Scotland, on sth October, 1836, and he was
educated at the High School and at the Uni-
versity of Glasgow. After spending some
time in a Liverpool shipping office, he came
out credited to the firm of Flower, McLaren,
WELL AND TANK, PITCAIRN.
and Co., Melbourne, in 1854, but shortly afterwards Mr. Sawers went to his cousin’s station,
Rich Avon, on the Avon, near the present township of Donald. I hen he went to Kadnook, on
the Glenelg, a station belonging to Stephen Henty, and became manager until it was sold.
He then left for Adelaide, and bought from his uncle, Mr. John Primrose, Uno Station, 70
miles west of Port Augusta. Mr. Sawers was there twenty-three years, but on account of
lapsing of leases in 1888, and the excessive rents, he did not take it up again. Iwo years
after that he bought the Pitcairn Station, in the north-east, and after fourteen years there
he has transferred it to his four sons. Mr. A. D. Sawers has been almost fifty-eight years
continuously in the bush. Prior to buying Uno (in 1866-7), he went to the Barrier Ranges to
manage for Clough and Co., Melbourne, the Corona Station, and took the first sheep to Cob-
ham Lake, settling that and Yantara. This was in 1864, and Ernest Giles, the explorer,
was his guide.
SHEOAK HILLS COUNTRY.
8
398
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Bungaree Estate.
The Property of Messrs, H. C. & R. M. Hawker.
BUNGAREE, the property of Messrs. H. C. and R. M. Hawker, is situated 100
miles north of Adelaide, and seven miles north of Clare. In 1841 the late Hon. G. C.
Hawker, with his brothers Charles and James, was travelling north with sheep, with
the idea of settling on what is now Bungaree, when they discovered that Mr. Robinson, also
with sheep, was hastening with the same end 111 view. Leaving his brothers with the flock,
Mr. G. C. Hawker hurried on ahead, and took up the country they had decided upon. Mr.
MARES AND FOALS.
Robinson then settled on what is now the Hill River Estate. Shortly afterwards Mr. Hawker
purchased from his brothers their interests in Bungaree, which then stretched from Clare
to the foot of the Hummocks Ranges, and from Kybunga to six miles north of the Brough-
ton River, 'this property was for some years all leasehold, but as it was put up to auction
by the Government at different times, Mr. Hawker purchased in all about 80,000 acres. On
his death in 1906 the property was divided among his six sons, who continued to work the
place together until 1907, when they dissolved partnersnip, each member taking his share of
I
399


A PANORAMIC VIEW.
the estate. Mr. R. M. Hawker purchased the old homestead, which adjoined his portion of
the estate. This is now Bungaree. Lieut. H. C. Hawker, R.N., who owns the north-west
portion of Bungaree, entered into partnership with Mr. R. M. Hawker, and the two places are
worked as one.
With the exception of a small portion of the property, Bungaree is all hill country,
lightly timbered with sheoak and gum. As no artificial feeding is ever done, the Bungaree
Merinos, reared on a country where the climate provides the extremes of temperature from
snow in winter to blazing heat in summer, are famed wherever they go for their constitu-
tion and capacity to hustle for a living.
Stub.
The Bungaree Merino Stud may be said to have been started in 1841 with the sheep
Mr. Hawker and his brothers originally took up to Bungaree. Mr. Hawker was always on the
lookout for sheep that would improve his own, and in 1844 procured some ewes from the
celebrated Camden House flock. In 1861 several Rambouillet rams were imported. This
importation proved a wonderful success, no doubt giving the Bungaree sheep their principal
characteristics. From that time on Bungaree jumped to the front as one of the leading
2
400
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


STATION BUILDINGS.
Merino studs of Australia, and has remained there ever since. In 1854, Mr. John Noble
took charge of the Bungaree Hock, and for nearly fifty years it was under his capable man-
agement. He succeeded in producing a large-framed, plain-bodied sheep, which as a profit-
maker it would be hard to beat. In 1899 three high-priced Wanganella rams were bought,
and tried with the ewes, but, as Mr. Noble says, they did not suit the country as well as the
pure Bungaree sheep, so their progeny were all disposed of.
For fifty years rams had to be sent up to Mr. Hawker’s northern properties, Parallana on
the edge of Lake Frome, and Carriewerloo, west of Port Augusta, and it was necessary to
breed a sheep with a long, strong-woolled staple and a heavy carcase. Two thousand
wethers on their way to market from Parallana when shorn at Bungaree clipped an aver-
age of 16] lbs., hand shorn each year. Four thousand of these sheep had been already dis-
posed of in the Adelaide market during June and July, 1906. One thousand of these Paral-
lana wethers in the previous year were sold to the butchers in Adelaide, and a careful record
was kept of the weights. They averaged 88 lbs. cold dressed weights.
Glenearn Station, in the Surat district, Queensland, has for many years used Bungaree
rams. Writing in August, 1910, the manager mentions that 2700 Glenearn wethers aver-
aged 74 lbs. freezing weight. He also mentioned that 700 bales out of a total clip of 1010
bales averaged over loci, per lb.
3
401
The Bungaree Estate, South Australia.


BUNGAREE
MERINOS.
Description.
Bales.
Price.
Description.
Bales.
Price.
d.
d.
Greasy Combing H
22
13
Greasy A Combing W
26
ni
55
1 2\
,, A „ W ...
42
114
,,
35
,, Combing Ell
39
I I
,, A ('oinbing E
40
12.2
W II
2 I
1 ti
A ,, E H
40
12\
, , • ,
37
ni
,, A ,, E
?o
I 2
, , , ,
51
Hi
A .. E
70
n£
23
I I
A E
20
11A
1st Pieces ...
I I
A E
38
ni
Pieces
toi
A E
31
ni
2nd Pieces ...
—
IO
A .. E
36
I I
Bellies
—
Si
TYPE OF HILL COUNTRY
One great thing about the Bungaree wool is the uniformly high prices it fetches; not a
case of a couple of lines of high-priced stuff, and then a big slump. A glance at the following
list of prices will explain this better than a page of written matter:
The above figures refer to the last time the wool was sold from the whole of Bungaree---
that is, prior to the dissolution of the firm of Hawker Bros. It is an extract from the report
of the London correspondent of the “Register,” who wrote, inter alia: “This clip fulfils one
condition which I have always maintained is the ‘reckoning day’ of all wool, namely, the
verdict of the saleroom and the price there made, for if buyers take the wool amid frantic
4
402
The Pastoral Homes of Australia


THE HOMESTEAD.
5
403
The Bungaree Estate,, South Australia.


THE GARDEN.
THE DRIVE.
6
404
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A BUNGAREE STUD EWE.
yells, and pay big prices for the same, that a'one is sufficient to stamp the mark of
approval on the clip. I call the above excellent prices, and every lot sold like fury.”
Carriewerloo, as before mentioned, is west of Port Augusta, and is now the property of
Messrs. H. C. and R. M. Hawker and Andrew Tennant. Eve: since this property
has been in the possession of the Hawker family—about fifty years—none but pure Bungaree
rams have been used there. The following figures for the total clip of 1907, 1908, 1909,
and 1910 are of interest. To fully appreciate them one must remember that Carriewerloo is
situated in the great drought country of the north, where the average rainfall is under /in.
per annum, and where in many years the horse has to be dispensed with in favour of the
mule: —■
1907 1908 1909
Description. cl. d. d.
Greasy A A Combing 11 ... ... ... ... ... l3 12.1
> 1 ~ ~ EH ... ... ... ... ... 11 12 12
~ ~ ~ W ... ... ... ... ... 11 j 2 12
» E ... ... ... 10J n| 12
A ~ II ... ... ... ... 1 1 i n 11
A ~ w 11 11 n|
A 1. E 11 u 1 i.t
Combing... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 10 lot
~ Ist Pieces H ... ... ... ... ... ... 10J lot lo
~ Ist I’ieces... ... ... .., 10 10 10
~ Bellies Hoggets .. ... ... ... ... ... 9 g g
~ Bellies 8£ Si 8
7
405
The Bungaree Estate, South Australia,


8
406
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


BUNGAREE STUD RAMS.
9
407
The Bungaree Estate, South Australia .


TADANGA.
Champion 2-year old, S.A. Won over ,£1,700 in stakes.
In 1910, 531 bales
averaged nfd., 53
bales pieces, average
9§d., and 42 bales bel-
lies The Carrie-
werloo sheep in these
four years averaged 11
lbs. 7 ozs.
In addition to grow-
ing a profitable fleece
and big frame, the Dun-
garee sheep are noted
for their high lambing
percentages. Mr. Noble
would not use a wild
ram, a fact which accounts for the sheep now being wonderfully quiet and tip-top mothers.
Last season (1911) the Dungaree breeding ewes averaged 92 per cent, of lambs. Included
in the breeding ewes were 1500 two-year ewes and 1 100 three-year ewes.
In 19 1 1 a Dungaree ram was champion at the Christchurch (N.Z.) Show, a pen of Dun-
garee fat wethers also gaining first honours at the same show. Dungaree sheep are reared
on country that is not rich; they are exposed to all the hardships of a rigorous
winter, which allows none but the fittest to survive; and they have proved themselves
great “doers,” not
only in the north
droughty country, but
also in the richer lands
of New Zealand.
IPcrsonaL
Mr. R. M. Hawker is
the seventh son of the
late Hon. G. C. Haw-
ker. He was educated
at St. Peter’s College,
Adelaide, and at Gee-
long Grammar School.
He studied medicine at
MEDAGLIA (Medallion-Second Thought)
Won Adelaide Cup, S. A. Stakes, w.f.a., and 9 other races.
IO
408
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A MOB OF BUNGAREE WETHERS.
II
409
The Bungaree Estate, South Australia•


THE WOOL TEAM.
Trinity Hall, Cambridge, for four years, and then returned to South Australia. He is well
known all over Australia as a keen racing man, who races for the pure sport of it. He does
most of his racing in South Australia, where he has won every race of importance, but he
has also successfully invaded Melbourne at various times. He is owner of the champion filly
Tadanga, whose recent match with Wolawa aroused such wide interest. In his younger
days Mr. R. M. Hawker was a noted big game shooter, travelling all over the world in this
pursuit. He is honorary collector for the British Museum. In his house at Bungaree there
are many fine skins and heads. In addition he has presented many trophies to the Bristol
and Adelaide Museums. In 1904 he married Adelaide, youngest daughter of Mr. Andrew
Tennant, the well-known South Australian pastorahst.
Lieut. H. C. Hawker, third son of the late Hon. G. C. Hawker, retired from the Royal
Navy in 1882, after serving seventeen years. He went out to the Boer war with the second
South Australian contingent, was invalided home, and now resides in England. His eldest
son, Mr. Seymour Hawker, is farming a part of Bungaree, which he purchased from his father,
and his other two sons are in the Royal Engineers in England.
12
410
The Pastoral Homes of Australia


The crissoge, Mangabane, Otatara and
Ohurukuru Estate
The Property of Mr. G. P. Donnelly
THE fine New Zealand estates described in these pages are the property of Mr. G. P.
Donnelly, one of the most prominent pioneer pastoralists of New Zealand. He was
born in County Tipperary, Ireland, and on his father’s decease left for New Zea-
land, arriving in Auckland in 1862, accompanied by his mother, three sisters, and three
A MOB OF SOUTHDOWN EWES AT CRISSOGE. THE PROGENY OF IMPORTED SHEEP BRED BY THE LATE
KING EDWARD VII. AT SANDRINGHAM.
brothers, his mother having been advised to come to New Zealand by her relati\e, Capt.
Hamilton, R.N., of H.M.S. “Esk,” then stationed in New Zealand. Soon after his arrival he
started farming with his brothers at Wairoa, South Auckland, and at Mangere.
In 1864 Mr. Donnelly joined the N.Z. cavalry and served during the Waikato War. In
1866 he sold out his property in the Auckland Province, and settled in Hawke’s Bay. He
was one of the first settlers to go to the Inland Patea, where he took up a large area of
I
411


land between the Ngaruroro and Rangitikei Rivers. This property is named Mangaohane
Station, and is still held by Mr. Donnelly. It contains 48,000 acres freehold and about
20,000 acres of leasehold, all being high country, from 2700 to 3 s°° feet above sea level.
This property carries about 40,000 Romney-Merino sheep, also a herd of horses and cattle.
Mangaohane when first taken up was native tussock, snow grass, mountain flax, scrub and
bush. The scrub and flax, through stocking,are fast disappearing, and the lower parts of
the country coming into danthonia grass.
CRISSOGE —SOUTHDOWN STUD FLOCK IN FOREGROUND.
In 1877 Mr. Donnelly married Airini, daughter of the late Chief Karauria, and niece of
Tareha, and took up his residence at “Crissoge,” near Hastings, the place being named
after one of his parents’ properties in Ireland. Mr. Donnelly farmed Crissoge in conjunction
with Ngatarawa and Turamoe. Turamoe was originally a large swamp, which Mr. Donnelly
drained, reclaimed, and grassed. When the movement for closer settlement started in
Hawke’s Bay, Mr. Donnelly cut up Turamoe and Ngatarawa, the land selling at from £l2 to
£35 per acre, and since resold at from £23 to per acre.
Mr. Donnelly also had a property at Waimarama, which he broke in, fenced, and
grassed so that it wintered 30,000 Lincoln-Merino sheep, in addition to about 3000 head of
cattle and 200 horses. This property, with the exception of one or two small areas held
2
412
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


TWO VIEWS OF OTATARA.
Group of Thoroughbred Mares in foreground, including Formula (full sister to Multiform), Edith Cureton (dam—Frailty), Louisa
(Wehikore—Louie),Stressa, imp. Orvieto—St. Mildred ).Pearl Powder (dam—Pearl Ash, imp.), Pearlshot (Torpedo—Pearl Powder).
Lady Delaval (Seaton Delava Edith Cureton), Kahuwai (Quilt —Brooklet), and others.
3
413
The Crissoge, Mangaohane, Otatara and Ohurukuru Estates, N.Z.


by the native owners, was also cut up and disposed of in blocks
of small areas. Mr. Donnelly’s present homestead, “Otatara,”
overlooks the bay, and the towns of Napier, Taradale, Hastings
and Havelock N., also the rich low-lying lands so richly planted
and subdivided, and owned by 7 small farmers.
Mr. Donnelly still keeps his racing stud and brood mares.
He first started racing in 1864, when he rode in the Garrison
Hunt Steeplechase at Tamaki, Auckland. He first started his
stud with the imported horse Pacific, dam Disagreeable, by
Flatcatcher, by Touchstone. Pacific’s stock raced well both on
the flat and over country, and with his progeny Mr, Donnelly won
a number of flat and jumping races, including the Grand National
Steeplechase on several occasions. His latest sire, Gold Reef
(imp.), by Bend ’Or, has also been very successful in producing
winners both on the flat and over country.
MORI PERRY.
Among the other stock located at Crissoge are the thoroughbred sires end mares, in-
cluding Formula (the full sister to Multiform), which was purchased by Mr. Donnelly for
1050 guineas at the disposal of the Wellington Park Stud; Stressa, purchased from the late
Mr. Stead’s stud for 550 guineas; Edith Cureton (half-sister to Trentham, dam Frailty);
Lady Cecilia (Cuirassier-Ouida), Pearl Powder (the dam of The Rand), Pursering, dam of
Gold Thread, one of the fastest mares in New Zealand, who, with lost. Hb. at Randwick,
N.S.W., in a held of twenty-two, was only beaten by a head by Poi Dance, carrying 7st
61b., in the good time of imin. I3sec.; also Kautuku, by Torpedo-Brooklet. He .always had
from six to twelve horses in training, and on one occasion has been known to win more than
half the races on the programme at a race meeting. Mr. Donnelly still has six horses in
training, and takes as much interest in racing as ever. He started hunting in Auckland in
1864, and is still a strong supporter of the H.B. Hunt. Both Mr. and Mrs. Donnelly, and
their daughter, Mrs. Perry, consistently rode with the hounds, negotiating many seven-wire
fences (the top being barbed) during the day. He has been a member of the H.B. Jockey
Club for over fortv years, and in 1868 won his first race in Hawke’s Bay, riding his own
horse, Bob, beating a held of twelve.
Running at Crissoge is also the stud flock of Southdowns bred from imported rams
and ewes bred by the late King Edward VII. at Sandringham, which took first, second and
champion at the “Royal” in their year.
Mr. Donnelly has always been a strong supporter of the Hawke’s Bay Agricultural
Society, and an exhibitor of sheep, cattle and horses. He won the special prize for weight-
carrying hacks given by Mr. Coleman six years in succession with his horse The Master,
which was never beaten in the Dominion.
4
414
fhe Pastoral Homes of Australia,


1. Mrs. Donnelly, sen., mother of Mr. G. P. Donnelly.
2. Master Derek Churchill Prior Perry.
3. P. Donnelly.
4. Airini, the late Mrs G. P. Donnelly.
5. Mrs. Maud Airini Perry, daughter of Mr. & Mrs. Donnelly
6. Miss Nellie Airini Elizabeth Perry.
415
The Crissoge, Mangaohane, Otatara and Ohurukuru Estates, N.Z.


When Col. Wyndham came to New Zealand with the Imperial troops, Mr. and Mrs.
Donnelly mounted the four officers. The Master - on that occasion being ridden by Col
Wyndham, and was afterwards presented to him by Mr. and Mrs. Donnelly, through the
late Mr. R. J. Seddon. The h orse subsequently took a first prize in Ireland, and was much
admired by everybody as a weight-carrying hunter when ridden to hounds by Col. Wynd-
ham in Ireland.
Mr. Donnelly, in the early days, also took up a very rough block of country near Pohui,
called Ohurukuru, which by extensive falling of bush and scrub, and grassing, now carries
a flock of 16,000 Romney-Merino sheep. He is now having a further 2000 acres of bush
fallen, and when the lease expires, the estate will become the property of Mr. Donnelly’s
daughter, Mrs. Pern'.
MR. G. P. DONNELLY WITH HIS DAUGHTER, MRS. PERRY, AND HER THREE CHILDREN.
Mr. Donnelly has always led a very active life, his great ambition being to take up large
properties and break them in.
He has never spared sufficient time to take up public life, although requested by the late
Mr. Seddon and Sir Joseph Ward on more than one occasion to stand for Parliament. He
always took a great interest in the welfare of the late Mrs. Donnelly’s people, and fought
their battles, the result being that the relatives of the late Mrs. Donnelly are some of the
largest landed proprietors and wealthiest natives in New Zealand. For many years Mr. Don-
nelly has been an active member of the Hawke’s Bay County Council, the committee of the
Hawke’s Bay Agricultural and Pastoral Society, and president of the Hawke’s Bay Jockey
Club. He also takes a great interest in the newly-formed Hawke’s Bay Rivers Board and
has been a member of that board since its inception.
6
416
Tho Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Mr. Donnelly has only one daughter, Mrs. Perry, and three grandchildren (Airini, Derek,
and Mori Perry). Mrs. Perry is at present in England, where the grandchildren are being
educated.
Despite the fact that Mr. Donnelly has taken such an active part in Maori affairs, it
should be put on record that he has never trafficked in native lands, though he has at different
times purchased land originally bought by Europeans from the natives. Indeed, it is on
GROUP OF FAT CULLOCKS FROM CRISSOGE.
record that, though the late Mrs. G. P. Donnelly left the Waimarama property to her hus
band, at a subsequent meeting of the executors and Mrs. Donnelly’s relatives he declined to
take the property, it having been a matter of principle with him not to traffic in native lands,
Waimarama was valued at £85,000, and at a meeting of Mrs. Donnelly’s executors and re-
latives Mr. Donnelly handed it all back to his wife’s estate.
A DRAFT FROM 14,000 CRISSOGE FAT SHEEP SOLD TO THE MEAT EXPORT COMPANIES 1901
417
417
The Crissoge, Mangaohane, Otatara and Ohurukuru Estates, N.Z.


WAIMARAMA STATION.
Showing Native Church, Hear Island, and Sea Beach.
In October, 1912, Mr. Donnelly contributed an interesting article to the “Hawke’s Bay
Tribune,” on the development of the East Coast of New Zealand during the past fifty years.
The article was headed “Looking Backward,” and it is worth reproducing here:
“ Fifty years ago the whole of the land lying between Wellington and Hawke’s Bay was
covered with dense fern, scrub, bush, raupo, and flax swamps, which have all been most
successfully drained and brought under cultivation. Only a small portion of the Ruataniwha
Plain, Waipukurau and the tops of the ridges had native grass. What you see to-day all
covered with English and native grasses has been broken in by the early pioneers by cut-
ting, burning, fencing, draining, sowing and stocking. The great trouble to the first settlers
was the want of stock, for when the fern was burnt the young fern sprang up immediately,
so that it took a number of sheep to the acre to keep it down. Of course, when stock be-
came more plentiful it was very much easier to cope with the fern. The sheep and cattle
had almost to be starved in order to break in the country. At the present time young fern
car be made use of to advantage, being a splendid change for young stock, who do well
on it.
The whole of the land lying between Takapau and Masterton was nearly all dense bush.
About the year ’6B two ships came to New Zealand with Scandinavians and Danes, whom
the South Island would not have. Mr. Ormond, who was then Superintendent of Hawke’s
Bay, was approached by Dr. Featherston, Superintendent of Wellington, the result being
that he took the two shiploads, and started them at Takapau, giving each man a farm on
condition that it was to be improved by felling and grassing. They had to work so many
8
418
The Pastoral Homes of Australia


THE MASTER.
Presented by Mr. and Mrs. Donnelly to Colonel Wyndham on the occasion of
the visit of the Imperial Troops to the Dominion. This horse won first prize as a
weight-carrying hack up to 14 stone for six years running at the Hawke’s Hay
Show. He won five years running in the 15-stone class at Palmerston North, and
many other similar prizes. The Master also won the Feilding Hunt Steeplechase in
1911, and the Wanganui Steeplechase in 1912.
days a week making roads, for
which they were paid so much a day.
This was of very great assistance to
them, for the majority were people
of small means. Mr. Ormond also
started a number of small settlers at
Woodville, taking them from Wai-
pawa, Waipukurau, and other parts
of the district, which was the means
of opening up that large and pros-
perous area of land in the Southern
pan of Hawke’s Bay.
Twenty years ago, when the
Seddon Government came into
power, the greater part of
Hawke’s Bay lands was held
in large runs. Since then
there have been a number of estates
taken by the Government, which have turned out a very great success. This has been the
means of educating the large land-owners in cutting up and disposing of their estates in
smaller blocks. The following list of properties which have been cut up during the last
twenty years will give some idea of the closer settlement that has been going on in Hawke’s
Bay, and if it goes on as it has done, Hawke’s Bay will in the near future be carrying a very
large population.
J. D. Ormond, Wallingford, 24,000 acres, 11,000 acres disposed of in small blocks, and is still selling. Also a
property at Gisborne. Tuki Tuki, sold by E. ,1. Watt, and afterwards cut up for closer settlement. Longlands, near Has-
tings, cut up by E. J. Watt into small holdings. Turamoe and Ngatarawa, about 3000 acres rich swamp and agricultural
land, cut up for closer settlement by G. P. Donnelly, also Waimarama, mostly occupied by me, about 35,000 acres, 7000
acres sold to the Government, balance cut up into small holdings. Maraekakaho, Douglas McLean’s, about 38,000 acres,
cut up for closer settlement, the balance, 12,000 acres, in occupation of Mr. McLean. Frimley Estate, all cut up for closer
settlement. Flaxmere, Sir W. Russell's and A. H. Russell’s, nearly all cut up. Hill’s Estate, Fernhill, nearly all cut up.
Moteo, about 7000 acres, cut up into about four blocks. Matapiro, cut up into about four blocks. Tunanui, Sir W. Russell’s
and A. H. Russell’s, cut up into about four blocks, 8000 acre s of this being purchased by the Government for closer settle-
ment Shield’s Konini, about 10,000 acres, cut up into three blocks. Kereru, cut up by the Steads into about five blocks.
Gwavas about three blocks have been cut up. Bridge’s Estate, Ruataniwha, cut up for closer settlement. A’Deanes’,
5600 acres, cut up into small blocks. Grant’s Estate, cut up for closer settlement. S. Johnson's, a portion cut up for closer
9
419
The Crissoge, Mangaohane, Otatara and Ohurukuru Estates, N.Z.


settlement. Fleming’s, cut up into small blocks. Newman’s, cut up for closer settlement. Johnson’s Motuotaraia, cut
up into small holdings. N. E. Beamish, Otamauri and Whanawhana, cut up into four blocks. H. Campbell, Poukawa, has
cut up 3000 acres into small holdings. J. M. Leigh’s (formerly T. Tanner’s), Ensleigh, 2000 acres cut up. Purvis Russell s,
at Waipukurau, cut up for closer settlement. Gollan’s, all cut up for closer settlement. Nairn’s Pourere, divided into
several blocks. Williams, Edenham, cut up into several blocks. McHardy’s, Blackhead, cut up into four or five blocks.
G. Hunter’s, cut up into several blocks. White’s, Porangahau, cut up into small blocks. Handyside’s, Akitio, cut up into a
number of blocks. Armstrong’s, Akitio, cut up into about three blocks. Rhodes’ Run, Rissington (one of the largest in the
Province), all been cut up into small blocks. Waterhouse, Managwhare, sold part of his run. Chesterhope and Pakowhai
MANGAOHANE STATION.
Showing Woolshed and Station Buildings.
havdbofh been tut uppnlo small blocks. Chambers Bros., Puketapu, cut up into about three blocks. J. White’s Estate,
Braeburn, 4430 acres cut up. Douglas Bros., Te Mahanga, have sold 4500 acres in small blocks, and are still selling.
McFarlane, The Grange, 4000 acres cut up and sold. M. Chambers, Taurca, has cut up 3000 acres. B. Chambers, Te Mata,
has cut up 1000 acres, and is still selling. H. McKenzie, Redcastle, cut up 3300 acres into small blocks. Mackersey, Tangoio.
8410 acres cut up for closer settlement. H. Gaisford, Mount Herbert, 21,000 acres cut up into small holdings. P. A.
McHardy, Aramoana, 7300 acres cut up. (Some of these blocks were divided among large families, w hich, of course, is
quite justifiable).
The whole of the lands lying between Hawke’s Bay and Wairarapa are composed of rich
alluvial flats, low-lying limestone hills, and the balance papa and shingle subsoil formation.
The land, when the scrub and bush is fallen, takes grass splendidly, and when sown with
grass seed, with which is mixed a little turnip seed, can be stocked within six months of the
burning off. This is not so with the fern land, however, as it takes years to get it burned
off and to cultivate a good sward of grass. With our beautiful climate, which is one of the
finest in the world, as a rule having suffi dent rainfall, the day is not far distant when the
greater part of the rich limestone land will be turned into dairy farms.
TO
420
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


There is a large area of native and Crown land lying between Napier and the Thames.
When the railway which has been started is pushed through as it should be, even if the
Government have to borrow several millions to do it, it will, with good roads and light rail-
ways to connect with the main line, be the means of bringing in a large area of land for
closer settlement. The light land, which was looked upon years ago as being useless, is now,
VIEW ON MANGAOHANE.
Showing Suspension Bridge, Old Station, Stock Yard and Wool Scouring Plant
by means of artificial manuring and proper farming, good grass country for sheep and cattle.
One has only to look at the returns of the Gisborne district to-day and compare them with
those of thirty years ago to see how that part of the country has progressed.
I am sure that if the Government purchased the large area of land lying on both sides
of the railway, belonging to the natives, it would be a profitable investment for the country
and a benefit to the natives, saving them from becoming a burden on the State in the near
future. Paying natives large amounts of money only means that it will be squandered in a
few months, as they have no idea of the value of money, with the exception of a few, who
are making very good settlers, both in dairying and sheep farming. Ngata has been carry-
11
421
The Crissoge, Mangaohane, Otatara and Ohurukuru Estates, N.Z.


ing on sheep and cattle farming with his tribe with very great success, and he deserves
every credit for the trouble he has taken.
I would strongly recommend that, when opening up the land on the East Coast, the Gov-
ernment should do away with the ballot, and adopt Mr. Ormond's idea of having the land
settled by associations. A number of families could then go to the Government and say that
they wanted a certain area of land. The land could then be surveyed and cut into blocks,
VIEW OF MANGAOHANE.
according to quality, and drawn for, thus ensuring that each family would secure a block.
I think the Government would find this the most successful way of settling a large area of
country. Of course, if the would-be settlers lied not sufficient money to make the improve-
ments it would be necessary for the Government to lend it at a reasonable rate of interest.
This would be the means of bringing into profitable occupation a vast area of country that
would provide homes for a larger population, and furnish a large revenue to the Dominion.
There would still be a large area of rough and high country which would not be suitable for
close settlement. This could be cut up into large areas and sold or leased to capitalists,
I 2
422
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


who would be the means of getting this land scrubbed, felled, and sown in grass, and in
years to come, when the country becomes more thickly populated, it could be cut up, with
very great advantage, into small grazing runs.
There are two classes of settlers required, the large landed proprietors, who have the
means to break in the rough land, and the small settler who follows up as the country be-
comes more thickly populated. In order to continue the carrying out of closer settlement
VIEW OF MANGAOHANE HOMESTEAD.
it would be necessary to get the right class of immigrants. These should be all farmers
and agricultural labourers and a number of youths between fourteen and seventeen years
of age who have had a certain amount of training in the old country; also a large number of
domestics of the right class. I am quite sure, if gone about properly, the right class of people
are to be had.
I think when one looks back fifty years, and sees what the country was then and what
it is now, that the pioneers deserve very great credit for their energy and hard work in bring-
ing in these vast beautiful lands to what they are to-day. It is a great pity that people should
i3
423
The Crissoge, Mangaohane, Otatara and Ohurukuru Esiat es, h.Z


cause bad feeding between the old settlers and the new, as there is still ample room in the
Dominion for both. With the prospects ahead of us in the market for frozen sheep and lamb
and wool, it will be quite impossible for the small farmer to keep up his ewe flock so as to
enable him to breed fat lambs. This the large landed proprietors will be able to do by break-
ing in and bringing under cultivation the high country and back blocks, and by carrying
TYPICAL COUNTRY ON MANGAOHANE
large flocks of sheep and cattle, thus enabling the small farmers to draw on them for their
ewe flocks every year. This would be the means of both large and small proprietors carry-
ing on sheep farming with success.
On the West Coast, from Wellington to Taranaki, the climate is different from that of
Hawke’s Bay, having a larger rainfall, and, as the land is nearly all cut up into small blocks,
both grazing and dairying are being carried on there with very great success. This will con-
tinue in an even greater degree than at present when the stumps and logs are all decayed
and the land can be ploughed and brought into a better state of cultivation. I have here
the returns of a few herds of cows on the West Coast and in the Wairarapa district, from
T 4
424
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


which you will see that if the farmers would only take more trouble to have their cows
tested and the right strain of blood used, there is no reason why the majority should not
have as good results as are shown by these returns. It clearly shows that if, in some cases,
dairying has not been profitable, it is not the fault of the land or the climate, but the want
of a better system of farming and testing their cows.
THE MANAGER’S HOUSE, OHURUKURU.
Name of farmer, address, and returns per cow, including calves, and pigs : —M. McPhillips, Manaia, £23 2s. Od. ;
H. Rayner, Carterton, £lB 15s. 2d. ; Joe Uudy, Dalefield, £lB 9s. IGd. ; J. Brady, Bunnythorpe, £l6 10s. Od. ; F. Lewis,
Bunnythorpe, £l6 4s. Od. ; E. Rose, Bunnythorpe, £l4 ss. Od. ; E. Holland, Bunnythorpe, £l5 4s. Od. ; L. Lassin, Bunny-
thorpe, £l5 Os. Od. ; T. Fowler, Bunnythorpe, £l4 15s. Od. Mr. McPhillips’ returns are the result of testing and culling.
Thanks are due to Mr. Murray, of the Waiohiki cheese factory, for supplying me with the above returns.
Hawke’s Bay must eventually be a very large and prosperous dairy centre with its
rich alluvial flats and low undulating hills. The only drawback might be that we get
occasional dry season in Hawke’s Bay, but as the land is so very rich and adapted for grow-
ing lucerne, a man with fifty acres of land, having from seven to ten acres well ploughed and
free from weeds and grass, sown with lucerne in September, would always be guaranteed
*5
425
The Crissoge, Mangaohane, Otatara and Ohurukuru Estates, N.Z.


ample food for his cows during the dry season, and an acre or two of mangolds for winter
feed. In this district you can cut lucerne from three to four times during the season, and in
ordinary seasons, besides feeding cows on it, you could have saved and stacked a quantity of
lucerne hay which you could always fall back upon during the dry season. This, with plenty
of newly-cut lucerne and a little willow leaves, cut judiciously—not all cut down at once —
will make splendid feed. Willows grow so magnificently in Hawke’s Bay that there are
FRONT ENTRANCE TO OHURUKURU, SHOWING NATIVE BUSH.
thousands of tons going to waste every year which might have been used for forage for
stock; and if property cut, the tree is not injured at all, in fact it grows more luxuriantly
next season. These facts are indisputable by any person who has lived in the district for a
number of years. Dairying has not been carried on to the same extent in Hawke’s Ray as
it has been on the West Coast of this island, the land here being mostly used as grazing coun-
try for sheep and cattle.
Fifty years ago the greater portion of the land lying north of Auckland was looked upon
as useless. To-day we find large areas planted with fruit trees and vines, and large areas
i 6
426
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


sown with native danthonia and other suitable grasses, carrying large quantities of sheep and
cattle. The North Island is, 1 consider, in its infancy, and with its even climate and rain-
fall and rich and light lands, will carry an immense population. This being indisputable,
the Government of the day would be quite justified in borrowing in order to open up all wasle
lands.
OHURUKURU STATION.
Showing native bush, The Class Of Country Mr. Donnelly Has Been
breaking in.
The settlers in the South Island were placed in a very different position to those in the
North Island. The North Island settlers had not only to face a dense forest of fern, scrub,
and heavy timber, but there was also the native trouble, which lasted for many years. Had
it not been for the assistance of the friendly natives who helped the Government and the
early settlers, the country would not have been so advanced to-day. The South Island
settlers had not the native troubles, and the lands taken up in the early days were princi-
pally native grass and tussock. The settlers had only to import their stock from Australia
and they got an immediate return. Hence the prosperity of the South Island in the early
days when the North Island was only struggling.
It is a great pity that when the books were being written on New Zealand there were no
records of the early settlements and the native trouble on the East Coast, as it would have
made a very interesting volume. The pioneers are disappearing as time goes on, and while
such men as Mr. Ormond, Sir William Russell, Mr. Tanner, Mr. R. D. D. McLean, Mr. Cole-
i 7
427
The Crissoge, Mangaohane, Otatara and Ohurukuru Estates, N.Z.


man, Mr. J. N. Williams, Mr. Rymer, Mr. de Pelichet, Mr. S. Johnson, Mr. Wm. Nelson,
Major Gascoyne, and Mr. Mason Chambers and other settlers who went through the whole of
the pioneering on the East Coast, are with us, no time should be lost in having the memories
of the old days written.
A GROUP AT OHURUKURU. THE MANAGER'S WIFE. ( MRS MACKAY ) AND FAMILY.
There is no doubt that the Dominion is at the present time in a most prosperous condi-
tion. With the present prospects for wool, frozen meat, dairy produce and flax, the outlook
is encouraging. If the Government can only see its way to carry on until the financial strin-
gency is past, there is every reason to expect that the prosperity of the Dominion in the
future will be even greater than it has been in the past. The richness of our land and our
marvellous climate will, under good government, ensure this ”
The “Christchurch Press” drew the attention of the public to Mr. Donnelly’s article in
the following leading article which appeared on October 31st, 1912; —
SETTLEMENT IN HAWKE'S BAY.
Mr. Massey, in the debate on the tlhrd reading of the Land Bill, pointed out that a system of free trade in land tended
towards the breaking up of large estates, and he instanced Waikato and Canterbury as cases in point. The process was
going on all over New Zealand, and he believed that in ten years’ time there would not be a large estate left in New Zealand.
In making this remark he was stating a fact evident to everyone who cares to use the ordinary powers of observation. When -
ever large estates are mentioned, however, Hawke’s Bay is at once held up as a shocking example, and the public are led
to believe that the whole of that province is in few hands, and that no signs are yet to be seen of the process of closer settle-
ment going on elsew here.
Mr. G. P. Donnelly, in an article in the “Hawke’s Bay Tribune ” of October 24th, show's that this idea is highly fal-
lacious. He gives a list of no fewer than 46 properties which have been cut up during the last twenty years, and shows that
the process is still going on. We reprint the list in another column. Mr. Donnelly says very frankly that some of the blocks
were divided among large families, w hich, he thinks, is quite justifiable. Surely all fair-minded persons will agree with that
i 8
428
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


view. We are quite at a loss to understand why sub-division is only beneficial when a property passes into the hands of
strangers, and why a pioneer who has had the task of bringing a property into profitable use should not, when the time
has come for its closer settlement, dispose of it among members of his own family, instead of selling it to outsiders. We
should agree with the objection if such sub-divisions were not bona fide, but were merely a device for evading the graduated
land tax, but the stringent provisions of the Land and Income Tax Assessment Act are, we believe, quite effective for the
purpose of defeating any such plans.
A GROUP AT THE HAWKES BAY JOCKEY CLUB’S SPRING MEETING, 1911.
Reading from left to right—The Hon. J. D. Ormond, M.L.C., Miss Airini Perry, His Excellency Lord Islington, Miss Shaw,
Mr. W. E. Bidwill, Capt. Shannon (A.D.C.), Mrs. J. Ormond, Jun., and Mr. G. P. Donnelly (President).
Mr. Donnelly also gives an interesting history of settlement in Hawke’s Bay, and reminds us of the enterprise and
energy of the pioneers, the hardships and risks they encountered before they achieved success. Fifty years ago, he tells us,
the whole of the land lying between Wellington and Hawke’s Bay was covered with dense fern, scrub, bush, raupo, and
flax swamps, which have all been most successfully drained and brought under cultivation. The land between Takapau
and Masterton was nearly all dense bush. About the year 1868 two ships came to New Zealand with Scandinavians and
Danes, whom the South Island would not have. Mr. Ormond, who was then Superintendent of Hawke’s Bay, was approached
by Dr. Featherstone, Superintendent of Wellington, the result being that he took two ship loads and started them at Takapau,
giving each man a farm on condition that it was to be improved by felling and grassing. They had to work so many days
a week making roads, for which they were paid so much a day. This was of very great assistance to them, for the majority
were people of small means. Mr. Ormond also started a number of small settlers at Woodville, taking them from Waipawa,
Waipukurau, and other parts of the district, which was the means of opening up that large and prosperous area of land in
the southern part of Hawke’s Bay. In other words, one of the much-abused Hawke’s Bay squatters was a pioneer in the
work of promoting closer settlement on the most liberal terms.
As to the future, Mr, Donnelly points out the direction in which closer settlement is likely to expand. He that
the Government should buy the Native land likely to be benefited by the East Coast Railway, and throw it open for settle-
ment on the system of family associations advocated by Mr. Ormond. If the settlers had not sufficient money to make the
necessary improvements, the Government should lend it to them at a low rate of interest. He points out that there would
*9
429
The Crissoge, Mangaohane, Otatara and Estates, NZ,


still be a large area of rough and high country which would not be suitable for close settlement. This could be cut up into
large areas and sold or leased to capitalists, w ho would be the means of getting this land scrubbed, felled, and sown in grass,
and in years to come, when the country becomes more thickly populated, it could be cut up, with very great advantage,
into small grazing runs. There is no doubt that the pioneers did a most valuable work in breaking in the country, and that
there is still work of the same kind to be done.
GOLDREEF (IMP.) BY BEND ’OR, OUT OF CRUCIBLE.
Photo taken when 23 years old.
As soon as a large estate has been broken in and made valuable, it is bound in the natural course of things to be cut up
and made available for closer settlement. The graduated land tax has been the process, and, indeed, makes it inevitable.
From all appearance sheep-farming will gradually decline in New Zealand, and dairying will, to a large extent, take its place.
We believe that most practical men will agree w ith Mr. Donnelly that the North Island is in its infancy, and with its even
climate and rainfall, and its rich and light lands, will carry an immense population. But to bring this about capital is neces-
sary, and if this is to be secured we must adopt a different policy from that which has been pursued in the past. Capital
must be regarded as a friend, not as an enemy, and we must endeavour to attract both capital and population to the country,
instead of seeing, as in the past, what can be done to keep both aw ay.
20
430
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Tamumu Estate
The Property of Mr. J. Goring Johnston
AND
The Castlepoint and Highden Estate
The Property of Mrs. W. W. Johnston.
THE photographs published here-
with illustrate some typical
grazing and farming country
in New Zealand. A large portion of
the Dominion is, of course, devoted to
general agriculture and dairying, but
there are still considerable areas left
which, on account of the nature of the
country and soil, will always be de-
voted to grazing, particularly to wool-
growing. The properties illustrated
herein are Tarnumu, owned by Mr. J.
Goring Johnston, and Castlepoint and
Highden, owned by his mother, widow
of the late Hon. Walter Woods John-
ston. There are also included photos
of Mr. J. Goring Johnston’s residence
at Palmerston North.
THE DRIVE THROUGH NATIVE BUSH AT HIGHDEN.
Tamumu is situated in the district of Hawkes Bay, and is about seven miles from the
town of Waipawa, with which it is connected by telephone. Waipawa is about thirty-five
miles from Napier, the port of Hawkes Bay, and the railway from Napier to Wellington runs
through it.
The Tamumu run originally consisted of about 15,500 acres, and was purchased in the
seventies by the Hon. John Johnston, on whos death it became the property of his eldest
son, the Hon. Walter Woods Johnston.
About 1903, owing to the Government then in power having introduced a very severe
graduated land tax, Mr. Johnston disposed of about half of the property, retaining the home-
stead and about 7700 acres. On Mr. Walter Johnston’s death, in 1907. the property passed
I
431


into the hands of his eldest son, Mr. Goring Johnston. 1 amumu is heavy papa country,
hilly, and undulating, and was originally covered with dense fern and bush. It is now all
cleared and laid down in English grasses, principally rye grass, and is divided into seven
large paddocks and about twenty smaller ones. The run is well watered with streams and
dams.
The winter carrying capacity is about 14,000 sheep (of which about 7000 are breeding
ewes) and about 800 cattle. The flock was originally Lincoln, but of late years Romney
rams have been used exclusively, with the result that the flock now shows all the character-
istics of the Romney.
GENERAL VIEW OF TAMUMU COUNTRY.—THIS VALLEY WAS ORIGINALLY HEAVY BUSH
The Tamumu sheep bear a high reputation in Hawkes Bay, and the cull breeding ewes
are eagerly sought after. The clip averages from gh lbs. to 10 lbs. per sheep, and the lamb-
ing averages about 90 per cent. Practically nothing in the way of cultivation is done at
Tamumu. About 4000 fat sheep are sold annually off the property, and about 100 head of
fat cattle.
A small stud flock of about 200 Romney ewes is kept, from which are bred the rams
required for use on the property. Mr. Johnston is a firm believer in the strong-woolled,
thick-set, square-framed Romney, low to the ground, with heavy bone.
The shearing shed is built on the T principle, and is fitted with twelve stands of shear-
ing machines. At one end of the shed Mr. Johnston has built a covered-in dipping bath,
2
432
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


PLANTATION AT THE TAMUMU HOMESTEAD.
STUD ROMNEY BREEDING EWES AT TAMUMU.
3
433
The Tamumu, Castlepoint and Highden Estates, New Zealand.


4
434
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


the bath being of concrete and of regulation length, i.e., 60 ft.; the yards are arranged
handy to the shed and dip.
The years of careful attention given by the present owner’s grandfather and father to
the property and to the flock have resulted in the Tamumu clip being classed as one of the
best produced in Hawkes Bay. The property is managed by Mr. J. Riddell, who has
been on it for over twenty years.
dastlepoint.
Castlepoint, the property of Mrs. W. W. Johnston, is situated about eighty miles south
of Tamumu, and is right on the East Coast. The homestead is quite close to the beach. It
is, as far as New Zealand properties go, a big run, as it comprises about 16,500 acres, 7000
FATTENING BULLOCKS ON TAMUMU.
of which is coast country, now all clear and in good order, while about 5000 acres in the
centre of the run is rough scrub. The balance at the Tinui end of the run is fairly well
grassed in English and native grasses.
Castlepoint, which is 100 miles from Wellington and forty miles from Masterton (the
nearest railway station), was originally taken up on occupation lease by a Mr. Guthrie, to-
gether with a large area of surrounding country. Castlepoint proper was some time later
purchased by Mr. Waterhouse, who, in the early eighties, sold it to the late Mr. W. W. John-
ston, who on his death, in August, 1907, left it to his widow.
When the late Mr. Johnston took up Castlepoint, apart from the rugged nature of the
property and its isolation, he had other drawbacks to face. Scab was then rampant in
5
435
The Tamumu, Castlepoint and Highden Estates, New Zealand.


New Zealand, and the rabbits had become a terrible pest. The first-named scourge was
stamped out by the stringent regulations enforced by Government, and Mr. Johnston even-
tually overcame the rabbits by means of wire netting and poisoning. At the present time
and for years past rabbits have given no trouble on Castlepoint, though a pack of dogs is
always at work harassing the few that are to be found.
The carrying capacity of the property is now 16,500 sheep and 800 cattle. Ihe sheep
are of Romney-Lincoln cross, and the clip thoughout averages about 8i lbs. of wool. The
flock contains about 8000 breeding ewes, and the balance is made up of hoggets and 2-tooth
wethers. It is good healthy country, not as heavy carrying as Tamumu, but it returns an
A MOB OF BREEDING COWS, CASTLEPOINT
average lambing of 85 per cent. A draft of about 2000 fat 4-tooth wethers is turned off
every year, also a small number of fat lambs.
There is a shearing shed at Castlepoint fitted with eight stands of machines, and the
property is so well situated as far as sea front is concerned, that all the wool is sent away in
small coasters, and the stores arrive by the same means. The homestead is connected with
Masterton by telephone, and a coach runs out there three times a week. Castlepoint is one
of the prettiest seaside spots in New Zealand, with a beautiful beach and other natural ad-
vantages.
UMgbben.
Highden, the beautiful home of Mrs. W. W. Johnston, is situated ten miles from Palmer-
-6
436
lhe> Pastoral Homes of Australia ,


THE CASTLEPOINT HOMESTEAD.
VIEW OF REEF AND LIGHTHOUSE, CASTLEPOINT.
7
437
The Tamumu, Castlepoint and Highden Estates, New Zealand


ston North, six miles
from Feilding.and one
mile from the village of
Awahuri. The Highden
Estate originally con-
sisted of 7000 acres.
About 4000 acres have
been sold during the
last three years, and
averaged £ 47, and a
further 1200 acres
were sold by public auc-
tion in March 1913. This
latter block was sub-
divided into small dairy
farms. Highden was
THE WOOL SHED AND SHEEP YARDS, CASTLEPIONT.
devoted by the late Mr. Johnston to general farming and fattening. It is exceedingly rich
land, and produces great pastures, and root, and fodder crops. During the late Mr. John-
ston’s lifetime it was worked as a fattening depot in connection with the Tamumu and the
Castlepoint properties, and turned off annually 20,000 fat sheep and about 500 fat cattle.
During the last two years the 3000 remaining acres of the property have turned off
annually about 10,000 fat sheep and 400 fat cattle. The land is essentially dairying coun-
try, and has become too valuable to hold for breeding and fattening purposes. Mrs. John-
ston has, therefore, de-
cided to cut up and dis-
pose of probably about
another 2000 acres, and
will retain the 1000
acres embracing the
house and grounds.
Highden is named
after the seat of the
Goring family in Sus-
sex, and it is widely
known as one of the
most beautiful homes in
New Zealand. The
house is very large, and
ONE OF THE HIGHDEN PADDOCKS.
8
438
Ihe Pastoral Homes of Australia.


HIGHDEN HOUSE—SHOWING THE LAWN AND GARDENS
9
439
7 he Tamumu, Castlepoint and Highden Estates, New Zealand.


the drive up to it is over a mile in length through delightful natural bush. The gardens
cover about 10 acres, all beautifully laid out in lawns, flower beds, shrubberies. The house
was built by the late Mr. Johnston in 1887, and it is now occupied by his widow.
Mrs. Johnston, who races under the name of “Mr. Highden,” keeps a small thoroughbred
stud at Highden. The brood mares —about seven in all—are Parera (dam of Pas-Seul, Vasa,
Nyland, and Boanerges—all good winners), Waitemata (dam of Porirua and other winners),
Inamorata (dam of Chauvelin and Blakeney), Lustrous (dam of Miss Soult), Vasa, Celaeno,
Truce, and Perolina. The four latter are all young mares, and belong to good families.
Perolina is by Persimmon from La Carolina, and was purchased by the late Mr. G. G. Stead
YEARLING FILLLIES AT HIGHDEN.
Reading From Left To Right—B. F. King Rufus—Inamorata; b.f. Boniform—Waitemata; b.f. Martian—Perolina;
from the stud of King Edward VII. The late Mr. W. W. Johnston founded the stud with the
mares Parera and Waitemata. The sire to be used next season in all probability will be
Polymorphous (Multiform —Rumour), six years old, who was the best three-year-old of his
year. The yearlings at Highden are; Bay colt from Parera, by Boniform; bay filly from
Truce, by Martian; bay filly from Perolina, by Martian; bay filly from Waitemata, by Boni-
form; bay filly from Inamorata, by King Rufus. These will all be broken in shortly, and
will go to the racing stables. The foals are: Brown filly from Parera, by Elevation; chestnut
filly from Waitemata, by Elevation; chestnut filly from Celaeno, by Achilles; black filly from
Vasa, by Achilles.
Last season Mrs. Johnston came second on the list of winning owners with £7500 in
stakes, but during the present season the stable has been clean out of luck. The training
stables are situated at Awapuni, adjacent to the Manawatu Racing Club’s course, and quite
10
440
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


VIEWS OF THE OAKHURST HOUSE AND ROSE GARDEN.
441
The Tamumu, Castlepoint and Highden Estates, New Zealand,


close to the residence of Mr. Goring Johnston, who manages the stud and racing establish-
ment for his mother.
The training establishment comprises about 13 acres, on which are the trainer’s (Mr. G.
Price) house of eight rooms, a boys’ cottage of six rooms, and fourteen loose boxes. I here
are five well-grassed paddocks, a nice patch of native bush, and all the stables and quarters
are lighted with electricity. An artesian well supplies an unlimited quantity of beautiful
sparkling water for all purposes.
©afcburst
Oakhurst, the residence of Mr. J. Goring Johnston, is situated about two miles out of
Palmerston North. It comprises in all about 23 acres, and is indeed a lovely home. The
house is of charming architecture, and it is surrounded by an extensive and glorious garden.
Mr. Johnston has added to the beauty of this by devoting a very considerable portion of it to
roses, and he has now what must be one of the finest rose gardens in New Zealand.
Mr. J. Goring Johnston was born in August, 1870, and was educated at Wellington Col-
lege, Wellington, N.Z. He went home to England in 1885, and finished his education
at Stonyhurst College (Jesuit College in Lancashire) and at Wadham College, Oxford. He
took his degree of Bachelor of Arts, was called to the Bar, and is a member of the Inner
Temple. He returned to New Zealand in 1892, and went in for farming pursuits, managing
Castlepoint and Tamumu Stations for his father. In 1889 Mr. Johnston married Alice Mar-
garet, daughter of Mr. Duncan Cameron, of Glendhu, Wairarapa, and has five children —
two boys, one eleven years, and the other ten years, and three girls, ages eight, six, and two
years.
1 2
442
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.








