

* 9m
ll 1 i // /p>' ! (10 1 a\ fQ 1 \'/
2 J K(SJ) V M 4 m (j 'I v\
Illustrated by Rufus Morris


(i( ||| M
*> x


| |||r
y/ v^"'" -<T **' r


JESSIE FINDS AN EGG
VERY early one Spring morning, Jessie the kookaburra awoke feeling very happy.
Both Jessie and her husband, Jackie, had chosen their nest with great care. Jackie had
insisted that their home should be in an old hollow tree, but not too hollow.
' Because,” Jackie had wisely said, "if it is too hollow, the cold winds and the rain will come
in. After all, the purpose of a nest is to keep us dry and warm.”
"And I,” J essie had said, "want a nest that is not too near to the ground, for that would allow
the foxes and ’possums to get in, and they can be such a bother to a kookaburra. What’s more,
I want our nest to be in a very old and very dry hollow tree, with its inside wood all crumbly and
perished, for then the floor of the nest will have a nice, soft, thick carpet of tiny little wood chips.
You can’t beat that for cosiness. At least, that’s what my mother told me, and she should know.”
And this was the nest in which Jessie awoke feeling happier than usual.
She could hear Jackie sitting on his branch somewhere outside, singing his happy laughing
song at the top of his voice, just as he always did —
Ho-ho-ho-ho-ho; haw-haw-haw-haw-haw; hey-he-he-he-he-he; coo-coo-000-ca-ca-ca-ca-ca-ca-
CAH-hah-hah-HEE-ee-eee-eeee-eeee-HAH!”
And so Jessie decided to get up and join her husband in singing his welcome to the rising sun.
But when she stood up and shook out her feathers, just as you might smooth out your rumpled


’ A ,
Ci 7 5 1 s JS
3 0 JAN 1945 ®
SKfinffira^p^i^
■r pmS-s-ir W? &}A* *4
W’Ss&tttSSlh
y - iimmmmh
4 'Tff
r V^l
to hold a lovely • \


lovely, pearl-white egg was broken cleanly in two pieces, and there, squatting between the two halves
and looking like a little ball of pale brown and white fluff, was —
A BABY KOOKABURRA!
"Well, Ido declare!” cried Jessie. "And it’s a boy, too. Oh, you darling little baby. You must
be as cold as ice. Come here under my wing at once and let me make you cosy and warm again.”
But all the baby kookaburra did was to open its mouth and cry:
"I’m hungry . . . I’m hungry . . . I’m hungry ... I want something to eat!”
The little darling had such a big mouth, too. And Jessie thought to herself: "What a lot of
flies, and grubs, and tender bits of snake, and lizard, and fish that mouth will want in the course
of a day.” Of course, Jessie knew what a lot baby kookaburras like to eat. They grow so quickly
that they just have to eat a lot in order to grow sturdy and strong. And while Jessie was wondering
what her husband, Jackie, would say when he saw
their newly arrived baby, she heard a flurry of
wings, and Jackie himself flew in to the nest.
"Look,” said Jessie. "It’s hatched —and it's a
Huh!” Jackie exclaimed, "huh!” And for a
boy! Aren’t you glad? I am!”
while he sat there and looked at his little son.
"Well,” said Jessie, "you might at least say thank you for such a nice little baby.”
"Yes, I suppose so,” replied Jackie. "But what a big mouth he has!
Oh, well, I suppose I had better start right away and find him something
nice to eat. What do you think he should have?”
I think a little fish would be nice,” replied Jessie.
Heigh-ho,’ sighed Jackie. And off he flew to hunt a fish
for his family s dinner. That pleased Jessie quite a lot, for
then she knew what a loving father Jackie was going to be
to their new baby kookaburra.
SO THEY CALLED HIM "JOKER JACK”
THE weeks soon passed, and Jackie had
hunt harder than ever to provide nice
things for his family to eat. And still


/|| We call him Joker Jack.,.a j


'That’s easy enough,” Jackie replied. "I
He couldn’t want a better name than Jack.”
"Lovely!” exclaimed Jessie. "But it’s only
call him Joker, because he’s such a funny little
' Jessie dared scarcely ever leave
their nest for fear her little boy
should start toddling and fall out
onto the hard ground below. He
was fast growing into such a lively
little fellow, and was always trying to
get into some sort of mischief or other.
T think,” said Jessie to her hus-
band one evening, "It’s time that you
picked a name for our son. Have you yet
thought of a suitable one?”
think that we should call the little joker after me.
fair that I should give him a name, too. Vd like to
chap.”
"Very well," said Jackie. "We’ll call him Joker Jack. I’ll make it known to all the rest of the
birds when next we meet that Jackie’s and Jessie’s son will be known to all as Joker Jack.”
But Joker Jack himself was more interested in swallowing some nice tender pieces of a lovely
oily goanna which his father had brought home. He liked goanna because his mother always said
that its oil would make his feathers shiny and their colours glossy. Not that Joker Jack ever needed
any excuse for eating. He was too fond of food! And, my! how that little kookaburra could eat!
Of course, he was growing so fast that he had to eat lots and lots of lovely fresh food to keep his
strength up. Every day he was becoming more and more like his parents. The soft, downy collar
of feathers around his throat was fluffy and white; the pearly crest feathers on the top of his head
were so strong that they stood upright. His colourings, too, were as bright as the flowers that grew
upon the river’s edge, and the pearl and sky-blue marking of his long tail feathers were so lovely
that any kookaburra could have been proud of them. And that was all due to the lovely things to
eat that Joker’s father and mother brought home for him every day.
Truly, Joker Jack had almost grown up. Then, one day, while it was still Spring, his father said
to him:


.
\ now to catch


' fhr.e:. ' / ' 1 *
/
must learn all that vour
mother and I will try to
teach you, especially
about hunting, for you
can’t always have us
catching your breakfast
and dinner and supper
"Now, my boy,
you have to take your
education more seri-
ously. Very soon you
will be a young man
and will have to look
after yourself. So you
for you. From now on
you will eat only what you can hunt for yourself. You are well over two months old, and you have
only one more month before you will be regarded by all other kookaburras as a fully grown young
man. So, during the next few weeks, your mother and I shall give you some final lessons. To-day
we shall take you to the river and teach you how to catch fish.” Then, turning to Jessie, he said:
Come on, my dear, we are going to give Joker Jack a fishing lesson.”
So off they all flew towards the river where Jackie knew there would be some lovely, plump
young fishes to catch, and they all three looked forward to having a nice fish dinner.
JOKER JACK CATCHES A FISH!
SOON after they had set out for the river, Jackie, Jessie, and Joker were all sitting on the
branch of a gum tree that reached out over the water’s edge.
Now, said Jackie in a whisper so that the fish in the river below should not hear him, "look
deep uo a n into the waters of the river, Joker. At first you will not see much, but soon, as your eyes
get used to the colours of the weeds and stones, you will notice fishes swimming about. Of course,
you know what fish look like —or you should know, considering the many I have brought you home


f 1 tmmmm{
yf Jackie dived headlong at the ant’s nest |y


for dinner. Well, when you see some fish, pick out one —a nice fat one —and watch it carefully.
By-and-bye it will come to the surface and poke its nose out of the water to catch a fly. That's when
you dive down as quickly as you can, grab it with your beak and shoot up in the air with it, taking
great care not to drop it. Sometimes those little fish are quite heavy.”
"I understand,'' said Joker Jack. "It seems easy enough.”
"Wait till you have tried before saying anything is easy,” said his father. "'But just to show
you how to do it correctly, mother will catch the first one that shows its nose out of the water. Now
watch carefully.”
Then, turning to Jessie, he whispered:
"Watch carefully, my dear, and when you see a fish come up to catch a fly, dive for it. And
mind you don't miss!”
Joker Jack sat very still, looking deep down into the river. Now and then he saw a fish swim-
ming along, and he trembled with excitement.
"My, what fun!” he thought. "Now I shall be able to eat as many fish as I like without waiting
for anyone to catch them for me. And I do love fish.”
Just then he saw one of the fish rise slowly to the surface of the water and stick its little wet
nose out. Joker was so thrilled that he quite forgot to whisper.
Look!” he shouted. "There’s one. Quick, mother!”
But, almost before he had finished speaking, his mother had dived, straight for the fish. Like
a shot she dropped down through the air pointing her long, strong beak right at the fish that was
too concerned with catching flies to notice her coming. She dived so straight that Joker thought
sne looked like a flash of sunlight as she sped downwards, her wings close to her sides. And then,
with a snap of her beak, Jessie caught the fish right across its middle, and up she shot into the air
again, leaving oelow her upon the surface of the river nothing but an ever-widening ripple to show
where a little fat fish had been caught whilst trying to catch a fly!
Beautifuiiy caught! exclaimed Jackie as he watched his wife fly up towards them with her
catch. "See how it’s done, Joker?”
But JoKei. didn t answer, hie was gone! He had become so excited at seeing his mother catch
the fish that he simply couldn t stay still a moment longer, and he had dived. Rushing headlong
down through the air, he met his mother on her way up, and what do you think he did? He


Joker Jack was sound asleep^y
5*
-
/ v I
Jr- t*A- . .■
J » \v-
/ ' % -'-m-Mw>W


snatched the fish from his mother's mouth —all in a flash —and in another flash he was up again
and presenting the fish to his father.
"There,'' panted Joker, all out of breath. "How's that?"
But he had spoken too soon. He had quite forgotten, in his excitement, that the fish was in
his mouth, and as he opened his beak to speak to his father, it fell out, and the plump little fish
fell plop! back into the river.
Oh! his father was angry. And so was Jessie, too, of course. But within another few
minutes Joker noticed a bigger and plumper fish coming to the surface to snap at a fly, and, even
before his parents had stopped scolding him, he had again dived down and made a beautiful catch,
just as his mother had done. This time he was more careful with the fish he caught, and all three
enjoyed a lovely fish dinner from Joker Jack's catch! And a big, fat goanna looking up at them
then knew that they wouldn't try to eat him for their dinner that day.
A LESSON IN NEST-BUILDING
SEVERAL days then went by while Joker Jack
saw that his son’s fishing skill was almost as
"That’ s enough fishing for a while, my son.
We have found an old, burnt-out ants’ nest in a
fished to his heart’s content. And when his father
good as his own, he said to him:
1 o-day you are coming with me and your mother,
nice old dead tree, and we are going to teach you
how to make a nest in
it for yourself. And,
besides being a good
lesson in nest-building
for you, it will sharpen
that beak of yours,
which is getting blunt
for want of use. Come
5 9
on.
—So, calling Jessie
to join them, they all
three flew off to where


the ants’ nest was. It was one of
those big ants’ nests, made ot dried
mud, and built on an old tree where
the branch forked out from the main
trunk. A bush fire had driven ail
the ants away, and both Jackie and
Jessie knew that, when they had
hollowed it out with their strong
beaks, it would make the snuggest
nest for Joker Jack.
"There,” said Jackie, pointing
the nest out to his son, "that’s where
your very own nest is to be. So get
ready to dig into it.”
"Dig into it?” asked Joker.
"Why, it's solid. It looks as hard as
a rock.”
"You are here, my lad,” his
father replied, "to see how it is done.
By the time the sun sets this evening,
there will be a lovely big hole in that
ants’ nest, big enough for you to
crawl into. And that, Master Joker
Jack, will be your very own nest.
Now follow me,”
With that command to his son,
Jackie, Jessie and Joker flew up
onto the branch of a tree a little way
off, about as high up as the height of
two tall men above the ants' nest.


"Now, Joker, watch carefully, because I want you to do exactly what I do. I am about to dive
headlong, with all my strength, at that ants’ nest. And I shall dig my beak right into it as I hit it.
And that will chip out a lump of its dried mud. Then I shall come back here and dive again, and
again I shall chip out a piece of that dried mud. I shall keep on diving at that nest again, and again,
and again, all day long. And each time I shall chip off a lump of that dried mud, making a bigger
and bigger hole each time I dive. And your mother will do exactly the same. Then, after you have
watched us carefully to see how it is done, you must help us and do just as we do—dive, and dive,
and dive —so that by the end of the day we shall have a nice little room inside that nest for you to
live in. Come on, Jessie, let’s begin,’’
Jackie then leapt headlong towards the nest, with wings closed and his powerful beak stretched
out before him like a lance, right at the middle of the old ants’ nest. Bang! And where his beak had
struck there fell onto the ground below a big chip of dried mud.
"000-oo!” cried Joker as he watched his father’s beak strike. "He’ll give himself a most
awful headache doing that, won’t he, mother?”
"No, of course not,” exclaimed his mother. "Your father is made of good stuff. And now
watch me and see how I shall chip off another lump of that ants’ nest. Then, as
soon as I have made a dive, it will be your turn. Do exactly what you
saw your father do, and let us see what sort of a young man
you can be.”
"Alright,” said Joker, "I’ll do the best I
can, but it looks awfully hard
work. I’d much rather
go fishing,”
"You can fish as
long as you like after
this nest is finished,”
replied his mother.
"Surely you don’t ex-
pect your father and
me to do it all, do
you?”


a- i i frr Vyiyp. V< V g U >
Joker Jack kills his first snake®
V
ESnBSSzC Jr*-;* •* •*
4 {


"No,” said Joker, and waited for his
mother to dive. He watched her strike —
BING! —just as his father had, And saw an-
other chip of dried mud fall to the ground at
the foot of the nest.
"Pooh!” exclaimed Joker to himself, "that’s
nothing, after all. I’ll soon show them how to
dig that mud out. Here goes!” —and off he
dived, BIFF, right into the centre of the hole
already started by his father and mother. And
such a big lump of mud fell to the ground that Joker felt quite proud of himself.
"How’s that?” he asked, and then added very boastfully: "Just you watch me dig into it.
And if I don’t sleep inside that nest to-night I’m a sparrow.”
And what Joker Jack said was quite true, for he did sleep inside that nest when the sun went
down upon the hardest day’s work he had ever done. All day long the three of them worked at
hollowing out Joker’s nest. Dive, dive, dive; biff, bang, bosh they hurled themselves at that nest of
dried mud as bigger and bigger grew the heap of chips on the ground beneath it, and bigger and
bigger grew the hole inside. Peck, peck, peck went those three strong pairs of beaks, for hour after
hour. Hundreds and hundreds of times they pecked, and pecked, and pecked, until at last it was
all hollowed out.
When at last the sun went down that day, Joker Jack crawled into his newly made nest to
show his parents how snugly it fitted him, and he was too, too, too tired to come out again. He fell fast
asleep —forgetting to stay up for his supper! And he didn’t even hear the baby koala bear climbing
over his new home.
But from that day on Joker Jack had a home all his very own, from which to come and go
just as he pleased. For now, you see, according to the kookaburras, Joker Jack was a grown-up
young man.
JOKER CATCHES HIS FIRST SNAKE
NEXT morning, just as Joker Jack was waking up, his head still aching from his hard labour of
the day before, he heard his father’s voice saving: "Goodness gracious! The boy’s still asleep.”
"No, I’ m not,” said Joker. "Er —that is, not now.”


"Ah/' said his mother. "You look very
cosy in there. Did you sleep well?"
"I don't know/' said Joker. "I never
know what I'm doing when I'm asleep. All I
know is, I’m jolly hungry. Did you bring any-
thing nice to eat?"
"Never mind about eating just now,
my boy," said his father, a little impatiently
thought Joker. "Just you hop out of that,
quick and lively. Your mother and I are going
to take you snake hunting. We’ve just remem-
bered that you haven't yet learned how to catch
a snake. Hurry up, lazybones."
Dinner of nice, fat snake sounded lovely
to Joker, so he hopped out.
"Come along," said his mother. "We are
going down to Christmas-bush Gully where
there should be lots of snakes just now. We
should get soma nice hunting and as much as
we can eat. I'm sure we shall enjoy ourselves."
So off they all three flew, and arrived there
in no time, for Joker Jack could
quickly as his parents.
"Here is where we stop," said Jackie as


_ /'i .
. V , ■*" f ' '"X , - "■ ; Vi-- l
.M\> \ 'tsM'Jr ,t
<■ 1 , ' • *■*•«
(T\ , - V > 1 *”*-
. i < - > ; ■'” i t-/
—.V i v - t
He could see for miles and mileT"^^


n *
they settled themselves on the branch of a big tree. "Sit
here with me, Joker, and don’t make the least move until
I tell you to. If a snake hears you, or sees you, it won’t
come out. But when you do see a snake, wait for it to
come right out into the open before you dive for it.
Otherwise it will have time to wriggle back under a stone
and you will not be able to catch him. Now listen care-
fully to what I tell you. When you see your snake right
out in the open away from any cover —DIVE! Be as
quick as you can, and grab him with your beak. But be
sure to grab him just behind his head, or he’ll wriggle
round and bite you. Then, when you have a firm grip
of him, fly up into the air as high as you like and drop
him to the ground so that he falls with a bang. That will
knock all the wind out of him and stop his struggling. But
before he has a chance to know what is happening, dive
again, and once more fly up with him, and drop him to
the ground with another bump. And then once more, and
still once more until your snake lies quite still and there
isn’t a move in him. That’s when we all go down and
start dinner. Now, do you think you could do that?"
'Yes," said Joker. "I think I could, but I hope
the snake will not be too heavy to keep carrying up
into the air. Anyway, I wish one would hurry up and
come out. I’m getting hungrier and hungrier."
They hadn’t to wait for long, however, be
fore a snake did appear.
'There," whispered Jackie. "But don’t
flick a feather until he gets to open ground.
Wait now! Wait! There he slithers. Get


That was the farm house
-
g* % *
MS®
'
1


ready now. Get ready. And don’t forget —grab him just behind the head, and grab him hard.
Now, are you ready?”
"Yes,” whispered Joker. "All ready. Can I dive now?”
"Right,” said Jackie. "One, two, three—DlVE!”
Joker dived. My, how thrilled he felt as he raced head downwards towards that snake as it
wriggled towards the water. And before it knew what was happening, Joker Jack had it by the
neck and was soaring up into the air with him, just as his father had told him to do.
"Gosh!” thought Joker as he climbed upwards with the fat, wriggling snake. "He is heavy.
I shall have to drop him. I—l can’t lift him another inch.” And drop him he did —plop! But
quick as a hash he had dived after him again, and again soared upwards with him, again to drop him
to the ground with a bang. By this time Joker was almost out of breath. It was such hard work
lifting that heavy snake up into the air. And so he circled round a time or two before making
another dive, because he was almost puffed. Then once more he dived for the snake, and once more
let him drop to the ground with a bang. This time the snake lay quite still.
Come on, Dad. Come on, Mum,” Joker cried. 'Dinner’s ready.”
And a very nice dinner it was, too. Joker Jack felt quite proud of himself, especially as he
could see a wombat and a squirrel, a butterfly and a koala bear admiringly looking on.
JOKER JACK MAKES FRIENDS WITH SOME CHILDREN
“T WONDER what there is over the other side of that big hill,” Joker Jack asked himself one
_ day. He had explored every nook and cranny of the lovely bush valley in which he had spent
all his life up till then, and now he wanted to travel and see some of the world outside.
I think, he said to himself, 111 take a trip. It might be very interesting.”
So he caught himself a nice, plump, young flsh and enjoyed a hearty breakfast. Then he set
out upon his journey.
Joker Jack flew high so that he could get a better view of the country. The sun was bright
and warm, and there was the loveliest little breeze blowing to keep him cool as he flew steadily alone
over the big hill.
This is good, he said as he flapped his strong young wings in flight. "And what a lot of
country there is. The world must be a very big place. It will take me quite a long time to see all of


Joker Jack makes friends g|


it. There seems to be all kinds of things that I have never seen before.”
And there were, too. He saw the loveliest big kangaroos, enormous lizards, and great, long-
eared hares. He had never flown so high in the air before, and he was now able to see for miles and
miles and miles. And one of the things he saw on the other side of the big hill was a farm. There
were acres and acres and acres of lovely growing crops —-potatoes, beans, peas, oats and cabbages.
And there were rows upon rows of fruit trees, some with pretty pink flowers all over them, and others
full of oranges and lemons.
"It's all very different,” thought Joker. "But I’m glad I came. I wonder what all that is.”
"That” was the farm-house. Joker had never seen a farm-house before and so, of course, he
didn’t know what it was. But, being very curious, as most kookaburras are, he said:
"I must fly down there and see if I can find out what that is.”
And soon he had dived steeply and seated himself upon a fence-post at the corner of the
farm-house garden.
"Well, well, well,” he said, looking at the farm-house. "What a big and wonderful
looking thing it is. It’s like a great, big nest. I wonder if anyone lives in it. I think I’ll
see. Here goes.”
So, taking a deep breath and throwing his head well back, he gave the happy
laughing call of the kookaburras:
' 'Caa-ca-ca-ca-ca-caaa-aaa. Hoo-hoo-hoo-hooooo. Haw-haw-haw-haw
haw - haw. 0000 - 000 - HOO - 0000. Ha -ha-ha-ha - ha - HEY!
Burrr-rrr-rrr-ip!”
"That,” he said to a koala who was sitting just behind him,
"was very well done, even though Ido say it myself. And now
let’ s see if anything happens.”
Well, Joker Jack didn’t have to wait for long before
something did happen. For, a minute or two after his
laughing song, the door of the farm-house opened,
and two children came running out, laughing
merrily as ran.
"Ha - ha - ha,” laughed Joker Jack


.
. 'SAy
\ f rj\
"Ho-ho-ho-ho. Well, that is a pretty sight. They must be
those human children that Mum and Dad talk about.
Well, well, well. Haw-haw-haw-haw-haw-haw. Caa-caa-caa-
ca-ca-ca-ca-ca. Heee-hee-hee-hee. COO-00-00-co. Caw-caw-
caw-caw-HO-HO-Ho-ho-ho-hah!”
s\ Then, to Joker Jack’s surprise, the two children stopped
still suddenly and burst into loud laughter, so very like his own.
"Goodness, how surprising,’’ said Joker. "It appears
that children can sing almost the same song as the kooka-
burras. That is nice. Now I am sure I can make friends with
them. They seem such very nice little humans.’’
The children, a little boy and a little girl, both about as big as you are,
came closer, and Joker noticed that the boy held something in his
outstretched hand, while the little girl called out:
"Come on, Jackie. Here’s something nice for you to eat. Come on. Come
and get it. We shan’t hurt you.’’
Of course, Joker Jack could not understand the children’s words, but he could see \\
quite plainly that they wished to be friends with him. And, what was a proof of
their friendliness, the little boy was holding out something nice to eat.
"Whatever it is,” thought Joker, "it certainly looks nice. I don’t
think there can be any harm in going closer. I’ll take a chance,
anyhow.”
So down he flew from his fence-post and hopped
over to the children to And out what it was they were
offering him. And when he got to within a few
steps of them, the little boy threw a piece
of something from his hand. With
a quick lift of his head, Joker
cleverly caught the piece
in his beak. And oh!
how nice it was!


Mcoeet.
"Why,” said Joker, swallowing hard, "that was meat,
00, how lovely. I’ve never tasted anything so delicious in
my life before. Oh, please, more!”
The little boy seemed to understand, and threw him
another piece, which Joker also caught in, his beak. That gave
the children great pleasure.
"This is fun,” thought Joker, so he, too, threw back
his head and sang his laughing song to show how happy he
was, and how much he liked the children —and, of course,
those lovely pieces of meat.
"Caa-ca-ca-ca-ca,” he laughed. "Haw-haw-haw-haw-
haw. Hoo-00-00-00-hoo. Ha-ha-ha-ha-ha-ha-ha. Hee-hee-
hee-hee-hee. Hey-hey-hey-hey-hey. Burrr-rrr-r-ippp-haw!”
Of course, that made the children laugh even more,
and louder, and from then on they were all the greatest of
friends. Joker caught piece after piece of that lovely meat
they had brought out for him, until he was as full as full, and
as happy as he had never been before.
Well, I must say, thought Joker, "that was very, very
nice. And now I will try to make these lovely children under-
stand my way of saying Thank you.’ Here goes.”
With that he leapt into the air and came to rest on the
little boy s shoulder. And this is how he said "Thank you very,
very much”:
Ca-ca-ca-ca-ca-ca-ca-ca. Ho-ho-ho-ho-ho-ho-ho. Hah-
hah-hah-hah-ha-ha-ha. Hee-hee-hee-hee-hee-he. BURR-RR-
rrrrr-rrrr-HEY-hey-hey-haw-haw-haw-haw-HO!”
And when he had finished singing his lovely laughing
song, he was not a bit surprised to see that the children really


I % .
N A 1


understood what he had said. The little boy stretched out his hand and very, very gently stroked
the lovely white crest feathers on Joker’s head, and, although Joker didn’t understand human lan-
guage, he thought the little boy said:
"We would like you to come every day, Joker Jack, and let us give you nice things to eat,
because we love to hear that happy laughter of yours.’’
Ever since then Joker Jack has been quite sure that
what he thought the little boy said really was that, for he
does call on the children every evening, and, sure enough,
there they are waiting for him. And as soon as he sees
them come from the shadow of the farm-house out into
the garden, bringing something nice for him to eat, he
sings Out from where he sits on the roof of the barn:
"Ha-ha-ha-ha-ha-ha-ha-ha. Ho-ho-ho-ho-ho. Hee-
heeee-heeeeee-he. Caa-ca-ca-ca-ca-ca. Haw-haw-haw-haw.
Bur-rrr-BURRR-rrrrr-rrrr-HEY! ”
JOKER JACK GOES TO LIVE ON THE FARM
ONE day when Joker Jack was visiting his parents in
their nest, he told them of his children friends.
"You should come with me to see them one evening,”
said Joker.
'But,” said his mother, who was very tired after a
day’s hunting, "it’s such a long way to fly.”
Anyway, she agreed, and they all flew together over
to the farm. And when they arrived there they sat
themselves on the roof of the old barn, and began to
sing their lovely laughing song to let the children know they
had arrived. How beautifully those merry notes echoed
about the farm-house and its sheds. No wonder the children


\A
came running out. They had never heard
three kookaburras in their garden singing
like that before.
Then they all had a lovely time. Extra
bits of tasty meat were brought out for
Jessie and Jackie. And every now and then
the little boy would throw a piece high up
into the air, and Joker Jack would dart after
it and catch it in his beak as cleverly as any-
thing. It was great fun for everyone.
At last, when ail of the tit-bits were
eaten, Joker Jack flew up to the barn roof,
where Jessie and Jackie joined him, and all
three sang a long and beautiful "Thank
you” as merrily as they knew how.
"Well,” said Jackie when the children
had gone in to bed and the last rays of the
sun had faded in the west, "we’ve all had a
nice time, and I am sure your little friends
are very lovely and kind. I like them. And
now I am going to suggest that we all three
make our home here.”
"Where?” asked Joker Jack. "There
isn’t any place here to build a big nest to
hold us all. There’s not a dead tree in
sight.”
"I was thinking of the loft in this
barn. Nothing could be cosier. It’s almost
weather-proof, and think of the mice there
would be to eat among all that straw and
bags of feed,”


Good-bye Joker Jack..7come to-morrow
.
F
.1


THE END "
k MP
V PRODUCTION
"It’s certainly cosy,” said Jessie. "We’d never be able to build one like it. I think it’s a lovely
idea, darling.”
"And so do I,” agreed Joker Jack. "And the children might give us breakfast as well as
dinner, eh?”
"Of course,” said Jackie with a knowing look, for he was quite a wise old bird.
And that’s how it came about that the kookaburra family went to live in the old barn, and from
then on the sun never rose nor set without Jessie, or Jackie or Joker Jack filling the with
their merry laughter. And so, you see, you have only to be nice and kind to kookaburras to have
them coming to you as friendly as friendly can be. And if you can make them happy by giving them
a little something nice to eat, they will tell you how glad you have made them, by singing you
their lovely laughing song, like the merry song Joker Jack sang to his little friends in the farm-house
garden.
PRINTED IN AUSTRALIA BY COLOURTONE PTY, LTD. FOR DAWFOX PRODUCTIONS. SYDNEY


3 1508 01469851 3


