

THE
CONFLICT BETWEEN AUTHORITY
AND REASON
ARTIFICIAL AND NATURAL RELIGION
HUGH JUNOR BROWNE
“ 0 LET MY BOOKS BE, THEN, THE ELOQUENCE
And dumb pbbsagebs of my speaking breast.”
Some view religion as a thing of smoke.
Others as a subject on which to joke,
But wisdom holds ’tis each man’s highest right
To test and weigh it in the clearest light.
GEORGE ROBERTSON AND COMPANY
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, ADELAIDE, AND BRISBANE




CONFLICT BETWEEN AUTHORITY
AND REASON
ARTIFICIAL AND NATURAL RELIGION
HUGH JUNOR BROWNE
“ 0 LET MY BOOKS BE, THEN, THE ELOQUENCE
And dumb presagers of my speaking breast.”
Some view religion as a thing op smoke,
Others as a subject on which to joke,
But wisdom holds ’tis each man’s highest right
To TEST AND WEIGH IT IN THE CLEAREST LIGHT.
GEORGE ROBERTSON AND COMPANY
MELBOURNE, SIDNEY, ADELAIDE, AND BRISBANE
1885


DEDICATION.
I have much pleasure in dedicating these pages to my friend and
co-worker in the grand cause of truth, Mr. William Lay ley, of Sandford,
who, although occupying a humble position in society and unknown to
fame, is, I hold, one of nature’s true noblemen, for he may be truly said
to be “ a man who does good by stealth.” The amount of time, labour,
and means he has expended in the interest of human welfare are only
known to himself; and the effects of his silent endeavours to free the
minds of his fellow-beings from the popular false conceptions, though
they may bear but little visible fruit in the present day, will be truly
appreciated by thousands in coming generations. That Mr. Layley
may long be spared to carry on the unselfish, though probably in many
cases unappreciated work he is now engaged in, is the earnest prayer of
his old friend and well-wisher,
THE AUTHOR.
Park House,
Wellington Parade, East Melbourne,
September , 1885.


very precepts and good actions on the part of the churches that give
to their false dogmas the semblance of truth in the eyes of their
thoughtless adherents. Why handicap good actions with senseless
creeds that only perplex 1 And why cumber the simple religion of
love to God and love to man with that which is not borne out by
analogy, and which is false, irrational, and misleading 1
What would you think of an earthly father who required his children
to be constantly praying for their daily bread, which he freely gives
them without their constantly beseeching him to do so 1 Or of one
who required his children to waste their time every seventh day in
offering up prayers to him and singing psalms of praise, in which with
the mouth they acknowledge his love, his goodness, and his mercy, and
the next moment declare him to be a jealous, partial father, full of
wrath and vengeance ? Is the All-wise Creator, think you, less rational
than man, His creature ? Does not the sun shine on those who are
wicked as well as upon those who are good, and does not the rain fall
■on the evil and the righteous alike 1 Then why doubt the impartial
beneficence of God by constantly beseeching Him for that which He
bestows on us more freely than we receive it 1 Is it not palpable to
your common sense that the time which is wasted in attending to these
so-called religious observances, in which professions of belief in that
which is inexplicable and incomprehensible are invariably made, would
be more rationally and better employed in endeavouring to raise those
less fortunate than yourself higher in the scale of being, morally,
socially, and intellectually ? Were it not that by false religious teach-
ings people’s judgments have been warped before they were capable of
reasoning, it would be apparent to them that, in countenancing the
irrational observances I have referred to, they have been but playing
the fool in regard to religion.
The following are a few questions to which I have never been able
to obtain reasonable answers from either priests, parsons, or laymen:—
What is the use of a form of religion that is impracticable, or that the
advocates of which practice the very opposite to its precepts 1 Can
you point to one who has left father, mother, sister, brother, wife and
•children, in fact, given up all for Christ’s sake ? Or one who can
perform the various signs that Jesus is reported to have said would
follow those who believed in him 1 or one who can do greater works
than he did! ora Christian who is reviled and persecuted for righteous-
ness’ sake 1 or who loves his enemies and blesses those who curse him 'I
or who turns not away from those who would borrow of him, but lends
hoping for nothing in return ? or who takes no thought for the morrow,
and lays not up treasures on earth, when he can 1 or who turns the left
cheek to those who smite him on the right 1 or who gives his cloak to
those who take his coat ? or who follows the example (as they all
profess) of his “Blessed Master,” who had not where to lay his head, and
who preached without money and without price ? “ Oh, shame, where
is thy blush ? ” may well be said to all such hypocrites, who have the
effrontery to publicly profess one thing and to belie their professions by
openly acting the very reverse thereto. No wonder the false and
irrational theory of Paul, that salvation cometh by faith through grace


THE CONFLICT BETWEEN AUTHORITY
AND REASON;
OR, ARTIFICIAL AND NATURAL RELIGION.
“There is no religion higher than truth.”
In view of the appalling amount of crime, misery, war, bloodshed, and
selfishness still so prevalent among nations bearing the name of “ Chris-
tian,” all thoughtful minds must, if they give the subject the slightest
consideration, be struck with the palpable failure of the popular forms
of religion to accomplish the purpose for which they were said to be
primarily established, and for which their advocates in our own day
profess to carry them on. It is, however, by their results, and not by
the professions of those who uphold them, that all forms of religion
should be judged, and in drawing our conclusions from the facts pre-
sented to our senses we should be careful not to allow any false bias or
prejudice to influence us. If a religion, which in its inception professed
to bring peace and goodwill to all men and to unite all in brotherly
love, has, after some eighteen centuries of existence, failed to accom-
plish the purpose for which it was introduced, surely it must be
admitted that there must be something radically wrong somewhere, and
that the fault must lie either in the so-called religion itself, or in the
way in which it has been administered and put in practice by its
adherents. It cannot reasonably be pleaded that, after so many
centuries of trial, it has not had time to prove its efficiency; therefore
we must look elsewhere for the cause of its failure. It is useless to
deny this failure, for the facts mentioned plainly speak for them-
selves.
To prove the hollowness and misleading character of the various
forms of religion current in our midst, we have only to enter one of the
churches of the various sects of a Sunday to witness the pride, osten-
tation, selfishness, hypocrisy, and mock-humility of those who nomin-
ally profess to be the followers of the humble and self-sacrificing
Nazarene, and this remark will be found to apply equally to the clergy
as to their congregations. The dress, bearing, and demeanour of both
give the lie direct to their professions of Christian humility, contrition,
and brotherly love and charity. The generality of the prayers there
uttered express the most intense selfishness, in that God’s special
blessings are asked to be showered not on humanity generally, but upon


this congregation, etc. The songs of praise sung are full of fulsome
flattery to One who is All-wise, and who is far above man’s feeble praise,
as all His works glorify Him. The sermons preached are, as a rule,
a mere play of words on some subject as well known to the hearers as
to the preacher, and are evidently composed more to please the fancy
and tickle the ears of the listeners than to enlighten them. The conse-
quence of all this is, that if one re-enters the same church twelve
months or even twelve years afterwards, he will find those who are
still spared, and who have attended these observances regularly Sunday
after Sunday, not a whit better or more spiritually enlightened than
they were on his previous visit.
To those who have got beyond the old stereotyped form of clerical
faith, it is pitiable to hear, in one of our churches, some highly paid
clergyman, with uplifted eyes, addressing with all seriousness the Giver
of all good in these words ;—“ Thy kingdom come”—while he is at the
same time doing all in his power to stay its advent, which he is aware
will do away with his office ; “Give us this day our daily bread ” —when
he well knows that he has at the time at least two days’ supply of
“the staff of life” in his parsonage; “Forgive us our trespasses as
we forgive them that trespass against us” while at the same
time his chief concern is how he can punish some one whose only
trespass against him has been that this individual has dared to
differ with him in regard to construing the purport of some of
the articles of his church or sect, as in the case of the Rev. Charles
Strong; “ Lead us not into temptation”—evidently showing that he
considers God as a being who is not to be trusted, in other words, the
Tempter of mankind ; “ Deliver us from evil ’’—leading one to infer that
as long as he and his friends get clear he does not care a straw how
the rest of mankind fare. This latter supplication, however, is only in
keeping with the prayer, as reported in the 109th Psalm, of that pious
king who is said to have been “ a man after God’s own heart,” in
which, after invoking all the most horrible curses he can think of on his
enemies, he finishes up with, “ But Lord have mercy upon me.” How
very different is this to the prayer ascribed to Jesus for his persecutors
—and which I repeat on behalf of these clerical deceivers—“ Lord,
forgive them, for they know not what they do”?
Your own common sense must point out that the irrational proceed-
ings which are to be witnessed every Sunday in the various churches
cannot be acceptable in the sight of an All-wise God. Let me ask you,
would a sensible man, far less the Infinite Deity, have any pleasure in
such fulsome flattery and such childish platitudes as form the main
portion of what are termed divine services ? That the clergy, as a
rule, are men highly educated in Biblical lore and priestly sophistry,
and that a few of them are gifted with rare eloquence, I freely admit;
but of what real benefit is all this if people are not made better and no
spiritual knowledge is gained thereby ? I also frankly acknowledge
that the various churches inculcate moral precepts and perform many
charitable acts in the name of religion; but does this cause to be true,
or can it justify the false and irrational conceptions of God and man’s
destiny which they teach ? Certainly not! I maintain that it is these


and not by works, which he declares are as filthy rags, has been adopted
by the churches in preference to the reasonable teachings of Jesus,
that “as ye mete so shall it be measured unto you,” or as illustrated
in the parable of the good Samaritan, wherein faith or belief is counted
as naught, and good actions as all that is necessary.
Had mankind been influenced in the past by the simple religion of
good actions, instead of faith in that which is unreasonable and God-
dishonouring, what a very different account history would have had to
record to that which disgraces its almost every page ! Is it to be
wondered at that war, with all its attendant horrors, is still as prevalent
as in the most savage times, when educated people continue to worship
a god of hosts and armies, who delights in blood and slaughter ? Is it
reasonable to expect the characterof the people to be superior to that of
the deity they worship 1 The moral consciousness in man repudiates the
idea of a God who would be so partial and unjust as to favour one
tribe called the Israelites, and command and assist them to slaughter
and destroy a number of other tribes, whose lands these marauding
Israelites coveted; yet we have the humiliating spectacle, in our own
day of so-called Christian grace, of the chaplains of one army imploring
God to bless the endeavours of the soldiers on their side to slaughter
and destroy those of the opposing force, and vice versa. Does not this,
which is to be witnessed almost every year in some portion of Christen-
dom, prove the utter hollowness and sham of a priestly religion of
blood and belief ? Does not this clearly demonstrate to any one of
common sense the utter worthlessness of a form of religion which it is
professed was established to bring peace and goodwill to all, and which
after 1800 years of trial shows such pitiable results? This being the
case—which I think few, if any, will deny—does it not clearly prove
that there must be something egregiously wrong either in the popular
form of religion in our midst, in its interpretation, or in the way in
which it is adminstered and put in practice ? And, further, does this
not point to the necessity of the establishment, in place thereof, of a
purer Christianity, a more rational conception of God, and a more soul-
elevating religion that will completely change this deplorable, this dis-
graceful state of affairs, and thus prevent religion being made, as it now
is, the laughing-stock of those who are opposed to all religion, and
who, if they could, would wipe all thought of God and man’s duty to
his Maker off the face of the earth ? I therefore earnestly call upon
all lovers of God, truth, and righteousness, to give their serious con-
sideration to this all-important subject, and to do all in their power,
individually and collectively, to bring about a better state of affairs.
If they do not, they may rest assured that in the life to come they will
regret sincerely having allowed their opportunities of doing good in this
respect to have passed by unheeded ; and the clergy, who have been
mainly instrumental in the continuance of this false state of affairs,
may then truly call upon the hills and the rocks to fall upon them, in
order to hide their shame and their confusion.
I maintain, without fear of contradiction, that when the extravagance,,
pride, hypocrisy, poverty, misery, crime, and immorality, which are still
so prevalent in all Christian countries, are considered, it is evident to


all unbiassed minds that the popular forms of religion have failed to
accomplish their professed purpose, namely, of making the world better
and happier. And surely it must be admitted that if, in the countries
where these forms of religion have existed for hundreds of years, they
have failed to produce the effects they profess to accomplish, it is not
likely that they will be any more successful in those countries into
which they have been more recently introduced. Looking back on the
past history of the world, how great and how wonderful have been the
changes and progress in the arts and sciences, but how little advance-
ment in righteousness and spiritual knowledge do we find to-day to that
which existed centuries ago. While men have been professing to seek
first the kingdom of righteousness, believing that all other things would
be added to them, they have, in reality, been seeking first their worldly
comfort and letting righteousness shift for itself, for it will be found that
the majority of the improvements made have been for the gratification
of man’s earthly appetites, while spiritually, people, as a rule, are now
almost as ignorant and as bound and fettered by the trammels of
priestly superstition as they were hundreds of generations back. Thus
it can be clearly seen that in all the popular forms of dogmatic religion
there is little or no progress, and in order to remove this stagnation and
to hasten forward human welfare, if we desire to succeed, we must start
on a surer foundation on which to redress every wrong and to build
universal happiness than that of mere belief on assumed ancient
authority. This surer foundation I hold to be knowledge, not gained
by relying on opinions expressed by others, but through earnest personal
research, study, and investigation, aided by the love of truth, the
desire to do good, and guided by the divine gift of reason.
All things in nature work together in harmony and beauty, then why
should the children of Nature’s Divine Author differ from this order so
observable in all around them ? Why should there exist such religious
animosities, such sectarian hatred between men, merely because they
hold different views in regard to religion ? Does not all this arise from
false prejudice and from the fact that the generality of men, through
erroneous teaching, ignore the grand fact that truth is the most essential
requisite of religion, and, instead of their listening to both sides of the
question, and considering the statements of others equally earnest and
honest as themselves, and testing their evidence, denouncing them and
the truths which they enunciate as wicked and unworthy of their con-
sideration ? Is it not by the interchange of opinions and the weighing
of evidence that the truth can alone be arrived at ? Then why this
stubborn rejection of all statements regarding religion that have not
been branded as of divine authority ? I hold that what is wanted is a
practicable religion of universal application based on facts that are
capable of demonstration, not on ancient fictions which are not in
accord with reason, experience, or analogy—a religion which will com-
mend itself to everyone, however circumstanced, in which there are
neither incomprehensible dogmas to mislead, nor mysteries to perplex
mankind, and in which there are no miracles or superstition of any kind
to impose on the credulous or ignorant—a religion designed to do good
and not to mislead, to enlighten and not to obscure truth by sophistry


and misrepresentation—a religion, in fact, which inculcates a reasonable
faith in a beneficent God and in the ultimate good of all that happens,
but which holds everyone responsible for his own actions, irrespective of
the merits or of the sufferings endured by another, and which, when
carried out, will ensure the happiness of all, not only in the life which
is to come, but also in that in which we now are. Such is the religion
which I advocate, and which every lover of truth and righteousness
should do all that lies in their power to forward.
In the sayings or writings of the great and the good in all ages and
of every country we can perceive flashes of truth shining through the
mists of error and superstition, and realize the fact that the human
mind has always been the same, though differently influenced by the
varying conditions by which it has been surrounded. We can also
perceive, from these flashes of truth, that some men in all ages have
been working for the same end, though in different ways, tending to
lead humanity to the one great ultimate of universal peace and hap-
piness. It is obvious, however, that through the persistent opposition
of priestcraft to man’s true spiritual progress, while civilization has
progressed and great strides have been made in the arts and sciences,
yet despite all this advancement, the same unruly passions which stirred
the breasts of those living in semi-savage days still influence the lives
of too many in our own time, thus proving the inefficiency of the old forms
of religion to regenerate the race, and indicating the necessity of the
adoption of a more rational conception of God, a purer faith, and a
more practical religion, which will lead man to cultivate his higher
nature, so that it may in time completely subjugate his animal passions
and selfish propensities. Thus only can the regeneration of the world
be accomplished. It can never be brought about, as experience only too
clearly proves, by a system of holy hypocrisy, pious sham, and cere-
monial mummery, or by faith in that which is irrational, mysterious,
and utterly incomprehensible even to the teachers thereof.
As an evidence of the sectarian hatred still prevailing—even in
“ death ” —I may mention that in our public cemetery each denomina-
tion has a separate compartment for its special use, and one sect will
not permit the priests of other denominations to officiate in its
compartment, lest its consecrated ground might be defiled by their
presence. Such is a fair example of the brotherly love exhibited by
those who profess to be the followers of the man who enjoined even
love for one’s enemies.
Like everything else in Nature, religion has two sides. It has its
false side as well as its true one. The former is based on assumed
ancient authority, the latter rests on facts capable of demonstration,
and is in accordance with reason and analogy. For brevity of expres-
sion I shall designate the one artificial religion and the other natural
religion. The great conflict between authority and reason, in what
passes as religion, does not belong merely to the present day ;it has
existed in all ages. Noble minds have, from time to time, raised their
voices in defence of reason applied to religion; they have in the past,
unfortunately in most cases, been silenced through the intrigues of
those who, from interested motives, upheld religion supported by


authority, not by argument, but by being put to death in the name of
God and in the interests of this so-called religion, proving thereby the
weakness of the foundation on which its assumed authority rests and
a knowledge of this weakness. It must, indeed, be a poor cause
that required such ignoble means to be resorted to in order to maintain
its status. Yet, with all this open to every student of history, we
have educated men and women who in our own day still cling to this
artificial religion, which is not only a disgrace to the intelligence of the
age in which we live, but which has throughout the many centuries it
has existed caused to be practised the very opposite to that which it
professed to inculcate. I refer to the doctrine not only of love to one’s
neighbour, but also of love even to one’s enemies, thus exemplifying
the truth of the lines ;
“ How often people’s creeds
Are contradicted by their deeds.”
Between true religion and science there cannot possibly be any conflict,
for they are both founded on natural facts, the former being but the
higher branch of the latter, the one commencing where the other leaves
off. To assume that science and religion can be at variance with each
other, is to impute inconsistency on the part of the great Author of
both. If religion is not natural it must be unnatural, and consequently
not of God, for He is the sole Author of all that exists, to the manifes-
tation of which the term “ Nature ” is applied. The generality of
people have been misled in supposing that conflict between science and
religion was possible, through the term religion having been falsely
applied to certain forms of worship, senseless creeds, and useless
dogmas, based on assumed authority. The upholders of this artificial
religion, in order to give their assumed authority weight, claim that it
was received in olden times through inspiration, but to all lovers of
truth the main question is not whether certain statements are inspired
or otherwise, but whether they are true and in accordance with
enlightened reason. Reason I hold to be the voice of God in man—
“ that light which lighteth every man that cometh into the world,” for it
is the only universal arbiter between truth and error, between right
and wrong. So long as people trust to authority in matters religious
they lean upon a broken reed, fox’, as has been truly remarked,
authority bears no relation to truth, for it as often attests what is
false as it does that which is true,” and, until this method of arriving
at truth is dispensed with, they cannot make any real progress in
spiritual knowledge. The earnest searcher after truth should therefore
endeavour to get rid of all prejudice and be prepared to accept the
truth, not as it is in this man or that, in this book or that, in this
church or any number of churches, but as it is in Nature, and to receive
it, not on the authority of a man, a church, or a book, but for its own
sake, bearing in mind that “ truth is its own best evidence, for its
witness is within,” and that “ there is no religion higher than truth.”
All assumed authorities that shrink from a candid and impartial inves-
tigation, and that will not stand a rational analysis, cannot be true, and
consequently are unworthy either of our acceptance or our retention.


If we freely investigate without prejudice all subjects through which
enlightenment is to be gained, we act wisely, hut if we hedge ourselves
around with creeds, dogmas, and articles of faith, we shut out the
spirit of truth which shall freely tell us all things.
That a great change is coming over the religious horizon throughout
Christendom we have every indication, not only in the advanced opinions
expressed by the leaders of modern thought, but also in the altered
tone of pulpit utterances, wherein the most repulsive doctrines of the
popular artificial religion, which some years back formed the leading
topics on which the clergy used to descant, are now seldom, if ever,
referred to. In the near future this change will not be, as it is now,
a mere modification of the dogmas of artificial religion, but a mighty
change, one unprecedented in the religious history of the world, a veri-
fication, through disbelief, of a divine truth which will electrify mankind
with the most sublime knowledge that their souls are capable of realiz-
ing—a knowledge that shall be an enlightener in all things, even from
the guidance of individual interests up to the government of the various
nations of the earth ; a knowledge that shall raise men above all those
trivial matters that now so frequently disturb and agitate their minds ;
a knowledge that shall enable them to realize the infinite love, goodness,
and mercy of God, their spiritual Father, and the universal brother-
hood of all, and thereby make all minds akin. That the irrational faiths
or beliefs of artificial religion have done little good for mankind in the
past, but have wrought an incalculable amount of perplexity and evil,
past history and present circumstances only too clearly prove; and
artificial religion having proved a failure, it must be defective, con-
sequently it cannot be of Divine authority, as falsely claimed for it.
The tendency of modern thought, however, indicates that the still small
voice within is at last making itself generally heard against that assumed
authority which is opposed to Nature’s divine revelations, and that has
for ages stifled the reason and enslaved the intellects of some of the
wisest men in other subjects. In the past the priests and the Levites of
the various forms of religion based on authority have made a point of
crucifying truth and exalting its adversary error, knowing well that
their old traditionalism cannot bear the light of truth, which, when
once admitted, exposes the untenability of their irrational dogmas.
Why, let me ask, has man been endowed with reason and thought, and
the power of transmitting his thoughts by language, if he is to be
debarred from exercising them in discovering whether or not what is
claimed to be of Divine authority is worthy of his acceptance? Is it
reasonable to suppose that these sublime qualities have been given to
him for the purpose of making use of them in all other subjects but
religion, simply because this has been inculcated by an interested class
whose very existence depends on the credulity of the masses ? Have
these qualities not rather been bestowed on us for the express purpose
of raising ourselves and others in the scale of being, by attaining to
greater knowledge of spiritual things than was possible to men who
lived in ignorant and superstitious times ? We do not rely on the wisdom
of our ancestors in any other subject, then why should we do so in
religion ? Let us rather, while profiting by the experience of our


ancestors, reach forward to the attainment of greater knowledge in
regard to religion as we do in all else.
He only acts worthy of his manhood who boldly searches after and
battles for the truth ; who makes use, in religion as in all other subjects,
of all the faculties with which he has been endowed, who, utilizing his
capacity of reasoning, follows the examination of truth wherever it
leads; and who endeavours to serve the cause of truth, not because a
church or a book inculcates this in a particular direction, but from a
sense of duty, and because he can recognize the harmony and the beauty
that pervade truth. It is the duty of all, I maintain, to raise their
voices fearlessly against popular error and to inculcate sober truth for
the advancement of humanity, now that this can be done without ren-
dering ourselves liable to be physically tortured by the upholders of
those barbarous conceptions of God and religion which have disgraced
the world in the past. In our endeavours to expose popular religious
errors, we should, however, be prepared to build up something nobler and
better in order to promote human welfare, and thus render ourselves
worthy of being called the sons and daughters of God. The sense of
right and wrong, of good and evil, is intuitive in all, but it is frequently
perverted by false teachings, and the usages of those amongst whom our
lot has been cast. We should therefore endeavour to induce those less
fortunate than ourselves to free their minds of these perversions, and, by
study and close reasoning, enable themselves to view with us religion
from the higher standpoint of unbiassed truth.
Blind faith without investigation is insulting to the Divine Source
from whom our intelligence springs, therefore reason and conscience
should be made the sole and supreme guide of all who claim to be
rational beings. It is simply absurd to suppose that investigation into
religious matters is to be shunned in case long-cherished doctrines and
tenets should thereby be proved to be false, and lest inquiry might
furnish evidence that would conflict with theories hitherto viewed as
divine verities. We may rest assured that no injury can possibly accrue
from the investigation of whatever is pure, holy, and true, for it is only
that which is false that can suffer thereby, and no one who is well-
meaning and honest can desire to continue error in religion or in any-
thing else. To arrive at religious truth, all principles and doctrines
must be submitted to the test of reason, for doubt and investigation are
the only true paths that lead to knowledge. Even did these principles
and doctrines of artificial religion not appear unreasonable, to accept
them without questioning their foundation, and examining the evidence
by which they are supported, is indicative of a weak or credulous mind.
The man who refuses to bring his religious faith to the test of rational
criticism evinces thereby a secret knowledge that what ho professes to'
believe in is at least not wholly true, although he may outwardly
pretend to believe otherwise, and thus for a time deceive himself and
others.
It is a popular but erroneous idea that certain religious creeds and
dogmas are too sacred to be submitted to the test of reason. Reason
being the voice of God in man, nothing can be too sacred to submit
thereto. Religion and everything else should therefore be brought to


the bar of reason, and should stand or fall by the judgment there de-
livered. Consequently, I would in all earnestness say to those who are
still in the bondage of authority, “Do not allow your reason to be
diverted from its natural course in religion, any more than you would
allow it to be in any other of the affairs of life, and guard yourselves
against those false and misleading dogmas of artificial religion which
are not in consonance with your reason, however eloquently they may
be urged by those whose interests it is to confirm popular prejudice,
and to keep the laity in spiritual ignorance. Rest assured that a
beneficent God, our loving and all-merciful Father, requires no priest
or “go-between” Him and His erring children, and that those who im-
pudently assume such a position are but spiritual deceivers, who impose
on your credulity, and are unworthy of your respect, far less of your
reverence and your obedience to their dictation. And, further, let me
remind you that these men are the successors of those who “ built
-cathedrals for God and dungeons for men.”
I am aware that to criticise another’s creed, or to question anything
pertaining to the form of religion in which he may have been brought
up, is almost sure to incur the bitter hatred of him whose creed is
criticised. This arises from the fact that men do not really believe
in their respective creeds from conviction—they merely give an
unquestioning acquiescence thereto, from their having been taught what
to think, not how to think. To such people, even when the most cogent
arguments are adduced, which clearly prove the fallacy of that which
they profess to believe in, it is only, for the time, so much breath wasted
to point out to them a better way. The weakness and absurdity of the
excuses and apologies made by them for continuing to hold such
irrational religious views, indicate the great repugnance felt by them
to give up time-honoured falsities and a misleading faith, even after
the untenability of the latter has been clearly pointed out to them.
Notwithstanding this, it is the duty of all who possess higher knowledge
to put in a word in season ; for although, for a time, it may lie dormant
in the minds of those as yet unprepared to receive it, still, eventually,
the seed thus sown will blossom and bear fruit, if not in this life, in
that which is to come-—for memory, like conscience, is undying.
From the world’s earliest history to the present day, all religions
based on assumed authority have had ambitious and unscrupulous
minds at their head; and what in their inception may have been simple
and true, has, by these unscrupulous minds, been adulterated with, and
perverted by, incomprehensible mysteries, necessitating a priestly class
to explain or rather misinterpret them. Natural religion, on the
contrary, is simple, and is endorsed by reason and analogy. Being
true, it is bright and beautiful, requiring no specially-trained class to
explain it—no outside show, pomp, or ceremony —no sacerdotal robes,
and no consecrations or blessings at the hands of fallible men; for, as
has been already observed, “ truth is its own best evidence, for its
witness is within.” This may be truly said to be a thoughtless world
as far as religion is concerned; for in all other matters people think
for themselves, and accept that which is the simplest, purest, and most
rational. In religion, however, with the generality of people it is


otherwise, for they prefer that which is complex, mysterious, and
irrational, and they pay the clergy to think for them ; whereas, in
natural religion, every one investigates and thinks for himself, and
thereby it becomes of individual application and of daily practice ; and,
further, through natural religion, faith is changed into knowledge and
hope into certainty.
In all ages the leading endeavour of the priests of the various forms
of artificial religion has been to extinguish self-reliance and manly
independence in all matters connected with religion, and to stamp out
that dignity and self-trust which are the divine prerogatives of every
child of God. Theoretically these churches, religious organizations,
or associations, may be beneficial, but practically they are the reverse,,
for, when unbiassedly examined, the good they do is found to be more
than counterbalanced by the evil which results from their false and
misleading teachings. Let us, for instance, here briefly consider the
Roman Catholic church or association. By a system of priestly terrorism,
and seemingly fair, but false and misleading promises to all who
prostitute their reason, their conscience, and their manhood at its
shrine of folly, it has dwarfed the souls of countless numbers of men
and women until they have become enslaved to a tyrannical system
which, notwithstanding all its gorgeous pomp and imposing ceremonials,
if they dared to think for themselves, their very souls would, as free
children of a universal Parent, abhor and loath with disgust. Thus, it
is easy to perceive how this mind-enslaving association has completely
crushed out individualism amongst its adherents. The reverential and
obedient slaves of this huge system of pious fraud, unfortunately,
cannot realize that they are units inspired by the Divine Soul equally
with the men who presumptuously profess to lie their spiritual advisers,
but who know no more of true spiritual knowledge than they do them-
selves. Even the man who arrogantly professes to be the vicegerent of
God on earth is totally ignorant of spiritual truth, or he would not
retain for a day the false and impious position which he occupies.
From a life-long vassilage to this iniquitous system its credulous
adherents dare not think for themselves or speak their own minds in
religious matters, lest the salvation of their souls might thereby be
endangered. Although this superstitious system—a relic of the dark
ages—still exists in our midst, the claws of its velvet-pawed priests have
fortunately, through the advance of civilization in spite of their so-
called religion, been clipped, and they can no longer burn at the stake
those who expose their God-dishonouring and man-enslaving system, or
even confiscate their writings to the flames as was their wont in
former times, when to laugh at a priest was held to be a mortal sin.
Fortunately, the days of this priestly association are numbered, for its
great, though silent enemy secular education, is gradually, in free
countries, undermining its very citadel, and its priests know this, as is
shown by their continual and pitiful, but ineffectual howls against
popular education.
This artificial form of religion termed Romanism chains the thoughts
and fetters the reason of its devotees with those degrading dogmas
which, through priestly influence, have so long enslaved the minds of


men. By its subtle sophistry, its gorgeous ceremonial mummeries, and
by the aid of grand and soul-soothing music, it has perverted the
reason, dazzled the eyes, and led captive the thoughts of its confiding
and credulous supporters, so that all argument, however conclusive and
convincing it may be, is almost wasted on them until unexpectedly
they are intuitively startled from their spiritual lethargy by some
passing thought, as they surmise, but which comes from a higher
source than they imagine. Writing of Romanism in England, Principal
Fairbairn, in the Contemporary Review of May, 1885, remarks :
“ Submission to Catholicism is the victory of unbelief, because
the man who accepts authority because he dare not trust
his intellect, lest it lead him into atheism, is vanquished
by the atheism he fears. He unconsciously subscribes to the
impious principle that the god he believes has given him so godless a
reason that, were he to follow it, it would lead him to a faith without
God.” But these remarks are equally applicable to the artificial form
of religion termed Protestantism as to Romanism, with this trifling
difference that, while the dupes of the latter allow their reason to be
overruled by a church, those of the former allow their reason to be
overruled by a book which alone derives any authority that may be
claimed for it, from its having been sanctioned by the priests of the
Romish Church, whose authority the Protestants repudiate in all else.*
The day, however, is coming when the laymen who now so generously
support both these artificial forms of religion will, through the light
of truth now dawning on the world, discover that they have been out-
witted and humbugged by their trusted shepherds, not only by the
absolution-giving, but also by the salvation-promising deceivers “who
live in comfort, wealth, and ease, whom Jesus never knew.” When
this day arrives, then it can be truly said, “The people who have
walked in darkness have seen a great light. They that have dwelt in
the shadow of death spiritual, upon them hath the light shined.”
Few believers in artificial religion ever consider the childish and
contradictory conceptions of the Infinite and Omnipresent Power,
whom we call God, set forth in the Hebrew and Greek scriptures. He
who filleth all space with His presence, and by whom all are vivified,
is represented in one place as dwelling in some remote region above the
clouds, from which He occasionally descended to see how the children
of men were getting on, and at other times ordering the most cruel
slaughter of some of His children, and even aiding the Israelites in
the sanguinary wars they carried on with those whose lands they
coveted. In another part He is represented as leaving His celestial
throne and incarnating Himself in the body of a worthy Jewish
peasant, hungering, thirsting, and weeping, and finally offering Himself
as a sacrifice on the cross for the sins of the world, for the purpose of
appeasing His own wrath and satisfying His sense of justice, and in
order that a few, who are credulous enough to believe these God-
* Note.— For fuller information on this point, see a pamphlet, entitled “The
Question Settled ; or, Religion versus Superstition,” by Gnostees, published by
Messrs. George Robertson and Co., of Melbourne, Sydney, and Adelaide.
Price Is.


■dishonouring fables, may escape in the life to come the just conse-
quences of the moral wrongdoings committed by them when on earth.
Can anything be more humiliating than to see otherwise sensible and
•enlightened men and women, professing to believe, in our own day,
such barbarous conceptions of the Infinite 1 Is it to be wondered at
that honest men endowed with reason reject such childish Jewish
fables 1
On one occasion, after returning from listening to a lecture delivered
by the Bishop of Melbourne on the “ Authenticity of the Gospels,” I
wrote him to the following effect: —“ If, instead of mere copies of
copies of writings said to be according to Matthew, Mark, Luke, and
John, we even possessed the original manuscripts of these men, with
each of their signatures attached, and every page thereof countersigned
by the gentle Nazarene, would we, as rational and accountable beings,
be justified in believing such God-dishonouring fables'? If you, sir,
had had an only-begotten son, or an only-begotten daughter, would
you have decreed the cruel death of either of them on the cross in
order to atone for the sins of humanity ? Would you, had you been
the Supreme Power, have cursed all mankind yet unborn with an
■eternal curse, because Adam and Eve eat a fruit; or would you have
made a broad path leading to destruction for the many, and a narrow
path to happiness for the few 1 If not, how can you honestly profess
to believe and teach such mentally dwarfing dogmas to the people 1 ?”
I need not add that I did not receive a reply from his lordship, neither
did I expect one to a letter couched in such plain language. I left him
to answer these questions to his own conscience. If I believed in
miracles, I should look upon the fact of one so highly educated and
intelligent as is the Bishop holding the views he professes to do, as a
most astounding one; but, as has been wisely observed, “there is no
room for miracles in a domain of law, and this domain, science
demonstrates, is co-extensive Avith the universe.” The cosmos admits
no miracle, but its own creation —no insoluble mystery, but the exist-
ence of God : all else is Nature, of which man is the ultimate, and as
the poet Pope truly remarks—
“ All are but parts of one stupendous whole,
Whose body Nature is, and God the soul.”
In a universe of law there can be no miracle, as that term is
commonly defined to be a violation of, or an exception to, law. What
have been called miracles, if they actually occurred, were mere antici-
pations of human knowledge —natural phenomena which, for the time,
exceeded human powers of comprehension, but which will not always
do so. Eclipses, now predicted with such minute accuracy by
astronomers, were considered miraculous events in ignorant times. In
fact, all things are mysteries until they are understood. But I find I
am digressing, so will return to the subject in hand.
If, as Bishop Moorhouse maintains, faith in Christ means self-
surrender to the will of Jesus, how comes it that those who profess
this faith fail to do according to the will of Jesus as expressed in the


Gospels ? Did you ever meet “ a Christian ” who loved his neighbour
as himself any more than do non-professing Christians 1 I have not;
neither have I met a Christian who exhibited “ the will to love ” his
enemies to a greater extent than others, or who manifested “ the will
to live ” to a less extent than those who make no professions of faith
in Christ. Yet such is the elegant, pious twaddle that hundreds of
the educated classes of this city, near the close of the nineteenth
century, rush to listen to whenever his lordship delivers one of his
fashionable week-day lectures. Possibly, in the future, some gifted
lecturer will hold forth on the Melbourne lapse from common sense,
in the same hall in which Dr. Moorhouse is now lecturing on “ The
Galatian Lapse.” Think you are people a whit better or more spirit-
ually enlightened through listening to these lectures, which I am
confident are beyond the comprehension of at least nine-tenths of those
who attend them ? The Galatian lapse, I maintain, has no more to do
with true religion than has the decline and fall of the Roman Empire
with the sanitary condition of this city.
Considering the lamentable failure of these artificial forms of religion
after so many centuries’ trial to make people better and happier, far less
to bring peace and goodwill to all, it is pitiable to hear an educated man
claiming that we have “ evidence of a spontaneous and continuous
moral development ” throughout Christendom by faith in that which is
unreasonable, and asking if it is possible “ to cure the evils of a weak
and perverse will ” without this irrational faith ; also, “ What can
secure the happiness and spiritual renewal of the human race 1 ” These
learned sophists falsely assume that pious hypocrisy is goodness, and
that the change called death abrogates the inevitable law of effect
following cause, and they foolishly ignore the fact that man’s real
happiness depends upon his character, which everyone makes for him-
self, not by faith or attention to outward observances, but by the
exercise of his will. If, as they assert, the blood of Christ cleanseth
from all sin, and every man can be saved, “ not by merit but by grace,
not by works but by faith,” where, let me ask, is the incentive to
strive to develop the will to do good, and thus improve one’s character ?
No man can honestly claim that the popular faiths have made their
adherents even a moral people, far less that they have regenerated
mankind, for our law courts and overflowing prisons are standing
evidences to the contrary. What, then, is the use of a belief in an
assumed risen and glorified saviour or redeemer, if such a belief does
not stamp out vice and make those who are credulous enough to rely
thereon better and happier 1 No theoretic scheme of salvation can
make men and women good, neither can the human soul be fed on
faith any more than the human body can be fed on a stone ; and the
idea that human action is governed, not by man’s will, but by faith
in that which is unreasonable, is as false as it is foolish and misleading.
Of one fact I am certain, and that is that professed faith in “the Lord
Jesus Christ ” does not prevent educated people from talking nonsense.
Bear in mind that a fluent tongue often gives to error the semblance of
truth, and be not led away by the saintly appearance or the popularity
of a lecturer, even if he be entitled to be addressed as “ The Right


Reverend Father in God.” Bear in mind, also, that love, sympathy,
and gratitude transcend all knowledge, fluency of tongue, and
popularity; they are the brightest gems of the human mind—the
silent eloquence of the soul within that shines forth in the life,
independent of all religious professions.
That the more liberal of churchmen are at last awakening to the
absurd dogmas and impious folly popularly taught as religion, and to-
their falsity and their untenability, we have even the authority of those
whose interest it is to keep up the popular priestly delusion by
pandering to preconceived ideas and confirming ancient superstition.
At the late United Presbyterian Synod the Rev. Dr. Leckie, of
Glasgow, is reported to have stated that it was “ painfully evident
that the pulpit no longer wedded that power, or enjoyed that prestige
in the land which it once commanded. The implicit assent with which
the preacher’s words used to be received by his hearers had given place
in their minds to an uneasy half-sceptical frame, a feeling as if the
preacher was dealing with things scarcely real; a sort of looking down
on his position as one quite inferior to that of the expounder of the
certainties of science.” The same speaker craftily added :—“ It was a
grave mistake to imagine there was any real or necessary conflict
between science and religion,” as if the popular Pauline dogmas had
anything to do with true religion. And at the last Free Church
Assembly at Edinburgh, Dr. Brown, principal of the Free Church
College, Aberdeen, who acted as moderator, made the still more candid
confession that “ After nineteen centuries of Christian (?) effort, the
annoying and lamentable fact must be admitted that the Christianity
of the churches is not only a partial, but an utter, failure; ” thus
bearing out what I have stated to be the case, namely, that a purer
Christianity and a more rational faith are demanded to meet the
advancing intelligence of the age we live in. Another frank admission
recently made by a clergyman is worthy of quotation here. In a
lecture lately delivered in Paisley, Scotland, by the Rev. David Watson,
minister of the Presbyterian Church, he is reported to have said : “ The
great, the wise, and the mighty are not with us. That I fear we must
all own to, however much we may grieve to say so ; and the more we
read of the history, the poetry, the biography, and the literature of the
age, the more we will think so. The best thought, the widest know-
ledge, and the deepest philosophy have discarded our church.
They are not even nominally with us. They look not for our heaven,
they fear not our hell. They detest what they call the inhumanities
of our creed Why are these, and such like men, without
the pale of the Christian church ? Not that they are unfit—we own
that; but we are unworthy of them, and by the mob-force of our
ignorant numbers have driven them out. They shun us because of our
ignorant misconceptions of heaven, man, and God. They feel our evil
communications corrupting their good manners ; they feel our limited
vision narrowing the infinitude of the horizon; and, therefore, as an
indispensable to the very existence of their souls, they separate them-
selves from us, and forsake—and greatly unwilling are many of them
to do so—the worship with us of our common God.”


I may here remark that the popular faiths demand a belief in a
startling antagonism between the Satan and Ohrist-principles. The first,
a personified idea of a supposed übiquitous power in the universe, is
represented as a real evil being, though not humanly incarnated, who
is constantly warring against God generally and man specially. The
second is represented as a man, (begotten by the overshadowing of a
human virgin by a seducing spirit, or ghost), who was specially sent by
God to suffer on the cross, as a Divine sacrifice, to counteract the baneful
influence of the former on mankind. These two mythical conceptions
form the leading characters in all the sacred dramas of the world—the
former representing the Tempter, and the latter the Saviour from the
Tempter’s wiles ; the Almighty being almost ignored, if not left out of
the programme altogether. In the popular faiths the priestly concocters
and self-ordained expounders thereof, in order to magnify and enrich
themselves, by working on the imagination of the credulous, have
terrified the latter into the belief that these two characters are essen-
tially necessary to their salvation from the wrath of an angry God.
As such teachings would not stand a rational analysis, we can easily
perceive why priestcraft has always been antagonistic to reason, science,
and progress, and why it has upheld the doctrine that “ ignorance is
the mother of devotion”—that is, ignorance in regard to anything that
will throw light on the falsity of their fraudulent systems.
In the popular faiths, two rudimental and fatal mistakes have been
assumed : —First, an account of what is really an incongruity between
God’s justice and His love; and, second, the dogma of evil. (1.) If
God’s justice inexorably required man’s eternal punishment, His love
could not consistently intervene, or permit intervention, in man’s
behalf. (2.) In order to give plausibility to the fable of man’s fall from
perfection to imperfection, and the presumed necessity of an atonement
for him by the sacrifice of some superhuman victim, the authors thereof
have imputed human passions to Him who is infinite and all-good, and
have represented Him as an irrational, jealous, and angry God. The
devil-theory adopted to account for the existence of evil is as absurd as
it is God-dishonouring and puerile. Evil, or sin, is simply the necessary
antithesis of goodness, to which it stands in the same relation as does dark-
ness to light. Without the power to choose between good and evil, man
could not be a responsible being. Light and goodness are absolute,
while darkness and sin are merely relative ; for as soon as the former
are appreciated the latter are dispelled. The false dogma of evil, and the
irrational belief that the burden of sin can and will be borne for every
man who is credulous by another, have been the two greatest obstacles
to man’s advancement morally and spiritually, not only in the past, but
also in our own day. The popular vicarious sacrifice doctrine is per-
nicious as well as misleading, for it encourages immorality by false
hopes of forgiveness of sins committed. It is true that what is termed
Christianity, but which in reality is Paulinism, calls for the mortifi-
cation of the lusts and passions of man’s animal nature, but, unfor-
tunately, as a rule it calls in vain, for, except outwardly, there is little
difference between those who call themselves Christians and those who
reject the irrational dogmas of artificial religion. Of the two the latter


have, by statistics, the best record to refer to, as far as crime is
concerned.
Through natural religion we learn that the strife of virtue against
vice or sin is an inherent natural law in all mankind. The divine
principle in man is ever warring against the passions of his sensuous
nature ; the voice of conscience, though it may be disregarded, is never
stilled ; the aspiration for something higher, though it may be ignored,
is never quenched, and all that is termed evil eventually works for
good, through the inevitable suffering which it entails. Thus, through
remorse and repentance, each individual is, sooner or later, not by
miraculous interposition, but by natural law, brought to a clearer light
and fitted to participate in that sublime happiness and bliss which a
Loving Father has designed for all His children eventually. Evil or
sin, about which so much priestly mystery has been raised, is simply the
yielding of our higher faculties to the selfish desires of our lower nature,
and the essence of natural religion is self-culture by which the God-
principle in man obtains the mastery over his selfish propensities, and
this is within the power of the human will to accomplish independent of
any fancied redeemer, saviour, or scape-goat. The doctrine of original
sin is, I hold, a libel on God, and is totally irreconcilable with a benefi-
cent Deity. And further, if the humble Jesus was divine, and his
crucifixion was a necessary atonement for the sins of the world, how, in
the name of common sense, if there be but one God, could He become a
victim and a sacrifice to appease His own wrath, and satisfy His own
sense of justice. Even according to the Gospel accounts themselves,
so far from Jesus having claimed to be God, he is reported therein to
have reproved a young man for even calling him “ good master, ”
adding that there was none good but One, that was God. And so far
from his having taught that his bodily crucifixion was necessary for
man’s salvation, he is credited with having said “ The flesh profiteth
nothing, the words that I speak unto you, they are truth and they are
life.” The difference between Jesus and Paul consisted in that the one
endeavoured to act up to what he taught; while the other, on his own
authority oidy, taught a number of irrational dogmas, and while a free-
thinker himself, he inconsistently denied the same right to others,
declaring that “if an angel from Heaven teach any other doctrine than
that which we preach, let him be accursed.” The ideal of Jesus was
impracticable—that of Paul absurd; and no one with a spark of
honesty but must admit that the former is far in advance of the prac-
tice of all who profess to act up to it, and the latter only causes its up-
holders to travesty religion.
Hot by trusting in the merits or sufferings of another, or believing
this or that dogma, but in yielding obedience to the promptings of the
Divine voice within, man fulfils the will of God.
It is high time that educated men and women should abandon a
system of worship that is not only dishonouring towards God but de
grading to themselves, and learn that irrational creeds, words, and
professions are mere solemn mockery, and that deeds alone proclaim
man’s worth. To those who recognize the utter insignificance of this
planet in comparison with those mighty worlds so infinite in number,


and separated by distances beyond the power of the human mind to
calculate, it is truly surprising to see others equally cognizant thereof,
still clinging to those childish conceptions of God and His relationship
to man set forth in an antiquated and ignorant traditionalism. The
crucifixion of Jesus, in which he sealed his teachings with his life, was
a noble example set for all God’s children throughout succeeding ages,
but designing men, pandering to the superstitious religious views then
prevailing, despoiled its utility by setting up the false idea of a wrathful
God, and a necessary sacrifice of a divine being for the purpose of
atonement, adding thereto the blasphemous trappings of idolatrous wor-
ship. Judging of the real character of Jesus, by sifting the few grains
of truth out of the mass of error and misrepresentation by which these
have been obscured, he was evidently a man frugal in his mode of living,
chaste in his life, obedient to the voice of God within him, and loving
even towards those who injured him. To apotheosize or deify Jesus is
to ascribe to him that which he never claimed, and that which robs
him of the merit which, as a man, he earned by his unselfish actions
and trust in God as his Father and our Father, his God and our God.
Through the cramping influences of the various stagnant forms of
artificial religion ruling for so many generations past, the spiritual per-
ceptions of the majority of men have become so beclouded with those
errors hallowed by antiquity that, in religion, it is almost impossible to
induce them to consider the subject rationally, and to perceive the beauty
of truth compared with the deformity of error. Even the most cogent
reasons urged against, or the most convincing proofs adduced to de-
monstrate the utter absurdity of many of the dogmas of artificial
religion, seem not to have the slightest effect on their beclouded
understandings. They appear to be totally impervious to all evidence
or even demonstration, however clear and convincing these may be,
that prove the irrationality and untenability of the popular religious
theories. In fact, the more convincing the arguments employed to
demonstrate the falsity of their belief, the more tenaciously do they
seem to hug these false dogmas to their souls, for, as has been wisely
written—
“Faith, fanatic faith, once wedded fast
To some dear falsehood hugs to the last.”
It is an undeniable fact that the popular faiths, when viewed from an
.unprejudiced standpoint, inculcate the worship of a conception of God re-
pugnant to man’s enlightened reason. It is true that this statement may
be met by quibbling and clerical sophistry, but I defy the world to refute
it by reasonable arguments. The excuse that the book on which the
popular faiths rest as their authority having been written in ignorant and
superstitious times, allowance must consequently be made for the many
contradictory, erroneous, and degrading conceptions regarding the
Almighty therein set forth. This argument, however, instead of
refuting the above statement only confirms it, and corroborates the
further fact that it is a standing disgrace on the part of all educated
minds of to-day to continue to countenance, far less to support, such
debasing and God-dishonouring conceptions of Him who is not only All-


wise, but who is also Infinite in goodness and mercy to one and all of
His erring children. No wonder is it, with such a repulsive conception
of God popularly taught in the churches, that atheism is so prevalent
in our midst. It is only surprising that there are not more atheists
among the intelligent classes who attend church regularly Sunday after
Sunday, when in one sentence God is admitted to be merciful—“ O
Lord, Thou art most merciful”—and in the next He is addressed as if
He were considered a merciless tyrant—viz., “Lord have mercy upon
us”—showing clearly that God is viewed theoretically as merciful, but
practically is worshipped as the very reverse.
While artificial religion professes to teach men how to die, natural
religion teaches us how to live, for in reality to the individual “ there
is no death; what seems so is transition” to a higher stage of existence.
Artificial religion also teaches that our souls’ salvation depends on our
belief in certain irrational doctrines laid down by men who lived in
ignorant and superstitious times. Natural religion, on the contrary,
leads us to reject all dogmas that are not in accordance with reason,
and that are not borne out by experience or analogy, whether taught in
ancient or modern times, and whether inculcated by men embodied or
disembodied. It is only by so acting that we can attain to real happi-
ness either in this life or in that which is to come, for it is alone
through utilizing the Divine faculty of reason, and from experience and
a mass of evidence, that we can judge between truth and error—
between that which is good and that which is evil—and thus prove all
things and hold fast to that which is true and good in religion as in all
else. The chief motives of the popular faiths are the selfish salvation
of the individual, the hope of future reward, and the fear of punish-
ment in the life to come; whereas the vitalizing principle of true or
natural religion is man’s duty to God and his neighbour, which should
manifest itself in our actions at all times and in all places. Those who
continue to uphold time-honoured falsities in the face of demon-
strable facts to the contrary, are the real enemies of truth and religious
progress. They may ignore this fact, as they do others that are
antagonistic to their cherished belief ; but, if so, they not only deceive
themselves, but are guilty of deceiving others by means of their
obstinate, wilful self-deception and their continuing to countenance
that which is false and misleading.
It may be argued that the popular artificial forms of religion teach
much of that which natural religion inculcates. This is quite true, and
I shall explain the reason of it. Artificial religion, in order to give its
priestly falsities the semblance of truth, adopts some of the simple
teachings of natural religion, but it takes care only to select sufficient
of these to make its irrational dogmas palatable to its dupes, much in
the same way as the apothecary coats with sugar his nauseous pills, or
the angler covers his cruel hook with an enticing bait in order to catch
the unsuspecting fish. Through the light of reason natural truths are
easily distinguished from the mass of artificial falsities with which they
have been cunningly mixed, for truth and error will not really amalga-
mate, though to the credulous and unsuspecting they may appear to do
so. Some of the truths of natural religion which have been incor-


porated with the falsities of artificial religion not only will not blend
with them, but are diametrically opposed thereto. Take, for instance,
the fact that man’s happiness on entrance into the inner life depends
entirely on his character formed by his daily actions in this life, and
contrast this with the artificial theory that good acts are but filthy
rags, and that man’s future happiness depends solely on his faith or
belief in certain unreasonable dogmas, which, except for the circum-
stances of his birth, he in all probability would never have heard of,
and which, if he were now told of them for the first time, he would
unhesitatingly reject. If faith is sufficient for man’s salvation, then
works are superfluous ; and if good works are sufficient, then faith in
that which is irrational must be superfluous.
What makes natural religion so attractive to the earnest truth-seeker
is its rationality, simplicity, and evident truthfulness, compared with the
unreasonableness, complexity, and contradictory character of artificial
religion. The former inculcates love to God as our Father and our Friend,
free from all dread, and it represents death as a natural and beneficent
process through which all have to pass, being the ne\tf birth of the
spirit into a higher stage of existence, in which we take up the thread
of life exactly where we leave off here, with our characters unchanged,
but under different conditions and with more favourable environments
for progress and happiness. The latter, i.e., artificial religion, inculcates
fear as well as love to God, an utter impossibility, for one can neither
love a being he dreads, nor fear one whom he truly loves, for “perfect
love casteth out all fear.” Consequently, if “ the fear of the Lord is
the beginning of wisdom,”* it follows that the inculcation of love to a
being whom we are to fear is inconsistent and irrational; it represents
death as the natural result of sin, and as a calamity to be dreaded, “ for
the wages of sin is death“ By one man sin entered into the world, and
death by sin ;”f also that there is no repentance beyond the grave, for
as a tree falleth so it lieth, which would not only be unjust, but also
cruel and unreasonable, for everyone has not equal opportunities here ;
the circumstances of our birth, over which we have no control, in a
great measure determining our moral state in this life.
The superiority of natural religion over all forms of artificial religion
lies in the fact that it presents a rational conception of God and man’s
relationship to the Infinite, a reasonable idea of the life to come, and a
common-sense view of religion, resting on the evidence of living wit-
nesses, and not merely on the statements of those whose veracity we
have no means of testing. Natural religion embraces all that is true,
good, and soul-elevating in all the various forms of artificial religion,
freed from the numerous excrescences which disfigure them. As I
have already observed, it is through the irrational and repugnant
conceptions of God and man’s destiny presented in artificial religion
that the existence of God is now so frequently denied, and the hope of
immortality is looked upon as a mere dream by many, including some
of the leading scientists of the day. Atheism, which is but the natural
revolt, or mental rebound against the jealous, partial, and angry God of
* See Proverbs ix. 10.
+ See Romans vi. 23. and v. 12.


artificial religion, is not confined, however, to non-churchgoers, but
prevails to a greater or less extent secretly in every congregation in
Christendom. The alarming prevalence of infidelity and the general
tendency towards atheism among the thinking classes is constantly
being admitted and deplored from the pulpit, while its cause is still
stubbornly retained and upheld by the very men who inconsistently
express public regret at the effect their preaching is producing on the
minds of the more intelligent of their supporters.
Natural religion, instead of appealing, as do artificial forms of religion,
to man’s emotions and his credulity, appeals to his highest faculties and
to his noblest impulses, and it supplies that priceless knowledge which
no religion based on mere faith can give, a knowledge which will prove
an inexhaustible source of endless pleasure eventually to every human
soul. To men in a state of worldly blindness and prejudice this state-
ment may appear mere foolishness, but to those to whom this knowledge
has, in a degree, already come through earnest personal investigation
and contemplation, it is otherwise ; and although this priceless know-
ledge may, for a time, be ignored by those who prefer darkness to the
light, still, when all artificial forms of religion, with their massive
cathedrals and churches, and their highly endowed colleges for the
propagation of ecclesiastical sophistry shall have passed away, the
eternal truth founded on facts and capable of demonstration shall
remain firmer and more enduring than the granite rock which is said
by geologists to be the primary formation on which all the other strata
of the earth rest. Many of our popular men of science, strong in
intellectual pride, foolishly ridicule this priceless knowledge, of which
they are totally ignorant from never having investigated the subject,
and thereby, for the present, secure greater popularity for themselves.
The time, however, is coming when their wisdom, like that of the clergy,
will be turned to foolishness, and they will regret their folly in having
denounced that knowledge which truly passeth their present under-
standing.
All unprejudiced minds must admit that a religion which best illus-
trates the supreme fulness of divine benevolence, and which points out
that infinite goodness supersedes severity—that justice merges in mercy
—that punishment tends to correction and not destruction, proving
remedial rather than penal—that love and wisdom have the ascendency
in the issues of divine government, has most the sanction of reason and
the support of truth, for this is the only conclusion consistent with
belief in a beneficent Deity. It must also be acknowledged that a
religion which teaches that the duty we owe our God and the duty we
owe our neighbour are the essence of true morality, and that the best
way we can evince our love to God is by aiding and enlightening our
fellow-men, is a religion, the truth, rationality, and simplicity of which
should commend itself to all thoughtful minds. Such is natural religion,
which, being founded on truth and reason, and based on facts capable
of demonstration, is divine and of universal application, consequently it
is destined in time to supersede all artificial forms of religion, and to
become the religion of all humanity. Through natural religion the
whole fabric of dogmatic theology is fast melting away, imperceptibly.


it may be, to the strongly prejudiced, before the sunrise of natural
truth, which has begun to shine into human hearts since the advance of
civilization has curbed the powers of the despotic priests of artificial
religion.
Is it asked why this important knowledge has been so long in coming
to the world 1 The answer is simple, and is as follows : —Because men,
through the cunning wiles of priestcraft, have during many centuries
opposed the acquisition of spiritual knowledge, under the false and
irrational pretext that God, some eighteen centuries back, vouchsafed suffi-
cient thereof for all time to come. And it is only now, since men have
commenced in earnest to throw off these priestly shackles, that the true
light of spiritual knowledge has begun to dawn on the benighted under-
standings of a few of the more liberal of earth’s inhabitants. The
spread of this inestimable knowledge may for a time be slow, for nature
makes no sudden leaps, especially where preparation for a change is
needed, so that the change may work in harmony with the existing
condition of things, but if slow it will be sure and enduring. Not only
has it had the opposition of the various churches to contend with, but also
that of the public press, which, as a rule, has grossly misrepresented it
and done all in its power, by foul means as well as fair, to stay its
onward march ; but, notwithstanding all this, it has made progress, and
will continue to do so until it silences all opposition alone on its merits,
“for truth is immortal and shall live, error is mortal and shall die.”
While stagnation in the beliefs of ignorant and superstitious times
is the boast of artificial religion, progress is the watchword of natural
religion. Ere long there will be a stern conflict between artificial and
natural religion, unless the senseless creeds, foolish doctrines, and false
teachings of the former undergo a complete and radical change, whereby
what are now esteemed its most important dogmas will be discarded as
unworthy of the credence, far less of the reverence, of sensible men and
women. It is the advancing intelligence of the age we live in that is
the liberating force that is freeing men from the moral and spiritual
stagnation caused by stubborn adhesion to these old dogmas that are
as dishonouring towards God as they are derogatory to man. The
great change that is dawning on the world through the adoption of
natural and philosophic religion in place of the popular, artificial, and
unphilosophic forms of religion, will, as already stated, carry with it
no sudden revolution in society. Indifference to this important change
is criminal, for it is a step in the right direction towards the long-
looked-for unity and brotherhood of the race, and the equality in
respect of love one towards another. Not the equality that would
level the aspirations of one soul down to the aspirations of another, for
this would be retrogression, but the equality of all men’s claims on
God’s love, irrespective of their belief, their social position, or their
learning. Curious enough the chief opponents to this beneficial change
are the very men who are constantly praying for it, and who profess to
be the people’s spiritual advisers. They are the true obstructionists,
who, as a rule, do all in their power to counteract the labours of those
whose works aim towards one general result—namely, the enlighten-
ment of their fellow-men through the promulgation of that spiritual


knowledge which has of late years again made itself heard. Thus, a
■change has already commenced which in a great measure has been
brought about through the walls that divide the seen from the unseen
world having been flung down, thereby bringing light out of what has
been for many ages darkness, and imparting to many a happiness
totally unknown to those who still cling to the old artificial forms of
religion. It is to the irresistible advance of civilization, in spite of
the endeavours of priestcraft to stay it, that a general interchange of
thought has been established between the two worlds, which will bid
defiance to all priestly attempts to close. Even those who are still
attached to those creedal bonds that bind and fetter their souls, if they
could but cast off for a moment false prejudice, would easily perceive
the radiant beauty of spiritual truth in comparison to the deformity and
folly of priestly fiction.
I may here observe that the churches are generally credited with
being the chief factors in the advance of civilization, but this is quite
contrary to fact, for the present expansion of thought throughout the
more civilized portions of the globe is opposed by the churches and is
almost entirely due to the printing press, through which the dormant
intellect of men during the ages that priestcraft was in power, when
reason was fettered and freedom of thought was almost crushed out,
has been stirred up to its present activity. Instead, therefore, of the
advance of civilization being due to the churches, as is falsely claimed,
its progress has been actually in spite of their endeavours to stay its
oaward march. It is recorded that soon after the introduction of
printing into England in 1474, the Bishop of London, at a convocation
■of the clergy, prophetically declared—“ If we don’t destroy this
dangerous invention, it will one day destroy us and, judging by the signs
of the times, I have not the slightest doubt that his lordship was a true
prophet in this instance, for it is evident to the most casual observer
that his prophecy is approaching fulfilment. It is useless, now, for
the clergy to endeavour to stay the onward march of freedom of
thought, for they might as wmll try to stop the movement of the
planets as to say “ thus far and no further” to the aspiration of the
human soul for more light. Priestly fetters can never again stay the
growth and expansion of thought on the part of men once freed from
the artificial shackles of mental bondage to ecclesiasticism.
It is to the rising generation and to the few who have begun to
experience the unsatisfying character to their higher nature of the
popular artificial forms of religion, and who consequently desire
increased spiritual knowledge, that we must look for the appreciation
■of the more rational and soul-elevating teachings of natural religion.
So long as a man is content with ancient superstition, and fails to
perceive that truth is an essential requisite of religion, there is little
hope of convincing him of the falsity, inconsistency, and misleading
character of the opinions he holds, or rather of the opinions that hold
him. The old adage, “ Convince a man against his will and he’ll be of
the same opinion still,” holds certainly true in this case. Such minds
appear almost past redemption from their cherished errors, and were
it not for the effect that the arguments used may, at some future time,


have on such minds when unexpectedly they are startled at the utter
absurdity of some of the dogmas taught them before they were old
enough to perceive their folly, it seems almost waste of time to try to
enlighten them on this vastly important subject. By the constant
dropping of water, however, even a stone in time becomes hollowed, so
by the frequent repetition of truths the most obdurate mind must,
sooner or later, yield to their influence.
It is only within the last half-century that the tide has perceptibly
begun to turn, that reason has been allowed openly to reassert her
governance in spiritual as in all other matters, and that the philosophic
position in regard to religion—which priestly intrigues caused to be
abandoned—has once more been regained by the people, or, rather, the
unprejudiced portion thereof. Owing to the advancement of civilization
and the general enlightenment of the masses, through our State schools,
colleges, and the almost daily discoveries of science, priestcraft can no
longer, by threats or anathemas, present an effectual bar to the attain-
ment of spiritual knowledge by those who are desirous of obtaining the
same. This knowledge is an infallible antidote to priestly superstition,
and is the dreaded Nemesis of clerical faith, which accounts for the
stubborn opposition at all times shown by the priests of the various
forms of artificial religion to the means whereby this knowledge is
obtainable. From interested motives these spiritual deceivers have,
during many centuries, raised the cry of “thief! thief!” against all
who dared to investigate the subject, and their credulous dupes have
joined them in the cry, little knowing that they were thereby only
aiding these priestly wolves in sheep’s clothing in their own spiritual
deception and in the continuance of a debasing superstition and mental
despotism.
Belief is mere passive assent to authority or to the testimony
of others; while knowledge is perfect conviction from evidence
presented to our senses. Some are satisfied in religion with secondary
evidence; but there is a large class who require personal observation
before they can accept that which transcends ordinary experience, and
this can only be obtained by individual investigation. Few, if any,
after a fair amount of study and research, have failed to be thoroughly
convinced of the reality of occurrences which defy explanation by any
of the laws within the domain of physical science. This fact, in itself,
ought to be a further incentive to investigate that which opens up a
new world of joy and beauty to the ken of the earnest searcher after
truth. When once the actuality of a life beyond the grave is established
by demonstration and is fully realized, the circumstances of material
life are completely altered for the better. New faculties of mind and
adaptation are opened up, mountains of trouble melt into molehills,
and the grand fact that we are never alone, even in what we consider
our most secret moments, although it imparts not infallibility, generally
acts as a charm against evil desires and temptations. The certainty of
a continuity of life beyond the portals of the tomb is very different to
a vague belief or hope therein; and to those who have fully realized the
sublime confidence which this actual knowledge imparts, it gives new
motives to purity, benevolence, and righteousness.


For the benefit of those who, in religious matters, through false
teaching dare not trust their God-given faculty of reason, and who
require therein the authority of others, I may here add that Paul
declares, “Now, concerning spiritual gifts, brethren, I would not have
you ignorant. . . . There are diversities of gifts. . . . To one
is given by the spirit the word of wisdom. ... To another the
gift of healing by the same spirit; to another the working of wonders ;
to another prophecy ;to another discerning of spirits,” Peter writes*
“ Add to your faith knowledge, and to knowledge understanding.”
John states, “ Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits.” In Luke,
Jesus is reported to have said, “Why even of yourselves judge ye not
what is right.” In later times, Dr. Robert Chambers writes,
“ Spiritualism is the germ of the greatest discovery and the greatest
revolution of human thought that any age of the world has witnessed.
. . . Instead of being a superstition itself, as some are disposed to
think it, they will find it the explanation and extinguisher of all super-
stition.” Hudson Tuttle maintains that “the advent of Spiritualism
is through facts and not theories. Its purpose is positive knowledge.”
Sir Charles Bell writes, “ Its facts have been denied with a heat and
pertinacity that I could never understand.” Alfred Russell Wallace
states, “ Up to the time when I first became acquainted with the facts
of Spiritualism I was a confirmed philosophical sceptic. Facts, how
ever, beat me and compelled me to accept them as facts long before I
could accept the spiritual explanation of them.” Professor Tait, of
Glasgow University, declares that “ the great advance in the future in
natural theology is to be found in the corridor now opened up between
science and religion, not through the material world, but through the
immaterial. The reconciliation of conflicting schemes of religious and
scientific truth will be found by investigating the unseen universe.
That avenue has been walled up > there has been placed over it, in the
name of both science and religion, ‘No thoroughfare this way!’ In
the twentieth century that wall will be thrown down from turret to
foundation stone, and scientific and religious thought will be reconciled
by an appeal to the realities of the unseen world.” Washington Irving
asks, “ What could be more consoling than the idea that the souls of
those we once loved are permitted to return and watch over our
welfare I —that affectionate and guardian spirits sit by our pillows
when we sleep, keeping a vigil over our most helpless hours I— that
beauty and innocence which have languished into the tomb yet smile
unseen around us, revealing themselves in those blest dreams wherein
we live over again the hours of past endearment 1 A belief of this
kind will, I think, be a new incentive to virtue, rendering us circum-
spect—even in our secret moments —from the idea that those we once
loved and honoured are invisible witnesses of all our actions.” These
are only a few out of innumerable quotations I could give of a similar
character were it necessary for me to do so.
In the estimation of the thoughtless, a subject that is ridiculed is a
subject that must be ridiculous, but to those whose knowledge rests on
facts demonstrated to their senses, and who are thereby invulnerable
even to misrepresentation and calumny, the shafts of ridicule are


harmless, and only recoil on the prejudiced or ignorant who resort to
such a mode of attack. To the truly observant it is evident that in
recent times the consciousness of some has become enlarged to receive,
and quickened to discover and apprehend, more of spiritual truth than
in any former age of the world, and I maintain that there is nothing so
derogatory to the human soul as the apathy of ignorance respecting
spiritual things, whereby the hope of conscious immortality is deadened,
if not for the time almost obliterated. Spiritual knowledge is the key
that unravels all ancient superstitious mysteries, and banishes the fear
■of the great change termed death. Only those who have cultivated
their spiritual faculties can realize the sublime calmness of hope when
it is grounded on knowledge. They alone know that the veil that
divides the seen from the unseen is thin, and that ere long even this
will be removed, so that all shall know the truth from the greatest to
the least, since the progress of life, evolving itself round and about us,
and the irresistible advance of human knowledge, must, in due course,
alter all things for the better.
In the ages of the past we learn by history of ever-recurring cycles of
alternate elevation and depression of the human mind, and centuries
have now passed in which it has remained almost quiescent, if not
deteriorated, through the inculcation of the irrational dogmas of
artificial religion. Throughout these ages of mental darkness men’s
minds have been imprisoned and man’s freedom of thought has been
curtailed to such an extent that the devotees of artificial religion
-could hardly call their souls their own. Through its false teachings
men have placed in the hands of men like themselves the obedience
which is due alone to God, and, in their enthusiasm, have elevated the
■creature to an equality with the Creator. The world has indeed
-experienced a long interval since the noble and soul-elevating thoughts
of the philosophers of Greece were openly expressed, during which
interval the human mind has been encumbered by dogmas and creeds
as irrational as they are God-dishonouring and false. In fact, through
the machinations of priestcraft man has spiritually retrogressed since
the philosophic days of Pythagoras, Anexagoras, Plato, and Aristotle.
Even in our own day the minds of some of the highest, as well as many
of the lowest in the social scale are still fettered by pernicious priestly
shackles which cramp and enslave the intellect, and which, strange to
say, the wearers thereof, instead of being ashamed of, openly profess to
be proud of.
Man, through his natural faculties of reason, conscience, and sym-
pathy, which are manifestations in him, under finite limitations, of the
Infinite, has, however, made progress otherwise in the past, and he
possesses capacity for indefinite progress in the future. Owing to false
and irrational teachings the lives, thoughts, and aspirations of the
generality of men in the present age are essentially and almost ex-
clusively materialistic, whereby their perceptions are beclouded and
their minds darkened, and thereby the germ of spiritual life has lain
dormant, owing to its never having been called into action, consequently
they have been misled by the outward manifestation, and have over-
looked the actuating, directing, and enduring principle within. They


have foolishly ignored the great fact that everything which we behold
is but the outward and visible sign of an inner reality of which the
physical counterpart is but the outward manifestation. That there
exists a general tendency to rank materialism -among many of the
scientists of our day is not to be denied, for the great hostility these
men manifest to anything that cannot be satisfactorily accounted for
by physical laws within their knowledge, clearly demonstrates this te
be the case, and all who attest having witnessed phenomena that can-
not be explained from a materialistic point of view are held by them to
be credulous and superstituous. Surely the belief in facts presented to
one’s senses, which are capable of demonstration, and which have been
attested by thousands of unimpeachable witnesses in all parts of the
civilized world, between whom it is utterly impossible that there could
have been collusion, cannot reasonably be held to constitute superstition ?
It should be borne in mind that it is much easier to ridicule and
denounce statements that do not confirm popularly received theories,
than it is to prove their truth to people strongly prejudiced against, and
who, while they obstinately refuse to investigate the subject, are pre-
sumptuous enough to pass judgment on that of which they possess no-
knowledge. It ill becomes men who live in an age when we have made
steam our servant-of-all-work, the sun our portrait-painter, and elec-
tricity our postman and lamplighter, to deny or oppose facts merely on
account of their apparent improbability, seeing that almost equally
extraordinary phenomena are now of daily occurrence, which, if they
had been described to our forefathers, would have been declared by them
to have been utter impossibilities. There is, however, scarcely a
great discovery of any kind but which has had to fight its way to
public recognition in the face of detraction, calumny, and persecution.
Three centuries ago, for instance, the noble Geordano Bruno was burnt
at Rome for declaring the plurality of worlds, and to-day in that city a
statue is raised to his memory, proving that even in that eternal city of
professed religious stagnation development is taking place. It also
augurs well for the Roman Catholic Church of this colony when a
Dean of that church publicly acknowledges that “in this vacuous
waste of atheistic gloom there is a glimmer of distant light.” It is
true that from his standpoint the light of truth may appear distant,
but it is near to every soul open to receive it and the inestimable
blessings which it brings to all who are prepared to accept it.
The prevalence of materialism in an age of inductive reasoning is, I
hold, but the natural outcome of the irrational and incredible con-
ceptions of God and His works, as upheld by the popular faiths.
These conceptions, being totally irreconcilable with the facts made
known through Nature’s Divine revelations, are a standing disgrace to
the intelligence of the age we live in, and are responsible, in a great
measure, for the prevailing atheism. All scientific discovery points to
the fact of incessant progress through ever-changing forms to a deeper
question—a more profound reality than physical evolution. Even
Herbert Spencer, notwithstanding his leaning towards agnosticism,
candidly acknowledges, in the Nineteenth Century , of January, 1884,
that the searcher after truth, in contemplating the universe, will find that


“ amid the mysteries, which become the more mysterious the more they
are thought about, there will remain the one absolute certainty that he
is ever in presence of an Infinite and Eternal Energy, from which all
things proceed.” That this Energy is all-pervading, and that it
manifests intelligence in every phenomenon of Nature, we have incon-
trovertible evidence, for, in all objects of which we are cognizant,
certain properties and qualities are manifested which determine their
modes of action, and all bodies in Nature reciprocally act on each
other by virtue of these properties and qualities, thereby proving an
ever-present Intelligence in all things. Thus it is palpable that the
doctrine of materialistic evolution is deficient and requires a spiritual
evolutor to complete it, for even
“ Every drop of water,
Every grain of sand,
Proclaims, within, its Maker—
An unseen, loving hand. ”
Throughout all Nature the operation of the Great Eternal Cause is
ever visible—the action of the Perfect on the imperfect tending to
develop higher and still higher forms of life, until man, the crowning
work of development, appears. The human organism thus stands forth
an epitome of evolution—a microcosm representing the macrocosm, in
that it embodies all that has been before it came into existence. All the
different states and conditions of mind in matter are organized and con-
trolled for good. The human family are, in fact, finite outbirths of the
Infinite. At birth, man is an unconscious embodiment of everything
that is, has been, and is to be. To unfold and develop this unconscious
consciousness, and to enjoy and demonstrate his indwelling conscious
activities, constitute man’s deathless mission. Mind, therefore, is not
the consequent of matter, but the very contrary, matter being merely
the temporary physical garb of the indwelling mind. The expression of
the soul is proved by thought; even the utterance of the simple “ yes ”
or “no ” demonstrates the existence of a power beyond matter, and
goes beyond the closest reasoning of any sophist. Thought is the main-
spring of the soul, will is its executive, and reason its true guide. It
is this power of thought, will, and reason in man that raises him far
above all beneath him. These, coupled with his emotions and his daily
actions, form his character and individuality; and, as there are no two
men exactly alike physically, there are none exactly similar to each
other morally or intellectually. Nature never uses the same mould
over again, so boundless and inexhaustible are her resources. It is the
indwelling mind that stamps the individual character with all its
peculiar idiosyncracies on the constantly changing body from the cradle
to the grave, and it is the mind that constitutes man a deathless entity,
possessing boundless capabilities of development. This knowledge
comes intuitively to the truly contemplative mind, and requires not
the authority of either a church or a book to give it weight; and I
maintain that, as the matter of which our bodies consist indicates a
source, so does our intelligence as plainly indicate an intelligent
Source, whatever name we employ to designate that Source.


Another great cause of the general prevalence of atheism is that
most people, when they find that many of the biblical statements are in
direct opposition to natural facts, and that others are repugnant to the
moral consciousness in man, foolishly jump to the conclusion that there
are no truths in the Bible worthy of consideration, and they irrationally
take for granted that there is no directing and guiding power in the
universe, no after life for man, and consequently they assume that
religion is all a farce and beneath the notice of educated and intelligent
minds. This arises from their having been, through false teachings in
youth, imbued with the pernicious and erroneous idea that the Bible is
divinely inspired and is an infallible record of God’s will, and that it is
absolutely necessary in religion to have a book of special Divine authority
by which to regulate individual action. On their discovering the un-
tenability of these priestly dogmas, they cast the whole aside as false
and delusive, instead of more rationally accepting what is true and good
in the Bible, as they would if stated in any other book, and rejecting all
that is unworthy of their acceptance. These men, in their contempt for
a book for which such absurd claims are put forward, foolishly ignore
the indisputable fact that religion is a natural instinct of the human
mind, for every man has the rule of right within him, and natural
religion consists in obeying it. The worst of all atheism is, I hold,
this utter indifference to truth because it is not confined within the
boards of a book.
Through pride of intellect, and false prejudice, the generality of the
scientific men of our day also ignore the fact that there are forces in
nature of which they are totally ignorant, and thus they allow their
inclinations to get the better of their reason in all cases where facts are
attested which are opposed to popular theories, and which cannot be
accounted for by the known physical laws. Many of these men are foolish
enough to deny and ridicule that of which they have had no experience
from their never having carefully investigated the subject. It is certainly
a very easy way of getting rid of unpalatable truths by condemning all
phenomena that are beyond their experience and comprehension; but
it must be admitted that this is, to say the least, a very unscientific
course to adopt. The most learned of these self-opinionated sages have
to admit that matter is only known through its force, that the latter is
only known by its effects, and that matter in its ultimate nature is as
incomprehensible as that ever-present Power by which it is energized ;
and, further, that the aim and unerring precision with which every
atom is moved demonstrate that intelligence is manifested throughout
all matter. It therefore follows that atoms are but atomic centres of
force—mediums through which intelligence flows—all force being the
manifestation of will which, as already remarked, is the executive of
mind.
The distinguished scientist, Alfred Russell Wallace, referring to the
unscientific attitude, and the general hostility manifested by scientists,
as a rule, towards the investigation of spiritual phenomena, writes: —
“ Scientific men almost invariably assume that, in this inquiry, they
should be permitted, at the very outset, to impose conditions; and if,
under such conditions, nothing happens, they consider it a proof of


imposture or delusion. But they well know that, in all other branches
of research, Nature, not they, determine the essential conditions,
without a compliance with which no experiment will succeed. These
conditions have to be learnt by a patient questioning of Nature, and
they are different for each branch of science. How much more may
they be expected to differ in an inquiry which deals with subtle forces
of the nature of which the physicist is wholly and absolutely ignorant?
To ask to be allowed to deal with these unknown phenomena as he has
hitherto dealt with known phenomena, is practically to prejudge the
question, since it assumes that both are governed by the same laws.”
It will, however, sooner or later, have to be acknowledged by all that
physical science has conducted the world up to the gates where
spiritual science commences.
From time to time foolish men, who have only casually inquired
into the subject, rush into print to denounce some of the ascertained
facts of Nature, such as the truths of clairvoyance and mesmerism, and
they have the audacity to set their ignorance of these subjects against
the knowledge thereon of such men as Dr. Ashburner, Dr. John
Elliotson, and Professor Wm, Gregory, each of whom devoted many
years to the study and demonstration of the truth of clairvoyance and
mesmerism. These foolish writers remind me of the French scientist,
Lavoisier, who, when asked his opinion regarding aerolites or meteoric
stones, replied, “As there are no stones in the sky, none consequently fall
to the earth.” Yet a part of one of these, weighing over half-a-ton,
can be seen any day at the Melbourne University Museum.
The difficulty experienced at first in obtaining evidence of the
reality of spiritual phenomena by those who wish to witness them,
compared with the ease with which facts in physical science can be
obtained, is frequently urged as an excuse for not having investigated
the subject; but, as has been truly observed—” How infinitesimally
few and far between have been the attempts to study or develop the
phenomena called spiritual, in the spirit in which so many have
ardently devoted themselves to physical science. It is not to be
denied that the difficulties are great and peculiar. A whole world of
stern influences comes in, which have not to be taken into account in
researches into the kingdom of inorganic nature. But this is no
sufficient reason for the way in which the alleged facts have been
treated. The laws appertaining to spirit and matter are, doubtless,
subtle, but difficulties should only incite the true seeker after know-
ledge to greater exertion.” From personal experience I can truthfully
assert that the stupendous results obtainable on realization of the truth
that the phenomena actually occur is more than sufficient to compensate
for all the difficulties that may be encountered in obtaining evidence of
their reality, A few facts once established under test conditions give
to the new investigator such a zest for further inquiry that he seldom
fails to become fully satisfied if he is favourably circumstanced for
continuing his investigations.
Many people, owing to false religious teachings, foolishly reject the
spiritual admonitions from the voice of God within until their souls
become almost dead to the mandates of reason; they are thus led


captive by the irrational conceptions of God and man’s destiny
expressed by men who lived in ignorant and superstitious times,
who had the arrogance to assume the false position of special divine
oracles, or prophets of God as they termed themselves. Those who
have been thus darkened by old theology thereby become so blinded
that they cannot perceive the beauty of simple truth. Others, through
timidity, caused by the inculcation of a religion of fear, have never
allowed themselves to doubt, which in reality is a prayer to God for
more light, consequently they have become willing slaves to habits of
thought which are a disgrace to their manhood, and which follow them
like shadows in the life to come, where it is equally difficult to rid
themselves of these habits of thought as it is in this life. Many in the
past have known the falsity of these artificial forms of religion, but for
fear of that priestly persecution which prevailed for many ages, they
were compelled to remain tremblingly silent on the subject. Truth has
thus been kept fettered in the dark by error, which in all ages of the
world has flaunted itself in high places.
As in superstitious times every spiritual communication, good, bad,
or indifferent, was headed “ Thus saith the Lord,” so to-day, by the
ignorant in spiritual things, everything of a supermundane character is
termed supernatural. Common sense points out that nothing can be
above Nature or supernatural, except its Eternal Cause, who is in,
through, and above all. If spiritual phenomena are supernatural, they
must be unnatural, consequently not of God, but as He is the Author
of all things, they could not occur in opposition to His supreme will;
and if God’s will is unchangeable, “ the same yesterday, to-day, and for
ever,” then it follows that if it is wrong to receive revelations from the
other world in these days, it must have been equally wicked on the part
of the biblical writers to have received them in olden times. If, in
reading the Bible in future, in place of “ Thus saith the Lord,” you
substitute “ Thus saith a spirit,” you will find that its contradictions
and inconsistencies are at once accounted for in a very simple and
rational manner. All other hypotheses hitherto suggested have failed
to reconcile the innumerable contradictory statements and incongruities
which disfigure the pages of the book, and which in all ages have
perplexed its earnest readers. This being the case, it is the height of
folly to continue to view the Bible in a false light, merely because an
interested class of men have sanctioned it as being of special Divine
authority, but which neither its external nor internal evidence bear out.
When true spiritual knowledge covers the earth as with a mantle, as
it must in time, owing to its resting on a scientific basis, then farewell
to all artificial forms of religion ; farewell to assumed authority ; fare-
well to all priestly deceivers of the people; farewell to their position of
supremacy over the minds of their fellow-men ; farewell to their pomp
and pageantry by which they have imposed on the credulous ; farewell
to their sophistry and falsehoods, by which they have deceived those
who supported them and by which they have kept their dupes in
spiritual darkness. How blind indeed the generality of mankind have
been not to perceive that the sole purpose of those priestly artificial
religions has been the lifting up of human vanity for the few, and the


mental degradation of the masses, and that natural religion, the single
end of which is to promote the wellbeing and happiness of all mankind,
goes back of all creeds and formulas—all books and churches. As of
old the Brahminical priests alone were allowed to open the sacred pages
of the Vedas, so the Romish priests of to-day claim the sole right to
interpret the Bible, and declare that only through the Catholic Church
can men enter heaven; the Protestant clergy at the same time preach
salvation from the wrath of an angry God through faith in the efficacy
of spilt blood, thus hemming religion in with senseless dogmas and
beclouding it with symbolism and mystery for their own ends.
To the earnest and unprejudiced truth-seeker the first and most im-
portant question that suggests itself is, “If a man dies shall he live
again ? ” The next is, “ Where can a satisfactory answer to this be
obtained 1 ” If he refers to the Bible he finds two distinct and con-
trary ideas upon this subject running through that work ; in some parts
an affirmative, and in others a negative answer to the question is set
forth. Take, as an example of the latter, the statement that man hath
no pre-eminence over the beasts of the field, “ As the one dieth, so dieth
the other.” See Ecclesiastes iii. 19. A book in which one passage
contradicts another, however revered it may be for its antiquity, cannot
be held by any sane man to be a reliable authority, and a book which is
partly true and partly false is more dangerous than one that is wholly
false. If physical science be consulted on the subject, it answers, “ The
knowledge sought is not with me, it is entirely out of my province.”
Where, then, is a satisfactory reply to the question, if a man dies shall
he live again, to be obtained but through psychology or spiritual
science! Those who have made this subject their earnest study and
investigation can, from personal knowledge, answer : “ Yes; man lives
after the change called death, for under test conditions we have over
and over again had indubitable evidence of the fact, not through wit-
nessing one class of phenomena but through various, and, if you will
but take the trouble and devote the time necessary to fully investigate
the subject, you can obtain similar convincing evidence ; not otherwise.”
The tiny spiritual rap has been well termed the despair of physical
science.
The great and inevitable change called “death” is, however, seldom,
if ever, considered by the generality of men. It is a subject they can-
not find time to think about, until someone who is near and dear to
them is removed by the hand of death. Then the earnest desire arises
for the first time to know does the loved one still live 1 Does he or she,
as the case may be, think of me ? Do they still love me ? Is he or
she cognizant of my thoughts of him or her, who, when in this life,
shared my sorrows and my joys 1 And other inquiries of a like charac-
ter. If in such a case one applies to his priest or his parson, can these
professed spiritual advisers of the people afford him any reasonable
comfort or consolation in his hour of need that will ease his poignant
grief 1 No ; they can only mock the bereaved one by pointing theatri-
cally upwards to the clouds, and quoting the opinion of some ancient
semi-savage on the subject. At such a time all forms of artificial
religion fail, proving their worthlessness; but this is not the case with


natural religion, through which communion with the so-called dead is
not prohibited, but encouraged, and through which alone the grand
reality can be ascertained. When these glorious, spiritual truths, now
being revealed to the few, become universally accepted, then the old
artificial forms of religion will become things of the past, in the same
way as alchemy and astrology have given place to chemistry and
astronomy.
Through spiritual knowledge we learn that all religions that are
devoid of a scientific basis, however ancient and however popular they
may be, are founded on mere conjectures which are as likely to be false
as to be true, consequently they are more apt to mislead than to cor-
rectly direct the earnest searcher after truth. Religion being a natural
instinct of the human soul, it cannot possibly be formulated by any
church or book. It is individual, and comprises each man’s knowledge
of his higher nature, and the application of such knowledge in his daily
life. Its chief commandment is, “ Man, know thyself, and gain all the
knowledge possible, acting thereon at all times to the best of thy
ability.” Spiritual knowledge points out that however complicated, for
selfish purposes, unscrupulous men may have made religion to appear,
when it is stripped of all the pious nonsense by which they have ob-
scured the priceless gem—the truth—it becomes very simple, and may be
said to be comprised in two words, namely, “ do right,” which includes
both love to God and love to man. Viewed in their historical light all
artificial religions have evidently, in their inception, been but the efforts
of men groping in the dark to give expression to the religious ideas held
by them. These crude ideas may have been suitable for the state of
development of the people in the age in which they were formulated,
but are ill-adapted to the advancing intelligence of modern times,
through which the cloud of mysticism, with which traditionalism has ob-
scured spiritual truths, is gradually being cleared away. Thus it is that
through the influence of modern revealments the old forms of faith
are slowly but surely being discredited, and much that was considered
as vital and divine verities by our ancestors is now being quietly
ignored by the more liberal of the clergy of our day. The Rev. H.
Andrews, at a late meeting of the Suffolk Congregational Union, made
the following frank admission: —“ Some of the dogmas elaborated in the
midst of mediaeval superstition are being quietly supplanted by brighter
and more inspiring propositions concerning human life and destiny,”
He had not the candour, however, to acknowledge the source from
which these more rational propositions emanated, owing to the unpopu-
larity of anything derived from the modern spiritual movement. And,
as a writer has truly remarked, “If anyone who has survived half a
century, now looks back to the religious world as it was at the period
of his twenty-first birthday, he must recognize that he has lived through
a period of upheaval and denudation, compared with which Luther’s
reformation was a mere landslip.” Science, both physical and spiritual,
coupled with freedom of thought and expression, are evidently modi-
fying by degrees the old views regarding religion, and causing men to
look for a more rational and higher faith than that which satisfied our
less enlightened forefathers. All forms of artificial religion are dark,


dismal, and perplexing; natural religion, on the contrary, is radiant with
the glory of future progress and happiness, not for this or that special
sect, but for all mankind. Moral probation, fortunately for all, does not
cease with this life, and there is, eventually, thank God, eternal hope
for all His children, irrespective of their faiths or beliefs.
Like all Divine laws, natural religion is simple, being an essential
part, an inherent law of human nature; but in all ages and in all
countries a selfish and unscrupulous class of men, taking advantage of
the ignorance and credulity of the masses, have added senseless creeds
and foolish dogmas derogatory to both God and man to spiritual truths,
and, through these additions, instead of religion having been a blessing
to the race, as it otherwise would have been, it has been the cause of
nearly all the wars, tortures, and bloodshed of the past, as well as the
sectarian jealousy and hatred of the present day. Through the light of
spiritual truth now dawning on the world these sectarian differences
will in the course of time cease, the errors and blasphemies of arti-
ficial forms of religion will become things of the past, and mankind
shall put the true and simple religion of good actions and holy aspira-
tions into daily practice, having cast to the winds clerical faith, in all
that is irrational and that cannot be demonstrated, as one of the vilest
delusions that has ever cursed and misled mankind. This, I am aware,
is strong language, but knowing its truth I am, in the interest of
truth, compelled to express it, in the hopes thereby of arousing those
who are still as I once was, blinded by the popular, God-dishonouring,
priestly delusion and pernicious superstition.
While artificial religion rests on the testimony of the dead past and
inculcates belief in man’s fall from a perfect to an imperfect condition,
which is opposed to facts disclosed by science and history, natural
religion rests on the demonstration of the living present, and teaches
that progress underlies all the events of life, and that the tendency of
all is onward and upward. The former represents God as a partial and
changeable Deity, working miracles in one age for a chosen portion of
humanity and leaving off doing so in other ages; the latter acknow-
ledges an Eternal Energy, an intelligent Power manifest in all things,
and working by immutable laws, and that as in man an imperishable
essence pervades his body so the universe is permeated by an Infinite
and Imperishable Essence, which is the Source of all intelligence.
Through natural religion we learn that these occurrences which appear
miraculous to our imperfect understandings are merely manifestations
of some law of nature as yet undiscovered by man ; that God’s will is
not comprised within the covers of a book or the traditions of a church;
that God speaks to mankind to-day as He has ever done through His
works and through the still small voice in each individual; and that
through His ministering spirits men are now as truly inspired to declare
the truth as they were in any age of the world, with this advantage, that
their minds not being influenced by superstition they are enabled to
give them to the world freed from the impurities with which ignorance
foolishly surrounded them.
The whole question regarding religion hangs, I maintain, upon a
single point, viz., “Is there another world 1” If there is not, it is


mere waste of time to consider the matter. If there is, surely nothing
is more reasonable than that there should exist a means of communi-
cation between the two worlds, and thereby of ascertaining the real
state of affairs ? Without this, all is mere conjecture, vague speculation,
whereby we are as likely to be misled as to be directed aright. The
sacred histories of all nations record instances of individuals who
formerly dwelt on earth having reappeared and communicated with
men in this life, and thousands of unimpeachable witnesses in our own
day, in all the civilized parts of the globe, openly attest the same fact
from personal experience. In my own case it is not a matter for
argument, for not only through professional mediums, but through private
mediums, through the mediumship of several members of my own
family, and through my own faculties, when no other in the flesh was
present, I have over and over again during the last twelve years had
the grand fact clearly demonstrated to me that those who have passed
through the change called death, still live, and can at times appear and
communicate with their friends on earth. In fact, I have had such
demonstrations of a continued sentient life beyond the grave, and such
proofs of spirit identity, that I would be worse than a fool if I denied
the truths of Spiritualism. Ido not blame others for disbelieving, for I
did the same until these truths were proved to me beyond doubt, but
what I do blame them for is their denial thereof without having investi-
gated the matter, and their ridiculing the statements of those who have.
I can understand a bigoted materialist’s opposition to these statements,
for they give the lie direct to his blank negation, and refute completely
his false theory that death ends all ; but I fail to see how anyone who
professes to believe, for instance, that John, when on the Island of
Patmos, saw and held converse with the spirit of one of his brethren,
can reasonably doubt them, unless he is prepared to prove that the laws
of nature are changeable, or that man was formerly endowed with
faculties which Nature has since withdrawn. To assume that it is sinful
to communicate with those in the other world is as absurd as to assume
that it is sinful to communicate with friends in another quarter of the
globe. And is it, let me ask, unreasonable that we, as rational and
reflective beings, should desire to know the actual details of the life to
come, and the best way to prepare for the inevitable change called death 1
In what way can the acquisition of such important knowledge be con-
trary to the will of Him who has endowed man with the powers of
reasoning and reflecting ? And, as an able writer has truly remarked,
“Why a belief in the survival of the soul, and its power, under certain
conditions, to communicate with man, should be denounced in the terms
used alike by the materialist and the believer in the orthodox creed, I
know not. To the latter I say his whole faith is founded on spiritual
revelation ; cut this away and you take away the very basis of his
faith.” Man, I hold, has quite as much need of spiritual revelation now
as in ages past. The real fact is, the light of spiritual truth is the
Nemesis of priestcraft, and the clergy have consequently poisoned the
minds of the masses against it from interested motives, and the general
press has followed suit.
The time, however, is not far off when the foolish prejudice at present


existing against the reception of spiritual truths will cease, and people
will then refuse to pay for and attend the preaching of doctrines incom-
patible with reason, and to listen to statements that are repulsive to
their moral consciousness and which their own established knowledge
contradicts. The change called death will then be generally recognized
in its true aspect. The cruel and unnecessary fears regarding it that,
through false teaching, now assail the souls of men will cease, and the
dogmas and doctrines of artificial religion leading up thereto will be
cast to the winds as impious priestly falsities which have for ages past
darkened the last hours of millions upon millions of timid souls that
have been misled and deceived thereby. I maintain that, compared
with the inestimable value of spiritual truths, the geometrical laws are
of but secondary importance, for while the latter are of mere temporary
application, the former supply knowledge that is transcendent and
enduring. Few, as yet, have realized the priceless value of these grand
spiritual truths; many know of them, but are too much engrossed with
temporal affairs to fully appreciate them ; and the majority, through
prejudice and ignorance, reject them as unworthy of their consideration.
In artificial forms of religion the way to happiness has been made a
mazy labyrinth, whereas in reality it is a plain and simple path open to
all who desire to tread therein and to know the truth.
History informs us, as I have remarked, that in all ages and among
every nation revelations from the unseen world have been received,
many of which have been carefully preserved, and though the majority
of these may be crude and unreasonable, owing to their coming from
and being received through undeveloped minds, still through all a vein
of truth will be found to run if they are carefully examined, though, it
is true, this may be imperceptible outwardly in consequence of the thick
mists of error and superstition with which spiritual truths have been
incrusted in order to make them subservient to the purposes of priest-
craft. Does not all nature claim the supremacy of truth, and is it to
be trampled under foot in the case of religion in order that a priestly
class of deceivers may be perpetuated 1 If people would only ask their
respective clergymen to give them plain and reasonable answers to the
following queries, they would soon perceive that instead of these men
being their spiritual teachers, as they profess to be, they are in reality
their spiritual deceivers—blind leaders of the blind! —lst, “What rational
evidence have you personally obtained that there is a continuity of life
after the change called death 1 ” 2nd, “ What are the conditions of the
higher life 1 ” 3rd, “Be good enough to describe the scenery of the
other world, and state what are the leading employments and enjoyments
of its inhabitants ? ” If they cannot answer these simple questions
without quibbling, it is evident they have been imposing on you. If
they can, they must have derived their knowledge from the same source
as I and hundreds of others have done, though they may be ashamed to
own this to you or to the world. Every form of religion that has ever
existed has originally sprung from spirit communion, and the wisest
philosophers of all the ages have perceived and acknowledged a con-
nection existing between the seen and the unseen worlds. There is now
no need to have recourse to the records of spiritual ideas of men living


in ignorant and superstitious times for religious knowledge, since higher,
nobler, and more rational and truthful conceptions of God and man’s
destiny are obtainable direct in our own day by all who are earnest in
their desire for truth. Some of the clergy know this and would willingly
acknowledge it, but they fear the prejudices of their surroundings, con-
sequently they dare not avow the conclusions which reason and evidence
have compelled them personally to adopt. It is, however, of the highest
importance for all to know that the avenue of communication between
the two worlds is not closed, as has been falsely taught by those whose
interests were opposed to the advancement of spiritual knowledge, and
who have, in consequence, persecuted all who have endeavoured to
spiritually enlighten their fellow-men.
What possible knowledge, beyond what anyone can read for him or
herself, can priests or parsons, who have never personally investigated
the subject, possess regarding the spirit-world, about which they so
impudently profess to teach the people? And of what use is the
possession of spiritual gifts, of which Paul writes “ I would not have
you ignorant,” if they stubbornly refuse to utilize them in the gaining
of “ more light ” or greater spiritual knowledge than was possessed by
men living in semi-savage times ? Are they not enjoined in the Scrip-
tures to “ try the spirits,” “ to believe not every spirit,” and how can
they do this if they set their face against holding communion with
them 1 They will tell you that in another part of Scripture communion
with the so-called dead is forbidden, but the latter is in the Old
Testament and the former is in the New, which, when it suits their
purpose, they maintain has superseded the Old Testament. Did John,
when on the Island of Patinos, refuse to hold communion with the
dead, when the spirit of one of his brethren the prophets addressed
him 1 This injunction against holding communion with the dead was
issued by the Jewish priests for the same reason that the clergy of our
day endorse it, namely, to keep the masses in darkness and subservient
to them. Carlyle is reported to have said that people are mostly
fools, and if he referred to the way they act in regard to religion he
was not far out, for the majority go to listen reverently Sunday after
Sunday to those polished hypocrites, who actually know no more about
spiritual matters than they do of the natural history of the planet
Venus.
If you give the subject the slightest consideration you can easily see
that, though the clergy outwardly profess to have consecrated the
services of their lives to God, they, as a rule, are men whose aspirations
are for high office, and whose lives are devoted to the purposes of
worldly advantages for themselves. You will also find that the
boasted wisdom of these reverend hypocrites is sophistical, resting as it
does on the superstitious religious theories of the past, and that the
results of their teaching are of no benefit, as it consists principally of
metaphysical disquisitions which only perplex, and from which no
ultimate advantages proceed. The more accomplished thesp men are
in the art of sophistry, the more highly are they appreciated ; and while
they inconsistently profess to be followers of the unselfish Jesus,
who preached without money and without price, you will find


they invariably preach and pray for place and pay, and that
when they are “ called to a more useful sphere of influence ” it is
always to a hundred a year increase of stipend, and not to a reduction;
in fact “ the love of God ” hath such a slight hold upon their affections
that they cannot surrender one chance of worldly advancement on
account of it. Notwithstanding this the majority of people still look
up with respect to, and even reverence, these pious deceivers, while they
ignore and treat with contempt those who endeavour to enlighten them
on these matters and to bring about a better state of affairs. This,
however, has been the case in all ages, and will continue to be so until
people use their reasoning powers in regard to religious matters as they
do in all else.
Do not suppose from my frequent reference to the clergy that I have
any ill feeling towards them personally; I bear no animosity to any
one of them ; on the contrary, I admire the benevolent and kindly
disposition of many of them. It is the falsity, irrationality, and
misleading character of the doctrines which they inculcate that I desire
to expose, and to substitute in their place living and soul-elevating
truths that are capable of demonstration and worthy of our acceptance.
I may parenthetically observe that I am the only son of one who, when
in this life, was a clergyman, and that my only sister in this life is the
wife of a reverend doctor who still upholds artificial religion. As long
as people pay their clergymen for preaching according to the articles of
the respective church to which they belong, instead of for teaching
according to what they really believe, how can they expect religious
progress 1 Let church-goers double their clergymen’s stipends and
insist on their devoting six days to the free investigation of spiritual
matters and the seventh to explaining fearlessly the results thereof,
and we shall soon see spiritual knowledge cover the earth as with a
garment. In no other of the affairs of life do people, as a rule, act so
foolishly as they do in regard to religion. If one desires information
on astronomy he does not refer to an antiquated book on astrology, or
if he desires to know about chemistry he does not consult an old work
on alchemy, but this is the way in which most people act in regard to
religious knowledge.
As an instance of the inconsistency of the generality of the clergy, I
need only refer to their untiring laudation of ancient spiritual revelations,
whether in accord with natural facts or otherwise, while they denounce
all those of modern times, because they are not in all cases found to be
reliable. Do they reject the inspired utterances of the great Teacher of
old, because his prediction—that the stars would fall from heaven before
the generation then living passed away—proved to be erroneous 1 or
because he was tempted of an evil or deceiving spirit ? Then why
should they condemn all modern revelations because some of them
happen to be erroneous 1 Are we not informed that there were false as
well as true prophets in biblical times, just as we have false as well as
true mediums in our own day ? Before the clergy or others attempt to
find fault with the mote that is in their brother’s eye, let them first
remove the beam that is in their own. To coming generations it will
appear almost incredible that, at a time when it was within the power


of almost everyone to find out for himself the real facts concerning the
life to come, the great majority of people, including a large proportion
of the educated classes, were content to listen to the ravings of those
who were totally unacquainted therewith, and who only philosophized
or speculated on facts which were capable of demonstration to their
senses. When the irrationality of these speculations are compared with
the reasonableness of the ascertained facts concerning the inner life, it
is evident that the prevailing prejudice arises from the general ignorance
of the grand facts disclosed, coupled with an obstinate objection to
receive increased spiritual knowledge, in case it might conflict with
their present cherished theories. Many worthy people, lam aware, are
deterred from entering upon an investigation of that through which
alone the actuality of a continuity of life and its attendant conditions
can be ascertained—through the denunciations and misrepresentations
of those whose personal interests are opposed to the reality becoming
known through the light of spiritual truth. That there has been a vast
amount of fraud, jugglery, and imposture mixed up with the modern
spiritual movement cannot be denied, but even had these been multiplied
a thousandfold it would not do away with the fact that there still
remains a large residuum of solid and important facts attested by
innumerable, unimpeachable, and highly educated witnesses in different
parts of the globe, between whom there could not possibly be any
collusion ; and who, so far from gaining any worldly advantage by their
attestations, have only drawn down upon themselves the spite or ridicule
of all those ignorant of the subject. The general press, knowing the
unpopularity of the subject, has seized every opportunity of publishing
prominently the frauds and impositions which unprincipled people have
perpetrated under the cloak of Spiritualism, while it has studiously
avoided to publish the grand facts made known through these modern
revelations. This, coupled with the usual misrepresentations of the subject
from the various pulpits, fully accounts for the general misapprehension
that prevails regarding what is termed Modern Spiritualism. One might
just as reasonably judge of the stability of the Bank of England by the
numerous forgeries that have been perpetrated on its notes, or of
chemistry, by the number of false deductions that, from time to time,
have been arrived at by experimenters therein, as to judge of spiritual
science, or, as it is commonly termed, Spiritualism, by the frauds and
absurdities that have been mixed up with it by unprincipled or
ignorant people in its incipient stage. If those who have not investi-
gated the subject would only well weigh in their minds the foregoing
statements, and look around among their acquaintances at the character,
both as to intelligence and veracity, of those who have openly declared in
favour of Modern Spiritualism after years of earnest investigation—bear-
ing in mind the long list of some of the most distinguished in science and
literature of our day, who have, notwithstanding the unpopularity of
the subject, attested the truth of spiritual phenomena—they must be
forced to admit that it is a subject well worthy of investigation, and
that it has gone beyond the stage that ridicule can affect it.
Through the spiritual wave now advancing over the earth the inner
life, long hid from the world through priestly machinations, is gradually


being disclosed to all who are prepared to receive spiritual knowledge,
and the world’s spiritual consciousness has now begun to enter on a new
stage of its development, for to those who have earnestly investigated
this higher branch of science the dark veil which has so long hidden
the spiritual from the physical world has, in a measure, been with-
drawn, the dismal abyss that separated the seen from the unseen has
been bridged over, and the awful silence which has existed during
many centuries between the two worlds has at length been broken by
words of love and comfort received from our friends who have crossed
to the evergreen shore of the higher life. Through spiritual investiga-
tion a new idea of an active life beyond the grave is opened up; through
it we are introduced to “people from the other world,” which is not far
distant, but is contiguous to this, and we find these people just as
natural and rational as they were when in this life, the only difference
being that their condition is changed. From them we learn that
spiritual ti’uths are necessarily expressed in language suited for those on
the physical plane of life, and that the potentialities of spiritual know-
ledge are beyond our present power of computation.
As a writer truly observes, “ the operations of psychological laws
have been observed in every age, but only in the light of false theology
and superstition; ” it is therefore high time that a different course
should be pursued, and that in these scientific times spiritual phe-
nomena should be investigated by all in the light of common sense and
free from false prejudice. Through history we learn that knowledge,
from the evidence of the senses in a continued existence after the decay
of the physical body, has from time to time been recorded by men of
every nation from the most remote periods, which proves that seership,
or as it is now termed mediumship, is a natural gift similar to that of
poetry or painting. The present diffusion of a knowledge of the
operations of psychological laws is gradually, as I have pointed out,
modifying the most repulsive dogmas of the churches, although the
clergy may not be candid enough to acknowledge this fact, and it will
continue to do so until the whole of the false theories of old theology
have been discarded and replaced by nobler, higher, and truer con-
ceptions of God and of man’s destiny. Through earnest investigation
and the cultivation of their spiritual faculties, many have had the
longing desires of their hearts satisfied; they have seen and recognized
the loved ones gone before unchanged in form, feature, or character;
they have heard the old familiar voice of a dear brother, sister, wife,
husband, child, or friend, whose memories they have dearly cherished ;
they have held sweet communion with those for whom they wept
bitter tears of heartfelt sorrow as they took the last fond look of their
lifeless casket ere the coffin lid hid it from their gaze for ever ; they
have listened to the loving assurances of long-lost friends, telling them
of their continued solicitation for their welfare and of their undying
affection; they have learned from their loved ones that, though absent
in the body they are still present in spirit, influencing and guiding
them as far as in their power, and that they are looking forward with
joy to the happy time when nature’s laws having been fulfilled they
will be reunited in that life where there is no parting from those we


truly love. Yet this is what an unreasoning and unreasonable world
rejects, and is insane enough to ask “ What good is it 1 ” It might just
as rationally be asked what is the good of friendship, of sympathy, or of
affection. There are, however, none so blind as those who won’t see, or
whose worldly interests or ease prevent them from wishing to see the
truth wherever it conflicts with their cherished beliefs.
44 Oh ! is it naught when fierce, wild storms shall gather,
And friends and fortune shall alike be lost,
And we shall drift amid this stress of weather
Upon life’s sea, aweary, tempest-tossed ;
“ To know that just beyond life’s roughest billow
There lies the entrance to a peaceful bay ;
Where hands we love shall smooth life’s troubled pillow,
And we may rest in quiet peace alway ?
* ‘ And is it nothing for a mother, sitting
Beside her suffering darling’s dying bed,
Who sees the spirit from the body flitting,
And knows, alas ! the one she loves is dead :
“ To feel that she’s not gone to some far city,
Some mystic heaven beyond the silent stars,
Where never look of love or word of pity
Can shed a ray of light between those bars ;
“ But to know rather that she’s ever near her,
Bringing her love to comfort day by day,
Bringing her words of peace to guide and cheer her
Through life’s dark valley on her weary way ;
“ To feel at evening, as the day’s declining,
As oft she’s known in days that are no more,
Those arms of love about her neck entwining,
And sense the presence of her lost ‘ Lenore ’ ?
‘ ‘ And is this nothing ? all this glad awaking
From sleep of fear of death, and future life,
To see old superstitions, trembling, shaking,
And errors fall before truth’s shining knife !
“ Perhaps to some these (facts) may seem unfruitful,
These joyous (truths) may ring no glad refrain,
But unto me they bring this message truthful,
That though man dies yet shall he live again.”
Is it no benefit to lift man’s thoughts from being all-engrossed with
the things of this passing life to the life which is enduring 1 Is it a
waste of time to learn from those who can speak from personal expe-
rience and tell us the best way to prepare for the great change that
must inevitably, sooner or later, come upon us all 1 Is not this a more
rational and beneficial mode of employing our time than singing psalms
to Him who needeth not the praise of men or of angels, for all His
works glorify Him ? I hold that it is the duty of everyone to gain all
the knowledge possible when here, as not one iota thereof is lost in the
transition termed “ Death,” and to impart to all willing to receive it,
as much as one can of the knowledge thus gained, so that thereby
every joy may be augmented and every sorrow alleviated. It will be


found that the continuance of doing good to others, instead of becom-
ing wearisome, as the ignorant and selfish falsely imagine, becomes an
added pleasure of life to those who practise it, and that it is alone the
soul of the individual, through a mind conscious of right action, that can
recognize its own felicity. The applause of the world may impart a
passing pleasure, but the consciousness of having passed through this
life without having endeavoured to make this world better and happier
by our presence can never be obliterated.
Those who have lived in this world for this world alone, and have
obtained all the honours and fame that this world can bestow, may
allegorically be said to have gained the applause of the whole world but
lost their own souls in selfish ambition, for of what use are worldly
honours or fame when the shades of death close their earthly career ?
At that moment ambition dies, and the soul, in nakedness of unselfish
acts, awakes to realize its truly humiliating condition in that life where
all is open, where the hidden things of darkness shall be revealed,
where mind reads mind as an open book, and where sham and hypocrisy
become transparent. How vague and irrational indeed is the popular
idea regarding the life to come, with which so many rest content !
Their ideal heaven is a place of selfish inactivity and rest, where the
singing of psalms and playing on golden harps form their only employ-
ment. Unfortunately, this superstitious and absurd idea of the future
life has got such a firm hold of many minds that it proves an almost
insurmountable stumbling block against the reception of nobler, truer,
and more reasonable views thereof, when presented for their con-
sideration by some one who for years has made the subject his earnest
study and investigation, undeterred by the frowns or sneers of the
ignorant or prejudiced.
I wish it to be distinctly understood that I do not blame people for
not believing in spirit-communion, as I did not do so myself until its
truth was clearly demonstrated to my senses as an indubitable fact; what
I do blame them for is the condemning or ridiculing of a subject of
which they know nothing from never having examined it. With
Solomon I say “He that answereth a matter before he heareth it, it is
a folly and shame unto him,” and I quite agree with Paul in his wise
injunction to “ prove all things and hold fast that which is good.” I
do not do this however on the authority of these writers, but because
my reason endorses these particular statements. A sensible investigator
of a subject is not led away by the supposed great name attached to
any statement, but he adopts or rejects it entirely according to its
merits. The authority of all the men who ever lived, or of all the good
or evil spirits that exist, cannot make a lie a truth or a truth a lie,
neither can antiquity cause that which is false to be true nor that which
is true to be false. If people would only consider this they would at
once perceive the folly of believing irrational statements merely on
account of their antiquity, or because they have been prefaced with a
“ Thus saith the Lord,” or “ Thus saith a man or a spirit.” Reason, I
hold, is the sole principle by which, as rational beings, our belief should
be regulated in religion and everything else.
During the last fifteen centuries priestcraft has effectually stamped


out the spirituality which vitalized the religion of love as taught by
Jesus, and it has thereby put a dead stop to progress in all knowledge
concerning man’s destiny. The church, in fact, has persistently closed its
doors against increased spiritual knowledge, consequently it is behind
the intelligence of the age we live in. Coming generations will, however,
respect those who have endeavoured to break the bonds of the prevailing
priestly superstition and to lighten the burden of those who uncon-
sciously are oppressed by it. lam aware that many of the statements made
by me are in advance of popular opinion and are more adapted for the
future, when spiritual knowledge shall have become a power in the land,
than for the present materialistic age ; but I am desirous of leaving the
marks of my “footprints on the sands of time,” so that others coming
after me may know that the path on which they then walk has been
trodden by others before their day. I can truly say, in the language of
the noble William Lloyd Garrison, “ If I leave my children any example
it shall be a fearless, impartial, conscientious investigation of every
subject to which their attention may be called, and a hearty adoption
of those principles which to them may seem just and true, whether
standing alone or proscribed as schismatics ; ” and I trust that they may
derive an equal amount of pleasure and happiness in the pursuit of truth
as I have experienced in the acquisition thereof.
It is erroneously supposed that the coming religious conflict will be-
between Romanism and Protestantism, or between these two popular
forms of artificial religion. Both of these being founded on mere authority
and not on reason—on fiction, not on fact—on faith, not on knowledge—
will assuredly pass away and leave the battle to be fought between
Materialism and Spiritualism. Owing to the strong materialistic
tendency on the part of the majority of the people, not only outside but
also inside of the churches, the coming struggle will be a long and a
fierce one. There need, however, be no fear of the ultimate result, for
“ truth is mighty, prevail it shall.” The Materialist will have at last
to acknowledge that the ever-changing outward body is but the tem-
porary covering of the deathless spirit within ; that matter is subject to
mind ; and that that which is seen is temporal, while that which is unseen
is enduring. He will have to learn that, although reason is man’s best
counsellor, still it requires the aid of spirit-communion in order to attain
to a knowledge regarding man’s higher nature and the glorious destiny
that eventually awaits every human being, be they good or bad, wise or
foolish ; and the Churchman will have to allow his God-given reason
to guide him in religion, as he does in all other subjects.
Through natural religion, based on the experience of those who have
passed through the change called death, we learn the following reasonable
facts : that that change does not affect the great law of effect following
cause ; that the future condition of each individual depends not on his
faith or belief, but will be just what his character, formed by his thoughts,
actions, and environments, makes it; and that everyone builds his own
heaven or hell, which are not localities, as has been falsely taught, but
states of mind. Thus we see that the laws of nature, which are not
confined to the physical plane of life, as popularly supposed, are just,
equitable, and considerate. The power of some who have passed through


the change called death to communicate with their friends on earth,
which is not unsupported by testimony in former ages, has now been
attested throughout the length and breadth of civilized society by
thousands who have had the courage to rise above the thoughts of
everyday life and the denunciations of popular religious prejudice ; and,
through the exercise of this power by those in spirit life, and the culti-
vation of the spiritual faculties of those on earth, the present state of
religious stagnation will soon be completely altered for the better.
It is truly a glorious privilege to be enabled to communicate with our
loved ones in the inner life who are now bright messengers of God, and
learn from the lips of those who can speak from personal experience
the best and surest way to attain to happiness, both in this life and
that which is to come. Thrice blessed is he who is enabled to realize
the presence of these angelic visitants, and who regulates his conduct
by* the knowledge thus acquired for the guidance of all who desire to
know the eternal truth as revealed by God’s ministering spirits. With-
out actual and earnest investigation and personal observation, it is
impossible to realize the continuity of life and the effect such knowledge
has on one’s everyday life. It is only he who has fully realized that
life is imperishable, not from mere belief on the authority of others,
but from actual demonstration, that can experience the wonderful effect
of this knowledge, which changes the entire aspect of things, imparting
to every cloud a silver lining, and cheering and supporting the possessor
thereof in the darkest hour, even under the most trying circumstances.
It truly causes the light of hope to break through the shadow of death,
and the bright dawn of certainty to dispel the dark gloom of the
grave.
It would be impossible for those who have once realized the pleasure
which communion with the loved and good imparts to surrender it
without feeling a want that nothing else can supply, for it is truly the
road that leads to the highest wisdom, which wealth cannot purchase
or death itself destroy. To the awakened mind, all thoughts sink into
insignificance in comparison to an actual knowledge of a life to come —
a life of light and beauty to all who are spiritually developed enough to
enjoy it. The realization that there is a spiritual as well as a physical
existence, in fact, introduces a new factor into man’s life on earth. All
that makes life worth the living is a knowledge, from demonstration,
that this brief existence of say three score years and ten, with all its
attendant troubles, trials, and sorrows, does not end all, as materialists
falsely assert. When the glorious destiny which awaits every soul
eventually is fully realized, the inequalities of human conditions in this
short stage of existence sink into insignificance, and men are led to
work for the good of all; and thus, in time, will this knowledge of a
common destiny unite all in the bonds of brotherly love and sym-
pathy.
“ Death,” which is the new birth of the spirit into a higher stage of
existence, has been well portrayed by Mr. Edwin Arnold in the
following poem ;
“ He who died at Azan sends
This to comfort faithful friends :


“ Yea, my body lies, I know,
Pale, and cold, and still as snow ;
And you say Abdullah’s dead !
Weeping at its feet and head.
I can see your falling tears,
I can hear your sighs and prayers ;
Yet I smile and whisper this—
‘ I am not the thing you kiss.
Cease your wail and let it lie —
It was mine. It is not I! ’
“ Dear friends ! what the women lave
For its last bed in the grave,
Was a net which I have quitted,
Was a garment, no more fitted,
Was a cage, wherefrom, at last
Like a bird, my soul hath passed.
Love the inmate, not the room,
The weaver, not the garb—the plume
Of the eagle, not the bars
Which kept him from the splendid stars
“ Loving friends ! be wise and dry
Straightway every weeping eye ;
What you lift upon the bier
Is not worth a single tear ;
’Tis a simple sea-shell, one
Out of which the pearl is gone ;
The shell is nothing—leave it there—
The pearl, the soul, was all, is here !
’Tis an earthern pot whose lid
Allah sealed, the while it hid
That treasure of His treasury,
A mind that loved Him —let it be !
Let the shards be earth’s once more
Since the gold goes to His store.
“ Allah glorious ! Allah good !
Now Thy world is understood !
Now the long, long wonder ends,
Yet you weep, oh ! foolish friends :
While the man you say ‘ is dead,’
In unbroken bliss instead
Lives and loves you : lost ’tis true,
For any light that shines with you ;
But in the light you do not see,
Raised to full felicity,
In a perfect paradise,
And a life which never dies.
“ Farewell, friends ! Yet not farewell;
Where you are, I, too, shall dwell:
I am gone but from your face
A moment’s march, a single pace.
When you come where I have stepp’d,
You will wonder why you wept;
You will see, by true life taught,
That here is all, with you is naught.
Weep awhile if you are fain,
Sunshine still must follow rain :


Only not at death—for death
Now I see, is that long breath
Which all souls draw, when they enter
Life, that is of all life centre.
11 Rest ye certain, all seems love,
Viewed from Allah’s seat above ;
Be ye stout of hope, and come
Bravely onward to your home ;
From its happy gate, my ken
Sees you, struggling souls, not men.
All for nameless joys decreed
Which your wills may stay or speed ;
But not one at length to fail,
Since at last love must prevail.”
Through the new revelation now being received by means of spirit
communion we learn that God’s government is, and has always been,
one of intermediate agency; that there has been no great action
tending towards the benefit of the human family but what has been
brought about by God’s loving care through His ministering spirits
sent forth to minister to those who shall be bearers of God’s love ; that
through these ministering spirits God has alone made, and is ever
making known His will to man. And who more fitting to form our
guardian spirits than the dear ones gone before who were true and
loving friends when on earth 1 Who so fit to console and cheer the
fainting heart amid the trials and sufferings of this world of change
than those who formerly shared with us our sorrows as well as our
joys 1 These spirit-friends, our guardian angels, bear with our failings
as an earthly companion with the shortcomings of his friend, as a
mother with the shortcomings of her son, or as a lover with the weak-
nesses of his beloved, for they are aware that if they had not the same
failings themselves, they had other infirmities which we have not.
From them we learn that the whole human family are compassed about
by a cloud of witnesses, whose desires and hopes are the furtherance of
God’s will, primarily in those whom they love and guide ; whose
sympathy is in every effort and struggle of their beloved ones, and
whose joy and happiness consist in the success of their labours to make
the world better and happier. The proudest aim of these loving
messengers is to render assistance and comfort, through their loving
ministrations, to those whom they loved on earth, and in every hour of
darkness, sorrow, and distress to lend them their soothing help. They
assure us that spiritual knowledge leads to light and truth ; that the
ransoming of the soul is brought about alone by this knowledge ; that
the darkness that surrounds so many is caused by an absence thereof ;
that true spiritual knowledge gives no cause for the wide differences of
opinion that now exist through the varying artificial forms of religion,
which only divide men and destroy that harmony which should exist,
namely, the harmony of universal brotherly love ; that this knowledge,
which concerns the happiness not only of all men on earth, but of
generations yet unborn, transcends belief, for it transforms darkness
into light and hope into certainty, while artificial forms of religion only


encourage hopes that there are no means of verifying, and can never,
like natural religion, impart to man that true knowledge which verily
passeth understanding.
Through communion with those, who, having passed through the
change called death, can speak from personal experience, we learn that
when this life’s closing scene is over, and the spirit, released from its
fleshly garb, stands hovering near its quivering body, lost in the
mystery of a deathless consciousness, yet observant of events taking
place before its eyes on the physical plane of life, it is greeted by some
loving spirit-friend in well-remembered accents, and then gently led to
its spiritual home, the beauty of which transcends the power of human
language to portray ; that there the nothingness of much that was
deemed worthy in this life soon becomes apparent ; there, feelings are
awakened which may have long lain dormant, and powers are attained
which the soul had long craved for but which were unattainable on the
earthly plane of existence ; that the inner life is not, as popularly
supposed, a life of idleness, but one of activity to all who desire to
progress ; that everyone possesses some knowledge which they can both
here and there impart to others, and by thus aiding those less fortunate
than they are, they thereby raise themselves in the scale of being ; that
the distinctions of classes as marked in this life of sham and hypocrisy
are very different to those that rule in the inner life, where those who
have done well for the love of goodness occupy a very different position
to those whose actions have been influenced merely by the selfish hope
of worldly praise or future reward ; that it is within the power of
man, without the aid of creed or doctrine, by the cultivation of his will,
which is the mainspring of the soul, governed by his reason (for without
reason there is no responsibility), to raise himself, so that the Divine
principle within him shall have complete mastery over his lower nature,
to the full felicity of which his soul is capable in this life, and thereby
become fully prepared for an entrance into a higher stage of develop-
ment ; that blind faith in unreasonable dogmas can never secure more
than a false and ephemeral sense of pleasure through the stimulation of
the emotions, for it is only by continually striving to live better day by
day that the soul can attain to real and permanent happiness ; that the
man who does not live well to-day will find it harder to live well to-
morrow ; that in the inner life, as well as here, it is more difficult to
unlearn long-cherished falsities than it is to acquire knowledge; that
every holy aspiration and every unselfish act draws the soul closer, not
in space, but in goodness to God ; that man is not a mere creature of
blind instinct, for by educating his mind and exercising his reason in
all things, he renders himself a law unto himself, independent of any
outside authority for directions to reach the road that leads to true
and lasting happiness ; that what are termed devils are merely the dark
spirits of men who lived wicked lives when on earth and have not
progressed, and angels are but men and women who have passed
through the necessary expiation of their past errors, and have thereby
become purified of their earthly stains, of which none on entrance into
spirit-life are completely free ; that all mankind, even the most vile
and depraved, possess the germ of angelhood, which for a time they, by


giving way to the selfish desires and degrading passions of their animal
natures, may cause to lie latent, but which it is impossible to annihi-
late ; that in accordance with the eternal law of effect following
cause, every kind act brings back its own reward, and every wicked
deed the exact punishment which it merits, from which there is no
escape until the uttermost farthing has been paid, for the balance of
Divine judgment is equitable ; that in the inevitable future there is
hope for all, for all punishment is remedial, not penal, but everyone has
to satisfy the demands of justice by an exacting conscience, which it is
impossible to silence until every wrong act committed is personally
atoned for and expiated, Divine justice, though tempered with mercy,
being as sure as that day succeeds night; that the spirit of the suicide
sinks into utter abhorrence of itself when it discovers that, for the
purpose of escaping the necessary experiences which nature intended
for its ultimate benefit—it has rushed into spirit-life uncalled for, its
mission being unfulfilled, and it finds itself an unformed individuality
with the mark of crime conspicuous and virtue almost obliterated; that
in the spirit-world the bright and the dark, the high and the low, are
not separated according to their professions, their beliefs, or the social
position they occupied on earth, but according to their characters
formed by their actions and the services they rendered to those less
fortunate than themselves, i.e., actions that have been beneficial
because they sprang from the sympathetic feelings of the heart, and
services that were acceptable because they expressed obedience to the
Divine will, or to the voice of God within them ; that the highest
efforts of the truly righteous are directed towards the dispersion of
that spiritual darkness in which so many, from false teaching, are still
enshrouded, and these efforts are not ended by the change called death,
moral probation and the acquisition of knowledge, fortunately for all,
not ceasing with mundane existence ; that God is supreme in unity, and
being infinite He is invisible to the finite vision of both men and angels
(who, as already stated, are merely men and women purified of their
earthly stains) ; that in the spiritual world, as on earth, God manifests
Himself alone through His works; that in His boundless mercy,
justice, and impartiality, He loves and cares, not for a favoured few,
but for all His erring creatures irrespective of their beliefs, their
intellectual capacities, or the colour of their skins; that man, whether
embodied or disembodied, being finite, it is impossible for him to attain
to absolute knowledge—he cannot comprehend the Infinite, he can only
apprehend to a very limited extent the Omnipresent Intelligent Power
of which he is an infinitesimal part; that mankind need not the
authority of a Church or a Book to testify of God, whose works are
everywhere manifest to all; that the only service God requires of His
children, whether they are on earth or in spirit-life, consists of acts of
kindness to their fellow-beings ; that religion, to be beneficial, must be
practicable and of universal application ; that the only way to happiness
is by a well-spent life ; that all things, whether they be in the physical
or spiritual domain of Nature, are quickened by God, for He is the
ever-present Power by which all things are energized—the Life and
Light of all; that even “death” is animated by God’s all-pervading


power ; that with Him there is no death. He being the Eternal Source
of Life which everywhere abounds ; that as life and light emanate from
God, external Nature reflects the Omnipresent Divine mind ; that
Nature, being the expression of God, therefore the law of God becomes
engraven on man’s soul, and cannot be instilled into it by a Church or
Book ; that Nature has placed happiness within the reach of all who
live in accordance with her laws, or in due fitness with the relationship
of cause and effect; that as man progresses he is enabled to overcome
the world through becoming the conqueror over the selfish desires of
his lower nature-modest in success, sublime in adversity; that
sympathy being one of the holiest feelings of the human soul, man’s
highest duty is the doing of good to others, whereby he not only
benefits and blesses them, but also raises himself in the scale of being ;
that all are the children of a universal Father who has no elect or
chosen people, therefore it is the duty of each individual to help, to
love, and to bless his fellow-beings, irrespective of their nationality,
their social position, or their religious belief ; that hope, when supported
by knowledge, which is not denied by God to any, is the parent of all
effort and the true incentive to every good action ; that with this
knowledge man is enabled to meet both joy and sorrow with a firm
heart and pure mind, and to bear with patience and submission the
passing trials of life, knowing that a beneficent Father ordereth all
things well, and that it is necessary that the human soul should receive
earth experiences to fit it for a higher life, also that these experiences
are only to be gained in accordance with Nature’s laws; that this
“dream of life,” as it has been truly termed, which is but the shadow
of the great reality to come, will soon be past by all, and then eternity
with all its gorgeous splendour will dawn on the awakened soul; that
man’s deathless memory, being the truthful chronicle of all his actions,
of virtue and of sin, the soul becomes its own accuser, its own avenger
and punisher, before it enters on that upward progress through eternity
which is the grand and inevitable destiny of all mankind; that when
this great fact becomes fully realized by all, it will make men’s days,
even when on earth, beautiful with love, and prepare them for that
wreath of glory that eventually awaits each individual, however humble
or however ignorant they now may be ;
That man is but a unit, part of a mighty whole,
And truth the rightful possession of every human soul.
THE TWO WORLDS UNITED.
“ We speak that we do know, and testify that we have seen."
I have seen the hills and valleys in the beauteous summer land,
I have heard the angels singing across the golden strand,
I have grasped the hands of loved ones, who’ve only gone before—
Who’ll greet me with a welcome when I reach the other shore.


For years I’ve held communion with the dear ones of my youth,
And from their loving hearts received sweet messages of truth ;
Our children, tod, they often come to tell us of their love,
And how they are progressing in “the angel home above.”
Thus my hope hath changed to knowledge, all fear of death hath fled,
I know that I shall live again, though numbered with the dead,
And that I shall return in love to those I leave behind,
To aid and comfort them through life with counsels wise and kind.
Oh ! could I but impart to all this knowledge of God’s love,
Which here we only dimly see, it shines more clear above ;
Thrice happy will the world become when this great truth is known —
That, as was said of old, we reap just as on earth we’ve sown.
Then trust not in these foolish creeds, for priestly ends devised,
But hearken to the voice within, and by it be advised ;
To wisdom you will thus attain, and then can truly sing—
Oh ! grave, where is thy victory ? Oh ! death, where is thy sting ?
Note. —The author has to acknowledge his indebtedness for many of the
thoughts expressed in these pages to the perusal of a recently-published work,
entitled “ Essays from the Unseen,” which he can with confidence recommend to
the attention of all interested in the subject herein treated of.


APPENDIX.
SPIRITUALISM EXPOSED IN A COURT OF LAW BY A
JUDGE.
The Spiritual Offering of 16th May reports the prosecution, in the
Court of Criminal Correction, at St. Louis, of Mr. and Mrs. Miller,
mediums, by Messrs. Johnson and Madden, on the charge of defrauding
them of a dollar and a-half, price of admission to a seance. The court
was occupied with the case from 28th April to 7th May, when it held
the defendants under bond to answer the charge, should the jury find
a true bill against them.
The Spiritual Offering invites attention to the testimony of the
principal witness for the defence, Judge Portis. We compress within
the limits of our space his answers to the main questions put to him.
The Spiritual Offering informs its readers that Judge Portis is a
lawyer of thirty years’ standing; has long resided in St. Louis, and has
exercised public functions ; he was legal adviser of the Pacific Rail-
road, and holds the same office now on the Missouri Pacific. He has
attended many of the seances of Mr. and Mrs. Miller at various houses,
as well as their own, for nearly four years. On Judge Portis’s entering
the witness-stand, the counsel for the defence put the question :
“Is the court to understand, Judge Portis, that you are a believer
in Spiritualism 1 ” —“ Yes, sir. I have been a believer in Spiritualism,
as I understand it, for fifteen years.”
“ What do you mean by your understanding of it ? ” —“ Spiritualism,
as I understand it, demonstrates that what is called death is but a
change into another state of life ; that we continue in that until we
die out of it, to be changed into a still higher one; and so on to
infinity. This is one of the teachings I have received from Spirit-
ualism ; another is the Universal Fatherhood of God, Motherhood of
Nature, and Brotherhood of Mankind ; the term Universal Brotherhood
includes, as I understand, spirits who have passed out of, as well as
those still in, the body, for one of the teachings is that we are as much
spirits now as we ever shall be; that we now occupy a physical
organism to be put oft* when worn out or broken, as we put off a
garment no longer useful; that we are then clothed in an organism so
fine as not to be cognisable to our senses. St. Paul said that spiritual
things are spiritually discerned. I believe many see, by spiritual light,
spirits who have left the body, and that some also hear them speak.
These faculties, called clairvoyance and clair-audience, are natural
faculties, capable of being developed and cultivated.”


“ Are you alluding to those who are called mediums ? ” —“ Yes ; and,
as I understand, all are naturally mediums.”
“What! all of us?” “Well, all who will take the trouble to
discipline, in that direction, faculties which they have by nature. It
is quite as possible to cultivate them as other faculties—memory, for
instance. And as many as are our faculties, just so many, as 1 under-
stand, are the modes of spirits manifesting their presence and action.
Such is my belief. To me there is nothing supernatural in Spiritualism
or mediumship.”
“Do you believe in materialization ? ” —“ Ido; It is, as I understand
the term, the putting on by a spirit of something material. Spirits are
ordinarily unperceived by us ; but their spiritual bodies can be clothed
upon with material less fine than their own, and then we can see them
and touch them. This materializing is a scientific operation to which
all spirits are not competent.”
“ Then do you believe that some spirits have greater power than
others ?”—“ Yes; just as some of us, who are spirits in bodies, have
greater knowledge than others.”
“ Can you make this materialization a little clearer ? ” —“ Spirits tell
us that spirit-chemists perform this operation on principles, as I
understand, of attraction, polarization, and crystallization ; but they
say that it is difficult for them to explain it to us, partly from the
inadequacy of our language. I confess Ido not comprehend how it is
performed. At circles, where materialization takes place, we under-
stand that one spirit controls the others who are present, just as a
stage manager controls performers and sends them on a stage ; and he
fixes the materialized spirit in such form that sometimes he can be
recognized and talked with.”
“ Have you recognized any?”—“ Many, at various times, in various
circles ; among them my father, my mother, my children, my step-
mother, uncles, aunts, cousins, and friends.”
“What is the court to understand by dematerialization?”—“The
getting rid by the spirit of the material that has been put upon his
spiritual body to render him visible to us.”
“Have mediums different powers?”—“Their powers vary just as
those of musicians, doctors, lawyers, or jurors ; and they differ from
one another as to their faculties. I have had, through one of them, in
Mrs. Miller’s mediumship, answers to questions written on the inner
sides of slates locked together.”
“Could you command answers obtained in that way?”—“No more
than you could from me if I were not able and willing to give one. I
have sometimes put questions, and the answer has been ‘ I do not wish
to answer that;’ sometimes, ‘I cannot answer;’ sometimes, ‘The
spirit is not here to answer.’ ”
“ Can you make the subject of materialization clearer ?”—“ I under-
stand from spirits that they mesmerize the medium into the state of
trance in order to keep her completely passive and enable them to
draw from her the elements for making an appearance and come in
contact with material things. Ido not know if I make my meaning
clear.”


“ Proceed. You have only the court to convince.”
Counsel for prosecution interposed : “ Proceed in what direction 1 ?”
“ I would say something of spirit-personation.”
Counsel for prosecution: “I cannot see what we have to do in this
case with all these theories. I submit the objection to the court.”
Judge Noonan : “ Does the defence desire to pursue this examination
further 1”
Counsel for defence : “We do.”
Judge Noonan : “ Then proceed.”
“ It is now an admitted scientific fact that one man can mesmerize
another, and put him into a condition in which he is so much under
his mental control as to make him do anything he wills him to do. A
spirit can do this with some mediums, and is then said to entrance
them. When Mrs. Miller is thus entranced I regard her as the
mesmerized subject of a spirit. In spirit-personation Mrs. Miller, the
medium, is then reduced to a state of passivity and may be controlled
according to the spirit-mesmerizer’s will. Then, if a spirit friend is
present and wishes to speak, he gets, as I understand, permission of
the controlling spirit; and, having that, controls the medium and
addresses you as that friend.”
“ On such occasions does the medium resemble that friend 1” —“ No ;
but I have sometimes marked a change in the medium’s voice,
reminding me of the friend speaking through her.”
“ Are there other indications leading you to believe that disembodied
spirits are present?” —“I have been told by them of occurrences
known only to them and myself; they have told me their names, and,
in various ways, have enabled me to identify them.”
“ Can you tell us anything else showing that it is not the medium
herself who so speaks ?”—“ Through her, my father and my children
have spoken ; and so has Colonel W. H. Coffin, who was Land Com-
missioner of the Pacific Railroad; J. N. Litton, who was Assistant-
Attorney of that road ; and Colonel Playback, whom I have also seen
while he so spoke, both here in St. Louis and at a medium’s in New
York.”
“ Did he say anything that the medium could not have known 1 ”
“He told of affairs connected with the circumstance of his being shot,
and about the trouble that led to that sad event, none of which could
she possibly have known.”
“ When these spirits spoke did you distinguish their voices ? ” —“ Yes ;
when we have had the condition of darkness, which, in Mrs. Miller’s
mediumship, is required for voice manifestations. The spirits explain
that in a closed, darkened room the air is still, while the smallest ray of
light sets it in vibration, and is against the manifestation. I have for
that reason, when I would hear the spirit voices, always accepted the
condition of darkness.”
“ Then they are subject to natural conditions 1 ” —“ Perfectly.”
“You do not regard their manifestations as supernatural ? ” —“ No ;
and when a spirit has a materialized exterior it will endure the light
for a short time ; then its elements begin to be attracted back to the
medium. In the midst of conversations with me, spirit-friends have


suddenly stopped, and gone back to the medium in the darkened cabinet,
presently to return and resume the conversation : they have explained
that they have had to renovate from the medium. To me that is a
natural and a rational explanation. The absence of physical light at a
seance is a condition, for certain manifestations, which commends itself to
my mind, especially in this of the spirit voice, for then there is no with-
drawing for renovation. 1 have made a study of such manifestations
with Mrs. Miller. Among spirits with whom I have thus communicated
have been my well-known former friends, J. T. Glover and Judge
Krurnm.”
“ How many seances have you attended at Mrs. Miller’s ?”—“Perhaps
fifty.”
“You consider her a genuine medium ? ” —“ I do.”
“ Could yon give a summary of her powers 1 ” —-“ Ido not consider
her possessed of what are commonly called powers: the powers she
appears to have come from the other side. She has an organism which
spirits can use for manifesting their presence and action. For this they
require passivity on her side. I have seen her, when she has been in a
perfectly passive state, raised in her chair to the ceiling, and on it names
Ixave been written through her hand.”
“ You have seen that done I”—“Yes.”
“ Anything besides 1 ” —“ I have seen so many manifestations, and in
so many different circles, that I would not attempt to specify from
recollection.”
The counsel for prosecution declined to cross-examine.
Judge Noonan having assured himself upon several points in the
evidence, the witness descended from the stand. He had been under
examination two hours.
The Spiritual Offering remarks that, whatever suffering may befall
Mr. and Mrs. Miller, the cause of Spiritualism must receive an impetus
from the publication in the newspaper Press of the testimony of Judge
Portis ; and it will be still more extensively published if the case is
carried, as it is proposed, into a superior court.— Light.
“ Those whom toe mourn are not absent , only invisible.” —Victor Hugo.
George Robertson and Company, Printers, Melbourne.




Works by the same Author—
RATIONAL CHRISTIANITY THE RELIGION OF HUMANII
Crown B vo, cloth, 6,*?.
THE HOLY TRUTH; or, THE COMING REFORMATION.
Octavo, cloth, reduced to 7s. 3d.
THE RELIGION OF THE FUTURE; or, THE HIGHER LA I
OF TRUTH AND RIGHT.
Crown Bvo, cloth, 3s. ; paper, 2s.
CHRISTIANITY: ITS ORIGIN AND ESOTERIC MEANING.
Do,per, 3d.
DELUSION AND REALITY; or, WHO WANTS HIE TRUTHi
Octavo, cloth, 2s. 3d. ; paper, Is. 3d.
THE HIGHER BRANCH OF SCIENCE; or, MATERIALISE
REFUTED BY FACTS.
Paper, 3d. ; with Addenda, Is,
IS SPIRITUALISM CREDIBLE I—A Paper read before the Scott
Church Literary Association, Melbourne, 7th May, 1884. 3d.
The above can be obtained from Mr. TERRY, 84 Russell Street
Melbourne; or, Messrs. GEORGE ROBERTSON & CO., Melbourne
Sydney, Adelaide, and Brisbane.
