

TRACTS FOR THE TIMES, No. 13.
THE
SOVEREIGN PEOPLE
P. H. PE ARSE.
CL « DUBLIN :
I(\ H WHELAN ft SON, 17 UPPER ORMOND QUAY
X G?
| . PRICE ONE PENNY. One Dozen or over, Po»t Free.


PREFACE.
This pamphlet concludes the examination of the Irish
definition of freedom which I promised in “ Ghosts.” For
my part, I have no more to say.
P. H. PEARSE.
St. Enda’s College,
Rathfarnham,
31st. March, 1916.


a iZtref _ i /
THE SOVEREIGN PEOPLE.
NATIONAL independence involves national
sovereignty. National sovereignty is twofold
in its nature.. It is lx>th internal and external.
It implies the sovereignty of the nation over all its parts,
■over all men and things within the nation; and it implies
the sovereignty of the nation as against all other nations.
Nationality is a spiritual fact; but nationhood includes
physical freedom, and physical power in order to the
maintenance of physical freedom, as well as the
spiritual fact of nationality. This physical freedom is
necessary to the healthy life, and 1 may even be necessary
to the continued existence of the nation. Without it the
nation droops, withers, ultimately perhaps dies; only a
very steadfast nation, a nation of great spiritual and
intellectual strength like Ireland, can live for more than
a few generations in its absence, and without it even so
stubborn a nation as Ireland would doubtless ultimately
.perish. Physical freedom, in brief, is necessary to sam;
and vigorous life; for physical freedom means "precisely
control of the conditions that are necessary to sane and
vigorous life. It is obvious that these things are partly
material, and that therefore national freedom involves
control of the material things which are essential to the
continued physical life and freedom of the nation. So
that the nation’s sovereignty extends not only to all the
.men and w'omen of the nation, but to all the material
possessions of the nation, the nation’s soil and all its
resources, all wealth and all wealth-producing processes
within the nation. In other words, no private right to
property is good as against the public right of the nation,
lint the nation is under a moral obligation so to exercise
its public right as to secure strictly equal rights and
liberties.to every man and woman within the nation. The
whole,is entitled to pursue the happiness and prosperity
of the >vhole, but this is‘to ,be pursued exactly for the
end that each of the individuals -composing, the, whole
may enjoy happiness and -prosperity, the maximum, amount
of happiness and prosperity consistent with the happiness
and prosperity of all the rest.


One may reduce all this to a few simple propositions -
1. The end of freedom is human happiness.
2. The end of national freed6m is individual freedom;,
therefore, individual happiness.
3. National freedom implies national sovereignty.
4. National sovereignty implies control of all the moral
and material resources of the nation.
I have insisted upon the spiritual fact of nationality ;
I have insisted upon the necessity of physical freedom
in order to the continued preservation of that spiritual
fact in a living people; I now insist upon the necessity
of complete control of the material resources of the
nation in order to the completeness of that physical
freedom. And here I think I give what has been called
“ the material basis of freedom ” its proper place and
importance. A nation’s material resources are not the
nation, any more than a man’s food is the man; but the
material resources are as necessary to the nation’s life as-
the man’s food to the man’s life.
And I claim that the nation’s sovereignty over the
nation’s material resources is absolute; but that obviously
such sovereignty must be exercised for the good of the
nation and without prejudice to the rights of other
nations, since national sovereignty, like everything else on
earth, is subject to the law's of morality.
Now the good of the nation means ultimately the good
of the individual men and women w'ho compose' the
nation. Physically considered, w'hat does a nation consist
of? It consists of its men and women; of all its men
and women, without any exceptions. Every man and
every woman within the nation has normally equal rights,
but a man or a woman may forfeit his or her rights by
turning recreant to the nation. No class in the nation has
rights superior to those of any other class. No class in
the nation is entitled to privileges beyond any other class
except with the consent of the nation. The right and
privilege to make laws or to administer laws does not
reside in any class within the nation; it resides in the
whole nation, that is, in the whole people, and can be
lawfully exercised only by those to whom it is delegated
by the whole people. The right to the control of the
material resources of a nation does not reside in any
individual or in any class of individuals; it resides in
the whole people and can be lawfully exercised only by


those to whom it is delegated by the whole people, and
in the manner in which the whole people ordains. Once
more, no individual right is good as against the right
of the whole people; but the people, in exercising its
sovereign rights, is morally bound to consider individual
rights, to do equity between itself and each of the in-
dividuals that compose it as well as to see that equity is
done, between individual and individual.
To insist upon the sovereign control of the nation over
all the property within the nation is not to disallow the
right to private property. It is for the nation to determine
to what extent private property may be held by its
members, and in what items of the nation’s material re-
sources private property shall be allowed. A nation
may, for instance, determine, as the'free Irish nation
determined and enforced for many centuries, that private
ownership shall not exist in land ; that the whole of a
nation’s soil is the public property of the nation. A nation
may determine, as many modem nations have determined,
that all fhe means of transport within a nation, all its
railways and waterways, are the public property of the
nation to-be administered by the nation for the general
benefit,- A nation may go further and determine that all
sources of wealth whatsoever are the property of the 1
nation, that each individual shall give his service for the
nation’s good, and shall be adequately provided for by*
the nation, and that all surplus wealth shall go to the
national treasury to be expended on national purposes,
rather than be accumulated by private persons. There is
nothing divine or sacrosanct in any of these arrangements;
they are matters of purely human concern, matters for
discussion and adjustment between the members of a'
nation, matters to be decided upon finally by the nation
as a whole; and matters in which Ihe nation as a whole
can revise or reverse its decision whenever it seems good
in the common interests to do so. I do not disallow the
right to private property; but I insist that all property is
held subject to the national sanction.
And I come back again to this: that the people are
the nation; the whole people, all its men and women;
and that laws made or acts done by anybody purporting
to represent the people but not really authorised by the
people,' either expressly or impliedly, to represent them
and to act for them do not bind the people; are a usurpa-


ticjn, air impertinence, a nullity. For instance, a Govern-
me.nt of capitalists, or a Government of clerics, of a Go-
vCTnment; of lawyers, or a Government of tinkers, of . a
<k)venrniem of red-headed men, or a Government of nu n
horn op,a Tuesday, does not represent the peoples-and
cannot bind the people, unless it is expressly or impliedly
chosen and accepted by the people to represent and act
for them; and in that case it becomes the lawful-govern-
ment of the people, and continues such until the people
withdraw their mandate. Now the people, if wise, will
not choose the makers and administrators of their laws on
such arbitrary and fantastic grounds as the possession of
capital, or the possession of red heads, or the having been
born on a Tuesday; a Government chosen in such a
manner, or representing (even if not so
deliberately chosen) capitalists, red-headed men, or men
born on a Tuesday will inevitably legislate and govern in
the interests of capitalists, red-headed men, or men born
on a Tuesday, as the case may be. The people, if wise,
will choose as the makers and administrators of their laws
men and women actually and fully representative of all
the men and women of the nation, the men and women of
no property equally with the men and women of property;
they will regard such an accident as the possession of
"property,” “capital,” “wealth” in any shape, the
possession of what is called “ a stake in the country,” as
conferring no more right to represent the people than
would the accident of possessing a red head or the accident
of 'having been born on a Tuesday. And in order that
the people may be able to choose as a legislation and as
a government men and women really and fully representa-
tive of themselves, they will keep the choice actually dr
virtually in the hands of the whole people; in other words,
while, in the exercise of their sovereign rights they may,
if they will, delegate the actual choice to some body among
them, i.e., adopt a “restricted franchise,” they will, if
wise, adopt the widest possible franchise —give a vote to
every adult man and woman of sound mind. To 'restrict
the franchise in any respect is to prepare the Way for
some future usurpation of the rights of the sovereign
people. The people,’ that is, the whole people, 'must
remain sovereign not only in theory, but in fact..
I-assert, then, the divine right of the people,-“ God’s
grant to Adam and-his poor children for ever.” to have


and to hold this good green earth. And I -assert' the
sovereignty and the sanctity of the nations, which are
the people embodied' and organised. The nation is a
natural division, as natural as the family, and as inevit-
able. That is one reason why a nation is holy, and why
an empire is not holy. A nation is knit together by
natural ties, ties mystic and spiritual, and ties human and
kindly; an empire is at best held together by ties of
mutual interest, and at worst by brute force. The nation
is the family in large ; an empire is a commercial corpora-
tion in large. - The nation is of God ; . the empire is of
man—if it be not of the devil.
Thi- democratic truths that I have just stated are im-
plicit in Tone and in Davis, though there was this differ-
ence between the two men, that Tone had a" manly
contempt for “the gentry (as they affect to call them-
selves)-,” while Davis had a little sentimental regard for
them. But Davis loved the people, as every Nationalist
must love the people, seeing that the people are the nation ;
his nationalism was not mere devotion to an abstract
idea, it was a devotion to the actual men and women who
make up this nation of Ireland, a belief in their rights,
and a resolve to establish them as the owners of Ireland
and-the masters of all her destinies. There is no other
sort of nationalism than this, the nationalism which
believes in and seeks to enthrone the sovereign people.
Tone had appealed to “ that numerous and respectable-
class; the men of no property,” and in that gallant and
characteristic phrase’ he had revealed his perception of a
great historic truth, namely, that in Ireland “the gentry
(as they affect to call themselves)” have uniformly been
corrupted by England, and the merchants and middle-
class capitalists have, when not corrupted, been uniformly
intimidated, whereas the common people have for the most
part remained utibought and unterrified. It is, in fact,
true that the repositories of the Irish tradition, as well
the spiritual tradition of nationally as the kindred tradition
of stubborn physical resistance to England, have been the
great, splendid, faithful, common people, —that dumb
multitudinous throng which sorrowed during the penal
night, which bled in ’9B, which starved in die Famine;
and which is here still —what is left of it —unbought and
unfefrified. Let no man be mistaken as to who will be lord


in Ireland when Ireland is free. The people will he lord
and master. The people who wept in Gcthsemane"; who
trod the sorrowful way, who died naked on a cross,: who
went down into hell, will rise again glorious and imtnortal,
will sit on the right hand of God, and will come in the
end to give judgment, a judge just and terrible.
Tone sounded the gallant reveille of democracy in
Ireland. The man who gave it its battle-cries was James
Fintan Lalor. Lalor was a fiery spirit, as of some angelic
missionary, imprisoned for a few years in a very frail
tenement, drawing his earthly breath in pain; but strong
with a great spiritual strength and gifted with a mind
which had the trenchant beauty of steel. What he had to
say for bis people (and for all mankind) was said in a
very few words. This gospel of the Sovereign People
that Fintan Lalor delivered is the shortest of the gospels;
but so precious is it, so pregnant with meaning in its ©very
word, that to express its sense one would have to quote it
almost as it stands; which indeed one could do in a tract
a very little longer than this. No one who wrote as little
as Lalor has ever written so well. In his first letter he
laments that he has never learned the art of literary
expression; in “The Faith of a Felon” he says that he
has all his life been destitute of books. Commonly, it
is by reading and writing that a man learns to-write
greatly. Lalor, who bad read little and written nothing,
wrote greatly from the moment he began to write. The
Lord God must have inspired that poor crippled recluse,
for no mortal man could of himself have uttered the
things he uttered.
James Fintan Lalor, in Duffy’s phrase, “announced
himself ” in Irish politics in 1847, and lie announced
himself “with a voice of assured confidence and
authority.” , In a letter to Duffy, which startled all the
Young Irelanders and which set Mitchel’s heart, on fire,
he declared himself one of the people, one who .there-
fore knew the people; and he told the young men that
there was neither strength nor even a disposition among
the people to carry O’Connell’s Repeal, but that; there
was strength in the people to carry national independence
if national independence were associated with something
else. .• ■
" A , mightier question is in the land—one beside
- which Repeal dwarfs down to,a petty parish question;


•one on which Ireland may not alone try her own right
but try the right of the world; on which she would be
not merely an asserter of old principles, often asserted,
and better asserted before her, an humble and feeble
imitator and follower of other countries—but an
original inventor, propounder, and propagandist, in the
van of the earth, and heading the nations; on which
her success or her failure alike would never be forgotten
by man, but would make her for ever a lodestar of
history; on which Ulster would be not l on her flank ’
but at her side, and on which, better and best of all,
she need not plead in humble petitions her beggarly
wrongs and how beggarly site bore them, nor plead any
right save the right of her might.
“ Repeal may perish with all who support it sooner
than I will consent to be fettered on this question, or to
connect myself with any organised body that would ban
or merge, in favour of Repeal or any other measure, that
greatest of all pur rights on this side of heaven —God’s
grant to Adam and his poor children for ever, when He
sent them from Eden in His wrath and bid them go,
work for their bread. Why should I name it?”
His proposals as to means thrilled the young orators
and debaters as the ringing voice of an angel might thrill
them:
“As regards the use of none but legal means, any
means and all means might be made illegal by Act of
Parliament, and such pledge, therefore, is passive
obedience. As to the pledge of abstaining from the use
•of any but moral force, I am quite willing to take such
pledge, if, and provided, the English Government
agree to take it also; but ‘if not, not.’ Let England
pledge not to argue the question by the prison, the
convict-ship, or the halter; and I will readily pledge
•not to argue it in any form of physical logic. But
dogs tied and stones loose is no bargain. Let the-stones
be given up; or unmuzzle the wolf-dog . .”
At Duffy’s invitation Lalor developed his doctrines in two
letters to the Nation, one addressed to the landlords and
-one to the people. To the landlords he spoke this ominous
warning;
“Refuse it [to be Irishmen], and you commit your-
selves to the position of paupers, to the mercy of
English Ministers and English members; you throw


your very existence on English support, which England
soon may find too costly, to afford; you lie at the feet:
of events; you lie in the way of a people and the move-
,meht of events and the march of a people shall be over
you.”’
The essence of Lalor’s teaching is that the right to the-
material ownership of a nation’s soil coexists with the
right to make laws for the nation and that both are
inherent in the same authority, the Sovereign People. He
held in substance that Separation from England l would be
valueless unless it put the people—the actual people and
not merely certain rich men —of Ireland in effectual
ownership and possession of the soil of Ireland; as for
a return to the status quo before 1800, it was to him im-
possible and unthinkable. When Mitchel’s United irish-
man was suppressed in 1848, Martin’s Irish Felon, with
Lalor as its standard-bearer and spokesman, stepped into
the, breach; and in an article entitled, “ The Rights of
Ireland” in the first issue of that paper (June 24, 1848)*
Lalor delivered the new gospel. A long passage must be
quoted in full; but it can be quoted without any comment*
for it is self-luminous :
“ Without agreement as to our objects we cannot'
agree 011 the course we should follow. It is requisite
the paper should have but one purpose; and the public:
should understand what that purpose is. Mine is not:
to repeal the Union, or restore Eighty-two. This is
not., the year ’ 82, this is the year ’4B. For repeal I
, never went into ‘ Agitation,’ and will not go into insur-
rection. On that question, I refuse to arm, or to act in
any mode; and the country refuses. O’Connell made
npi mistake when he pronounced it not worth the price of
one drop of blood; and for myself, I regret it was not
left, in the hands of Conciliation Hall, whose lawful
.property it was, and is. Moral force and repeal, the
means and the purpose, were just fitted to each other —
Arcades ambo, balmy Arcadians both. When the
means were limited, it was only proper and necessary
to limit the purpose. When the means were enlarged,
that purpose ought to have been enlarged also. Repeal,,
in its vulgar meaning, I look on as utterly impracti-
cable by any mode of action whatever; and the con-
stitution of ’B2 was absurd; worthless, and worse than
.worthless. The English .Government will never concede;


or surrender to any species of moral force whatsoever;:
and the'country-peasantry will never arm and fight for
it —neither will I. If lam to stake life and fame, it
must assuredly be for something better and greater,
more likely to last, more likely to succeed, and better
worth success, And a stronger passion, a . higher
purpose, a nobler and more needful enterprise is
fermenting in the hearts of the people. A mightier
question moves Ireland t o-day than that of merely
repealing , the Act of . Union. Not the constitution
Wolfe ,Tone died to abolish, but the constitution that
Tone died to obtain —independence; full and absolute
independence for this island, and for every man within,
this island. Into no movement that Would leave an
enemy’s garrison in possession, of all our lands,, masters-
of our liberties, our lives, and all our means of life and
happiness—into no such .movement will a single man
of the greycoats enter with an armed hand, whatever
the town population may do. On' a wider fighting
field, with stronger positions and greater resources than
are afforded by the paltry question'of Repeal, must we
close for our final struggle with England, or sink and
surrender.
“ Ireland her own —Ireland her own, and all therein,
from, the sod to the sky. The soil of Ireland for the
people of Ireland, to have and hold from God alone who
gave it—to have and to hold to them and their heirs for
ever, without suit or service, faith or fealty, rend or
render, to any power under Heaven. . . . When a greater
and more’ennobling enterprise is on foot, every inferior
and feebler project or proceeding will soon be left in the
hands of old women, of dastards, imposters, swindlers,
and imbeciles. All the strength and manhood of the
island—ail the courage/ energies, and ambition- * all
the passion, heroism, and chivalry—all the strong,men
and strong minds—all those that make revolutions will
quickly desert it, and throw themselves into the greater
movement, throng into the : larger' and loftier under-
taking, and flock round the banner that flies nearest
the sky.. There go the young, the gallant, the gifted,
the daring; and there, too, go the wise. For wisdom
knows that in national action littleness is more fatal
fcan the' wildest rashness; that greatness -pi object is
essential to greatness of effort, strength, and success/


that a revolution ought never to take its stand, on low
or, narrow ground, but seize on the broadest and highest
ground it can lay hands on; and that a petty enterprise
seldom succeeds. Had America aimed or declared'for
less than independence, she would, probably,, have
failed, and been a fettered slave to-day.
“ Not to repeal the Union, then, but the conquest —
not to disturb or dismantle the empire, but to abolish
it utterly for ever—not to fall back on ’B2, but act up
to ’48 —not to resume or restore an old constitution,' but
found a new nation and raise up a free people, and
strong as well as free, and secure as well as strong,
based on a peasantry rooted like rocks in the soil, of
the land—this is my object, as I hope it is yours and
this, you may rest assured, is the easier, as it is the
nobler and more pressing enterprise.”
Lalor proceeds to develop his teaching as to the owner-
ship of the soil of Ireland by its people;
“ The principle I state, and mean to stand upon, is
this: that the entire ownership of Ireland, moral and
material, up to the sun and down to the centre, is
vested of right in the people of Ireland ; that they,
and none but they, are the land-owners and law-makers
of this island; that all laws are null and void not made
by them, and all titles to land invalid not conferred or
•confirmed by them; and that this full right of owner-
ship may and ought to be asserted by any and all means
which God has put in the nower of man. In other, if
not plainer words, I hold and maintain tha.t the entire
soil of a country belongs of right to the entire people
•of that country, and is the rightful property, not of
any one class, but of the nation at large, in full effective
possession, to let to whom they will, on whatever
tenures, terms, rents, services, and conditions they
will; one condition, however, being unavoidable and
■essential, the condition that the tenant shall bear full,
true, and undivided fealty and allegiance to the nation,
and the laws of the nation whose lands he holds', and
-own no allegiance whatsoever to any other pnnoe,
power, or people, or any obligation of obedience or
respect to their will, orders, or laws. I hold, further,
and firmly believe, that the enjoyment by the people
•of this right of first ownership of the soil is essential
to the vigour and vitality of all other rights, to their


validity, efficacy, and value; to their secure possession
and safe exercise. For let no people deceive them-
selves, or be deceived by the words, and colours, ‘and
phrases, and forms of a mock freedom, by constitutions,
and charters, and articles, and franchise. These-things
are paper and parchment, waste and worthless. Let
laws and institutions say what they will, this fact, will
be stronger than all laws, and prevail against them—
the fact that those who own your lands will make your
laws, and command your liberties and your lives. ’ But
this is tyranny” and slavery; tyranny in its widest ’scope
and worst shape; slavery of body and soul, from the
cradle to the coffin—slavery with all its horrors, and
with none of its physical comforts and securityj even
as it is in Ireland, where the whole community is made
up of tyrants, slaves, and slave-drivers. ”
As to the question of dealing with land-owners. Lalor
re-echoes Tone and Davis :
“ There are, however, many landlords, perhaps,, and
certainly a few, not fairly chargeable with the crimes
of their order; and you mav think it hard they should
lose their lands. But recollect the principle I assert
would make Ireland, in fact, as she is of right, mistress
and queen of all those lands; that she, poor lady, had
ever a soft heart and grateful disposition; and that
she may, if she please, in reward of allegiance, confer
new titles or confirm the old. Let us crown her a queen ;
and’ then —let her do with her lands as a queen may do.
“ In the case of any existing interest, of what nature
soever, 1 feel assured that no question but one would
need to be answered. Does the owner of that interest
assent to swear allegiance to the people of Ireland,-and
to hold in fee from the Irish nation? If he assent
he may be assured he will suffer no loss. No eventual
■or permanent loss I mean ; for some temporary Joss he
must assuredly suffer. But such loss would be
incidental and inevitable to any armed insurrection
whatever, no matter on what principle the right of re-
sistance should be resorted to. If he refuses, then I
say—-away with him-—out of this land with him—him-
self and all his robber rights and all the things him-
-self and his rights have brought into our
and tears, and famine, and the fever that goes, with
Tamine.” " -


:1b -the issue of the Irish -Felon for July 8, Lalor, ex-
pecting suppression and arrest, wrote “The Faith of a
Felon ’i-r-a; statement which, ill-framed and ill-connected
though'he.kncw it to be, he firmly believed-to “carry’ the
fortunes of Ireland,” and sent “forth to its -fate, to
coriquer. or be conquered.” It was conquered for the
time,> hiit, like, such immortal things, it was destined to-
riscragain. In it Lalor re-affirmed his principles-and re-
statedhis programme. The idea of the ownership of the
soil by the .whqle -people which is his-essential contribu-
tion , to. modern political thought, was in this statement
put more clearly .even'.than before:
... “.What forms the fight of prooerty in land? I have
never read in the direction of that question. I have
all my life been destitute of books. -But from -the
first chanter of Blackstone’s second book, the only
•page I ever read on'the subject, I know that jurists are
unanimously agreed in considering ‘.first occupancy’
to be the only true original foundation on the right of
property and possession of land. f
Now I;am prepared to prove that ‘occupancy ’ wants
..every character and quality that could give it moral
efficacy .as a foundation of right. I am prepared to-
prow this, when ‘occupancy’ has first been defined.
If ho/definition can be given, I am relieved from the
.necessity: .of showing any claim founded on occupancy
lo.ibe weak and worthless.
yj.To any plain understanding the right of private
.property, is very simple. It is the right of man to
possess, enjoy, and transfer the substance and use of
whatever he has himself CREATED.- This title is
good,against the world; and it is the sole and only
title by which a valid right of absolute private property
can possibly vest.
: . " But no. man can plead any such title to a right of
, property in the substance’of the soil.
.if." The earth, together with all it spontaneously pro-
ffiroes,: is the 1 free and common property of all mankind,
o&Aaturai right, and by the grant of God—and all men
faffing equal, no man, therefore, has a right, to appropri-
• att: exclusively to himself any part or portion thereof,
ekoept with and by the common . consent and agreeinent
of all other men. : !
" The sole original right of property in land Which-


I acknowledge to be morally valid, is this right at ;jam-
mon consent and agreement. Every other I hold .to
be fabricated and fictitious, null, void, and of -no
effect.” ' . '
, As for Lalor’s programme of, action, it was in brief:
i. To refuse all rent and arrears beyond the value of
the overplus of harvest remaining after due provision., for
the tenants’ subsistence for twelve months, :.
2. To resist eviction under the. English law. of ejection.
3. To refuse all rent to the usurping proprietors,.,dhtil
the people, the true proprietors, had decided in national
■congress what rents were to be paid, and to whom ; ,c
4. That the people should decide that rents should;'“be
paid to themselves, the people, for public purposes-,-..and
for behoof and benefit of them, the entire general people.”
Lalor saw clearly that this programme might, and
.almost certainly would, lead to armed revolution. If, so—
“ Welcome be the. will of God- We must only try
to keep our harvest, to offer a peaceful, passive resist-
ance, to barricade the island, to break up the roads,
to break dbwn the bridges —and, should need be,, and
favourable occasions offer, surely we may venture Jo try
the steel.
“It has been said to me that such a war, on the
principles I propose, would be looked on with detesta-
tion by Europe. I assert the contrary. I say such a
war would propagate itself throughout Europe. Mark
the words of this prophecy : —The principle I propound
goes to the foundations of Europe, and sooner or later,
will cause Europe to outrise. Mankind will yet be
masters of the earth. The right of the people to make
the laws —this produced the first great modern earth-
quake, whose latest shocks, even now, are heaving in
the heart of the world. The right of the people to own
the land —this . will produce the next. Tram your
hands, and your son’s hands, gentlemen of earth; for
you and -they will yet hare to use them, I want to
put Ireland foremost, in the van of the world, at the
head of the nations —to set her aloft in the blare of
■ the sun, and to make her for ages the lodestar .of
history. Will she take the oath. I point out—.the path
to be free, and famed, and feared, and followed —
1 the . path . that , goes sunward? ..
’.A’ fortnight later, in-the Irish Felon for Julv‘,32,


Lalor wrote the article “ Clearing the Decks,” which was-
intended to declare the revolution. • It was worthy of a
braver response than it received:
"if Ireland be conquered now—ur what would be
worse. —if she fails to fight, it will Certainly not be the
fault of the people at large, of those who form the rank
an#: file of the nation. The failure and fault will be
that of those who have assumed to take the office of
commanding and conducting the march of a people for
liberty without, perhaps, having any commission from
nature to do so, or natural right, or acquired requisite.
The general population of this island are ready to find
and furnish everything which can be demanded from the
mass of a people —the members, the physical strength*
the animal daring, the health, hardihood', and endurance.
No population on earth of equal amount would furnish
a more effective military conscription. We want only
competent leaders —men of courage and capacity —men
whom nature meant and made for leaders. ■ . . ■. These
leaders are yet to be found. Can Ireland furnish them?
It would be a sheer and absurd blasphemy against nature
to 1 ddUbt it. The first blow will bring them out. . . .
“In the case of Ireland now there is but one fact to
deal with, and one question to be considered. The fact
is this—that there are at present in occupation of our
country some 40,000 armed men, in the livery and service
of England; and the question is—how best and soonest
t6‘ kill and capture these 40,000 ? . .
"Meanwhile, however, remember this—that' some-
where, and somehow, and b> r somebody, a beginning
must be made. Who strikes the first blow for Ireland ?
Who wins a wreath that will be green for ever ?”
That was Lalor’s last word. The issue containing the
article was seized, the Irish Felon suppressed, and
Martin and Lalor arrested. In a few months Lalor was
released from prison a dying man. From his sick bed
he tried f to rally the beaten forces; he actually went down
into North Munster and endeavoured to lead the people.
This effort—the almost forgotten rising of 1849 —failed.
Lalor died in Dublin a few weeks after. But his word
has marched on, conquering.
The doctrine and proposals of Fintan Lalor stirred
John Mitchel profoundly. Mitchel was not a democrat


by instinct, as Tone and Lalor were ; lie was not a
revolutionary by process of thought, as Tone and Lalor
were; he was not from the beginning of his public
life a believer in the possibility and desirability of
physical force, as Tone and Lalor were. He became
all these things ; and he became all these things suddenly.
It was as if revolutionary Ireland, speaking through
Lalor, had said to Mitchel, “ Follow me,” and Mitchel,
leaving all things, followed. Duffy and others were
amazed that the most conservative of the Young Irelanders
should become the most revolutionary. They ought not
to have been amazed. That deep and passionate man
could not have been anything by halves. As well expect
a Paul or a Teresa or an Ignatius Loyola to be a
“ moderate ” Christian as John Mitchel, once that
“ Follow me ” had been spoken, to be a “moderate”
Nationalist. Mitchel was of the stuff of which the great
prophets and ecstatics have been made. He did really
hold converse with God ; he did really deliver God’s word
to man, deliver it fiery-tongued.
Mitchel’s is the last of the four gospels of the new
testament of Irish nationality, the last and the fieriest
and the most sublime. It flames with apocalyptic, wrath,
such wrath as there is nowhere else in literature. And it
is because the man loved so well that his wrath was so
terrible. It is foolish to say of Mitchel, as it has been
said, that his is a gospel of hate, that hate is barren,
that' a nation cannot feed itself on hate without peril to its
soul, or at least to the sanity and sweetness of its mind,
that Davis, who preached love, is a truer leader and
guide for Ireland than Mitchel, who preached hate. , The
answer to this is—first, that love and hate are not mutually
antagonistic but mutually complementary; that love
connotes hate, hate of the thing that denies or destroys
or threatens the thing beloved; that love of good'
connotes hate of evil, love of truth hate of false-
hood, love of freedom hate of oppression; that hate
may be as pure and good a thing as love, Just as love
may .be as impure and evil a thing as hatethat
hate is no more ineffective and barren than love, both
being as necessary to moral sanity and growth as sun
and storm are to physical life and growth- And,
secondly, that Mitchel, the least apologetic of men,-. wp.s
at,pains to explain that his hate.was not of English men


and women, but of the English thing which called itself
a government in Ireland, of- the. English Empire, of
English commercialism supported by English militarism,
a thing wholly evil, perhaps the most evil thing that there
has ever been in the world. To talk of such hate as
unholy, unchristian, barren, is to talk folly or hypocrisy.
Such hate is not only a good thing, but is a duty. '
. When Mitchel’s critics (or his own Doppelganger, who
was his severest critic) objected that his glorious wrath was
merely destructive, a thing splendid in slaying, but With-
out any fecundity or life-giving principle wdthin it,
Mitchel’s answer was adequate and conclusive :
“. . . Can you dare to pronounce that the winds, and
, the lightnings, which tear down, degrade, destroy, execute
a more ignoble office than the volcanoes and subterranean
■deeps that upheave, renew, recreate? Are the nether
.fires holier than the upper fires ? The waters that are
above the firmament, do they hold of Ahriman, and the
waters that are below the firmament, of Ormuzd ? Do
you take up a reproach against the lightnings for that
they only shatter and shiver, but never construct ? Or
have you a quarrel with the winds because they fight
.against the churches, and build them not ? 'in all
' nature, spiritual and physical, do you not see that some
powers and agents have it for their function to abolish
arid demolish and derange—other some to construct
.and set in order? But is not the destruction, then, as
natural, as needful, as the construction? —Rather tell
me, I pray you, which is construction—-which destruc-
tion ? This destruction is creation: Death is. Birth
and
‘The quick spring like weeds out of the dead:
Go to—the revolutionary Leveller is your only archi-
tect. Therefore, take courage, all you that Jacobins
be, and stand upon your rights, and do your, ap-
pointed work with all your strength, let the canting, fed
■classes rave and shriek as they will—where you see
a respectable, fair-spoken Lie sitting in high places,
feeding .Itself fat on human sacrifices —down with it,
strip it naked, and pitch it to the demons; whenever
you see a greedy tyranny (constitutional or
ing the faces of the poor, join .battle with it oh the spot
confederate, and combine against it, resting
never.'till-"the huge mischief come down, though the


whole ‘ structure of society ’ come down along with it.
Never you mind funds and stocks; if the price of the
things called Consols depend on lies and fraud, down
with them, too. Take no heed of ‘ social disorganisa-
tion'; ’ you cannot bring back chaos —never fear; no
disorganisation in the world can be so complete but
there will be a germ of new order in it; sanscuiottism,
when she hath conceived, will bring forth venerable
institutions. Never spare; work joyfully, according
to your nature and function; and when your work is
effectually done, and it is time for the counter opera-
tion® to begin, why, then, you can fall a-constructing,
if you have a gift that way ;if not, let others'do their
work - , and take your rest, having discharged your duty.
Courage, Jacobins ! for ye, too, are ministers of
heaven. ...
“ I do believe myself incapable of desiring private
vengeance; at least, I have never yet suffered any
private wrong atrocious enough to stir up that sleeping
passion. The vengeance I seek is the righting of my
country’s wrong, which includes my own. Ireland,
indeed, needs vengeance; but this is public vengeance
—public justice. Herein England is truly a great
public criminal. England! all England, operating
through her Government: through all her organised
and effectual public opinion, press, platform, pulpit,
Parliament, has done, is doing, and means to do,
grievous wrong to Ireland. She must be punished ; that
punishment will, as I believe, come upon her by and
through Ireland ; and so will Ireland be avenged."
This denunciation of woe against the enemy of Irish
freedom is as necessary a part of the religion of Irish
nationality as are Davis’s pleas for love and concord
between brother Irishmen. The Church that preaches
peace and goodwill launches her anathemas against the
enemies of peace and goodwill. Mitchel’s gospel is part
of the testament, even as Davis’s is; it but reveals a
different facet of the truth. A man must accept the
whole testament; but a man may prefer Davis to
Mitchel, just as a man may prefer the gospel according to
St. Luke, the kindliest and most human of the gospels,
to the gospel of St. John.
Mitchel’s teaching contains nothing that is definitely
new and his. He accepted Tone ; he accepted Davis ;


be accepted in particular Lalor ; and he summed up and
expressed all their teaching in a language transfigured
by wrath and vision. Tone is the intellectual ancestor
of the whole modem movement of Irish nationalism, of
Davis, and Lalor, and Mitchel, and all their followers;
Davis is the immediate ancestor of the spiritual and
imaginative part of that movement, embodied in our day-
in the Gaelic League; Lalor is the immediate ancestor
of the specifically democratic part of that movement, em-
bodied to-day in the more virile labour organisations;
Mitchel is the immediate ancestor of Fenianism, the
noblest and most terrible manifestation of this
unconquered nation.
And just as all the four have preached, in different
terms,' the same gospel, making plain in turn different
facets of the same truth, so the movements I have indi-
cated are but facets of a whole, different expressions,
and each one a necessary expression, of the august,
though denied, truth of Irish N ationhood; nationhood
in virtue of an old spiritual tradition of nationality,
nationhood involving Separation and' Sovereignty, nation-
hood resting on and guaranteeing the freedom of ail the
men and women of the nation and placing them in
effective possession of the physical conditions necessary
to the reality and to the perpetuation of their freedom,
nationhood declaring and establishing and defending
itself by the good smiting sword. I who have been in
and of each of these movements make here the necessary
synthesis, and in the name of all of them I assert the
forgotten truth, and ask all who accept it to testify to
it with me, here in our day and, if need be, with our
blood.
At the end of a former essay I set that prophecy of
Mitchel’s as to the coming of the time when the kindred
and tongues and nations of the earth should give their
banners to the wind; and his prayer that he, John
Mitchel, might live to see it, and that on that great day
of the Lord he might have breath and strength enough
to stand under Ireland’s immortal Green. John Mitchel
did not live to see it. He died, an old man, forty years
before its dawning. But the day of the Lord is here,
and you and I have lived to see it.
And we are young. And God has given us strength
and courage and counsel. Mnv He give us victory.
■toTIG.NAL LIEGAin O? A-:;™:ALIA
