

4 00>t A J
*****rtf A >. rj
f f
1 LECTURES os ASTRONOMY. If
J 1 INTO. 2. F|
•' The Sun, "
With Biographical Notice of the
Eminent Lecturer
R. A. PROCTOR
PRICE SIXPENCE.
(Cofyright Reserved.)
5 §h ,t, « c v : pi-
Published by M. A. CLEARY, and Sold by all Booksellers.
lBB o.
®Pf iB<So.




M'S3SS
2% -
f ) S^5 < S!dS{.
Seeing that very many have been unable, from various causes, to
attend the lectures of the eminent astronomer, R, A. Proctor, Esq., the
publishers having at great expense, under obviously adverse circum-
stances, thought fit to place these lectures verbatim within the reach
of all classes, and, for this reason, have resolved to publish them in the
present cheap form, at the uniform charge of Sixpence each. To Mr.
Howell, late of the Sydney Daily Telegraph, the publishers are
especially indebted for his management of these' rerbatim reports, which,
as can be attested by those who had the privilege of attending the lectures,
are most faithful Reports ; and they trust the Public will understand
that their object in publishing the Lectures in this cheap form, is to
put them within the grasp of every one as an educating medium.




LECTURE 11.
In my first lecture treating of the life and death of a world,
reference was made to the sun, some of the other giant
planets, our own earth and the smallest planet—the Moon.
I was compelled to touch lightly on all these in order to shew
the stages of a planet’s life. To-night our enquiries shall be
about that grand and majestic Orb the Sun. At the very
outset I must impress upon your minds that this planet
although looked upon and spoken of as the largest planet
belongs only to the second class of stars —other suns that
people the universe in millions being so much larger and
surpassing the sun to so great an extent that they have to be
classed differently. It will therefore be seen that the
Sun is only a representative star, and the only one that has
hitherto been able to be studied by man. It is through him
that all the worlds around him derive their warmth and life.
In ancient times the Persians and other nations worshipped
the Sun, and I for one am not at all surprised that such
should have been the case, for if there is any body that could
tend to make one forget the creator and worship his crea-
ture, that body is the Sun. Were I a clergyman, knowing
as I do, the power and the benevolence of this planet, I
should be inclined to hold up Our Sun as typifying the Great
Creator. The Sun is working night and day for man’s com-
fort and benefit. It is not only during the day when we see
him pouring his rays of light on the earth and know him to
be generating heat, that he is working for us, but even at
night when to us he becomes invisible is he in a state of
activity benefiting not only the earth but his whole family.
Even then he is keeping the other planets that work around
him, in their proper places in their track around him pre-
venting them from the slightest displacement that would set
the whole Solar system wrong and consequently work un-
speakable ruin. He is unceasingly at work, guarding the
earth and performing his mission of good.
In the hours of the day when the sky is clouded, and in
the hours of the night when He is hidden from our sight, he
is raising unto himself the clouds which although obscuring
the light from our eyes, pour their on mankind
whereby the fat of the land increases.
I will to-night dwell on the size, the might, the splen-
dour, and finally the heat of the great planet..
The size of the Sun is arrived at by a determination of
its great distance from the earth. Until the 9th of Decem-
ber, 1874, when the planet Venus passed the Sun, the dis-
tance of the Sun from the Earth was rather doubtful, but on
that date observations were made which have pretty strongly


established the distance. In former times it was generally-
accepted that the Sun was 95,365,000 miles from the Earth.
About 25 years ago, however, Professor Hansen a German
Astronomer of great repute made a series of observations on
the Moon, and by deep calculations expressed it as his belief
that the Sun could not be as far from the Earth as had
previously been computed. This assertion of the Professor’s
created some stir and most opportunely in the year 1874, the
expected Transit of Venus created hopes that minute obser-
vations would enable Astronomers of that day to determine
the distance accurately. These hopes although not realised
to their greatest extent, in some measure were realised, and
the conclusion arrived at, has tended to shew that
astronomers of by-gone days had in reality achieved a great
triumph in computing the distance of the Sun from the
earth.
At an enormous expense to the crown, grand prepara-
tions were made almost all over the world in order to take
extensive observations on the 9th of December of the posi-
tion of Venus on the Sun’s disc, which would furnish reliable
and workable data for accuretely determining the distance
of the Sun. The most eminent Astronomers had laid them-
selves out for the task and even the eminent Mr. Russell as
was afterwards shewn exercised the greatest skill and care in
taking observations. lam sorry to say that notwithstanding
all the labor and anxiety, and despite all the skill and energy
bestowed by those engaged in the task, the result was not so
satisfactory as was anticipated.
This, as I may term it modified failure, was owing not
to the inability or incompetence of the observers, but to a
vagary of Venus herself who persisted in making her entry
on the Sun’s face. The photographs taken at the different
stations on the Earth enabled the observers to caculate the
distance as approximately as possible, and strange to say that
notwithstanding the behaviour of Venus, all the observers
agreed in stating that the distance of the Sun from the Earth
was between 92 and 93 millions of miles. When the fact was
made known, some gave it as their opinion that Astronomy did
not deserve to be called the exact science as it had been
termed, since there had been such a discrepancy as, more than
2,000,000 of miles between the accepted distance previous to
the Transit of Venus and the determined distance after the
Transit. Others again propounded the theory that this dis-
crepancy arose from the fact of the Sun having attracted the
Earth something more than two millions of miles closer to
himself within half a century. I need not say that neither of
these opinions can for a moment be accepted. Astronomy
cannot be reproached for the difference of 2,000,000 miles, for
although the discrepancy might look glaring to you, you must
understand that an error in observation of a hair’s breadth


seen at a distance of 100 yards would throw out the calculation
to the extent of 2,000,000 of miles. Then again you must con-
sider the great difficulties that have to be contended with when
one set of observations has to be taken most probably at Ihe
Northern hemisphere in Winter, and another set at the same
time has to be taken at the Southern Hemisphere in Summer and
the results of these observations have to be de-
termined ; you will after this explanation acknowledge that
Astronomy had achieved a great triumph in having given such
approximate determinations. With reference to the other
assertion you may at once dismiss from your minds any fear of
the attraction to the Sun of the Earth. To show you its utter
fallacy I need only tell you that were the Earth only attracted
towards the Sun within the last fifty years, two millions of
miles, the year would have shortened 12 days in that time.
You as a matter of course know that the year has not shortened,
therefore that idea is altogether erroneous. What plea then
can I put forward with regard to the discrepancy ? None
save the one I have already mentioned, and all that astronomers
can do is to present that plea with a strong appeal to your
imagination.
When we come to consider, to think of the distance of
the Sun from the earth we are lost in surprise and amaze-
ment. I will proceed to give you some idea of this great dis-
tance. The journey from New York to San Francisco in an
express train takes 7 days to accomplish (this gives me an
idea of the size of the earth). Were it possible for you to
travel to the Sun, going night and day, and at the top speed
of an express train, it would not take you days or weeks
or months, or even a year to reach him, but 500 years. A
cannon ball fired from an Armstrong gun, continuing its
progress with unchanged velocity (premising of course that
such a thing were possible) would not reach him until after
the expiry of 13 years, and sound travelling at the same rate
that it does in our atmosphere, would take years to
reach the Sun. That is the explosion of the Gun would not
be heard until half-a-year later than when the cannon ball
had reached him. This fact alone shews, how absurd it was
for the ancients to have prayed to the Sun, since it was not
until after the lapse of years that their prayer
reached their God. To give you another striking idea of the
distance, I will state that a friend of mine Professor Mun-
denhall, of Columbia, once told me that he had calculated,
that if a child were born with an arm 93,000,000 of miles in
length, and at the moment of its birth it touched the Sun
with the tips ot its fingers, it would have to grow to the age
of 132 years before it would become conscious, that it had
burnt its fingers the day of its birth. Light travels through
space at the enormous velocity of x 86,000 miles-per second
and would travel round the earth 8 times during one second,


yet light with its tremendous velocity takes g minutes to
reach us from the Sun. So that if anything happened to the
King of the Solar System we should know nothing of it
until nine minutes after such occurrence. From the mom-
ent that the Sun sheds its first spark of light to the lime it
reaches us the Sun shifts his real position about the 180th
part of his diameter. It does not seem so to us, but the
space between apparent position, and his real one in 9 min-
utes if measured would be the 180th part of his diameter.
The power of gravity—that wonderful force which regu-
lates so harmoniously the movement of every particle in the
universe is exerted at a rate that far exceeds the velocity of
light. In fact it will be impossible to conceive the speed
with which it operates.
The exertions and the effects of the Power of Gravity
are perfectly synchronous.
With regard to the size of the Sun, it has a diameter 108
times that of the earth, a surface 11,700 times, and a volume,
1,250,000 times greater.
Although the matter contained in the Sun is 324,000
times as much as that contained in the earth yet the Volume
you see is enormously greater, and this is on account of
terriffic heat and the consequent expansion of matter. Sir
John Herschel has very properly remarked—“ That the Sun
notwithstanding his great size would be nothing without his
proportionately great power.”
A comet, although larger than the Sun, if placed as the
Sun to discharge his duties would be absolutely useless.
The mass of the Sun is greater than the mass of our
earth, but not greater in proportion to its volume. If the
mass of the earth suddenly increased 324,000 times in degree
a weight representing half an ounce how, would require a resis-
ting power of between four and five tons. Then again a sub-
stance half an ounce in weight on being lifted only one inch
from the ground and dropped, in falling would acquire a
velocity three times that of an express train, viz.:—a velocity
of 180 miles an hour. You can now in some measure
imagine the energy that results from the Sun’s Mass. With
regard to the law of gravity very little explanation can be
given. It is surprising to see the numerous planets that
stud the Universe keep their different positions with regard
to the Sun. When Sir Isaac Newton discovered the law of
gravity it was thought that all that was mysterious would be
explained. The discovery of the law brought about another
mystery, and that was “the operation of gravity.” The
question is still asked—“ How does Gravity operate ?” Sir
Isaac Newton has said “ that a body cannot operate where
it is not,” yet the Sun a body millions of miles away from
the Earth acts powerfully and instantaneously not only on it
but on the whole Solar system. The question is invariably


asked—How does he affect them ? Is his action conveyed
by any intermediary substance ? These questions at present
remain unanswered, and Gravity becomes a profound
mystery. Science with its great strides may possibly over-
come the difficulty in the future and the problem may be
solved, but no sooner will that solution be given, then other
questions and obstacles will arise merging the whole in
obscurity and mystery ad infinitum. Numbers believe that
the planets are kept in their relative positions through the
direct agency or interference of the Divine Being, but at all
events the laws of gravity are at present inexplicable.
The sun is not only great in size, the sun is not only
possessed of giant power, but also possesses what may
practically be termed great benevolence. Take for instance
the light that he diffuses throughout the world. Every part
of the surface of the sun is a sheet of light. So intense is the
brightness of the sun that his average lustre is 150 times
brighter than the oxy-hydrogen lime light, indeed so great is
his lustre that were that light held up between the eye and the
sun, it would appear a dark blot on the sun’s disc. Even the
far famed electric light is said to be only £ as bright as the
light of the sun ; one average inch of the surface of the sun
shines with greater lustre than a thousand electric arcs.
Heat is as necessary to life almost as food, and the Sun
diffusing light without heat could not be styled the central
mechanism of the Solar System. The heat thrown out by
the Sun is enormous, during every second, it has been calcu-
lated that as much heat is emitted by the Sun as would be
thrown out by the combustion of 11,000 millions of millions
of tons of coal. As another proof of the intense heat of the
Sun it is known that if this heat emitted only on one mile of
the earth’s surface was taken and utilised expressly for the
purpose, it would melt 26,000 tons of Ice in one hour. The
question may present itself to you, whence does the Sun
derive his heat ? I must tell you that Sir William Thomson
has put forward the theory that the Sun obtains his heat
from the continual impact of falling masses of meteoric
matter. This theory, however, feasible at first, it appeared
was obliged to be discarded owing to the fact that the heat
which would be obtained from the colliding of two meteors,
however great was only momentary.
Then again some had advanced the idea that the Sun
derived his heat from the contraction of his mass, if this was
the case, how could the existence of the earth for more than
100 millions of years, and probably more than 300 millions
of years be accounted for ? for the Sun has most assuredly
imparted heat to the earth from the beginning. This you
see the earth gives us one theory and the Sun another.
I have a method of getting over the difficulty, and
it is this ;—The real globe of the Sun is much smaller than


we seem to think the Sun itself is situated far below the mass
of luminosity apparent to us. Masses of meteoric clouds
envelope the Sun showing him to us far larger than he really
is. In the real mass I believe the process of contraction
which enables the Sun to sustain his heat goes on and has
gone on for a much longer period than you imagine.
The spots on the Sun’s surface are noticed to
appear, increase in number, decrease, and disappear at
regular periods the maximum occuring about every eleven
years. They are of immense size, and one spot shown is
stated to be three times as great in extent as our Earth.
From the central mass of the sun continually rise glowing
vapours of the metals and other constituents of his compo-
sition. Having reached a certain height, they form bright
cloud masses, floating in a series of layers, and where the
telescope reveals the sun-spots these clouds are swept on one
side by terrific cyclones, the spots being dense cloud masses,
each with a penumbra of metallic rain. In a photograph,
taken by Father Seechi in 1857, is shown a forcible illustra-
tion of a cyclonic storm, whirling the cloudy masses around
with a force compared to which our fiercest hurricane would
be but the merest zephyr. No idea can be formed of the
terrific uproar that must accompany these solar cyclones;
but all the noises known on earth must be intensified to an
appalling extent there. The elements composing the Sun
can be traced by means of spectrum analysis, and even
oxygen and hydrogen have been detected among them. The
coloured prominences on the Sun were formerly only visible
at the time of a solar eclipse ; but now they can be studied
at all periods by means of the spectroscope. Leverrier sup-
poses them to be great mountains, but spectrum analysis has
shown them to be great masses of glowing gas. The whole
region of the Sun is perpetually disturbed, and the streams
of the corona, or glory of light surrounding it, has been traced
to a distance of 10,000,000 miles from the solar surface,
while the zodiacal light has been known to extend ten times
that distance into space. It may be imagined that there is
a great waste of Solar energy seeing that the proportion of the
Sun’s total light and heat that falls on the earth and the
other members of the solar system is insignificant compared
with the amount he radiates far into the infinity of the star-
depths. Still, no part of the Sun’s energy is wasted, and it is
because our knowledge is so limited that we see waste where
there is probably only the most perfect economy.
I tuo />
(44*3 “7 _ JAN* 1993 *
JARHETT / ND CO., Printers* Liverpool SttteQSydney.




TO BE PUBLISHED SHORTLY—
‘ HOIV TO LEARN FRENCH."
Quickly and Grammatically, under the now famed
“ANGLAIS SYSTEM.”
With Original Notes on the Modes of Answering Correct
Pronunciations—
WITH A SERIES OF MOST SERVICEABLE EXER-
CISES AND EXPLANATORY NOTES.
Likewise a Complete Course of the most approved modern style op
Private and Commercial French Correspondence by
B. A. CLEARY,
Professor of Elocution & Languages-
N.B.—Orders may be left at GEO. ROBERTSON & CO’S.
Price 2s 6d.
IN THE PRESS, AND WILL BE PUBLISHED
SHORTLY—
“Stutter imp
THEIR CAUSE AND REMEDY.
With Instructions for bringing about a clear and distinct
enunciation.
INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE CULTIVATION AND
PRACTICE OF GOOD READING-
As also an Appendix consisting of an entirely New Selec-
tion of'the Most Admired, Poetical, and other Recitations,
with Hints for Emphasis in the delivery of them.
M. A. CLEARY,
PROFESSOR OF ELOCUTION to the principal Schools, S*c.,
around Sydney, and Lecturer to the late Council of Education's
Training School.
N.B. —Orders may be left at GEO. ROBERTSON & CO’S-
Price 2s. 6d.
