

The Married Woman;
Is She a Person?
“To treat a person as a means instead of an end
is to deny that person’s right to live.”
George Bernard Shaw.
npifF




The Married Woman:
Is She a Person?
SECOND EDITION
MAY, 1938.




THE MARRIED WOMAN:
IS SHE A PERSON ?
THE PRESENT WORLD CRISIS AND WOMEN’S WORK.
The world at present is passing through a series of
upheavals—crises, struggles, and disasters. It is a cliche, to
say that we live in a time of transition : that is true of all
times. But looking back over the course of human history
we can see at certain points a definite shaping into new
patterns, a focussing of tendencies to a result. Those who
at such crucial periods were shaping the results appear
rarely to have seen more than parts of a whole, and to have
been often unaware of certain consequences involved in the
forces they set going. It is this danger which confronts
us to-day. Rapid advancement in applied science, in
productivity and mechanisation, together with maladjust-
ment in working conditions, in the machinery of distribution
and in the monetary system, have thrown the economic
scheme of things out of gear ; and one resultant happening
is being overlooked, obscured by what appear as the more
obvious problems of peace and war, international trade
relations, widespread unemployment and the trial of
supposedly new forms of government. This unrealised
happening is the effect of the general upheaval on the
position of women.
The intention of this pamphlet is to examine a very
serious change which is being made in well-nigh every
country in the world in the status and liberties of women,
particularly in their economic status, and to draw con-
clusions as to the way in which this change affects, or is
likely in the future to affect, both women and the social life
of the community in which they live. In its crudest form
this change in policy is seen in the general attitude to the
right of the married woman to earn, and it is here proposed
to deal with the reasons given for this particular line of
policy as regards women’s rights, and its inevitable results.
But it is quite clear that this is merely the beginning of
a general policy towards all women. Observe the suggestion


made by a large employer of labour—Sir Herbert Austin—
that women should be removed from industry. Note the
publication in 1933 of a pamphlet in the form of an appeal
to all Members of Parliament, suggesting that if a million
women were removed from industry most of our unemploy-
ment problems would be solved—see page 18 for an
examination of this suggestion. Such sweeping demands
are seen to be at this stage impracticable, and the actual
translation of the policy into practice is therefore at present
for the most part confined to the work of the married
woman.*
LEGAL POSITION OF THE MARRIED WOMAN
It is easy to see why this should be so. She is of all
women in the weakest and most vulnerable position. While
women, whether married or unmarried, are subject to certain
legal disabilities, additional disabilities are by law imposed
on married women. (See Appendix, pp. 20-22, for the
legal position of the married woman.)
FOUR REASONS WHY PEOPLE SEEK WORK.
In order to appreciate the extent of the change which is
taking place, let us first consider the motives which actuate
people, be they men or women, who go out to work for
money. They are, in the main, four in number. Let us
observe their operation in the case of men and of women
respectively :
(1) Need of bare livelihood.
(2) Desire to maintain or raise the personal or
family standard of living.
(3) Ambition to make good and to do the expected
thing.
(4) Vocational urge.
* But not in all countries. See the statement made by Mr, Krier,
Workers' delegate to the 18th Session of the International Labour
Conference, June, 1934 (Provisional Record of the Conference, 10th
Sitting, Friday, 15th June, 1934, p. 152) :
“ While in certain countries, the question of the prohibition of
women’s work is under discussion, in Luxemburg the employ-
ment of women, married or not, has for some little time been
subject to a preliminary authorisation by the Government. This
regulation, embodied in a Grand Ducal Decree, is a first attack
on the right to live, which is the same for men and women.”


Let us take these in order and see what differentiation
is made as between men and women in regard to the
principle involved ; what are the results of such differentia-
tion —to the women concerned, to male workers, and
to the community in general ; and what arguments are
advanced in support of such policy.
(1) The compulsion to earn one’s living if no other
means of livelihood is available is equally strong for both
sexes, and even in Nazi Germany, where of late the move-
ment to drive women back to the home has been so strong,
such women as have no one to whom they can look for
maintenance are permitted to maintain themselves by their
own earnings. It should be noted, however, that general
decrees, such as those automatically prohibiting the paid
employment of “ married women,” are apt to take no account
of special circumstances, e.g., of such married women as are
for one reason or another not maintained by their husbands,
and cases of great hardship result.
(2) The ambition to raise the standard of living of
oneself or one’s family, or at least to prevent its deterioration,
is regarded in a man as wholly praiseworthy. The further
he raises himself and his family above the fodder basis, the
more is he recognised not only as the good and responsible
husband and father, but as the good citizen who is an asset
to the community, increasing its well-being as he increases
his own. He —unmarried or married, or in whatever family
relationship —is not accused of “ taking the bread out of
other people’s mouths ” when he takes paid work, however
many others may be competing against him in a crowded
labour market. Why then should that which in the father
is accounted a virtue be stigmatised as reprehensible in the
mother? Quite often the “extra bit coming in” which
results from her earning makes just the difference between
“ rubbing along ” and effectively equipping the boys and
girls in the matter of health and education to be sound and
capable citizens.* 7 Always there is, for the great mass of
industrial workers —men and women —the haunting sense of
insecurity, the desire and the need to have “ something to
* The outcry against “ pin-money ” workers should be carefully
examined. Women have every right to earn, whether for family
betterment or for personal “ pins.” The charge against them of
accepting sweated pay-rates overlooks the fact that the economically
depressed position of married women makes effective organisation for
higher rates almost impossible.


fall back on ” in bad times, and this anxiety is shared to the
full by the married woman. Yet against her alone the
argument is raised that it is “ not fair for two incomes to go
into one home.”
(3) When a boy leaves school, or a young man leaves
college, he is expected as a matter of course to undertake
some definite work as his job, trade or profession. A lad
who loafs about at home making no effort to pull his weight
and support himself is not regarded favourably by public
opinion, and indeed the normal young fellow has no mind to
adopt such a position, but reckons it as his right to obtain
paid employment and thus to secure his independence, to
make good at some job, and, if he can, to grow rich on the
fruit of his labours. Why is there no such healthy opinion
to support the efforts of his sister directed to the same end ?
Independence should be just as precious to her, but if her
father can “ keep ” her it is still in many quarters looked on
as something in the nature of a selfish indulgence on her
part to take paid work : while as a wife continuing her paid
work after marriage she is not merely discouraged but
increasingly debarred from the opportunities of doing so,
and told that she is “ taking the bread out of other people’s
mouths.”
Here again the objection against “two incomes into
one home ” is raised. The family’s standard of living is
sufficiently high without the wife’s earnings, it is argued,
and therefore she should be prohibited from taking a job
which some unemployed man might have. We will consider
presently this question of substitution (page 18). Let us
for the moment examine the outcry about two incomes in
one home.
This question of “unfairness” in the married woman
earning as well as her husband involves implications which
do not seem to have been squarely faced by its advocates.
It is really based on the idea that subsistence level—the
“ fodder basis ” —is an adequate standard where married
women are concerned. But why stop at married women, if
“ fair ” distribution of jobs is the desideratum ? There is
a vast number of homes which are enjoying two or more
incomes, poor homes, and comfortable homes, and luxurious
homes. Their inmates incur no condemnation. Where, in
the case of a working-class family, father and sons are all
earning (a common case in certain districts, notably the
mining areas where there is employment) two or three


incomes are going into one home. Other examples are
those of brothers or sisters living together, and maintaining
a home by their joint work : of widowed mother and
daughter (or son) each working independently to maintain
the joint home. Indeed, to be consistent it must be admitted
that any man whose income is in excess of the bare needs of
his family is virtually “ bringing two incomes into the
home ” —one, the income which suffices for necessities, the
other, that which provides the amenities and luxuries. ” In
none of these cases, however, does anyone raise a murmur.
The opprobrium is all reserved for the earning married
woman. Against her alone it is pretended that she is
“taking the bread out of other people’s mouths” and
“ increasing unemployment.” To her alone it i$ said : “You
shall be in a different class ; you alone in the community
shall be tied to the fodder basis.”
(4) In the case of women with a strong bent towards
any particular type of work—the “born teacher,” as we
say, the doctor or minister of religion with a definite
vocation for her special work —it is surely obvious that the
prohibition to continue such employment after marriage
means for the women themselves a cruel frustration, and for
the community a most uneconomic waste in the deprivation
of the services of these peculiarly efficient workers. We
will consider this matter in further detail later on. For
the moment we shall best appreciate the arguments of
those who advocate this wasteful policy if we enquire who
are those people who oppose the paid employment of
married women generally.
WHO ARE THOSE WHO OPPOSE ?
The married woman as a paid worker is opposed by
numerous groups of her fellow citizens :
(i.) Those who look on her as a direct competitor in
a world where the number of jobs seems to be limited. Of
this group there are four distinct sections :
(a) The single man who either is unemployed, or
fears unemployment for himself or other men.
* The man who holds one or more directorships, the man who has
an income from investments, does not consider himself thereby
precluded from earning another income, nor do his neighbours arrogate
to themselves the right to decide whether he “ needs ” this or not.


(6) The employed single woman worker who
imagines that the dismissal of the married woman
will give a better chance of promotion for herself
and other single women.
(c) The unemployed single woman worker who
suffers from a double jealousy of the married
woman with a job and a husband, both of which
seem to her desirable assets.
(d) The unemployed man with a wife and children
to support. He sees the labour market employing
many young single women, .but perhaps dimly
appreciates that in modern conditions of industry
thejabour of a large number of these is inevitable.
With a special bitterness, however, he sees
a married woman, whose husband is in employ-
ment, holding another paid job. He does not
want his own wife, even, to have such a job : he
wants her to be the domestic manager while he
earns. He is not jealous of the husband earning,
though in fact that husband is much more directly
his competitor than the wife, since modern industry
is so organised as to make a fairly rigid demarca-
tion between what is called “ man’s work ” and
“ woman’s work.” But it seems intolerable to him
that, when there is apparently not enough work or
pay to go round, a woman, a married woman with
a husband in work, should be absorbing some of
that work and money which he and his family so
sorely need.
(ii.) A second group consists of those who see in the
married woman earner an indirect competitor. They are,
for instance :
(а) The wife (or other members of the family) of
the unemployed married man to whom we have
just referred. In the married woman worker they
see one who is attacking and undermining the
earning power of the person on whom they depend.
(б) The single woman who may be working only
temporarily until the time of her marriage, and
sees in the married woman earner one who, by
absorbing some of the available work and pay,
may be affecting the possibilities of work or
promotion for the man to whom she is engaged.


(iii.) There is yet another type of woman who sees in
the married woman worker her enemy : who is not jealous
of her, but apprehensive. This is the woman—product of
the false ideas so widely held as to the status of women—
who accepts as a right and with complacency the role of
dependent, the woman who has always seen in marriage the
possibility of avoiding any compulsion to work outside the
home, and who fears that if it becomes recognised that
a married woman has a right to earn, this may be the first
step towards the recognition of a duty.
(iv.) In the fourth category of those who denounce the
paid work of married women we find the traditionalist, the
philanthropist, and the sentimentalist. There are more
people than one would suppose who still have antiquated
ideas about women in general, and the married woman in
particular. They bring forward no special arguments to
support their ideas : for them the place of all women, and
especially of the married woman, is the home. Argument
as to whether in fact it would be possible to have home or
bread without working for it finds them impervious : the
reiteration that “ women ought to be in the home ” is enough.
Unlike the members of the three groups previously
mentioned, these objectors are not actuated by naked self-
interest ; but some sort of emotional urge impels them,
regardless of psychological or economic realities, to advocate
their ideal. In a time of real progress, the feelings of such
persons would be of very little account ; their ideas and
ideals would suffer the same extinction as the idea of the
propriety of the duel, or the tradition that drinking three
bottles of port a night was one of the marks of a “ gentleman.”
But in a time such as the present their zealous propaganda
is the buttress of the new “ reformer,” one of whose first
activities—as we have already seen in Europe—is to apply
his “ authoritarian ” state rules to women and the home.
The Claim of the Child.
This last section of opponents is particularly insistent
on what they regard as the paramount duty of a married
woman who has children to devote her life to being their
nurse, governess, housekeeper and useful companion, and
they secure a large body of unthinking public opinion in
support of their demand that married mothers shall not be
allowed to engage in paid work outside their home. Let us
therefore consider this line of opposition more closely.


Many women of good physique, brain power and
character —eminently desirable as a type to perpetuate—are
nevertheless singularly deficient in the qualities needed for
the satisfactory rearing of children. It is notorious that the
youngsters “mothered” by the maiden aunt often turn out
far better than those brought up by their own mother.
Equability, firmness, vivid imagination, tolerant sympathy,
and an immense patience—these are qualities not necessarily
in the possession of every woman who has borne a child.
Even if they were, it may be better for the children to enjoy
the higher standard of living which the mother’s earnings
may secure than to be deprived of comforts and even
necessaries, stinted in education and in outlook, merely to
satisfy the sentimentalist’s insistence that a mother’s place is
the home. Of well-to-do mothers not a few relegate the
care of their children almost exclusively to paid assistants of
one sort or another practically from birth, but as these
women busy themselves with tennis-playing, bridge-parties,
hunting, dancing, or serving on unpaid committees, no
objection is raised. Indeed, it would be difficult to find any
well-to-do mother who does not to some extent call in the
aid of specialist care for her children, whether at home or at
school. In the case of those with scantier means it is surely
a gross impertinence to assume that any outsider has the
right to dictate to the mother how she shall care for her
family ; it is for her to decide what in all the circumstances
is her best course in the interest of all concerned.
(v.) The fifth category presents a strange anomaly. It
is surely a curious fact that the keenest attack on the
married woman who earns comes from persons and organisa-
tions which profess to support the institution of marriage.
For example, the Roman Catholic Party in Belgium seeks to
have the married woman forbidden to earn outside the
home. There, too, a Christian Trade Union (National Union
of Commercial Employees) adopted in 1932 a resolution
that “married women should not be allowed to engage in
paid employment.” And at a meeting held in March, 1933,
the German Branch of the International Federation of
Christian Trade Unions laid down a policy which included
the following ; “A development of the right to work and of
social insurance corresponding to the natural pre-eminence
of the father of the family. This new orientation of politics
and social legislation should maintain the unity of the
worker’s home, menaced at the present time by the paid
work of the married woman.”


Yet they do not seem to realise that, through their
interest in a specific ideal which they wish women to
subserve, they arc dealing a serious blow at the institution
which they seek to uphold. Wc may see this in two
aspects of the question, viz.: status and finance. Let us
take the latter aspect first. If everything is done by the
State and society to make marriage difficult (and this is done
when it is demanded that marriage shall always, where the
wife has no private means, depend on the income of the
husband), there is a marked tendency to postpone marriage
until the man’s earnings ensure some security or comfort for
the family. If the woman is to be punished in her pocket,
by a prohibition to take paid work, or by being turned out
of her job, when she marries, marriage must inevitably begin
to seem to her a less desirable institution than formerly, and
this especially so with the spread of knowledge of birth-
control. Surely it is not the intention of this class of
supporter of the prohibition to encourage the extra-marital
union ? That they are, really, doing so is shown by the fact
that the recent Austrian decree turning out of work the
State-employed wife of the State-employed man has had at
the same time to include in the prohibition to earn the
woman (State-employed) who is co-habiting with such man.
And apart from the question of money, many of the
present day young women are looking on marriage in
a very different light from that in which their mothers
viewed it. So long as the attack on the woman earner is
confined to the married woman, marriage definitely becomes
a state in which there is loss of status, loss of dignity, and
loss of independence. It is difficult to believe that this is
what is desired by religious bodies. Do they not realise
that this is the inevitable result of their attack on the
institution which they profess to respect ?
THE MARRIED WOMAN AS A PERSON.
The hostility shown all along this wide front arises
from the fact that those who attack her do not consider
that the married woman is a person. From the moment of
her marriage she becomes, in their eyes, a dependent and
an adjunct. Were the married woman considered as
a person, a distinct human being, with the rights, liberties,
responsibilities and duties of other adult human beings,
marriage would be looked on as merely incidental.
We now propose to examine this question on the
assumption that a married woman is a person, a complete


human being with a human being’s rights and responsibilities.
If we accept this premise, the objections to her right to
work appear to be unjust to the woman, and highly
undesirable for the community as at present organised, or
for any system of communal life which the future may
produce. We have already (on p. 7) touched briefly on
the two-fold injury done by imposing the marriage bar upon
specially gifted and highly trained women. Let us now
examine on more general lines the meaning for the married
woman, as an individual and a citizen, of the prohibition,
partial or general, legal or customary, against her taking,
when she so desires, paid work outside the home.
Such a prohibition, if general, would impose on millions
of adult women a complete and compulsory dependence :
an economic dependence more thorough-going than that
suffered by married women before the passing of the Married
Women’s Property Acts : for, in spite of the fact that in
those days married women’s money or earnings were, by
law, when received or earned, not her own but her
husband’s, nevertheless married women did work for
money before the passing of those Acts, and, where human
nature was better than the law, did often retain the fruit of
their earnings.
However, people will at once say that no general
prohibition is intended ; and in fact any prohibition of the
paid work of married women is not applied to the work of
such women as actresses and authors, or again doctors or
lawyers in private practice, or, at the other end of the
scale, of women employed in unorganised and unskilled
work, particularly of a domestic nature such as charing,
which is so menial and so ill-paid that no one desires to
take it from them. Quite so ; a most interesting and
important fact. If only certain married women in certain
jobs are really picked out for attack the scope of our
enquiry at once narrows, and moreover it should be more
easy to discover and analyse the underlying motives which
give rise to the attack, the jealousy or the sentimentality
which accompanies it.
Who, then, are these women to whom a compulsory
dependence is recommended, and even threatened, as the
one proper way of living ? Are they so essentially different
from the rest of married women that they personally, and
the State of which they are citizens, will benefit from their
being denied any outlet for their varying natures, save in
the domestic service of the family and the home ?


They are —not “ teachers,” but such teachers as are in
the employment of certain Local Authorities ; not “ doctors,”
but such doctors as are employed by the State or certain
Local Authorities. Similarly, though Society admires the
married woman who gives a part of her leisure to care for
the poor, the mental defective, the blind, or the child, the
State, which raises taxation on a wide scale to remedy the
social evils, and to care for the youth of the nation,
encourages the dismissal of the employed woman Health
Visitor who marries. Yet Society has found that it had
much to gain from the work of similar women in private
practice. Marriage does not debar a woman doctor from
private practice. Some of the most successful, such as
Dr. Mary Scharlieb, have been married women with
families, and their patients have felt that their full life has
added to their knowledge and efficiency in their professional
practice.
Let us therefore concentrate our attention upon the
women just mentioned, so as to test the truth of our state-
ment that a prohibition to do paid work for the State is
unjust to the women, and contrary to the well-being of the
community which refuses to employ them. For a Local
Authority to dismiss a woman Health Visitor on the ground
of marriage is to deny to that woman exercise of gifts which
she has trained, work for which she probably feels a true
sense of vocation, and economic independence, and to deny
to those whom she visited the benefit of her training and
experience ; and this in a profession in which marriage,
surely, must act as a desirable addition to professional
training. Similarly, to forbid the employment of a teacher
in the State-aided schools because she is leading a full life
when at home, and to confine the rising generation of young
people to the example and influence of single women only,
although a large proportion of those children will themselves
in the future be married men and women, is to ensure that
the education given in these schools will be one-sided. To
suggest that the woman who in private practice is able to
get together a practice, in competition with other doctors, is
to be forbidden to use her ability for the children in the
State-aided school, and that the School Medical Officer and
the Medical Officer of Health are to be drawn from the
ranks of the unmarried only, where women are concerned,
is to limit the field of choice, and so to make it probable that
the State and the children are not getting the best person for
the post, and this merely on the irrelevant intrusion of


such considerations as the private marital status of some of
the candidates for the post. This is not to suggest that the
work and services of the unmarried woman arc always
worth less than those of the married, but in certain cases
they may be, and in any case the point of value is the
worth of the individual, which is independent of her marital
status. Is not the case of the actress, too, very interesting ?
Never for an instant has it been suggested that marriage is
to end her individual career in the profession of her choice.
Why ? Because the public want her ; she has given them
pleasure, she has clothed many parts with reality, and
they want her to continue to do so. Her unquestioning
acceptance by the public puts the coping-stone to our
indictment. We arrive at this position : a married woman
may work for pay in war time, because the country needs
her work ; she may work when her husband is ill or unem-
ployed, because he or the family needs her money ; the
married actress may work because the public needs her
individual artistic skill. But as a worker to fulfil her own
need, whether economic or self-expressive, the married
woman is met with disapproval and prohibition.
The harm done goes far beyond the actual women who
either do not get appointed to certain posts, or are dismissed
from them on marriage. Such action creates a situation
which discourages a desire on the part of the young women
and their parents for a wide and useful education such as
would enable the individual to give something of her own
personality to the community ; and this is disastrous to the
women, and impoverishing to the community. The decrease
in the number of candidates among highly educated women
for the higher posts in the Civil Service is a matter of much
recent comment, and the suggestion made in the Press has
been that this proves the realisation by women that they have
not the intellectual capacity to pass the stiffest of examinations.
But, in view of the examinations which women have passed
and the admitted attainments of women in research and
science, the reason is much more probably an instinctive
revulsion from a situation which might arise when they have
passed the same examinations as the men candidates, namely
that while in responsible work they will receive less pay,
and that they may be faced with an alternative of work or
marriage, a choice which their male colleagues are not
obliged to make. Preparation for a competitive examination
which takes several years is beginning to cease to seem
worth while, when the rewards of success are so much less


for the woman candidate than for the man. This is a very
serious thing for women, parents, and the community—that
there should arise this sense of “ not-worth-while-ness ” for
the highest public work ; and this feeling affects not merely
the married, but all women, for many of the girls may never
marry, but the penalty to be paid if they do marry may
permanently affect alike the careers of those who eventually
do and those who do not.
We have assumed that woman is a person, but by this
creation in her of the feeling of “ what’s the use ? ” we are
stifling in her those impulses which we seek to encourage in
other persons -the desire for independence, the desire to
raise the standard of living of the family —laudable ambition
to personal service by the best exercise of one’s gifts. The
sentimentalist cries that the best use of all the gifts of every
woman, once married, can be obtained only in one environ-
ment, in one occupation. How can it be that, in this
world of diversity, half the citizens can, without harm to
themselves or to the community, be pressed into one mould ?
Our sentimentalist is a true Procrustes, seeking to force all
women to fit the same bed. Yet women have as great
a diversity of gifts, tastes, capabilities and powers, as men.
WOMEN IN INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE.
So far we may have seemed to confine ourselves to the
professional woman worker. But all that has been said
applies with equal force to industrial women, and those
engaged in commerce. It is true that there are no regula-
tions in industry forbidding the paid employment of the
married woman, but it is notorious that many employers
discharge their women employees on marriage. This habit
is of disastrous consequence for industry. It creates one
arc of a vicious circle of undercutting. One of the most
frequent complaints in industry is that employment in these
times is passing from the hands of the skilled workman to
those of the unskilled repetitive worker, and that this
worker tends more and more to be the female young person,
“Women” it is said, “do not take their work in industry
seriously. They look on it as stop-gap employment, to fill
in the time between leaving school and marriage. They
will not combine, because they do not think it worth doing
so for an occupation which they expect to leave as soon as
they are grown-up. They will accept contemptible rates of
pay, since they often are not self-supporting, but merely


make a contribution towards their keep by their parents
until they have found a man to keep them. And it is not
worth while training them to do better work, since they are
liable to leave at any time, and the time spent on training
them is wasted.” Yet many of those who argue in this way
are themselves creating, by their attitude to their women
employees, just the situation with which they reproach
those employees. It is the feeling that the employer and
the community do not regard women’s work as serious
which fosters in the minds of the young women workers
that sense of impermanence from which these other results
spring. What man would take his job seriously, if he knew
that no matter how well he learned his job he would never
be promoted to responsible posts, would always be paid
a lower rate than other workers with equal or less ability,
and on marriage would be turned out of his chosen means
of gaining his independence ? It is quite true that large
numbers of young women do look on their work as stop-
gap, and it is not they alone who suffer by such a state of,
things. The practical disadvantages of such conditions
fall upon the male worker, for in a time of dispute or crisis
the married women who have been turned out of industry
are available as a pool of cheap labour, and help to keep the
men’s wages down ; and the employer who employs the
women because they are cheap but who sacks them as
soon as they marry is ensuring for himself that he gets as
little as possible for the wages he pays. It is remarkable to
note how many large employers, who spend time and
money on “ scientific management,” encourage a state of
affairs under which, in their pseudo-scientifically managed
firms, a large part of the personnel is denied what the
pseudo-scientists themselves recognise elsewhere as one of
the best incentives to good work—the incentive of a fair
deal and a chance of promotion.
THE UNEMPLOYMENT BUGBEAR.
Our examination of the whole question has established
the fact of the injury done by this wide-spread attack on
the married woman’s right to earn—injury to her, to all
women and girls psychologically, educationally, economically,
and to the community as a whole, by the loss of the
contribution which specially well-qualified or experienced
workers could give. But it may still be said by some
opponents ; “Yes, we grant you all that, but we feel that in


a time of world-wide unemployment on the present un-
precedented scale we must choose the lesser evil, and
forbid the labour market so far as possible to the women
who do not need to work.” This is the tragic blunder of
to-day, to accept—and even to speed on its way —the lie
that it is a “ lesser evil ” to do a gross injustice to a whole
section of the community (and that a peculiarly defenceless
one) rather than face up to the implications of doing
even-handed justice.
There cannot, surely, be a clearer instance of the folly
of regarding a woman as something less than a person. To
turn out of work the married woman, and fill her place with
a man, merely leaves us with a woman out of work and
a man in work. We have shifted the incidence of un-
employment, and in some cases actually widened the field.
For we must not forget that in many cases the turning out
of work of a woman does not stop with the woman herself.
She will be driven to attempt many unpaid tasks for which
she has not been trained, but for which she can no longer
afford to pay expert help. She will try to make her own
clothes, to do her own housework, to dye her family’s
dresses, to do her house decoration. She may do none of
these things very well, but at least those skilled workers,
such as the dyer, the painter, the dressmaker, and the
domestic servant, who would have found employment as the
result of the paid work of the woman, will now be the
poorer by the loss of the employment which she would have
given them.*
THE SUBSTITUTION QUESTION.
Moreover, even the imagined economic gain which it is
sought to achieve by the injustice of turning married women
* Even the solace of these unpaid occupations will not be available
to the woman of the poorest class, who has gone to work not in the
exercise of a skilled profession but at any job by which she could bring
in a little help to supply the family’s needs. It is a delusion to think
that the very poor woman has her hands full with housework. She
cannot spend her time cooking—she has very little to cook. She can-
not spend her time washing—there is little to wash, and money spent on
soap means so much less for the family food. She cannot dressmake—
materials are too dear. She cannot knit—wool is less necessary than
food. What is she to do ? Exercise wears out shoes, all amusements
cost money, and the result of her unemployment is atrophy of all her
gifts, friction, and unhappiness. And this is accepted in the sacred name
of the family !


out of their employment to make room for men would
amount to almost nothing, in face of the vast numbers of
male unemployed and the almost insignificant proportion
of them who could by that means be absorbed into
employment, for, in the common though artificial division
in the labour market of men’s work from women’s
work, men at the present time largely compete with men,
women with women, and both are suffering from the
introduction of the modern machine and the competition of
the young person in the tending of that machine. And, in
fact, in the present condition of industry, as has been well
brought out by Madame Thibert, in her articles in the
International Labour Review of April and May, 1933’”, if
every woman, single as well as married, in the country were
thrown out of work, the unemployment problem would
remain almost as far Irom solution as ever. You cannot
replace a domestic servant by an unemployed coalheaver.
You cannot put an out-of-work dock hand to fine weaving.
We repeat that the divisions between men’s work and
women’s work are artificial, but they exist, and the field in
which men unemployed in certain trades could be absorbed
in occupations now pursued by women is so small as to be
unworthy of serious attention. It is true, as we have said
(p. 15), that the modern tendency is increasingly for lower
paid labour to oust the better paid, and, under rationalisation,
for women, untrained or semi-trained, to replace men and to
be in fact interchangeable with them if the unequal wage-
rate consideration did not operate. But the problem of
unemployment is far too large and complicated to be solved
or even appreciably lessened by such piecemeal tinkering as
changing its incidence here and there from men to women.
It involves far-reaching modifications in the generally
accepted economic systems of the world, and thus it
challenges our statesmanship, and will sooner or later
compel us to reckon with it on a comprehensive basis. It is
futile and indefensible to postpone that duty by such
pretended palliatives as the denial to married women of
their human right to work for pay.
Whatever plan or state of society emerges from the
present maladjustments and distress, that plan or state will
have everything to gain, and nothing to lose by securing to
* Republished as a separate brochure, under the title of The
Economic Depression and the Employment of Women, Geneva, 1933,
price 1/-.


all women—including the married ones —their just and right
position of equality with men, in the economic sphere as in
others. If it is the family that is looked on as the bedrock
of the State, the family is not well served by the mother
being in an inferior position, personal or economic. If the
individual is the bedrock, and individual effort and initiative
are the fundamental need, it is useless and even dangerous
to have a mass of individuals, in the persons of the married
women, with their initiative sapped and their efforts thwarted
and blunted. And if motherhood is to be respected and
encouraged it can be so only if the wbman who is to be the
mother is recognised as possessing—to the full and in every
sphere—the rights of a human being.


APPENDIX.
LEGAL POSITION OF THE MARRIED WOMAN.
Certain legal disabilities, as, for instance, special restric-
tions under the Factory Acts, minimum wages fixed by
Trade Boards lower than the minima for men, lower sickness
and unemployment insurance benefits for not-so-much lower
contributions, refusal of employment in the Consular and
Diplomatic Services and of seats in the House of Lords,
are imposed on all women, married or unmarried. Certain
additional disabilities are by law imposed on the married
woman alone. Some of these are the residue of the old
Common Law doctrine of coverture, under which the
personality of the woman was merged in that of her
husband. Others have been introduced in recent times by
statute.
Many of the disabilities arising out of coverture have,
fortunately, been abolished. The married woman can now
enter into a contract. She can sue or be sued personally.
She controls her own property and earnings. She can make
a will. But because the amendment of this legal custom has
been done piecemeal, and because the underlying idea that
the married woman is merely an adjunct of her husband has
not been completely swept away, there still remain a few
disabilities attaching to a woman because she is married.
She has no domicile of her own but must take that of her
husband. Up to 1935 she was responsible on her contracts
and torts only to the extent of her separate property
and not personally. Legal judgments were not enforceable
against her in the same way as they are against a man.
Up to 1936 there might be imposed on her property by its
donor a restraint on anticipation, which means, in general,
that a married woman can spend the income of such part of
her property as has actually come into her hands, but that
she cannot bind her future income, for example, by guarantee
or contract ; and this may make a married woman trouble-
some as a partner.
But the passing of the Law Reform (Married Women
and Tortfeasors) Act, 1935, has swept away several of these


disabilities. A married woman is now capable of acquiring,
holding, and disposing of, any property ; capable of
rendering herself, and being rendered, liable in respect of
any tort, contract, debt, or obligation ; capable of suing and
being sued ; subject to the law relating to bankruptcy, in all
respects as if she were a feme-sole. Any instrument
executed on or after Ist January, 1936, in so far as it
purports to attach to the enjoyment of any property by
a woman any restriction upon anticipation or alienation
which could not be attached to the enjoyment of that
property by a man, is by that Act, rendered void. But this
provision does not apply to any restriction upon anticipation
or alienation attached to the enjoyment of property in any
instrument executed before Ist January, 1936. It is
regrettable that the Act, which made it impossible to attach
such a restriction in future to the property of married
women, should not have been applied retrospectively. As
a result, restraint on anticipation may remain operative for
some women for another 60 years or so, with its lowering
effect on the status of women.
Of recently introduced disabilities there is the statutory
provision, dating only from 1870, which deprives of her
British nationality, with a few recently introduced exceptions,
the British woman who marries a foreigner, and turns her
into an alien. Before 1870 such women remained British.
Again, under the Income Tax Acts, a wife’s income is
deemed to be that of her husband. She is not separately
taxed. The first such Act dates from the time before
the Married Women’s Property Acts, when, in fact, the
income of the wife did belong to her husband and was
controlled by him. And still to-day the incomes of husband
and wife are added together for the purposes of income tax
and called his. The result is that the wife’s abatements are
paid to the husband, and, in very many cases, the marriage
abatement is not sufficient to prevent a heavy money
penalty being imposed on husband and wife for no other
reason than that they are married.
These are discriminations which indirectly tend to
depress the economic position of the married woman, but
there are others which directly affect her status as a worker.
There is the regulation requiring women, with a few
exceptions, to resign from the Civil Service on marriage.
There is the present widely growing practice on the part of
Local Authorities of dismissing women on account of


marriage.* And there is the woman’s position in social
insurance. Within the last twenty-six years the employed
person has been brought, and by compulsion, within national
schemes for sickness and in many occupations for
unemployment insurance. Under these every “ insured
person ” is compelled to pay certain weekly contributions
and receives certain benefits while sick or unemployed.f
Besides the several discriminations against women in these
schemes, before 1931 there was one against the married
woman as such, that she could not be a voluntary contributor.
When in a recent inquiry into sickness insurance
finance it was found that women, and especially married
women, were a heavier charge on the fund than men,
their benefits were cut down—the sickness benefit of married
women from 12/- to 10/- and their invalidity benefit from 7/6
to 5/-. On the other hand, when the figures produced before
the Royal Commission on Unemployment Insurance showed
that the men were a much heavier charge on the fund than
women, no proposal was made for cutting down the men’s or
raising the women’s benefits. On the contrary, the dis-
crimination effected by the Unemployment Insurance (No. 3)
Act of 1931 was continued./; Regulations made under this
* It is by no means certain that this practice is founded on good
law. The first section of the Sex Disqualification Removal Act of
1919 provides that “a person shall not be disqualified by sex or
marriage .... from being appointed to or holding any civil or
judicial office or post, or from entering or assuming or carrying on
any civil profession or vocation. ” It is true that the decisions, one of
which was favourable to the women in the court of first instance, went
against them in the Court of Appeal in certain cases raised by women
(married) teachers, but the question has not been dealt with on appeal
to the House of Lords, which alone can give a final decision.
f This does not refer to widows’ pensions or wives' allowances,
which are benefits not of the insured woman, but of the insured man.
I The following information was given in the Minority Report of
the Royal Commission on Unemployment Insurance. Thai men are a
heavier charge on the fund in proportion to their numbers than women :
at September, 1932, 26.5% of male insured persons as against 13.6%
of female insured persons were unemployed (p. 478, par. 211), Males
receive a higher percentage of transitional payments, the percentages
for insured persons being for males 42.2 and for females 18.1. Women
get proportionately less for their contributions than men. In the three
years 1929-1931 men (aged 21-64) paid info the fund 3times as much
as women, and drew out 6 times as much, leaving out of account what
they drew for their dependents, for whom men drew £49,450,000 and
women £207,000 (pp. 479 and 480, par. 195). The cases of married
women denied benefit under the anomalies regulation affecting them
between October, 1931 and September, 1932 were 179,888 (p. 407,
par. 195). The number disallowed has since increased to more than
399,000.


Act require married women to satisfy more onerous conditions
than men or single women before they can qualify for benefit,
and in certain cases to pay additional contributions. These
regulations have resulted in excluding married women from
benefit in more than 399,000 cases. Nothing has so seriously
undermined the status of the married woman as earner since
the Married Women’s Property Acts first gave her the right
to earn on her own behalf. Part of the earnings of workers
come to them in the form of unemployment benefit, and to
make it more difficult for the married woman to receive
unemployment benefit is to put her at a disadvantage as an
earner. It is taking so much of her contributions and giving
them to other workers who are given benefits on easier terms,
in what purports to be a national insurance scheme for all
workers. It is pressing the married woman into a state of
dependence on others.


Published by the Open Door Council.
Printed by the Women’s Printing Society, Ltd.,
31, 33, 35, Brick Street, Piccadilly, London, W. 1.
\ -\SQB 01369519 1
