



14JA the <~2)ctectati it meat*


01jc Piomonb Jubilee
of tfie
MERCANTILE MUTUAL INSURANCE CO. LTD
1878 - 1938
Foreword by the Manager, Mr. Selwyn King.
npHE ceremony and the events referred to thereat are
regarded by the Directors of such historic importance,
that it is felt that a proper record should be kept of same
and that all Members of the Staifs at Head Office and
Branches and all Agents throughout Australia should have
the opportunity of thus gleaning some knowledge of the
history and development of the great Institution we are
privileged to serve. Unable to attend in person, I appreciate
the opportunity of contributing these few lines.
The Mercantile Mutual has Representatives throughout
the length and breadth of this fair land and gives a service
to many thousands of Australia’s Citizens whose lives and
fortunes are thus closely allied to our great Institution.
During my 45 years’ service with the Company I have
visited our Representatives in almost all habitable parts of this
great Continent and have found everywhere loyalty and
goodwill added to conviction that Australian Institutions such
as the Mercantile Mutual merit support to enable them to
employ growing Capital and Reserves in the development of
Australia’s Industries.


'Btamunb 3lwJbtlee
of tye
Mercantile M u * ,3lnsurance Co. Jltb
anh tye
Commemoration of life completion of
60 gears’ service fag
Jiir pelso ;Mmg, M aita ß* n B elector
as tye
Compang’s Chief (Officer
'J’O celebrate the important event, Sir Kelso King was invited
to meet the Directors and Senior Officers, past and present,
to receive their congratulations upon having completed 60
years’ service as Chief Executive Officer of the Company.
The Chairman, Mr. C. C. Gale, presided and in addition
to the Directors and Staff, Lady King and the Misses Olive
and Hat el King were also present.
The Chairman outlined the commencement of the
Company’s activities at 158 Pitt Street, Sydney, its removal to
Bell’s Chambers, 131 Pitt Street and subsequently to the
Company’s own Freehold Property at 118-120 Pitt Street.
While at that address, a few weeks prior to the Great War,
he stated that Sir Kelso King received the offer of the handsome
property at the corner of Pitt Street and Martin Place, which
on his recommendation was acquired at a figure much below
the cost price. Some years later, the Directors, recognising the
Company’s growing business called for so much greater ground
floor space than could be provided in the abovementioned


building, accepted an offer for the property at an enhanced
price. The profit on the transaction was used in the erection
of the present magnificent and commodious Head Office building
in which provision has been made for anticipated extension of
business for years to come. The Company also owns the
freehold of its Offices in all the Capital Cities of the
Commonwealth.
The Chairman expressed pleasure in seeing among those
present, Miss Mansfield who had been the leading Typiste on
the Staff for twenty-five years and who was a daughter of
the late Mr. G. Allen Mansfield, one of the Founders and
first Directors of the Company, also Mr. H. M. Broomfield,
previously on the Staff of the Company, now with the
Australian General Insurance Co. Ltd., a son of the late
Captain Broomfield, also one of the first Directors.
The Chairman stated that the Australian General
Reinsurance Company Ltd. was inaugurated on the
recommendation of Sir Kelso King 24 years ago as an
independent Company but with the object of participating in
reinsurances available from the Mercantile Mutual. After a
number of successful years during which the Company became
firmly established, the Shareholders approved of the Directors’
recommendation that the Company’s name be changed to
“Australian General Insurance Coy. Ltd.” with the necessary
authority to transact all classes of insurance (except Life
Insurance) with the general public; it is making good progress
and has excellent prospects. The extent to which it has gained
the confidence of the public may be gauged by the price of
the Shares which are more than double their par value.
The formation and endowment of the Officers’ Provident
and Superannuation Fund which was duly approved of by
the Shareholders some 22 years ago was, said the Chairman,
but another of the many thoughtful actions by Sir Kelso for
the benefit of the Staff, pensions being thereby provided for


those Officers who have retired and for all other Officers who
will retire in the future.
The Chairman concluded by stating that it was gratifying
to the Directors to realise that so many of their Officers have
records of long service, some having been associated with the
Company for periods exceeding fifty years, and a considerable
number for forty years and upwards and that this was the
best evidence of a happy and contented Staff.
THE FOLLOWING OFFICERS SUPPORTED
THE CHAIRMAN
The Secretary (Mr. Alan Bla\e).
I am very pleased indeed to have the opportunity of
saying a few words on this important occasion.
I would first like to refer to our unavoidably absent
friends whose thoughts are with us to-day. I refer particularly
to the Manager, Mr. Selwyn King, and to our fellow Officers
at the Branches. I have here certain telegrams which I have
the Chairman’s permission to read. (Telegrams read.)
The sentiments are very nicely expressed and are heartily
endorsed by the Staff at Head Office.
As this ceremony is taking place during Office hours, it
was necessary to restrict the attendance here this morning. I
am sure, however, that every Officer at Head Office would
have liked to have been! present to do honour to our respected
Chief.
This is a unique occasion and one that cannot be repeated
in the history of the Mercantile Mutual. We hear from time
to time of men completing 50 years’ service with the one
employer and very occasionally for a longer period. But to
have 60 years’ service and as Chief Executive Officer during


the whole of that time must be unique in commercial circles
in Australia, and probably in the World.
I have been trying to conjure up the scene 60 years ago
when Sir Kelso received his appointment as Secretary of the
Company. Here was a young man, not quite 24 years of age,
with limited Insurance experience, set the formidable task of
establishing a Company at a time when there were no Tariffs
to guide his underwriting, and many of the facilities which we
enjoy to-day and treat as a matter of course, were non-existent.
However, he set about the task with zeal and determination
and we all know how well he succeeded; he built a firm and
true foundation on which was erected the splendid business
we have to-day.
We are apt to think that competition is more severe to-day
than it was in the past. 60 years ago there were certainly not
as many competitors in the field, but the business available
was considerably less, there were fewer buildings and the
population was much smaller, and taking it by and large and
on a comparative basis, competition was probably just as keen
then as it is now.
Looking back up to say 100 years, we can cal! to mind
a number of Australian businesses which have made good and
here, as in other parts of the World, we find that the initial
success of a business and its establishment on a sound basis,
have been due to the character and ability of an individual.
The Mercantile Mutual is an example of this and it is freely
admitted that the success of the Mercantile Mutual is due in
the main to Sir Kelso King —in fact many people refer to the
Company as “Kelso King’s Office.” The Chief will probably
say that what he has done and whatever measure of success
he may have achieved, could not have been accomplished
without the co-operation and support of the Boards of Directors
and the Staff, and while this is true, it is the Kelso King
personality which has been indelibly stamped on the Company.


Speaking for myself, I regard it as a privilege to have
received my training under Sir Kelso. I have had close contact
with him for many years, and have learnt much out of his
wide experience and sympathetic understanding of human
nature. On the business side he has always given the client
just, and in most cases, generous treatment. It is impossible
to be associated with such a man for any length of time without
absorbing in a small degree at least, some of his qualities, and
we all freely acknowledge the benefit of his influence not only
in our business training, but also in our private lives.
Despite the cares of business and his many interests, the
Chief has always been mindful of the personal welfare of the
Staff. The Chairman has referred to the establishment of the
Provident Fund. We can all recall that occasion in 1915, and
although at the time a few of the younger members may have
been somewhat doubtful of its benefit, nevertheless its
establishment has been fully appreciated during recent years.
We are pleased, to have with us to-day all our Retired Officers;
they are easy to pick out; suntanned and healthy and obviously
without a care in the World.
There is another matter to which I must refer, viz;, the
establishment of the Endowment Fund by Sir Kelso out of his
private resources. It is something which will never be forgotten.
It has relieved many Officers of financial worry during sickness
or other trouble, and will be a perpetual memorial of his
generosity and kindly consideration for the Staff.
In conclusion, on behalf of the Staff generally, I desire
to offer Sir Kelso our heartiest congratulations on the completion
of such a splendid record of service, and at the same time
convey to him an expression of our loyalty and our high regard
for him, not only as the “Chief” but also as a man.
The Metropolitan Superintendent (Mr. H. G. S. Austin )
addressing the Meeting on behalf of the Outdoor Staff referred


to the long service of Sir Kelso King and mentioned that the
Mercantile Mutual was well known for the long service of
many of its Officers and also pointed out that some of the
present and past Directors had served over 20 years on the
Head Office Board.
Mr. Austin concluded by saying “On behalf of the Outdoor
Staff I offer Sir Kelso hearty congratulations and I think that
the Directors, Staff, Shareholders and even all Policyholders
who have met or heard of our Chief are proud and pleased
he is with us all tO'day.”
The Ex'Chief Inspector (Mr. D. Manion) in his opening
remarks said “On behalf of the retired Officers, it affords me
great pleasure at being present this morning to congratulate
Sir Kelso upon attaining his 60 years’ management of this
great Institution, which by diligence, perseverance and hard
work, he built! up from its inception.”
Mr. Manion referred to the keenness of competition and
the Inspectors’ means of transport 50 years ago, viz: horse
drawn vehicles and bicycles, compared with the present day
fast motor cars.
Mr. Manion also mentioned that Sir Kelso was a fearless
underwriter and instanced bis activity in seeking business
following the most disastrous bushfire experienced in New
South Wales 35 years ago when the policy of some of his
competitors was to restrict rather than seek fire insurance
business.
Mr. Manion concluded by saying “We are delighted to
see Sir Kelso so well and still going strong. We pray that
he may be spared for many years to continue to guide the
destiny of this great Institution.”


The Chairman then presented Sir Kelso King with a
silver tray inscribed as follows: —
Presented to
SIR KELSO KIHG, K.B.
by the
Directors and Staff
of the
Mercantile Mutual Insurance Company Limited
as a token of their esteem and affection and to commemorate
the Sixtieth Anniversary of his service with the Company
1877 19th December 1937.
The Chairman said that it was a wonderful record for
Sir Kelso King to have had sixty years’ service as the Chief
Officer of the Mercantile Mutual and he hoped that he would
be spared for many years yet to carry on his important duties.
The Chairman also presented Lady King with a silver
fruit bowl with the following inscription:—
Presented to
LADY KELSO KDffG
with the compliments of the
Directors and Staff of the
Mercantile Mutual Insurance Company Limited
in commemoration of the
Sixtieth Anniversary of Sir Kelso King’s
service with the Company
1877 19th December 1937.


SepU) bt) Sir MOO Mh
I am at a loss to find words that will express my feelings
on this unique occasion. I had the impression that the Directors
wished to meet me this morning to offer congratulations in
respect of the Company’s Diamond Jubilee, but I was not
prepared for the pleasant surprise of finding not only the
Directors, but also the Senior Members of the Staff, including
Officers on the retired list, present to join in felicitations so
freely expressed, consequently it is difficult to find words
sufficiently adequate to convey my deep regard and gratitude
to all present. I am sure you will understand how much I
appreciate your generosity in both words and gifts, and I hope
you will overlook the insufficiency of the attempt made of
expressing thanks by one who feels overcome by so much
kindness.
I was given to understand that you desire me to give
some incidents in my career and to refer to the conditions
prevailing at the date the Mercantile Mutual was launched
Prior to my appointment as the Chief Executive Officer I had
spent about nine years in acquiring experience in various
occupations. The first was that of a Jackeroo in Queensland,
subsequently six years in Banking and finally two years with
a Commission Merchant. I was about to retire from the latter
office when I saw an advertisement inviting applications for
the position of Secretary of The Mercantile Mutual Insurance
Co. I gave the matter careful consideration, discussed it with
a few friends and decided that although I should be taking
up a new line in business, I felt that I could undertake the
office confident of success. That was just sixty years ago but
to me the events which led to my appointment are still fresh
in my memory. I was requested to meet the Directors who
cross'examined me thoroughly, one passed the remark that I
looked too young to undertake the responsibility. However,


in due course I received a letter from Mr. George Hardie
stating that he had been authorised to offer me the appointment
on terms stated in his letter.
You may not all be aware of the facts that led to the
founding of the Company. Mr. A. H. McCulloch, realising
that he had a considerable amount of Fire Insurance to attend
to on behalf of his clients, called on Mr. G. A. Mansfield,
Architect, and suggested that they, with other friends, could
with advantage form a Mutual Fire Insurance Co. Mr.
Mansfield being in agreement, they decided to consult Mr.
George Hardie who at once grasped their idea and undertook
the task of forming the Company. He said, however, that
he had arranged to attend the Cricket Match to commence
that morning between the first Australian Eleven to visit
Great Britain and fifteen cricketers selected to oppose them,
consequently he would not commence operations until the
following day. However, while at the Cricket Ground he met
so many citizens whom he regarded as eligible to become
shareholders and were anxious to join, that a large proportion
of the capital was subscribed before Mr. Hardie left the ground;
the remaining shares were taken up by clients of Mr. T. J.
Thompson, Share Broker, whose business is being carried on
by his family. The capital consisted of 100,000 shares of one
pound (£1) each paid up to 2/- per share.
I received my appointment on the 19th December, 1877,
and my first duty was to secure a ground floor office. It was
decided that the site should be in Pitt Street between King
Street and Hunter Street. On enquiring at the Real Estate
Agents’ Offices I learnt that I would not be likely to succeed
and I was recommended to take rooms on the first floor of a
building within the above zone. However, I decided to try
what could be done by personal investigation and was finally
rewarded by discovering a second-hand piano dealer at 158
Pitt Street who had the lease of two small ground floor rooms


which, after negotiations, I secured on payment of £SO for
the unexpired portion of the lease. Having an address, I was
able to order the necessary stationery while the rooms were
being put in order. Although ready to commence operations,
I had to wait until the Company was duly registered; that
occurred on 10th January, 1878. In the meantime a fair
amount of business had accumulated which was at once
completed and when the first Report and Balance Sheet was
presented to the Shareholders on sth August, 1878, the income
for the half-year was £3,495 3s. 4d. and the surplus earnings
(after writing off all Flotation Expenses) £1,411 15s. od.,
which permitted the transfer of £I,OOO to the Reserve Fund
and the payment of a dividend of 4% for the half-year.
Realising that the Paid Up Capital was small, care had
to be taken in the selection of risks. The business, however,
continued to grow and with the growth of business the Capital
was gradually increased as circumstances required.
At the date the Company commenced operations, New
South Wales was the second Colony and Sydney was the
second City in population in Australia, the number being
662,000. Wool then, as it is now, was our staple industry
and the total number of sheep in, New South Wales was under
twenty-one millions.
At this date the political position was subject to several
changes due to disagreements between Sir Henry Parkes and
Sir John Robertson while the balance of power was held by
Mr. Farnell. The trouble did not, however, prevent the
erection of the Garden Palace on portion of the ground then
belonging to Government House, now portion of the Botanic
Gardens, being proceeded with for the purpose of holding a
Great Exhibition. It was officially opened by His Excellency
Sir Hercules Robinson in 1879. It consisted of the largest


wooden building ever erected in Australia. Three years later
the building was destroyed by fire and it was stated that with
it many valuable records were lost.
I have been given credit for the successful progress of
the Mercantile Mutual, I cannot, however, claim that right.
From the very start I have had the advantage of working
under the guidance of some of our most capable citizens who
composed the Board, a great advantage particularly with a
young man. I should here mention that from the commencement
of the Company’s career the principle laid down by the Board
was that the client’s interest was to be given first consideration,
realising that the finest service that can be given the Shareholders
is to place the interests of the clients first.
I am pleased to be able to say that while there has been
a number of changes in the sixty years in the personnel of the
Board, the standard has right through been maintained. I have
also had the support of a loyal, reliable and hard-working Staff.
I have never heard a complaint from any, no matter how much
work had to be accomplished, on the contrary all have cheerfully
accepted conditions as they found them and have worked in
co-operation with one and another. I regard the Staff as being
a big brotherhood and myself as the elder brother.
A word about the progress of the Company. It has kept
pace with the progress of Australia, in which Country the
business extends to every State but does not go beyond. I
have mentioned that in 1878 New South Wales was the second
Colony in Australia with a population of about 662,000.
During the sixty years that have elapsed, the population has
increased by about two millions. Sydney was at that date
the second City in'Australia; to-day Sydney is the second City
in white population in our Empire; the suburbs have extended
and each year settlement is obliged to move further out.
Secondary industries scarcely existed in 1878, now they provide


employment for a vast number; under conditions so favourable
you would expect a similar increase in the Insurance business
and that The Mercantile Mutual should participate in the
progress of N.S.W. and Australia generally. Such is the case
and with the co-operation of the Staff, progress has been
achieved. The total funds in sixty years have increased from
£IO,OOO to more than £700,000. On that question you are
aware that a section of the Community takes exception to
Insurance and Financial Institutions accumulating funds, quite
overlooking the necessity of providing for all contingencies and
to the fact that the funds are the property of the thrifty
members of the community. In the case of the Mercantile
Mutual the shares are held by 1369 shareholders and the
average number held is only 365 each, evidence that there is
no monopoly. On the contrary the shares are well spread and
the funds have assisted in the progress and development of
Australia, which I claim to be of national importance.
In 1878 and for many years afterwards the Fire Brigades
consisted of a Brigade maintained entirely by the Insurance
Companies and several Brigades conducted by volunteers, some
of whom gave good service and others the reverse. Conditions
became so serious—cases being reported of the volunteers having
attacked the members of the Insurance Brigade in the fight for
first place in attendance at fires—that the Government were
obliged to take notice and to bring the Fire Brigades under an
Act. The fire engines were drawn by horses, well-trained and
quite efficient but at best not to be compared with the up-to-date
plant now operating, not only in the Metropolitan Districts,
but also in all important towns throughout Australia. The
cost is heavy, but the service is efficient.
So far my remarks have mostly concerned New South
Wales which is the Company’s home office, but I wish to pay
a tribute to our Directors and Officers at our Branches whose


loyal and careful attention to the Company’s interests have
contributed largely to the progress and success achieved. The
Victorian Branch was the first to be established, subsequently the
business was extended to the other States, and as opportunities
occurred, Freehold Properties have been acquired in each State
to provide office accommodation with provision for extension
of business. At the present time a building is in course of
erection at Perth, W.A. When that is completed, each of
the Interstate Branches will occupy its own Freehold Property.
Before closing, I wish to again thank you, Sir, and all
present for the very handsome gifts you have made to my wife
and to me; they are most useful and will be treasured, not
only by us, but by the members of our family, for all time.
We do appreciate the kind thought of all. I shall ever look
upon tO'day as being one of the greatest importance in my life,
and shall remember with gratitude the appropriate remarks
which the Chairman and other speakers have made in connection
with the Company and the kind and over-generous terms in
which reference has been made to me.
Lady King also expressed her thanks for the presentation
made to her and extended a cordial invitation to the Directors
and Staff to a Garden Party at “Quambi,” Edgecliff, on 15th
January next.
The singing of “For They are Jolly Good Fellows”
concluded the ceremony.


IW.C.PENFDLD&C-Lffi
fpjffyVyrpNEYi


The Mercantile Mutual
Insurance Company Limited
CAPITAL £500,000
IN £1 SHARES (WITH POWER TO INCREASE).
Head Office: 117 Pitt Street, Sydney.
Directors: C. C. Gale, Chairman.
Theodore J. Marks. G. F. Davis.
J. Hunter Stephenson. Commander J. E. Patrick,
e.a.n.r. (Eetd.)
Managing Director; Kelso King.
Manager: Selwyn King. Secretary: Alan Blake.
Solicitors: P. V. McCulloch & Buggy.
Auditors:
Eobertson, Crane & Gibbons, P.C.A. (Adst.)
Larcombe and Gowahd, F.C.A. (Aust.).
Melbourne Branch; 1 Queen Street.
Directors :
A. L. Wettenhall {Chairman). John Turnbull,
Local Manager: Resident Secretary:
E. W. Heqgie. A. J. Lodqhnan.
Brisbane Branch: 62 Eagle Street.
Directors: Wm. Hamilton Hart, Chairman.
Egbert Willis Taylor. Arthur Baynes,
Local Manager: J. G. Milne.
Townsville Branch:
Director:
Resident Secretary
H. T. Wooster.
Arthur Allan.
Cairns
Chief Agents: Estate H, S. Williams, Ltd,
Adelaide Branch: 74 Pirib Street.
Directors: Napier K. Birks, Chairman.
Norman Jackson. O. F. Burnett.
Local Manager: W. H. Sheppard.
Hobart Branch: 105 Macquarie Street.
Directors: Eobt. Nettlefold, 0.8. E., Chairman.
Hon. Sir John McPheb. .
Local Manager: Boss Wilkins.
Launceston:
Chief Agents: E. H. Hart and Go.
Perth Branch: St. George’s House, St. George’s Terrace.
Directors: B. H. Darbyshire, Chairman.
E. S. J. Dennis. L. I. Burridge. L, J. W. Butler.
Local Manager: J. H. Dobson.
