

M 11B mmE FOM
LORD BRYCE?S Committee proved that
(1) In many parts of Belgium the people were systematically and deliberately
murdered.
(2) Men, women, and children were murdered in large numbers. The women were
violated.
(3) Houses were burnt and looted. The wanton destruction of property was ordered
by German Officers. Provision was made at the very outbreak of War for
burning and destroying on a large scale.
(4) Civilians?men, women, and children?were made to advance in front of the
German troops to shield them from the fire of the French. The Germans in
some cases killed their wounded prisoners, and they frequently abused the
Red Cross and the White Flag.
The Committee found all these crimes Mly established by evidence. Murder,
lust, and pillage prevailed in many parts of Belgium and Northern France on a
scale unparalleled in any War between civilized nations during the last three
centuries.
When Von Hausen?s army entered France a massacre of the inhabitants
of Andenne was immediately begun. The population was murdered continuously
for two hours, and at intervals throughout the night. The troops were allowed
to murder and ravish unchecked. About 400 people were killed in this massacre.
Unarmed civilians were killed in masses at other places. They were dragged
from their homes, and shot under the direction of the German Authorities, without
any charge being made against them.
Wholesale murders were committed by the Germans before or during their
retreat from Malines. Women and young children were killed under revolting
circumstances.
At Sempst a girl of seventeen, and other girls, were dragged into
a field, stripped naked and violated. Some of them were afterwards killed
with the bayonet. Two children at the same place were bayoneted;
they were only three or four years old.
At Aerschot and district some people were burnt alive in their houses.
A child of two or three years old was found nailed to the door of a
farmhouse by its hands and feel. Lord Bryce says that the evidence of
this crime is undoubted.
At Eppeghem the dead body of a child of two years was seen pinned
to the ground with a German lance.
Lord Bryoe?s Committee found that these crimes were due to a calculated
policy, carried out scientifically and deliberately, under the direction of the
higher German Military Authorities, and not to any provocation or resistance
by the civilian population.
Sydney: William Applegate
Gnllick,
Government Printer ?191$.
38105
