

= = Address by
Mr H. B. Higgins,
M. L. A. for Geelong, 1894
to 1897, and one of the
Victorian members of
the Federal Convention,
delivered in the Exhibition
Theatre, Friday, October
Ist, 1897.
[Reprinted from the “Geelong Advertiser,” of 2nd Oct.]
E. J. HALL & SONS, PRINTERS, RYRIE STREET, GEELONG,
"T gr -v, —jpr-




The Parliamentary Elections.
Mr H. B. Higgins
At the Exhibition Theatre.
AN ENTHUSIASTIC RECEPTION.
W 3IS! jf- lOUDh^y
33. <7- <7 7 .
A large and enthusiastic meeting o£ the electors of the constituency
of Geelong was addressed in the Exhibition Theatre last evening by
Mr H. B. Higgins, who has represented Geelong in the Legislative
Assembly for the past three years. The whole of the building was
thronged, the dress circle being well peopled by ladies, and the stage
was filled by a large and influential body of electors. The entrance
of Mr Higgins to the platform was the signal for continued applause
and some cheering, and from the start of the meeting he received very
encouraging demonstrations in his favor.
Aid. Munday, a member of the Geelong Town Council, occupied
the chair, and introduced Mr Higgins as a candidate for re-election as
a representative of Geelong in the Legislative Assembly. He was
quite certain that Mr Higgins would be able to show the electors that
he had done well for Geelong and for the whole colony. That the
candidate was a good man was disclosed in the New South Wales
newspapers, which referring to his association with the Federal Con-
vention, reckoned that Mr Higgins was one of the first five, while a
well-known legislator reckoned that Mr Higgins was one of the first
three. In his (Aid. Monday’s) opinion Mr Higgins had performed
his work faithfully and well, and that he had carried out all his
pledges in an honorable manner, and had excellently represented
Geelong in the Legislative Assembly. (Cheers.) He asked for the
candidate a patient and impartial hearing. (Applause).
The candidate, who was received with cheers, remarked amidst
laughter that he had again brought wet weather, but from the splendid
gathering before him he could see that he had not damped the spirits
of the people of Geelong. (Applause). They had now had him as


their representative for three years (and we are satisfied with you),
and the question was whether they were going to have him for their
member for another three years. (Yes, and applause). They had
elected him as a man untested and untried. They had him now as one
who had stood a test of three years, tried to some extent, and in a
measure used to parliamentary practice. Were they going to reject
him after that trial? (No). He knew that he could not expect to
have their approval in everything. They had put 170 bills through
Parliament during the past three years, and it would have been won-
derful if they could have been able to agree upon everything in
connection with those measures. But he would say for himself that
during the last last three years he had acted to the best of his knowledge'
and the best of his power. He had nothing to be ashamed of (applause);
nothing to retract; no promise to make an apology about. If he had
committed any faults, he hoped they would put them down as faults
of the head rather than of the heart. (Applause). Graceful refer-
ence was made by the speaker to the spirit in which the late Mr Chas.
Andrews had accepted retirement from public life, and to the death
since last election of an old personal friend, Mr Alexander Dick. The
electors of Geelong had a very ample choice of candidates at the present
election. He understood five candidates were going to the poll, and
he had no reason to complain. He thought that it was for the
interests of the people that this should be so. He did not like to see
elections going uneontested. It was a great education for the electors
to have matters of public interest threshed out by men keenly desirous
of bringing their views before the public. It was a means of bringing
candidates into sympathy with the people they sought to represent,
and keeping members of Parliament true to their pledges and promises.
But he had to warn them that when there were two seats with five
candidates fighting for them, some curious complications were bound
to arise. They would recall how at the last elections, by plumping
and cross-voting, the wishes of the people were in danger of being
defeated. He was glad the Government promised to bring in a bill to
create single electorates. During the last parliament he had introduced
a bill to prevent plumping, but it has not reached. But if the double
electorates were converted into single constituencies the possibility of
plumping would no longer exist. With regard to the other candidates,
he had no personal quarrel with any one of them. He should not
attack anyone in person. He hoped this election would be contested
purely upon political grounds; but in politics, as in other things, a man.
was known by the company he kept. (Applause). When a member
came before his constituents he was bound to refer to what he had
done personally, but he hoped in this connection they would remember
that he did not speak in any spirit of boasting. He did not think he
had done half what he had hoped to do, but the powers of a member
of Parliament were exceedingly limited. As to the weight he com-
manded in Parliament and the country they were the best judges. If
they found a candidate strongly abused by one section of the metro-
politan press and praised with equal warmth by the other they could
be sure that he had some influence. The Geelong papers


liad been just and even kind to him, tbongb it had been charged
against him that he did not develop into a leader of the Opposition,
but apart from the question of his capacity to act as leader,
why should he join the Opposition unless he wanted to oppose?
He would not seek to put out Governments without strong reasons.
Governments had heavy work to do, and were entitled to all the moral
support that could be given them. They should not be made to feel
that they were working with men behind them anxious to step into
their shoes, and frequent ministerial changes are inexpedient. He felt
that the people of Victoria did not want frequent changes of Ministry,
above all when the colony was passing through such critical times.
(Applause.) He could assure them that he would never be found to
be one of those intriguing for office. He would feel that his position
was of no value, whether supporting a Government, or in opposition,
unless he was conscious of doing some good according to his light for
the people who sent him into Parliament. (Applause.) The people
of Victoria had been getting from the Turner Government what they
wanted —steady hard work of a liberal 'tendency, and he only wished
those tendencies were at times a little more liberal. He thought he
could personally take credit for having helped to steady the ship of State
in a storm, and if he had not been good cargo he had been good ballast.
(Applause;) He could not speak to them for 170 hours upon the
170 bills that had been passed by the last Parliament, but he could
refer to one or two of the principal measures. One of these was the
Factories’ Act, which he had supported. True, the measure was an
experimental one, possessing many defects, but he hoped that these
would be remedied by experience. There was no carpenter who had
not spoiled some wood in his time, and he regarded the Factories’ Act
as a hona fide attempt to help those who were poor and helpless.
(Applause.) He credited the vast majority of employers in Victoria
with the possession of an honest desire to deal fairly by their
employees, and these would be protected by the Act from those who
were not too scrupulous to overreach competitors in business at the
expense of the people who were working for them. (Applause.) “ Talk
of supply and demand ruling everything,” said the candidate scorn-
fully, “that may have been true once, but supply and demand are
created artificially in these days of rings and trusts, and by the
system of buying and selling futures.” He wished he could be as
cock sure as Sir George Turner about the effectiveness of the
Companies’ Act as a means of preventing fraud, but men who wanted
to make money by telling lies would continue to do so in defiance of
the penalty. Sir George Turner proposed to bring in an amendment
of the Act to make it illegal for a bank to give an advance to any man
who was on its directorate. (Quite right.) Yes, quite right; but
might he be allowed to tell them that it was he who proposed the in-
sertion of a clause to that effect when the measure was originally
before the House. It was rejected by the Government, and finally
when the Government and the Assembly came round to his views on
the matter it was defeated in the Council. But he was only too glad
to find that the Government was now taking it up. (Applause.) The


evils which had found their rise in the facilities possessed by the
directors of financial institutions to make advances to one another,
were dealt with most lucidly. In England, he understood, directors
and managers were not allowed to have accounts in the banks with
which they were connected. (Quite right)—but here we had got into
the vicious habit of making directors of men without any experience
of banking business, and simply because they could bring a big account
to the bank. If the proposal he indicated were carried into law,
applications for advances by directors would be effectually met by
reference to its illegality. It was a very important amendment, and
one that he hoped the Upper House would see its way to pass when it
came again before that branch of the legislature. The Insolvency and
Mining Acts were touched upon briefly, and the candidate said that
he had set his face rigidly against the reduction of the protective
duties because he saw in it merely a selfish attempt to stir up the
country against the town. The insincerity of the movement was
shown by the fact that those who supported the reduction of the
tariff in one direction did all they could to keep it up as high as
possible whenever it affected their own peculiar interests, or those of
their particular constituencies. (Applause.) What was the result ?
They had some tinkering with the tariff, and the great triple reform
movement had disappeared into the limbo of forgetfulness. (Laughter
and applause.) What about Geelong in particular? Well, he had
not done all that he had hoped to be able to accomplish, but they
could take his assurance that he had been doing his best. (Applause.)
The colony’s finances had not been strong for several years, and mem-
bers of Parliament, as a matter of duty, had to support the Treasurer
in making ends meet and avoid pressing him for grants, even in
respect to public works that seemed absolutely necessary. His
colleague, Mr Gurr, who had been indefatigable in regard to local
requirements —(applause) —knew how difficult it had been to
get provision made for anything but expenditure that was
unavoidable. There were some things, however, for which he
took credit with his colleague, and he instanced his efforts
no behalf of the salt works, the freezing industry, and for the
improvement of wharfage accommodation. He had also personally
taken charge of the measure for the enlargement of the powers of
the Geelong Town Council in regard to the collection of rates upon
unoccupied allotments, and he trusted, as he had been promised, that
this would enable the council to improve the wages of its laborers.
(Applause). He knew of no experience more painful to a member of
Parliament than to hear the recital of the woes of those who were
unable to obtain the means of supporting wives and families. The
help that members of Parliament could give was little, but he had done
his best to relieve the distressing cases which had come under his
notice. Only one provision of the State Bank Bill had been carried,
and that was in regard to the Credit Ponder scheme, to provide cheap
money for the farmers. He was glad the state bank proposal had
not been carried, for its pro visions were of the crudest possible
description. One of the last things in which the state should inter-


fere at the present time was in the matter of money and banking.
People were as much puzzled about the conditions of money as they
appeared to be about the question of religion—(laughter)—and it was
as dangerous for the state to interfere in one as it was in the other.
The credit of the state was one of the greatest levers for advancing
the national welfare, and he did not want to spoil that credit by
voting for a measure which would have ended in disaster. He hoped
the Exported Products Bill would come into law next session, for it
was of the greatest consequence that the reputation of their products
in the home markets should not be endangered by want of care or
dishonesty on the part of individual exporters. Where competing
interests were so strong, a bad consignment would be sure of being
well advertised, and the consumer would not trouble to make dis-
tinctions between one Australian article and another. He commended
the Government for assisting in the development of the mining
industry, but the assistance in this direction should have been provided
out of the revenue, and not by fresh borrowing. He was sorry that
£375,000 had been borrowed for this purpose by the Treasurer.
They should pay their way as they went, and if bonuses were
necessary they should come out of their own pockets instead of
adding to the legacy of debt that would be handed down to their
children. (Applause). He objected to borrowing money which had
no asset to show for its expenditure. Nothing could be more
injurious to their credit than the disposition to be self-indulgent, and
throw upon posterity burdens which they themselves should bear.
He did not think they gave enough attention to this matter of
borrowing, and he would give them some figures bearing upon it.
The public debt of Victoria amounted to more than £4O per head.
In the United Kingdom it was only £l7 Bs. Id., and this, notwith-
standing the enormous drain that the Napoleonic and other wars had
entailed upon the finances of Great Britain. In Canada the public
debt per head was £l2 Bs. ; Prance, after the payment of the large
indemnity to Germany, and notwithstanding its huge naval and
military expenditure, had kept down its indebtedness to £3l 18s. Bd.
per head, and the public debt of Portugal, which was practically
insolvent, did not exceed £27 10s. sd. per head. The indebtedness
of the Australian colonies averaged £49 14s. 3d. per head, so that
Victoria with all her faults, compared favorably with her neighbors.
He admitted that they had borrowed in a large measure for railways,
and reproductive works, but they had no right to throw the current
expenditure upon the future. They had now an accumulated deficit of
millions. That was that the revenue had not come up to the
expenditure by 3| millions. Sir George Turner spoke of a surplus,
and of having squared the ledger, but he could say with absolute
certainty that there was no surplus. As a matter of fact there was
a deficit of £194,000. To meet a deficiency of revenue in 1893, Mr.
Shiels borrowed £750,000, expecting to repay it in three instalments
of £250,000 each in 1897-98-99. But he reckoned without his host.
He had discounted the future. When the first instalment became
due in January last, there was no surplus to provide for its repayment,


nor was there likely to be one in the coming year. That amount
should have been paid from revenue and not from borrowed money,
because it was as much a debt chargeable to 1897 as the salaries of the
public service. Tet Sir George claimed to have a surplus. "We had
no right to talk about having got out of our difficulties when we had to
fall back this very financial year upon borrowed money to pay our way
to the extent of £191,000, a fresh addition to the accumulated deficit.
Sir George Turner was a man in whom they could trust, but he was
too sanguine, and in spite of his calculations the fact remained that
there was a deficit of £194,000 instead of a surplus. He did not
wish to make them go home and sleep uneasily, but he thought they
ought to stop in this reckless course of throwing their burdens upon
the future. Reviewing the Ministerial programme, he said he was
afraid the Government was going to sleep upon its laurels. No
doubt the temptation to do so was great when nine-tenths of the
candidates now before the country were aA r owed supporters. Ministers
said in effect. “ What is the use of awakening antagonism, rousing
doubtful questions,” and having worked hard the Government was
disposed to turn round on its side and go in for a snooze. Sir George
Turner said, “ Peace and progress,” but they could never get peace
until they removed that which made peace impossible. (Applause). They
could never get progress until they took away the obstructions to pro-
gress. He regretted the disposition to take things so easily because they
had a Ministry as strong as any they ever had in the colony, and they
were missing a grand opportunity of modifying the obstruction
of the Tipper House upon legislation. (Applause.) He advocated
the liberalising of the qualification of members for the Upper House,
and the reduction of the area of the provinces, for which only men
of great wealth could afford the expense of a contest. They should
get both Houses in accord with the will of the people. (Applause.)
The government was losing opportunities for a progressive policy in
other directions. They had a chance of taking away revenue duties,
such as those upon tea and sugar, which fell upon the poor. (Ap-
plause.) They had the chance of helping the industrious people
who were developing the land in the far back country, by the
reduction of railway freights and fares. They had the chance of doing
away with the twopenny postage upon letters posted and delivered
within the radius of cities and towns. If the Government, in addition
to what he had said, would bring forward a land value tax, it would
have the country behind it. (Applause.) From his observation of
the histories of Governments he had been led to liken them to balls
projected by the people. At first they moved at a great impetus, but
gradually decreased in momentum, and the Government now appeared
as if it was in danger of becoming a spent ball. He remarked last
session an effort on the part of the Opposition to induce the Govern-
ment to throw over its supporters for the support of members.
If the Government were deceived into that policy, it would find for
every Opposition member gained to its side it would, lose two of its
valuable supporters. (Applause). He spoke with disapproval of the
reduction at the present juncture of the income tax, in view of the


fact that the country had not yet fulfilled the promise made to public
servants, the rank and file of whom had in many cases been retrenched
to the bone. They should not be generous to the taxpayers until they
had been just to those whom they had promised relief. (Applause.)
They should not reduce the income tax until they had paid back the
trust funds from which they' - had borrowed millions. They had
no right to reduce the income tax until they had a real surplus to
show their bondholders. (Renewed applause.) In a colony like this
there was a peculiar advantage in direct taxation, for they were apt to
be extravagant, and when people had to put their hands into their
pockets and fork out to meet their obligations they would take
greater care to see that the money was wisely expended. He would
be very willing to reduce the Income Tax if the Land Value Tax were
put in its place, and they all knew his views upon that. During his
stay in Sydney last mouth he had seen the benefits which had followed
the land value tax adopted by the Reid Ministry. So long as they
taxed industry they discouraged industry; when they put a tax on
land values, industry was encouraged. He spoke approvingly of the
thoughtful considerations upon the question of railway finances, to
which Mr Blakiston had given utterance, and pointed out that the
vehicles which were employed in the traffic upon public highways
did not pay for the construction and maintenance of the latter.
That was provided by the community, and the permanent way in
connection with the railways should be on a similar basis. Sir
George Turner was advocating the policy of one adult one vote and
woman suffrage, and it showed that Victoria had not progressed so
well as the other colonies had done in that respect, for New South
W ales had one man one vote, and South Australia and New Zealand
had already one adult one vote, and Adelaide and even New Zealand
had adopted that policy. He pointed out the absurdity of the dual
vote system, illustrating it by saying that on the dual vote principle
you would give Judas Iscariot two votes and Jesus Christ one vote ;
Judas Iscariot, because he purchased a piece of land with the price of
blood, whereas the Son of Man had no place to lay His head. They
observed that Sir Gfeorge Turner was to bring forward the referendum,
and he was proud to say that with Mr Outtrim he had brought the
question before the last Parliament when the Government refused
to take it up ; but it was not yet carried through, so that he was glad
to see that it was to be again taken up ; but he pointed out that the
referendum was not to be applied indiscriminately. It was a motion
of his on the subject which called attention to the Conservation of
State Forests, and a good work had been performed in the appoint-
ment of a Royal Commission; the object being to prevent as was
being done in the Beech forest, the destruction of valuable timber as
if it were weeds. Upon his motion a law commission had been
appointed for the purpose of looking into the undue charges and
undue delays in the law, with the view of applying remedies ; and he
had been appointed chairman. Through his action they had been
able to get a great area of the Mallee country used for seven years in
wheat growing, which would be of benefit to Geelong, whilst Mr


Lascelles would pay 3d per acre for it instead a farthing per
acre, so that the State had made a good bargain. Speaking
with regard to the federation question, he said that they came to the
poetry of politics when they talked about it, and it was the
greatest ideal at present before the Australian people. Federation had
passed from the control of local Parliaments, and it now stood between
the convention and the people, who would shortly be asked to say
“Yes ” or “Ho” regarding it. It would then remain for the Parlia-
ment to pass a resolution, and for the Imperial Parliament to put it
into law. As the votes he had obtained in Geelong, 1914 altogether, had
largely contributed to his election to the Federal Convention, he would
not be doing justice unless he referred to the question. He wanted
for a few minutes to rivet their attention to the constitutional pro-
visions which were to bind the future Parliament of Australia, and
which were to affect the well-being of their children’s children. What
they wanted was a constitution under which the people could work out
their own destiny in peace and quietness, and his object was to enable the-
whole of the people of Australia, so far as human effort was concerned,
to work out the destinies of Australia, and not leave it to any class of
people, or artificial distinctions of people, to work them out. He was
thankful to the writer of a letter, whom he did not know, which was
published in the “Geelong Advertiser,” for defending him whilst
he was away in Sydney. The writer was good enough to say—“ To
my mind, Mr Higgins has been one of the few Victorian delegates-
who has not proved a traitor to the best interests of the colony, and
he has striven nobly to safeguard the people of this colony.” The
“ Sydney Morning Herald,” which was not a Liberal paper, but a
Conservative paper, although not so conservative as the “Argus,” had,
in a paragraph regarding the subject, said : “Mr Higgins has helped
the work by the tenacity with which he has pleaded the claims
of the larger colonies as identical with those of the Australian people.’*
He felt that his attitude was beginning to be understood, and be-
thought that the more they studied what he had said and done on that
federal question the more they would see that he had been working—
and working well —in the interests of federation. (Applause.) The-
references to himself were as to his opposition to the equal represen-
tation of the States in the Senate; that was, that there should be six
members from each State, or to put it more plainly, Western Aus-
tralia, with its 150,000 people, should have six members, whilst Hew
South Wales, with 1,300,000 persons, should only have six members.
That he had opposed, because he considered that it would not be fair
play. There were two classes of foes to federation—the parrots and
the provincialists. The parrots were those who cried out incessantly,
“ federation, federation,” just the same as a parrot would do when
taught the word without knowing its meaning. Most of the parrots
were in their own colony, and they said “ Let us have federation at
any price,” and they were, in reality, the worst foes they could have
to federation. He took it that the people would not accept federation
unless they had a fair thing. (Applause.) In making a bargain
those who were the most eager for the bargain would come the w r orst


out of the bargain. Then again there were the “ provincialists,” of
which there were two kinds. One kind wanted to keep up artificial
distinctions between New South Wales and Yictoria, for all purposes,
and they found most of that species in New South Wales. Some of
the people there did not want federation of Customs, or anything else,
but relied upon the wealth of the place; and the other class of pro-
rincialists wanted to keep up the artificial distinctions in respect to
the Senate only. The candidate proceeded to show that what he had
objected to was that Tasmanians should get eight times the voting
power that New South Wales men would have, that is, 150,000 men
in Tasmania would have the same power as 1,300,000 men in New
South Wales, or a Tasmanian w'ould have eight votes as against a
New South Wales man’s one vote. He was very glad to see that the
New South Wales Assembly was against it by 59 votes to 4 votes, and
he regarded this as a victory in his favor. It had been said that unless
there was equal representation there would be danger to the smaller
states, and to protect them they would have to get a House in which
the less populous states would be specially favored, but the argument
■would not hold good. They could not have equal representation of
states, and the question of state rights, he remarked, had been ad-
vanced by extreme Conservatives, in order to prevent the will of the
whole people having effect given to it. He was sorry to say that the
"Victorian Government in the Assembly made the mistake of getting
the House to vote for equal representation, in order to satisfy the un-
reasonable demands of the smaller states ; because with it they could
not get federation with New South Wales, and federation would be no
good unless they had New South Wales in it. What good would
federation be to "Victoria unless the trade across the Murray was open
to them ? and what good would it be to South Australia unless they
got federation with New South Wales? It was very doubtful, he
thought, if they could induce New South Wales to come in if they got
equal representation. But if equal representation should be conceded,
it could net be conceded without some provision for finality when the
two Houses could not agree, and without some provision for making
the voice of the whole people supreme in the last resort; and at con-
considerable length Mr Higgins pointed out the mistake the Victorian
Ministers had made in voting at the Convention against a National
referendum. He had strongly objected to one House being dissolved
in the event of the two being at variance, whilst the other sat waiting
for the result; and he argued that both Houses should go to the
country. (Applause.) In this argument he found only six supporters
at Adelaide; but his proposal was carried at Sydney, although the
Victorian Ministers voted against it. With regard to the preamble to
the bill, which, according to Parliamentary practice, was always the
last thing to be arranged, he had to say something, because it affected
himself. Mark Twain said that there was this difference betw'een a lie
and a cat, that a cat has only nine lives. There were a large number of
persons who wanted to have some reference to the Almighty in the
preamble of the Constitution Bill, and although it had been asserted
that he had objected to it, and had voted against it, the assertions-


were not true, for he had paid that he would vote for it and he intended
doing so. In Adelaide he had voted against words being suddenly
inserted in the preamble which were untruthful and unseemly, and
would have made them hypocrites in the eyes of the world. Of the
five Parliaments which had dealt with that preamble, not one of them
asked for those words to be put into it, which he had voted against.
A member of the Convention, on the last night of the Adelaide sittings
suddenly proposed that words should be inserted in the preamble to
the effect that the people of Australia, in agreeing to the bill “invoked
the Divine Providence.” That bill was not their bill, but a bill they
were asking the Imperial Parliament to make law, and they would
nave been asking the Imperial Parliament to put in a smug falsehood,
and he had voted against it, as he well knew that more appropriate
words would be put into the bill at the adjourned sittings in Sydney.
But it was his duty to tell them that the proposal to mention the
Almighty in this preamble was worked up through the colonies by a
few men who had a very definite object; and he would have preferred
them to have had more candor. Their object was not merely to show
respect or reverence to the Almighty. The Constitutions of the
United States and Canada did not have any reference to the Almighty,
and the object in view of those who sought to get the words inserted
was to get rid of a difficulty which faced those who wanted to get
certain religious legislation enacted in those countries —such as legis-
lation to compel “ seventh-day adventists,” and others to observe Sunday.
He did not believe that the people of Victoria wanted to compel people to
any particular religious observances. He was opposed to compulsion in
respect to any religion, but, with proper safeguards, he had no objection
to please those people who wanted some reference to the Almighty in the
the preamble. He knew that some people had been sent to the meeting
that evening to question him regarding his opinion as to the Scriptural
lesson books. This was part of the machinery of the organization, so
as to make the subject prominent; but he would save the organ-
isation the trouble. They wanted to ask him if he was in favor
of the Irish National scripture lessons being taught —not read
—in the State Schools, and he emphatically answered “No.”
(Tremendous cheering.) He had said “no ” when asked in a
letter by some clergymen whom he highly respected. (Cheers.)
He had said “no” before the Government had spoken—(applause)—
and he was glad to notice by the Premier’s speech that the Govern-
ment said “no” also. (Renewed cheering.) Whatever might be the
rule in such countries as Scotland, where there was comparative unity
of belief, he argued that the less the State had in a mixed community
like this to do with religion and religious beliefs the better it would
be for the colony. (Applause and cheers.) If there was anything in
history they ought to recollect it was that which showed them that
wherever a State interfered in religious matters it had resulted in
lamentable failure. The greater the freedom given to denominations
the better for the State, and the greater the facilities given to denom-
inations to give religious instruction to their children the better for
the State and the great mass of the people. (Loud applause and


cheers.) He contended that they should open the windows to all
denominations, but on no account should they endeavour to put in any
particular kind of air and light through those windows. (Great
cheering). They could rest assured that the demands of the Scripture
League was rejected, not because he and others with him thought
religious instruction of the young insignificant, but because they
regarded religious instruction as too valuable, too sacred, to be placed
in the hands of the State school teachers. They ought to have
religious instruction as far above the ordinary instruction as they
could make it. (Hear, hear). They should take it from the hack-
work of spelling, reading, grammar, and writing, and religious in-
struction should not be entrusted to those employed in giving the
ordinary instruction in the school. If they did not have some
spiritual teaching different from the ordinary school work, it would be
useless. There were teachers of all kinds of religion,and it would not
be right to ask them to give the instruction, and he asserted that
earnest men of any religious persuasion must be proselytising agents.
(Hear, hear). If he knew his fellow Protestants aright, they did not
want to have any unfair advantage, nor did he think that they wanted
to Protestantise the state schools. He did not know of anything which
would be so unfair as using the general taxpayer’s money to make
the State schools Protestant agencies. Bishop Moorhouse, referring
to the subject, said that it was putting a “ brutal muzzle ” upon the
teachers to prohibit them from giving religious instruction. But the
teachers were nearly all against giving such instruction, and against
the present proposal. In Sydney they did not rely on the books, but
upon the ministers of the Gospel and special teachers, there being in
Sydney alone 11 paid teachers on behalf of the Church of England.
The same could be done in Victoria, but the excuse made was that the
ministers had to attend funerals and committee meetings. (A Voice :
And tea meetings). He saw no objection to the religious instructors
going even in school hours to teach their children religion. He
remembered a passage in one of the Gospels where Jesus Christ, ad-
dressing one of His apostles, said “Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou
me?” and Simon said “Yea, Lord, Thou knowest that I
love Thee,” and Jesus said “Peed My lambs.” What did
they think of the alteration at the present time when those
who professed to be disciples said, “Let Csesar feed the lambs.”
(Cheers.) What would those proud prelates of the theological hall
say to that command given to the apostles themselves, not to the
servants of Csesar ? Instead of doing what Simon, son of Jonas, was
bidden to do, they went drivelling to Caesar, saying, “We have no time
to feed these lambs.” Sir George Turner was quite right when he said
that the books were not fit to be put into the children’s hands, and he
did not know how men of discretion could have compiled them from
Scripture. Any discreet teacher of the Bible would have avoided
giving prominence to many of the lessons, such as those of Jacob and
Laban, Abraham and Sarah in Egypt, Potiphar’s Wife, &c. It was not a
time to flinch from unpleasant subjects, they would have to be frank and
out with their objections. (Applause and cheers). There was more


in the proposal than they thought in regard to the teaching of the
Scripture lessons. It was the thin edge of the wedge. That was
shown by Mr Robert Harper, brother of Professor Harper, when he
acknowledged that the modicum of religious instruction proposed was
small, and failed to meet the object intended, and added that it was
meant to break the extreme secularity of the education system and to
bring in further proposals subsequently. He (Mr Higgins) did not
want the people of Victoria to forget the difficulty they had in
getting free, secular and compulsory education. (Cheers.) The
following paragraph appeared in “ Truth,” the organ of the Scripture
League:
“ What must we do to be saved (politically) ? This was the question put in
all seriousness in the lobbies in Parliament to one M.L.A., who has consistently-
supported our platform, by two of his fellow-members. Thus early they have learnt
that a solid hostile vote must be faced if they decline to give their adhesion to the
League’s demands. The answer to the members’ query is simple and brief—accept
the platform of the Scripture Education League, which is in full consonance with
the mind of the vast majority of the electors, and your (political) salvation is assured.”
He (Mr Higgins) would rather depart from political life for ever
than submit to dictation of that sort. (Great cheering.) Even if he
had been inclined to waver as to the proposal, he would have been
compelled, after reading this, and similar passages, so calculated to
degrade politics and political life, and out of mere respect
for himself, to say “No ” to the proposal. The proposal was being
supported by all the conservative candidates, and by some of the
liberals; and it was being used as a means of splitting up the liberal
party. Some persons had pledged themselves not to vote for a
candidate who did not agree with the league proposal. Well, if they
did not vote for the candidate they wanted they would be helping the
candidate they did not want. He urged the electors of Geelong to
give him a larger majority of votes than they had done three years
ago, for it would strengthen his hands in Parliament and in the
Eederal Convention. (Continued cheering.)
In reply to questions, Mr Higgins, who resumed his seat at the
close of his address amidst continued cheering, said that he was not
in favour of retired Government employees with pensions competing
with outside workers.
He did not know why the fellmongering industry had not been
brought under the Shops and Factories’ Act, but the matter was one
which would receive his consideration.
He had always been opposed to the percentage reductions in the
civil service, but he had never promised to vote against the Government
should their continuance be found absolutely necessary to enable the
Treasurer to make ends meet. The Government was returned with a
mandate from the country to make the finances straight and at the risk
of incurring a certain amount of unpopularity he had felt bound to meet
the Premier’s appeal. Personally he thought the men should get all
that was due to them, even if additional taxation was necessary, but


lie could not do that of himself. (Applause). Though he much
regretted it he had felt hound to vote for the continuance of the
reductions.
He was not in favor of engine-drivers in the country being ex-
empted from the Shops and Factories Act, and. butter factories in rural
•centres should not be upon a different basis to those in the towns.
Compulsory vaccination was a subject about which there was a
great diversity of medical opinion, but as far as he could see the
evidence was not sufficiently strong in its favor.
Mr E. Parnell said it was with much pleasure he rose to propose
a vote of confidence in the candidate. It had been a wonderful
pleasure to him to hear the statesmanlike utterances of Mr Higgins,
who was more than a local candidate. He moved: —
“That this meeting most cordially approves of the action of Mr
Higgins in the Legislative Assembly during the past three years, and
thereby pledges itself to use every effort to secure his re-election.”
In regard to federation, he considered that no one in the Conven
tion had such a grasp of the subject as Mr Higgins.
The resolution was seconded by Mr Collyer, and after being
supported in eulogistic terms by the chairman, was carried amidst a
•demonstration of applause of a most remarkable description.
After the cheering had subsided, Mr Higgins said they could
hardly conceive the gladness their acclamation had brought to his
heart. He had been told all sorts of things about his wickedness, but
he had frankly told them what he had done, and what he intended to
do, and he felt that he had the confidence of the people of Greelong
still. (Eenewed cheering.)
A vote of thanks to the chairman closed the proceedings.
E. J. Hall & Sons, Printers, Eyrie Street, Geelong.


PjiSUO
p ( o-f $6
go.
Pedex.
In . ±1
close of his address amidst conk
in favour of retired G-overmr
with outside workers.
He did not know
t + x '°
