

CYCLOPEDIA
of
New South Wales








The
Cyclopedia of New South Wales,


Sir HARRY RAWSON, G.C.B., Governor of New South Wales.


THE
CYCLOPE DIA of N.S.W.
(ILLUSTRATED)
Xlluher the patronage of Government of IRew South XHHales.
anh the Xorh tlhapor of SvCmev » , «
An HISTORICAL and COMMERCIAL REVIEW.
DESCRIPTIVE and BIOGRAPHICAL, FACTS, FIGURES and ILLUSTRATIONS
An EPITOME of PROGRESS.
NEW SOUTH WALES:
McCARRON, STEWART & CO., PRINTERS, 44 PITT STREET, SYDNEY.
1907.




EDITOR'S PREFACE.
publication of the “Cyclopedia of New South Wales” derives its origin, as well as much of
its interest, from the fact that hitherto there has been no attempt made to weld together, in
chronological order, an historical account of the crude elements of our early days with the
advanced conditions of the present. It is not so much, in fact, a history of the colony, which,
after all, would of necessity be but little more than a mere recapitulation of well-published data ; but it
is a concise narrative of the rise and progress of every phase of Antipodean life in this State —official,
political, commercial and social—and as such it stands alone in its scope.
It was felt by the promoters that the longer the opportunity was delayed of taking a general
survey, from the commencement of British rule in Australia, of the material development and
resources of the country the greater the difficulties to encounter. They have therefore endeavoured within
a comparatively short period to gather together essential material and preserve it from that oblivion which
sooner or later overtakes particulars mainly entombed in the imperfect journalistic records of a century
or so ago. In the prosecution of their labours the publishers have received assistance from the last and
the present Government, and they desire to also acknowledge their obligations to the heads of the various
official departments, who have helped them to collect materials not readily accessible; also to the
Government Statistician and the Government Printer.
Some compression of this varied and valuable epitome having been found necessary in conformity
with the prescribed bulk and compass of the book, this work was performed under official direction ;
it will be found that no information of general importance has been sacrificed to the necessities of
abbreviation,
tor easy reference a convenient system of classification has been pursued throughout, which should
prove of advantage to the reader ; and accompanying each section, in due order, are given short biographical
notices of those amongst us most prominently connected with the subject matter of the article.


A BIRD’S-EYE VIEW OF PARRAMATTA.


CONTENTS.
PAGES
History of N.S.W .. . .. .. .. 1 —43
Constitutional .. .. .. .. .. .. 44—54
Parliamentary 55_ 10 2
Federation .. .. .. .. .. .. 103 —122
Geographical and Topographical .. .. .. 123—127
Treasury \
Mint - .. .. .. .. .. .. 133 —145
Taxation J
Lands .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 146 —166
Agriculture .. .. .. .. .. .. 167 —180
Forestry .. .. .. .. .. . . .. iBr
Water Conservation and Irrigation .. .. .. 183-186
Mines and Mining .. .. .. .. .. 187 —210
Public Works .. .. .. .. .. .. 211 —216
Water Supply, &c .. .. .. .. .. 217 224
Education
Technical Instruction J
University
Colleges .. . . •. .. 226 —246
Schools
Museums
Libraries
Post and Telegraph .. .. .. .. .. 247 —252
Railways and Tramways .. .. .. .. 253—272
Law .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 273 —336
City and Port of Sydney .. .. .. .. 337 —339
PAGES
Customs .. .. .. .. .. •• .. 36° —362
Harbour Trust .. .. .. .. .. .. 362 —365
Navigation ,
Harbours and Lighthouses )
Fisheries .. .. .. .. .. .. 367—368
Observatory and Meteorological .. .. .. 368
Ecclesiastical .. .. .. .. .. .. 369-400
Architecture and Engineering .. .. .. 401 451
Naval and Military .. .. .. .. .. 452 —461
Consuls .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 462 —464
Local Government )
Municipal J 465—480
Fire Brigades .. .. .. .. .. .. 481 —484
Public Charities .. .. .. .. .. 483 —494
Medical Institutions .. .. .. .. .. 495 —496
Banking .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 497—542
Pastoral .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 343 —360
Insurance.. .. .. .. .. .. .. 561—608
Shipping and Shipbuilding .. .. .. .. 609—629
Trade and Manufactures .. .. .. .. 630
Wine Growers, Merchants, &c. .. .. .. 673 —678
Racing Clubs 679—680
Merchants 681—688
Newcastle and District .. .. .. .. Ni




The Cyclopedia of New South Wales.
HISTORICAL SKETCH OF THE STATE.
r I HE history of Australia—its discovery, its appro-
■ prialion, settlement and development by the
British race, partakes of the nature of a great
romance. As the years roll by, the absorbing
story of its rescue from
the oblivion of the past,
and the travail and
birth of the new great
nation destined to oc-
cupy its vast territory
in the ages to come,
will command an ever-
increasing interest
with each successive
generation of civilised
man. More especially
will the story prove an
inspiration to the im-
agination of the sons
and daughters of Aus-
tralia of each success-
ive generation. To
them it will be a
genuine source of pride
and glory, that not in
the clash of arms, nor
in the outpourings of
the precious life blood
of contending armies
was the genesis of the
great Commonwealth
of the South accom-
plished ; but by the
resolute, persistent and
heroic efforts of brave
men of our own race,
who, turning their
backs on the comforts
of civilised life, entered
the silence and solitude
of the great Southland,
and planted the seed
of a new nation. The
fathers of Australian
civilisation laboured
for something far great-
er than they had any
real conception of at
the time. True, the
heroic Phillip seemed
to have had a vision
of the coming glory,
when on that memor-
able january after-
Cl UiC J Cl line XL J
noon in the year 1788, on the side of the wooded hill
which sloped down to tiie shores of the peaceful waters
at the head of the little inlet of the majestic harbour so
recently discovered, and which he had just named
Sydney Cove, surrounded by the whole of his company,
bond as well as free, he gave utterance to the following
words: “ We are here to take possession of this fifth
division of the globe on behalf of the British people,
and to found a state
which we hope will
not only occupy and
rule this great country,
but will also be the
patroness of the entire
Southern Hemisphere.
Howgrand is the pros-
pect before the youth-
ful nation.” But not-
withstanding Phillip’s
prognostication, so
hopeful and, as after
events proved, so ac-
curate, there was little
reason in those days
to warrant the belief
that from so small and
unsatisfactory a begin-
ning, a century later
six comprehensive and
complex systems of
governments would be
in existence, with one
supreme power feder-
ating the whole a
power fashioned some-
what on the model of
the United States of
America, controlling
the destinies of six
virile States and oc-
cupying the whole of
the great island con-
tinent, only then
awakened from the
sleep of ages.
“ Terra Australis
Incognita.”
Up to the com-
mencement of the
seventeenth century,
the civilised nations of
the world were in
absolute ignorance of
the existence of any
extensive territory to
the south of the great East Indian Archipelago. True,
there were surmises. Even ancient classical writers
gave indefinite hints that away to the south there
existed a strange land which, in imagination, they filled
CAPTAIN COOK


with a still stranger people—but nothing more. Provi-
dence seems to have reserved this land for later day
occupation for some wise purpose —for some great
destiny. Had the Chinese been a maritime race
possessed of something of the enterprise of the ancient
Phoenicians, or of the modern Dutch or British, in all
probability, long prior to the discovery of New Holland
by European adventurers, the land would now have
been peopled by teeming millions of the followers
of Confucius. The general idea among the geographers
of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries seemed to
have been that a great unbroken continent existed,
which entirely surrounded and covered the South Pole,
and extended generally east and west in an irregular
coast-line right round the globe. This enormous area of
land surface, which was thought to be larger than
Europe, Asia, and Africa combined, presented an un-
broken front to the two northern great land divisions of
SYDNEY COVE, AUGUST 20, 1788.
Fac-simile of an Old Print from a Sketch by Governor Hunter.
the earth’s surface. In the maps of the period, Tierra
del Fuego. divided from South America by the narrow
O > J
Straits of Magellan, is made to appear as a portion of
this “ Terra Australis Incognita” From that point the
vast line is shown to run east at about twelve degrees
north of the Antarctic Circle. But somewhere near to the
sixtieth degree east longitude it breaks away to the
north-east, until it almost reaches an incongruous-looking
representation of the island of Java. From this it would
almost appear that some hazy idea existed of the western
coast of Australia. In “Frobisher's Voyages,” published
in 1578, the following quaint description of the supposed
great Southland appears: “ Terra Australis seemeth to
be a greate firme land aboute the south pole, being in
many places a fruitful soil, and is not yet thorowly dis-
covered but only seen and touched on the north edge
thereof by the travails of Portingales and Spaniards in
their voyages to their East and West Indies. It is
included almost by a parallel passing at 40 degrees in
south latitude, yet in some places it reacheth into the
sea with greate promontories even into the tropicke of
Capricornus." Even so late as 1625 the same extrava-
gant ideas concerning “Terra Australis Incognita”
o o o
prevailed. Purchas speaking of the land on the southern
side of the Straits (Magellan), said : “ This land about
the Straits is not perfectly discovered. Some take it for
continents and extend it more in their imagination than
any other man’s experience towards those islands of
Saloman and New Guinea, esteeming (of which there is
great probability) that Terra Australis or the Southern
Continent may, for the largeness thereof, take up a first
place in order, and the first in greatness in the division
and parting of the whole world.” The discovery of
America by Columbus, in 1492, gave a decided impetus
to colonisation and navigation. The nations of Europe
were fired with a desire to add to their territories, and
they vied with one another in every ambitious design
that had for its object the accumulation of wealth or an
increase in power. For a hundred years subsequent to
the discovery of America by Columbus the attention of
the great maritime nations of Europe was confined to
the western hemisphere. The whole of the newly-
discovered continent was circumnavigated times without
number, and by adventurers of every European nation.
During the latter half of the sixteenth century, navigators
had already begun the exploration of
the wild waste of waters that washed
the western shores of the two Americas.
De Quiros and
De Torres.
At the commencement of the
seventeenth century Pedro Fernandez
de Quiros and Luis Vaez de Torres
sailed away from Lima to the Western
Pacific and discovered the Terra del
Espiritu Santo, which, when re-
discovered by Cook, was found to
consist of many islands and which
were re-named by him the New
Hebrides. A quarrel having taken
place between these two navigators,
Torres sailed along the southern coast
of New Guinea and passed through
the straits to which his name was
subsequently given, and which separates New Guinea
from the mainland of Australia. It is certain that
Torres saw the most northern point of the continent
now known as Cape York, but it is evident also that
he merely regarded it as another of the many islands
he had seen in the course of his long and weary
voyage.
Discoveries by the Dutch.
Simultaneously with the setting out of the expe-
dition conducted by de Quiros and de Torres, the
Council of the Indies at Batavia despatched the
Duyfhen on a voyage of discovery to the already known
island of New Guinea. Venturing further south the
Dutch navigators unwittingly entered the great inden-
tation now known as the Gulf of Carpentaria and
actually landed upon its eastern shore. This happened
just five months before de Torres passed through the
straits that bears his name. To the Dutch, therefore,
belong the honour of being the first discoverers of the
great island continent. The Dutch did not at first
pursue their voyages of discovery, though the greatest
portion of the western coasts of the continent were
shortly afterwards first accidentlv seen by navigators
carryingon their commerce between Europe and Batavia.
Hartog, Zeehan. Von Edels, Van Nuyts. De Witt and
Carpenter discovered and explored a large portion of the
2
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


coast between 1616 and 1628. Abel Tasman, in 1642
discovered Tasmania, which he deemed to be a portion
ot the mainland. This conception was not proved to
TORRES SIGHTING CAPE YORK.
be a fallacious one until Bass, in 1798, passed through
the straits which bears his name.
Dampier the Intrepid British Navigator.
Among the many adventurous navigators of the
seventeenth and early part of the eighteenth centuries,
no name ranks higher than that of William Dampier. He
was the fii st Englishman who is known to have set foot on
the shores of Australia. Born in Somersetshire in 1652,
he served in the Dutch war, under Sir Charles Sprague,
in 1673. A year or two later he served in the West
Indian coasting trade. During the time he was thus
employed he was persuaded to join a party of buccaneers.
Crossing the Isthmus of Darien, Dampier and his party
played havoc with the Spaniards, plundering some of the
towns upon the coasts of Peru and Mexico, also captur-
ing Spanish vessels and annexing the spoils. His first
visit to Australia was in a buccaneering vessel from
Virginia, fitted out to exploit the Spanish settlements in
the South Seas. During the voyage the crew mutinied
and made Dampier commander, and whilst cruising
about for prizes he touched on the northern coast of
New Holland in 1688. In 1698 he was given charge of
the “ Roebuck,” a sloop of war of twelve guns and fifty
men. and was commissioned to proceed upon a voyage
of discovery to the South Seas. He reached the
western shores of New Holland in 1699, and made a
thorough examination and survey of the coast from
Shark Bay to Roebuck Bay.
Captain Cook’s Voyages and Discoveries.
We have little occasion to trace the experiences
of other navigators who visited the western portions
of Australia prior to the discovery of its eastern£shores
by Captain Cook in 1770. In 1768, at the instance
of the Royal Society the English Government
commissioned Captain James Cook to convey a party
of scientific men to Otaheite to make
observations of the transit of Venus
across the sun’s face, which it had
been calculated would occur on the
3rd of June, 1769. The “ Endeavour ”
was placed at his disposal, and
he undertook command. This expe-
dition was carried out successfully;
and Cook, in order to fulfil another
engagement contained in his com-
mission, entered upon the unravelling
of the mystery of the supposed great
southern continent. In order to make
his voyage one of circumnavigation
he, at the outset, made up his mind
to return to England by rounding the
Cape of Good Hope. First proceeding
to New Zealand, he circumnavigated
both islands, thus disposing of the idea
that they were a portion of any great
south land. After making a close obser-
vation of the coastline and physical
characteristics of the two islands, he
shaped his course towards Van Die-
man’s Land, which like New Zealand,
was a discovery of Tasman’s. Upon
his approach to its coast, a heavy gale arose, driving the
“ Endeavour ” away to the north, which caused Cook to
WILLIAM DAMPIER.
narrowly miss the then immediate object of his enterprise
—Van Dieman’s Land.
3
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


The First Sight of the real Terra Australis.
This storm was something more than a lucky
accident. In the light of all that has transpired since,
it can be regarded as no other than a dispensation of
Providence. Cook’s idea, as has already been noticed,
was to navigate the Southern Seas, to verify or dispel an
hypothesis that was more or less believed in for centuries.
COOK’S MONUMENT, HYDE PARK, SYDNEY
Possibly, after reaching the land of Van Dieman, he
would have proved it an island by circumnavigating it as
he had already done New Zealand. But in doing so,
very probably he would have missed the eastern shores
of Australia. Be that as it may, on the morning of April
19th, 1770, Hicks, his first lieutenant sighted land to the
north-west. This must have been what
is now known as the Ninety Mile Beach
of Gippsland. Upon making this dis-
covery, Cook decided to go north. Pass-
ing the sandy cape to which he gave the
name of Howe, he sailed along the great
unknown coast, closely observing its
outline, and at the same time looking for
some inviting opening where he might
land.
On April 28, nine days after Hicks’
discovery, he entered the heads of a
capacious harbour, which he afterwards
designated Botany Bay. Here the ship
cast anchor and a sojourn was made for
eight days. During the time of their
stay in the bay many efforts were made
to hold friendly communication with the
natives, but they refused to be approached.
Cook, with Banks and Solander, the
two naturalists, who solely in the
interests of natural science accompanied the expe-
dition, explored the country in the immediate vicinity
of the bay and made one short trip inland. Plants and
flowers hitherto unknown to science were discovered,
the latter in such profusion as to suggest a name to the
newly discovered harbour. It was an unfortunate
circumstance that among the many rambles which the
party must have made during their eight days’ stay
the existence of the adjoining harbour on the north
was not disclosed to them. Fate evidently ordained it
to be otherwise. After making close and practical obser-
vations as to the qualities of the soil in the vicinity of the
bay, and other physical characteristics such as would
commend themselves to Cook’s practical intelligence,
anchor was weighed, and on the morning of May 6th,
1770, the “Endeavour” sailed out. Before doing so,
however, the gallant captain planted the British flag
and claimed the territory in the name of his Britannic
Majesty, King George HI. Passing north, close obser-
vations of the long stretch of coast-line were made until
Torres Straits was reached. Upon his return Captain
Cook tendered his report to the Admiralty—one of the
most important which even that great department of
British Administration has ever received. The im-
mediate result of Cook’s voyage was the complete
dissipation of the erroneous conception of “ Terra Aus-
tralis Incognita.” In place of a great Southland stretch-
from the tropic of Capricornus to the south pole, as
suggested by the ancient geographers, an island in area
fully equal to two-thirds of the whole of Europe and
lying within the temperate and sub-tropical zones was
presented to civilisation. True the western and northern
portions had long previously been discovered and chart-
ed, but to all intents and purposes Cook’s achievement
was a new discovery and proved epoch-making in its
results. His dispelling of the illusion of “Terra Aus-
tralis Incognita ”is referred fcVin a long but now almost
forgotten poem by T. K. Hervey, entitled “ Australia,”
portions of which are quoted by G. B. Barton in his
comprehensive history of New South Wales. Cook’s
triumphant work is honoured in the following lines:—
Before his daring soul and piercing eye
Behold that polar vision darkly fly !
See from its throne upon the waters, hurled
The shapeless phantom of a Southern World.
BOTANY BAY, THE FIRST LANDING PLACE.
The territory thus annexed by Captain Cook to the
British Crown stretched from latitude 38 degrees
Point Hicks, just below Cape Howe—to latitude
io| degrees south —Cape York; this he designated


New South Wales because of some fancied resemblance
which he thought he detected in its coast-line to that
of South Wales. The name is an unfortunate and a
clumsy one, and ill befits the mother State of the group
which constitutes the Commonwealth of Australia.
The Dilemma of the British Government.
Although the reports of Cook’s three, voyages to
the southern hemisphere created great interest in
Great Britain, nothing was done to confirm the action
of the intrepid navigator in taking possession of the
newly-discovered territory of the east coast of Australia
in the name of his Britannic Majesty , still it was not
disallowed. The fact was England had her hands
sufficiently full with more important matters nearer
home. In addition to wars with foreign nations, her
relations with her North American colonies were
strained, which culminated in their separation from the
mother country six years later, after a prolonged con-
flict. There is a distinct connection between that
event and the determination of the British Government
to make use of the territory which Captain Cook had
taken possession of a decade or more previously. In
the dilemma in which the British Government found
itself in consequence of the loss of her American
colonies, the feasibility of colonising New South Wales
was again and again considered. There were two great
difficulties which confronted the British Government
of the time, the greatest and most important of which
was how to give adequate relief to the loyalists—that
is to say, to that small section of the American colonists
who had remained faithful to the old flag during the
stormy days of the revolution This unfortunate
section of the American community at the declaration
of peace found themselves in the most unpleasant of
circumstances conceivable. The British Government
was bound in honour to find some place where they
could live in peace and given a chance to repair their
shattered fortunes. In this perplexing situation the
authorities were strongly urged by one James Matra,
who had been a subordinate officer on the “ Endeavour,”
to colonise New South Wales. He addressed the home
government again and again on the subject, pointing
out — [a) that the territory was suitable for colonisation,
and would atone for the loss of the American colonies ;
( b ) that it would afford an asylum for the American
loyalists; ( c) that the initial expenses of founding a
settlement at Botany Bay need not exceed
(1 d) that the proposed colony would improve trade with
China and open up commercial intercourse with Japan,
Corea and the Moluccas ; ( e) that convicts could be
transported to the new territory under more favourable
circumstances as regards expense and other practical
considerations than to any other country, and with far
greater prospects for their ultimate reformation. 1 he
other difficulty which the government had to face was
one that was bound up with the former. It was, what
can be done with the prison population of Great
Britain now that she was dispossessed of her American
colonies ? When Matra’s suggestions were placed
before the government the plan suggested itself to
many of the leading public men of the old land as a
good solution of the difficulty. But Australia seemed
so far off. A great deal of time was also wasted in the
consideration of other schemes. An expedition was
even despatched to the western coast of Africa in
search of a more suitable country, but that resulted in
failure. In her foreign relations Great Britain’s hands
were full. Another life and death struggle seemed to
be impending between her and her great neighbour,
France. Everything seemed to conspire to shelve the
consideration of this problem, consequently during the
ensuing five years nothing was done. In the meantime
the loyalists of North America, tired of waiting for
redress from 1 tie government they had so faithfully
SIR JOSEPH BANKS.
served, solved their own difficulty by emigrating to
Canada. This was a relief to the home government,
but the remaining problem every year became increas-
ingly serious. The prisons of the nation became filled to
overflowing. The barbarous penal code then in opera-
tion manufactured infinitely more criminals than it
prevented A new penal colony was now an absolute
necessity. At last the government, by the mere force
of circumstances, was moved to action, and an Act was
passed through the British Parliament authorising the
transportation of offenders to “ some place beyond the
seas.” After much deliberation New South Wales
was chosen, and Botany Bay, as recommended by
James Matra, Sir John Young, Sir Joseph Banks and
others, was determined upon as the immediate site for
the new penal colony.
Captain Arthur Phillip selected.
Lord Sydney, Secretary of State for the Home
Department, recognised the necessity of selecting ror
the administrative position a man of great wisdom and
practical experience in controlling men, since upon the
first governor of the proposed new colony the success


of a great and serious undertaking absolutely depended.
Sydney’s choice fell upon Captain Arthur Phillip, who
at the time of his appointment held the position of post
captain in the Royal Navy, had fought in the seven
years’ war, and had gained distinction in the more
recent war with France. Immediately upon the receipt
of his commission Captain Phillip entered upon the
work of preparing for the expedition. He personally
supervised all the arrangements in detail, and assisted in
the selection of the ships necessary for the transportation
of those who were to form the new colony. According to
Lieut. King, in his M.S.S journal of the “ Voyage to
Botany Bay,” the chief ship of the fleet was a Berwick
store-ship that had previously been employed in the East
Indian trade. This vessel was of 480 tons burthen. It
was subjected to a thorough overhauling and converted
into a frigate with 20 guns “ Her name,” says
GOVERNOR ARTHUR PHILLIP.
King, “ was changed to the ‘ Sirius,’ the bright star in
the southern constellation of the Great Dog.” Captain
John Hunter was given working command of the
“Sirius.” An armed tender of 170 tons burthen was
the next selection. This was the “ Supply,” which was
fitted with 8 guns. Of this ship King speaks dis-
paragingly. He writes: “ Her size is much too small
for so long a voyage, which, added to her not
being able to carry any quantity of provisions and her
sailing very ill, renders her a very improper vessel for
the service.” And well might King speak condem-
natory of the “ Supply.” For a journey to the almost
unknown land of the antipodes and over unknown
waters in such a vessel seemed like tempting fate.
Then there were the six transports—the “ Alexander,”
452 tons; “Lady Penrhyn,” 333 tons: “Charlotte,”
335 tons ; “ Friendship,” 274 tons ; “ Prince of Wales,”
350 tons : and three store-ships—the “ Fishburn,” 378
tons; “Golden Grove,” 375 tons; and the “ Borra-
dale,’ 1 *275 tons. These were the ten vessels which
made up the famous first fleet which set sail under the
command of Phillip on the 17th May, 1787.
Despatch of the First Fleet
On board the ten ships that composed that first fleet
there were no less than one thousand and seventeen
souls —men, women and children. Of this number no
less than 756 were exiles, 564 males and 192 females.
The remainder were officers and soldiers and a number
of free men who were enamoured of the prospect of a
new life in a new land.
The following officers accompanied the first fleet to
Botany Bay, and composed Phillip’s staff: Robert
Rose, Lieutenant-Governor and Judge of the Admiralty
Court ; David Collins, Judge Advocate and Secretary
to the Governor ; Augustus Alt, Surveyor-General ;
Andrew Miller, Commissary of Stores and Provisions ;
Zechariah Clark, Assistant Commissary ; Henry
Brewer, Provost Marshal ; and James Smith, Peace
Officer. The Rev. Richard Johnson was the chaplain
of the fleet, and will be known throughout history as
the first clergyman to permanently reside in the colony.
Of the naval establishment were : Captain John Hunter ;
Lieutenants Philip Gidley King, William Bradley,
George William Maxwell and Henry Lidgbird Ball.
In the military establishment were ; Major Robert
Ross, Commandant ; Captains James Campbell, John
Shea, James Meredith, Watkin Tench, George
Johnston, John Creswell, John Johnstone, James
Maitland Shairp, Ralph Clarke, William Dawes and
several others. Adjutant John Long and Quarter-
master James Furzer completed the list of officers.
The voyage was a long, tedious, and perilous one,
for it was not until the 18th of January the following
year that Captain Phillip entered the heads of Botany
Bay. Anchoring in the shelter of South Head, an
immediate examination of the land surrounding the bay
proved its unsuitableness. It was consequently found
necessary that some other site should be selected.
Remembering the “ small boat harbour” a few miles
to the north, which Captain Cook had designated Port
Jackson, a trip was made thither by Phillip. What was
his surprise to find that the “small boat harbour”
opened up into a magnificent port of deep water,
entirely land-locked, with numerous inlets and dotted
with verdure-clad islets. After spending a day or two
in exploring this newly-discovered harbour and fixing
upon Sydney Cove as a suitable site for disembarking,
Phillip and his company returned to the fleet in Botany
Bay, when immediate preparations were made for
departure. Port Jackson was entered by the fleet on
January 26th, 1788, and the same afternoon Phillip,
hoisting his colours ashore, and assembling his officers
round the flagstaff, drank the King’s health and success
to the settlement, with all the display of force which on
such occasions is deemed propitious, and founded the
city of Sydney.
Ihe very morning of the departure of the fleet
from Botany Bay for the newly selected site in Port
Jackson, two French ships, the “ Boussole ” and the
“ Astrolabe,” commanded by Admiral La Perouse,
rode throngh Botany Heads. As the French vessels
cast anchor in the bay the fleet under Governor
Phillip sailed out. That evening the Union Jack
floated from a hastily-erected flagstaff on the point
now known as Dawes Point. On February 7th, 1788.
Phillip gathered the whole settlement on a cleared
space, the military under arms, and the convicts


Standing apart. His commission was read by the
Judge Advocate, a triple discharge of musketry followed,
and the ceremony concluded with a speech from the
Governor which was received with acclamation. Thus
were laid the foundations of civilisation on Australian
soil.
Famine Threatens the Settlement.
We can but faintly imagine to-day the difficulties
and privations the founders of the new settlement had to
contend with and endure during the few years that
immediately followed the arrival of the first fleet in
1788. The scheme of settlement was based upon the
provision that as soon as possible the colony should be
self-supporting. Among the first things to be done,
therefore, was to commence the cultivation of the soil.
geon’s mate, two marines, two men who understood the
cultivation of flax (that was the immediate object of the
settlement of the island), with nine men and six women
convicts. Later on two hundred convicts, with a guard
of seventy marines, were sent to the island. Ihe
“ Sirius,” in command of Captain Hunter, was sub-
sequently despatched to the Cape for a fresh supply of
flour. In the following year the prospect was so lower-
ing that Phillip sent an earnest appeal to the Home
Government to forward to the colony regular and
adequate supplies. In his despatches he pointed out
that little could be expected from the cultivation of the
soil for some time to come, not only because the land in
the neighbourhood of the settlement suitable for agri-
culture was limited in area, but among the community
A GLIMPSE OF PORT JACKSON IN 1842. FROM THE ENTRANCE TO THE DOMAIN, MACQUARIE STREET .
A small area was put under cultivation at the head of
Farm Cove, the next indentation of the harbour east
from Sydney Cove ; but this not proving a success, a
second, and more extensive area, was placed under
cultivation November 4th, 17885 on a s^e the head
of the Parramatta River named Rose Hill.
Before the end of the year of the colony’s foundation
it was seen that unless fresh supplies were received from
the outside world, the community would be brought face
to face with starvation. Phillip sent one of his ships,
the “Supply,” under the command of Lieutenant King,
to Norfolk Island, which he had already been instructed
to occupy. King took with him a petty officer, a sur-
so far there were very few who had any practical know-
ledge of farming. In addition to other calamities the
colony suffered the loss of a number of its sheep. Most
of the cattle strayed away. The Home authorities paid
little heed to Phillip’s earnest entreaties to forward
regular supplies to the settlement Things went from
bad to worse. For a lengthened period in 1789 and
1790 every member of the community, from the
Governor downwards, had to be placed on short allow-
ance. Phillip’s private stock of flour had long since
been absorbed into the general stores. The danger of
famine was accentuated in the arrival of more transpoits
which considerably augmented the population, while
little additional food supplies were received.


Parramatta Established.
In July, 1790, a town was surveyed contiguous to
Rose Hill plantation, the principal street being one mile
in length with a breadth of 205 feet, and on the 4th
June, 1791 —the King’s birthday—the Governor pro-
claimed and named the proposed new town “ Parra-
matta.” But Phillip was not content with what he
had already achieved towards cultivating the soil.
Notwithstanding the absence of good agriculturists
within the colony, he assiduously searched the sur-
rounding country for cultivation. He explored the
Hawkesbury Valley from its mouth to the Grose
junction and succeeded in finding considerable areas
of good land at various points more or less accessible
to the settlement.
During the first three years disaster followed
disaster, crops failed, store-ships were wrecked and,
because of other misadventures, provisions failed to
arrive. The Governor, through every difficulty and
disaster, kept a stout heart. He never wavered in his
duty but actively controlled the various efforts that
were put forward to establish the settlement on an en-
during basis, and this notwithstanding the condition
of his health which, at the test of times, was precarious.
By the middle of the year 1792 the danger of a per-
manent famine was passed. Three store-ships had
arrived and the various agricultural settlements were
now in a thriving condition. In the Parramatta dis-
trict alone, which had now a population of over two
thousand,there were between sixty and seventy farmers
working their own land. A settlement was also formed
at Toongabbie. In Sydney which, of course, was the
official headquarters, there were still over a thousand
inhabitants, notwithstanding that so many had been
remove:! to Norfolk Island and to Parramatta.
The Value of Phillip’s Work.
He held the office until it was clear to him that his
health would never be such that would admit of him
returning to New South Wales to again
active work of administration. In July, 1793, ie * :en "
dered his resignation which was accepted by the Govern-
ment with regret. His services were acknowledged by
the grant of a pension of £soo per annum, and in 1801
he was promoted to the rank of an Admiral. His death
took place at Bath, on August 31st, 1814. It is possible
that a far more correct estimate of the value of Phillip’s
services can be made now, than at any other
period, since the trying days of his administration.
For nearly tw'o years the population he governed
were face to face with starvation, yet his courage
never failed. He carried out his instructions from
the Home authorities, except where it was im-
possible for him to do so to the very letter. He laid
the foundations of the colony upon an enduring basis,
although during the whole of his regime it was mainly but
a great penal establishment. He offered all encourage-
ment for the immigration of a free population, and not-
withstanding the harsh penal code which in those days
governed in the administration of justice, where possible
he exercised his powers with clemency and in accordance
with the dictates of humanity. In fine his adminis-
tration was such, that upon tendering his resignation to
the British government, he could in all truth write, “ I
have the consolation of believing that I have discharged
the trust reposed in me to the satisfaction of His
Majesty’s ministry.”
Major Grose Administers the Government.
Upon the departure of Phillip in 1792, Major
Grose, who had brought with him in February of that
Captain Phillip applies for Leave
of Absence.
In April, 1790, Captain Phillip ap-
plied for a year’s leave of absence, and
in March following he renewed the re-
quest on the grounds of ill health. His
despatches disclose the fact that during
the term of his arduous administration
he suffered acutely from an old ailment.
In November, 1791, finding himself
no better he wrote requesting permission
“ to resign the government in order that
he might obtain that relief which the
country could not afford.” In the latter
end of 1792, after four years of incessant
and strenuous service, Phillip relinquished the active
administration of the colony he had founded. On
December 10th of that year he embarked on board
the “Atlantic” in order to return to England. The
following morning, says Collins, at daylight the
“Atlantic” was got under way and at eight o’clock
was clear of the heads. Although Phillip had
severed his connection with the colony he was still
its Governor.
OLD GOVERNMENT HOUSE. PARRAMATTA.
year his commission as lieutenant-governor, assumed
the powers of administration, but in a temporary
capacity only. In 1789 he had been commissioned
by the Home Government to raise a corps of
infantry for special service in New South Wales.
This body of military, first consisting of 300, but after-
wards being increased to 500 men, was the real power
which governed New South Wales, until its colonial
career came to an inglorious conclusion through the part


it took in the deposition of Governor Bligli. Its rule con-
stituted the darkest page in the early history of New
South Wales colonisation. It was never the intention of
the Home Government to confirm Grose in the Governor-
ship of the colony. Almost his first executive act was to
suspend the civil authority and establish in its place
military rule. What induced him to take this step is
not known. His reasons for so doing were never com-
municated to the British Government. Early in 1793,
he deprived justices of their power and transferred all
magisterial functions to the officers of the New South
Wales Crops. Phillip’s high endeavour throughout the
disposed of them to anyone who would purchase at
prices which gave them enormous profits. The con-
sequence was that drunkenness and debauchery spread
throughout the settlement to the almost total destruction
of discipline and good government. Other disasters
were threatening the country. In the early part of
Grose’s administration the stock of food in the country
was so great, that a cargo of provisions, brought into
port by a speculative trader, was refused. Twelve
months later, the settlement was again threatened with
short commons ; indeed, upon one occasion the stores
were closed, but the situation was saved by the timely
OLD SOUTH HEAD ROAD, WITH SIR E. DEAS-THOMSON’S HOUSE AND WINDMILLS
AT WOOLLOOMOOLOO.
whole of his administration, had been the reformation of
the criminal. His policy was to prevent the convicts
from obtaining any spirits whatever, but immediately
upon his departure from the cclony, this wise design was
reversed and the military officers took advantage of the
opportunity afforded them by Grose, to make money
by a traffic in spirits. Spirits and wine were imported
in bulk not only from England, but from India, America
and the Cape of Good Hope. Calcutta and other
Indian merchants took advantage of the opportunity
and catered especially for the infamous trade. Govern-
ment spirits were sold to officers at cost price, and they
arrival of a store-ship from Great Britain. The ad-
ministration of Grose, however, is to a certain extent
redeemed in the encouragement he gave to the culti-
vation of the soil, and in the opening up of fresh dis-
tricts for agriculture generally.
In December, 1794, in order to confer with the
Home authorities regarding the condition of affairs in
the settlement, Grose departed for England. As com-
mander of the military and as lieutenant-governor,
Captain Paterson was his successor. This officer made
a genuine effort to confine within reasonable bounds the
infamous traffic in spirits, but he was too much under


was made in exploration, and the discovery of coal at
Newcastle, in 1796, gave the first impetus to the de-
velopment of colonial resources Earlier in the same
year three of the crew of the “ Sydney Cove,” which
had been wrecked in Bass 1 Straits, reached Sydney
overland and reported the existence of coal in an out-
crop on a cliff now known as Mount Keira, some forty
miles or so to the south of Sydney, The discovery
having been verified, Governor Hunter mentioned the
the domination of the New South Wales Corps to effect
any lasting reform. In other respects his policy was
the same as that of his predecessor; he made no effort
to restore civil authority in the government of the
settlements. During his and Grose’s administration
the country progressed in agriculture, but the harshness
of military rule, allied with the debauched social con-
ditions that prevailed throughout every settled district,
was deplorable in the extreme.
Captain John Hunter appointed Governor.
In 1795 the British Government appointed Captain
John Hunter, formerly of the “Sirius,” to the Governor-
ship of the colony of New South Wales. The Home
authorities delayed the appointment of a successor to
Governor Phillip in the hope that he would yet be
induced to return to the colony and resume the work he
had so well performed. The effect of the Government’s
tardiness in taking action in this respect was, as has
already been seen, destructive of the well-being of the
infant settlement. This disgraceful condition of affairs
in the colony were well known in England, for Hunter
brought with him express instructions to suppress the
traffic in spirits altogether. To his credit it must be
said, he made an honest endeavour to carry out his
instructions. But, unfortunately, he found the official
ring too strong for him to control. He came repeatedly
into conflict with his military officers. His resolute
refusal to allow the landing of large cargoes of wines
and spirits, brought upon him the most virulent opposi-
tion of all those who benefited by the traffic.
Notwithstanding this opposition, he restored to the
civil magistrates their functions, which had been trans-
ferred to the military during the years of Grose’s and
Paterson’s administrations. Hunter, in a despatch to
the Home Government, said : “ After the departure of
Governor Phillip, a general change took place. All his
plans and regulations were completely laid aside. The
civil magistrates were superseded entirely, and all the
duties respecting the distribution of justice, and every
other concern of that office was taken into the hands
of the military.”
During Hunter’s administration the colony, in
material conditions, made headway. Great progress
FIRST GOVERNMENT BUILDINGS IN
AUSTRALIA.
GOVERNOR JOHN HUNTER.
fact in his despatches to the Home Government. An
attempt was made a little later to open up a coal
trade with South Africa, but nothing came of the
proposal.
An era of Maritime Discovery and Land
Exploration.
The early Governors who succeeded Phillip did not
contribute much towards the exploration of the interior.
Their chief purpose seems to have been to preserve as far
as possible the character of the settlement as a great
penal establishment. They regarded the mountains as a
good natural barrier to keep the convicts within bounds.


In 1799 a convict named Wilson escaped and crossed
the Mittagong tableland and discovered the Lachlan.
The revelation of a great fertile country beyond the
mountains was a circumstance more disconcerting to
Hunter than otherwise, and he discountenanced all efforts
to have the country properly examined. Notwithstand-
ing his disinclination to encourage explorations, the
Grose and Nattai valleys were thoroughly examined by
private enterprise. This was undertaken with a view to
the discovery of a passage across the mountains.
Discoveries by Bass and Flinders.
The sea was of more importance to these naval
administrators than all the land territory in Australia.
remarkable. That intrepid navigator visited, examined,
and charted the eastern coast of Australia north from
Port Jackson as far as Hervey Bay. Upon the com-
pletion of this work, he took his maps to England where
the merits of his achievements were acknowledged by the
Admiralty. He was then granted a commission to make
a complete survey of the whole of the Australian coast,
and in order to do so was given a ship, the “ Investigator,”
with full powers of control and command. Upon arrival
on the west coast of Australia he commenced his work at
Cape Leeuwin and a week later entered King George’s
Sound.
After making the necessary investigations and
soundings he proceeded along the Great Australian
ST. JAMES’ CHURCH AND SUPREME COURT IN THE OLD DAYS
It was their natural element. Therefore, when two
young officers of the “ Reliance ” —the ship in which
Governor Hunter arrived in the colony—George Bass,
the surgeon, and Matthew Flinders, a midshipman,
urged upon the Governor to permit them to explore the
coast south from Sydney, they were granted an oppor-
tunity of entering upon the work.
To the former belongs the honour of proving that
Tasmania was not, as hitherto supposed, a portion of the
mainland of Australia. The wide channel which separates
the former from the latter received his name and per-
petuates his memory. The discoveries of Flinders were
Bight, a coast beheld by no white man since 1627,
when it was discovered by the Dutch and named
“Peter Nuyts Band.” From here he sailed eastwards,
charting the coast as he went until he arrived at
Kangaroo Island, where he landed and explored the
interior. Proceeding onwards he shortly fell in with
the French ship “ Fe Geographe,” under the command
of the intrepid Captain Baudin, who, strange to say,
had been surveying the coast-line westward from West-
ern Port. After exchanging courtesies and particulars
of their respective discoveries, Flinders continued his
work and sailed into the expansive sheet of water


which had been visited only ten weeks previously by
Captain Murray, of the “ Lady Wilson,” and named
by him Port Phillip Bay. It is rather remarkable
that Captain Baudin, of “ Le Geographe,” although on
a surveying expedition, should have missed this bay.
After a brief sojourn in Sydney, Flinders proceeded
northward and took up the work of surveying the east
coast at Hervey Bay, at the point he left off before
going to England. Rounding Cape York he continued
his work until he reached, in the Gulf of Carpentaria,
the point where the old Dutch navigators had left off.
This completed the work of his commission, and
Flinders was ready to return to England. The
“Investigator” was now found to be in an utterly
unseaworthy condition and he was obliged to make
other arrangements. Upon his return to Sydney he
started for England in a small schooner, the “ Cumber-
land.” Unfortunately, he found it necessary to put in
at the Mauritius, then held by France, where he was
detained and imprisoned. On what charge his detention
was made is not clear. His papers were seized and
sent to France. Here he remained until 1810, when
he found that all his work had been appropriated by
the French geographers. The publication of his jour-
nals, copies of which had been left with the Adminis-
trative at Sydney, restored to him the credit of his
work, notwithstanding the fact that his maps had been
published with French names as the result of Baudin’s
voyage. It is right it should be mentioned in this
connection that Baudin himself has been exonerated
from any share in this imposition. To Flinders belongs
the honour of suggesting the application of the name
“Australia” to that of the island continent, replacing
that of the ancient title of “ New Holland,”
When Governor Hunter was recalled to England
in 1800 the population of the colony had reached six
thousand.
Philip Gidley King’s Administration.
Upon the recall of Governor Hunter Captain
Philip Gidley King, who had shown capacity as an
administrator in the establishment and control of the
Norfolk Island settlement, was called to assume the
governorship of New South Wales. He arrived in the
colony with the first fleet as the lieutenant of the
“ Sirius.” Pie proved to be one of Phillip’s best
officers, rendering him invaluable service in the
pioneering work associated with the founding of the
settlement. Phillip and King always worked har-
moniously together, and it is more than probable that
had King followed Phillip in the administration the
dark pages of early New South Wales history would
never have been recorded. His official instructions
were “ to order and direct that no spirits be landed
from any vessel coming to Port Jackson without your
consent.” Plis resolute endeavour to carry out this
order brought him into direct conflict with the “official
monopoly.” Determined to carry out the requirements
of his Government, King incurred the bitterest oppo-
sition as well as the resentment of those officers who
“ waxed fat ” on the degrading traffic. But notwithstand-
ing the most virulent abuse and truculent opposition, he
issued stringent regulations restricting the importation
of liquors. In many instances he absolutely prohibited
the landing of cargoes proved to contain large quantities
of wines and spirits. During his term of office, which
closed in 1806, he had sent back altogether nearly
70,000 gallons of spirits and 32,000 gallons of wine.
The Troubles of Governor King.
In addition to the troubles thus thrust upon him in
his capacity as administrator, Governor King had also to
contend with almost insurmountable difficulties in his
control of the convict section of the community. The
terrible vindictiveness of the penal code in operation
during the initial years of the settlement, was not con-
ducive to the reformation of criminals. It not only
helped to make bad men worse, but it made men in
whom good instincts lived irreclaimably bad. The sys-
tem in vogue destroyed all hope within the breast of
GOVERNOR PHILIP GIDLEY KING.
men who ardently desired to live good lives. The efforts
of men like Phillip and King, and the clergymen who
were appointed to minister at the settlement, were frus-
trated not only by the iniquitous traffic in spirits but by
the penal code itself. It was no wonder, therefore, that
men tried to escape, and that conspiracies and mutinies
were of frequent occurrence. Probably the most serious
of these outbreaks occurred in 1802. A large number of
men, said to have consisted of three hundred of the most
refractory of the convicts, were working in chain
gangs on the road to Castle Hill and leading from
Parramatta to Windsor. A small force of soldiers was
in control. The prisoners overpowered the guard, and
freeing themselves of their chains, they marched towards
the Hawkesbury in the expectation of receiving rein-
forcements from another large body of men then employed
near Windsor. These men had become possessed of a
wild idea that they could ultimately overpower the
military authorities and make their escape to one of the


islands of the Pacific. 1 heir career was, however, cut
short by the appearance on the scene of Major Johnston,
who, with twenty men only, routed the insurgents. The
ringleaders, six in number, were hanged ; the others
■\\ere allowed to return to their work, but were placed
under a more strict surveillance.
Expeditions to the Derwent and Port Phillip.
It seemed apparent to King that the intentions of
the French were towards annexation, else how could the
presence of Baudin and other French navigators at
various times, surveying, charting and making observa-
tions round the Australian coast be explained ? In
1803 the settlement of Tasmania was decided upon. In
August of that year, two ships under the command of Lieu-
ANCHOR OF H.M.S. “SIRIUS,’ IN MACQUARIE PLACE, AND
ON WHICH THE FOLLOWING INSCRIPTION APPEARS:-
“ This Anchor belonged to H.M.S. ‘ Sirius,’ which convoyed
the first fleet, sailed from the Isle of Wight 13th May, 1787,
arrived in Botany Bay 20th January, 1788, anchored in Sydney
Cove, Saturday 26th January, 1788, and was wrecked 19th March,
1790, at Point Ross, Norfolk Island, whence this anchor was
recovered through the efforts of Sir F, B. Suttor. Erected
1907.”
tenant Bowen left Sydney, containing a large company
of convicts and the necessary military. Proceeding up
the /Derwent, Lieutenant Bowen selected the site at
Risdon Cove as the most suitable, where he established
the first camp. Upon this settlement the name of
Hobart Town was in honour of the then
Secretary of State for the Colonies, Lord Hobart.
About the same time another expedition under
Lieutenant-Colonel Collins was despatched to Port
Phillip Bay ; that officer, however, reported adversely
to the site. The idea of establishing a settlement in
that locality was abandoned, and instructions were
given for his removal to Van Dieman’s Land.
Departure of Governor King
Governor King delivered up his trust in 1806. As
an administrator, he was a worthy successor of Captain
Arthur Phillip. Worn out with the heavy responsibili-
ties of his office and with the incessant strife in which he
was perpetually engaged, he was glad when the relief
came in i8o6»
The party that insisted upon carrying on the ne-
farious traffic which stood condemned by the Home
administration, and which had proved so destructive of
all reform and so subversive of all good government,
hailed with joy the day of his departure. King had not
been so successful towards suppressing the rum traffic as
he wished, but he had carried on a gallant fight against
overwhelming odds. He had at least done someihing
towards restricting it within moderate bounds, and be-
cause of this he was compelled to bear the opprobrium of
those who should have supported him in his administra-
tion. When he left New South Wales the population
numbered 9,642, of whom 5,172 were males and 1,701,
females. The total area of land under occupation, was
165,882 acres, of which n,6gi acres were cultivated and
144,805 were used for pnsture. The number of sheep
had increased to 10,389, while the cattle numbered
2,128; horses, 518; pigs, 6,787 ; goats, 2,283. These
figures include Norfolk Island and Van Dieman’s
Land.
The Romantic Administration of Captain Bligh.
Upon the departure of Governor King, Captain
Bligh, the hero of a remarkable adventure known as the
Mutiny of the Bounty, was appointed to the Governor-
ship. Similarly to his predecessor he commenced his
GOVERNOR WILLIAM BLIGH
administration by the issue of a stringent proclamation
forbidding the bartering of spirits and wines for other
commodities, or of their application as payment for labour
or services rendered. This brought down upon himself,
as it did upon King, the bitterest resentment of all in-
volved in the traffic. In spite of all his vigilance and


determination an extensive illicit traffic in liquors was
carried on during his term. The romance of his regime
was his celebrated dispute with Captain Macarthur,
which ended in his deposition from office by Major
Johnston. The quarrel commenced in regard to a claim
preferred against Macarthur by the crew of a vessel
of which he was part owner. The military officers,
smarting under the despotic administration of Bligh, to
a man almost supported that officer. An order was
issued against Macarthur with regard to the claim and
with which he refused to comply. He was then placed
under arrest, but the officers of his regiment immediately
released him from custody. They recognised that this
Lieutenant-Governor of the Derwent Settlement, to
proceed to Sydney to temporarily administer the
government. At the same time Macarthur and
Johnston proceeded to England in order to explain their
conduct to the home authorities. In this grave quarrel
it is right to say that Macarthur had little to do with the
spirit traffic. True he was an officer of the New South
Wales Corps, but his time was fully occupied in his
sheepbreeding and agricultural affairs. He incurred the
ill-will of Bligh from the outset of hisMficial career,
probably because he was a “ strong man, more perhaps
because he was an officer of the Corps whose power
Bligh was determined to curtail. Ihe fact that
A VIEW OF WOOLLOOMOOLOO BAY IN THE OLD DAYS.
FROM OLD SOUTH HEAD ROAD.
daring deed would recoil upon their own heads unless
something effectual was done, and that quickly. At the
critical moment, Major Johnston acting as Lieutenant-
Governor and at the urgent request of Macarthur’s party,
marched the regiment from the barracks to Government
House with band playing and colours flying. The
Governor and the civilian officials were arrested, and
the next morning the Corps went through the farce of
formally deposing Bligh, and Major Johnston took the
administration of the Colony into his own hands. He
however, did not retain it for any length of time,
Lieutenant-Colonel Foveaux eventually superseded him.
Bligh was kept under arrest for a year, when despatches
came from England instructing Colonel Paterson,
Macarthur was a man of enterprise did not concern him
in the least, but that he was associated with the spirit
monopolists and therefore an insubordinate, did. At
the court-martial which subsequently took place on
Major Johnston, Macarthur in the course of his
evidence said: “I went to Government House; this
was about a month after he had taken command. I
found him walking in the garden, disengaged and alone.
Thinking it a proper opportunity to speak to him on
the subject of my affairs, I inquired if he had been
informed of the wishes of the Government respecting
them, 1 particularly alluded to the sheep and the
probable advantage that might result to the colony and
the mother country from the production of fine wool.


He burst out instantly into a most violent passion.,
exclaiming, ‘ What have I to do with your sheep, sir ?
What have Ito do with your cattle ? Are you to have
such flocks of sheep and such herds of cattle as no man
ever heard of before? No, sir!’ I endeavoured to
appease him by stating that I had understood the
government at home had particularly recommended
me to his notice. He replied, ‘ I have heard of your
concerns, sir ; you have got five thousand acres of land
in the finest situation in the country, but by God you
shan’t keep it.” Upon the news of Bligh’s deposition
reaching England Colonel Lachlan Macquarie was de-
spatched tothecolony asGovernor. He wasinstructed by
Lord Castlereagh to arrest Major Johnston on a charge
GOVERNOR LACHLAN MACQUARIE.
of mutiny and to send him to England. He was also to
reinstate Governor Bligh for twenty-four hours and then
to assume the powers of government himself. As Bligh
was absent from the colony this could not be done. The
court-martial resulted in the cashieringof Major Johnston,
and Captain Macarthnr was forbidden to return to New
South Wales. After six years’ banishment this sentence
was revoked, and the exile allowed to come back to the
land of his adoption. Upon Major Johnston’s return to
the colony he was accorded a reception by that section
of the community who approved of his action.
The Administration of Governor Macquarie.
Macquarie arrived in Sydney on the last day of the
year 1809, bringing with him a detachment of his
regiment —the 73rd —in supersession of the notorious
New South Wales Corps, which was to be sent back to
England at once. The first step, after carrying out, as
far as he was able to do so, his instructions with regard
to the matter of the deposition of Governor Bligh, was
to declare null and void all the acts of administration
done by its officers during their usurpation of authority,
which, of course, were absolutely unlawful. Their grants
of land and their pardons were all revoked as illegal,
and all documents issued by them were recalled. After
vindicating the authority of constituted government,
Macquarie re-issued all grants and pardons. He also
legalised other documents and actions where it was
necessary to do so.
Macquarie just as vigorously, but with infinitely more
tact than either of his predecessors, opposed the iniqui-
tous rum traffic, and succeeded ultimately in suppressing
the illicit system which happily resulted in the moral and
industrial advancement of the colony. Every effort that
had for its object the moral elevation of the people
received the cordial support of Macquarie. All branches
of the Christian Church received encouragement in every
work that aimed at the moral and spiritual regeneration
of the colonists. In all his activities he had an earnest
coadjutor in his wife, who especially directed her influence
towards improving the surroundings of the women and
children of the community.
His arrival was the commencement of a new era in
the administration of the colony. Hitherto, the governor
had been an officer of the navy, but his authority
depended on the military, and between army and navy
in those days there was considerable bitterness of feeling
and much jealousy. Macquarie was determined in the
exercise of his functions to carry into effect the higher
purposes for which the system of transportation was
established—that of encouraging the reformation of the
offender. His treatment of the “ emancipists,” that is,
those convicts who had become free after serving out
their sentences was in the highest degree humane. He
made mistakes ; possibly he was too lenient in many
cases, but his errors were not of the heart. He offered
such “emancipists” every inducement and opportunity
to settle in any part of the country they might select,
and establish for themselves houses. The result of his
policy was the gradual cleansing of the Augean stable,
the uplifting of the community to a more elevated
plane of civilisation.
Discovery of the Blue Mountain Pass.
During Macquarie’s term of office a passage over
the Blue Mountains was, for the first time effected.
Hitherto the mountain range, with its frowning crags
and precipices, formed an impassable barrier to the
country beyond, a veritable terra incognita , providing a
fruitful source of conjecture and surmise to the early
settlers/ Several attempts had been previously made to
pierce the mystery, but without avail, until in 1813 an
expedition consisting of Blaxland, Lawson and Went-
worth set out from South Creek, near Penrith, to explore
the mountains. To this company belongs the honour of
opening up “ the limitless West,” in which the ever-
increasing activities of a rapidly-increasing community
find free scope for almost boundless expansion. Shortly
after the return of this expedition, a survey party was
sent out with particular instructions to follow the route
taken by the Blaxland party. The survey was effected,
and upon the party’s return, the discovery of the Western
Plains was reported. The country was described “as


equal to every demand which the colony may have for
extension of tillage and for pasture lands for a century
to come.” The report was received with excitement and
enthusiasm, and almost immediately preparations were
commenced to take advantage of the new discovery.
Convict companies were sent out to form roads, the site
for a town was selected, the same that is now occupied
by the city of Bathurst.
The discovery of the river on the Western Plains,
which was named the Macquarie, opened up a vista of
future glory for the colony. Whither the river flowed
the course of the river in order to discover whither it
flowed, only to encounter a series of disappointments.
He believed in the theory of an inland sea. Leaving
Bathurst for a second attempt, on 12th June, 1818, he
again proceeded down the river. On the third of July
he wrote; “ I was sanguine in my expectations of soon
entering the long-sought-for Australian sea, when it all
at once eluded our further search by spreading out on
every point from north-west to north-east. But he still
went on increasing his endeavours to unravel the mystery
of this remarkable river—a physical phenomenon which
he was at a loss to understand. How bitter his disap-
MILLERS’ POINT (1842)
and finally discharged itself was a matter of much
speculation. Wentworth, a young man then, radiant
with hope, wrote: “If the sanguine anticipations to
which the discovery of this river has given birth should
be realised, and it should be found to empty itself into
the ocean on the north-west coast, which is the only
part of this vast island that has not been accurately
surveyed, in what mighty conceptions of the future
oreatness and power of this colony may we not reason-
ably indulge ” It was then decided that further explora-
tions should be made to clear up the mystery of the
newly discovered river. Oxley, the then Surveyor-
General of the colony, was selected to conduct an
expedition into the interior. He endeavoured to follow
pointment was, may be realised when he wrote in his
journal : “ It is with infinite regret and pain that I was
forced to the conclusion that the interior of this vast
country is a marsh and uninhabitable.” The result,
however, of Oxley’s explorations supplied compensations
later on. His lieutenant in the expedition, George
William Evans, the deputy Surveyor-General of the
colony, had gone north and discovered the Castlereagh.
Oxley, with his party, then shaped his course due
north, and was rewarded in finding the magnificent
pastoral country now known as Liverpool Plains. He
then descended the coast range, discovered and named
the Hastings River, and followed its course to its em-
bouchure on the coast.


The Progress of N. S. Wales under Macquarie.
Reference has already been made to Macquarie’s
method of settling “ emancipists ” on the soil and dis-
tributing them throughout the country. His exploration
work, and the inevitable opening up and gradual
occupation of the new territories, gave him ample scope
for the expansion of his reform policy. Nearer home
he carried into effect a splendid policy, that of surveying
and laying out a number of internal towns and then, in
order to attract settlers to them, offering town allot-
ments and cultivation areas free of charge to those who
would go and reside there. In this way he established
Windsor, Richmond, Penrith, Liverpool, Castlereagh,
viding the settlers with stock on long credit. It was
largely through this policy that the territory beyond
the mountains was so rapidly settled. Macquarie was
not content to give his orders from Sydney —
he was incessantly travelling. He visited the
Hawkesbury, then the two settlements in Tasmania,
as well as all the chief harbours along the coast.
He inspected the sites for his new proposed townships
and crossed the mountains and saw Bathurst in its
infancy. Practically he had absolute power in the
colony, but on the whole he used his autocratic power
for good. In his “ emancipist ” policy he fell foul of
many of the leading colonists. His enemies complained
of him to the home authorities, with the result that a
YORK STREET, LOOKING SOUTH FROM MARKET STREET, IN 1842
GEORGE STREET MARKETS ON THE EASTERN SIDE.
Gosford, Pitt Town and other places. It was during
Macquarie’s regime and by his express direction that
the main roads of the country, as far as Bathurst in the
west and Goulburn in the south, were surveyed and
measured For fifty miles around Sydney he built
bridges and constructed roads in order that settlers
might have no difficulty in getting their produce to
markets. During his term of office over 271 additional
roads were constructed. Solidly built public buildings,
hospitals, asylums for the destitute, and over 200
schools, churches, and institutions and other public
buildings were erected during his occupancy of office.
He carried into effect a policy, which Bligh suggested
but was unable to do anything with because of the
bitter opposition he encountered —that was of pro-
commissioner was sent out by the British Government
to inquire into the whole business. This commissioner
(Mr. Bigge) made a careful inquiry into the whole of
Governor Macquarie’s administration and drew up
separate reports on its various branches. lie reported
against Macquarie’s policy with regard to the emanci-
pists, and he strongly condemned what he considered to
be his extravagant policy of public works. On most
other matters his investigations proved the value of his
spirited policy. Macquarie deserved well of New
South Wales. We of to-day can appraise the value of
his work even more correctly than Mr. Commissioner
Bigge. He encouraged education by building schools
wherever children could be got together. He estab-
lished the New South Wales Savings Bank, thus


encouraging thrift, and the Bank of New South Wales
in the interests of commerce. After eleven years of
active administration, Governor Macquarie in 1821
returned to England, carrying with him the best wishes
of by far the great majority of the colonists of New
South Wales.
Sir Thomas Brisbane’s Tenure of Office.
The arrival of Sir Thomas Brisbane in Port Jack-
son in succession to Lachlan Macquarie took place in
November, 1821. With his assumption of office, the
colony may be said to have entered upon its period of
adolescence.
In 1823 Governor Brisbane despatched Surveyor-
General Oxley north to make a survey of Moreton Bay,
they remained until their rescue. Pamphlett and his
companions then took Oxley to the mouth of the river up
which he sailed some fifty miles. This river he named
after Governor Brisbane. An examination of the country
discovered its value. Oxley believed that he had at last
found the long-looked-for outlet to that great inland sea
into which he imagined the western rivers to flow. A
year later a settlement was formed, first at the mouth of
the river, and afterwards at the present site of the city of
Brisbane.
The following year Hume and Hovell undertook the
exploration of the country to the south. Starting from
Lake George in 1824, the two explorers directed their
course southward, discovering the Murrumbidgee and
OLD SOUTH HEAD ROAD—NOW OXFORD STREET,
Port Curtis and other portions of the coastline in that
vicinity. Upon entering Moreton Bay, he fell in with
a large company of painted aboriginals with a white
man amongst them, who gave his name as Thomas
Pamphlett. This man was a timber-getter at Illawarra
who, eight months previously in a small boat with three
others had been blown out to sea. Steering north in the
hope of making Sydney, they made land some days later.
They then shaped their course northwards still expecting
to reach Sydney. After great hardships they struck a
large river, up which they travelled for a month before
they could cross it. Fortunately they fell in with a tribe
of friendly blacks who gave them succour and with whom
Murray Rivers. 1 heir labours resulted in the disclosure
of illimitable areas of rich agricultural and pastoral lands.
Brisbane offered every inducement for free settle-
ment. He adopted a policy which, combined with a
rapidly-extending knowledge in England of the existence
in Australia of vast territories of valuable lands suitable
for tillage and pasturage, encouraged the influx of
settlers superior in every way to any class that had
hitherto entered the colony. Up to this time the free
population of the colony consisted largely of soldiers,
sailors, officials, and a limited number of tradesmen,
with recruits drawn from the overcrowded cities of
England.


The worst feature of Brisbane’s administration
was that he made no attempt to prevent injustice and
brutality towards the natives. All his predecessors—
even the arrogant Bligh, a law unto himself —had
adopted measures, more or less efficacious, to check
inhuman or unfair treatment on the part of the colo-
nists towards the original owners of the soil. Brisbane,
however, to his discredit, allowed the whites to deal
with the natives as they listed ; and in one instance,
when informed that a number of blacks had been shot
in an affray, he caused a reply to be sent regretting
the circumstance, and adding “ there was no occasion
to inform the Government of such an occurrence.
fcC Killing no crime,” he brought up to dace. In June,
1824, he told the Secretary of State that he proposed
to raise a corps of mounted police to coerce the natives
who had been committing outrages, omitting to add
that these outrages had been provoked by the convict
servants of the settlers. This body of troops became
one of the most valuable in his Majesty’s service, the
GOVERNOR SIR THOMAS BRISBANE.
officers being of the line and the troopers picked men
from the British army None but those of irreproach-
able character in their regiments were selected, and to
their military discipline, and their stirring experiences
with desperadoes in the bush, they added The activity
and 1 alertness of guerilla warfare. Dressed as light dra-
goons, they carried sabre, carbine and pistols. Odds they
knew naught of, and to read of their doughty doings
is to recall the feats of the paladins of yore. At the
commencement of their career they consisted of two
officers and thirteen troopers. Darling materially
increased their numbers in 1831 in order to repress
bushranging, and in 1839 their establishment had
grown to nine officers and 157. non-commissioned
officers and men. In 1850, after twenty-five years’
unparalleled service, they were sacrificed to the sorry
schemes of a politician, who effected their disbandment
for the purpose of embarrassing the Government.
It was during Brisbane’s reign’that the first sepa-
ration took place, Van Diemen’s Land being granted
an independent Government. Commerce rapidly grew
and there was a largo increase of the agricultural and
pastoral industry under his administration The popu-
lation in! 1825 was 33,675 ; the revenue raised in the
colony, £71,682; 45,414 acres was under cultivation;
411,600 lbs. of wool was exported, andi there were
237,622 sheep and 134,519 cattle ; about' thirty locally-
owired ships were employed in the whaling industry
and the South Sea islands trade.
A man of scientific pursuits, Brisbane did not take
the same active interest'in the affairs of the settlement
as his predecessor, and after the rupture with his Colonial
Secretary, Major Goulburn, he allowed himself to be
drawn into the same errors as Macquarie regarding
breaking down <the between the free and the
freed. This gave satisfaction neither to the respect-
able colonists nor the English Government, and in
1825 Brisbane was recalled.
Governor Darling.
Sir Ralph Darling, a soldier of considerable
capacity and service, thoroughly imbued with military
ideas, 'was the seventh Governor. Landing on Decem-
ber 19th, 1825, Darling brought with him a Royal
warrant appointing his Legislative Council, which was
to consist of the official members as before, and three
new civilian nominees—John Macarthur. John Camp-
bell, and Chas. Throsby. Alexander Macleay, the
valued honorary secretary of the Linnsean Society,
and successor of Major Goulburn as Colonial Secretary,
arrived in January, 1826. From the outset there was
a feeling among the emancipists that, notwithstanding
the active partisanship of Chief Justice horbes, they
would find no special advocate in the new Governor ;
and events proved that they were not mistaken.
Bringing their old world notions of propriety fresh to
the task, Darling and Macleay at once set about
introducing administrative reforms, which laxity,
initiated by Macquarie and continued by Brisbane
had made necessary. The public offices were weeded
out of the relics of convict element ; a series of checks
and counter-checks was introduced to restore the
order they found lacking ; and they encouraged a higher
sense of duty among Government servants. This
incurred the odium of Wentworth and other members
of the self-christened 66 patriot party,” who never ceased
their attacks on Darling throughout his administrative
career, and held high festivities on the eve of his de-
parture from the colony.
Discoveries in Darling’s Time.
In 1827 Allan Cunningham, with six men, jour-
neying across the affluents of the Namoi and the 6w\ dir,
continued northward until he' discovered the Darling
Downs, and then returned to his starting-point on the
watershed on the Hunter River. Two years later, on
taking his departure from Moreton Bay, he traced the
Brisbane River to its upper reaches, connected his
two expeditions, and, retracing his steps through a
pass in the cordillera that faces Warwick* named it
Cunningham Gap. A second exploring party, under
Captain Charles Sturt, of H.M.’s 39th Regt., and with
whom Hamilton Hume was associated, stalled to ex-
plore the interior of the colony during the drought
year of 1828. Sturt attempted to trace the Macquarie,


now a small muddy watercourse, to its rise, but failed.
Then the explorers, in their search for water, struck
a large brackish river, which was named the Darling.
Striking north and then south they could find no al-
teration in the character of the river, and after a search
extending over five months they returned to Sydney,
having established the fact'that the Macquarie, Castle-
reagh, Gwydir, Namoi and Darling Downs streams
all emptied their waters into the Darling below the
confluence of the rivers converging from the spurs of
the cordillera. A second commission was given Sturt
in 1829 to explore the rivers in the southern part of
New South Wales. Accompanied on this occasion by
George Macleay, a son of the Colonial Secretary, they
established a depot on the banks of the Murrumbidgee,
not far from its junction with the Lachlan, and then
proceeded down the river in a boat. Passing the
junction with the river, which Hume had named after
his father, Sturt unwittingly renamed this running
water the Murray, after Sir George Murray, a Secretary
GOVERNOR SIR RALPH DARLING
of State. Before their return in 1830 they had suc-
ceeded, in the face of many difficulties and privations,
in tracing the main trunk of these waters into Lake
Alexandria, and thence to their disembouchure at
Encounter Bay. Capt. Barker, a brother officer of
Sturt, who had been in command at Raffles Bay when
that outpost was abandoned, received instructions
from Darling in 1830 to complete a more accurate
survey of Lake Alexandria than it had been possible
for Sturt to obtain. Leaving his company at the
channel connecting the lake with the sea and crossing
over with his compass in his hand, he disappeared in
the bush, and was seen no more. Subsequently it was
ascertained that, in revenge for the outrages committed
by sailors, he had been speared by the natives and his
body thrown into the sea.
Darling Establishes New Outposts.
The frequent appearance of French scientific
jnissions in Australian waters suggested to the official
mind in Downing Street schemes of alien annexation.
These fears were not altogether groundless, as the
western boundary of the territory had been fixed by
the Pitt Ministry at the 129th decree of east longi-
tude. Lord Bathurst, therefore, determined on steps
which would at once exclude foreign nations, and open
up fresh fields for British enterprise. Darling was
ordered to establish settlements at Western Port, on
the southern coast, and King George’s Sound, and
these, with the existing post at Raffles Bay, on the
north coast, were held sufficient to secure the entire
continent from the intrusive foreigner. “If the
French.” wrote Lord Bathurst, “should be found
landed, you will, notwithstanding, land the troops
agreeably to your instructions and signify that their
continuance with any view to establishing themselves,
or colonisation, would be considered an unjustifiable
intrusion on his Britannic Majesty’s possessions.”
Captains Wright and Weatherall, accompanied by
Hovell, were despatched in 1826 to Western Port.
After an exhaustive examination of the surrounding
country, Captain Wright reported unfavourably on
Port Phillip as a suitable district for colonisation.
Lord Goodrich sanctioned the abandonment of the
settlement, and the military establishment was with-
•/
drawn in 1828. Meanwhile Commander Sterling, R.N.,
who Lad already formed the settlement at Raffles
Bay, was instructed to survey Swan Bay. He finished
this task before the end of 1826, and thereupon Major
Lockyer was despatched with a small l force to establish
the King George’s Sound outpost, which he did on
the site of Abany. In 1829 Captain Fremantle was
sent down from India in H.M.S. “ Challenger” to
Swan Bay, when he formally took possession in the
name of his Majesty of “ all that part of New Holland
which is l not included within the territory of New
South Wales,” and thus prevented the possibility of
a divided occupation. Twelve months later these two
posts were’ transferred from the control of New South
Wales to the new colony of Western Australia.
Treatment of the Natives.
Not upon any measure of his for the protection of
the natives can Darling’s character as a humane Gover-
nor be established. In fact, the do-nothingness of
Brisbane he put into the shade, by a policy of military
aggression, which was only suppressed when the voice
of authority in Downing Street made itself heard.
In July, 1826, a native, known to the officials as Jackey
Jackey, captured in the Upper Hunter, was removed
to Maitland, where on the morning after his arrival,
he was ordered to be shot without trial or investigation.
This was sworn to at a later stage by T. Farnham,
who had brought Jackey Jackey down ; and the «vi-
dence of other witnesses went to show that the murder,
which even Darling admitted “ could not be sub-
scribed to as a measure of justifiable policy,” had been
perpetrated openly. Alarmed at this, and the fre-
quency with which similar cases were brought under
his notice, the Attorney-General, Saxe Banister, re-
ported to the Governor, on August 26, that the
military had been putting “ men to death in cold
blood, and the magistrates do not at all interfere.”
Darling did not move at the time, but later on, in reply


to a petition from the Hunter Rivei; settlers praying
for protection from the incursions of the blacks, he
recommended the settlers to combine and defend them-
selves, resting assured of his support when necessary.
The settle’s acted on this ; the aboriginals, declining
to be shot down indiscriminately, retaliated vigorously,
and Banister had again to report (September, 1826)
that violent proceedings were going on on both sides.
Darling then sent a detachment of the military “ to
punish the natives according to my instructions.”
The alert lawyer, scenting trouble as the outcrop of
this action, no martial law having been proclaimed,
applied for a copy of the Governor’s instructions,
and added the opinion “that the indiscriminate
slaughter of offenders, except in the heat of immediate
pursuit, or other similar circumstances, requires pre-
liminary solemn acts ; and that to order soldiers to
punish any outrage in this way is against the law,
which is powerful enough to guard the public peace
from any permanent aggression.” Darling denied a
reply, and a month afterwards Banister, resigned from
office, was on his way home to have the matter ven
tilated in the House of Commons. Before this could be
effected. Darling thought it expedient to have Lowe,
the officer responsible for the shooting of Jackey
Jackey, put on his trial, and the latter was acquitted
by a military jury.
Darling was an able administrator, but he incurred
no little unpopularity by his attacks on the liberty of
the press. The first Bill he put through the Legis-
lative Council, compelling periodic licenses, revocable
at the will of the Governor, Chief Justice Forbes re-
fused his certificate to, as repugnant to the law of
Fmgland. Then Darling introduced two measures,
still more far-reaching in their scope, to curb the power
of' those papers which, at the instance of W entworth
and other emancipists, were continually attacking him.
The first Bill to “ check abases arising from the pub-
lication of blasphemous and seditious libels ” contained
a clause to the effect that on a second conviction of
publishing a seditious libel “tending' to bring into
hatred or contempt the Government of the colony,
the offender might be banished for a term to be fixed
by the Court The second Bill sought to impose a tax
on newspapers, fixed at fourpence per copy. Neither
Bill became law, owing to Forbes’ opposition ; and
although this was tlm immediate cause of the power
of veto upon legislation being removed from the Chief
Justice’s hands, the Crown Law officers in England
supported Forbes in acting on the opinion he had
formed in respect to the newspaper stamp duty
Macquarie’s road-building policy was carried on
by Darling ; a water supply for Sydney was estab-
lished ; the first steamer in Australia was built during
his rule ; the export of horses to India was initiated
under his supervision ; the post office was reorganised ;
and largely through his influence the Australian College
and the Sydney College sprang into existence. He also
established a special board for issuing grants of land.
When he left New South Wales in 1831 the population
of the colony had increased to 51,000 ; wool exports
represented 1,250,000 lbs; the imports totalled
£500,000 ; and the export oil trade was little short of
£IOO,OOO. On Darling’s departure the Lieutenant-
Governor, Colonel Lindsay, administered the Govern-
ment until the arrival of General Bourke, the eighth
Governor.
The Bourke Administration.
The appointment of Sir Richard Bourke gave
satisfaction to all sections of the community. 18
reputation had preceded him. He was known to be
a well-meaning man, of moderate views, tolerant of
the opinions of others, politic, and wedded to a hide-
bound system of administration. When he landed,
on December 5, 1831. he was welcomed with an en-
thusiasm not in any way diminished by his assurance
in his first public utterance that the institutions of t e
motherland would be introduced as soon as 'it appeared
expedient, and that during his stay in the colony he
would do his utmost to establish concord among a
sections of the community. He met his Legislative
Council on January 19, 1832, and in the course of ls
opening address outlined a policy embracing measures
GOVERNOR SIR RICHARD BOURKE.
for' the extension of the jury system, for disposing of
land by auction as soon as practicable after survey,
for limiting the rate of usury, and for dealing with
debtors, fraudulent weights, and savings banks. He
further promised to place estimates of expenditure
before the Council for consideration —a reform much
needed and long demanded. His Jury Act, passed
during Bourke’s second year of office, and onl\ b} the
exercise of his casting vote, was hailed with delight b}
the emancipists as the disqualifications of attainted per-
sons were limited to those who were unpardoned 01 vho
were not within the protection of some Act of Parlia-
ment having the force and effect of a pardon under
the Great Seal, and those who after emancipation
had been found guilty of any felony or other infamous
offence.
An Era of Discovery and Occupation.
During the whole of Bourke’s rule the arduous
task of the explorer was steadily carried on, and the
boundaries of settlement were further removed, from


the seat of Government. Sir Thomas Mitchell, the
Surveyor-General, in 1831 fitted out an expedition
at the instigation of an escapee, who averred that
north of the Liverpool Plains he had discovered a broad
waterway and tracked its course to the north coast.
This statement? was proved to be false ; but in the
course of his investigations Mitchell found opportunr-
ties to amplify Allam Cunningham’s surveys of the
Namoi and Gwydir Rivers. A second exploring party
in 1833 selected the country between the Bogan and
the Macquarie as its field of inquiry ; and in 1835 Mit-
chell started a third time with the object of obtaining
a complete survey of the Darling. In the neighbour-
hood of the Bogan the botanist, Allan Cunningham’s
brother, leaving the main camp in search of specimens,
lost his way, ,and was killed by the natives whilst de-
lirious from thirst. The'Bogan was followed to a point
where its waters blend with those of 4he Darling.
Then Mitchell followed the latter river to its union
with the Murray, having several serious encounters
with the natives on the way, and naming the scenes
of one of these affrays Fort Bourke. But Mitchell’s
where Horsham now stands. En route he named the
highest peak of the Grampians Mount William, in
honour of the reigning sovereign ; and, struck by the
beauty and fertility of the Loctdon country, he called
it Australia-Felix—a name only to be met with now
on old-time maps. His western track terminated at
Mount Arapiles, discovering on his way the Glenelg
River, named after Lord Glenelg, Secretary of State.
Thence he steered a southerly course to the coastline
south of Mount 1 Schanck, near Cape Northumberland.
After refitting at the Henty’s station, Portland Bay,
Mitchell commenced his homeward journev. The
Dividing Range was crossed at Expedition Gap, after
passing and naming Mount Macedon ; and, intersecting
Hume’s track in 1824, Mitchell reached Sydney,
without mishaps in 1838. The “ overlander” now
appeared on the scene. When it became known that
Port Phillip was colonised, and that the whole of the
country traversed' by MitcTiell was capable of being
crossed 1 by carts, settlers 'from all paits of the territory
overlanded ’ ’ with their stock to take up land in
the new settlement.
SYDNEY COVE, 1836, FROM THE STREAM.
greatest and most successful effort was made in 1836,
when Bourke sent him out again to obtain a more
effective survey of the Darling. Several Tasmanians
had already come over and established themselves in
and around the Port Phillip district; and Mitchell was
ambitious to explore the country to the westward,
hitherto untrodden by white man. The course of
events now favoured this project. Striking the Lach-
lan and foiled in his attempts to cross the sterile country
lying between that river and the Darlibg, he slowly
pursued his course along the banks of the Murrum-
bidgee and Murray, having constantly to repel the
attacks of his old enemies, the local tribes. At the
junction of the Darling, instead of ascending these
waters, as his instructions demanded, he turned and
came down the Murray to the latitude of 1 Mount Hope.
There steering westward he ascended the Loddon to
within a short distance of its rise ; and facing westward
again, he continued on that course beyond the site
Mutiny at Norfolk Island.
The most serious matter that Governor Bourke
had to deal 'with was a mutiny at Norfolk Island in
1834. An ex-commander in his Majesty’s navy, trans-
ported for forgery, with a gang' of ' most hardened
criminals, conspired to overpower the officials, liberate
their fellow-convicts, seize a vessel in the harbour,
and escape to other lands. A traitor in the camp
warned the authorities, but before repressive measures
could be arranged the convicts had revolted, over-
powered their guards, and seized several stations.
The surprised soldhrs, however, rallied, and, firing on
the unarmed mutineers, soon had the rising quelled.
Major Anderson, an old Peninsular warrior, and one
of the finest men in the service, replaced the com-
mandant, and, on arriving at Norfolk Island, found
130 prisoners awaiting trial, He selected 55'of the
Prime movers to be dealt with by the Court, and Judge


Burton was sent over to hear the charges brought
against them. The shocking state of affairs disclosed
by the evidence simply appalled the conscientious
Judge. “ To my mind,” he wrote, “ the picture of
the place was a cage full of unclean birds, full of crimes
against God' and man, murders, blasphemies, and all
uncleanness.” And when he realised that in this
inferno there was no spiritual adviser to administer
the comforts of religion to these malefactors in theii
last moments he hesitated to utter a sentence which
would hurl them into eternity, with no effort to bring
them to repentance. They were reprieved until their
case could be laid before the Governor, and the Judge
departed in H.M.S. “Alligator” for Sydney, Major
Anderson accepting the risk of another mutiny when
the frigate had sailed. This second outbreak was
actually planned, but again an informer put the com-
mandant on the alert, and he promptly had the leaders
ironed and. into gaol. On the arrival of the hang-
man, with the Rev. Mr. Stiles (Church of England) and
the Rev. Father Ullathorne, thirteen prisoners suffered
interest. The unpaid territorial magistrates, looking
upon this as a refusal to suppress immorality amongst
the emancipist class, professed to be horrified. But
nothing could be done until W att brought himself
within the meshes of the law by being an accomplice
to the theft of an article from the Herald office. He
escaped punishment owing to the Herald proprietor
refusing to swear that the article had a value ; but
Judge Burton, who tried the case recommended that
Watt should be deprived of his ticket-of-leave. Bourke
“ did not see sufficient cause for so severe a measure,’
and again the sense of propriety attaching to ; the ex-
clusionists was shocked. However, on a third prose-
cution brought against Watt, this time for libel, the
bench of two magistrates being unable to agree, re-
mitted the case to the Governor, who ordered Watt’s
removal to the depot for educated convicts at Port
Macquarie ; a decision which induced the unpaid magis-
trates to consider themselves slighted. They bided
their time, and it came when the post of Chairman of
Quarter Sessions became vacant. Commissioner
SYDNEY COVE, 1907.
the extreme penalty of the law ; and henceforth, the
convicts enjoyed a more humane system of control
than that which induced a prisoner at the bar to tell
Judge Burton that the place was a 11 hell upon earth,
where a man’s heart was taken from him, and there
was given him the heart of a beast.
Governor Bourke’s Resignation.
Bourke resigned office owing to a difference of
opinion with the Secretary of State, indirectly brought
aboffi through his attitude in dealing with one of the
phases of that vexed subject of the times—the eman-
cipist question. Watt, the convict editor of the Sydney
Gazette (which supported Bourke s policy thiough
thick and thin) had long been attacking the unpaid
magistracy, and, in reprisal, one of their number was
instrumental in having a charge of immorality brought
against this scribe. The Governor, on being appealed
to, refused to order a public prosecution against Watt,
assigning as his reason that the matter had no public
Therry, of the Court of Requests, and Colonial Treasurer
Riddell, also a member of the Executive, were the
candidates, Bourke strenuously supporting the former.
Riddell, however, thanks to the advocacy of the un-
paid magistrates, was returned by a small majority.
Bourke suspended Riddell and tendered his own
resignation lest the Home authorities should disapprove.
They did, ordered Riddell to apologise for taking part
in the election, and to resume his seat in the Executive
Council. At the same time Bourke was asked to
withdraw his resignation this he declined to do, and
accordingly was relieved 1 “ with regret.’
During Bourke’s term the imports averaged
£1 ; 114,805, and the exports £682,193 per annum ;
while the estimated population was 76,793, including
27,831 convicts.
The end of Personal Rule.
On the departure of Sir Richard Bourke there was
an interregnum of two months, during which Colonel


K. Snodgrass administered the affairs of the territory.
Sir George Gipps, Bourse’s successor and the last
Governor of New South Wales to exercise personal
power, arrived on February 2, 1838. Intellectually he
was a stronger man than any of his predecessors—strong
in self-will ; and although of high personal worth, his
imperious disposition and arbitrary actions brought upon
him before the close of his administration the united
opposition of all sections of the community. Besides
serving as an officer of the Royal Engineers in Wel-
lington’s Spanish campaigns with marked distinction,
he had held high civil office in Canada with equal suc-
cess ; and by his commanding abilities and lofty prin-
ciple he obtained the confidence and esteem of her
Majesty’s Ministers of State, even those politically
opposed to him. But, notwithstanding these favour-
able characteristics, he altogether lacked the grace of
conciliation ; and whilst administering his functions in
the face of the popular wave which crested the sea of
politics when representative government was intro-
duced. through eschewing diplomatic courses, he stuck
GOVERNOR SIR GEORGE GIPPS.
on rocks which far less able, but more discreet, helms-
men would have escaped. At the same time, it is
only fair to acknowledge that his position was one of
no little difficulty ; for, owing to the delay on the part
of the British Government in amending the consti-
tution. he had to legislate for posterity with the know-
ledge that at any moment his powers might be cur-
tailed.
Wentworth and the Emancipists.
Wentworth, still the trumpet-voiced champion of
the emancipists, but soon to know them not, from the
earlisst days of Gipps’ colonial career was his unswerv-
ing opponent ; and later on this, deepened, through
private interests, into implacable enmity. Before 1839
the infant colony of New Zealand had been placed
under the jurisdiction of New South Wales. There were
numerous purchases of land from the native chiefs on
conditions which would be mildly described as one-
sided, and Wentworth was to be found amongst the
prune sinners. To put an end to these transactions
Gipps, in 1839, proclaimed that no titles to land in
New Zealand would be deemed valid which were not
derived from her Majesty. The following year he
introduced a Bill in the Legislative Council to nullify
the claims of the New Zealand Company, and of others
which, in the Governor’s blunt parlance, were com-
prehensive enough to absorb more acres than were
contained in the islands. Transactions where a fair
price had been given would be recognised, but only to
a limited extent. For two days Wentworth pleaded
his claims at the. bar of the Legislative Council, whose
debates Gipps had thrown open to the public. Other
claimants supported their claims in person or by proxy ;
and when Gipps urged the Council to pass his Bill he
declared' that “ all the jobs since the days of Walpole,
if combined in one, would not equal the one Wentworth
asked him to lend a hand in perpetrating—the job,
that is to say, of making to him a grant of twenty
millions of acres—at the rate of one hundred acres for
a farthing.” “ For myself/’ he added, “in respect
to the occupation of New Zealand by her Majesty—l
may, I trust, be permitted to exclaim— as did the stan-
dard-bearer of the tenth legion when Cassar first took
possession of Great Britain —‘ Et ego certe oifcium
tneum, BepuNicce atque Imperatori prcsstitem ’ • fear-
less alike of what people may say or think of me,
I will perform my duty to the Queen and the public.”
And from this position Gipps never receded a hair’s
breadth. The Bill became law. Wentworth, in a fit
of petulance, resigned his seat on the magisterial bench,
and Gipps, who in endeavouring to 'gather able men
around him had recommended Wentworth for a seat
in the Legislative Council, withdrew the nomination.
To the great orator henceforth no good could be ex-
pected from such an administrator, and this attitude
he never varied, either whilst a citizen outside the
Legislature or when returned by the electors of Sydney
in 1843, he was able to vigorously assert his views on
the floor of the first partly-elective Legislative Council
in New South Wales. The powerful advocate of repre-
sentative institutions and of the right to control colo-
nial revenue, he remained until these reforms were
granted, but he now ceased to pose as the reformer of
emancipists’ grievances. The emancipist was becom-
ing of no use to the politician.! Another party had come
to the front, and under the new condition of affairs the
emancipist found himself dropping more and more
into the background. When Gipps arrived in the
colony he found society undergoing a rapid and radical
change The emancipist class was being overwhelmed
by free immigrants, who, in his earlier writings, Went-
worth had not hesitated to term “ impertinent inter-
lopers.” For many years afterwards immigrants were
still intruders, in Wentworth’s eyes, and continued to
remain so, whilst 'there was no lack'of convicts for the
labour market. Even as late as 1839 he and other
prime movers in the so-called “Patriotic Association”
insisted that “ colossal advantages would accrue from
tbe continuance of the present system and assignment.”
But in 1841 Buller, M.P., and other English friends
of the patriots, made it clear that the British Parlia-
ment would never sanction representative government


whilst New South Wales remained a penal colony.
The emancipist had served his purpose, and thence-
forward the politicians, and “patriots” cried their
reforms in the name ot the people.
The Expeditions of Leichhardt and Sturt.
Gipps pursued the same progressive policy in re-
spect to exploration as his predecessors, and if the
expeditions promoted during his rule were not alto-
gether as successful in their results they were more
pretentious in effort than any attempted before. Early
in 1840 a station manager named McMillan, starting
from Omeo, succeeded in crossing the Dividing Range
separating the Murray River from those flowing over
the plains between the mountains and the coast. He
Lake Omoo, and from there to Mumblamunjee, dis-
covering the Latrobe River on the way. Dx March,
1840, the party crossed the level country discovered
by McMillan, cut a track through the densely wooded
country of the Upper Latrobe River and walked to
Melbourne, via Western Port. The Count immediately
forwarded an account of the expedition to Gipps, and
as at this time nothing had been heard of McMillan’s
doings, the name pf Gippsland, given by Strzelecki
to the region he and McMillan had exploied, was
adopted. /
In 1843 Gipps* was petitioned to place £I.OOO on
the estimates for an expedition to discover a route to
Port |Essington. He recommended the project to
Lord*"Stanley, Secretary’ of State,Abut’ before official
SYDNEY (SHOWING ST. MARY’S) IN THE THIRTIES
got as far south as Lake King, naming the Nicholson,
Mitchell and Avon Rivers and Mount Wellington.
To this new country he gave the name of Caledonia
Australis. Then retracing his footsteps, McMillan
blazed a fresh track to Mumblamunjee, on the Tambo,
where he had taken up a station for his employ er,
McAllister, in September, 1839.
Meanwhile John Macarthur, of Camden Park, was
fitting up another expedition under the Polish Count,
Strzelecki, to explore the country between Ninety-Mile
Beach and the mountains—practically the same ground
that McMillan had just gone over. In February, 1840
they had reached Murray station, on that river, and
from there, ascending the highest peak, they named it
Mount Kosciusko. Thence they pushed across to
sanction could arrive Ludwig Leichhardt, a Prussian
traveller, who had taken part in several minor expe-
ditions, took up the idea, and obtained private sub-
scriptions for his outfit. Starting with seven white
men and two natives from the Darling Downs in Sep-
tember, 1843, he left civilisation behind him at Jimba,
on the 27th parallel south latitude, and launched,
buoyant with hope, into the wilderness of Australia.
“ Many a man’s heart would have thrilled like our own
had he seen us winding our way with a full chorus of
‘ God Save the Queen,’ which has infused many a
British soldier —ay, many a Prussian too —with courage
in the time of danger.” The Condamine, Comet, Mac-
kenzie, Isaacs, Suttor, Burdekin, Lynd and Mitchell
were traversed and named ; and then Leichhardt


travelled westward to the Gull of Carpentaria, 11
degrees north of Jimba parallel. So far no trouble
with the blacks had been encountered. But he was
now in the haunts of natives who had suffered from
contact with the white men, and had many wrongs to
avenge. On the night of June 28, 1845, his camp was
attacked. The assailants were driven off, but not
before Gilbert, one of the whites, had been killed, and
two others, Roper and Calvert, wounded. To avoid
further’ fighting Leichhardt made a wide detour, strik-
ing the eastern shore of the Gulf of Carpentaria, in the
16th parallel. Taking a westerly course, the Nicholson
and Macarthur Rivers were located, and after two
months, exhaustive plodding through malarial districts,
and precipitous tracks, most of the botanical specimens
jettisoned, horses drowned, oxen almost worn to death,
the now tattered travellers camped on the banks of
the Alligator River, from whence friendly blacks led
them to their journey’s end. From Port Essington
they returned by water to Sydney, where many honours
were bestowed upon Leichhardt and his brave com-
panions, besides a grant of £l,OOO from the Legislature
and £1,500 raised by private subscription.
In Sydney Leichhardt learnt Sir Thomas Mitchell
had discovered excellent grazing lands on the Fitzroy
Downs, at the head of the Maranoa ; and as there was
only one range of mountains between this country and
Leichhardt’s first track, he set out again to connect the
two discoveries. This accomplished, accompanied by
Messrs. Hentig, Classen, Donald Stuart, Kelly, and
two natives, he started at the beginning of 1848 on the
ill-fated quest from which none of the explorers ever
returned. The object of the travellers was to traverse
the continent from east to west, and, if baffled bv
Sturt’s Stony Desert, they decided to diverge to the
northwards and make their way along the coastline.
What they actually accomplished, where dire disaster
overtook them, what was the nature of it, what became
of their relics, are as much matters of mystery to-day
as they were m those adventurous times. Leichhardt’s
last letter was written from the Cogoon River on April
3, 1848, and notwithstanding several well-equipped
search parties, led by the most experienced bushmen
available, endeavoured to discover his tracks through
the wild wastes of Central Australia, nothing could be
ascertained or obtained to shed the slightest light upon
his and his companions’ melancholy fate
Whilst Leichhardt was successfully prosecuting his
expedition to the northern coast Sturt had not been
idle. The English Government wanted the continent
explored from Mount Arden, at the head of Spencer’s
Gulf, to the heart of the interior, Sturt resolved to
essay this task, but by another route. His plan was
to ascend the Darling River and take his departure for
the desired goal front there. After narrowly escaping
death fiom thirst, he failed to get nearer than 150
miles from his destination, the terminal point of the
expedition being latitude 24 degrees 30 minutes south,
and longitude 137 degrees 58 minutes east. Another
attempt was made from Fort Grey depot, which Sturt
had established at the intersection of the 139th degree
east longitude and 129th degree south latitude. He
discovered Cooper’s Creek and Strzelecki’s Creek, the
former being named after the Chief Justice of South
Australia. Coopers Crock flowed westerly, and this
induced Sturt to take a northerly course, which soon
brought him to the confines of the Great Stony Desert
—country which for sterility and desolation “ had no
parallel on the surface of the earth ” Availing of a
barren eminence adjacent, Sturt looked out, as far as
his eyes could reach, upon an absolutely lifeless suc-
cession of sand ridges and fiats, radiating with unen-
durable heat. This plutonic prospect he satisfied
himself was typical of the whole of Central Australia.
Returning to Cooper’s- Creek, he followed its course for
some distance. Then, driven back by a temperature
which made matches ignite as they touched the sand,
Sturt arrived at his camp to find nothing but a note
from Mr Brown, who had been left in charge, intimat-
ing that, owing to the water becoming putrid, the
camp had 1 shifted to Flood’s Creek, 118 miles away.
Notwithstanding disappointments and difficulties,
Sturt’s stout heart never quailed, and he biought the
party across the intervening distance in safety, but at
the journey’s end he had so wasted away that he was
unable to stand u'naided. Strength under normal
conditions returned, but the terrible glare of the Stony
Desert led to the loss of his eyesight irrevocably.
Sir Thomas Mitchell went out on his final expedition
to the upper waters of the Darling, in 1846. His party
numbered 29, and, besides an equipment of boats and
carts, they took with them provisions for a year.
Leaving the Macquarie, Mitchell crossed the Narran,
Balonne and Culgoa rivers. Then taking a new de-
parture, he ascended the Balonne beyond its junction
with the Maranoa, and followed the Culgoon to its
head waters, where Mount Abundance, the Fitzroy
Downs and the Grafton Range were discovered. He
now attempted to find a direct track to the Gulf of
Carpentaria, and, proceeding northward, added the
sources of the Barcoo river to the credit of his re-
searches. These upper waters he named the Victoria.
The main stream was pursued to latitude 24 degrees
14 minutes south and longitude 144 degrees 34 minutes
east, and, as supplies by this time were running short,
he returned to Sydney, satisfied that the river emptied
into the Gulf of Carpentaria. Kennedy, one of
Mitchell’s party, was despatched in 1847 to continue
the search and had scarcely passed the latter’s turning-
point when he found the stream turned to the south-
west, its waters being reduced to stagnant pools and
finally disappearing in the sands of Sturt’s Stony
Desert. In the following year Kennedy was killed by
the blacks in endeavouring to explore the country
between Rockingham Bay and Port Albury.
The Myall Creek Massacre.
To deal with the state of disorder beyond the
boundaries of the settled districts a Border Police Act
was passed in May, 1839. At the same time Gipps
published a stirring protest against treating the natives
inhumanly—a protest which drew upon him censure
from the Sydney Herald “ for inflicting on the colo-
nists the drawling philanthropy and mawkish senti-
mentality of his Whiggish patrons.” The moulder of
public opinion in those days was, at times, carried by
the tide into very muddy waters. “As human
beings,” wrote Gipps, ‘‘partaking of our common


nature, as the aboriginal possessors of the soil from
which the wealth of the country has been principally
derived, and as subjects of the Queen, whose authority
extends over every part of New Holland —the natives
of tne colony have an equal right with the people of
European origin. . . His Excellency is determined to
make no distinction, whether the aggressors or parties
injured be of one or the other race of colour, but to
bring all, as far as may be in his power, to equal and
indiscriminate justice. . . . Each succeeding de-
spatch from the Secretary of State marks in an increas-
ing degree the importance which her Majesty’s Govern-
ment, and no less the Parliament and people of Great
Britain, attach to the just and humane treatment of
the aborigines. ... It is most earnestly and solemnly
my deep conviction that there is no subject or matter
whatsoever in which the interest as well as the honour
of the colonists are more essentially concerned.” To
shoot the blacks on the slightest, and very often with-
out any, provocation had become so common that a
large majority of the people were unable to realise
that the Governor was in earnest. They were sharply
undeceived when a most brutal massacre of inoffensive
blacks took place on Hangar’s station, Myall Creek,
in 1838. One Sunday evening a gang of armed whites
rode up to the station, and surrounding the camp of
forty unarmed natives—principally old men, women
and children —brutally shot down all excepting ten
men, who managed to escape—for the time being
only—to the bush. The murderers endeavoured to
hide the traces of their crime by burning the bodies,
but the remains of twenty-eight victims were dis-
covered among the ashes. Of the blacks who fled
nothing was ever heard, Gipps writing that '' on the
day after the massacre the perpetrators scoured the
country in search of them, and they have never been
seen or heard of since.” Eleven of the murderers
were brought to trial for the murder of an old man.
The prosecution broke down through lack of identi-
fication. Then they W' re arraigned a second time for
taking the life of an infant, name unknown, and seven
of them convicted, were sentenced by Judge Burton
to suffer the extreme penalty of the law. At the trial
not a tittle of evidence, could be produced in extenua-
tion of the diabolical outrage. Nevertheless the sen-
tence put the whole of the colony in a ferment. It
was denounced in the press as judicial muider, and
among the wilder spirits the question of a rescue was
discussed. Protests poured in upon the Governor.
His predecessors, Phillip excepted, had given little
heed to the repeated instructions from Downing Street
to afford the despoiled blacks the same protection as
the whites. But Gipps was made of different stuff.
The law was there, and though the colony to a man
was against him, enforce it he was determined to.
“l n S pite of the law I’ll shoot the blacks in self-
defence,” one squatter told him. Then 111 hang
you, sir,” was Gipps’ prompt reply. The convicted
men were hanged, and gradually it came to be realised
that the Governor intended to be as good as his word.
It was impossible for him, under the circumstances,
fo put a stop to outrages altogether, but he checked
them to a great extent by initiating the practice ol
withdrawing settlers’ licenses directly he was satisfied
that they had connection with any ill-usage of the
natives. A Bill was also passed by Gipps to enable
the natives to give evidence in the law courts, under
declaration, its acceptance being subject to material
corroboration. Unfortunately, this was disallowed as
unconstitutional, by Lord John Russell ; and the same
difficulties to obtain evidence against white men who
committed criminal offences against the blacks con-
tinued for many a day.
Retirement and Death of Gipps.
Before the end of 1845 ill health compelled Gipps
to apply to be relieved from the cares of office, and in
March of the following year news reached the colony
that Sir Charles Fitzroy had been appointed his suc-
cessor. His last public act was characteristic of the
man. He had assembled the Legislative Council for
a short session to pass a few measures of minor im-
portance, before his career came to a close This did
not suit the views of Wentworth, the business to bring
forward, to his way of thinking, being of very great
importance* and having successfully blocked the pas-
sage of the Government measures, Lowe, now a servile
follower of the great colonial tribune, gave notice of
a series of resolutions, asserting (1) ” the undoubted
right of the Council to appropriate by ordinance in the
usual manner, the revenues subject to the Schedules
A, B and C to the Constitution Act; (2) that the
Governor had, without authority, appropriated certain
sums, according to his pleasure; (3) that the Gover-
nor’s claims would place a large sum at his disposal ,
(4) that an address be prepared praying her Majesty
to direct the officer administering the Government of
the colony to respect the constitutional rights of the
Council ; (5) that the resolutions be presented to the
Governor.” In moving these resolutions, Lowe
charged the Government with “ wilfully and of malice
aforethought murdering the liberties of the colony.”
The first of these resolutions was passed without a
division. On the others Wentworth moved an amend-
ment, that “ leave be given to introduce a Bill to repeal
so much of all local ordinances now in existence as
assumes to vest the appropriation of the ordinary
revenue elsewhere than in the Legislative Council.
In moving this, he intimated that if this measure were
not accepted he would fall back on the resolutions.
On the Bill being read a first time, he moved the ad-
journment of the House till July 21. By so doing the
Governor would be deprived of communicating with
the public through the medium of the Council during
the remaining days of his office. It was an astute
move, but Gipps met it with a better card proroga-
tion. To the amazement of the members the Governor
prorogued the Council to August 28, thus gH mg his
successor time to grasp the position of affairs befoie an}
legislation could be carried. Then he availed himself of
the columns of the Gazette to publish his dissent to the
resolution carried on June 11, and his views on other
public matters..
On July 11, at Gipps’ farewell levee, an address,
signed by nearly 6,000 persons, was presented to him,
regretting his retirement, and testifying to his talent,
industry and impartiality, to which the candid his-
torian cannot but affirm.” He sailed for England the


same day, and on arrival was appointed to a post in
the Royal Engineers’ department, London, but before
assuming his duties he died suddenly of heait failure.
The other leading features of his colonial administra-
tion may be briefly mentioned. When Gipps arrived
in the colony he brought with him instructions to
carry out the Wakefield system, introduced into South
Australia, with regard to public' lands. This involved
the raising of the price of land from ss. to 12s. an acre,
and the innovation was therefore not popular. A
financial crisis in 1843 increased the public depression ;
and it was during this period that New Zealand was
separated from the mother colony.
The First Civilian Governor.
Sir George Fitzroy, who had been brought from
the administration of Antigua to succeed Sir George
Gipps, was 'the first civilian Governor of New South
Wales. Prudent' and courteous, exercising the powers
GOVERNOR SIR GEORGE FITZROY.
entrusted to him with a tact which never failed to keep
him in unison with Parliamentary practice, he soon
put an end to that feeling of opposition to Imperial
authority. w T hich the arbitrary actions of his
predecessor had done so much to foster. The oaths
of office were taken on August 3, 1816. A month
later. September 18, when he convened the Legislative
Council, he intended that only pressing measures would
be proposed that session, and assured the members
of his earnest desire to co-operate with them in legis-
lating for the public good. The address in reply was
friendly. At the same time Wentworth intimated his
intention to maintain the position he had taken up
with Gipps by re-introdufing his Bill to repeal all
local legislation tending to vest the appropriation of
the ordinary revenue elsewhere than in the Legislative
Cbuncil In October, on the Governor’s estimates
being submitted, Wentworth carried a mildly worded
address that “ perceiving that your Excellency has
placed on the estimates several departments for which
provision is made by Schedule A ... we desire most
respectfully to intimate to your Excellency that being
thus called on to vote a supplement to the services in
the said schedule enumerated, we claim the right as
heretofore, to fix the amount to be appropriated to
every detail of such services, except such as are speci-
fically provided for in such schedule. At the same
time we respectfully beg to assure your Excellency
that we have no intention in asserting this right to
propose alterations in any of the salaries in the said
schedule, to which the faith of her Majesty’s Govern-
ment has already been pledged.” Fitzroy, determined
to show it was no desire of his to maintain a conflict
with the members, replied that “ in compliance with
the address, and placing implicit confidence in the
assurance that the Council had no intention to propose
alterations to which the faith of her Majesty’s Govern-
ment has already been pledged, he submitted an esti-
mate of the expenditure of the establishment for the
administration of justice, now defrayed under the
aforesaid schedule.’’ In this way a long-standing
dispute, which had been a never-ceasing thorn in the
flesh to the imperious Gipps, was promptly and peace-
ably ended. It augured well for the future.
RemoYal of Transportation.
There were soon, however, to be fresh troubles.
The Governor had not been in office three months
when a despatch from Mr. Gladstone, then Colonial
Secretary, suggested that the promise made by her
Majesty’s Government in 1839, to exclude New South
Wales from transportation sentences, .should be set
aside. Some more convicts were shortly to be sent, if
this alteration met with “ the general approval of the
colony, or the-portion to be affected. As her Majesty’s
Government had doubts as to whether it was to be
desired that the absolute exclusion of convicts from
New South Wales should continue, her Majesty’s
Government would be pleased if the Legislative Council
should show a disposition to concur in the opinion
that a modified and carefully-regulated introduction of
convict labourers into New South Wales, or into some
part of it, may, under the present circumstances, be
advisable.” On October 13, 1846, Wentworth obtained
a Select Committee to report on the despatch. In
1839 the Patriotic Association, of which Wentworth
was vice-president, had forw'arded communications to
the Parliamentary Agent in London urging the con-
tinuance of transportation, and it is therefore not to
be wondered at that, with the leading spirit of the
old association on the new committee, the Governor
should now be informed that the well-regulated intro-
duction of convicts “ may, under the present cir-
cumstances, be advisable.” Certain stipulations ac-
companied this extraordinary acquiescence in the
baneful proposal ; among others, the assignment sys-
tem was not to make way for the probation system of
gangs in vogue in Norfolk Island and Van Diemen’s
Land ; five thousand male convicts, young delinquents,
were to be sent, with an equal number of females, and,
simultaneously, an equal proportion of free immigrants
of both sexes. The report was brought up in the Council
on the day (October 3) that body was prorogued,' and
it could not, therefore, be considered. In the following
session a motion of Cowper’s that “the Council dis


approves of the principles avowed and recommen-
dations contained in the report of the Select Com-
mitte ■ respecting the renewal of transportations to this
colony ; and desires to record the expression of its
opinions that a return to this system of transportation
and assignment would be opposed to the wishes of
this community, and would also be most injurious to
the moral, social and political advancement of the
colony,” was carried by a large majority, Wentworth
voting in the minority of seven. For the time being
the matter was dead. Then Earl Grey, who succeeded
Mr. Gladstone, shifted his ground. In 1848 he re
voked the Order-in-Council of 1840, which had stopped
transportation to New South Wales, and intimated
that in sending ticket-of-leave men only for the future,
he would at the same time endeavour to get Parliament
to vote the cost of forwarding an equal number of
emigrants. To this proposition the Council offered
no demur, whereupon Earl Grey immediately sent off
to the Cape of Good Hope a shipload of convicts with-
out moving in Parliament for a vote for emigration.
With the exception of Western Australia, every colony
was in arms. At public meetings held in Melbourne
and Sydney in February, 1849, “ transportation in
any form” was condemned; and in the New South
Wales Legislative Chamber an address was carried
(June, 1849) praying the Queen to revoke the Order-in-
Council re-instituting transportation. Meanwhile the
“ Hasheney ” arrived (June 10) in Port Jackson with
212 convicts aboard. Fitzroy was appealed to, with
the result that the convicts were hired on board, and
each removed by his employer beyond the limits of
Cumberland —the metropolitan county. Ten months
later another consignment of felons, by the ‘ ‘ Ran-
dolphe,” was similarly disposed of. But no more.
Earl Grey kept the Order-in-Council as long as he
could, on the giounds that ‘‘the judgment of the
Colonial Legislature had varied at different times, and
the opinions of the country were known to be divided. ’
During the succeeding year the country gave this
statement an emphatic denial. Eight petitions, signed
by 595 persons, supported a modified continuance of
transportations ; whilst 40 petitions, bearing the sig-
natures of 36,500 pjrsons in Cumberland county,
urged total abolition. The Legislative Council also
carried a motion that “ the revocation of the Order-in-
Council would alone secure social and political tran-
quility.’ 4 This proved effectual. The Order-in-Council
was revoked in April, 1851, and with Earl Grey and
his Liberal friends out of office the following February,
all fears of another renewal of' transportation were
appeased. Thus ended the history of New South
Wales as a penal colony.
Separation of Victoria.
As early as 1840 the Land and Emigration Com-
missioners in London, Messrs. Torrens, Elliott and
Villiers, framed regulations for the separation from
the rest of New South Wales for all purposes connected
with the disposal of land. The territory to the south
of the counties Murray and St. Vincent and the rivers
Murrumbidgee and Murray was to constitute the Port
Phillip or southern district ; and the lands to the East-
ern bcundary of South Australia. These recommen-
dations were approved by Lord John Russell, who
under the Royal Sign Manual proclaimed the Port
Phillip district as described. This may be said to have
quickened the separation question into active life, and
thenceforward the Port Phillip colonists persevered in
the, agitation until their ends were attained. The
Legislative Council protested against the limitations
Lord John Russell proposed, and prayed that if there
must be another colony the dismemberment should be
more equitable. On the advice of Bishop Broughton
the members suggested the division might be ‘‘ a line
drawm from near Cape Howe,” or Ram Head, about
twenty miles to the southward, “ to the source of the
River Hume or Murray ; and from thence the course
of the river itself until it reaches the 131st degree of
east longitude.” Public meetings were held in both
centres in support of the rival interests, and for the
time the matter made no further progress officially.
When Lord John Russell’s administration came into
power in 1846, it fell to Earl Grey to deal with the
constitutions of all the Australian colonies. In his
despatch of July 31, 1847, he intimated that Port
Phillip w r as to have an independent administration,
and “ by her Majesty’s gracious permission, receive
the name of Victoria.” The boundary line as prayed
by the New South Wales legislators, and supported by
Gipps, would divide the two colonies. The new con-
stitutions of the two colonies would found municipal
institutions and put them in the relation of constitu-
ents to the new House of Representatives. This
intimation raised a furious storm of dissent ; it was
the revival of Gipps’ odious district councils which had
been so vehemently and, it was believed, successfully
opposed ; it was an attempt to destroy the consti-
tutional liberties of the country ; it was the strangling
of the elective principle. A monster meeting was held
in Sydney in January, 1848, at which the leaders of
all shades of opinion were for once in harmony ; and
a motion was carried that the Governor be informed
that the proposed measure will have the effect of de-
priving the colonists of the elective franchise, “ which
we maintain to be our inalienable rights as British
subjects.” “ Tell the Minister,” said the bold Went-
worth to the meeting formally and bluntly, ‘‘that
you love constitutional freedom too well to allow
his measure, and that you will have none of it.” Her
Majesty’s advisers were alarmed. Earl Grey, writing
to Fitzroy in July,' 1848, “ continued to believe that
his municipal scheme and a legislature emanating from
the municipal college were desirable . . . but I can
have no i wish to impose upon the inhabitants of the
colony a form of government ... to which they
generally object ” Constitution-building by a faddist
was not to be the final answer' to Australian aspira-
tions. On January' 31, 1849, the Committee of the
Privy Council on Trade and Plantations was called to
report on the question of separation generally. Their
report, issued on April 4, 1849, was,' in effect, that
separation be effected, that the boundaries be those
proposed in 1840 by Gipps and his Executive Council,
and that in effecting changes in the constitution of the
legislature it was not advisable for the legislature at
home “ to press them on> an unwilling or even an in-
different people.” It was further recommended that


nothing more be done than to enable the local legis-
lature to resolve their single chamber into two in New
South Wales, and to afford like facilities elsewhere.
The report was despatched to the Governor in May,
1849, with an intimation that a Bill giving effect to
its recommendations would be introduced immediately
It was not, however, until August 5, 1850, that the
Bill received the Royal assent. Besides separating
Port Phillip, it brought the dividing line of a prospec-
tive colony in the north to the 30th degree of south
latitude, a limit which would detach the Clarence and
Richmond Rivers and a portion of the watershed of
the Darling from the mother colony. When the news
that the separation was at last effected reached Mel-
bourne, o’n November 30, 1850, the city held high
festival for several days, one enthusiast averring ‘ ‘ that
the decorations in the windows expressed the triumph
which had been gained over Sydney, and the gratitude
the colonists felt to the Queen and the Home Govern-
ment for affording them even a tardy release- from
political oppression.” Separation was nob consum-
mated until July 1, 1851, when writs for the return of
members of the Legislative Council for Victoria were
issued.
Exploration and Settlement.
For a decade after 1846 little was attempted in
the direction of exploration, owing to the rush to Cali-
fornia and the financial depression which paralysed
the efforts of the colonists for several years. A West-
•/
ern Australian, Augustus Charles Gregory, afterwards
Surveyor-General of Queensland, took charge of an
expedition promoted By the. Imperial Government to
explore the northern coastline, and obtain information
about the ill-fated Ludwig Leichhardt. This was in
July, 1855. Gregory sailed from Sydney in the barque
“ Monarch,” accompanied by the schooner “ Tom
Tough,” and on September 18 landed at Point Pearce,
on The eastern side of the Cambridge Gulf. The Vic-
toria River was traced to its watershed on Mount
Wollaston. Then pursuing a track across Alexandra
Land, he followed the Roper River (Gladstone county)
from Pandanus Creek to the sea. The “ Tom Tough ”
had been instructed to meet the party at the estuary
of the Albert, but on Gregory arriving there he found
no trace of the vessel, and as supplies were running
short he immediately started for the eastern coast,
reaching Brisbane a few days before Christmas.
With settlement along the eastern coast treading
closely on the heels of discovery, it dawned on Downing
Street that the colonists in the north were too far re-
moved from Sydney to be effectively governed, and
in 1846 it was determined to form the colony of North
Australia. Instructions w r ere received from Mr. Glad-
stone to establish a settlement at Port Curtis, and the
appointment of superintendent of the new colony fell
to Colonel Barney, R.E. It was not a happy selection.
Accompanied by about 100 persons, the Colonel sailed
for Port Curtis in January, 1847, but finding no w r ater
there, he returned to Wide Bay without any better
results. Up to April 15, by which time most of his
stores were consumed, ho had not even selected a site
for the settlement, and, disheartened by ill-success,
was on the point of returning to Sydney when instruc-
tions were received from Earl Grey directing the colony
to be broken up. Port Curtis was subsequently brought
within the settled districts, and eight years later, when
Gladstone —then looked upon as a situation of great
importance—had been laid out, town and suburban
allotments were being offered for sale in Sydney-
Captain O’Connell, whose father married Governor
Bligh’s daughter in 1808, received the first appoint-
ment of Crown Commissioner of Port Curtis district
and Government Resident at Gladstone.
An Era of Transformation.
Fitzroy witnessed more stirring changes in the
political and social life of the colonists than any other
Governor, preceding or succeeding him It was dur-
ing his administration that “ the discovery of gold,”
to borrow the language of Wentworth, ‘‘precipitated
the colony into a nation ” ; that the colonists received
the charter that was to mould their national life for
weal or woe ; that the first Australian railway—Sydney
to Parramatta —was begun ; that the efforts of Went-
worth and others in the cause of education found prac-
tical expression in the inauguration of the Sydney
University; that steam communication with Great
Britain was secured ; that the Sydney branch of the
Royal Mint was established, and the first stone of
Fitzroy dry dock (Cockatoo Island) was laid. Some
of these pregnant happenings may be briefly outlined,
although dealt with at length in other articles.
The Advent of the “ Golden Age.”
The discovery of gold in payable quantities is due
to the sagacity of Edward H. Hargreaves, a New South
Wales digger, who had tried his luck in the Californian
goldfields with no happy results. But when he saw
the conditions under which gold was won there, he
became impressed with the idea that similar conditions
existed in his own country. He therefore returned to
New South Wales and put his theories to the test.
Long before this the occurrence of gold had been re-
ported in Australia. Gold-bearing specimens, obtained
by Count Strzelecki from the Vale of Clwydd, were
shown to Sir George Gipps in 1839. Five years after-
wards Sir Roderick Murchison pronounced the Aus-
tralian eastern mountain system as auriferous. At this
time an old shepherd named McGregor was daily pick-
ing up good specimens of gold whilst tending his mas-
ter’s flocks on the watershed of the Mitchell. But he
knew' how to guard his secret so well that the era of
gold was put back several years. The Rev. W. B.
Clarke had also found gold-bearing stone in the granite
westward of the Vale of Clwydd, but, influenced by the
penal conditions of the colony, he took no steps to
make known his discovery until 1844, when he showed
a specimen to Gipps, who appeared to view the matter
as unimportant. In 1846 Sir Roderick Murchison
suggested to the British Government that several
Cornish miners be sent out to test the accuracy of his
opinion ; and in 1848 he informed the authorities that
a miner named Smith had sent him a good specimen
of gold found in a matrix on the western slopes of the


Blue Mountains. The following year another shepherd
sold 16 ozs. of gold, alleged to be picked up in the
Pyrenees, to a Melbourne jeweller named Brentani,
and then left for Sydney. Brentani organised a secret
party to locate the find, but, although he claimed to
have found more payable stone, nothing further was
heard of the matter. Smith turned up again this year.
He exhibited a nugget to the Colonial Secretary and
offered to disclose the site of his discovery if the Go-
vernment would give him a substantial award. Deas
Thomson, suspecting the genuineness of the find told
him that the Government could enter into no blind
bargain on such a subject, but if he trusted in their
liberality he would be awarded in proportion to the
covenes were genuine ; again, on May 17th he sent
word to Sydney that “ 400 of all classes had gathered
within a mile on Summer Hill Creek.” The first rush
had set in. In a short time the gold fever was to rage
fiercely in all corners of the two principal settlements.
Last Days of Crown Control.
From the time he entered the arena as a political
reformer Wentworth never abated his attempts to
secure control of the expenditure, and representative
government. These were his cardinal demands, and,
heedless of any sops in the shape of minor reforms, in
season and out of season, he hammered away on the
OLD RACECOURSE (NOW HYDE PARK), SYDNEY.
value of the alleged discovery. Smith declined, and
nothing more was heard of his gold. Hargreaves re-
turned to Sydney in the early months of 1851, and soon
realised, in the Bathurst district, that his anticipations
were well founded. He then demanded £5OO from the
Government as a recompense for his “ great hardship,
expense, and exercise of skill ” In reply Deas Thom-
son made the same offer to Hargreaves as he had to
Smith, and the former, accepting it, led the Govern-
ment geologist, Mr. Stutchbury, to auriferous areas at
Lewis Ponds and Summer Hill Creek, the Macquarie
and other “ unnamed ” rivers. Stutchbury reported
to the Government on May 14, 1851, that the dis-
official anvil to attain his ends. In May, 1851, he
tabled his famous Remonstrance, setting out at length
the grievances the colonists sustained. This was
adopted by the Legislative Council, and re-affirmed the
following year, the Council then declaring ; “ We owe
it to ourselves and our constituents to denounce to
your Majesty, as the chief grievance to which the
people of this colony are subjected, the systematic and
mischievous interference which is exercised by the
Colonial Minister, even in matters of 'purely local go-
vernment. . . Most anxious as we are to strengthen
and perpetuate the connection happily subsisting with
our fatherland, it would be impossible to maintain


much longer the authority of a local executive com-
pelled to refer all measures of importance for the
decision of an inexperienced, remote and irresponsible
department. . . . That her 'Majesty’s advisers might
have no excuse for the continuance of these abuses, we
unhesitatingly declare that we are prepared, upon the
surrender to the Colonial Legislature of the entire
management of all our revenues, territorial as well as
general, in which we include mines of every description,
and upon the establishment of a constitution similar
in its outline to that of Canada, to assume and provide
for the whole cost of our internal government, whether
civil or military, the salary of the Governor-General
alone excepted and to grant to your Majesty an ade-
quate Civil List." Earl Grey met the Remonstrance
in his usual airy majiner, years afterwards recording
his opinion ‘‘that in it the Council had fallen into
errors both of reasoning and of fact, so obvious that
it must have been drawn up under the influence of
excited feelings." But the days, of the Liberal Minis-
ters and their indifference to colonial aspirations were
numbered. In December, 1852, the Conservatives
were in power. The new Colonial Secretary was Sir
John Pakington, and on the 15th of that month, when
Sir Win. Molesworth drew attention in the House of
Commons to “ the solemn protest and declaration of the
colony," the Secretary of State announced that his
colleagues had considered the “ very important state-
ment it contained and a decision had been arrived at."
The exceptional condition of affairs caused by the dis-
covery of gold, and the signal evidence of the fitness
of the New South Wales people to regulate their own
affairs, compelled the Government to pay serious
attention to the Remonstrance. Control of the customs,
and the distinction between local and Imperial sub-
jects of legislation, would be favourably considered
when represented specifically Regarding the appro-
priation of moneys levied by authority of the Colonial
Legislature and the control of waste lands, the Govern-
ment were “ ready to accede to the wishes of the Coun-
cil and' of the colony in a spirit of entire confidence."
The revenue of Crown lands would be given up by the
Crown “ after those changes have been effected in the
constitution which are adverted to in the petition.
On the receipt by her Majesty’s advisers of such a
constitutional enactment . . . with a Civil List an-
nexed . . they undertake forthwith to propose to
Parliament such measures as will be necessary to carry
into effect the entire arrangement." The battle for
political freedom was won. Meanwhile Wentworth,
putting not his trust in Ministerial changes, had main-
tained his agitation with undiminished ardour. Imitat-
ing the example of the illustrious Hampden in the British
Parliament* he attacked supplies, and although foiled
in his efforts to obtain a postponement of the estimates
for 1853 till a reply to the Remonstrance was received,
he carried a resolution in the ‘Council to refuse supply
for 1854' if the Minister’s answer were unfavourable.
*
Sir John Pakington’s reply arrived whilst the Council
was in recess ; the members reassembled on May 10,
1853, and ten days afterwards Wentworth obtained a
Select Committee to draft the constitution, which, as
amended by the British Parliament, is now the frame-
work of our political life.
National Education and the Sydney University.
In 1848 a Board of National Education was ap-
pointed consisting of J. H. Plunkett (Attorney-General)
chairman, Sir Charles Nicholson, and W. S. Macleay
(a son of the ex-Colonial Secretary). Simultaneously a
Denominational School Board came into existence to
control the expenditure of Government grants in these
schools. The national system established by Lord
Stanley irt Ireland, where the State paid nothing for
religious instruction, was to be adopted A time
would be set apart in the national schools for reading
the scripture lessonsi approved by Archbishop Whately
and the Roman Cathclic Bishop, Dr Murray, but no
child would be compelled to attend such classes when
the parents' objected. At the beginning the national
system was subjected to strong opposition -from the
clerical heads of all denominations, but as it became
better understood the opposition was gradually with-
drawn.
Until 1849 nothing definite was done to establish
a university, although for many .years it had been
advocated. During that year, as the result of the
labours of a committee consisting of Wentworth, Deas
Thomson, G. R. Nichols, J. Macarthur, C. Cowper,
Plunkett, R. Lowe and Sir Charles Nicholson, a mea-
sure passed its second reading “ to test,” as Wentworth
said. “ the philanthropy and patriotism of this Council
—a test by which we may safely abide. So long as
this institution shall exist we shall not be forgotten ;
so long as it shall flourish our memory will not decay.
Far more important will the effects be than aught we
have yet done. We have passed laws ; but these laws
may be altered —may in the change of fleeting circum-
stances be swept away. But this measure, which is to
enlighten the mind, to refine the understanding, to
elevate the soul of our fellow-men—this of all our arts
contains the germs of immortality—this I believe will
live —will live tc commemorate the Council who passed
it. I believe that from the pregnant womb of this
institution will arise a long line of illustrious names
of statesmen of patriots, of philanthropists,; of philo-
sophers, of poets, of lieroes, and of sages, who will
shed a deathless halo, not only on their country, but
on the university we are now about to call into being.'’
Opposition to the proposed constitution of the .Senate
delayed the passage of the Bill until 1850, when the
first colonial university in the British Empire became
an accomplished fact, and Wentworth saw in his
handiwork—the greatest, perhaps, of a glorious life of
achievement—the facility given to the child of everv
man of every class, to become great and useful. In
the same year the first Senate was appointed, a curri-
culum of arts w'as decided upon, and the Sydney Uni-
versity occupied a portion of what is now the Sydney
Grammar School.
The Colony just before Division.
The substantial advance made bv New South
Wales may be gathered from the following figures,
made up to the period when \ ictoria became a separate
colony. There were in this colony 13,059,324 sheep,
1,738,965 horned cattle, 132.437 horses, and 61,631
pigs. The number of acres of land under cultivation


amounted to 198,050, inclusive of nearly 1,000 acres of
vineyards. The imports had swollen to £2,078,338, and
the exports to £2,399, .>BO j the annual revenue was esti-
mated at £575,794. These figures show that the manufac-
turing interests had been greatly developed. There
were sugar refineries, steam and other mills, foundries
and factories of different kinds, breweries, distilleries,
tanneries, clothworks and soapworks. The census of
1851 gave the population at 187,243 souls, and the
number of schools at 659, with 28,604- scholars.
Responsible Government Commences.
Sir W. T. Denison succeeded Sir Charles Fitzroy
on January 20, 1855, his commission constituting him
Governor-General of the Australian colonies, as well as
Vice-Admiral, Captain-General and Governor-in-Chief
of New South W ales. Perhaps no more-suitable ser-
vant of the Crown could have been selected for vice-
regal representative at such a time, when many en-
tirely new administrative conditions had to be intro-
duced. As an officer of rank and attainments in the
Royal Engineers he bore a high reputation in military
circles, and the marked ability he had displayed as a
Governor in Tasmania drew acknowledgements even
from thctee violently opposed to his policy. The diffi-
culties in inaugurating the new form of government were
numerous, requiring' the exercise of considerable tact,
and the prospect induced many anxieties ; but Denison
was level-headed, and his vigour and resolution allowed
no obstacles to remain in the way. Those who could
not agree with his public acts admired the sterling
character of the man. Without siding with any person
or party, his advice was available on all general sub-
jects, and he thus,stamped the impress of his mind upon
every section of the community. When the adminis-
tration of Norfolk Island passed to New South Wales
he crossed over, and in the code drawn up for the
government of the descendants of the Bounty muti-
neers, he thoughtfully incorporated many of the pe-
culiar customs they had adopted on Pitcairn Island
of Their own control. When the Home authorities
endeavoured to induce convicts to emigrate to More-
ton Bay, in the days before separation, he warned the
Secretary of State that it would not only prove ex-
tremely costly, but arouse the ill-feeling of the colonists.
He put his foot down when the Cowper Ministry en-
deavoured to swamp the Upper House in 1858 ; and
as the time arrived to nominate life members for that
chamber, be strongly impressed on the Colonial Sec-
retary the necessity of electing men who were repre-
sentative of the colony, and not mere partisans. He
would countenance no violation' of the constitutional
rules. When urged to dissolve the Parliament, in
1860, and enable the Government to carry on by pay-
ments, not constitutionally provided for, he intimated
that after a specified time he would permit no disburse-
ments unauthorised by Appropriation Acts. In all
instances he never failed to weigh the circumstances
of the case, and once he had arrived at a decision there
was no swerving, even if the position he took up
brought him into opposition with his Ministers. When
he received instructions to issue a Crown grant, pro-
mised years before by one of his predecessors, and
Mr. Cowper, then a member of the Robertson Govern-
ment, refused to affix the public seal, Sir William
requested the Minister to hand the seal to him, and he
sealed the grant himself. His views on immigration,
education, land settlement. &c , were broad and states-
manlike. There is no doubt that if responsible govern-
ment had been delayed a few years longer a vigorous
railway policy would have been in operation. Road-
making and bridge-building we’re Denison’s hobbies.
Continuous study and experiment led him to the con-
clusion that Igiht lines of wooden rails could be cheaply
run into the interior, capable of maintaining speeds
of'froin ten to twelve mile's an hour, h’or this purpose
he was prepared to borrow money largely, paying off
the debt by the sale of land in the vicinity of the road.
He was so sanguine of success in this particular policy
GOVERNOR SIR W. T. DENISON.
that, if his hands were free, he would certainly have
put his ideas into practice, but with responsible govern-
ment between him and action he could do little more
than chafe at lost opportunities.
The Governor’s Functions Altered.
The first Governors in New South Wales exercised
the functions of the third consuls, as the Roman pne-
tors were termed. Their rule was autocratic, and
it varied according to individual characteristics. They
were furnished with general instructions, but whenever
a decision was necessary they had to act on their own
responsibility. Only the knowledge that, in the future,
they might be called upon to explain, placed any check
upon their actions. Even when under the Constitution
Act of 1823 it became necessary to appoint an Execu


live Council to co-operate with the Governor, his
power to legislate suffered no diminution. No measure
could be brought forward by any member of the Coun-
cil unless it met with his approval, whilst he could
initiate any Bill he chose As the resouicesi of the
colony expanded, and population increased, the system
of government which made one man responsible for
every administrative Act had to be modified. Gradu-
ally he had to look to his officers for the carrying out
of details, and step by step, as reforms were conceded,
the work of administration fell upon others. But his
responsibility remained. When the amended consti-
Under responsible government the Governors of
the Australian colonies had to establish a new order of
affairs almost without precedent. They had very
little official knowledge —about ten years’ experience
in Canada —to assist them, and success chiefly de-
pended on their own sagacity. As events developed
instructions 'from Downing Street made the official
functions of a Governor more clear. Sir C. Darling,
Governor of Victoria, was informed that the British
Government had no wish “ to interfere in any ques-
tions of purely colonial policy, and only desire that
the colony shall be governed in conformity with the
PITT STREET IN 1836,
Showing vacant land from Bridge Street to Alliance Assurance Company’s offices, corner Little George Street. The tree
represents the position now occupied by the Liverpool and London and Globe Insurance Company, and the posts on the
opposite side indicate Bond Street.
tution of 1844 made the Legislative Council partly
representative, the Governor no longer took part in
legislative debates, but his voice could be heard through
the one-third nominee members, whom he controlled ;
and he could veto any Bill. An anomalous position,
however, arose. On the one hand the Governor de-
pended for many measures that he wished passed upon
a House containing two-thirds elected members ; on
the other hand, he was subject to stringent instructions
from> the Crown. Such a position could never endure
long, and the Wentworth Remonstrance in 1851 proved
the means of ending it.
principles of responsible and constitutional government
subject always to the paramount authority of the law.”
“ The view that with responsible government,” says
Rusdeni in his able “ History of Australia,” “ a
Governor of a British colony becomes a Ministerial
puppet can be accepted only by the unwise. Those
who, not being ignorant, would maintain that view
have often ulterior designs incompatible with loyalty.
Wheit law is respdcted, when Ministers are honourable,
when a colony is unshaken by alarm and distress, the
Governor may appear to have little to do beyond
fulfilling those functions in virtue of which he is the


crowning of the social edifice in the colony. But ‘ the
providence that’s in a watchful State ’ requires upon
occasion the exercise of highest wisdom or tact by a
Governor ; and if he be found wanting disorder may
ensue. If a rash or designing Ministry find him false
to the law, they may demand from him disloyalty to
the Throne. Having abandoned the principle that he
will do no wrong, he can never again regain firm ground,
and must become a creature of accident. His relations
to the Crown are a source of strength or of weakness
in proportion to his own perspicacity and firmness He
has to guard, not only against wrong-doing which may
lead to early mischief, but against carelessness, which
selecting the best public men who had not been re-
turned to the Legislative Assembly. Just before the
new constitution was proclaimed, on November 24,
1855, the old Legislative Council was prorogued. The
Colonial Secretary, Deas Thomson, was away on leave
of absence at the time ; but as it was understood that
his colleagues arid he would be relieved from office as
soon as practicable, a Executive Council
was appointed to assist Denison and carry on the
affairs of the country. The retiring staff had been
asked to continue on the old Executive, but not seeing
how this was possible under the altered conditions
they decided to resign. In continuing their relations
PITT STREET IN 1907.
may heap up trouble for his successors. Loyal to the
Crown, firm'to obey the iaw, impartial to public men,
frank towards his constitutional advisers, but never
consenting to be their creature or partisan, solicitous
for the welfare of the colony, and wary in the exercise
of the Royal prerogative, especially in summoning or
dissolving Parliament —a Governor can find worthy
employment for the highest faculties.”
The Old Executive and New Government.
A duty devolved upon Denison which the. Gover-
nors of other colonies escaped. He had to nominate
the Upper House, and'in the fulfilment of this task it
must be admitted he acted with great circumspection.
with the Governor, as many' thought they should have
done, it was not stated on what footing they were to
stand —whether they were to act under the old system,
which made them a “ council of advice,” or were to
assume the duties and authority of responsible govern-
ment. In their former position they were all held
together by the obligations of official subordination
But when the constitution changed it contemplated the
employment of statesmen, not functionaries. The
co-operation of statesmen requires concurrence of
political opinion. It was upon this ground that the
Attorney-General declined to act as a member of the
Executive Council. The advice which he gave the
Governor was to suspend all permanent arrangements
till after the elections should be completed—mean


while to provide himself, as authorised by his instruc-
tions, with an Executive to carry on the routine busi-
ness of the colony. Acting on Plunkett’s recom-
mendations the Governor had recourse to the temporary
arrangements referred to above ; but practically until
Parliament assembled and his Ministers had been
constitutionally returned all responsibility rested on
his shoulders.
When there was so much difficulty to carry on the
affairs of the colony during the months intervening
between the proclamation of the new constitution and
the meeting of Parliament, the formation of the first
Ministry was not an easy task. The elections were
only beginning when the subject was first mooted, and
it was not possible to predict with any certainty what
would be the result of an appeal to the country. Mr.
Deas Thomson, whose position and character secured
for him a very large amount of interest in the colony,
seemed the likeliest man to successfully undertake the
formation of a Cabinet, and to him the Governor ap-
pealed. But Deas Thomson evinced a strong disin-
clination to make himself the sport of a fickle public ;
he preferred a retired life in his declining years. He
would neither attempt Ministry-making, nor woo the
electors, nor accept the Presidentship of the Upper
House. Later on, however, he agreed to sit in the
Upper House among the thirty-one nominees—includ-
ing Sir Alfred Stephen, Chief Justice of the colony, and
other of the ablest citizens in New South Wales —who
composed the Legislative Council. Mr. Donaldson,
selected by the Governor to form a Cabinet, was made
a member of the Executive Council immediately after
the elections in April, 1856, as well as J. B. Darvall,
a leading barrister,, and Sir William Manning. The
latter, formerly Solicitor-General, was the only official
under the old regime who held office in the new Minis-
try as a representative of the electors. The remaining
colleagues of the Prime Minister were Thos. Holt and
G. R. Nichols —the one prominent in mercantile circles,
and the othei a clever attorney. That Darvall, who
with Parkes had persistently plotted against the Con-
stitution Bill, and hitherto avowed himself an opponent
of his newly-formed colleagues, should have accepted
a seat in the first Administration was a theme for much
unfavourable comment. It did but show, however,
that very much in the same way as to-day, the poli-
tician of the fifties found himself more attached to
place than to principle.
The Separation of Queensland.
In December, 1859, in deference to the repeated
petitions of the leading settlers, the Moreton Bay
district, which had hitherto been an appendage of New
South Wale"-, was made an independent' colony, under
the name of Queensland. To Dr. Lang the success of
the separation movement is mainly due ; the same
John Dunmore Lang who took an active part in earlier
days in the severance of the Port Phillip district from
the mother colony, and who once formally proposed
in the Legislative Assembly that New South Wales
should sunder the ties which bound her to the British
Empire —a proposition one member thought ought to
be “ thrown on the floor of the House and' swept out
by the common hangman.” The* turbulent doctor’s
sympathies with his northern friends were peculiar,
and savoured of self-interest. In 1847 Lang induced
emigrants from Scotland to settle at Moreton Bay
under false, representations. They were to receive
grants of land at their journey’s end. He obtained
money from them, and was given land orders,, but
when the emigrants landed in the colony they found
Lang’s “ promises were of no avail and that no land
was forthcoming ” —a deception which brought on the
doctor the condemnation of the Legislature. Notwith-
standing this, he made application to the first Queens-
land Government for compensation, and gave evidence
before a Select Committee in Brisbane. Some of his
dupes protested against the claim being entertained.
In their report the committee pronounced Lang’s
efforts in the cause of immigration “ a commercial and
strictly sectarian effort ’ ’ undeserving of any monetary
solatium ; and then with grim humour they added that
his exertions to secure separation merited the gratitude
of the country. This obligation was discharged by the
Queensland Legislature passing a vote of thanks, which
Lang acknowledged characteristically—in his worst
possible taste. At the time of separation the popu-
lation of Moreton Bay district represented 23,450
whites and 12,000 blacks ; the estimated revenue being
£160,600. Adopting a dividing line recommended by
the British authorities in 1850, Lang fixed the 30th
parallel as the southern boundary of the new colony ;
but the division now made was an imaginary line from
Point Danger on the east, running westward along the
Macpherson and Dividing Ranges and the Dumaresq
River to the Macintyre River, thence by the 29th
parallel of south latitude to the 141st meridian of east
longitude. The proclamation of the new colony ap-
peared in the London Gazette of June 3, 1859. An
Order-in-Council empowered Denison, as Governor-
General, to provide for convoking the first Legislature ;
and the qualification of Queensland electors and mem-
bers was the same as that in the Constitution Act
(1855) of New South Wales. The first Governor, Sir
George Bowen, arrived on December 10, 1859. Nearly
six months afterwards the Queensland Parliament
assembled ; one of its earliest acts being to pass an
address to the Queen recording “ heartfelt gratitude
for the great attention and impartial justice ” shown.
Sir Charley Nicholson, an ex-Speaker of the Legislative
Council prior to responsible government in this colony,
at the request of the Colonial Office;. accepted the
presidentship of the nominee Upper House, and his
long experience made him instrumental in fashioning
the forms of thd Queensland Government.
Six Years of Responsible Government.
With the expiration of Denison’s governorship in
1861 the first six years of responsible government were
fast drawing to a close. On the whole they were years
of substantial progress. The population had increased
to 358,278 ; there were 849 schools, attended by 37,874
scholars ; 788 factories of various kinds, 1 and
297,575 acres of land under crop ; the stock had in-
creased to 233,220 horses, 2,271,923 horned cattle,
146,091 swine. Sheep showed a slight falling off in
number, being 5,615,054. The annual imports were
£6,391,555, and exports £5,594,839 ; the revenue was


estimated at £1,418,610, while the expenditure, on the
other hand, has risen to £1,540,005 —an evidence that
the Micawber of national finance had arrived.
An Ex-Cabinet Minister as Governor.
Sir John oung (afterwards Lord Lisgar) relieved
Sir Win. T. Denison, and was the vice-regal represen-
tative from the middle of 1861 to the end of 1867
During the five months between Denison’s departure
and Young’s arrival Lt.-Col. S. F. Kempt acted as
Administrator. The new Governor made himself wel-
come everywhere. He was a man of commanding
eloquence, expressing himself clearly and in a pleasant
style, entrancing to his hearers. People would be
drawn to him by the suavity of his manner, and the
Penetrating gift of persuasion that he possessed. He
brought a ripe experience in politics to Australia
•
him as an exponent of good government. Within two
months of his landing he lent himself to one of the most
irregulai acts a Governor was ever asked, or consented,
to perform. At the instigation of Chas. Cowper, his
Prime Minister, and John Robertson, then Secretary
for Lands, he attempted to throttle the Legislative
Council when they threw out the Robertson Land
Bills by swamping the chamber with thirty-cne
of Cowper’s obsequious followers, whom he had
“ swept up from the streets.” The plot failed owing
to the action of the President, Sir W. W. Burton.
When he received a verbal message —instead of the
customary notification—that his Excellency had com*
missioned these new members, with those among the
old members opposed to the Government’ $ land policy,
he left the chamber, whilst the nominees were waiting
to be sworn in. There was no quorum ;it was the last
sitting-day before the Council expired by effluxion of
FORT DENISON.
A member of the House of Commons for several years,
then Chief Secretary for Ireland, he had also exercised
administrative functions as Lord High Commissioner
of the lonian Islands.
“Violent” and Unconstitutional.
Responsible government when Young arrived in
the colony had passed out of the novel stage. It had
been established for several years ; and whilst under
the altered condition of affairs a Governor was not
looked to to materially influence the destinies of the
people, he was, at' least, expected to exercise his func-
tions in strict conformity with constitutional practice,
and allow himself to be drawn into no questionable
deeds by designing ministers. In this expectation
Young grievously disappointed all who looked upon
time, and the sitting had to be adjourned “ until the
next sitting,” which of course would never be.
Cowper’s high-handed attempt to subvert the con-
stitution was the scandal of his political life, and Young
did not escape' severe censure for the flabby share he
took in it. “I cannot pass without notice,” wrote
the Duke of Newcastle, Secretary of State, ‘‘your
report of the means which you took, by the advice of
your responsible advisers, to ensure the passing of, the
Land Bills through the Legislative Council ; the crea-
tion, namely, upon a sudden, and for a single night, of
a number of Legislative Councillors, which you do not
specify, but which must have been sufficient to convert
a large majority against the Bills into a majority in
their favour. ... A measure, so violent and in its
nature unconstitutional, could only be justified by


circumstances of the gravest danger and the greatest
urgency, which did not, as it appears to me, exist on
the present occasion ... I have thought it my duty
to say so much by way of comment upon a proceeding
prejudicial to the cause of constitutional government
in Australia, while it tends to weaken the position of the
Governor”
The Second Legislative Council.
Under the Constitution Act members of the second
Legislative Council were to be appointed for life, and
the responsibility for their nomination devolved upon
the Governor. Cowper, with the fate of his Land Bills
before him, would pack the chamber with his creatures,
but the Ministerial will in this instance was not to be.
GOVERNOR SIR JOHN YOUNG.
With characteristic sagacity Denison had accurately
guaged the moral fibre in his last Prime Minister, and
provided against the possibilities of a partisan House
by recommending to the Secretary of State the lines
upon which the new Council should be established,
urging that his successor be directed to nominate
Councillors who represented the colony at large. His
advice w r as embodied in the Royal instructions of
March 5, 1861, and Young, finding he could take no
independent course, informed Cowper that no members
would be nominated of his choosing. The Governor
went further. Wentworth had returned to the colony
and Young urged him to accept the Presidentship. The
veteran statesman did accept, not from choice, for he
was wearying of the turbulence of public life, but in
order, as he afterwards explained, that he might “ assist
in preparing a constitution for this House which would
supersede the present Council, and prevent the recur-
rence of any future attacks upon its independence
The other members of the new Council were : Messrs.
Geo. Allen, ffm. Byrne, John Campbell, J. B. Darvall,
R. Fitzgerald. J. F. Hargrave, G. K. Holden, C. Kemp,
John McFariane, A. Macarthur, F. L. S. Merewether,
J. Mitchell, J. H Plunkett, John Robertson, R. M.
Robey, B. Russell, A. W. Watt, E. Heas Thomson,
E. A' Ward, J. B. Watt and Sir William Manning.
Wentworth remained President long enough to see a
measure to constitute the Council on an elective basis
passed through all its stages in the Upper House. He
then announced his attention to retire, and shortly
afterwards sailhd for England —whence he never re-
turned to the land of his birth alive. Eventually his
Bill was shelved in the Assembly by 33 votes against
15, Cowper voting with the majority.
Confidence in the Mother Colony.
The entire indebtedness ■of the colony when \oung
assumed the Governorship was about £3,825,000 and
debentures w 7 ere sold in the English market from 97|
to 103, illustrating the confidence of the capitalists in
the resources and management of New r South Males.
The policy of the Government, too, was inspiriting.
The subject of immigration received special attention
during 1861. Mr. Rotton brought the matter up in the
Assembly and on May 7, the Assisted Immigration Fund
Bill passed, appropriating £50,000 for the purposes of
immigration, of which £5,000 w r as to be set aside for
lecturers and agents in England. Messrs. Parkes and
Dailey went to England as such, and soon aroused
such a lively interest in the colony that a few r years
brought back to the Treasury tenfold the amount of
expenditure. Steps' were also taken by the Govern-
ment the same year to inaugurate a system of tram-
lines in Sydney-
During 1862 the Torrens Real Property Bill became
law, doing aw r ay with the necessity of putting in a deed
of transfer, the entire abstract of title ; and the law of
primogeniture hitherto in force in the colony was
abolished. Two years later on there Were disastrous
floods, involving heavy damages to stock and property
in every district of New South Wales, but before the
Governor departed good seasons had more than recom-
pensed for the losses.
Sir John Young retired on December 22, 1867, his
administration being marked by great changes in
nearly all departments. During his Governorship the
population had increased from 358,278, in 1861, to
447,620, in 1867 ; land under cultivation, from
297,595 acres to 413,164 acres ; general revenue, from
£1,448,610 to £2,134,490; sheep, from 5,615,054 to
13,919,574, and other stcck in like proportion.
Attempted Assassination of the Duke of
Edinburgh.
The Earl of Belmore who followed Sir John
Young, did not-stay out his full term of office. He
assumed responsibility on January 8, 1868, and, owing
to the continued illness of his wife, he was recalled, at
his own request, quitting New South Wales in Feb-
ruary, 1872. A greater contrast between the new and
the old Governor can scarcely be conceived. Though a
man of equal worth in point of character, the Earl


neither possessed Young’s persuasive gifts nor did he
attempt to fashion people by the power of speech. He
was courteous, careful and painstaking. At the outset of
Ids career he. noticed certain practices contrary to the
constitution, and did what he could to check them.
A laxity had arisen in connection with public pay-
ments. Ministers had made it common for the
GOVERNOR EARL BELMORE.
Governor-in-Council to authorise payments in antici-
pation of the sanction of those votes by the Legislature.
Lord Belmore demurred, and on referring the matter
to Earl Granville as to his responsibility in permitting
the practice to continue, was told he would be acting
illegally if he did so, and that he was bound to refuse
to sign such warrants except in times of extreme
urgencj*. There was scarcely any portion of the colony
that Lord Belmore did not visit, holding it to be one of
the principal duties of a Governor to become tho-
roughly conversant with the wants and wishes of the
people. And he paid constant attention to the needs
of the unfortunate.
Early in 1868 H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh paid
a visit to the colony, January 16, the date of his ar-
rival at Sydney, being made a day of public demon-
stration. Twenty-four sea-going steamers met the
“ Galatea,” the Duke’s man-o’-war, off Botany, and
when she had passed through their double lines, they
formed a procession astern. After passing Hornby
Light as many more harbour steamers joined in the
procession, and within the heads the harbour' was
covered with yachts. It was the most effective aquatic
display yet attempted, and did but symbolise the
fervid loyalty which greeted the first member of the
Royal Family to visit Australian shores. In the midst
of their rejoicings the people were startled, on March 12,
by the announcement that the Duke had been shot
from behind by an assassin. A picnic to Clontarf had
been arranged that day, to which Prince Alfred was
invited as a special guest. As the festivities were
drawing to a close a man named O’Farrell was seen
to draw near and fire at the Duke. The aim was a bad
one, and the bullet only inflicted a slight wound, from
which the Duke speedily recovered, Farrell, who
narrowly escaped being lynched by the eye-witnesses,
was prosecuted by Mr Martin (Prime Minister and
Attorney-General) for attempted murder, and on being
found guilty was sentenced to be hanged—in accord-
ance with the prevailing colonial law.
In 1870 New South Wales celebrated the cen-
tenary of Captain Cook’s discovery of the eastern
coast of Australia by holding an Intercolonial Indus-
trial Exhibition at Prince Alfred Park, Sydney. A
suitable building was erected by the City Corporation
on this site, under an agreement with the Agricultural
Society of New South Wales, through whose agency the
exposition of our industrial wealth was arranged.
The Government assisted with a vote of £3,000. The
exhibition was opened with great ceremony by Lord
Belmore on 31st August, and it remained open for a
month, during which time it was visited by 185,000
persons.
A stimulus was given to immigration and railway
construction during the four years of Lord Bel more’s
administration, this period generally being marked
with prosperity and healthy progress. The population
in 1868 was 466,765, and in 1871 519,882 ; imports in
1868 were £8,051,377, and in 1871 £9,609,138; and
exports £6,192,904 and £11,245,032 respectively. The
general revenue, £2,476,701 in 1868 had risen to
£2,908,153 in 1871.
A Period of Activity and Advancement.
Sir Hercules G. R. Robinson, the Earl of Belmore’s
successor, held office from June 3, 1872, to March 19,
1879, his regime being distinctive as a period of activity
GOVERNOR SIR HERCULES G. R. ROBINSON.
and advancement. At no time did the colony make
greater strides, and its progress in the six years, or
more, of his administration was remarkable. The
population increased from 539,190, in 1872, to 693, <43,
in 1878; £9,208,496 and £14,768,873 represented the


imports of these two years, and the exports were
£10,447,00:1: and £12,965,879 respectively. The re-
venue in 1872 was £3,592,979, and in 1878 £6,708,047.
During his government Fiji was annexed to Great
Britain ; the remains of Wentworth were brought from
England and accorded a public funeral ; the colonies
agreed in the organisation of the ocean mail service ;
the question of exercising the Royal prerogative of
mercy was definitely settled ; New South Wales was for
the first time (1876) officially represented at an interna-
tional exhibition—the Centennial Exhibition of Phila-
delphia ; and a Bill was passed for an international
exhibition.
Fiji in its condition of lawlessness had long
menaced the interests of Australia. It occupied a
position of strategic importance in the Pacific Ocean,
midway between the colonies and America. Fears
existed that it would be annexed by a foreign power ;
it had been offered to and refused by the President of
the United States, as well as the German Emperor,
and there was no knowing when the one or the other
would change his mind and become possessed of the
country. It was the Alsatia of the antipodes—a
sanctuary for rogues and law-breakers. “ Off to
Fiji ! ” would explain the absence of defaulting Aus-
tralians, much the same as “ Off to Mexico ! ” used
to in America. Twice had the islands been offered, on
conditions, to Great Britain by the leading chieftain,
Cakobau—a sort of Fijian Regulus, —and on each
occasion declined. Then Cakobau formed an ad-
ministration, composed almost entirely of British sub-
jects, and official rule obtained for a few years, the
Government being recognised and practically supported
by the British authorities. After four or five years’
regality Cakobau found himself a bankrupt sovereign.
His treasury was empty, credit had been exhausted,
and there w 7 as a deficit in the national balance-sheet of
£60,000 —mostly Australian money. Added to these
worries, seven-eighths of his subjects, white and black,
were ripe for revolt, being only held back by British
guns. Earl Kimberley commissioned Commodore
Goodenough and the British Consul at Levuka, Mr.
Layard, to look into the condition of Fijian affairs and
report. A third time Cakobau offered his sovereignty
on terms, to England, and a third time it was declined.
But by this time British interests in Fijian waters had
greatly increased. Sir Hercules Robinson was en-
trusted with the delicate mission of explaining to the
Fijian chiefs that the conditions which accompanied
the offer of cession would, unless waived, render its
acceptance' impossible, and that if the King was not
prepared' to trust in the generosity and justice of the
Queen of England, negotiations would have to termi-
nate. The Governor arrived in PI.M.S. “ Dido ” at
Levuka on September 25, 1874. Two weeks later—
Saturday, October 10th, 1874—the final scene in the
drama was played out, and amidst much ceremonial
and legal formality the Fiji Islands were ceded to the
British Crown. Until such time as her Majesty’s
pleasure could be made known regarding the consti-
tution and permanent administration of the colony* a
provisional government was established with Sir
Hercules Robinson as Governor, and an Executive
Council, consisting of the late British Consul, Mr.
Layard ; the Attorney-General of New South Wales,
Mr. J. G. L. limes ; the late Premier, Mr. Thurston,
Mr. T. Horton and Mr. R. S. Swanston. The charter
was proclaimed in September, 1875, and Sir Arthur
Gordon was selected as Governor of Fiji and High
Commissioner in the Western Pacific.
Sir Hercules Robinson governed under favourable
auspices. His partiality to outdoor sports, his manly
characteristics and the straightforward character of
his speeches made him popular with a large majority of
the people, and his departure to assume the Governor-
ship of New Zealand was the cause of general regret.
First International Exhibition.
Lord Augustus W. F. S. Loftus, who had earned a
high reputation in the diplomatic world as Ambassador
at the Court of St. Petersburg, was the fourteenth
Governor, succeeding Robinson on August 3, 1879
The International Exhibition was a notable and
GOVERNOR LORD AUGUSTUS W. F. S. LOFTUS.
fortunate commencement of his vice-regal career, con-
centrating upon tEe colony, as it did, th 6 attention of
the whole civilised world, and drawing to it vast num-
bers of visitors, who found much to astonish them in
the rapid strides New South Wales had made in national
life. During Robinson’s term of office a Bill had been
passed sanctioning the exhibition and voting £lO,OOO
to the Agricultural Society of New South Wales to
carry the project to a successful issue. But the course
of events rendered it necessary for the Government to
undertake this responsibility. Under the name of the
Garden Palace, a building 700 feet in length and 400
feet in height was erected’ at a cost of £191,000, on a
site now contained in the Botanical Gardens. Opened
on September 17. 1879, by Lord Loftus, the Exhibition
did not close until April 20, 1880, and as a whole was
eminently successful. Two years afterwards the
building, now utilised for public purposes, was totally
destroyed by fire, when State records and valuable
products of art, collected from all parts of the globe,
were consumed.


Beginnings of Australian Federation.
Although the Committee of the Privy Council
recommended in 1849 that a General Assembly of
Australia be authorised to deal with certain subjections
they set forth, the resultant provisions for this federal
body were eliminated from the Australian Colonies
Government Bill (1850) in the Imperial Parliament.
Federation then dropped out of the political purview
for thirty years. It was revived in 1881 at an Inter-
colonial Conference, when Sir Henry Parkes carried a
resolution to frame a Bill for the creation of some
federal corporation authorised to deal with certain
defined subjects of mutual interest. The Bill was
drafted, but a majority of the conference was hostile
to its adoption. At the second conference, held in
Sydney in 1883, the annexation of New Guinea,
the control of the New Hebrides and other burning
troubles were discussed, and the representatives
framed another Bill to constitute a Federal Council
of Australasia. All the Australian colonies were
represented, and also New Zealand and Fiji, the
Governor of the colony (Sir G. W. Des Voeux)
being present ; but the New Zealand representatives
limited their functions to observation. In 1885 the
Imperial Government put through Parliament the
Federal Council of Australasia (1885) Bill, enabling a
Federal Council to dispose of “ such matters of common
Australasian interest in respect to which united action
is desirable, as can be dealt with without unduly inter-
fering with the management of the internal affairs of
the several colonies by their respective Legislatures.”
Enabling Acts were passed in most of the Australian
colonies, but Parkes, who had taken no share in the
convention of 1883, would not recognise its work, and
for many years New South Wales sent no represen-
tives to the Federal Council meetings.
The Soudan Contingent.
An important event occurred in the last year of
Lord Loftus’ office, which served to emphasise the
colonists’ loyalty to the mother country. On a reso-
lution moved by Mr. W. B. Dailey, then Acting Pre-
mier, the Cabinet placed two batteries of Permanent
Field Artillery and a battalion of infantry, 500 strong,
under the command of Colonel Richardson, Com-
mandant of the New South Wales forces, at the dis-
posal of her Majesty’s Government for service in the
Soudan. The offer was accepted, conditional upon
only one battery of artillery being despatched. The
action of the Cabinet met with general approval through-
out the empire and in the mother colony voluntary
subscriptions flowed in freely. Ladies and gentlemen
offered themselves as nurses and attendants until the
Government intimated no more offers would be ac-
cepted. On March 3, 1885, 743 troops with a strong
ambulance corps, sailed in the ‘ ‘ Iberia ’ ’ and ‘ ‘ Aus-
tralasia ” for the seat of war, disembarking at Suakim
on March 30. Their services at the front, however,
were very brief, as the evacuation of the Soudan was
decided upon shortly after their arrival, and on June
19 the contingent returned to Sydney.
The Retirement of Lord Loftus.
Among other events which made Lord Loftus’
service in New South Wales memorable were the open-
ing of the Sydney-Melbourne railway ; the visit to
Australia of the Princes Albert and George, sons of the
Prince of Wales, as midshipmen aboard H.M.S.
“ Bacchante ” ; and the passing of Parkes’ Public
Instruction Act This important measure repealed
the Public School Act of 1866 and transferred the
powers possessed by the Council of Education to a
Minister of Public Instruction. It created five classes
of schools, reduced fees to 3d. per week, and made
attendance compulsory.
Weary with the burden of long service and crip-
pled by the cares incidental to financial embarrass-
ments. Lord Loftus retired from the Governorship
into private life on November 9, 1885, after a dis-
tinguished career of forty years in public life. In
manners he was dignified and exclusive, averse to
GOVERNOR LORD CARRINGTON.
taking any share in the outdoor gatherings which
monopolise the colonists’ recreation, and this reserve
made many consider him cold and unsympathetic.
Four Federalist Governors.
Possibly from accident, although by many the fact
would be attributed to well-meaning design, the next
four Governors, Lord Carrington, the Earl of Jersey,
Sir Robert Duff and Lord Hampden, were ardent fede-
ralists. They warmly supported a federal Australia,
believing that from this union would spring a great
and powerful nation ; and whilst all keeping to the
strictest letter of constitutional law, they availed them-
selves of every opportunity to support the national
aspirations of the colonists.
Lord Carrington (now Earl of Carrington) who suc-
ceeded Lord Loftus, held office from December 12,
1885, to November 3 ; 1890. He had previously been
the member for High Wycombe in the House of


Commons, an Aide-de-Camp to the Prince of Wales, and
a member of the Privy Council ; besides holding various
public offices in England, hereditary and otherwise.
Owing to the great interest he took in the social and
political advancement of the colony, and the natural
kindness of his disposition, he was a great favourite
with all classes of the community, and retained his
popularity to the, day of his departure. Several
memorable occurrences mark his term of office. The
years 1887 and 1888 were prolific of interest to every-
one, the jubilee of her Majesty’s reign crowning the
one, and the centennial anniversary of the colony
«/ "
marking the other. To commemorate the jubilee a
practical movement was warmly taken up, at the
instigation of Lady Carrington, whereby the Women’s
Jubilee Fund for the relief of distressed women was
created. In honour of the centenary of New South
Wales a new .issue of postage stamps was struck, and
the Centennial Park was dedicated on a tract of land
adjoining Moore Park, Sydney, set apart by the far-
seeing Governor Macquarie in 1820 as a water reserve.
Two clouds passed over the colony in the year of the
jubilee—the Mount Rennie outrage, for which four
youths, who had not attained their majority, were
hanged and another four sentenced to imprisonment
for life ; and the Bulli disaster, occasioned by an ex-
plosion of firedamp, resulting in the death of 81 miners.
The Naval Force Bill providing for the defence of the
Australian station by the ships of the Imperial Navy
also became law in 1888 ; and mainly through an ap-
pointment made in connection with the Governorship
of Queensland in 1888, Parkes carried an address to
her Majesty submitting it was desirable that for the
future the colonial Government should be informed of
any intended appointment to the high office of
Governor before such appointment is finally made.”
The Earl of Jersey, Lord Carrington’s successor,
was Governor of the colony from January 15, 1891, to
GOVERNOR EARL OF JERSEY.
March 2,189 J. He showed himself as keen a federalist
as his predecessor, and took a warm interest in every
movement affecting the well-being and advancement of
the community. It was during his term that the
conference met in Sydney from which the first Federal
Constitution proceeded ; and that the unionists, foiled
in the maritime and shearers’ strikes of 1890, elected
representatives to Parliament, who formed the Labour
Party in politics.
Sir William Dull, the succeeding Governor, arrived
in the colony in time to witness the people in the throes
of the most severe financial crisis which has ever dis-
organised trade in New South Wales. He held office
until March 15, 1895, when the hand of death removed
him after a painful sickness, contracted in Tasmania.
His remains were accorded a public funeral.
Viscount Hampden, the last of the quartette of
vice-regal federalists, had a difficult part to play in
GOVERNOR VISCOUNT HAMPDEN
supporting the national question, as after his arrival,
on November 22, 1895, party feeling ran very high, in
which stage it would have been frankly impossible
for a Governor to take any part. But the great tact
he displayed at all times in the administration of his
office saved him at a most critical juncture from making
any mistakes. It was during his rule the final touches
were put to the Federal Constitution by the conven-
tions which sat in turn at Adelaide, Melbourne and
Sydney, and all parties of the great question of union
became merged into one. A family bereavement pre-
vented the public demonstration of popularity which
would have attended his departure in March. 1899.
The Last Governor of an Independent Colony.
After an interregnum of nearly three months,
during which the Lieutenant-Governor, Sir Frederick
M. Darley, acted as administrator for the third time,
Earl Beauchamp arrived on May 18, 1899 He was
the last of the Governors of an independent New South
Wales. The Imperial Parliament passed the Com-
monwealth Enabling Act in 1901, the new constitution
coming into force and federation being formally
inaugurated at Sydney on the first day of the twentieth


century. During this same year the Government
despatched to South Africa three contingents of troops ;
the contributions of private citizens almost exclusively
provided for another ; and added to these was a Bush-
men’s Contingent,' formed at the request of the Im-
perial authorities. The departure of Earl Beauchamp
on November 1, 1900, allowed the Sydney Government
House to be placed at the disposal of the Earl of Hope-
toun, the first Governor-General of the Common-
wealth, who was welcomed with great cordiality by
the people on his arrival. Subsequently Sir William
Lyne, Premier of New South Wales, was sent for by him
to form the first Federal Ministry, but not succeeding in
eventuated, partly as a result of federation. In 1902
Messrs. Knibbs and Turner, officers of the Educational
Department, were appointed special commissioners by
the Government to investigate the various systems of
public instruction adopted in Europe and America.
And among the legislation of that year was the Com-
pulsory Industrial Arbitration Act, under which indus-
trial disputes are investigated and adjudicated upon
by a court of justice. In the following year the most
protracted and disastrous drought the State had ever
experienced breke up, and by dispelling the depressed
feeling which had checked commerce for so many
years, infused a spirit of hopefulness in industrial
THE FIRST PREMIATED AND APPROVED DESIGN FOR THE STATE HOUSE
Proposed to be erected in the Centennial Park by the late Sir Henry Parkes, G.C.M.G. [John Kirkpatrick, Architect.
this, on his advice, the work was entrusted 1o and
accomplished by Mr. (now Sir) E. Barton.
The First Governor under Federation.
Admiral Sir H. H. Rawson, who still holds office,
is.'*’the first Governor of New South Wales appointed
since the colony merged from independence into one of
the federated States of the Commonwealth. He ar-
rived on February 12, 1902,. since when the prosperity
so long denied the citizens has returned to New Soutli
Wales, and a marked increase of industrial establish-
ments, more particularly in Sydney and its vicinity, has
affairs throughout the State. In 1905 the Govern-
ment made a new departure fiaught with much good
industrially, by contracting locally for all steel and
iron supplies required by its officers. During the same
year Admiral Rawson sustained a sad shock of that
common misfortune to which humanity is ever liable,
%/ /
in the death of Lady Rawson on her way back to
Sydney. As chatelaine of Government House Lady
Rawson endeared herself to all with whom she came
in contact by her kindly and unaffected manner, and
the active part she took in all movements to promote
the welfare of the poor and of the afflicted.


CONSTITUTIONAL.
In the various stages of Australian nation-making
the historian will find material for one of the most
interesting and curious stories that records of the growth
of States can furnish. The colonies became a field
for political experiment at a singularly favourable
moment. British Liberalism had begun to permeate
the mind of the nation. When the Reform Bill of 1832
was passed, and by the time the nineteenth century
had just reached its meridian, there were few British
subjects who had not to some extent been instructed
in its doctrines. At the same time certain influences,
up to then at work in the making of Australia, began
to arrive at the point of convergence. The discovery
of gold in the early fifties suddenly attracted to the
antipodes a large population, composed of the most
active and enterprising of British manhood ; a popu-
lation carrying with it all the fervour of political ex-
pansion and reform. Most of the new arrivals had
looked on at the then recent movement in Great Britain
for a broadening of political privilege, and some had
FIRST GREAT SEAL OF NEW SOITH WALES.
even been personally touched by it. They departed
from the land of their birth with a sense of keen dis-
appointment that the movement had not won all it
promised, but the generation to which these emigrants
belonged had at least gained through the. Anti-Corn
Law agitation a thorough training in political thought.
The Cobden crusade had convulsed the mind of the
whole country, and in that awakened mood the
strangers came to Australia. Here they found a com-
munity ripe for responsible government. For a quar-
ter of a century and more the question in modified or
complete form had been dwelt upon by the people.
The first demands were moderate enough, but suc-
cessive instalments of reform only whetted the popular
instinct towards the liberalising of the country’s poli-
tical institutions. The steps by which the Legislative
Council was first constituted, and then led into closer
touch with the popular aspirations, becoming more
representative with every change, had been as liberal
an education to the colonists.as Cobden’s effort proved
to the people of Great Britain. Accordingly the new
population, when it came filled with the hopes of realis-
ing here what its units had failed to gain in full mea-
sure at home, found the soil already well sown. Before
the new-comers’ arrival the political way had been
prepared by the efforts of such men as Chief Justice
Forbes. Bland, Wentworth, Deas Thomson, Cowper
and others, so that the new population and the new
constitution, conferring responsible government, reached
Australia about the same time. Almost fortuitously
there were thus brought together all the conditions
necessary to the launching of a constitutional experi-
ment under entirely novel circumstances. Experiments
in constitution-making had been tried often enough
before. The French, at the end of the preceding cen
tury, had made a national recreation of that pursuit.
The United States adopted the (constitution of the
Republic just about the time that the existence of
Eastern Australia was becoming known to Europeans.
But there was nothing in the conditions in these two
countries to compare with those under which a new
continent, sixty years before hut a wilderness, was
handed over to practically a new population, as a field
for the trial of these principles of modern politics, of
which the first and final word is confidence in the
people- Never, perhaps, was the experiment begun
under such exceptional conditions. Leaders were
wanted, and not the- least remarkable thing about
the story is suggested by the manner in which the
want was supplied. The official and professional
classes at first contributed a certain proportion of
candidates for places in public life. Other men, who
a few years before had reached Australia in immigrant
ships, were presently found discharging the duties of
legislators with the full confidence of their fellows.
Gradually certain notable figures emerged and certain
names became politically known. Australia evolved
her own type of public men, political reputations were
made, and early in our political history the work of
legislation went on as smoothly as it does in the oldest
deliberative Assembly in the world. The experiment
had been proved a success.
It has long been a popular notion that the con-
stitution under which Australia has grown and pros-
pered during the half-century, completed on May 22,
1906, was evolved suddenly—the result of a brilliant
fortuitous flash of inspiration. As a matter of fact,
it was a plant of slow growth, the seeds of which were
planted fully thirty years before responsible govern-
ment in its complete form was won. To be more
precise, in the development of government in New
South Wales there are certain strongly-marked phases,
three transitions in fact. First of all, from 1788 to
1824 there was a rigorous local despotism,' tempered
only by the far-off influence of Downing' Street. Seeing
the interval which must elapse between an appeal to


the English authorities and the receipt of their de-
cision, the Governor was practically master of the
situation. As the first four Governors were naval
officers, accustomed to quarter-deck discipline, it is
not to be wondered at that severity was a distinguish-
ing feature of their regime. In the words of Went-
worth, N&w South Wales was at this time the only
province of the empire in which “ there was not at
least the shadow ol a free government, as it possessed
neither a Council, a House of Assembly, nor even the
privilege of trial'by Jury.”
The shadow came in 1824, when a nominee Council,
consisting first of seven, and afterwards—in 1829 —of
fifteen members, was appointed. This was during the
governorship of Sir Thomas Brisbane, a period which
was also memorable for the granting of the privilege
of juries, whose absence Wentworth lamented. It was
not long ere efforts were made to secure further reform.
The first public meeting to that end, of which there is
record, was held ostensibly to prepare a farewell address
to the then Governor, Sir Thomas Brisbane- A few
leading men of the day met together about three
mcnths before the Governor’s departure from New
South Wales, December, 1825, and conspicuous among
them are to be seen the names of W. C. Wentworth
and his father, and of Daniel Cooper, who was also on
the deputation which presented the address. This
action is only remarkable by reason of the fact that it
formulated a direct demand for a House of Assembly,
to consist of a hundred members, and the recognition
of the principle of taxation by Representation. It was
not always safe to make demands like that in those
«/
days and in a Crown colony of the most rigid type.
But the occasion was skilfully chosen, and it cast
abroad the germ which had time to ferment in the
public)'mind ; for another public meeting was called by
the sheriff on a requisition made about a year later.
The memorial adopted on that occasion is a chaptei
of history in itself. It inferentially summarises' the
political and legal conditions of the colony by its plain
statement of the people’s wants. They ask for trial
by jury and a representative Assembly, and it is a
curious fact that the twenty-four signatories were
reported to represent a million sterling.
The meeting was held on Anniversary Day, 1827,
Mr. W. C. Wentworth proposing, and Sir John Jamieson
seconding, a proposition that a petition embodying
the above-mentioned demands be presented to the
King and both Houses of Parliament. Three years
later another meeting was held to make the same two
demands, and a similar petition was adopted for pre-
sentation to both Houses of the British Parliament.
Governor Darling’s term of office —1825-1831 —was
marked by so many harassing interferences with popu-
lar rights, and liberty of the press, that the movement
in favour of self-government was immensely stimulated.
Its leaders came successively into conflict with the
Governor, and some were either fined or imprisoned
for more or less serious offences. It was about this
time too that Chief Justice Forbes made his famous
stand against the Governor’s arbitrary action. Matters
were therefore ripe in Darling’s 1 last year—when
William IV. ascended the throne —for the colonists to
make anotner attempt to secure attention to their
wants. The address of congratulation to his Majesty
expressed a hope that New South Wales, as the only
remaining British colony ‘"bereft of the rights of
Britons,” would owe to the King “ a f ill participation
in the benefits and privileges of the British constitu-
tion.” No special effect resulted from this remon-
strance, any more than by most of the petitions that
DR. LANG.
had gone before. Tf> had this benefit though —the
question secured ventilation in the British Parliament,
where Sir James Macintosh, Joseph Hume, H. Lytton
Bulwer and others did yeoman service in their efforts
to secure for the mother colony constitutional reform.
It was not long before another formal meeting was
held in Sydney to adopt and forward a further consti-
tutional petition, and on this occasion those members


of the House of Commons who had urged the claims
of the colonists ware thanked by resolution. In now
asking for a representative Assembly the membership
was lowered to fifty, but the right to impose taxation,
and spend the resultant revenue, was stoutly affirmed.
By this time it seems to have been felt by those who
had the movement in hand that their efforts would be
better seconded in London if New South Wales had
its own Parliamentary agent there, and the Governor
was consequently asked to allow the land and house
holders to elect such a representative, who, it was
proposed, should be remunerated at the rate of £I,OOO
a year. A Patriotic Association w r as formed, and its
members rvere soon at work arranging the terms and
details of a measure to secure constitutional freedom.
Even at this early stage differences of opinion arose as
to the form the Parliament should take. One section
believed in two Houses, while the other advocated
one of fifty members, of whom ten were to be nomi-
nated by the Government.
Two more meetings, that presided over by Dr.
SIR MAURICE O’CONNELL.
Bland tow T ards the end of 1841, and that in February,
1842, before the Legislative Council was placed on a
more popular and representative basis. At this last
meeting, in 1842, it was stated that a population of
10,000 free subjects, representing 30 millions of pro-
perty, and raising an anrtual revenue of £350,000,
laboured under the injustice of having “ no control
over their taxation, nor over the management of their
own affairs, nor representation in the local Legislature,
and thus they were deprived of having free institutions,
which every Briton was taught to prize as the safe-
guard of his liberties, and as the invaluable birthright
of his race.” In one respect —the matter of taxation
this was not strictly in accord with the facts, for as
far back as 1835 the Council had adopted measures for
the local payment of a pxdice force out of revenue, and
secured the disposal of the surplus/ of land revenue
after immigration had been provided for. The right
to tax and spend was thus admitted, and the way
opened for further constitutional reforms along the
same lines.
In January, 1843, the intelligence reached Aus-
tralia that the British Parliament had passed a Con-
stitution Act, on something like popular lines, six months
before. One House constituted the Legislative Council,
to consist of 54 members, of whom the Crown was to
nominate 18, leaving 36 to be elected by the people—
Port Phillip, it was provided, having to return four of
these. The Government of the day was to consist of the
Colonial Secretary and the Treasurer, the Auditor-
General and Attorney-General, the Commandant and
the Collector of Customs, who were nominated as a
matter of course, and held their seats as a corollary of
their appointment to office. But the qualification for
a voter was stated at £2OO freehold or a rental of £2O,
while qualification for membership of the Council was
the possession of £2,000 or an income from real estate
of £IOO. Later on the colony agitated against' this
and petitioned the Crown for a reduction. The unoffi-
cial members nominated by Governor Gipps were :
Messrs A. Berry, R. Jones, J. Blaxland, Thos. Icely,
C. Hamilton and H. Elwin. Messrs. W. H. Wentworth,
Bland (Sydney), H. H. Macarthur (Argyle), Win.
Bradley (Northumberland), Win. Forster (St. Vincent
and Auckland), J. Coghill (Cumberland Boroughs),
Win. Bowman (Georgiana. King and Murray), T. A.
Murray (Cook and Westmoreland), John Panton (Nor
thumberland Boroughs); D’Arcy Wentworth (County
of Bathurst), F, Lord (County of Camden), R. Therry
(Roxburgh, Phillip and Wellington), W. H. Suttor
(County of Durham), R. Windeyer (County of Durham),
Henry Condell (Melbourne), C. H. Ebden, Thos. Walker,
Dr. C. Nicholson, Alex. Thomson and Dr. J. D. Lang
(Port Phillip dis+rict), Alex. McLeay (North-western
district), and Captain Win. Dumaresq (Northern dis-
trict) were the. elected members. These with Lt.-
General M. C. O’Connell, Commander-in-Chief, the
Hons. E Deas Thomson (Colonial Secretary), C. D. R.
Liddell (Colonial Treasurer). Lt.-General G. Barney
(Colonial Engineer), J. G. H. Gibbes (Collector of Cus-
toms), and W. Lithgow (Auditor-General) constituted
the first representative Legislative Council in
Australia.
This mixed Council is mainly memorable for the
zeal and care with which the members formulated the
constitution which was to bring the blessings of “ re-
sponsible, government.” In the second session it
began to be felt by leading members of the House that
certain grievances existed in the constitution,which
barred the way to political freedom. These related to
the revenue derived from the sale of lands, and the
withholding of certain privileges enjoyed by British
subjects outside of New South Wales. Select com-
mittees were appointed to inquire into these matters,
and they recommended, among other things, (1) the
investiture in the Governor and Legislative Council of
the management of Crown lands and the revenue
arising therefrom ; (2) that an address be presented to
her Majesty praying that the government of the colony
be henceforth conducted on the same principle of re-
sponsibility as the legislative control which had been
conceded to Canada, and that a tribunal for irnpeach


merits be established by law ; (3) that the judges of
the Supreme Court be placed in the same tenure of
office and security of salary as judges in the mother
country.
These recommendations were embodied in reso-
lutions by the Council, and forwarded home in
addresses to the Queen and both Houses of Parliament.
They received, however, little attention from the
Ministry of the day, up to the year 1850, when an Act
was passed containing a clause empowering the Legis-
lative Council to make such alterations in the consti-
tution (subject to the assent of her Majesty-in-Council)
as might seem fit. On the proclamation in the colony
of this Act the’ Legislative Council was dissolved, but
prior to the dissolution Mr. Wentworth moved petitions
to her Majesty and both Houses of Parliament, pro-
testing, insisting and declaring as follows :—(1) That
the Imperial Parliament has not, nor of right ought to
have, any power to tax the people of this colony, or to
appropriate any of the moneys levied by authority of
the colonial Legislature ; that this power can only be
lawfully exercised by the colonial Legislature ; and
that the Imperial Parliament has solemnly disclaimed
this power by the Act 18, George 111., cap. 12, sec. 1,
which remains unrepealed. (2) That the revenue aris-
ing from the public lands, derived as it is mainly from
the labour and the capital imparted to them by the
people of the colony, is as much their property as the
ordinary revenue, and ought, therefore, to be subject
only to the like control and’ appropriation. (3) That
the Customs and all other debts should be subject to
the direct supervision and control of the colonial Legis-
lature, which should have the appropriation of the
gross revenue of the colony, from whatever source
arising ; and as a necessary incident to this authority
the regulation of the salaries of all colonial officers.
(4) That offices of trust and emolument should be
conferred only on the settled inhabitants, the office of
Governor alone excepted ; that this officer should be
appointed and paid by the Crown, and that the whole
patronage of the colony should be vested in him and
the Legislative Council, unfettered by instructions from
the Minister for the Colonies. (5) That plenary powers
of legislation should be conferred upon and exercised
by the colonial Legislature for the time being, and that
no bills should be reserved for the signification of her
Majesty’s pleasure, unless they affect the prerogatives
of Crown or the general interest of the Empire.
In the first session of the new Legislative Council,
on December 5, 1851, the petition and remonstrance
was formally adopted in the following terms
“ Solemnly protesting against these wrongs, and
insisting upon these our undoubted rights, we leave
the redress of the former and the assertion of the latter
to the people whom we represent, and the Legislature
which shall follow us.
“ That we, the succeeding Legislative Council, do
accordingly present to jmur honourable House our
affirmation of the same grievances, all of which, with
a slight modification in the patronage of the Customs
department, by no means commensurate with the
rights in the said protest and declaration insisted upon,
remain unredressed.
“ That these grievances, having formed the sub-
ject of repeated representation and complaints from
the former Legislative Council, all of which have met
with neglect or disregard from her Majesty’s Colonial
Minister, we owe it to ourselves and to our constituents
to denounce to your honourable House as the chief
grievance to which the people of this colony are sub-
jected, the systematic and mischievous interference
which is exercised by the Minister, even' in matters of
purely local concernment.
That whilst we are most anxious to strengthen
and .perpetuate* the connection which still happily
exists with our fatherland, we feel it a solemn duty to
our sovereign and our fellow-countrymen in the United
Kingdom to warn them* that it will be impossible much
longer to maintain the authority of a local Executive
which is obliged by its instructions to refer all mea-
sures of importance, no matter how great the urgency
Cor their immediate adoption, for the decision of an
inexperienced, remote and irresponsible department.
That in order, however, that her Majesty’s con-
fidential advisers may have no excuse for the continu-
ance of these abuses, we unhesitatingly declare that we
GOVERNMENT HOUSE AT PARRAMATTA IN 1798.
are prepared —upon the surrender to the colonial
Legislature of the entire management of all our
revenues, territorial as well as general, in which we
include mines of every description, and upon the estab-
lishment of a constitution among us similar in its out-
line to that of Canada—to assume and provide for the
whole cost of internal government, whether civil or
military, the salary of the Governor-General only
excepted, and' to grant to her Majesty an adequate
civil list, on the same terms as in Canada, instead of
the sums appropriated in the schedules to the Imperial
Act, 13 and 14, Vic., chap. 59.”
In the first session of the new Legislature this
petition and remonstrance' was again adopted, and in
forwarding It to the Secretary ot State his Excellency the
Governor-General wrote : ‘ 1 I have already expressed my
opinion on the principal points now submitted for her
Majesty’s consideration, but I deem it right to add that,
when the motion upon which the petition was adopted


was brought before the Council, it was carried (after a
division,, which was called foi by the Colonial Secre-
tary on the part of the Government) by a majority ol
21, to 8, the minority consisting entirely of the nominee
members, with the exception of one non-official mem-
ber, Mr. Parker. It is also proper that I should state
my conviction that the desire to have a constitution
conferred upon the colony is not confined to the Legis-
lative Council alone, or to a party in the colony; but it
is supported by the opinions of the most loyal,
respectable, and influential members of the community.
I have reason to believe, however, that neither the
Cduncil nor the public are anxious for responsible
government to the extent that now exists in Canada,
as it must be evident to every unbiassed person
conversant with the subject that, although there are
probably in this colony more talenled and educated
gentlemen than are to be found in any other British
colony, there are not as yet a sufficient number in it so
independent in their fortune as to be prepared to hold
office under an administration depending upon the
precarious tenure of being able to command a majority
of the popular branch of the Legislature.”
In the session of 1852 a select committee was
appointed to prepare a constitution for the colony,
and draft bills for this purpose were brought up and
laid upon the table of the House. These provided for
two chambers. The Legislative Council to consist of
not less than 21 persons, appointed by letters patent ;
two-thirds of these to be persons holding office for life
‘ ‘ who shall have served in one of the Legislative Coun-
cils ” (as at present constituted) “ or in the Assembly.”
The Legislative Assembly to endure for five years, and
to consist of 72 persons, elected on a franchise of a
freehold of £IOO or a household of £lO per annum, or
a leasehold of £lO per annum with not less than three
years to run at the time of registration ; no attainted
person tc vote unless he had served his term of punish-
ment, or been pardoned, nor any person who had
omitted to pay all taxes in respect of his qualification ;
ministers of religion and certain of those holding offices
of profit under the Crown to be disqualified from voting,
On October 15, 1852, in a despatch answering that
of the Governor-General, Sir John Pakington, then
Secretary of State for the Colonies, in a general way
conceded the whole of the demands made in the peti-
tion and remonstrance, and a despatch dated January
18, 1853, from the Duke of Newcastle (who had suc-
ceeded to the office of Secretary of State for the Colo-
nies), contained this passage : “ My colleagues and
mvself cordially adopt the conclusions of her Majesty’s
late Government respecting the future administration
of the waste lands of the Crown. ... I am ignorant
of the shape which the project under consideration of
the committee of the Council may eventually assume.
The Legislative Council, indeed, in the petition before
adverted to, favoured a constitution similar in its
outline to that of Canada. It would be premature for
me, without material for forming a judgment, to pass
an opinion upon the policy of totally reconstructing the
frame of government recently established, but I may
state that I have always thought it probable that the
experience and wisdom of the Council would dictate
better provisions than Parliament for securing good
government in New South Wales and promoting har-
mony in the connection subsisting between Great
Britain and this important province of the empire.’
In the early part of the session of 1853 Mr. E.
Deas Thomson (Colonial Secretary), Mr. James Mac-
arthur, Mr. J. H. Plunkett (Attorney-General), Mr.
Chas. Cowper, Mr. Jas. Martin, Mr. Geo. Macleay,
Mr. Win. Thurlow, Mr. T. A. Murray, Mr. H. G. Doug-
lass, and Mr. W. C Wentworth (chairman) were ap-
pointed by ballot a select committee to prepare a
constitution. Two months later (July 28) Mr. Went-
worth attached his signature to the report. The most
important alterations made in the measure recom-
mended by the committee in the previous session
related to the constitution of the Legislative Council
and the civil list to be granted to her Majesty upon
the surrender to the colony of the waste lands and
royalties then vested in the Crown. Concerning the
constitution of the Legislative Council, the committee
expressed the opinion that the creation of hereditary
titles, leaving it to the option of the Crown to annex
to the title of the first patentee a seat for life in such
House, and conferring on the original patentees and
their descendants, inheritors of their titles, a power to
elect a certain number of their order to form, in con-
junction with the original patentees then living, the
Upper House of Parliament, would be a great improve-
ment upon any form of Legislative Council hitherto
tried or recommended in any British colony. This was
Wentworth’s cherished notion in the declining years of
his life —an Australian titled aristocracy. The sturdy
democrat of 1824 had evolved in the course of thirty
years into a crusted conservative and stickler for class
distinctions. In support of their view the committee
further wrote : “ They desire to have a form of govern-
ment based on the analogies of the British constitution.
They have no wish to sow the seeds of a future democ-
racy, and until they are satisfied that the nominated,
or the future elective, chamber which they recommend
will not effect the object they have of placing a safe,
revising, deliberative and conservative element be-
tween the' Lower House and her Majesty’s represen-
tatives in this colony, they do not feel inclined to
hazard the experiment of an Upper House based on a
general elective franchise.” In its closing passages
the report set out that one of the more prominent
measures required by New South Wales and the colo-
nies of the Australian group generally was the estab-
lishment at once of a General Assembly, to make laws
in relation to the intercolonial questions that had
arisen or might arise among them.
The Constitution Bill, as prepared by the commit-
tee, contained 68 clauses and a schedule in three parts.
At the initiation of the debate on the second reading,
on August 16, 1853, Mr. (since Sir John B.) Darvall
presented a petition bearing the signatures of 2,630
residents of the city of Sydney, setting forth that the
Bill was radically defective and opposed to the wishes
of the people, who believed that a representative Legis-
lature consisting of two elective chambers “ would alone
possess the stability, energy and usefulness which wore
maintained by •public confidence, and without which
no government could permanently exist.” The peti-
tion was received, and in closing the debate Mr. Went


worth said the sole principle he wished to have affirmed
by the second reading was that there should be two
Houses of Parliament—an Upper and a Lower House
and that whether the Upper House was to be elective
or nominated was to remain an open question until
they should have received an expression of opinion from
the different districts of the country on that subject.
The second reading was agreed to, on division, by 33
ayes to B'noes, the names of those who voted being as
follows :—Ayes : Colonial Secretary, Mr. (since Sir
Edward) Deas Thomson ; Attorney-General, Mr..]. H.
Plunkett ; Colonial Treas., Mr. C. D. Riddell ; Solicitor-
General. Mr. (since Sir William M.) Manning; Auditor-
General, Mr. F. L. S. Merewether ; Collector of Customs,
Lt.-Ccl. John G. N Gibbes ; Chief Commissioner of
Crown Lands, Mr. Geo. Barney ; Postmaster-General,
Major \\ . H. Christie ; Inspector-General of Police,
Captain W. C. Mayne ; Mr. James Macarthur, Captain
(since Rear-Admiral P. P.) King, Mr. (since Sir William)
Macarthur, Mr. Win. C. Wentworth, Mr. Ed. Cox, Mr.
John Dobie, Mr. Robt. Fitzgerald, Mr. Geo. 0. Nichols
Mr. Ed. Flood, Mr. Geo. Bowman, Mr. Wm. Bowman,
Mr. Ed. Broadhurst, Mr. Robt. Campbell, Mr. Thos.
Barker, Mr. (since Sir George) Macleay, Mr. Arthur
Jeffreys, Mr. Win. Bradley, Mr. (since Sir Henry W.)
Parker, Captain Wm. J. Dumaresq, Mr. Chas. Wm.
Finch, Mr. George Allen Dr. LI. G. Douglass ; tellers :
Mr. (since Sir James) Martin and Mr. Augustus Morris.
Noes: Mr. Jas. W. Bligh, Mr. John Richardson, Mr.
Alex. Park, Mr. Henry S. Russell, Mr. Thos. W. Smart,
Mr. (since Sir John B.) Darvall ; tellers : Mr (since Sir
Charles) Cowper and Mr. Wm. Thurlow. Mr. Alex.
Berry and Mr. Matthew H. Marsh took part in the
debate, but did not vote in the division.
The Bill was read a third time in December, 1853,
and W. C. Wentworth and E. Deas Thomson went to
England with it in hopes of obtaining Imperial assent.
This was granted on July 16, 1855, and on May 22,
1856, the first Australian Parliament under responsible
government met in Macquarie Street, Sydney. It con-
sisted of two Houses —the Legislative Council, of not
less than 21 members, nominated by the Crown ; and
the Legislative Assembly, of 54 members, elected by
freeholders, householders, and occupiers or leaseholders,
persons paying £4O a year for board and lodging,
lodgers paying £lO a year, persons in receipt of £IOO
a year salary, and pastoral licensees. Persons qualified
to be electors were also eligible as members unless
they were ministers of religion, who, following English
custom with regard to clergymen of the Established
Church, were expressly declared ineligible.
The Constitution Act of 1855 was proclaimed in
Sydney on the 24th November of the same year, and
J J '
at'vonce came into operation, sweeping away entirely
the former system. The ties which bound the colony
to the mother country were in no way loosened, for
the Constitution Act simply conceded to the people of
New South Wales the rights which prevailed in the
United Kingdom, namely, of taxing themselves and of
being governed by Ministers responsible to Parliament,
elected by popular vote. The authority vested in the
sovereign remains as before, though the mode of its
exercise is widely different. Previous to responsible
government the sovereign exercised, through the
Governor, almost despotic power, uniting in him-
self (he executive and legislative Junctions- Personal
liberty and independence were, therefore, to no small
degree in his control ; but with the establishment of
responsible government this state of affairs ceased,
and the greatest',..measure of individual liberty is now
found compatible with the full protection of public
rights. All laws are enacted in the name of the King,
“ by and with the advice of the Legislative Council
and Legislative Assembly,” the Governor as the Royal
Deputy, immediately giving the assent of the sovereign
to Acts of Parliament, or, if he should think fit, re-
serving them for the consideration of his Majesty.
The office of Governor is now constituted by per-
manent letters patent, and by a standing commission.
Previous to 1879 the Governor of the colony was ap-
pointed by letters patent under the Great Seal ; but
in that year the practice was discontinued on the
advice of Sir Alfred Stephen, given during the tenure
of office of Sir Hercules Robinson. The change was
first carried out in the appointment of Sir Augustus
Loftus. The Governor receives his appointment at
present by commission under the Royal Sign Manual
and Signet, which recites the letters patent of April
29, 1879, as well as the instructions issued in further
declaration 4C of the Queen’s will and pleasure.” The
original letters patent, then recited and enforced,
declares that the Governor is directed and empowered
to do and execute all things that belong to his office
according to the tenor of the letters patent, and of
such commission as may be issued to him under our
Sign Manual and Signet, and according to such in-
structions as may from time to time be given to him
under our Sign Manual and Signet, or by our order in
our Privy Council, or by us through one of our prin-
cipal Secretaries of State, and to such laws as are now
or shall hereafter be in force in the colony.” In ac-
cordance with long-established custom, no Governor
retains his office for a longer period than six jjvears ;
and should he die or become incapable of performing


liis duties during his tenure of office, or he be removed
before the arrival of Ins successor, or should he have
occasion to leave the State for any considerable period,
the Government is to be administered (1) bv the Lieu-
tenant-Governor, or, if there be no such official, (2) by
an administrator, to be appointed according to the
provisions cf the letters patent and instructions.
The Lieutenant-Governor, or, in his absence, the
Administrator, is empowered by his commission to fill
the office of Governor during any temporary absence of
the Governor from the State ; but the Governor may
not be absent from the State, except in accordance
with the terms of his instructions. Without the King’s
special leave he may not leave the State for a period
exceeding one month at a time, or exceeding in the
aggregate one month for every year of his service,
unless on a visit to the Governor of a neighbouring
State : but, on the other hand, he may leave the State
for any period not exceeding one month without it
being reckoned as a departure if he shall have pre-
viously informed the Executive Council in writing of
his intention and appointed a deputy to act for him till
his return. This deputy must, in the first instance,
be the Lieutenant-Governor ; Vut if, from any cause,
the services of the Lieutenant-Governor should not be
available, the Governor may appoint whomsoever he
pleases as his deputy.
The Governor’s functions, according to the letters
patent, are as follows : —He is the custodian of the
Great Seal, under which all Crown grants, &c., must
pass. He has the appointment of his own Council—
the Executive. He is also to summon that Council,
and is ordinarily its President ; but in his absence some
other member may be nominated to preside. It is
usual, however, to appoint some memb ir of the Ministry
permanent Vice-President, who presides in the absence
of tin Governor. He has the power to appoint, in the
Sovereign’s name, all judges, justices of the peace,
commissioners, and other necessary officers and minis-
ters ; and by virtue of his power as Viceroy, he may
remove from the exercise of his office any official so
appointed.
The Governor has it in his power to pardon, either
absolutely or conditionally, any offender convicted in
New South Wales. He can also rmnit fines, penalties
and forfeitures due to the Crown, but he cannot pardon
or remit on the condition of the offender voluntarily
leaving the State, unless the offence is a political one.
In all capital cases, until recently, the final responsi-
bility of deciding whether or not the death penalty
should be carried out rested solely with the Governor,
but, by a new arrangement, which has been agreed to
by all the Australasian provinces, such final power is
now exercised by the Governor “ with the advice of
the Executive Council.” The new system was first
brought into operation in New South Wales towards
the end of October, 1892. In other cases the Governor
is instructed not to pardon or reprieve any offender
without receiving the advice of one at least of his
Ministers ; and in any case in which such pardon or
reprieve migat directly affect the interests of the em-
piic or of any country or place beyond the jurisdiction
of the Government of the State, the Governor must,
before deciding either to pardon or reprieve, take those
interests specially into his own personal consideration
in conjunction with such advice as aforesaid, further,
he is permitted to act in opposition to the advice of
the Executive Council ‘‘if he see sufficient cause,
but he is to report any such matter to the Sovereign
without delay.
The Governor is also vested with the authority of
the Crown, enabling him to nominate the members of
the Upper House of the Legislature, and to summon,
prorogue to a future day, or dissolve “ any legislative
bodv ” existing in the State His instructions, how-
ever. provide that in the exercise of the above powers
he is to act by the advice of the Executive Council in
all cases except those whose nature is such that in his
opinion the public service “would sustain material
prejudice were he to follow such advice,’ or in matters
too trivial to submit to the Council, or “ too urgent to
admit of their advice being given,” but in all such
urgent cases he must communicate to the Council as
soon as practicable the measures taken by him and his
reasons for acting. It is expressly provided, however,
that the Governor may, if he think fit, disregard the
advice of the Executive, and act in direct opposition to
the declared will of his advisers, but in such cases ho-
is required to make a full report of the whole circum-
stances for the information of the Secretary of State
for the Colonies.
The Governor acts as Viceroy as regards giving the
Royal assent to or vetoing Bills passed by the Legis-
lature, or reserving them for the special consideration
of the Sovereign. The instructions deal at large with
this matter, but it is usual in practice to be guided to
a large extent by the advice of the law officers of the
Crown. There are eight different classes of Bills to
which the Governor is bound to refuse the Royal assent,
viz., (1) Private Divorce Bills ; (2) Bills making any
kind of grant to the Governor ; (3) Bills affecting the
currency ; (4) Bills imposing differential duties not in
accordance with the Australian Colonies’ Duties Act,
1873 ; (5) Bills apparently contrary to Imperial treaty
obligations ■ (6) Bills interfering with the control of
the Sovereign’s land or sea forces employed in the
State ; (7) Bills whereby the Royal prerogative, or the
rights and property of British subjects residing bevond
the State, or the trade and shipping of the United
Kingdom and its dependencies may be prejudiced ;
(8) Bills to which the Royal assent has already been
refused or which has once been disallowed, unless they
contain a clause suspending their operation till the
Sovereign’s pleasure has been signified, or unless the
Governor be satisfied that there is urgent necessity for
bringing such Bill into immediate operation. The
effect of the Acts of Parliament regulating the acts of
a Governor in assenting to Bills on behalf of the Sove-
reign is to deprive any reserved Bill of all legality
until the Sovereign’s assent thereto has been formally
communicated to the Governor ; and power is given
the Sovereign to veto any Bill to which the Governor
has assented on his behalf within two years after re-
ceipt of such Bill by the Secretary of State for the
Colonies, in which case the'Bill is to be declared null
and void by message of the Governor and proclama-
tion. Reserved to be laid before the Sovereign-
in-Council, and the Sovereign may allow them or not


within a period of two years from the day on which
they were received by the Governor.
Under the Constitution and Electoral Acts the
Governor must summon the Legislative Assembly ;
appoint the President of the Legislative Council ;
prorogue or dissolve Parliament ; appoint his Ministers
propria motu : also appoint with the advice of the
Executive, all public officers whose appointment is not
vested in heads of departments : issue all warrants for
the payment of money ; issue the writs for general
elections, and, in the absence of the Speaker, issue
writs to fill vacancies occurring in the Assembly. In
summoning, proroguing or dissolving Parliament the
Governor usually acts according to the advice ten-
dered, him by the Cabinet ; but he is in no way bound
to do so and as a matter of fact, he has sometimes
declined to be guided by his Ministers—in respect to
granting a dissolution. In March, 1877. Sir Hercules
Robinson refused to grant a dissolution to Sir John
Robertson, and in September of the same year he also
declined to enable Sir Henry Parkes to go to the coun-
try ; the reason given in each case being that the
Assembly had refused to make provision for the ex-
penditure of the year. The Viceroy is the conservator
of the rights and interests of the whole population,
and it is evident grave evils would ensue were a dis-
solution to take place before supplies had been granted.
As regards matters of purely Imperial interest, the
Governor is responsible to the British authorities for
their due conservation. If in consequence of his action
in any such matter he is involved in a dispute with his
Ministers, he is bound to refer them to the Sovereign,
should his action have been endorsed by the Colonial
office. If his conduct were not approved of in Eng-
land he would most likely be recalled. It follows that
in no case can the Governor be held responsible directly
to Parliament for his conduct. He has only to render
an account to the Crown itself —that is, to the Imperial
Parliament.
The Executive Council is now composed of the
following salaried Ministers, namely, the Chief Sec-
retary, the Treasurer, the Attorney-General and Minis-
ter of Justice, the Secretary for Lands, the Secretary
for Public Works, the Minister of 1 Public Instruction
and of Labour and Industry, the Secretary for Mines
and Agriculture, with a Vice-President of the Executive
Council, and two other members without portfolios.
These form the Cabinet, and are responsible to Par-
liament. As the advisers of the Governor the Ministry
must also retain his confidence ; but practically this is
seldom likely to be withdrawn so long as they com-
mand a working majority in the Assembly. Although
the Ministry have not sustained a defeat, the Governor
may dissolve Parliament, and in this case the con-
tinued existence of any Government would depend
directly on the vote of the constituencies
The relations established between the Ministry
and the representatives of the people are in accordance
with the time-honoured precedents prevailing in Great
Britain, which may thus be defined. The Cabinet must
be chosen from—“ (1) Members of the Legislature ; (2)
holding the same political views, and chosen from the
party possessing a majority in the House of Commons ;
(3) carrying out a concerted policy ; (4) under a com-
mon responsibility, to be signified by a collective resig-
nation in the event of Parliamentary censure ; and (5)
acknowledging a common subordination to one Chief
Minister.” The Imperial rule as to the circumstances
under which a Government Is bound to, resign is as
follows :—Censure, involving loss of office, rests en-
tirely with the Lower House ; hence directly a Ministry
fails to command a majority of the House of Commons
it must give place to another. Want of confidence in
a Cabinet may be shown irt three ways: first, by a
direct vote of censure, or a specific declaration of want
of confidence ; second, by a vote disapproving of'some
Act of the Government ; or. three, by the rejection of
some important measure by the Ministry.
In any of these cases Ministers must either resign, or
appeal to the country if they can get the sovereign to
sanction a new election. These rules have virtually
been adopted by New South Wales.
MR. ROBERT LOWE.
Apart from the Vice-President of the Executive
Council, who holds no portfolio, it is rare for more than
one Minister to be selected from the Upper House, and
it will thus be seen that the principle of the ,respon-
sibility of meiribers of tKei Government to Parliament
is fully carried out. For every act of the Governor as
Viceroy 1 some Minister' is responsible to Parliament,
and even in matters pi Imperial interest, where the
final onus' rests upon the Governor ; he himself 7 ’s re-
sponsible to the Imperial Government, whose members
are under the control of the House of Commons, so
that no loophole is left for the exercise of any arbitrary
act. The Crown, except in appeals to* the Privy Coun-
cil and the bestowal of titles, acts towards the Execu-
tive through its representative, the Governor ; and
so long ago as the inception of responsible government,
Earl Grey declared, in an official despatch, that he
should make a judicious use of the influence rather
than the authority of his office,” which wise maxim has
usually been followed. But in extreme cases, such as
when his sanction is required to any illegal proceeding.


the Governor is bound, without question, ito keep the
law, though he may thereby be brought into hostile
relations with the Cabinet. Sir Michael Hicks-Beach,
in a communication to the Governor-General of Canada
in 1879, clearly laid down the doctrine that the Gover-
nor of any British colony ‘'has an unquestionably
constitutional right to dismiss his Ministers, if from
any cause he feels it incumbent on him to do so.”
This does not militate against the doctrine of respon-
sibility ; for if the Ministry appointed by the Governor
do not possess the confidence of Parliament, they
cannot hold office, and the Governor will be forced to
give way, or else persevere till he can select a Ministry
whom the Assembly will accept. The final control
will then be, as in every other case, with the represen-
tatives of the people. The Executive Council cannot
discharge a,ny function unless duly summoned by the
Governor, and unless at least two members, in addition
to the Governor or presiding member, be present to
form a quorum.
As at present constituted the Executive Council
consists of the following Ministers : —Vice-President,
the Hon. James Hughes, M.L.C. ; Premier and Colonial
Treasurer, the Hon. Joseph Hector Carruthers ; Chief
Secretary, the Hon. James Alexander Hogue ; Attorney-
General and Minister for Justice, the Hon. Charles
Gregory Wade, K.C. ; Secretary for Lands, the Hon.
James Ashton ; Secretary for Public Works, the Hon.
Charles Alfred Lee ; Minister of Public Instruction and
Minister for Labour and Industry, the Hon. Broughton
Barnabas O’Conor ; Secretary for Mines and Agricul-
ture, the Hon. Samuel Wilkinson Moore ; Minister
without portfolio, the Hon Wiliiam Thomas Dick ;
Minister without portfolio, the Hon. James Nixon
Brunker, M.L.C.
In the Constitution Act no definition is given of
the relative powers of the Legislative Council and
Legislative Assembly. By common assent it has been
agreed that the precedents regulating the proceedings
and relations, inter se , of the two Houses of the Imperial
Parliament shall be followed, as far as applicable, in
New South Wales. The Constitution Act provides that
all money Bills shall be introduced in the Lower H ouse
only- The important rule of the House of Commons,
affirmed two hundred years ago and constantly en-
forced ever since, that “ all aids and supplies, and aids
to her Majesty in Parliament, are 1 the sole gift of the
Commons, and it is the undoubted right of the Com-
mons to direct, limit and appoint' in such Bills the
ends, purposes, considerations, conditions, limitations
and qualifications of such grants, which ought not to
be changed or altered by the House of Lords,” is also
held to be in force as regards the Parliament of this
State; and has generally been recognised and acted
upon.
The two Houses, however, do not possess the most
important of the privileges of the Imperial Parliament,
namely, the right of punishing for contempt, although
the Legislative Assembly has on one occasion punished
one of its members, by expelling him for conduct be-
yond its precinct's assumed to be dishonourable As
regards disorder!) conduct within the walls of the
chamber, it has been held by the Supreme Court, and
affirmed bv the Privy Council, that the Assembly only
possesses the power of suspending a member for dis-
orderly conduct for the period of the sitting at which
he displays such conduct. A member may also be
removed from the House by order of the Speaker if
he persists in obstruction oh contemns the Standing
Orders—-a course which, fortunately, has seldom been
rendered necessary. Witnesses may be summoned to
give evidence before either House, or before committees
of the Council or Assembly, the necessary powers for
compelling their attendance having been conferred by
an Act passed in 1881. Any person disobeying a sum-
mons may be arrested on a Judge’s warrant ; and the
maximum penalty for refusing to give evidence is
imprisonment for one calendar month.
The number of members of the Legislative Council
is not limited by the Constitution Act, although the
minimum number is fixed at twenty-one. It will be
seen that this gives power to a Governor to quash any
possible obstruction on the part of the Council to the
will of the Government and the Lower House by
“swamping” the Council. Such a proceeding, how-
ever, can hardly be held to be allowable, except under
extreme circumstances. As a matter of fact, an at-
tempt to “ swamp ” the Council was made during one
of the premierships of Sir Charles Cowper, but public
opinion condemned the course most strongly, although
the somewhat peculiar circumstances of the case were
thought by some to justify the Governor’s action.
The home authorities severely rebuked the Governor
(Sir John Young) for the course he had taken, and
since then “swamping” the Council has never been
seriously entertained, nor is there much chance that it
will ever again be attempted. The principle, in fact,
has been affirmed that the members of the Legislative
Council should be limited to a convenient number,
and that no nominations should ever be made merely
for the purpose of strengthening the party which hap-
pens to be in power. A deadlock between the two
Houses is provided against by the universal feeling
that the Assembly represents the will of the people,
and iit such case the Council would certainly have to
give way to the deliberate will of the people’s repre-
sentatives. The Council is intended as' a 'check to
hasty legislation ; and it doubtless acts as a useful
“ brake ” to 'violent party feeling.
Every member of the Council must be of full age,
and cither a natural-born or a naturalised subject.
Four-fifths of the members must be persons not holding
any paid office under the Crown, but this is not held
to include officer® “ in his Majesty’s sea or land forces
on lull or half-pay, or retired officers on pensions.’’
As the number of members of the Assembly stands at
90, the number of members comprising the Council at
the end of 1906 (61) can hardly be considered an unfair
proportion, though it certainly is very close to what
should be the limit. Though the appointment is for
life, a member of the Council may resign his seat, and
he also forfeits it by absence from the House for two
consecutive sessions without leave, by becoming natu-
ralised in a foreign State, by becoming bankrupt, by
becoming a public contractor or a defaulter, and by
being attainted of treason, or being convicted of felony
or any infamous crime. The Governor appoints and.
if necessary, removes the President, who may speak in


debate, but can only give a casting vote. An attend-
ance of one-third of the members on the roll was for-
merly necessary to constitute a quorum, but an Act
has been passed reducing the proportion to one-fourth.
The Council must hold a sitting at least once in every
year, and no greater interval than twelve months must
elapse between session and session. The proceedings
are regulated by standing orders, which are, in the
main, similar to those of the Assembly, the latter
being framed on the model of the rules obtaining in
the House of Commons. No member may sit or vote
till he has taken the oath of allegiance, or the affir-
mation prescribed in lieu of the oath.
In the session of 1892-3 an Act was passed, en-
titled the Parliamentary Electorates and Elections Act
of 1893, by which the course of procedure in regard to
elections for the Legislative Assembly of New South
Wales was almost entirely changed. The enactments
under which such elections had been conducted up to
that time —the Electoral Act of 1880, and the Went-
worth Subdivision Act—wore repealed upon the pass-
ing of the Act of 1893, with the exception of certain
provisions which have since been abrogated by pro-
clamation. During the year 1896 several important
alterations were made in the Act of 1893 in the direc-
tion of the extension of the franchise and of the re-
moval of restrictions placed upon electors changing
their residence ; and in 1903 the number of the single
electorates, by a complete redistribution, were reduced
from 125 to 90. Further readjustments can be taken
under the 1893 Act. if necessary, every four or five
years. No Assembly can exist beyond three years.
One session must be held yearly, and twelve months
must not elapse between any two sessions. On meet-
ing after a general election the first business is to elect
a Speaker, who has only a casting vote. Twenty
members, exclusive of the Speaker, constitute a
quorum.
The qualification for an elector is that he must be
a natural-born subject, who has resided in New South
Wales for a continuous period of one year, or a natu-
ralised subject who has resided in the State continu-
ously for one year after naturalisation. It was pro-
vided in the principal Act that in either case he must
have resided three months continuously in the electoral
district for which he claimed to vote ; but by the
amending Act of 1896 the period of residence was
reduced to one month in the case of persons already
on the rolls, and who had but removed from one dis-
trict to another. The disqualifications, under the
Constitution Act, apply to persons attainted or con-
victed of treason, felony, or other infamous offence in
any of her Majesty’s dominions, unless they have
received a free or conditional pardon, or have under-
gone sentences passed on them for such offence ; and,
under subsequent enactments, to persons in the naval
and military service on full pay (except the militia and
volunteers), and to persons of unsound mind or in
receipt of public charity. All other disqualifications
have now been removed. Every person who has estab-
lished his qualification to vote, and who has been
placed on the electoral roll, is entitled to receive an
elector’s right upon signing his name in a book kept
for the purpose, as well as on the butt and face of the
right itself. A substituted right is obtainable in the
event of a right being lost or defaced.
Writs for the election of members of the Assembly
are issued by the Governor in the case of a general
election, and by the Speaker, or, in his absence, or if
there should be no Speaker, by the Governor, in the
case of a by-election. The writs for a general election
are required to be issued within four clear days from
the proclamation dissolving Parliament, and are made
returnable not later than thirty-five days from the
date of issue. Parliament must meet not later than
seven days from the return of the writs. The polling-
day for a general election is fixed as the eighteenth day
from the date of the issue of the writs. A person, to
be qualified as a candidate must be the holder of an
elector’s right. Each candidate must be nominated
by at least six electors' for thei district. The nomi-
nation must be made in writing, signed by the nomi-
nators, and endorsed by the candidate; consenting to
the nomination. The “ one man one vote ” principle
is enforced ; and no elector can nominate more than
one candidate. No deposit from a candidate is re-
quired. Under the Parliamentary Elections (Polling)
Act, No. 20. of 1898, the poll remains open from 8 a.m.
to 6 p.m. irrespective of the season in the year when
the election is held. Stringent clauses against bribery,
treating, and intimidation are included in the Act. It is
even forbidden to make a wager on the result of an
election, under a penalty of from £5 to £SO. Provision
is made for Die appointment of a Committee of Elec-
tions and Qualifications, with powers similar to those
conferred by the Act of 1880.
The disqualifications for membership of the Legis-
lative Assembly provided by the Constitution Act still
remain in force. They are as follow : —(1) He must
not be a member of the Legislative Council (2) He
must not hold any office of profit under the Crown,
either for a term of years or during pleasure. (3) He
must not be in any way interested in any contract for


the public service. By the Constitution Act Amend-
ment Act of 1884, the disqualification of persons hold-
ing office of profit was not to apply to the
Colonial Secretary or any other member of the Ministry.
The third disqualification also does not apply to any
contract made by a company of more than twenty
persons. If any disqualified person be elected, the
election is voided by the House, and should such person
presume to sit or vote he is liable to a fine of £SOO.
Members are allowed the sum of £3OO per annum in
the discharge of their Parliamentary duties. A mem-
ber may resign and he is held to have vacated his seat
under any of the following conditions : —Absence
during a whole session without leave, naturalisation
in a foreign country, bankruptcy, being a defaulter, or
convicted of anv infamous crime.
THE MILITARY BARRACKS IN GEORGE STREET, 1832.
The buildings of the Bank of New South Wales and the Commercial Banking Co. of Sydney now partly occupy this site.
AN EARLY VIEW OF MACQUARIE STREET NORTH.


PARLIAMENTARY.
The first Parliamentary elections held in New
South Wales under the Constitution Act of 1855 began
on March 10, 1856, and were finished on April 19. In
the absence of any real live question on which political
parties could stand opposed there were no party cries
to arouse enthusiasm amongst the electors- Sir Wil-
liam Denison, the Governor, who had been instructed
by the Duke of Newcastle to regard responsible govern-
ment in Australia as government by party, endeavoured
to classify the various candidates as Conservatives and
Republican* ; but events promptly showed such
division was wholly misleading. The men who sought
J > O
seats were agreed on giving the new form of govern-
ment a fair trial, and the old party line consequently
was wiped out, so far as politics was concerned.
Nevertheless, while not going to the length of the
faction fights which distinguished the return of mem-
bers of the first representative Legislative Council in
184:3, the election campaign of 1856 aroused the keenest
public interest With every man fighting for his own
hand, the issues were mainly personal, but none the
less they appealed very strongly to the friends and
supporters of the candidates, most of whom were men
of high capacity and pronounced individuality. The
four seats in the city of Sydney electorate—the centre
t/
of interest —were contested by Charles Cowper, Robert
Campbell, Henry Parkes, James R. Wilshire, John H
Plunkett and Thos- R Duigan the first four of whom
“bunched,” to the discomfiture of the Attorney-
General in the defunct Executive Council The result
was announced in the presence of 10,000 persons to be
—Cowper, 3,073 ; Parkes, 3,057 ; Campbell, 3,041 ;
Wilshire. 2,901 ; Plunkett, 2,800 ; and Duigan, 89-
There was tremendous excitement when the result
was made known from a waggon, the hustings having
been demolished in the heat of the fray
When the elections were completed the Assembly
Was found to be composed as follows :—City of Sydney
(4) : Charles Cowper, landowner and squatter ; Henry
Parkes, journalist ; Robt. Campbell, merchant ; James
Robert Wilshire, tanner- Sydney Hamlets (2) : Daniel
Cooper, merchant ; Stuart Alex. Donaldson, merchant.
Camden West (2) ; Jas Macarthur, landowner ; John
Norton Oxley, landowner. Northumberland Boroughs
(2) : Geo. O. Nichols, solicitor ; Bourn Russell,
landowner- Parramatta (2) : Henry Watson Parker,
landowner ; Geo. Oakes, landowner. North-eastern
Boroughs (1) : Edward Flood, landowner and squatter.
Western Boroughs (1) : Arthur Todd Holroyd, bar-
rister-at-law. Camden East (2) ; Henry Osborne,
landowner ; John Marks, settler Murray (1) : William
Forster, squatter- Southern Boroughs (1): Terence
Aubrey Murray, landowner. Argyle (1): John Hubert
Plunkett, barrister-at-law- Bathurst County (I):
John Hubert Plunkett, barrister-at-law, Cumberland
North (2) ; John Bayley Darvall, barrister-at-law ;
Jas. Pye, agriculturist. Cook and Westmoreland (2) ;
James Martin, solicitor ; Robt Thos Jamieson, land-
owner. Moreton, Wide Bay, : Burnet and Maranoa
(1) : Gordon Sandeman, squatter. Murrumbidgee (2) :
George Macleay, squatter ; John Hay, squatter.
Manaroo (1): Daniel Egan, merchant. Durham (3):
Richard Jones, freeholder ; Samuel Deane Gordon,
merchant ; Win. Mannings Arnold, settler. Cumber-
land Boroughs (1) : Win. Bowman, landowner. Cum-
berland South (2) : Win. Montague Manning, barrister-
at-law ; Elias Carpenter Weekes, ironmonger. Stanley
Boroughs (2) : Thos. Holt, landowner ; John Richard-
son, merchant. Wellington and Bligh (1) : Geo. Win.
Lord, squatter. Roxburgh (1) : Win. Lee, landowner.
King and Georgiana (1) : Peter Faucett, barrister-at-
law. Gloucester and Macquarie (1) : Thos. Barker,
miller. St. Vincent (1) : Jas. Thomson, squatter. Wel-
lington (1) : Geo. Henry Cox, squatter. Phillip, Bris-
bane and Bligh (1) : John Robertson, squatter. Nor-
thumberland and Hunter (3) : Alex. Walter Scott,
landowner ; Win. R. Piddmgton, stationer and book-
seller ; Hovenden Hely, settler. Stanley County (1) :
Henry Buckley, miller Liverpool Plains and Gwydir
(2) : Gideon S. Lang, squatter ; Francis T. Rusden,
squatter. Lachlan and Lower Darling (2) : James
Garland, squatter ; Win. Macleay, squatter. New
England and Macleay (2) : Thos. G. Rusden, squatter ;
Richard Hargrave, settler Clarence and Darling
Downs (1) : Clark Irving, landowner
Mr Plunkett, who had been returned by the
constituencies of Bathurst and Argyle, declared on
May 29 that he would sit for the latter, whereupon the
seat for Bathurst was declared vacant. The vacancy
was filled by the election of Mr. W. H. Suttor. The
Committee of Elections, to whom was referred a peti-
tion complaining, of the return of Mr. Bourn Russell,
brought up a report declaring that Mr. Russell was
not dulv elected, and that Mr. E. C. Weekes was dulv
elected for Northumberland Boroughs. Mr. Weekes
had been also returned for the South Riding of Cumber-
land, but deciding to-sit for Northumberland Boroughs,
the South Cumberland seat was declared vacant.
Mr. Jas. Ryan Brennan, who secured the vacancy, was
unseated on petition, and replaced by Mr- Jas- Byrnes.
Mr. W. B. Dailey did not enter the House till December,
1856, when he took the seat vacated by Mr. Parkes.
Mr. Daniel H. Deniehy entered the House on February
17, 1857, as member for Argyle, vice Mr. J. H. Plunkett,
who had succeeded Sir Alfred Stephen as President of
the Legislative Council. Other extraordinary vacan-
cies in the first Assembly were filled by the election of
Messrs. Jas. Dickson, Patrick Leslie and Thos. W.
Smith. Of those elected to the representative House,
Messrs. Cowper, Parkes. R. Campbell, Wilshire, Cooper,
Donaldson, Macarthur, Nichols, Parker, Flood,
Holroyd. Osborne, Murray. Plunkett. Daivall, Egan.


Martin, G. Macleay, Bowman, Manning, Richardson,
Barker, W. Macleay and T. G. Rusden had held seats
in the old Legislative Council.
Early in January, 1856, the Governor-General had
urged Mr E. Deas Thomson to accept the responsibility
of constituting the first Government, and he had de-
clined, to make the attempt. His Excellency then
sent for Mr. Stuart A. Donaldson, but the lafier having
failed to induce Messrs. D. Cooper, C. Cowper, W- M.
Mann ng and H. W. Parker to join him in an adminis-
tration, advised Sir William Denison that it would be
better to wait until after the elections. This recom-
mendation the Governor-General acted upon, and
nothing further was done in the direction of Cabinet-
making until April 21, when his Excellency, desirous
that the members of the Upper House should be nomi-
nated by a representative Government, commissioned
Mr. Donaldson a second time to form a Cabinet, with
the result that the following Ministry was; formed :
Stuart Alex. Donaldson (Prime Minister and Colonial
Secretary), Thomas Holt (Colonial Treasurer), Wm. M.
Manning (Attorney-General), John Bayley Darvall
(Solicitor-General), Geo. 0. Nichols (Auditor-General).
On May 13th the following gentlemen were gazetted
members of the Legislative Council : —A. M. a’Beckett,
John Alexander, George Allen, Alex. Berry, Jas. Wm.
Bligh, Col. Henry K. Bloomfield. Edward Broadhurst,
Alex Bushby, John Campbell, James Comrie, Ed.
Deas Thomson, C-B-, his Honor John Nodes Dickinson,
Jos. Docker, Captain William Dumaresq, Wm. Pitt
Faithfull, Robt. Fitzgerald, Geo. Hall, Geo. Kenyon
Holden, Robert Pitt Jackson, Robt. Johnson, David
Jones, Ed. Knox, Robt. Lethbridge, Francis Lord,
Francis L. S. Merewether, Jas. Mitchell, Jacob Levi
Montefiore, Campbell I). Riddell, Henr;y G. Smith,
Sir Alfred Stephen, Knt., his Honor Roger Therry, Robt.
Tooth. Robt. Towns, Jas. Walker, Randolph John
Want and Alex. Warren. Under the Constitution Act
members of the Council were to hold their seats for five
years, but this quinquennial limit was to be altered
in 1861 to a life holding.
The first Parliament of New South Wales under
the new Constitution Act assembled on Thursday,
May 22, 1856, in the building erected for the Legis-
lative Council in 1843. The event excited much in-
terest throughout the city, and the day was kept as
a public holiday by a large number of citizens. Cere-
mony there was of a simple and appropriate nature,
but it lacked any attempt to ape the pageantry of
Imperial courts. Mr Wm. Macpherson was appointed
Clerk of Parliament, and he acted in that capacity
until December 31, 1859, when Mr. Richard O’Connor
succeeded him. The latter held office until March 31,
1871, and then gave way to Mr. John Jackson Calvert,
who has discharged the duties of this onerous position
ever since. In the Legislative Council merely formal
business was transacted. There was the Usher of the
Black Rod (Major Lockyer), in full costume of black
velvet, lined with crimson satin, and with his baton
of office in his hand, and he superintended the placing
of the members and their friends in the places
assigned to them. Messrs. A, Bushby, John Docker,
Wm. Dumaresq and Robt. Fitzgerald were the only
members of the Upper House unable to attend. Sir
Alfred Stephen produced a commission from the
Governor appointing him President of the Legislative
Council of New South Wales. He also produced a
commission from his Excellency, appointing “ Sir
Alfred Stephen, Mr. Ed. Deas Thomson and Col. Henry
Keane Bloomfield commissioners to open and' hold
this present session of the Legislative Council and
Legislative Assembly, and to do all things necessary
to be done in and about the opening of this Parlia-
ment.” Members of the Assembly were summoned to
hear the commission read. The President informed the
Assembly that he had it in command from his Excel-
lency the Governor-General to let them know that
they would hereafter be informed of the cause of this
Parliament being called together ; but it being neces-
sary that a Speaker for the House of Assembly should
first be chosen, he requested they would for the pur-
pose return to the place prepared for their meeting,
and there be pleased to choose a Speaker, and present
him at noon on the following date for his Excellency’s
approbation. The Assembly then withdrew. Members
of the Council having taken the oath of allegiance and
signed the roll, the Council adjourned.
In the Assembly Mr. Donaldson acquainted the
House that the Governor had been pleased to issue a
commission empowering him and two other members
of the House, therein named, to administer to each
other and to members generally the oath or affirmation
of allegiance. Mr. Donaldson having taken and sub-
scribed the oath himself, and administered the same
to the other commissioners, Messrs. W. M. Manning
and Jas. Macarthur, the other members present were
duly sworn, and signed the roll of the House. Mr. J. H.
Plunkett claimed to be (and was) sworn separately as
member for Argyle and member for Bathurst, and
twice subscribed the roll.
The election of a Speaker was next proceeded
with. Mr. C. Cowper proposed, and Mr. R. Jones
seconded, cc That Daniel Cooper, Esq., do take the
chair of the House as Speaker.” cc He had ” (his
proposer said) sat in Pailiament for years and had
performed his duties in a satisfactory manner. He is
a gentleman of considerable attainments, punctual in
habits of business, methodical, clear, and possessing
intelligence and a power of comprehension, which I
think will be quite sufficient to meet the duties that
may devolve upon him in his new position.” Mr. G.
Macleay moved as an amendment, and Mr. Holroyd
seconded, ct That Henry Watson Parker, Esq., be the
Speaker of this the first Legislative Assembly of New
South Wales, entirely representative in its constitution. 5,
On behalf of Mr. Parker members were asked to bear in
mind that he had cc performed during two whole Legis-
lative Councils —that is for a period of ten years —the
arduous and responsible ,duties of chairman of com-
mittees. It is also known that in that province the
honourable gentleman gave universal satisfaction.”
The debate occupied more than three hours, both the
candidates addressing the House. Eventually the
motion that Mr. Cooper take the chair as Speaker was
carried by a majority of one, the voting being—ayes 24,
noes 23. Mr. Plunkett, sitting for two constituencies,
claimed a dual vote, and, had his claim been allowed,
the voting would have been equal. A journalistic critic


of the day commenting, in the S.M. Herald , upon
the length of the debate, wrote :— ct The gentlemen
who spoke for the first time, on the whole, were not
inferior to the more experienced debaters. We look
forward, however, with some terror to the oratory of
the House. The idea seems to prevail that every
member ought fo say something —to offer reasons for
every vote, then to explain his reasons, and then throw
light on his explanation. This would be of no great
consequence if it happened once a year, but it becomes
an intolerable imposition when the pastime of every
day.”
The opening of Parliament by Sir William Denison
took place on Friday, May 23. As the ceremonial hour
attain his ends. 64 The distance” (writes an eye-
witness) “ from Government House to Parliament
House was only a short walk, and some suggested it
should be got over on foot. But Sir William wished
to show the highest respect to the new order of things,
and insisted on surrounding the inauguration with
pomp and ceremony. But materials for display were
meagre. There was a State carriage to begin with,
but only two reliable horses. After .much casting
about the additional horses were procured. There
was an everyday carriage for Lady Denison, but only
one horse, and that a saddle one, slightly used to har-
ness. There were, of course, other horses to the fore,
but the difficulty was to find such as would stand a
THE FIRST MINISTRY UNDER RESPONSIBLE GOVERNMENT.
Reading from left to right:—T. Holt, W. M. Manning, S. A. Donaldson, J. B. Darvall, G. O. Nichols.
approached Macquarie Street became thronged and its
balconies crowded with spectators. The Council cham-
ber, too, presented a much gayer appearance than it
could boast of on the previous day. Lady Denison
and family arrived shortly before 11 o’clock and took
their seats near the chair occupied by the President,
Sir Alfred Stephen. The back benches on either side
of the chamber were set aside for the fair friends and
relatives of the legislators, the front seats only being
reserved for the members of the Council, most ol whom
were present. His Excellency, who was anxious to
open the proceedings with as elaborate a ceremonial as
possible, was put about no little in endeavouring to
crowd and keep their heads when salutes were fired.
There was only one State liverv for the coachman, and
%/ •/
as the regular coachman could not drive four horses,
he had to give up his livery to a competent driver for
the occasion. Government House domestics were next
mustered. Two were selected as footmen to walk at
the horses’ heads, two were to stand up behind, and
one was to go with Lady Denison. Every man who
wore a livery of any kind was put into the procession,
and only the butler was left behind at Government
House to act as hall porter.” On the arrival, without
disaster, of the Governor-General and suite at the
Council, he was cheered, and entering the chamber


and taking his seat a message was sent to the Assembly,
the members of which, headed by Mr. Speaker, were
promptly in attendance.
His Excellency read the following address
“ Gentlemen of the Legislative Council and Gentlemen
of the Legislative Assembly,—
“It is with no ordinary feelings of satisfaction
that 1 address you, for the first time, as the Legis-
lature constituted under the provisions of an
enactment framed for the purpose of adapting, so
far as circumstances will permit, the principles
characteristic of the British constitution ; and I
trust that this form of government will be found
congenial with the habits and feelings, and con-
ducive to the happiness and prosperity of the
people of New South Wales. By this enactment a
change has been made in my relation towards the
Legislature, to which it is necessary that 1 should
briefly allude.
“Under the former constitution of the colony, the
Governor only was responsible for the policy of the
Government, and for the measures submitted f o
the Legislature by which that policy was intended
to be carried into effect. Under the present con-
stitution the Governor is relieved from that great
responsibility, which now, most properly, falls on
those gentlemen whom he may select as his ad-
O• • i
visors, and in whose ability, integrity and political
principles the Legislature places confidence. As
in my former relations to you I was always most
anxious to press upon your notice whatever could,
in my opinion, be conducive to the interests of the
colony, so now I shall he ever ready to carry into
effect, as head of the Executive, such measures as
the Legislature may consider best calculated to
enhance the general prosperity.
' ‘ Before I allude to the measures which will be sub-
mitted for your consideration, I am desirous to
explain the reasons which have induced me to
avail myself of the services of the gentlemen at
present composing the Executive Council.
“ Under the new constitution and by the Royal in-
structions, it became the duty of the Governor,
prior to the meeting of the Legislature, to summon
to the Legislative Council such persons as the
Governor and the Executive Council should think
fit. In my opinion it was requisite that the Exe-
cutive Council, under whose advice this duty was
to be performed, should be composed of gentlemen
most of whom had been returned as members of
the Legislative Assembly,' and who had thus
(regard being had to the peculiar circumstances
under which responsible government is now first
organised) given the best constitutional guarantee
that they possessed the confidence of the com-
munity. I have nob however, yet placed these
gentlemen in charge of any of the departments of
the Government, because their seats in the As-
sembly would 1 thereby have become vacant, and
as there Was no power to issue writs for their re-
spective districts until after the meeting of Par-
liament, I should then have been deprived of the
opportunity of explaining to you at the commence-
ment of the session the principles upon which the
Government is prepared to act with reference to
many important questions, which must necessarily
be submitted for your consideration.
“ I am glad to have it in my power to congratulate you
on the propitious season with which we have,
under Divine providence, been favoured, and on
the general prosperity of the colony.’
“ Gentlemen of the Legislative Assembly,—
“ The failure cf the cereal crops in 1854, followed by
considerable depression arising from this and other
causes, exercised an unfavourable influence upon
the Customs revenue for 1855 and for the first four
months of the year. The amount of revenue col-
lected during the above period has fallen con-
siderably short of the estimate.
“ There are. however, already indications of such
increased activity in trade and commerce as may
justifv me in looking forward with confidence to
a steadily increasing revenue.
“ The Estimates for 1857 shall be laid before you at
the earliest possible period.
“ It will be my anxious desire so to regulate the public
expenditure as to combine with a wise but judicious
economy the increased efficiency of the Govern-
ment departments and the advancement of the
colony.
‘‘Should the exigencies of the country demand in-
creased taxation, care will be taken that such
additional burthen shall be so distributed as not
to bear with undue pressure upon any particular
class of the community.”
“ Gentlemen of the Legislative Council and of the
Legislative Assembly,—
“ Availing myself of the provisions contained in the
fourth section of the Act of Parliament, enabling
her Majesty to assent to the Constitution Act, I
shall lay before you a Bill to repeal those clauses
which require a majority of two-thirds of the
Legislature to effect changes in the system of
representation, or the principles of the consti-
tution.
“Material changes in the administrative departments
will be required for the more efficient conduct of
the public service, and to this the attention of the
Executive Government has been already directed.
The expenses and numerical strength of various
public offices may be diminished, without impair-
ing their efficiency, by a better distribution of
r» * •
departmental responsibility, and by simplifying
official forms.
“ it will be necessary to make arrangements by which
occupants of offices (some, perhaps, yet tc be
created ) will be placed in a position of direct re-
sponsibility, and by simplifying official forms.
“ The final report of the commissioners appointed, in
accordance with an address of the late Legislative
Council, to inquire into the state of the public
schools throughout the colony, will be laid before
you. This report places in a strong point of view
the urgent necessity which exists for devising a
comprehensive system of public education. The
subject must claim the early attention of the
Executive Government and the Legislature.
“ The management of public lands, and the control of


the revenues derived from that source, having
been surrendered to the local Government, and the
Imperial Acts for the disposal of these lands hav-
ing been repealed, it will be your duty to give
your immediate attention to this important sub-
ject. I confide in the wisdom of the Legislature
to aid the Government in the enactment of im a-
sures by which, without violating the public faith
or sacrificing exacting interests, greatly increased
facilities may be afforded for the acquisition of
land by persons of all classes, and the settlement
of the country promoted. Arrangements are in
progress for surveying and preparing for sale a
very large extent of available land, and for the
improvement and more prompt issue of deeds of
grant.
The internal communications of the country will
require much consideration, with the view to the
adoption of such a system of railway extension,
and other means cf transit, as shall enhance the
value of property and develop the resources' of
the country, j
The important subject of immigration will demand
your early and earnest consideration, and it will
be desirable to consider how far it may be expe-
dient to enable those persons who require labourers
with extensive jurisdiction, civil and criminal-
Bills for these purposes will be laid before you
‘ ‘ Measures designed to simplify and improve the law,
and to relieve the administration of justice from
sources of delay and costliness, will be proposed-
I particularly invite your attention to the im-
portance of uniting the Common Law and Equity
jurisdictions of the courts in all cases in which
practical evils are entailed upon suitors by the
maintenance of the present system.
‘ ‘ You will I am sure give your earnest attention to
a measure which will be proposed to you for the
amendment of the Insolvent Law ; and will es-
pecially desire to mark more broadly the distinc-
tion between the honest but unfortunate and the
fraudulent or reckless insolvent, so essential to the
maintenance of a high tone of commercial honour.
‘ ‘ In order to secure the skilful preparation and proper
construction of Bills it will, I think, be necessary
to appoint an officer specially charged with the
duty of preparing them, and of watching their
progress and of aiding in their amendment, whilst
passing through the various stages. It should also
be the duty of that officer to devote his attention
to the subject of the progressive amendment of
the law.
FIRST LEGISLATIVE CHAMBERS.
and who by purchase of land or otherwise provide
the means for their introduction, to exercise a
direct influence in their selection, in order that
the funds appropriated to that purpos. may be
employed in introducing the most suitable de-
scription of labour.
Measures will be laid before you for the establishment
of municipal institutions throughout the colony —
for the purpose of relieving the) central Govern-
ment of duties which it cannot adequately fulfil,
and of vesting the control of local affairs in those
directly interested in their successful management.
The Goldfields Management Act will expire at the
end of the present year ; the serious attention ol
tfe Government will be given to the development
of the goldfields, and to all the details of the
management. *■'
The great and growing importance of the northern
districts of the colony and their remoteness from
Sydney call for the earlv establishment of a branch
of the Supreme Court, with a resident Judge, at
Brisbane- I trust also that it may be found
compatible with a due regard lor the public fi-
nances, to establish in other districts local courts
“ Despatches on the subject of steam communication
with Great Britain and other important matters
will be laid before you.
6 4 By the terms of the Act of the Imperial Parliament,
enabling her Majesty to assent to the Constitution
Act, it became my imperative duty to call you
together on or before this day ; but it is obviously
necessary that sufficient time should be afforded
by adjournment, for the preparation of the mea-
sures to be submitted to you in reference to the
foregoing and other important subjects Under
the peculiar circumstances of the great change
now taking place in the whole system of our gov-
ernment, I trust you will not hesitate to assent
to the adoption of such a course
“ I entertain a firm reliance in the moderation and
sound judgment of the Parliament, satisfied that
the measures which may ultimately be determined
upon will be such as to affirm the high character
justly attained by the preceding Legislature of
this colony, and. under the blessing of Almighty
God to ensure the public welfare-”
At the conclusion of the address the members of
the Assembly retired, and both Houses adjourned


until a later hour in the afternoon. In the Council, on
reassembling, the vice-regal address was read by the
President, a Bill having been previously read a first
time, in order formally to claim the right of the Council
to discuss questions independently of the reasons
given by the Government for calling them together.
MR. JUSTICE BURTON.
Uu the motion of Mr. Holden a committee, consisting of
Mr. Warren, Mr. Justice Dickinson, his Honor Judge
Therry, Mr. Riddell, Mr. Knox, Mr. Allen, Mr. Bligh,
Mr. Want, Mr Johnson and Mr. Holden, was appointed
to prepare a reply to the address. The committee
quitted the Council chamber, and, after a delay of
more than an hour, returned with the reply, which was
a mere echo of the address. Mr. Holden moved the
adoption of the reply, carefully guarding himself, how-
ever, against the inference that by doing so he was
committed in any way to a support of the Ministry.
Mr- Knox seconded the proposition, expressing his
approval of the Ministerial programme, and offering his
hearty support to carry through the measures an-
nounced The reply was then carried unanimously.
On the motion of Mr- Warren it was agreed that until
standing orders were adopted the House should be
guided by the forms of the British Government so far
as they were applicable-
In the Assembly no time was lost in challenging
the position of the Ministry. Mr Garland, in moving
the address-in-reply, delivered an able speech in sup-
port of the Government policy. “ His Excellency,’
he said, “ in order to avoid anything like the exercise
of power which would appear to be inconsistent with
the principle of responsible government, had entrusted
to other hands the task of forming a Ministry, so as
to initiate the constitution on the new principles it em-
bodied ” ; indeed he could not see what other course
the Government could have adopted without violating
the very first principle which the constitution was
intended to carry out- Had it been otherwise the
nomination of the Upper House would have been
purely the act of the old Executive Council, and as
such it would have assumed the very worst possible
form of nomination. Mr. Faucett seconded the mo-
tion, and specially commended the action of the
Government in proposing the repeal of what was known
as the two-thirds clauses of the Constitution Act.
Mr. Terence Murray, a member of the committee ap-
pointed to draft the address-in-reply, stated that he,
with two others were dissentients from those who
approved of the answer. He considered the Governor’s
action in reference to the appointment of the Upper
House was most objectionable, and ought not to re-
ceive the sanction of the Assembly. Instead of having
appointed a new Ministry to undertake the functions
of the old, these gentlemen who had been so liberally
provided for by the country should have been ap-
pointed to the office It was they who should ha\e
been chosen to meet the representatives of the people,
and he was astonished that his Excellency had not
insisted on their doing so. He condemned the appoint-
ment of a new Ministry until the late Executive had
retired from office on political grounds ; and these
grounds, he contended, could only arise from the votes
of the House so given as to show a want of confidence
in the Executive- He did not know upon what
authority the arbitrary selection of five representatives
of the people had been made at all, and if it was only to
show their sense of what was due to the House, they
should oust the Ministry on the first occasion. Mr.
Holt asked the House not to come to any decision
until the head of the Government submitted to the
members the reasons which had induced the Ministry
to take office. Mr Donaldson promised to make the
explanation at the next sitting, and the House, ap-
proving, adjourned.
MR. FORSTER.
When the Assembly met on Monday, May 26th
Mr. Donaldson made his promised statement, the
report of which filled seven columns of the S.M. Herald.
It was to the effect that after advising his Excellency
in the previous January that it would be premature
to form any Administration until the results of the
elections were known and the public had declared the


character ol the new Assembly, he suggested that the
officers in charge of the Government should continue
to hold their offices until such declaration took place.
The Governor-General, having sought the advice of the
Judge's, nominated a temporary Executive Council,
which had no status or patronage whatever, but which
undertook to keep the whole of the government in
motion, so that the people might suffer no harm, either
from action or inaction In naming this Executive
his Excellency availed himself of the services of Mr.
E. Deas Thomson, and it was subsequently proposed
that Mr- Thomson, who held a seat in the Legislative
Council, should form a Ministry, and that he
(Mr- Donaldson) should be chief Minister in the Assem-
bly- This proposal was not entertained by Mr Thom-
son, and consequently the present Ministry was formed.
No salaries had been paid, and a vote of want of con-
fidence would leave the offices of the Ministry where
they originally were, and the House and the country
would be at liberty to fill them up as might seem
most proper.”
Mr. C. Cowper, who thought he ought to have been
called upon to form the first Administration, followed,
and wound up a vigorous attack on the Government
by moving an amendment on the e ddress-in-reply :
1. With reference to the recent appointments by
your Excellency of gentlemen who have been returned
to the Legislative Assembly as members of the Execu-
tive Government, without the charge of any depart-
ment, we desire to convey to your Excellency the
expression of our opinion that the officers of the
Government for whom pensions or retiring allowances
have been provided by the Constitution Act on their
release or retirement from office, on political grounds
are not entitled to claim under the Act such pensions
or allowances unless such release or retirement takes
place after some direct Parliamentary manifestation of
their inability to carry on the Government, which
manifestation has not yet been made 2. That the
assumption of office as responsible Ministers under
existing conditions by any persons in the place of those
for whom such pensions have been provided before
such manifestation shall have taken place is highly
irregular and unconstitutional ” This amendment was
supported by Mr. Parkes and Mr. Piddington, and on
the Government side of the House the speakers were
Mr James Macarthur and Mr. George Macleay. On
May 29th, when the debate closed, the House re-
jected the amendment, and by 30 votes to 18 adopted
the address-in-reply.
The Donaldson Government had now to go before
their constituents for re-election. This, however, did
not apply to Mr. Manning, the Attorney-General, who
had accepted this portfolio in lieu of the other office of
Solicitor-General, which he held at the time of his
election for South Cumberland. Messrs- Nichols and
Macarthur were returned unopposed- Mr Donaldson
and Mr. Darvall had to fight for their seats, and were
victorious. Possibly there was too much of the legal
element in the team, but Mr. Donaldson and his col-
leagues were not to the liking of the first Assembly.
A crisis occurred on August 21, 1856, when the
Premier moved the adjournment of the House, with a
view to the tender of their resignations l by the Ministry.
On the previous day they had carried a contested
motion by a majority of 24 to 22 ; and their resignations
under these circumstances can only be explained by
going back and briefly detailing the history of the
session. On meeting the House after a two months’
recess, the Premier announced the speedy introduction
of a measure to effect certain material changes in the
administrative departments of the Government. This
was on August 5 It was proposed that there should
be three Secretaries of Government —the Principal
Secretary, the Treasurer, the Secretary for Lands and
Works —with an Attorney-General and a Solicitor-
J
General, the Auditor-General to be no longer a political
officer. Mr. Martin moved an amendment affirming
that for the present there should be four Principal
Secretaries ; that each should be absolute head of his
own department, and the immediate responsible ad-
viser of the Governor in all matters connected with it;
that one should have a position in reference to his
colleagues similar to that of the First Lord of the Trea-
sury in England ; and that the salaries should be voted
annually. In the course of the debate Mir. Jones held
that the matter should be referred to a select com-
mittee ; Mr. Parkes found fault with the Government
for failing to point out distinct constitutional prin-
ciples as the basis of their scheme. The amendment
was negatived by 29 to 14, Messrs. Arnold, Cowper,
Forster, Jones, Parkes and Robertson voting against
the Government. The motion was carried without a
division. On August 20th Mr. Donaldson moved for
a select committee to inquire into and report on the
expediency of creating an additional department,
and the salary that should be attached to the office of
each responsible Minister. Opposition members con-
tended that the committee, if appointed, should be
authorised to consider the whole of the departments.
An amendment to inquire into the existing depart-
mental arrangements was moved by Mr. Robertson,
but lapsed. Another was moved by Mr. Jones to
inquire into the Ministerial arrangements under which
the Government would thenceforth be carried on.
Mr. Parkes held that the Government ought either to
carry on as before, or inaugurate a new system and
take their stand upon it- The amendment was de-
feated by 24 to 19, and the original resolution was
carried by 24 to 22, Mr Robertson voting with the
Government in both cases, and Messrs. Cowper, Forster
and Parkes against-
These were the last divisions under the Donaldson
Ministry, but they did not stand alone in influencing
'V J O
the mind of the Government. On August 15, 1856,
a motion by Mr Martin to refer the report of the City
Commissioners on Sewers to a select committee was
opposed by the Government. On the 17th two
Government motions relating to the appointment of
Parliamentary draughtsmen were carried by 23 to 17,
and 21 to 15 respectively. And on August 12th the
House divided evenly upon a resolution by Mr. Forster
condemning the presence of Judges in the Upper House.
The motion was opposed by the Government, and
carried by the Speaker’s casting vote In the course
of debate Mr. Forster disclaimed the idea of the reso-
lution being a party motion, but it was remarked by
Mr. Jones and others that tfie conduct of the Ministry


in appointing the Judges was the real question.. It
appears that either then or subsequently the vote was
spoken of by Opposition members as a vote of censure,
for on August 11, Mr. Donaldson saying that he was
ready to meet any censure, and wishing the intention
of the vote made plain, moved that the resolution be
rescinded. Mr. Forster said he meant to censure the
appointment of the Judges, but not to pass a general
censure on the Ministry. Mr. Robertson, who held
that members on the cross-benches ought not to be
asked to vote that black was white, because Ministers
chose to consider this a vote of censure, moved an
amendment that the House declined to rescind the
resolutions, but did not wish them to be considered a
vote of want of confidence. Mr. Parkes opposed the
amendment as an explanation of a former vote of the
House ; other speakers concurred in this view, and the
amendment was negatived by 23 to 22, Messrs. Arnold,
Cowper, Forster, Martin, Parkes and Robertson, who
had all voted for Mr. Forster’s resolution, voting for it.
The motion to rescind was then put and passed- On
August 22nd Mr. Donaldson declared that his Ministers
had found themselves without that support which they
had a right to expect, and having a due regard to their
position in the House, as well as to their dignity and
character, they were compelled to resign office- This
they did three days afterwards, having lasted but two
months and nineteen days —from June 6 to August 25,
1856- Mr. Donaldson was an English gentleman—one of
the best his country has contributed to the building-up
of the Australian colonies All who knew him —
and opponents alike —agree in referring to him as a
man whom it was a privilege to be associated with-
He had high notions of what a Minister should be, and
he acted on those principles, declining to descend to
the humiliation of being kept in office in return for
favours received- Directly he recognised he could not
carrv the proposals he deemed essential to the welfare
of New South Wales he went out of office-
His Excellency then sent for Mr. Cowper, and the
first of several Cowper Governments succeeded. On
August 26th the formation of a new Ministry was
announced as follows : —Charles Cowper, Colonial Sec-
retary ; Robert Campbell, Colonial Treasurer ; Terence
A. Murray, Secretary for Lands and Works ; James
Martin, Attorney-General; Alfred J. P. Lutwyche (Legis-
lative Council), Solicitor-General- Ministers were all
re-elected, and on Saturday, September 16, 1856, they
met the House- On the following sitting day Mr. John
Hay moved, “ That in the opinion of this House the
formation of the present Ministry under circumstances
which precluded the prospect of its obtaining the confi-
dence of the representatives of the people, was calcu-
lated to obstruct the public business and is most repre-
The circumstances referred to were in part
the fact that the retirement of the previous Ministry was
The illustration on opposite page reproduces many men prominently figuring in the commercial life oi
New South Wales on the introduction of responsible government, and several of them occupied seats in th
first parliament.
All wood, Eev. Canon—lB
Audley, Lord—37
Allen, Sir George Wigram—6s
Bennett, Francis—ll
Bonar, Andrew—l 7
Broadhurst, Edward—23
Bayley, Lyttleton—44
Barton, William—46
Bloxsome, Oswald—64
Brown, Andrew—Bs
Beazley, Eev. John—99
Barton, Wm. (A. A. Co.) —lOO
Campbell, W. 0.—26
Cooper, Sir Daniel—4l
Croft, Dr. Jonathan—s 7
Clarke. Eev. William B.—BB
Denison. Sir William—l
Dumaresq, Col. William—4
Donaldson, Sir S. A —6
Deas Thomson, Sir E.— 7
Darvall, Sir J. 8.—73
Darvall, Major E.—9o
Dowling, Judge J. S. 107
Elliott, Gilbert—49
Fairfax, John—33
Fox, Capt. H. T.—loB
Freeman, Wm.—B4
Fowler, Frank, 47
Freeman, James—s 6
Gregory, Very Eev. Dr.— 0
Goddard, Edward—39
Graham, J. E.—-45
Geard, Frederick, 68
Gibbes, Col. J G. N.— 78
Hay, Sir John—3
Henfrey, William—24
Halloran, Henry—3o
Hollingworth, E. W. 31
Hughes, David—4B
Henderson, James—s 3
Holt, Thomas—7o
Holroyd. Dr. A. T.—74
Hodgson, Arthur—94
Heath, Geo.—96
Harnett, Eichard—97
Irving, Clark- 63
Jones. David—ls
Johnson, Eichard—ss
Johnson, James—Bl
Jones, John Eussell—9B
King, George—lo 2
Lamb, Eichard—s2
Lang, Eev. Dr. John—6l
Manning, Sir Win. M.—75
Martin, Sir James—2
Macarthur, Hannibal H.—2l
M’Namara, John- 60
M’Donald, Alex.—22
McEncroe, Yen. Archdeacon—4o
Macarthur, Eev. G. F.—2B
Montefiore, 0 L.—27
Montefiore, J. L.—7l
Mort, Henry—32
Mort, T. 5.—76
Meymott, F. W—so
Morris, John—Bo
Murnin, M E.—B2
Muriel, Eobt.—93
Nathan, Dr. Charles—lo 4
Nichols. Geo 0.—77
Parkes, Sir Henry—s 9
Parker, Sir H. W.—s
Pennington, W. G.—54
Prince, Henry—l 2
Eae, John (M.A.)—lOl
Eees, George—l 4
Eiddell, C. D.—B
Eolleston, Chris.—sB
Eothery, Edward—66
Salamon, Edward—36
Samuel, Sir Saul—43
Sands, Jolm—67
Skinner, Thomas—lo 3
Smith, T. W.—34
Smyth, S. H. —l3
Stuart, Sir Alex.—3s
Stephen, Sir Alfred—42
Symonds, Samuel—62
Terry, F. C.—109
Templeton, W. E.—25
Therry, Sir Roger—2o
Thompson, Joseph, sen.—B7
Thompson, Joseph—lo
Thompson. William-38
Thompson, T. J—9s
Thornton, George —l9
Thorne, George—los
Tooth, Edwin—B9
Tooth. Eobert—l6
Treeve, J. R—79
Ward, Capt. E. W. (E E.) -106
Weekes, Elias C.—69
West, Eev. John—9l
Wild,’ Wm. V.—92
Wolfen, A.—29
Woolco’tt. Wm, sen.—sl
Woolcott, C. H.— 86
Woolley, Prof. John—B3
Young, Matthew—72
The number after the names indicates the number in the illustration




thought unnecessary by a large number of members,
and in part the way in which Mr. Cowper had filled the
office of Attorney-General, by appointing Mr. Martin,
who at that time was in practice as a solicitor. The
censure debate extended over five days, and the motion
was carried against the Government by 26 votes to 23.
On August 25 “ Slippery Charley,” as his critics called
the Premier, was going on with the business of the
day, as if nothing had happened, so Mr. John Hay
gave notice that he would the next day ask the Colonial
O
Secretary what were the intentions of the Government,
and moved the adjournment of the House accordingly-
Mr. Cowper said he did not deem it necessary to state
his intentions unless he received an intimation from a
majority of his friends that they would no longer sup-
port him- The adjournment was carried by 24 to 23,
Messrs. Robertson and Parkes both voting with the
“ noes.” On August 26 Mr. Cowper announced that
he had tendered certain advice to the Governor-General,
who had required time to consider it- A week later
the Premier read the correspondence between the
Ministry and the Governor. This included a statement
that the effect of the late vote was not directed against
the policy of the Ministry ; that it was too clearly
factious and personal to call for Ministerial action ;
that the Ministry had hoped to be enabled still to carry
on business, but had perceived from later proceedings
that the crisis must be terminated ; and that, seeing
no possibility of the formation of a strong and useful
Government, they advised a dissolution. The Gover-
nor-General, to whom this statement had been sub-
mitted, replied that he did not feel justified in taking
the extreme step of dissolving Parliament on the mere
chance of the members of a new House being more
likelv than the present members to form organised
parties. Mr. Cowper thereupon resigned, one month
and five days —from August 26 to October 2, 1856-
being the period of his first Ministry’s existence. This
second crisis was really an expression of the opinion of
the House that the first ought never to have happened.
The Governor-General, acting on Mr. John Hay’s
advice, commissioned Mr. H. W- Parker to form a
Ministry. Mr. Parker aimed at a coalition, offering
both Mr- Donaldson and Mr. Cowper seats in the Cabinet.
The latter declined the offer, but Mr. Donaldson con-
sented, and on October 3rd the Ministry was announced
as follows : —Henry Watson Parker. Premier and Colo-
nial Secretary ; Stuart Alex. Donaldson, Colonial
Treasurer ; John Hay, Secretary for Lands and Works ;
Win. Montague Manning, Attorney - General ; John
Bayley Darvall, Solicitor - General ; and Ed. Deas
Thomson, Representative in the Legislative Council. In
May, 1857, Mr. Darvall succeeded Mr. Manning as
Attorney-General, and Mr- Ed. Wise became Solicitor-
General- On going before their constituents all the
Ministers were returned except Mr Donaldson, who
was defeated by Mr. John Campbell ; but a few days
later Mr. Donaldson re-entered the House as member
for the South Riding of Cumberland, and took his
place in the Ministry. One of the earliest measures
carried through by the Government was a Bill repeal-
ing so much of the Constitution Act as required the
concurrence of two-thirds majorities in Legislative
Council and Legislative Assembly respectively in the
passing of Bills to alter the constitution, or the number
and apportionment of representatives in the Assembly-
The Bill passed both Houses, and on January 22, 1857.
was reserved for her Majesty’s assent. Sir Alfred
Stephen, President of the Legislative Council, retired
on January 28, 1857, Mr. John H- Plunkett, Q.C-,
being appointed to the vacancy.
Parliament was prorogued on March 18, the second
session being opened on August 11 In the opening
speech his Excellency announced that a Bill would be
immediately laid before Parliament to increase the
number of members in the Assembly (54), to remove
the disabilities to vote arising from change of residence
or qualification, to introduce the ballot, and bring the
electoral distribution in harmony with the changes
among the population indicated by the census. The
rejection of this measure, following upon the rejection
of a Bill to Regulate the Revenue and Payment of the
Public Revenue, and the Light, Navigation and Pilot
Board Bill, impelled Ministers on September 7, 1857.
to hand in their resignations.
The second Cowper Administration succeeded,
Mr. Cowper, who held the portfolio of Colonial Secre-
tary, having with him as colleagues :—Richard Jones,
Colonial Treasurer ; Terence A. Murray, Secretary for
Lands and Works ; James Martin, Attorney-General ;
and Alfred J. P. Lutwyche (Legislative Council), Soli-
citor-General. Ministers were returned unopposed,
and met the House on October 20 Announcement
was made of the death of Mr. George 0- Nichols (a
member of the first Cabinet) and of Mr. George San-
deman- The Premier (Mr. Cowper) stated that it was
the intention of the Government to proceed with those
measures already advanced to their later stages, and
then to go to the country, first calling a short session
to pass the Electoral Act. On December 16 the House
threw out a Bill to impose an assessment on runs in the
unsettled and intermediate districts, and to increase
the rents of lands leased for pastoral purposes within
the settled districts. Mr. Cowper thereupon moved
the adjournment of the House, and on December 18th
the first Parliament in New South Wales was dissolved
by proclamation- During its short life of one year and
seven months it had seen the rise and fall of four Cabi-
nets, and had failed to realise the high expectations
with which responsible government was inaugurated.
In fact, Sir William Denison looked upon the first
Parliament as destructive to public progress and an
expensive convincing ground for personal rivalries.
“ The spirit of individuality,” he wrote, “ is so strong
among the people here that they can with difficulty
be persuaded to combine for any social purpose, and
can hardly be expected to do so for political objects.”
He exhorted his Ministers to drop personal rivalries
and concentrate attention on national principles. But
he realised he was talking to the wind, and saw, as he
put it, “ in every politician’s eye the question, ‘ Won’t
you send for me next 1 If not Premier, 1 am entitled
at least to be a member of the Government.’ ”
Before the electors had been called upon to return
representatives to the second Parliament, the fact
oozed out that the dissolution of the Assembly had
been brought about as the Cowper Ministry threa-
tened to collapse on account of internal dissensions.


Mr. R. Jones, Colonial Treasurer, and Mr. T, A. Murray
declined to have further political association with the
Prime Minister, and they resigned office, their port-
r- R. Campbell and Mr. John
Robertson respectively. The appointment of the latter
as Secretary of Lands gave rise to much unfriendly
feeling, as it was largely owing to Mr. Robertson’s
caustic criticisms that the old Parliament had ref used
to accept Mr. Cowper’s Land Bill. However, in the
face of this union of con dieting principles, it was found
convenient to go to the country on the question of
electoral reform. The appeal to the electors resulted
in favour of the Cowper Administration, and they met
the second Parliament on March 23rd, 1858. SirW. W-
Burton was now President of the Legislative Council,
Mr. Plunkett having retired from office in February,
owing to a disagreement with the Premier. Excepting
the Electoral Act of 1858, the Parliamentary Reform
Act—which enacted that Parliament should expire on
April 14, 1859, abolished the qualification of members
of Parliament and did not even require that candi-
dates should be electors —and the District Courts Act,
there was not a single measure introduced during the
existence of this Parliament that would require con-
siderable deliberation. The divisions of the House
during this period, taken all in all, were hostile to the
Ministry. They often escaped defeat by the with-
drawal of their most important measures ; and it was
accredited to the Premier that he made it a practice
of speaking strongly against resolutions and then
voting with the victorious side in order to strip the
decisions of the House of the character of a Ministerial
defeat. Disgusted with this undignified shuffling, Mr.
James Martin left the Ministrv on November, 1858,
and was succeeded as Attorney-General, first by Mr.
A- J. P- Lutwyche, and later on by Mr. Lyttleton
Bayley. Mr. Win. Bede Dailey took the place of
Mr. Lutwyche as Solicitor-General until February, 1859,
when he was replaced by Mr. John Hargrave. The
prorogation of Parliament took place on Saturday,
April 4, 1859 —the preliminary to the dissolution of the
Assembly and a general election-
On August 30, 1859, the third Parliament met, the
Assembly under the Electoral Act of 1858, consisting
of eighty members, of whom forty-six were new repre-
sentatives. Mr. Cowper now found two parties against
him, the first his declared opponents, led by Mr. Terence
A. Murray, and the second those who opposed the
management of the Premier’s political principles and
measures. This last had Mr. John Hay at its head
The principal measure promised by the Government
was a Bill to make the Upper House elective- On
September 2 Mr. Parkes, unexpectedly, moved for the
removal of the Customs duties on tea and sugar. The
Premier was taken by surprise, and making no effort
to seriously combat the motion, it was carried in a
thin House on a majority of one The Ministers im-
mediately tendered their resignation- His Excellency
sent for Mr- Murray as the accepted leader of the Oppo-
sition, but the latter failing to induce Mr. Hay or Mr-
Parkes to join him, returned his commission to the
Governor-General. No other person was sent for, and
Mr. Cowper resumed his duties, the Assembly there-
upon, by way of a vote of confidence, rescinding Mr-
Parkes’ motion But this victory was to have little
effect- On November 5, 1859, the Premier introduced
his Public Education Bill, which proposed to imitate
the Privy Council system in vogue in England by
placing the control of education in this colony in the
hands of the Executive Council. This proposition
created enemies on all sides, and the second reading
was rejected by 8 for and 52 against. The Cowper
Ministry had no option but to resign-
Mr. Hay and Mr. Jones having both tried their
hands at Cabinet-making without success, Mr Wm.
Forster was sent for. Finding the old Parliamentarians
held aloof, he practically formed his Ministry of men
new to office, his colleagues being :—Mr Saul Samuel
(Colonial Treasurer), Mr. John Black (Secretary for
Lands), Mr Geoffrey Eagar (Secretary for Public
Works), and Mr. Ed. Wise (Attorney-General) and Mr.
John Hargrave (Solicitor-General) With this team of
colts Mr. Forster only held the Premiership for six
months. On February 24, 1860, the Assembly rejected
the second reading of his Elective Legislative Council
Bill. He then intimated his intention to put the esti-
mates through and at once ask for a dissolution, where-
upon Mr. Gray moved “ that the continuation of the
Ministry in office would be an obstruction to public
business.” On this the Forster Ministry resigned,
but the part taken by the leaders of the Opposition
on the immediate occasion of the crisis was so little
marked that his Excellency sent for the late Speaker,
Sir Daniel Cooper, who declined to form a Ministry.
Mr. Jones was the next to receive the Governor-Gene-
raPs commission. He communicated with Mr. Cowper
and proposed that he (Mr. Jones) should take the
Premiership and Treasury, and Mr. Cowper be Colonial
Secretary, with a seat in the Upper House. Mr. Cowper
accepted, but as Mr. Hay refused to become a colleague,
Mr. Jo nes informed Sir Win. Denison that he could
not succeed in forming a Ministry as would justify him
in attempting the business of the country.
Mi. Robertson was sent for, and he took up the
reins of office on March 9. 1860, with Mr. Chas- Cowner
, ' i
as Colonial Secretary ; Mr. Elias C- Weekes, Colonial
Treasurer ; Mr. W. M Arnold, Secretary for Public
Works ; and Mr. John F- Hargrave. Attorney-General-
The. administration of the Lands Department the
Premier undertook himself, holding these two offices
till January 9, 1861, when another crisis occurred, and
his Administration was merged into the Cowper Minis-
try No. 3- Mr. Robertson’s two Land Bills, which
had been laid on the table of the House on July 3.
%/
1860, the day before prorogation, were formally intro-
duced on September 27, two days after the House had
met again- The second reading of the Crown Lands
Alienation Bill was carried without a division on Oc-
tober 11 ; but in Committee on the 26th an amend-
ment by Mr. Hay, requiring survey before selection,
was carried by 33 to 28- As a result of this, which the
Government regarded as defeating the main principles
of the Bill, his Excellency was advised to dissolve the
House, and the Government endeavoured to get six
months’ supply ; this was refused. The Government sub-
mitted to go on with the business, taking the estimates
in due course ; but ultimately a motion to go into
Committee of Supply was intercepted by an amendment


1 Morris Asher
2 Alexander Hamilton
3 Henry Parkes
4 Gilbert Elliott
5 W. B. Dalley
6 Randolph Nott
7 Andrew Loder
8 Arthur McArthur
9 Robert Wisdom
10 Augustus Morris
11 John Douglas
12 Stephen Neate Dark
13 Nicholas Hierdnimus
14 E. M. Sayers
15 J. F. Clements
16 Alex. McArthur
17 Samuel Lyons
18 Terence Aubrey Murray
19 Wm. Henry Walsh
20 W. M. Arnold
21 S. W. Gray
22 G. D. Lang
23 E C. Close
24 Clark Irving
25 Saul Samuel
26 Wm. Forster
27 George Oakes
28 Danl. Egan
29 Thos Laidlaw
30 Win. Roberts
31 G. W. Lord
32 Robt. Cribb
33 Wm. H. Suttor
34 W. T. Cape
35 W. C. Windeyer
36 E. C. Weekes
37 J. B. Darvall
38 R. L Jenkins
39 H. M. Oxley
40 John McPhillamy
41 Wm. Handcock
42 J. N. Ryan
43 J Dickson
44 John Black
45 John Robertson
46 Daniel Cooper
47 J. F. Hargrave
48 J. C. Laycock
49 W. R. Watt
50 John Garrett
51 Richd. Jones
52 W. R. Piddington
53 J. H. Plunkett
54 John Hay
55 Ed. Flood
56 Chas. Cowper
57 Henry Mort
58 James Hart
59 J. H. Atkinson
60 A. W. Scott
61 Jas. Byrnes
62 John Campbell
63 Rev. Dr. Lang
64 F A. Cooper
65 W. Wild
66 John Richardson
74 W. Cummings
75 James Martin
76 Wm. Bussell
77 Thomas Broughton
78 Wm. Macleay
79 John Wurley
67 Henry Flett
68 A. Hodgson
69 Jas Pemell
70 R. J. Jamieson
71 Hon. Lyttleton Bay ley
72 Henry Rotton
73 J. B. Wilson


by Mr. Roberts affirming “ that the continuance of
the Government in office was unconstitutional and
injurious.” This was carried by 30 to 29 ; Mr. Parkes
and Mr. Forster voting for the amendment. Proroga-
tion and a dissolution followed, but when the fourth
Parliament met, on January 10, 1861. Mr Robertson
announced that Mr. Cowper had taken the position of
first Minister of the Crown- Cowperism was then a
power in the land, and by virtue of the Land Bill of
1861, with its free selection before survey, and certain
democratic proposals the Premier managed to retain
Ins position until October, 1863, when an adverse vote
sent him again out of power.
The collapse of the Cowper Ministry was brought
about upon the question of finance. They had de-
feated by a majority of 44 to 18 a vote of censure pro-
posed by Mr. Martin in reference to the police and the
administration of justice- On September 13, 1863,
Mr. Smart, the new Treasurer, announced in his finan-
cial statement that he expected a deficit of £439,000
at the end of the year, instead of a surplus of £55,000
upon which his predecessor, Mr. Weekes, had counted ;
and he proposed to levy stamp duties, new duties on
rice, salt, soap, &c., and increased duties on wine,
beer and coffee- Mr. Cowper, however, maintained
that the finances were in a prosperous condition. On
the next day, when the House went into Committee of
Ways and Means, Mr- Egan moved, on the Treasurer’s
motion that the sum of £1,458 be granted for the
service of her Majesty, an amendment declaring that
the financial conditions of the country, as shown by
the ways and means, was unsatisfactory. The amend-
ment, after a debate extending over seven evenings,
was negatived by 27 to 26 ; but the House divided
evenly upon the original motion, and Mr. Wisdom,
the Chairman of Committees, gave his casting vote
with the noes. The effect of this was to stop Supply,
and the resignation of the Ministry was sent in the day
following. Mr. James Martin undertook the formation
of a Ministry, which he constituted as follows
Jas. Martin, Premier and Attorney-General ; Wm.
Forster, Colonial Secretary ; Geoffrey Eagar, Colonial
Treasurer ; Peter Faucett, Solicitor-General ; John
Bowie Wilson, Secretary for Lands ; Arthur T. Holroyd,
Secretary for Public Works ; and John Hubert Plunkett,
Representative of Government in the Legislative
Council.
The Martin-Forster Administration lasted till Feb-
ruary, 1865- At the opening of the session, on October
18, 1864, Mr. Cowper moved, as an amendment upon
the address a series of resolutions expressing regret
that the House had been called together so late ; that
during the recess Ministers should not have carried out
measures affecting the public revenue and commercial
interests without Parliamentary sanction, and declar-
ing that in consequence of dissatisfaction with the
conduct of the Government the Ministry did not possess
the confidence of the House. The debate was warm
and prolonged. The extension of the recess while the
deficit was increasing was one great subject of com-
plaint, but more feeling had been excited by the issue
of a new Commission of the Peace, omitting many
names of former magistrates. It was not until Novem-
ber 2nd that the House came to a division, but then
the amendment was carried by 36 to 29 The Premier,
after a few days, announced that the House would be
dissolved, and held that the Government was entitled
to supply for three or six months- This claim was
denied by Mr. Cowper, Mr. Robertson and Mr. Parkes,
and the House adjourned on November 8, to be pro-
rogued on the following day, and dissolved on the 10th.
Of course at the general election the action of the
Government in the issue of the new commission had
its influence ; and the views of the Premier brought up
the question of protection—which he supported —and
freetrade under circumstances that were rendering
fiscal legislation of some sort necessary. The new
House met on January 24, 1865, but the speech was
not read until the 27th- It showed, amongst other
things, that whilst the Cowper Ministry had left a
deficit of £390,000, an additional deficit of £413,000
had been erected in 1864. In the course of the debate
it became known that Mr Forster had resigned office
in consequence of the Governor having declined to
nominate two gentlemen as additional members of the
Legislative Council- An amendment by Mr Macpherson
affirming that the House would withhold support
from any Government that failed to make provision
for State aid to religion, was negatived by 50 to 6-
Mr. Cowper then moved an amendment declaring that
the Government did not possess the confidence of the
House and the country. After a short reply from
Mr. Martin, the amendment was carried by 42 to 14,
and on January 31, 1865, the resignation of the Ministry
was announced. This defeat was the direct result of
the general election, the course of which had been
affected by the unpopularity of the Ministry, its failure
to accomplish its special task of squaring the finances,
and its premature attempt to bring in protection.
Mr Cowper succeeded to the administration of
the affairs of the country, retaining office till January
21, 1866, and having in his Ministry the following
colleagues :—Saul Samuel, Colonial Treasurer ; John
Bayley Darvall, Attorney-General ; John F. Hargrave,
Solicitor-General ; John Robertson, Secretary for Lands ;
Win- M. Arnold, Secretary for Public Works ; Jas- A.
Cunneen, Postmaster-General- But there were many
changes in the composition of this Government during
its term of official life—two in the office of Colonial
Treasurer; one (Mi. J. H Plunkett) in that of the
Attorney-General ; two (Mr. W. M- Arnold and Mr.
John Robertson) in the Lands, and one (Mr. T. W
Smart) in the Works Department ; besides the creation
of a new Minister, the Postmaster-General One of
these changes brought about Mr. Cowper’s defeat.
Starting with Mr. Smart as Colonial Treasurer, and
afterwards taking Mr. Samuel in his place, Mr Cowper,
in January, 1866, induced Mr- Marshall Burdekin to
accept office, and moved “ That Mr. Burdekin’s sear
be declared vacant in consequence of his having ac-
cepted the Colonial Treasurership.” Mr. Parkes moved
as an amendment, “ That the House in declaring Mr.
Burdekin’s seat vacant expresses its strong disapproval
of the appointment of the honourable member to the
office.” This was carried by 25 for, 10 against. Mr.
Cowper then advised his Excellency to dissolve the
House, but the Governor refused to do so, and the
Ministry resigned-


The short tenure of office held by most of the
Governments had evidently taught the politicians the
lesson of combination, for the fourth Cowper Ministry
was succeeded by a Martin-Parkes combination, the
Ministerial portfolios being distributed as follows :
James Martin, Q C., Premier and Attorney-General ;
Henry Parkes (succeeded by Joseph Docker), Colonial
Secretary ; Geoffrey Eagar, Colonial Treasurer ; John
B. Wilson, Secretary for Lands ; James Byrnes, Secre-
tary for Public Works ; R- M : . Isaacs, Solicitor-General ;
Joseph Docker (succeeded by A. A. P. Tighe), Post-
master-General- The Ministry took office on January
22, 1866, and held it until October 26, 1868. Mr.
Parkes, however, resigned on the 17th of the previous
month. This resignation, which took place during a
recess, was founded upon the dismissal of Mr- Duncan,
Collector of Customs, and a quarrel with the Colonial
Treasurer about it- On the retirement of Mr- Parkes
from the Colonial Secretaryship, Mr. Docker, sitting in
Premier, to one in which, with Mr. Martin as Premier and
Mr. Docker as Colonial Secretary, reactionary principles
preponderated.
Mr. Robertson formed a combination with Mr.
Forster on October 27, 1868, and held office till January
12, 1870, when Mr Robertson, on private grounds,
resigned. Holding the Premiership and Colonial Secre-
taryship, his colleague, Mr. Forster, took the portfolio
of Lands, the other members of the Ministerial team
being :—Mr. Saul Samuel, Colonial Treasurer ; Mr. John
Sutherland, Secretary for Public Works ; Sir Win. N-
Manning, Q-C-, Attorney-General ; Mr. J. F. Josephson
(succeeded by Mr. Julian E. Salomons), Solicitor-Gene-
ral ; Mr. D. Egan, Postmaster General ; and Mr. Robert
Owen, Representative of the Government in the Legis-
lative Council. The Ministry encountered persistent
opposition from the beginning. Mr. Parkes met it at
the outset by a motion of want of confidence. This,
after a protracted debate, by bitter displays of
PARLIAMENT HOUSE IN 1884.
the Upper House, was appointed to that office- The
session opened on October 13th, 1868, and upon the
motion for the adoption of the address-in-reply,
Mr- Robertson moved the addition of the following
words, “ That the House regretted that the Governor
had not called to his Council gentlemen having the
confidence of Parliament when Mr. Parkes gave in his
resignation.” After the debate the House divided
evenly, the Speaker (the Hon- W- M- Arnold, who suc-
ceeded the Hon. John Hay in 1865, who in turn suc-
ceeded the Hon. T. A- Murray, the successor of the
Hon. 1). Cooper in October, 1862), giving his casting
vote with the “ayes.” The address was adopted,
and the House adjourned. The Ministry advised a
dissolution, but the Governor declined to grant one,
and Mr. Martin therefore resigned. It was held in the
House that the retirement of Mr. Parkes had changed
the character of the Ministry from a coalition one, in
which Mr. Parkes had been an equipoise to the
personal feeling, wasjrejected by 29 to 25. In the
session of 1869 the opposition came to a head. Mem-
bers declined to go into a consideration ot the esti-
mates, which contained proposals for retrenchment.
The Ministry asked for two months’ supply, but svas
refused, and ultimately, on November 15, 1869. the
House was dissolved. During the election Mr. Cowper,
who had before temporarily retired from public life,
was returned for his old metropolitan electorate, and
took Mr. Robertson’s place at the head of the Ad-
ministration, the Ministry in other respects being the
same as the late one- But in August, 1870, Mr. Robert-
son succeeded Mr. Forster as Secretary for Lands.
On November 30 the Treasurer moved the suspension
ol the standing orders to enable him to pass a Bill to
continue the Stamp Duties Act lest it should lapse-
The motion was rejected by 26 to 22, and the follow-
ing day Mr. Cowper asked the House to adjourn to
enable the Ministry to consider the position- On


December 6th Mr. Robertson made the twofold an-
nouncement that the Ministry had determined to
resign, and that Mr. Cowper had accepted the office of
Agent-General in London.
io the surprise of everyone the late coalition was
succeeded by another between Sir James Martin and
Mr. John Robertson, the latter to administer the office
ol Colonial Secretary, whilst to his Primerial duties
Sir James Martin undertook those of the Attorney-
General’s department. Mr. G. W. Lord was Colonial
Treasurer ; the Hon. J. B. Wilson, Secretary for Lands ;
Mr. Jas. Byrnes, Secretary for Public Works ; Mr. W. C.
Windeyer, Solicitor-General ; and Mr J. Docker, Post-
master-General. In the session of 1871 the Govern-
ment got their Navigation Bill, establishing a Marine
Board for the colony, through the Council without any
serious alterations, and things looked well for a long
term of office. Two months later, when the Govern-
ment had brought the negotiations with Victoria re-
this was carried by 38 to 19. On February 2 the House
was prorogued, and on the 3rd it was dissolved. The
new Ho use met on April 30th, 1872. On the following
day, when the Governor’s speech had been read, it was
announced that the Ministry had resigned on April 26,
and only hold office for the purpose of obtaining sup-
plies to enable the Government to carry on during the
Ministerial elections. Mr. Forster was sent for, and
failing to form a Ministry, Mr. Parkes succeeded to
power, for the first time, choosing for his colleagues :
Mr. William R. Piddington (succeeded by Mr. G. A.
Lloyd), as Colonial Treasurer ; Mr. J. S. Farnell, Sec-
retary for Lands ; Mr. R. P. Abbott, Secretary for
Mines ; Mr. John Sutherland, Secretary for Public
Works ; Mr. Ed. Butler (followed by Mr. J. G- L. Innes),
Attorney-General ; Mr. G. W Allen, Minister of Justice
and Public Instruction ; Mr. Joseph G- L. Innes, Soli-
citor-General : Mr. G. A. Lloyd (succeeded by Mr. Saul
Samuel, C M.G.,) Postmaster-General ; and Mr. Saul
PARLIAMENT HOUSE—SHOWING PROPOSED ALTERATIONS.
specting border duties to a close, the political outlook
became entirelv altered. On January 24, 1872, Mr.
_ v # */
Forster moved a resolution affirming “ that the terms
offered by the Government of Victoria for the settle-
ment of the border duties question were reasonable
and ought to have been accepted, and that immediate
steps be taken to obviate the collection of such duties.”
After two evenings’ debate the resolution was carried
by 27 to 23, Messrs- Parkes, Sutherland and Farnell
voting with Mr. Forster. On the 30th Sir James Martin
stated that the Government had accepted advice to
dissolve the House, and the Treasurer gave notice of
a three months’ Supply Bill to be passed through all
its stages in a day Mr. Parkes denied that the ques-
tion was one for a dissolution, and held that it would
be the duty of the House to refuse Supply. On the
Treasurer’s motion to suspend the Standing Orders,
Mr. Piddington moved as an amendment certain reso-
lutions pressing the Government not to dissolve, and
Samuel, Vice-President of the Executive Council.
The Premier commanded a good working majority,
and during the two years and nine months that he was
in office managed, in the teeth of a formidable and
factious opposition, to pass some useful and much-
needed legislation, including a comprehensive Mining
Act, the Matrimonial Causes Act. the Friendly Socie-
ties Act and the Companies Act. But the selection of
Sir James Martin, instead of the Attorney-General, for
the Chief Justiceship brought an influential section of
the community into conflict with the Government,
and when, in addition, the Ministers, in February, 1875,
sanctioned the release of the notorious bushranger,
Gardiner, their fate was sealed.
This turn in the political wheel brought Mr.
Robertson once more to the head of affairs, and he
formed his third Cabinet as follows :—John Robertson,
Premier and Colonial Secretary ; Wm. Forster (suc-
ceeded by Alex. Stuart), Colonial Treasurer ; J. Docker,


Minister of Justice and Public Instruction ; Thos.
Garrett (succeeded by E. A. Baker), Secretary for
Lands ; John Lackey, Secretary for Public Works ;
W. B. Dailey, Attorney-General ; John Lucas, Secretary
for Mines ; John F. Burns, Postmaster-General. The
Ministry held office for about two years, and then had
to hand over administration to the Opposition through
the Premier, it was alleged, misleading the House.
On March 6th. 1877, Mr. Parkes moved. “ That the
retention of office by Ministers after having suffered
within nine days four several defeats on motions ex-
pressive of condemnation and want of confidence, is
subversive to the principles of the constitution.” The
motion was carried by ayes 31, noes 28- The Premier
communicated with the Governor, and on meeting the
Assembly again implied that his Excellency had granted
a dissolution unconditionally. He then applied for
Supply. In the ensuing debate it was disclosed that
the Governor would duly consent to dissolution con-
ditional upon Supply being granted. This the Assem-
bly now emphatically refused, and the Premier had to
make way for Mr. Parkes, who took into his second
Ministry ; —Mr. W. R. Piddington, Colonial Treasurer ;
SIR CHAS. NICHOLSON, BART , M.D.
Member of the first Legislative Council, 1843.
Mr. F- B. Suttor, Minister of Justice and Public In-
struction ; Mr. R. Driver, Secretary for Lands ; Mr. Jas.
Hoskins, Secretary for Public Works ; Mr. W. C. Win-
deyer. Attorney-General ; Mr. G. A Lloyd, Secretary
for Mines ; Mr. Saul Samuel, C.M.G., Postmaster-
General.
The Government assumed responsibility on March
22, 1877, and was out of harness again in the middle
of the following August, owing to an opinion given by
the Attorney-General on the interpretation of the 31st
clause of the Lands Amendment Act of 1875. This
opinion, the Opposition held, increased the difficulties
of selection. Mr. Garrett moved, ‘ ‘ That in the opinion
of the House the opinion given by the Attorney-General
as to the meaning of the 31st clause of the Lands
Amendment Act of 1875 is not in accordance with either
the spirit or the meaning of the law, and should not be
acted on in its administration.” An appeal to the
country was imminent. The House had become de-
moralised, and the question was only debated from an
electioneering standpoint. Eventually the motion was
carried by 22 to 20. Mr. Parkes attempted to carry on
as if nothing had happened ; Sir John Robertson moved
the adjournment of the House, and his motion was
adopted. The old see-saw of politics still continued—
Parkes-Robertson, Robertson-Parkes with Sir John
now in the ascendancy. For his fourth Cabinet he
took Mr. W A. Long as Colonial Treasurer ; Mr. John
Lackey, Minister of Justice and Public Instruction ;
Mr. Thos. Garrett (succeeded by Mr E A. Baker),
Secretary for Lands ; Mr. Ed Coombes, Secretary for
Public Works ; Mr. W B. Dailey, Attorney-General ;
Mr. E. A- Baker (followed by Mr. A. H- Jacob). Secre-
tary for Mines ; Mr. John Davies, Postmaster-General.
Parliament was dissolved on October 12, 1877 ; the
general elections ensued, and when Sir John met the
new House, as an amendment to the address-in-reply,
Mr. Farnell moved a vote of want of confidence, which
was carried by 33 to 31.
Mr Farnell took up the reins of government with
an entirely new team, his Cabinet being formed as fol-
lows:—J. S. Farnell, Premier and Secretary for Lands ;
M. Fitzpatrick. Colonial Secretary ; H- E- Cohen,
Colonial Treasurer ; Joseph Leary, Minister of Justice
and Public Instruction ; John Sutherland, Secretary for
Public Works ; Wm John Foster, Attorney-General ;
W. H. Suttor, Secretary for Mines ; J- F. Burns, Post-
master-General ; John Marks, M.L-C-, representative
of the Government in the Legislative Council- For one
year the Ministry enjoyed the sweets of office ; then,
being defeated on Mr. Farnell’s Crown Lands Bill,
thev resigned- Sir John Robertson was sent for, and,
after some delay, he announced that Messrs. Watson,
Baker, Lackey, Jacob, Dailey, Davies and Sir Patrick
Jennings would be his colleagues in the Cabinet- Two
days afterwards Sir John not only withdrew from the
responsibility of administration, but resigned his seat
in Parliament. The Governor requested Mr. Farnell
to withdraw his resignation and resume office- He
did so and found the temper of the House antagonistic.
A motion of Mr. Parkes, “ That the House declines to
proceed with public business while the present Minis-
ters are allowed to remain in office,” was carried bv
30 to 21, and Mr. Farnell had to retire from the Minis-
terial benches.
The three last Governments had not lasted alto-
gether more than one year and nine months, a proof
that the matter of Premier-making had fallen into the
hands of the rank and file, who, wearying of the see-
sawing of the veteran politicians, had supported the
Farnell Ministry as a change- This kicking over the
traces alarmed the old leaders, and they now united
their forces, forming the Parkes-Robertson coalition
which lasted from December 21, 1878, to January 2,
1883. Sir Henry Parkes was Colonial Secretary, whilst
Sir John Robertson, the Vice-President of the Execu-
tive Council, represented the Government in the Upper
House- The other portfolios were held as follow
F. B. Suttor, Minister of Justice and Public Instruction ;
James Watson, Colonial Treasurer ; Wm. C. Windever,
Attorney-General ; Jas. Hoskins, Secretary for Lands ;
John Lackey, Secretary for Public Works ; Saul
Samuel, Postmaster-General ; E- A. Baker, Secretary
for Mines. After three strenuous sessions, in the last
of which the Premier’s Education Bill became law.
Sir Henry Parkes made a trip to England. Returning


in 1882, he met Parliament later in the year- Mean-
while there had been created a great deal of bad feeling
between squatters and selectors, and both were
vehement in their demands for land reform- Sir
Henry Parkes was not an adept on the subject, and
therefore left it to Sir John Robertson, the author of
the Land Act of 1861, who never could see imper-
fections in his creation. Sir John introduced his
amending Land Bill on November 8, 1882, and in the
debate at first the Government seemed secure- The
leader of the Opposition, however, made a strong
speech, and surprised the House by winding up with
a series of resolutions condemning free selection before
survey, providing for the division of the colony into
two or more districts, for dividing runs into leasehold
and resumed areas, reducing deposits for selections to
2s. an acre ; establishing local land boards, and grant-
ing conditional leases to selectors- The resolutions
appealed to both squatters and selectors, and the pro-
gramme was welcomed by both press and the public.
SIR HENRY PARKES.
Their sentiments found vent in representatives in
Parliament, who, one by one, went over to the Oppo-
sition, then led by Sir Alexander Stuart. After a
debate extending over three nights the Parkes-Robert-
son Government were defeated by 43 to 33 votes.
The House was at once adjourned, and dissolved on
November 23, 1882- Then ensued one of the most
exciting elections ever held in New South Wales, in
wffiich the Parkes-Robertson party were badly beaten,
several of their Ministers defeated, and a seat only se-
cured for Sir Henry Parkes himself with great diffi-
culty. There was a frequent shuffling of portfolios
during the career of this Ministry. Mr. F. M. Darley,
Q.C., succeeded Sir John Robertson as Vice-President of
the Executive Council and Representative in the Upper
House ; Sir John took over the portfolio of Minister of
Public Instruction from Mr. F. B. Suttor, the latter
being translated to the Department of Justice ; in this
administration Mr. Suttor was followed, alternately,
by Sir J G. L Innes and Mr. Win. J. Foster; Mr.
Robert Wisdom replaced Mr. W. C. Windeyer as Attor-
ney-General ; and Sir John Robertson succeeded Mr.
Jas. Hoskins as Secretary for Lands ; on the retirement
of Mr. Saul Samuel, Mr. F. B Suttor and Mr. S. C.
Brown were in turn Postmaster-General ; and lastly,
Dr. Ren wick took up the Mines portfolio when Mr-
Baker’s administration of that department was brought
to a close-
The Land Law Reform Cabinet —which included
Sir Alex Stuart (Colonial Secretary), Mr. G R Dibbs
(Colonial Treasurer), Mr- G. H- Reid, succeeded by
Mr. W- J. Trickett (Minister of Public Instruction),
Mr- H E Cohen (Minister of Justice), Mr. W. B. Dailey,
Q C. (Attorney-General), Mr. J. S. Parnell (Secretary
for Lands), Mr H- Copeland, succeeded by Mr. F. A.
Wright (Secretary for Public Works), Mr. F. A. Wright,
succeeded by MrW. J. Trickett, and later on by Mr. Jas.
Norton (Postmaster-General), Mr. J. P. Abbott (Sec-
retary for Mines), and Sir Patrick A. Jennings (Vice-
President of the Executive Council) —went into office on
January 6, 1883. The team was a strong one, and
they had no difficulty in carrying through the Legis-
lature a comprehensive Land Act, based on the Stuart
resolutions and skilfully drafted on suggestions by
experts, both inside and outside the House Sickness
compelled Sir Alex. Stuart to give up active command,
and Mr, Dailey as Acting-Premier, brought further
strength to the Ministry by despatching a contingent
to the Soudan to fight with the British troops. Sir
Henry Parkes offered strenuous opposition to the
expedition, but, finding his protests made little im-
pression upon the public, he went off again to England,
and Sir John Robertson became leader of the Oppo-
sition in Parliament- 111 health compelled Sir Alex.
Stuart to resign on October 7, 1885, and Mr. Dibbs
succeeded to the Premiership, selecting as his col-
leagues : Sir Patrick Jennings (Colonial Secretary),
Mr. W. J. Trickett (Minister of Public Instruction),
Jas. Squire Farnell, M-L.C., succeeded by Mr. Tom
Slattery (Minister of Justice), Mr. John H. Want
(Attorney-General), Mr. J. P. Abbott (Secretary for
Lands), Mr. H- S'. Badgery, succeeded by Mr. W- J-
Lyne (Secretary for Public Works), Mr. John See
(Postmaster-General), and Mr. F. A. Wright, succeeded
by Mr Geo. Thornton. M-L.C. (Secretary for Mines).
Mr. Dibbs’ reign as head of the Government was the
shortest on record —just two days- On October 9 he
was Premier; on October 11th Sir Patrick Jennings
relieved him of the position, and Mr. Dibbs had to
content himself with the Treasurership It was said
that his party, fearing his headstrong and risky politics,
endeavoured to restrain him by putting another over
his head ; but events soon proved that it would have
been better to let him remain in the Premiership, for
he really acted as the head of the Ministry. Finding
their majority in Parliament a bare one, the Govern-
ment immediately appealed to the country. Sir Henry
Parkes, holding out prospects of the electors securing
their long-talked-about North Shore bridge, succeeded
in defeating Mr. Dibbs for St. Leonards, and the latter
had to fall back upon the Murrumbidgee for a seat.
When the twelfth Parliament met it was seen that the
Government had a very slender majority. Sir John
Robertson tabled a motion of censure, which was only
defeated by the votes of two new members. No
Government could carry on under such circumstances
in those days, and no effort was made to do so. As
soon as Mr. Dibbs had delivered his financial statement
the Government resigned, and Sir John Robertson was
sent for on December 22, 1885.


Before the meeting of Parliament a harbour picnic
was given to his supporters by Sir John Robertson.
Sir Henry Parkes attended, and, in proposing the
health of their host, said as Sir John had borne the
brunt of the fight against the Stuart Government
whilst Sir Henry was at home, it was his turn to be-
come Premier. In the face of this Sir John naturally
expected Sir Henry Parkes to join him, but the latter
declined, and the Robertson Cabinet was formed of
Sir John Robertson, Premier and Colonial Secretary ;
Mr. John F. Burns, Colonial Treasurer ; Mr. James H.
Young, Minister of Public Instruction ; Mr. L F. Hey-
don, Minister of Justice ; Mr. G. B. Simpson, M L G,
Attorney-General (Representative of the Government
in the Upper House) ; Gerald Spring, Secretary for
Lands; Jacob Garrard, Secretary for Public Works;
Daniel O’Connor, Postmaster-General ; and Mr. R. M.
aughan, Secretary for Mines- It was not long ere
trouble arose. On supplies being asked for the new
Administration Mr. J. P. Abbott took the unprece-
dented course of opposing the motion ; but this tactical
error aroused so much indignation that the vote was
easily carried On the House reassembling in Feb-
ruary, 1886, Sir John found himself in almost as bad a
predicament regarding the Government majority as his
predecessors had been ; and he was warned by one of
his whips that in the coming struggle Sir Henry
Parkes, with certain of his supporters, could not be
relied upon. He, chivalrous and stanch himself,
discredited the rumour, but it proved true notwith-
standing, for on a vote of want of confidence being
tabled by Mr* J. P. Garvan, the Opposition were joined
in their efforts to overthrow Sir John by Sir Henry
Parkes and his following. The next day Sir John
Robertson interviewed the Governor, Lord Carrington,
about a dissolution. “ Were you in my place would
you grant one under the circumstances ? ” inquired
his Excellency. “ No, I would not,” was honest Sir
John’s blunt reply, and then Sir Patrick Jennings,
leader of the Opposition, was called upon to form an
Administration. He endeavoured to coalesce with the
ex-Premier, and would have done so but for a difficulty
arising over the position of Attorney-General. For
this there were, two aspirants—Mr. G. B. Simpson,
who had already held office with Sir John Robertson,
and Mr. J. H. W ant.. Sir John was proverbial for
attachment to his friends, and as he would not abandon
Mr. Simpson, and as the Dibbs-Jennings party insisted
on having Mr. Want, the coalition suddenly was aban-
doned. Sir Patrick Jennings then formed a com-
posite and fairly strong Administration, which in-
cluded Mr. G. R. Dibbs (Colonial Secretary), Dr. A.
Renwick (Minister of Public Instruction), Mr J. P.
Garvan (Minister of Justice), Mr. J. H Want (Attorney-
General), Mr. Henry Copeland (Secretary of Lands),
Mr. Wm J. Lyne (Secretary for Public Works), Mr.
F. B. Suttor (Postmaster-General), Mr. Jas. Fletcher
(Secretary for Mines), and Dr. C, K. Mackellar (Repre-
sentative of the Government in the Legislative Council).
They had not been long in office before it was found
necessary to impose ad valorem duties, a policy which
led to more scientific stonewalling than any which has
been developed before an Australian Parliament 111
health compelled Sir John Robertson to seek retire-
ment, and Parliament, at the instigation of Sir Patrick
Jennings, voted him a grant of £lO,OOO. Sir Henry
Parkes took command of the “outs ” and it was not
long before he was “in holts ” with the Government
over the New Hebrides question, implying the Ministry
had not attempted to conserve the rights of British
subjects Defeated in this attempt, he next concen-
trated his forces on the ad valorem- duties, and, well
supported by the metropolitan press, in a very short
time he had aroused an extraordinary tempest of
passion over this impost. Scenes hardly excelled in
Continental Legislatures were of nightly occurrence,
and fights were frequent and free. But on the Minis-
terial benches were strong-willed men, and in spite of
this stonewalling and other Opposition tactics, the
Government won a victory on the ad valorem question
This portended a long tenure of power, but internal
dissensions soon broke the party up Sir Patrick
Jennings, a cultured and easy-going politician, could
not brook the dictatorial tone of the masterful Dibbs ;
so, much to the astonishment of his colleagues, early
in January, 1887, on the eve of the general election, he
tendered his resignation and advised that Sir Henry
Parkes be sent for. This advice was accepted, and
Sir Henry formed the following Ministry : —Premier
and Colonial Secretary, Sir Henry Parkes ; Colonial
Treasurer, J. F. Burns ; Minister of Public Instruction,
Jas. Inglis ; Minister of Justice, Wm. Clarke; Attorney-
General, W. J. Foster, (succeeded by B, R Wise and
G. B. Simpson, QC.) ; Secretary for Lands, T. Garrett,
(succeeded by Sir H. Parkes and J. N. Brunker) ; Sec-
retary for Public Works, J. Sutherland ; Postmaster-
General, C- J. Roberts ; Secretary for Mines, F Abigail ;
Vice-President of the Executive Council, J. E. Salo-
mons, ML C- Issuing his manifesto on Anniversary
SIR JULIAN SALOMONS.
Day, the Premier aroused the country against the
attempt of the Opposition “ to sneak in protection,”
as he called it, and made the fight in the electorates,
Freetrade v■ Protection. He was returned to power
with a strong freetrade following behind him; but,
notwithstanding this, little was done to interfere with
the alleged semi-protective policy of his predecessors.
This fact, later on, gave an opening to Mr. G. H. Reid,
which he did not fail to avail of. Apparently safe in


their seats, the Ministry did not last very long. The
first attack on the Government, caused by rumours
that they intended to sell the tramways, proved harm-
less, as it could not be shown that any such proposal
had ever been submitted. Then a Select Committee,
appointed at the instigation of the Opposition, to
inquire into certain charges that roads were being
made on private estates by Government men, dis-
covered that on private land, where Hornsby now
stands, nine miles of roads had been so constructed,
and that on the Holt-Sutherland Estate there were
more than forty miles of roads made in like manner.
The work had been carried out by the Casual Labour
Board, and as several members of the Government
had an interest in this last estate, the Premier con-
sidered it the best policy to ride for a fall- Under a
motion for adjournment, Mr. Want, a Government
supporter, attacked the appointment of Mr. Fehon as
a Railway Commissioner, and, not being satisfied with
the Minister’s explanation, he called for a division.
No effort was made to whip up the supporters of the
Government, and they were beaten by 37 to 33, in a
House of 1-fl members-
Mr. Want would not put off a trip to Japan to
become Premier, so on Mr. George Dibbs being sent
for, the following Cabinet was formed : —Colonial
Secretary, G-„ R. Dibbs ; Colonial Treasurer, J. P.
Garvan ; Minister of Public Instruction, T M Slattery ;
Attorney-General, E Barton, M.L.C. ; Secretary for
Lands, W- J. Lyne ; Secretary for Public Works, Jas.
Fletcher ; Postmaster-General. H. Clarke ; Secretary
for Mines, J. M. Chanter. Dissolving on January 19,
1889, the Premier met Parliament again on February
27 with a protectionist following, but two short of a
majority. Sir Henry Parkes moved a vote of censure,
which was passed, and he returned to power, free from
all scandals, with almost a brand new team, including
Wm. McMillan (Colonial Treasurer), J. H- Carruthers
(Minister of Public Instruction), A. J. Gould (Minister
of Justice), G- B Simpson, M.L C- (Attorney-General),
J. N. Brunker (Secretary for Lands), Bruce Smith,
succeeded by J. H. Young (Secretary for Public Works),
Daniel O’Connor (Postmaster-General), Sydney Smith
(Secretary for Mines), and W H Suttor, M L.C. (Vice-
President of the Executive Council). During the term
of this Parliament the Public Works Committee was
called into existence, payment of members was estab-
lished, a spirited public works policy was carried out,
and another Land Bill, amending the Act of 1884,
became law. The House was dissolved on June 6,
1891, and at the elections a Labour party slipped into
the political arena, capturing no less than 35 seats.
In the new Parliament the Labour members took their
seats on the Government cross' benches, and it soon
became evident that without their support the days
of the Parkes Ministry were numbered. In October,
1891, when the Minister for Mines introduced his Coal
Mines Regulation Bill, it was known that there was a
difference of opinion between Sir Henry and his col-
league over the compulsory eight-hour clause. The
Labourites joined forces with the rank and file of the
protectionists. Sir Henry took the extraordinary
course of intimating his opposition to his Minister’s
proposal. Mr. E Barton, although a protectionist,
endeavoured to save the Government and moved the
adjournment of the debate, but this, was defeated, and
Sir Henry resigned office —for the last time in' a long
and meritorious career.
This crisis brought in Mr. Dibbs once more, who
selected his Cabinet as follows ; —Premier and Colonial
Secretary, G. R. Dibbs ; Colonial Treasurer, John See ;
Attorney-General, Ed. Barton, Q.C.> succeeded by
C. G. Heydon ; Secretary for Lands, H. Copeland ;
Secretary for Works, Wm. J. Lyne ; Minister of Public
Instruction, F. B. Suttor ; Minister of Justice, R- E.
O’Connor, M.L.C'. ; Secretary for Mines and Agriculture,
T. M. Slattery ; Postmaster-General, John Kidd ; Vice-
President of the Executive Council, Sir J E- Salomons,
Q.C., succeeded by Dr. H. N. MacLaurin In this two
or three juniors, who had really won the battle for the
Premier, were left out ; and they formed a ring which
caused the Government a good deal of trouble, ulti-
mately compelling them to take back their Estimates.
Sir Henry Parkes played the part of Achilles in the hour
of his defeat. He sulked in his tent, and allowed
Mr. G H. Reid to be elected leader of the Opposition.
Sir George Dibbs brought in a measure to make the
franchise one man one vote and to reduce the number
of members from 141 to 125. In the banking crisis of
1893 he gained unlimited kudos for the prompt and
able manner in which he dealt with unquestionably
the severest financial disruption that had ever threat-
ened the credit of the colony. All storms in Parliament
his adroitness safely weathered, and these were not
a few, as in one session Mr. Reid moved no less than
thirteen direct or indirect votes of censure- But the
Premier suffered defeat at the polls in 1894- Never-
theless he determined to challenge a vote in the House.
Meanwhile the Governor, Sir R. Duff, refnsed to appoint
eleven nominees to the Upper House, and Sir George
immediately retired, withdrawing soon afterwards from
political life.
Mr. Reid came in with the following as members
of his Cabinet ;—Premier, Colonial Treasurer and
Solicitor-General, G. H. Reid ; Chief Secretary, J. N.
Brunker ; Attorney-General. G. H Simpson* Q C-,
succeeded by J- H. Want; Secretary for Lands, J. H.
Carruthers ; Secretary for Public Works, J. H. Young ;
Minister of Public Instruction and Minister of Labour
and Industry, Jacob Garrard ; Minister of Justice,
A. J. Gould ; Secretary for Mines and Agriculture, S.
Smith ; Postmaster-General. J. Cook ; Vice-President
of the Executive Council. W. H- Suttor. M L.C., suc-
ceeded by A. Garran, M-L-C- Strongly supported by
the Labour party, this Administration had a five years’
run of power, and did good work in the direction of
land reform and educational expansion- Freetrade,
too, was established as the fiscal policy of New South
Wales. The payment by the Government of £350 as
expenses to Mr. J. C. Neild—an accredited commis-
sioner to England to inquire into the question of old-
age pensions—after the Premier had intimated, before
Mr. Neild started, that ho was not to be paid for his
services, sent the Labour party into the Opposition
camp, and in the tempest the combined forces raised
the Ministers were swept off their feet
On September 14, 1899, Sir Win. Lyne formed his
first Administration. The fiscal question having been


relegated to the Federal Parliament, protectionists and
freetraders could work together. Hence in the new
Government were Mr. B. R. Wise (Attorney-General)
and Mr. J. L. Fegan (Minister or Mines) from the
freetrade camp, while all the other members were
protectionists, vi#. : —Sir Wm. Lyne, Premier and
Colonial Treasurer ; Mr. John See, Colonial Secretary ;
Mr. E. W. O’Sullivan, Secretary for Workte ; Mr. W- H.
Wood, Minister for Justice ; Mr, John Perry, Minister
for Education ; Mr. W. P Crick, Postmaster-General ;
Me. T. H. H assail. Secretary for Lands ; and Colonel
Mackay, Vice-President of the Executive Council and
representative in the Upper House- A vigorous and
progressive policy was adopted by the Lyne Govern-
ment, including many problems which had been wait-
ing for solution for years, and some of which —old-age
pensions, early closing, extension of eight-hours system,
navigation law, appeal court for railway men, and
miners’ accident relief fund—appealed strongly to the
Labour members. Loans were floated for large sums
in the Home market, and a spirited public works policy
initiated, which brought a support to the Adminis-
tration sufficient to defy all the powers of the Oppo-
sition The departure of Sir William Lyne to the
Federal political arena left a vacancy in the Premier-
ship, which was filled by Sir ’John' See, who had held
office thrice before.
Sir John See formed his Government on April 10.
1901, as follows : —Colonial Treasurer, T. Waddell ;
Attorney-General, B. R. Wise ; Secretary for Public
Works, E W- O’Sullivan ; Vice-President of the Exe-
cutive Council Sir F- B. Suttor, succeeded by Colonel
Mackay ; Minister of Public Instruction, J. Perry ;
Secretary for Lands. W. P. Crick ; Minister of Justice,,
R G. U. Fitzgerald ; Minister for Mines and Agricul-
ture, J. Kidd ,' Honorary Ministers, J. Hayes, W.
Bennett and J. L Fegan The Government lasted for
a period of three years and three months, during which
time the policy of borrowing was continued actively
for the furtherance of public works, until the dies irce
arrived and British financiers declared that the na-
tional credit could be stretched no further But before
this rude awakening to the financial state of affairs.
Parliament had expired by effluxion of time, and in
the appeal to' the country, on June 14, 1901. the
Government was returned by a large majority, which
enabled them to put through the Compulsory Arbi-
tration Bill, the Western Lands Act, Women’s Fran-
chise Act, Advance to Settlers’ Act, Shearers’ Accom-
modation Act, Reduction of Members Act, Workmen’s
Block Act, and other legislation, notwithstanding the
activity of the Opposition, about .30 strong- In the
middle of June. 1904, when the dissolution of Parliament
was imminent and there was a general cry for more
economy in the administration of national affairs, ill
health compelled Sir John See to retire from politics,
and his Colonial Treasurer was sent for. Mr Waddell
formed an Administration as follows :—Attorney-Gene-
ral, J. C. Gannon ; Colonial Secretary, Mr. John Perry ;
Secretary for Lands, Mr. E W- O’Sullivan ; Minister
for Public Instruction, J. L Fegan ; Secretary for
Mines, J. Kidd ; Secretary for Works, W- Bennett ;
Vice-President of the Executive Council, Colonel
Mackay.
The elections, which took place on August 6, 1904,
gave the Opposition, or “Reform” party, a clear
majority of one, there being besides several “inde-
pendents.” whose leanings were antagonistic to the
Government. The Secretary for Mines, Mr. Kidd, had
failed to hold his seat, so Mr. Waddell decided to meet
Parliament, obtain supplies for his session, and then
resign- This course was carried out ; the Waddell
Ministry closed a brief career of two months and four-
teen days on August 29, 1904, and made way for a
Government formed by Mr- J. H- Carruthers, the
leader of the Opposition, who is still in power. For
his colleagues the Premier selected Mr. J. A. Hogue
(Colonial Secretary), Mr. C- G- Wade (Attorney-General
and Minister for justice), Mr. J. Ashton (Secretary for
Lands), Mr C- A. Lee (Secretary for Public Works),
Mr. B. B- O’Conor (Minister of Public Instruction and
Minister for Labour and Industry), Mr. S. W. Moore,
(Secretary for Mines and Agriculture), Mr- J, Hughes,
M.L C., Vice-President of the Executive Council ; and
W. T. Dick and J. N. Brunker, M.L.C-, without port-
folios- The ex-Ministerialists suffered so much in
numbers at the polls that in the new Parliament they
had to relinquish their constitutional rights to the
Labour party, who, for the first time in their history,
found themselves on the Opposition benches
Under the Carruthers Administration diverse and
potent additions have been made to the Statute Book ;
and the twentieth Parliament of New South Wales
will be noted in our political history for a record of
legislative accomplishments truly remarkable. Tins
embraces the various stages of the Land Commissions,
appointed to inquire into the administration of the
Lands Department, including the exceptional proceed-
ing of recording a resolution of ineligibility for mem-
bership against a representative who was a Minister of
the Crown ; the preliminaries, by special Act, for the
cancellation of Government contracts entered into
with certain improvement lessees ; the cancellation,
also by special Act, of the contract entered into with
the Railway Commissioners ; and the passing of some
admirable legislation, including, among other measures,
the Local Government Extension Bill, the Mining Bill’
the Gaming and Betting Houses Bill, the Electoral Bill
(abolishing electoral rights), the North Coast Railway
Bill, the Barren Jack Irrigation Scheme Bill, the
Friendly Societies Bill, the Neglected Children and
Juvenile Offenders Bill, the Liquor Amendment Bill,
and the Closer Settlement Bill.


Admiral Sir HARRY HOLDSWORTH RAWSON, G.C.B.


72Tt DMIRAL SIR HARRY
o£|l| HOLDSWORTH RAW-
SON, G.C.8., Governor of
the State of New South
Wales and its dependen-
cies, is the son of the late Christopher
Rawson, Esq., of Petersfield, Surrey,
and was born on sth November, 1843.
He received his education at Marl-
borough College, and entered the
British navy as a cadet in 1857 and
sailed one month after in H.M.S.
“ Princess Charlotte ” for China.
Appointed to H.M.S. “Calcutta” in
1858. He served at the taking of
the Peiho forts and capture of Tient-
sin. Joining the “ Encounter,” Cap-
tain Roderick Dew, in 1859, he
served in iB6O as his aide-de-camp
at taking of Peiho forts, battle of
Palikas and taking of Pekin, also in
1862-3, against the Chingmaos in
the Ningpo district, at the taking of
the cities of Ningpo, Tsikie, Yuyao
and Eungwha, taking part in every
engagement, and on one occasion he
was severely wounded. For three
months he was in command of 1,300
Chinese troops- mobilised for the
defence of Ningpo against the rebels.
He was several times mentioned in
despatches, and at the conclusion of
the war he received the Chinese
medal with three clasps. During the
time his ship was carrying on opera-
tions in the Shanghai River Sir
Harry Rawson jumped overboard at
night and rescued the life of a
marine, for which action he received
the thanks of his captain on the
quarter-deck. Promoted to Lieuten-
ant in 1863 and joined H.M.S.
“ Vulcan,” returning to England in
1865. Went through gunnery
course on board PI.M.S. “ Excellent ”
and appointed First and Gunnery
Lieutenant in 1867 to H.M.S.
“ Bellerophon,” to the Royal yacht
in 1870, and promoted to Com-
mander in 1871. While in the
Queen’s yacht received the Humane
Society’s Silver Medal and Civic
Cross of Belgium, second class, for
saving life in the River Scheldt at
Antwerp. In 1871 appointed as
Commander to H.M.S. “ Hercules,”
and served in her till 1875, first in
Channel squadron and afterwards as
flagship in the Mediterranean.
Promoted to Captain in 1877. Fie
served as F'lag Captain in H.M.S.
“ Minotaur.” During his occupancy
of that position in 1878 he received
instructions to inquire into and re-
port upon the capabilities of defence,
&c., of the Suez Canal. Upon the
completion of this important work he
received the thanks of the Admiralty.
Also, while connected with the
Mediterranean fleet as commander it
devolved upon Sir H. Rawson to
hoist the British flag at Nicosia, the
capital of Cyprus, when that im-
portant island was annexed to the
British Crown. For a short time he
acted as military commandant of
that place. In 1881-2 employed on
the Awards, Punishments and Cer-
tificate Committee. Upon the out-
break of hostilities in Egypt in 1882
as principal transport officer Sir H.
Rawson rendered important service.
Upon the termination of the Egyp-
tian war he received the C. 8., and
was also decorated with medal, clasp
and the Osmanieh of the third class.
From January 7, 1883 —August, 1885
—served as Flag Captain in H.M.S.
“ Alexandria,” on the Mediterranean
station, Captain of the Steam Reserve,
Devonport, 1885-8, and as member of
the committee on the new Manoeu-
vring Signal Book. Commanded
H.M.S. “Warspite” in 1888
manoeuvres and H.M.S. “ Benbow ”
in Mediterranean from 1888 to
November, 1891. From August,
1890, to January, 1892, he had the
honour to act as an aide-de-camp of
her late Majesty Queen Victoria. Pro-
moted to Rear-Admiral January, 1892,
served as member of the committee on
the International Code of Signals from
1892 to 1895 and as umpire in the naval
manoeuvres of 1894. I* l 1895 he was
appointed Commander-in-Chief of the
Cape of Good Hope and West Coast
of Africa Station. In August of that
year he took command of the expedi-
tion against M’baruk, and landing a
naval brigade, with the assistance of
sixty Soudanese and fifty Zanzibar
Askaris troops, he attacked and
captured M’wele, the stronghold of
the rebellious Arab chief. Upon the
return of the expedition Sir H.
Rawson received the African medal
with note on rim in commemoration
of the event. In 1896 he bombarded
the palace of the Sultan of Zanzibar,
which had been seized by a pretend-
er, for which service he received the
first-class brilliant star of Zanzibar
and promotion to the order of
Hamoudieh. In 1897 Sir H.
Rawson was entrusted with the
organisation and command of a
punitive naval expedition against
Benin city in order to avenge the
massacre of a political expedition
which had been sent thither. The
operations against Benin were emi-
nently satisfactory. Landing a com-
pany of marines and seamen from his
squadron, with men sent from
England, and assisted by a force of
Housas, he captured the city. For
this service he received the personal
recognition of her late Majesty and
the thanks of the Admiralty. He
was also awarded special clasp and
medal and decorated with the order
of K.C.B. (military). Sir H. Rawson
was appointed to the command of the
Channel squadron in December, 1898.
During a visit to Sardinia by his
squadron in 1898 he had the
honour to entertain their Majesties
the King and Queen of Italy on
board his flagship, H.M.S. “ Majestic,”
and also at Lisbon, the King and
Queen of Portugal. In igoi Sir H.
Rawson acted as president of the
Gibraltar committee, also as president
of committee on torpedo boat destroy-
ers. His appointment as Governor
of New South Wales —which gave
every satisfaction to the people
of the State—was received on Feb-
ruary 12, 1902, and he assumed office
May 27 of the same year, and in 1906
was made G.C.B. Sir Harry Raw-
son married in 1871 Florence Alice,
daughter of the late John Shaw,
Esq., of Arrowe Park, Cheshire
Lady Rawson accompanied Sir
Harry to New South Wales on his
appointment as Governor, and dur-
ing a residence of three years won
the affection and esteem of all classes
by her kindly disposition and readi-
ness to help any good work. She
was Patroness of the District Nurs-
ing Association, the women’s branch
of the British Empire League. In
the Sydney University Women’s
Society, Sydney Medical Mission,
Sydney Needlework Guild, she took
a kindly interest. The work in
which she was most interested was
the National Council of Women in
New South Wales, and when the
first congress was held in Sydney in
1904, gave a garden party at “ Cran-
brook,” the vice-regal residence, to
the members of the affiliated organi-
sations. Lady Rawson was also
President of the Council of the
Mothers’ Union, and often attended
the annual meeting and addressed
those present. During her short
residence in Australia there was
hardly an association or society that
did not receive her help in some
way. 11l health necessitated a visit
to England, and while on the return
voyage the sad news was received of
her death, which took place in the
Red Sea on Sunday, December 3,
1905.


Mon. Sir FRANCIS BATHURST
SUTTOR, K. 8., President of the
Legislative Council of New South
Wales, son of the late Mr. William
Henry Suttor, was born at Bathurst,
New South Wales, in the year 1839,
and received a liberal education at
the old collegiate institution, the
King’s School, Parramatta. Upon
leaving school in 1858 he engaged in
pastoral pursuits with his father in
the western district of the colony
contiguous to his native city. Five
years later he commenced operations
on his own account in the Wellington
district. Devoting his best energies
to the production of sheep of the
finest classes he was successful, and
for many years in succession he
Talma & Co, Sydney,
Hon. SIR FRANCIS B. SUTTOR.
secured leading prizes at all the more
important agricultural and pastoral
shows throughout the colony in the
sheep and wool sections. In the year
1875, i n response to an influential
requisition, he allowed himself to be
nominated as a candidate for a seat
in the Legislative Assembly for the
city of Bathurst, when he was re-
turned by a considerable majority.
Mr. Suttor sat continuously as mem-
ber for that electorate until 1889.
In March, 1877, Mr. Suttor was
offered the combined portfolios of
Minister for Justice and of Public
Instruction in the second Parkes
Administration. This government,
however, was a shortlived one, and
he went out of office in the following
August, when it was succeeded by an
administration formed by the late
Sir John Robertson. In the third
Parkes Administration, which at-
tained to office in the following year,
Mr. Suttor again accepted office as
Minister for justice and Public In-
struction, which portfolios he held
until April, 1880, when, upon the
reconstruction of the Ministry, he
accepted control of the Postal and
Mines Departments, and later became
Minister for Public Instruction, This
Ministry retained office until January,
1883, when it sustained defeat upon
an appeal to the country on the
question of the administration of the
Crown lands of the colony as pro-
posed in a new bill. In the year
1889 Mr. Suttor again accepted office
as Minister for Public Instruction in
the second Dibbs Administration, but
that Ministry suffered defeat within
three months of its assumption to
power. Upon his appearance before
his constituents at this juncture,
owing to his acceptance of office in
the Dibbs Administration, he was
defeated, but * shortly afterwards
Mr. Suttor was nominated to a seat
in the Legislative Council, which
position he occupied till 1891, when
he resigned in order to again seek
the suffrages of his old electorate for
a seat in the Assembly. In this he
was successful, and he retained the
confidence of his constituents until
he was again called to the Upper
House in igoo. Upon the formation
of the third Dibbs Administration in
1891 he was again called upon to
administer the Public Instruction
Department, and during the absence
of his Premier, Sir George Dibbs, in
England in 1892, he administered the
office of Colonial Secretary. Upon
the defeat of the Dibbs Ministry in
1894 Mr. Suttor was again compelled
to relinquish office. In 1901 he
succeeded the Hon. Kenneth Mackay
as Vice-President of the Executive
Council and representative of the
Government in the Legislative Coun-
cil. This position he continued to
occupy until February, 1903, when
he was appointed President of the
Legislative Council in succession to
the late Sir John Lackey, his long
parliamentary and official career fully
justifying the appointment in the
opinion of the citizens of the State of
every shade of political thought.
Subsequently he received the honour
of knighthood. Mr. Suttor, in 1863,
married the only daughter of the late
Thomas J. Hawkins, Esq., one of the
pioneer pastoralists of the western
district of New South Wales, by
whom he has had four sons and five
daughters.
Hon. ALEXANDER KETHEL,
M.L.C. of New South Wales, was
born at Perth, Scotland, in No-
vember, 1832. He was sent to
one of the leading schools of his
native city, but at twelve years of
age he took to the sea, obtaining a
berth on one of the local trading
vessels. Subsequently he served an
apprenticeship, and afterwards spent
a number of years trading between
different ports of the United King-
dom. He then obtained a position
upon an oversea vessel trading
between Great Britain and India
and China. In 1857 he came to
Sydney, and was offered sufficient
inducements to engage in the Aus-
tralian coastal trade. After several
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
HON. ALEX. KETHEL.
years’ experience in the Australian
maritime trade, he embarked in
a general timber business, and
established saw-mills in Sydney and
on several of the northern rivers.
For several years he was a member
of the firm of Messrs. John Booth
and Co., but upon a dissolution of
partnership, he became proprietor of
Market Wharf and owner of a
number of vessels which traded
between Sydney and the northern
ports of New South Wales. In
1900, upon the resumption by the
Government of the wharves, he
retired from active business as a
wharfinger and shipping agert. Mr.
Kethel has, from time to time,
actively participated in the manage-
ment of several important financial
institutions. In 1885 he entered the
political life of New South Wales


by being elected at the head of the
poll one ot the representatives lor
West Sydney to the Legislative
Assembly. In 1888 he was again
returned for the same constituency,
but the following year, owing to
pressure of private business, he
found it incumbent upon him to
resign. In 1893 ie was nominated
to a seat in the Legislative Council
by the then Premier, Hon. G. H.
Reid. In politics Mr. Kethel has
strenuously supported the Freetrade
and Liberal cause, and as such has
always commanded the confidence
of a large and influential section of
his fellow-citizens in the metropolis.
In 1896 he was appointed the Legis-
lative Council’s representative on
the Parliamentary Public Works
Committee. For over twenty years
Mr. Kethel has been persistent in
directing public attention to the
necessity for conserving the forests
of the State, in order to save from
total destruction many of the valu-
able timbers of the territory. In
connection with this subject he has
devoted much study and attention,
has published numerous newspaper
articles and pamphlets on the ques-
tion, and from time to time delivered
lectures, with a view to forcing the
Government to make the conserva-
tion of forests a matter of national
policy. Upon his recommendation
the late Sir Henry Parkes, while
Premier, organised a Forestry
Blanch in the Public Works Depart-
ment, and Mr. Ednie Brown, one of
the leading authorities upon forestry
in the world, was induced to re-
linquish a good appointment in South
Australia to take charge of the
newly created branch. In this
capacity he did valuable work, but
the succeeding Government, upon a
plea of retrenchment, abohsned the
department, and dispensed with the
services of Mr. Brown. Upon the
formation of the Board of Arbitration
in 1894, Mr - Kethel was appointed
employers’ representative. He was
also appointed a member of the
Roval Commission to inquire into
the administration of the govern-
ment railways. This action was
taken upon the occasion of certain
charges being levelled against Mr.
Eddy’s administration in the Legisla-
tive Assembly. This investigation
resulted in the complete exoneration
of the late Mr. E. M. G. Eddy from
every charge that was made against
him. Mr. Kethel was for many
years a vice-president of the Sydney
School of Arts. With Mr. Dowling
and others, he founded, in connection
with that institution, a system of
technical education, which was after-
wards extended to other centres of
population in New South Wales.
He was a member of the Board of
Technical Education until it was
dissolved upon the system being
incorporated with the Department of
Public Instruction. He was one of
the founders of the Highland Society
of New South Wales, also of the
Burns Club, of which body, for many
years, he filled the position of
president. For several years he
has been a Grand Lodge officer of
the Masonic body. He has also
filled a prominent position in the
control of the Presbyterian Church,
of which he has been a member
since boyhood. For many years he
has acted as an elder in one of the
leading metropolitan churches, and
has always taken an active interest
in Sunday-school work.
J. Hubert Newman, Sydney.
HON. SIR ARTHUR RENWICK.
Hon Sir ARTHUR RENWICK,
Knight, M.D., F.R.C.S. Edim,
M L.C. of New South Wales, is a
son of the late Mr. George Renwick,
of Redfern, and was born 30th May,
1837. He is one of the oldest
students of the Sydney University,
having entered there as a freshman
in 1854. I n *855 he took high
honours in mathematics, chemistry
and experimental physics. He grad-
uated as Bachelor of Arts in 1857,
and in the following year went to
Scotland and entered the Edinburgh
University. He obtained his M.D.
degree in 1861 and the Fellowship
of the Royal College of Surgeons
1862. In 1882 he was elected a
member of the Senate of the Sydney
University. In 1877 Sir Arthur
Renwick, with a gift of to
the University, assisted in the foun-
dation of a scholarship for natural
science, including comparative ana-
tomy, which largely contributed
towards establishing the School of
Medicine now connected with the
University. In the public affairs of
New South Wales Sir Arthur
Renwick has for many years taken
a prominent part. He took an
active interest in the great campaign
which preceded the inauguration of
the present system of public instruc-
tion, and was returned at the head
of the poll for the East Sydney
constituency in the tenth Parliament
of New South Wales, which met in
December, 1880. In October, 1881,
he was appointed Secretavy for
Mines in the third Parkes Adminis-
tration, in succession to the late
Hon. E. A. Baker. During the
tenure of office of this Government
the Public Instruction Act was
passed, but the land policy of the
Administration, not commending
itself to the electors, the Govern-
ment was rejected by the country.
Among other members of the Minis-
try, Dr. Renwick suffered defeat
at the ensuing general election in
1882. He was, however, returned
for the constituency of Redfern in
1885. In the following year Dr.
Renwick accepted office in the
Jennings Administration as Minister
lor Public Instruction. In 1880 and
1881 he held the post of Executive
Commissioner lor New South Wales
at the Melbourne International
Exhibition, and in 1883 that of
Vice-President for the Amsterdam
Exhibition. Later still he became
President of the New South Wales
Commission at the Adelaide Exhi-
bition. He also represented the
State at the Chicago World’s Fair.
Apart from political affairs, Sir
Arthur Renwick has been closely
identified with the leading philan-
thropic institutions of the metropolis.
He has tilled the position of Presi-
dent of the Sydney Hospital uninter-
ruptedly since 1879, His connection
with the Sydney Hospital dates from
1866, when he was appointed a
member of the honorary medical
staff. In the following year he was
elected honorary physician, in suc-
cession to the late Hon. Dr. Macfar


lane, and was called upon to fill
the position of honorary consulting
physician on Bth February, 1876.
In 1878 he was elected vice-presi-
dent of the institution, and on the
nth February, 1879, president,
succeeding the late Hon. Sir E.
Deas Thomson in that dignity.
During his term of office as presi-
dent the old building in Macquarie
Street erected by Governor Mac-
quarie was replaced by the present
handsome, modern structure, which
constitutes one of the finest, if not
the finest, hospital in the southern
hemisphere. Sir Arthur Renwick
lias taken a similar active interest
in the work of the Benevolent
Society of New South Wales. In
1871 he acted as honorary physician
to this organisation. Ten years
later he was appointed vice-presi-
dent, and finally president. He has
filled the positions of consulting
medical officer, Vice-President and
President of the Deaf, Dumb and
Blind Institution of New South
Wales. The latter position he still
holds. Sir Arthur Renwick was one
of the original founders of the British
Medical Association of New South
Wales and was its first president.
He is at present, and has been for
some years, President of the Medical
Board of New South Wales. He
has also acted as Dean of the Medical
Faculty of the University of Sydney.
He is a member of the governing
body of the Prince Alfred Hospital,
and has, since its foundation, filled
the position of trustee of the Car-
rington Hospital. He has also acted
at various times as honorary phy-
sician to the Children’s Hospital,
also to the Thirlmere Home for
Consumptives. He was the first
president of the State Children’s
Relief Board, which position he
occupied for nearly a quarter of a
century. Sir Arthur Renwick is
Chairman of the Board of Directors
of the Australian Widows’ Fund
Life Assurance Society and the
Industrial Building Society.
Hon. ALFRED WILLIAM
MEEKS, J.P., M.L.C., is the son
of the late Mr. William Meeks, and
was born at Cheltenham, England,
on 15th April, 1849. He arrived in
Melbourne in the early sixties, and
received a liberal education at St.
James’ Grammar School and other
educational establishments of the
southern capital. Deciding upon a
mercantile career he obtained a
position in one of the leading com-
mercial houses of the southern
capital. His business capacities
having attracted the attention of the
old and well-known Australian firm
of Messrs. Bright Bros., he was
offered and accepted the position
of manager of one of their depart-
ments. Subsequently an amalgama-
tion of this firm with that of the well-
known London house, Messrs.
Antony Gibbs & Sons, was consum-
mated, and the present business, now
known throughout the Common-
wealth as Messrs. Gibbs, Bright & Co.
was established. The head of the
London firm is Lord Aldenham, who
prior to his elevation to the peerage
sat in the Imperial Parliament as
member for the city of London. The
Hon. Alban G. H. Gibbs, M.P. for
the City, and the Hon. Vicary
Gibbs, M.P. tor St. Albans, are also
members of the firm. Upon com-
mencing operations at Adelaide in
1882 Mr. A. W. Meeks was de-
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
HON. A W. MEELS.
spatched from Melbourne to take
control of affairs. Under his juris-
diction the Company made great
progress in the South Australian
capital. During his five years’ resi-
dence in Adelaide he took an active
part in mercantile and public affairs.
He actively supported the project of
the Adelaide International Exhi-
bition of 1884, and filled the position
of Chairman of the Finance Com-
mittee. He was also a member of
the Adelaide Chamber of Commerce,
and for a term he occupied the
position of chairman of that insti-
tution. He was also elected a local
director of the National Bank of
Australasia. Partly through his
instrumentality the Adelaide Indus-
trial Blind Institute was brought
into existence, of which organisation
he was a member of the committee
of management. Upon the demise
of Mr. W. G. Murray, of Messrs.
Gibbs, Bright & Co., in Sydney in
1888, Mr. Meeks came to Sydney as
resident partner. Upon leaving
Adelaide a farewell banquet was
tendered him by the leading com-
mercial and public men of the city,
and lie was made the recipient of an
address in which his many services
on behalf of the commerce of South
Australia were adequately acknow-
ledged. As representative in Sydney
the same success has attended his
efforts as in Adelaide. In 1890, or
two years after his arrival, Mr. Meeks
was elected a director of the Aus-
tralian Mutual Provident Society,
which position he has uninterrupt-
edly held for the past thirteen years.
Of this society he is now Deputy-
Chairman. For several years Mr.
Meeks has acted as Chairman and
local director of the Ocean Accident
and Guarantee Corporation, of Lon-
don ; also Chairman of the Sydney
Hydraulic Power Co. ; and is closely
associated in the management o 1
other equally important mercantile
and financial institutions. In 1894
and the following year Mr. Meeks was
elected Chairman of the Sydney
Chamber of Commerce. During his
term of office the Australian Com-
mercial Congress met in Sydney,
over the deliberations of which he
was called to preside. Mr. Meeks
can claim the distinction of being
the only man who has filled the
office of Chairman of the Chamber
of Commerce in the two metropolitan
cities—Adelaide and Sydney. In the
great movement which preceded
Australian federation Mr. Meeks
took a prominent part. As a mem-
ber of the executive, and as honorary
treasurer of the League, as well as
by his consistent advocacy, he did
much towards securing for the Com-
monwealth Bill its final acceptance
by the citizens of New South Wales.
In 1900 Mr. Meeks was called to
occupy a seat in the Legislative
Council of the State, an honour
which he accepted with the full
approval of the vast majority of his
fellow-citizens. Since his arrival in
New South Wales Mr. Meeks has
been actively identified in many


charitable and religious movements.
He is a member of the Committee of
the Sydney Industrial Blind Insti-
tution and several other organisations
of a kindred character. He is also a
Justice of the Peace for New South
Wales, Victoria, South Australia
and Queensland.
Hon. CHARLES KINNAIRD
MACKELLAR, M. 8., for many
years a member of the Legislative
Council of New South Wales, was
born in Sydney in the year 1844.
His father, the late Dr. Frederick
Mackellar, a native of Scotland,
arrived in Sydney in the later thirties,
and for many years was held in high
esteem as one of the leaders of the
medical profession in that city.
Amongst other important positions
held by Dr. Frederick Mackellar, was
that of chief medical officer of the
Macquarie Street general hospital,
then, as now, the chief institution of
its class in the State of New South
Wales, probably in the southern
hemisphere. The basis of the son’s
education was laid in the Sydney
Grammar School. He followed up
pastoral pursuits for five or six years,
but the allurements held out by the
noble profession—of which his fathe r
was so distinguished a membe:
however, were too strong for him
to resist, for at the end of that
period he proceeded to Scotland and
entered the University of Glasgow,
where he assiduously applied him-
self to the study of medicine ai d
surgery. Passing the necessary ex-
aminations and obtaining his degree,
he returned to Sydney in 1872, where
he established himself, and soon built
up an extensive practice. In 1882
the Parkes-Robertson Administration,
which had just previously passed a
comprehensive Public Health Act,
offered to Dr. Mackellar the presi-
dentship of the newly formed Boaid
of Health, which position he accepted.
In this capacity Dr. Mackellar ren-
dered considerable service to the
public of New South Wales. Three
years later the Government of the
day called him to occupy a seat in
the Legislative Council of the colony.
Accepting the honour, he was per-
force compelled to resign his position
as president of the Board of Health.
Within two years after his elevation
to the Upper House he accepted the
position of Secretary for Mines in
the Jennings-Dibbs Administration,
acting at the same time as the repre-
sentative of the Government in the
Legislative Council. In active
politics Dr. Mackellar has rendered
signal public service, mainly in mat-
ters which affect the social life of the
community. The protection and pre-
servation of child life, and the welfare
of women are subjects with which
the name of Dr. Mackellar has always
been closely associated ; indeed, it is
due to that gentleman that much of
the advanced legislation in this direc-
tion is now on the statute books of
the State. As a party politician he
has made little effort to achieve dis-
tinction, but in all matters which
make for the solid comfort and pros-
perity of the State his influence and
advocacy have always been available.
In the stirring movement which led
up to the attainment of federation,
Dr. Mackellar was ardently in favour
of an united Australia; but in his
capacity as member of the Legisla-
HON. C. K. MACKELLAR.
tive Council he always insisted that
the rights and claims of the mother
State should receive just recognition.
Outside of the political sphere the
most important public position occu-
pied by Dr. Mackellar was the presi-
dentship of the Board of Directors
of the Bank of New South Wales.
Dr. Mackellar has occupied for many
years the position of chief medical
adviser in Sydney of the Equitable
Life Assurance Society of the United
States. The operations of this great
organisation are world-wide. As a
director in the firm of Messrs. Pitt,
Son & Badgery, Dr. Mackellar’s
connection with the great pastoral
and producing interests of the State
is maintained. To revert once more
to his deep interest in purely social
movements. As a representative on
the Government Board of the Sydney
and Prince Alfred Hospitals, and also
as president of the State Children’s
Relief Board —-the great cause of
suffering humanity and of helpless
infancy provide a scope in which the
generous sympathies and cultured
experience of Dr. Mackellar find their
highest exemplification. Dr. Mac-
kellar was a member of the Common-
wealth Senate from October, 1903,
until the following December.
Col. the Hon. KENNETH
MACKAY, C. 8., M.L.C., is the
eldest son of Alexander Mackay,
who came to Australia from China
after the second opium war with the
object of starting tea plantations for
the firm of Jardine, Matheson & Co.
Finding that impracticable, he went
in for station properties, at one of
which—Wallendbeen—Col. Mackay
was born on sth June, 1859. He was
educated at Camden College and
Sydney Grammar School, New
South Wales, and learned to ride on
the cattle camps and at the horse
musters on his father’s stations.
Before he was twenty-one he was
sent to the Lachlan to look after and
improve a back-block. While there
he struck a drought, and had no rain
for fifteen months. Of 12,000 sheep
he took out he lost all but a thousand,
and had to empty out his straw
mattress to give his horse a last feed.
He had to fence in all the tanks to
save the water, and has seen the
wild brumbies standing with their
heads on the rails till they dropped
dead from sheer starvation. Here
he had for companions some of the
gladdest, maddest dare-devils to be
found in Australia, and both in the
scrub and over the fences took his
chances with the best of them.
Brought back to civilisation again,
he, after winning the Cunningham
Cup on an outsider, won several races
at firrana, and finished by winning
his second Cup, the Hurdle Race and
Bachelors’ Bag in one day and in
succession at Cunningham. As a
gentleman rider his mounts at Rand-
wick and Rosehill always carried
the public money until he gave up
sporting silk. During his racing
career he won the Cavalry Cup given
by Lord Carrington, and later the
Cavalry Cup at Rosehill, and among


his victories are the double at
Rand wick and Rosehill. In 1884
he went to read for the bar at Oak-
lands, near Mittagong, where he
raised the West Camden Light
Horse, of which he was gazetted
Captain in 1885. For some years he
had been writing verses for papers,
and in 1887 he published a small
book of sporting and bush verse,
entitled “Stirrup Jingles,” which
had a wide sale. This was followed
up by a poem, in blank verse, en-
titled “ A Bush Idyll.” In 1893 he
wrote his first novel, “ Out Back.”
The second novel, “ The Yellow
Wave,” was written for Bentley and
Sons in 1895, a military romance
describing the invasion of Australia
by Chinese, commanded by Russians.
In that book he conceived the idea
of the Bush Brigade, which he
brought into actual existence by
creating and raising the First Aus-
tralian Horse, of which he is still
Colonel. He has also, in conjunction
with Alfred Dampier, written a play,
which had a successful run at Her
Majesty’s Theatre. He entered the
New South Wales Legislative
Assembly representative for
Burrowa in 1895, an d sat in three
Parliaments, resigning his seat to go
into the Upper House, on joining
the Hon. William John Lyne’s
Government as Vice-President of
the Executive Council in 1899, which
position he resigned in March, 1900,
to take command of the Ist Im-
perial Bushmen of New South
Wales, he having been accepted for
that position by Mr. Chamberlain,
and so has the distinction of com-
manding the first Imperial regiment
raised in Australia. He served in
South Africa in command of the
1st —or, as they were there called,
the 6th —Imperial Bushmen from
23rd April to 12th November, 1900,
receiving his C.B. for meritorious
service in the field. He was ap-
pointed Chief Staff Officer for the
whole of the oversea colonial forces
12th November, igoo, and occupied
that position till 17th June, igoi,
being specially thanked by the Base
Commandant, Col. Cooper, on re-
tiring to return to Australia. The
following minute is from the Record
of the Corporation of the City of
Capetown for the year encing 12th
September, 1901 Minute of His
Worship the Mayor : “ I had the
pleasure of entertaining Col. the
Hon. Kenneth Mackay, Senior Staff
Officer for the Australian Forces in
South Africa at a farewell dinner on
the 131 h June, 1901, upon the eve of
the departure of the gallant and
distinguished officer for Australia,
after the trying vicissitudes of a
campaign in which the Australian
troops have borne themselves with
conspicuous bravery. In addition
to the service rendered to houth
Africa as a soldier of the Empire,
Col. Mackay has placed the city
under deep obligations in respect of
much valuable information so kindly
furnished in connection with the
outbreak of bubonic plague in the
city, as to the measures which
should be adopted in combating the
disease, based on the experience
gained by the Colonel as a member
of the Cabinet of New South Wales
during the outbreak of plague in
Sydney.” Col. Mackay came back
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
COL. THE HON. KENNETH MACKAY.
to Australia as O.C. troops transport
“ Orient” in charge of the 6lh Im-
perial Bushmen, 4th Victorian 1.8.,
and details. On the Hon. F. B.
Suttor being appointed President of
the Upper Plouse in 1901, Sir
John See asked Col. Mackay to join
11 is Cabinet as the Vice-President of
the Executive Council and leader of
the Government in the Upper House.
So that the Colonel, in a short
number of years, has been a station
manager “ out back,” a drover, 11
digger, a crack amateur jockey,
playwright, novelist, verse writer, a
member of the Lower House, twice
a Cabinet Minister, a Captain of
Light Horse, Commanding Officer
and creator of the First Australian
Horse, Colonel commanding the
First New South Wales Imperial
Bushmen and C.S.O. for the Over-
sea Colonial Forces in South Africa.
For his services at the front he was
created a C. 8., and holds the South
African war medal with four clasps.
In Africa Col. Mackay enjoyed the
friendship of Cecil Rhodes and Kip-
ling, and saw a good deal of Lord
Milner. In 1890 Col. Mackay
married Miss Mabel White, a Vic-
torian, and on both sides an Aus-
tralian of the second generation.
Like her husband, Mrs. Mackay
comes from a squatting family. They
have two children, both girls,
Hon. GEORGE DAY, M.L.C.
of New South Wales, is a nativs
of the Hawkesbury district of New
South Wales, where he was horn
on the 31st October, 1826. His
father was one of the pioneer
farmers of Australia, and carried on
extensive farming operations near
Windsor in the early days. He
was educated at schools at Richmond
and Windsor. When fourteen years
of age, he went to reside with his
brother, Mr. James Day, who was
managing an extensive station in the
Monaro district. In the year 1852,
when the gold fever in Victoria was
at its height, Mr. Day, in company
with Dr. Hedley, went to the Bendigo
diggings, and was among the first
gold-seekers on that famous field.
Within a year Mr. Day and his
party returned to Omeo, and in 1853
a rush taking place at Livingstone
Creek, near Lake Omeo, he opened
a general store on the newly dis-
covered gold-field. This venture
proved a success, and two years later
he and his brother James purchased
the Table Top Station near Albury,
and afterwards the Meb Malta
Station on the River Murray, and
the Yarra Yarra Station on the Billa-
bong Creek. Mr. Day also engaged
in flour-milling, and for many years
was proprietor of the Fanny Ceres
steam flour mills. In 1864 he was
honoured with a Commission of the
Peace, and a few years later was
elected an alderman of the munici-
pality of Albury. In this capacity he
was elected five times in succession,
and for two years he filled the po-
sition of mayor. In 1874 was
elected to the Legislative Assembly
of New South Wales as represen


tative of the Hume district, and sat
continuously for that electorate and
for Albury until 1895, when he was
called to occupy a seat in the Legis-
lative Council. During his active
political career, Mr. Day has been
instrumental in introducing to the
New South Wales Legislature some
forty private bills, some of them of
a very important character. The
matters comprehended in these bills
dealt with pastoral, agricultural, and
mining interests, water conservation,
an arbitration act in connection
with the A.M.P. Society, and a gas
company’s bill. A most important
measure introduced by Mr, Day into
the Legislature, sought to confer
upon sons or daughters of legal age
the right to manage the estates of
their deceased parents. Mr. Day
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney,
HON. GEORGE DAY.
has been associated with the Albury
District Hospital since 1859, while
for many years continuously and up
to the present he has filled the posi-
tion of president of that institution.
He is also president of the Albury
Racing Club, having been also as-
sociated with that organisation since
its inception. In the long continuous
and persistent agitation which pre-
ceded the construction of the Great
Southern Railway from Goulburn to
Albury, and which united Sydney
with Melbourne, Mr. George Day
took a prominent part. Early in
1849 Mr. Day married a daughter of
the late Mr. John Williams of
Grosse’s Plains.
Hon. NICHOLAS HAWKEN,
M.L.C., is one of the most widely
known of the able public men of
New South Wales, having been
actively associated with the political
affairs of Australia for the past
quarter of a century or more. Mr.
Hawken is of English birth, but his
sympathies and interests are distinctly
and essentially Australian. To say
this, however, is not to question his
patriotism or affection for the land of
his birth, or his fidelity to the great
Empire of which the Australian
Commonwealth forms an integral
part. He arrived in Sydney a youth
of nineteen during 1855, consequently
he has spent nearly fifty years in
New South Wales, a period which in
reality covers the most stirring and
vital portion of Australian history.
For many years prior to his active
participation in the legislation of
the sovereign colony, Mr. Hawken
rendered earnest service to his fellow-
citizens as an alderman and mayor
of the important municipality of
Darlington. His advent into the
Legislative Assembly took place in
1887, when he was elected a repre-
sentative of the populous constituency
of Newtown. He was subsequently
re-elected by this constituency, but
in the general election of 1891, which
witnessed the sudden rise and develop -
ment of a Labour Party as a distinct
and definite power in the political life
of the State, Mr. Haw T ken sustained
defeat. He was not rejected, how-
ever, because of his main political
principles or conduct, but simply
because the newly formed Labour
Party demanded the election of
specific labour representatives. Mr.
Hawken, while holding liberal politi-
cal views, regarded the exaction of a
pledge from candidates to vote, if
returned, only in accordance with
the decisions previously arrived at
in secret caucus as a menace to
the freedom of representation. Mr.
Hawken was defeated while defending
a great principle, consequently he
went down with honour, and, in
support of this view of the case, he
was subsequently nominated to a
seat in the Legislative Council, an
action that received public endorse-
ment. In 1891, on the 28th July,
Mr. Hawken tabled a resolution in
the Legislative Assembly to the
effect, “ That in the opinion of
this House, the present industrial
conditions of Australia warrant the
appointment of a Department of
Labour, represented in Parliament
by a minister.” Had this resolution
been at once adopted and acted upon,
possibly the current of political
history in this State would have
been more advanced. The resolution,
however, was never debated, a
dissolution taking place almost
immediately after the notice of this
resolution was placed on the table,
but subsequently a Minister for
Labour was appointed. While ad-
dressing the constituency of Darling-
ton, Mr. Hawken solemnly warned
the country as to the result of
profligacy in the expenditure of public
money. He emphasised the neces-
sity of the Government practising
administrative economy and depart-
mental prudence, which he said was
essential “ for the continual and
healthy growth of a vigorous com-
munity.” Since his elevation to the
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
HON. NICHOLAS HAWKEN.
Upper House, Mr. Hawken has
displayed the same careful discretion
in legislation and administration in
all matters that have come before
the Council for review. Upon the
occasion of the discussion of the
Amended Commonwealth Constitu-
tion Act in 1899 in the Legislative
Council, Mr. Hawken urged the
alteration of this measure upon two
points. Although not successful in
the House, the alterations were sub-
sequently made by the British Parlia-
ment. This included the restoration
of the important provision of “Appeal
to the Throne.” In 1902 he advocated
by resolution that the Federal fiscal
policy should be based on that in
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


force in Great Britain. From igoo
to 1902, Mr. Hawken advocated by
resolution the acceptance and passing
formally by the State Parliaments of
the Commonwealth Act, thus adopt-
ing constitutionally the British Act.
He strenuously opposed the proposed
Federal postal espionage. To his
trenchant criticism of the Federal
administration of the Customs is due,
to a large extent, the subsequent
ameliorated conditions, and, later on,
the resignation of the minister. In
1903, he brought in an amended Bill
of Sales Bill to protect household
goods. This Bill was passed into
law. Mr. Hawken is the author of
a number of political and literary
works, including a pamphlet on “The
Power of Government.” This work
is to be found in the Public Library
of New South Wales. He is also
the author of a critique entitled,
“ The Catastrophe of Gold ” ; also
of sundry poems.
The Hon. JOHN SEE, ex-Premier
of New South Wales, was born at
Yelling, Huntingdonshire, England,
on November 14th, 1845, and ar-
rived in Sydney with his parents in
1853. The family settled on a farm
at Hinton, on the Hunter River,
where the subject of this sketch
attended school at different inter-
vals for a total period of about
three years. While yet a young
man, he left the Hunter River dis-
trict in 1861, and was among the
pioneers on the Clarence River,
taking up land under the Robertson
Act, which gave “ free selection
before survey.” After a short term
of four years he left the Clarence
River and came to the metropolis,
and in 1865 entered into partner-
ship with Mr. George Nipper, under
the name of Nipper & See. This
business developed into one of the
largest of its kind in Australasia.
The partnership being eventually
dissolved by mutual consent in
1883, was then carried on by Mr. See
until 1891, when the shipping por-
tion of the business was amalga-
mated with the Clarence, Richmond
and Macleay River Steam Naviga-
tion Company,—the joint concern
being called the North Coast Steam
Navigation Company. In the year
1880 Mr. See first became a candi-
date for Parliament, and was elected
for the Grafton constituency.
Through all the political changes
he continued to represent that dis-
trict, until failing health compelled
him to retire from political life in
1904. Ministerial dignity was first
attained in 1885 when Sir George
(then Mr.) Dibbs came into power,
and the portfolio of Postmaster-
General was offered to Mr. See and
accepted. This Ministry was a short-
lived one, but when, in 1891, Sir
George Dibbs again assumed control
of public affairs, the important office
of the Colonial Treasurer was accepted
by Mr. See. This administration was
Freeman & Co.
HON. SIR JIHN SEE.
displaced by the Reid Government
in 1894. Upon the defeat of the
Reid Government in 1899, the task
of forming a new administration
was entrusted to Sir William Lyne-
The important offices of Chief Sec-
retary and Minister for Defence were
conferred upon Mr. See- During his
administration of these important
departments, his duties were ren-
dered extremely arduous because of
the part Australia was taking in the
South African war. Contingent
after contingent was despatched
from this State, and the heavy and
responsible duties in connection
therewith fell upon the shoulders of
Mr. See. In the year 1901* upon
the acceptance of office in the first
Federal Ministry by the Premier,
Sir William Lyne, Sir John See was
selected to reconstruct the Ministry.
Having been honoured by his fellow-
citizens with the highest position in
the State, his Sovereign, in June,
1902, conferred upon Mr. John See
the honour of knighthood. On the
day following the publication of the
royal recognition, every section of
the Legislature joined in felicitating
Sir John See on the signal honour
that had been conferred upon him.
Friends and political opponents alike
joined in this manifestation of royal
approval. In the early part of 1904
his heavy and incessant service to
the public, as Premier of the State,
commenced to tell upon his consti-
tution and a serious breakdown was
seen to be imminent. Acting upon
the urgent advice of his medical
attendants he proceeded to New
Zealand and made a lengthened stay
in the hot lakes district of that
country. Whilst there he suffered
an irreparable and heavy loss in
the death of his wife. He returned
to Sydney in order to take part in
the funeral obsequies of the late
Lady See, but was obliged to again
visit New Zealand, where he re-
mained three months. Upon his re-
turn to Sydney, at the end of May,
1904, he deemed it advisable to
retire from public life, and on June
14 he placed his resignation in the
hands of his Excellency Sir Harry
Rawson Sir John subsequently
accepted a seat in the Legislative
Council. In other spheres of life
Sir John See also displayed great
activity. During the greater por-
tion of the extended period in which
he has carried on business in the
metropolis he resided at Randwick.
For years in succession he occupied
a seat in the council of that muni-
cipality ami thrice he has occupied
the position of mayor- Amongst
other important works carried out
during Sir John’s term of office the
Randwick Town Hall was erected.


The Hon. JOHN HUGHES,
M.L.C., Yice*President of the Execu-
tive Council and Representative of
the Government in the Legislative
Council of New South Wales, born
at Sydney on the 11th May, 1857, is
the eldest son of the late John
Hughes, K.C.S.G., merchant, of
Sydney. Sent to England by his
parents in 1870, he was educated at
Stony hurst College, Lancashire,
whence he matriculated with
honours at the London University
in June, 1876. Returning to Syd-
ney he adopted the profession of
law, and was admitted a solicitor in
1884. He immediately commenced
practice on his own account, and
being joined by his brother, Thomas
Hughes (now Lord Mayor of Syd-
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
HON. J. HUGHES, M.L.C.
ney) in 1887, established the well-
known firm of Hughes & Hughes,
now practising at 26 Hunter Street,
Sydney. Mr. Hughes has always
taken an interest in municipal mat-
ters, and served as alderman for
Fitzroy Ward in the Municipal Coun-
cil of Sydney from 1891 to 1894.
After the general election of 1895
he was nominated to the Legis-
lative Council on Bth August, 1895,
and, three years later, joined the
Reid Ministry as vice-president of
the Executive Council and represen-
tative of the Government in the
Upper House, becoming Minister for
Justice also in July, 1899. In 1901
he was elected as one of the Legis-
lative Council’s representatives on
the Parliamentary Standing Com-
mittee on Public Works, on which
committee he served during that
Parliament. On the formation of
the Carruthers Ministry, in August,
1904, he was again selected to repre-
sent the Government in the Upper
House as vice-president of the Exe-
cutive Council, which office he still
holds. He has been honorary trea-
surer of St. Vincent’s Hospital at
Sydney since 1885, a trustee of the
Public Library since 1898, and is a
director of the Australia Hotel Co.
Ltd. He has received the decora-
tion of Knight Commander of the
Order of St. Gregory the Great from
the present Pope, Pius X. Mr.
Hughes married, on 2nd July, 1884,
Mary Rose, eldest daughter of the
late Dr. Gilhooley, of Sydney, and
has a family of six sons and two
daughters.
The Hon. WILLIAM JOSEPH
TRICKETT. M.L.C., Chairman of
Committees and Deputy-President
of the Legislative Council of
New South Wales, was born
on the second day of Sep-
tember, 1843, and is the only son
of the late Joseph Trickett, who
was a member of an eld Isle of
Wight family, and. being connected
with the Imperial Engineer De-
partment, was entrusted by the
Home Government in 1853 with
the supervision of the erection and
equipping of the Royal Mint at
Svdnev, where he remained as
second officer of the Mint until
his retirement in 1873. Mr.
W. J. Trickett, like many other
prominent colonists, finished his
education at the Sydney Grammar
School, then entered the study
of the law, became a leading
solicitor, and was appointed by the
Judges as Law Examiner. In muni-
cipal matters Mr. Trickett and his
late father hold a record, the latter
having been one of Woollahra’s
first aldermen in 1860, acting until
1873, was succeeded in 1875 by his
son, who has occupied the position
continuously until now, a period
of thirty-two years. In 1880 the
subject of this sketch was elected
M.L.A. for Paddington, and held
the seat until 1889, when he
resigned and was appointed to
the Legislative Council. Mr. Trickett
was Postmaster-General from May,
1883, to May, 1884, and during
that time was the means of
largely improving and facilitating
the English mail service, of
doing away with the heavy
subsidy, and of arranging an im-
proved and weekly service with the
P. & 0 and Orient companies,
paying a reasonable sum for the
mail matter carried ; he also largely
extended the range of the penny
postage in this State. He was
Minister for Public Instruction from
May, 1884, to December, 1885, and
amongst his Ministerial acts pro-
cured the present site for the Art
Gallery and the first vote of £lO,OOO
to commence the building. He was
elected Chairman of Committees of
the Legislative Assembly in 1886,
was chosen for eleven years by his
Freeman & Co.
HON. W. J. TRICKETT, M.L.C.
fellow-members as one of the Public
Works Committee, and was elected
chairman until his resignation. He
has been elected to his present
position of Chairman of Committees,
&c., at each session from June,
1900, until now; New South Wales
Commissioner, Calcutta Exhibition,
1883, Colonial and Indian Exhi-
bition, London, 1885-6, Adelaide
Exhibition, 1887, Melbourne Inter-
national Exhibition, 1888-9 ;
Trustee, Art Gallery and State
Children’s Relief Board : Director
of M.L.A. of Australasia and of
Mercantile Insurance Co. ; President
of New South Wales Cricket Asso-
ciation 'and Trustee of Sydney
Cricket Ground.


The Hon. REGINALD JAMES
BLACK, M.L.C j sou of the late
John Henry Black, who was for
many years manager of the Bank
of New South Wales, and retired
from the bank in 1854. He steered
the bank through its troubles in the
early days of the colony, and to his
personal influence and guidance its
present solid foundation is largely
due. The family has been iden-
tified with the development of the
State for over a century. The first
member to arrive, Mr. John Black,
was one of the intrepid pioneers,
who arrived in Sydney in the year
1798, in command of his own ship.
He afterwards carried on business
as a merchant for several years,
and was eventually lost at sea while
Freeman & Co.
HON. R. J. BLACK, M.L.C.
on a voyage to India. Reginald J.
Black was born in 1845, and edu-
cated at the Sydney Grammar
School. At the age of eighteen he
joined the Bank of New South
Wales, passing through various posi-
tions, eventually being for several
years inspector. He left the bank
in 1882 to commence business of a
financial character for himself In
1898 he was invited by the bank and
A.M.P. Society to join their respec-
tive boards, and in so doing he gave
up active business. Mr. Black is
the author of various pamphlets
and papers on financial and eco-
nomic questions, and is considered
one of the soundest authorities on
banking and general financial mat-
ters. His paper on the land laws
of the State, read before the Cham-
ber of Commerce in 1905, is con-
sidered the best exposition of the
land question in existence, and' was
printed and published in pamphlet
form by the Daily Telegraph and
circulated free' of cost. During the
bank crisis in 1893 Mr. Black was
the first man consulted (outside the
Cabinet) by Sir George Dibbs, and
it is an open secret that to his
efforts is lar ly duo the passing of
the Note's Issue Bill, which gave
such relief to the community and
went far to assuage the effects of
the crisis. In 1887 Mr. Black was
elected a member of the Legis-
lative Assembly for Mudgee and
represented that electorate for close
on five years. In 1900 he was ap-
pointed to the Legislative Council,
and has travelled over a large por-
tion of the Commonwealth, and few
men are personally better acquainted
with the State of New South Wales.
Going further afield, Mr. Black has
travelled extensively in Europe and
through portion of the United States
and Canada Is a director of the
Bank of New South Wales, A M P.
Society, Indemnity Marine Cor-
poration of London, Harrison. Jones
and Devlin, Sydney Exchange Co.,
and North Shore Gas Co. Mr. Black
takes keen interest in charitable and
educational matters ; he was for a
number of years on the board of the
Royal Alexandra Hospital for Chil-
dren, and is a director of the Sydney
Hospital. He is a trustee of the
Sydney Grammar School, and has a
seat on the council of the Church of
England Grammar School. Is a keen
sportsman and still rides, yachts
and plays cricket ; is president of
the Zingari Club and the Gordon
Electorate Cricket Club. Married
in 1883. Eleanor, youngest daughter
of the late George Rouse, of Bira-
ganbil, Mudgee, and has five chil-
dren.
The Hon. JOHN BRADY NASH,
M.L.C., M.D. Edin. and Sydney,
M.R.C.S., Major Commanding Irish
Rifle Regiment, Volunteer Infantry,
New South Wales, Y D., J.P., &c.,
is the eldest son of the late Dr-
Andrew Nash, of Wallsend. New
South Wales, who came from the
County Cork, Ireland, to Victoria
in the year 1857, and resided in
Victoria and New South Wales till
his death in November, 1885. His
two sons became doctors of medi-
cine. The subject of this article
obtained his training in classics and
mathematics from his father and at
St. Patrick’s College, Melbourne.
He passed the matriculation exami-
nation at the Sydney University in
1877, and in 1878 was sent to the
medical school at the Edinburgh
University to obtain a degree in
medicine- There he studied for four
years, and had a distinguished
career as an undergraduate, obtain-
ing first-class honours in most of the
subjects- He studied in London,
Dublin and Paris before he returned
to New South Wales. In the year
1883 he commenced the practice of
his profession in Lambton, a suburb
Tesla
HON. J. B. HASH, M.L.C.
of Newcastle, N-S-W., ana m 1800,
on the death of his father, he suc-
ceeded to the extensive medical and
surgical practice of that gentleman
in Wallsend. Here he spent a very
successful and hard-working period
of his life, rising to eminence as a
surgeon and gaining the respect of
all the people in the northern dis-
tricts of New South Wales. He
was honorary surgeon to the New-
castle Hospital, and afterwards of
the Wallsend Mining District Hos-
pital. This institution was built
from plans which were arranged by
Dr- Nash. In it he did a lot of
first-class work and made a name
for the hospital, which w r as second
to none in the State. He contri-
buted many articles on medical and


surgical subjects to the medical
journals, and also read numerous
papers at the medical congresses
which have been held triennially
throughout Australia and New Zea-
land. While in the Newcastle dis-
trict he held a commission, first as
captain and afterwards as major, in
the military forces, and he com-
manded as captain the Lambton
Company of the 4th Infantry Regi-
ment- He left Wallsend in Feb-
ruary, 1900, and commenced the
practice of his profession in Mac-
quarie Street, Sydney. In June,
1900, he was called to the Legis-
lative Council He has from the
first taken an active part in the
debates in the Council, and he has
become a prominent member of
that body. In August, 1903, he
was appointed a member of the
Royal Commission on the decline in
the birth-rate, and he took an active
part in the deliberations of the com-
mission. In 1905 he accepted the
seat on the board of the Sydney
9 V %/
Hospital which was vacated by the
then Premier, the late Sir John See-
The Hon. FERGUS JAGO SMITH,
M.L.C., is the eldest son of the late
Hon. John Smith (who came out to
this colony in the early thirties) and
was born at Gulgong in 1843. He
was educated privately, and also at
the King’s School, Parramatta-
Associated from his youth with
Falk Studios.
HON. F. J. SMITH, M.L.C.
pastoral pursuits, Mr. Smith is
naturally better known as a pas-
toralist and breeder of high-class
sheep than as a politician- In the
City of the Plains (Bathurst), where
he resides, and throughout the west-
ern district, the name of Jago
Smith is as familiar as that of the
Dangars in the Hunter River district,
and Kater Brothers, of Mnmblebone,
Warren. It was from Mr. Smith’s
father, then owner of Gamboola,
that Kater Brothers made their
first purchase, in 1879, of sheep,
which formed the foundation of the
celebrated Mnmblebone breed. Mr.
Smith has, however, borne his part
in the political life of the State. In
1885 he contested the electorate of
Molong, but was defeated by Dr.
Ross, the present member. Two
years later (1887) he was returned
to the Legislative Assembly by the
electorate of West Macquarie, de-
feating Mr. W. P. Crick, but did not
contest the next election. On the
Bth August, 1895, he was appointed
to the Legislative Council. In 1866
Mr- Smith married the eldest daugh-
ter of Dr. Machattie, a well-known
resident of Bathurst.
The Hon CHARLES JAMES
ROBERTS, M.L C, C.M.G., eldest
son of the late Charles Warman
Roberts, was born in Sydney on
the 29th March, 1816- He was edu-
cated at the Sydney Grammar
School, and entered commercial life
at an early age- His first appear-
ance in public life was in 1877, when
he was elected an alderman of the
Municipal Council of Sydney. Two
years later he was elected mayor of
Sydney for the year 1879- In 1882
he turned his attention to politics,
and in that year was returned to
the Legislative Assembly of New
South Wales as member for the
Hastings and Manning electorate,
being re-elected by the same con-
stituency in 1885, 1887 and 1889.
Mr. Roberts early made his mark
in politics, and being a strong sup-
porter of the late Sir Henry Parkes,
was selected to fill the office of
Postmaster-General when that dis-
tinguished statesman formed a Go-
vernment in 1887. This office he
held until 1889- He was a member
of the Public Works Committee for
four years, 1894 to 1898. In 1890
he resigned as a member of the
Assembly, and in April of that year
was appointed a member of the
Legislative Council Mr. Roberts
has travelled extensively, and has
acted as commissioner for New
South Wales at several exhibitions-
During his year of office as mayor
HON C. J. ROBERTS, M.L.C., C.M.G.
of Sydney he was vice-president of
the Sydney International Exhibi-
tion- He was also commissioner
for New South Wales at the Mel-
bourne Exhibition, 1880-1, the Am
sterdam Exhibition, 1883 ; the Cal
cutta Exhibition, 1883-4 ; the Colo-
nial and Indian Exhibition, South
Kensington London, 1886 ; the Cen-
tennial International Exhibition,
Melbourne, 1888-9 ; and the Chicago
World’s Fair in 1893. In 4882 he
was created a Companion of the
Most Noble Order of St- Michael
and St. George (UM.G). Mr.
Roberts has always taken a deep
interest in all institutions for the
relief of sufferers, and was seven
years a director of the Sydnev Hos-
* , *> J
pital, and of the Industrial Blind
Institution of Sydney As a gener-
ous patron and president of numer-
ous football, cricket, rowing, yacht-
ing and athletic clubs, he has done
much to forward the best interests
of every legitimate branch of sport
Mr- Roberts has the distinction of
having been the youngest man ever
elected to the important office of
mayor of Sydney, and his term will
Idng be remembered by the lavish
manner in which the social functions
appertaining to the office were car-
ried out. Mr. Roberts was married
in April, 1867, to Lucretia daughter
of the late Abraham Abrahams, and
has one sou and five daughters-
the cyclopedia of new south wales.


The Hon, FREDERICK THOMAS
HUMPHERY, M.L.C., is a son of
Mr- T. B Humphery, one of the
eatly colonists, and was born at
Oldbury, near Berrima, New South
Wales, on the 16th September, 1841.
He was engaged in commercial pur-
suits from the completion of his
education at private schools, and
there are few men in the State with
a wider range of general business
knowledge than the subject of this
sketch. For twenty years Mr.
Humphrey was official assignee, hav-
ing been appointed in 1864, but re-
signed on entering into politics- He
was elected to the Legislative As-
sembly of New South Wales as
member for Shoalhaven, and sat in
two Parliaments, and was appointed
a member of the Legislative Council
in 1887- For three years he acted
as chairman of Committees of the
Council, when the chairman became
acting-president during the long
illness which preceded the death of
Sir John Lackey ; was vice-chairman
J '
of the Public Works Committee,
1894, and a member cf the Standing
Falk Studios.
HON. F. T. HUMPHERY, M.L.C.
Parliamentary Committee for seve-
ral years after passing of the Act by
which it is constituted- He is vicb-
president of Children’s Hospital,
Sydney ; chairman of directors,
Mutual Life Association of Aus-
tralia and the Permanent Trustee
Co. ; director of the Commercial
Banking Co. of Sydney Ltd , Com-
mercial Union Assurance Co.,
Richardson & Wrench Ltd., and
other companies. He became in-
terested in pastoral matters in 1871
and still retains the Mount Debat-
able cattle station, Queensland.
Was on the Royal Commission to
inquire into the working of the
civil service, the present Act being
the outcome of the investigation
and report by that commission ;
was also on the Royal Commission
to inquire into the proposed exten-
sion of the city railway. Married
(first) Helena, daughter of Rev. Dr.
King, and (second) Lucy, daughter
of J. W. King ; one son. Dr. E. M.
Humphery, and two daughters.
Sir JULIAN SALOMONS, Knt.,
K.C., is a son of the late Emanuel
Salomons, and was born at Edg-
baston, England, on the 4th No-
vember, 1836. Sir Julian’s father
was a well-known merchant of
Birmingham, and it was in that
town he received his early educa-
tion. In 1858 he entered as a
student of the ancient and historic
Gray’s Inn, and was called to the
Bar on the 26th January, 1861.
Proceeding almost immediately
afterwards to Australia, the sub-
ject of this sketch came to Sydney,
and was admitted to the Bar of
New South Wales, where he quickly
made a name for himself and
gradually rose to an eminent posi-
tion in his profession. Sir Julian
was in most of the cases that have
become historical, and as counsel
for the Crown had on many occa-
sions long and arduous work, which
he carried out with credit to him-
self and satisfaction to his clients.
For many years Sir Julian was a
prominent part of the political
machinery of the State. He was
appointed Solicitor-General in the
Robertson and Cowper ministries in
1869, with a seat in the Legislative
Council. He was vice-president of
the Executive Council and repre-
sentative of the Government in the
Upper House m the Parkes minis-
try, 1887-9, and also in the Dibbs
ministry, 1891-3. In 1886, on the
death of Sir James Martin, Chief
Justice of the Supreme Court, Sir
Julian was offered and accepted the
high office, but resigned shortly
afterwards for reasons which were
made public at the time. In 1891
the honour of knighthood was con-
ferred on Sir Julian (then Mr.) by
her late Majesty, Queen Victoria ;
and from 1899 to 1900 he held the
position of Agent-General for the
colony. He then retired from active
political life. When the question
of federation arose Sir Julian, as a
member of the Legislative Council,
vigorously opposed the movement,
and on the passing of the Common-
wealth Bill he withdrew entirely
from political life. He received soon
afterwards a general retainer from
the Federal Government. He has
SIR JULIAN SALOMONS.
recently been elected one of the
Benchers (the governing body) of
Gray’s Inn. where he was called to
the English Bar nearly half a cen-
tury back. The arts and sciences
have ever found a generous patron
in Sir Julian. For many years he
has been a trustee of the Nationa.
Art Gallery, and also of the National
Park. In 1862 he married Louisal
daughter of Maurice Solomon, of
Edmonton County, Middlesex, Eng-
land, and has two daughters, both
of whom are married and reside in
Sydney. It is understood that Sir
Julian has now retired from prac-
tice at the Bar.
The Hon. Sir HENRY NOR-
MAN!) McLAURIN (known as Sir
Normand), Knt., M. A , M. I)., LL.D.,
M L.C-, is a son of James McLaurin
and Katherine Briancliffe, and was
born at Kilconguhar. Scotland, in
1835. He' was educated at St.
Andrew’s University, where he took
his M'.A. degree, and at Edinburgh
University he took that of MD.,
and is LE D of both universities.
In 1858 he entered the Royal NaVy
as Assistant Surgeon, and s'.erved on
H M S. “ Royal Albert ” in the
Channel Squadron, HATS- “ Marl


borough” in the Mediterranean,
and was with the fleet at Athens
during the revolution in which King
Otto lost the throne of Greece. He
was one of the medical officers at
Greenwich Naval Hospital and
served on board H-M-S. “ Chal-
lenger ” on the Australian station
He decided to settle in Sydney and
practise his profession, and in 1885
was appointed president of the
Board of Health, which position he
held for some years. He was chair-
man of the Immigration Board, and
in 1883 was selected a fellow of the
Senate of Sydney University, and
vice-chancellor in 1896, which high
Crown Studios
HON. SIR NORMAND MCLAURIN,
M.L.C.
office he has continuously held up
to the present time. In 1889 he
was appointed a member of the
Legislative Council of New South
Wales, and was vice-president of
the Executive Council and repre-
sentative of the Government in Sir
George Bibbs’ Ministry, 1893-4. He
was created Rnight Bachelor in
1902- He is president of the Bank
of New South Wales, director of the
Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, and
a trustee of St. Andrew’s College.
He married Eliza, daughter of
Charles Nathan, F.R C S-, of Syd-
ney.
Hon. JOHN MACRINTOSH,
M-L C-, is a son of the late John
Mackintosh, of Auldean, County
Newin, Scotland, where he was
born on the Bth July, 1821- He
J '
was educated at the local school,
and came out to Australia in 1839.
The business of John Mackintosh
and Sons, wholesale and retail iron-
mongers, in Pitt Street, Sydney,
was founded by Mr. John Mackin-
tosh in November, 1846, and is now
controlled by his sons For sixteen
years he was an alderman ol the
Municipal Council of Sydney, hav-
ing been elected by the ratepayers
of Macquarie Ward in 1862- On the
25th April. 1872, he was returned to
the Legislative Assembly of New
South Wales as member for East
HON. J. MACKINTOSH, M.L.C
Sydney, and re-elected in 1875 and
1880, and appointed to the Legis-
lative Council in 1881- He was a
member of the Licensing Court for
the metropolitan district from Sep-
tember, 1882,; to January, 1891.
Mr. Mackintosh still continues his
attendance at business, though leav-
y o
ing the management to his sons.
Mr. Mackintosh has been a member
of the Parliament over 35 years
seldom missing any attendance, and
is now the father of the Parliament,
and constantly on committees on
both houses.
Hon. JAMES WATSON, M.L.C,
was born at Portadown, County Ar-
magh, Ireland, on the 17th Decem-
ber, 1836,. and received his early
education at the Church of England
Grammar School, Rilmore. He ar-
rived in Australia in 1856, and, after
a short period in Victoria, came to
New South Wales and commenced
business at Young. In 1870 he
joined the firm of John Frazer and
Co., merchants and importers, Syd-
ney, in which he is now a partner.
In 1869 he contested the electorate
of the Lachlan, and was duly re-
turned as a member of the Legis-
lative Assembly of New South
Wales, being re-elected for that
constituency in March, 1872, Janu-
ary, 1875, and October, 1877. In
1880 he was returned to the Assem-
bly as member for Young, and in
Freeman & Co.
HON. J. WATSON, M.L.C.
1883 for Gundagai. Mr. Watson
was Colonial Treasurer in Sir Henry
Parkes’ Ministry from 1878-83, and
appointed member of the Legis-
lative Council in February, 1887.
He has been a trustee and vice-
president of the Savings Bank,
chairman of directors of the City
Bank Ltd., the Australian Joint
Stock Bank Ltd., and of the local
board of the Equitable Life Assur-
ance Company of TJ.S.A.
Hon. HENRY EDWARD RATER,
M L C , was born in Bungarabie,
New South Wales, on the 20th
September, 1841, and is the son of
the late Henry Herman Rater (one
of the Earl Marshal’s Gold Staff
officers at the coronation of the late
Queen Victoria), who came out to
this colony in 1839 and chartered
the ship “Euphrates” to bring
out thoroughbred horses and cattle,
the latter being afterwards sold to
Mr. William Henry Suttor, of Bruce-
dale, and laid the foundation of the
well-known herd on the Lachlan


River. Among the horses was
“Cap-a-pie,” the ancestor of some
of the stoutest racehorses this
State has seen. The subject of this
sketch received his education in this
State, and from his youth has been
interested in pastoral pursuits- He
is the owner of the Mount
Broughton Estate, Moss Vale,
Freeman & Co.
HON H. E. KATER, M.L.C.
Egelabra' and Yanganbil Stations
on the Macquarie River, where he
breeds the well-known and high-
class “ Mumblebone ” sheep- Also
chairman of directors of the Colonial
Sugar Refining Company, vice-
chairman Commercial Banking
Company of Sydney, director of the
local board of the Liverpool and
London and Globe Insurance
Company, director and honorary
treasurer of the Royal Prince
Alfred Hospital. Mr. Kater was
nominated a member of the Legis-
lative Council on 22nd February,
1889, and has always taken an
active part in its proceedings. In
any debate on the land question his
opinions always carry considerable
weight. He married Mary Eliza,
daughter of the late \\ illiam
Forster, M-L-A-, some time Agent-
General for New South Wales.
Hon. JAMES NIXON BRUNKER,
M.L.C. and Honorary Minister in
the present Administration, is a
native of the Hunter River district,
having been born in Newcastle,
New South Wales, on the 27th
April, 1832. He received his early
education in that town from the
Rev. C. P. N. Wilton, and then went
to Sydney College. After three
years in the offices of Messrs. Carr,
Rogers and Owen, of Sydney,
solicitors, Mr. Brunker, who did not
enjoy good health at that time,
decided to devote his energies to
more congenial pursuits, and com-
menced business in East Mait-
land, and subsequently established
branches at West Maitland, Sydney,
and Newcastle, as a stock and station
agent, and during the course of the
last half-century his connection has
become one of the largest in the
State. In political life Mr. Brunker
has always taken an active part.
Elected a member of Parliament
for East Maitland in 1880, he re-
presented that constituency con-
tinuously for twenty-four years. Dur-
ing that period Mr. Brunker held
office in several Administrations.
He accepted office as Minister for
Lands under the premiership of the
late Sir Henry Parkes, from August,
1888, to January, 1889, and a
second time, after a dissolution,
from March, 1889, to 22nd October,
1891. After the formation of the
Reid Government he occupied the
position of Chief Secretary from
3rd August, 1894, to 13th Septem-
ber, 1899, and during the period of
Mr. Reid’s absence in England,
from 7th May to 31st August, 1897,
held the position of Acting Pre-
mier. During his term of office as
Minister of Lands under Sir Henry
Parkes he constructed and passed
the Land Act of 1889, and in his
book, “ Fifty Years of Australian
History,” Sir Henry wrote:—
‘‘Mr. J. N. Brunker moved the
second reading of his Land Bill on
May 15th. Mr. Brunker was a man
who, by his personal conduct and
general bearing through a long life,
had secured the respect and con-
fidence of all classes, and he pos-
sessed an extensive practical know-
ledge of the relation of classes
settled on the public estate and of
the working of former Land Acts.
He explained and supported his bill
in a well-reasoned speech, which was
very favourably received. The bill
provided for the correction of cer-
tain abuses, amended defects in the
legislation of 1884, offered special
facilities for the acquisition of larger
holdings by what may be termed a
class of middlemen, on the western
plains ; and it created a judicial
tribunal for hearing and deciding
cases of dispute. The debate on
the second reading, though marked
by much agreement in opinion,
extended over nine nights, when
the bill wa c read the second time by
68 votes to 3. The measure was
discussed very fully in committee in
both Houses, and generally with
approval. In due course the bill
received the Royal assent. It made
a great change in the law ; it did not
satisfy everybody, but it was re-
ceived with widespread opinion in
its favour.” For several years a
member of the Maitland District
Council and the East Maitland
Municipal Council, and also return-
ing officer under the Electoral Act.
He was appointed to the position of
Justice of the Peace by Sir James
Marlin in the year 1865. As a
candidate for election as a member
of the Federal Conver tion, for
which Mr. Brunker was chosen, he
polled 72,036 votes. In the develop-
ment of the coalmining industry
near Maitland Mr. Brunker mani-
fested considerable interest and
ensured the survey and establish-
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
HON. J. N. BRUNKER, M.L.C
ment of Kurd Kurd, the principal
township, securing the provisions
essential for the homes and comfort
of the large and increasing popula-
tion settled in the town and sur-
rounding district. In 1851 Mr.
Brunker made East Maitland his
home, and in every public move-
ment tending to the advancement


of the district as a whole ex-
hibited untiring energy. The
erection of Pitnacree Bridge, which
connects the town with the Pater-
son and Williams River districts, as
well as similar connections at
Morpeth, are largely attributable to
the interest which he manifested to
the advantage and prosperity of the
localities principally concerned, as
well as the large population now so
fully served ; neither did he lack
attention to social matters. The
charitable institutions, the churches,
the East Maitland Mechanics’ In-
stitute, and the public schools have
all shared in receiving at his hands
a full share of attention.
The Hon. Dr. JAMES NORTON,
LL.B., M.L.C., is a son of the late
Mr. James Norton, and was born
on the sth December, 1824. He
began school life with the sons of
many prominent colonists at an
infant school in Macquarie Street,
conducted by Miss Williamson. His
education was continued under Mr.
Willia m Cape, and later was trans-
ferred to the care of his son, Mr.
William Timothy Cape, subse-
quently going with him to the
.Sydney College (now the .Sydney
Grammar School) on that institution
being placed under Mr. Cape’s care
in 1835. On leaving college he
was for some time under a private
tutor, the Rev. J. K. Walpole, and
finished the best education then
obtainable in Australia under the
Rev. Robert Forrest, at Campbell-
town. After serving under articles
with his father, he was admitted
into partnership, and upon the
decease of the former in 1862, Mr.
Norton continued to carry on the
business, at first in partnership
with the late Mr. William Parker,
then by himself, and subsequently
in partnership with Messrs. Robert
Smith and others. In 1874, Mr.
Norton was elected a trustee of the
Australian Museum, and four years
later was appointed Trustee of the
Public Library of New South Wales,
and also of Hyde, Phillip and Cook
Parks. In 1879 h e was appointed
chairman of the second board of
inquiry into the working of the
Real Property Office. The same
year Mr. Norton was, witli the
advice of the Parkes-Robertson
Government, summoned to the
Legislative Council, and is now the
“ father” of the House. In May,
1884, owing to the change which
had just taken place in the .Stuart
Ministry by the reorganisation of
the Cabinet, he succeeded Mr.
Trickett as Postmaster-General.
Mr. Norton was the first Minister
of the Crown who has held office
without ever having been elected
by the popular vote. He has been
a careful and valuable contributor
to the press, both over the pseudo-
nym of ‘ ‘ Ecce ’ ’ and his own proper
signature. In 1872 the public were
greatly exercised over the question
of the future water supply for
Sydney. Mr. Norton devoted much
time to a careful examination of
the water reserves, and embodied
the results of his observations in a
series of articles in the Herald on
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
HON. DR. JAMES NORTON, M.L.C
their history and their existing con-
dition. Mr. Norton has been con-
nected with the Church of England
in a representative capacity, but
chiefly in the affairs of his parish
church, St. Mark’s, Darling Point,
of which he was for many years a
churchwarden, and is still a trustee.
He was elected in 1869 a Fellow of
>St. Paul’s College within the Uni-
versity of Sydney. In the year
1870, he was invited to allow him-
self to be nominated Alderman of
Double Bay Ward, Woollahra, for
which he was at once returned
without opposition on his acceding
to the request of the ratepayers.
At the expiration of his term of
aldermanic office, from 1873 to
1875, he was again returned in a
similar way, but though repeatedly
invited to accept the mayoralty of
his borough, he has on all occasions
declined. When about nine years
of age, he went with his father to
live at Elswick, where he acquired
that love of botany and natural
history which he has been enabled
to cultivate, notwithstanding his
close attention to the duties of an
onerous and exacting profession.
Hon. ROBERT FOWLER,
M.L.C., New South Wales, was born
in Parramatta Street, Sydney, in
1839. His father, a native of Tyrone,
Ireland, arrived with other members
of his family, in Sydney, a few years
previously, and started, in 1837, the
extensive pottery works with which
his name was for so long connected,
and which are still being carried on
by his son and grandson. The sub-
iect of this sketch was educated at
Christ Church School, and subse-
quently he studied privately, history,
natural philosophy, and political
economy. Upon the termination of
his school career, he joined his father
in the business, was afterwards
admitted to partnership, and, upon his
father’s death, acquired sole control.
He was elected an alderman of Cook
municipality in 1869, attaining to the
position of mayor of that borough the
following year. During this year,
mainly through his instrumentality,
the municipalities of Cook and
Camperdown were united. He was
again elected mayor of the consoli-
J. Hubert Newman . Sydney.
HON. ROBERT FOWLER, M.L.C.


dated borough the following year, and
again in 1872. He resigned, however,
before the completion of his term.
He was elected alderman for Denison
Ward, in the City Council, in 1872,
and was re-elected every election for
that ward until 1884, when he retired
for a time from active participation
in municipal life. In 1890 he was
returned unopposed to represent
Phillip Ward in the City Council,
and was re-elected in 1893, also in
1896, and again in 1899, when he
was returned unopposed. He was
also returned unopposed in 1900, but
upon the completion of his term he
did not seek re-election. In 1880 he
filled with distinction the position of
Mayor of Sydney. In 1894 he con-
tested Phillip Division, as the Free-
trade candidate, against Sir William
Patrick Manning, and succeeded in
defeating his opponent by a substan-
tial majority. In the following year,
it the general election, he sustained
a defeat. In August of that year he
was nominated to a seat in the Upper
House. Mr. Fowler in 1867, was
married to Jane, daughter of the late
Mr. Joseph Seale, by whom he has
had a family of eight children. His
son, Mr. Robert Fowler, jun., is
now entrusted with the management
and control of the Camperdown
works.
Hon LOUIS FRANCIS HEYDON,
M.L C., was born in Sydney on the
22nd April, 1848, and is a son of
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
HON. L. F. HEYDON, M.L.C.
Jabez King Heydon. Entering poli-
tical life, Mr. Heydon was returned
a member of the legislative Assem-
bly of New South Wales by the
J V
electorate of Yass Plains, and took
a prominent part in the Anti-Free-
trade agitation, being for some
time the leader of the protectionist
party in New South Wales. He
was Minister for Justice in the last
Robertson Administration, from
December, 1885, to February, 1886,
and in February, 1889, was nomi-
nated to the Legislative Council.
Mr. Heydon has been president of
St. Joseph’s Benefit Building So-
ciety since 1892, director of the
Mutual Life Association of Aus-
tralia since 1896, and president of
the St. Vincent de Paul Society
for Australia since 1897.
Hon. WILLIAM ROBSON,
M.L.C. of New South Wales, Ac-
countant, of 164 Pilt Street, Sydney,
was born at Newcastle, N.S.W., on
December 21, 1843. He was edu-
cated first at Robinson’s Academy,
East Maitland, a notable school of
the northern district of the colony,
and afterwards at the Model School,
Wollongong. Upon the termination
of his school career he entered his
father’s office, the late Mr. William
Robson, who was for many years
identified with the southern coal
trade. He afterwards obtained an
appointment under the Colonial
Architect, acting as secretary to
that officer. Finally in 1886 be
entered into business as an account-
ant, and laid the foundations of the
business he now controls. Mr. Rob-
son has always taken a deep and
active interest in political affairs.
Upon his arrival in Sydney, twenty-
five years ago, he was associated
in the movement which brought
about the present system of national
education. In later years, upon the
inception of the movement which
ultimately resulted in the inaugura-
tion of the Commonwealth of Aus-
tralia, he ranged himself without
hesitation under the leadership of
the late Sir Henry Parkes, and Mr.
(now the Rt. Hon. Sir Edmund)
Barton, and in their efforts to create
a great public sentiment in favour of
federation, Mr. Robson rendered in-
valuable assistance on the public
platform and in organisation. In
his advocacy of the cause be never
wavered or permitted his energy to
flag, and in the later days of the
agitation after Mr. Barton bad as
sumed the leadership of the move-
ment, he, with others, was con-
tinuously at work in educating the
public up to a full realisation of the
future destiny of Australia under
a comprehensive system of federa-
tion. He was appointed to the
Upper House in 1900, and since
then has sat upon various select
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
HON. W. ROBSON, M.L.C
committees of the House. Mr.
Robson had charge of the bill
which effected the consummation of
the various Methodist denomina-
tions. This measure was intro-
duced by him and carried through
the Parliament without alteration.
He also passed a short measure
through the House giving relief to
the Friendly Societies in regard to
certain risks and penalties. He took
an active part in the discussion on
the Arbitration Bill, and also of the
Women’s Franchise Bill which he
strenuously supported. Mr. Rob-
son is a prominent layman of
the Methodist Church, and has
sat continuously on the annual
and general conferences for many
years. He has recently been ap-
pointed to serve a second term
of three years as lay general trea-
surer of the Methodist Missionary
Society of Australasia. He was
selected a commissioner to Fiji to
inquire into certain important mat-
ters connected with the Methodist
Church. On his return from Fiji
he contributed several articles to the
press on political and social subjects
as affecting that colony, and these
articles attracted considerable atten-
tion. He is a vice-president of the
Discharged Prisoners’ Aid Society,
and is a member of various other
charitable institutions.


Hon. WILLIAM McCOURT,
M.L.A., Speaker of the Legislative
Assembly of New South Wales,
was born in County Monaghan,
North of Ireland, in 1851. He
arrived in Australia with his parents
while still a youth. After receiving
his education he engaged in news-
paper work. In 1874 he started, at
Moss Vale, the Scrutineer, a journal
conducted for some years at a high
standard of ability. Mr. McCourt
entered the Legislative Assembly as
representative of the constituency of
Camden in 1872. He remained a
member of that Parliament until its
dissolution in 1885. At the general
election of that year he did not stand
for re-election, preferring to devote
the whole of his time to his private
concerns. However, upon the divi-
sion of his old electorate into
Camden and Bowral, he was elected
for the latter, and has continued to
represent that district to the present
Grouzelle Studios Ltd.
HON. WILLIAM MCCOURT, M.L.A
date. In 1894 ie House appointed
him Chairman of Committees and
Deputy-Speaker, which position he
held until June, 1900. During the
sessions of 1898 and 1899, Mr.
McCourt was repeatedly called upon
to fill the position of Speaker, owing
to the absence of Sir Joseph Palmer
Abbott, the then occupant of the
office, through ill health. On the
assembling of Parliament on June
12, 1900, Sir Joseph Abbott (since
deceased), finding that the condition
of his health necessitated his retire-
ment from active public work.
resigned the Speakership, and Mr.
McCourt was unanimously chosen
to fill the vacant position. Since
his accession to this, the highest
office in the gift of the people’s
representatives, in carrying out his
arduous duties, he has fully justified
the confidence reposed in him. It is
not too much to say that in guiding
the deliberations of the House, Mr.
McCourt has earned the esteem of
every party—probably every mem-
ber. He has proved himself the
possessor of a thorough and extensive
knowledge of parliamentary pro-
cedure and of constitutional govern-
ment. Mr. McCourt is the ninth
Speaker in succession since the
establishment of parliamentary in-
stitutions in New South Wales.
Mr. JOHN HENRY CANN,
M.L.A., J.P., ex-Chairman of Com-
mittees in the Legislative Assembly
of New South Wales, was born in
Devonshire, England, in iB6O, and
brought up in Northumberland. He
started work at the early age of nine
years as trapper in a coal-mine, and
worked at coal-mining in various
capacities until he was twenty-two
years of age, when he decided to go
to London. He there joined the
service of the Metropolitan District
Railway, first as porter and after-
wards as signalman, and other posi-
tions. For two years also in London
he followed mercantile pursuits, dur-
ing which period he married. Having
decided to come to Australia, he sold
his home, arriving in Sydney in
March, 1887. He obtained employ-
ment at Kembla and other places at
coal-mining. He subsequently en-
gaged in silver-mining at Broken
Hill, at different mines, for twelve
months, and then entered the service
of the Broken Hill Proprietary Com-
pany. In 1889 he was elected presi-
dent of the local branch of the
Amalgamated Miners’ Association,
then to that position in the district
body of that organisation. In the
general elections of 1891, he was
selected by that body as their candi-
date, and returned unopposed. In
the elections for 1894 he was op-
posed, but succeeded after a contest
in securing the seat. In the fol-
lowing year a dissolution taking
place, at the ensuing general elec-
tion Mr, Cann was again returned
unopposed. In the general election
of 1898 he topped the poll with 1,100
votes. In 1901 Mr. Cann met
opposition, for the second lime
without reverse. In 1898 he was ap-
pointed Deputy-Chairman of Com-
mittees. His duties were rendered
all the more onerous through the
illness of the then Speaker, the late
Sir Joseph Abbott, which necessi-
tated the services of Mr. McCourt
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. JOHN HENRY CANN, M.L.A.
who was then Chairman of Com-
mittees,in the Speaker’s chair, Upon
Mr. McCourt’s election to the
Speakership, in igoo, Mr. Cairn was
elected Chairman of Committees.
Hon. JOHN KIDD, M.P., ex-
Minister for Mines and Agriculture,
is a native of Brechin, County of
Forfar, Scotland. He commenced
work at an early age, and his educa-
tion he received, at broken periods, at
the parish and night schools in Scot-
land. He came to Sydney at the age
of eighteen years, where he remained
for about two-and-a-half years, after
which he proceeded to Campbelltown
and started a general store at that
place. This was in the end of iB6O.
He was engaged in business for
sixteen years, and in 1877 he paid a
visit to the old country. Mr. Kidd
entered Parliament at the latter end
of 1880 as one of the members for
the Camden electorate, and has re-
presented that constituency almost
without a break since that year. He
was Postmaster-General in the Dibbs
Government from 1891 to 1894.
When Mr. (now Sir John) See
formed his government on Sir Wm.
Lyne entering Federal politics, Mr.
Kidd joined the Government as


Minister for Mines and Agriculture,
and presided over that department
from the early part of April, 1901,
till the retirement of the Ministry,
which was occasioned by the ill-
health of the Premier, Sir John See,
at the end of May, 1904. As Minis-
ter for Mines and Agriculture he
introduced several important legisla-
tive measures affecting his department
into Parliament, amongst which may
be mentioned :—The Mines Inspec-
tion Act, 1901, Gold and Mineral
Dredging Act, Regulation of Wages
in Coal Mines Bill, Alines (Eight
Hours) Bill, Coal Alines Regulation
Amending Bill; also the Wine
Adulteration Act, Dairy Industry
Bill, Fertilisers’ Adulteration Bill
and the A ine and Vegetation Diseases
Amendment Bill. Upon the recon-
struction of the Government in June,
1904, with Mr. Thos. Waddell as
Premier, Mr. Kidd still continued to
act as Minister for Alines and Agri-
culture. Air. Kidd has been for the
past few years, and still is, a director
of the Farmers’ and Dairymen’s Milk
Co. Ltd., one of the largest companies
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
HON. JOHN KIDD.
of its kind in the State. He is a
trustee of the Government Savings
Bank, Barrack Street, and was
recently elected a director of the
Australian Mutual Fire Insurance
Company. It may be mentioned
that he contested the Senate elec-
tions in 1901, and, although unsuc-
cessful, polled about 46,000 votes.
Mr. THOMAS FITZH EL-
BERT HAWKINS MACKEN-
ZIE, Member of the Legislative
Assembly of New South Wales,
was born in Melbourne in 1854, Lit
came with his parents to Sydney in
1859. He received a liberal educa-
tion by private tuition, and at fifteen
years of age he went to Fiji, where
he joined his brother, who was
engaged in cotton-growing. A few
J. Hubert Newman . Sydney.
MR. T. F. H. MAcKENZIE.
years later Mr. Mackenzie was ap-
pointed secretary and interpreter on
the Ra coast, and afterwards was
promoted to the secretaryship for
the whole of the Ra coast and
Yassawa, which position he occupied
until the annexation of Fiji by the
British Government in 1874. He
then returned to New South Wales,
and immediately joined his brother
in squatting pursuits on the Mac-
quarie River. In 1883 their enterprise
suffered a severe check through the
drought of that and the preceding
year, and Air. Mackenzie transferred
his activities to Queensland, where
he remained for some time. Re-
turning to New South Wales,
Mr. Mackenzie again engaged in
station life on the Murrumbidgee for
a while, and then came to Sydney to
take control of his father’s business,
who was then in declining health.
He subsequently established himself
in Sydney as an accountant, auditor
and arbitrator, which profession he
still follows. Mr. Mackenzie is an
auditor of the A M.P. Society, also
of the A.J S. Bank and a number of
other important financial institutions.
Mr. Mackenzie has taken an active
interest in public affairs in New
South Wales for the past ten years.
Residing at Homebush, he was
elected to the municipal council of
Strathfield in 1892, of which borough
he is still an alderman. Appointed
mayor in 1898, he occupied that
position for four years in succession.
In politics Mr. Mackenzie is a strong
freetrader, and has been a prominent
member of the Liberal and Free-
trade Party for a number of years.
In igoi he was selected to contest
the important constituency of Can-
terbury in that interest, when he was
elected to sit in the Legislative
Assembly by a substantial majority.
Hon. E. W. O’SULLIVAN, ex-
Minister for Lands in New South
Wales, was born in Tasmania, and
was early in life apprenticed to the
printing trade in Hobart. He came
to New South Wales in 1869, but
after a stay here of about two years,
he returned to his native State, and
later on started a daily newspaper
called the Tasmanian Tribune. The
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney
HON. E. W. O’SULLIVAN.
venture was a success, but young
O’Sullivan sold out his interest in the
paper and went to Alelbourne, when
jn 1874 he, with other printers,
started another newspaper called
the Evening Tribune. This was not
so profitable, so the property was
sold to another proprietary, and the
subject of this sketch became Editor
of the St. A maud Mercury , which


post he held for nearly four years.
Thence he went on to the Melbourne
Argus, >and came back to Sydney
in 1881 to a responsible position
in the Daily Telegraph. He always
took a keen interest in trade union
movements and democratic politics,
and became president of a number
of labour organisations in turn.
In 1882 he stood as a candidate
for West Sydney, but was beaten
by a small majority; a similar result
following an attempt on his part to
win South Sydney. Nothing daunted
by these defeats, however, in 1885
he stood for Queanbeyan, a country
electorate peopled by pastoralists,
farmers, and miners, and embrac-
ing the two towns of Queanbeyan
and Bungendore, his persistency this
time securing its reward. A protec-
tionist with strong labour views, Mr.
O’Sullivan has held his own during
eight subsequent elections, and last
time was returned by the largest
majority that he ever had. He is a
man of considerable energy and force
of character, and an excellent speaker.
Those who know him well give him
credit for earnestness, honesty and
truthfulness —three good character-
istics in a public man. Mr. O’Sulli-
van was the second whip in the
Robertson Government, a member of
the Public Works Committee for four
years, and Deputy-Chairman of
Committees on several occasions. In
1899 he was called to the portfolio of
Public Works in the Lyne Adminis-
tration, and Sir John See, who be-
came Premier, continued him in that
post. As Minister he proposed and
carried out a comprehensive scheme
of public works, including twenty
new railways, twenty-nine tramlines,
a large number of harbour and
sewerage works, &c.; also public
buildings, including the large Central
Railway Station in Sydney, which,
with its approaches, is claimed to be
the handsomest in the world. In
addition to all these and other works
he introduced a policy of water
conservation, drainage, and artesian
wells, in connection with which he is
empowered to spend per
year for five years. His idea is to
take advantage of the depressions
and channels formed by nature, such
as rivers, billabongs, anabranches
and creeks, and by throwing weirs or
dams across them to thus conserve
the surplus waters that run through
them in time of Hood. Nearly two
hundred of such works have cither
been proposed or put in hand, and
great benefits are likely to accrue
from them. Mr. O’Sullivan rapidly
pushed on with artesian wells and
light railways, in order to modify
the results ot the periodical droughts,
by enabling the starving stock to be
carried off before they are too weak to
travel, and take up fodder cheaply and
speedily to those that cannot be
removed. These public works were
of great service during the late pro-
longed drought, as new railways not
only assisted stockowners, but the
money spent upon the works circu-
lated at a time when many industrial
and pastoral operations were para-
lysed. Employment was thus given
to thousands, and the money thereby
circulated proved an inestimable boon
to breadwinners all over the State, at
the same time helping to avert what
might otherwise have been an indus-
trial, commercial and financial crisis.
Upon the resignation of Sir John See
as Prime Minister in June, 1904, and
the reconstruction of the Ministry
under Mr. Waddell, Mr. O’Sullivan
was translated to the office of
Minister for Lands. He is a strong
supporter of Mr. Chamberlain’s pro-
posal for a preferential tariff, and
believes in the consolidation of the
Anglo-Celtic (or English-speaking)
people, to be governed by supreme
council of the master minds of our
race. He is the author of the “ Power
of Mounted Riflemen,” for which he
received warm commendation from
General Hutton; a work on “Pro-
tection or Stagnation ” ; a short tale
called “ Esperanza ” ; and a drama
entitled “ Under the Southern Cross.”
Mr. WILLIAM HERBERT
WOOD, M.L.A,, Chairman of
Committees, was born in Victoria
on the 4th November, 1869. He
was educated under the Public School
system of Victoria and New South
Wales, and spent four years at the
Sydney Grammar School, from
which institution he matriculated
at the Sydney University. For
some years after leaving the Uni-
versity he was occupied inland in
business pursuits with his father,
Mr. Henry Gibson Wood, one of
the early pioneers of Victorian gold-
fields. In 1894 Mr. Wood was
induced to offer himself as a candi-
date for the Eden-Bombala elector-
ate, and was elected in July of that
year as a democratic protectionist,
which electorate he represented until
the redistribution of seats in 1903,
when he was elected for Bega, the
seat lie now occupies in Parliament.
For five years he was the youngest
member of the New South Wales
Parliament. On the formation of
the Lyne Ministry in September,
1899, Mr. Wood accepted the port-
folio of Minister for Justice, which
position he held until the resignation
of the head of that Ministry in 1901.
In June, 1905, Mr. Wood was elected
Chairman of Committees, holding
that position till the House dissolved
in 1907. During his younger days
he took a very active interest in
sporting matters, and was a leading
school athlete, distinguishing himself
more particularly in running con-
tests and in the football field. Mr.
Wood was associated with Colonel
Falk Studios.
MR. W. H. WOOD, M.L.A.
Mackay, who formed the ist Aus-
tralian Horse regiment in 1897, with
which regiment lie was identified for
four or five years, holding the acting
command of same for a period
of twelve months during Colonel
Mackay’s absence in South Africa,
from April, 1900, to July, 1901.
The Hon. JOHN PERRY, M.L.A,
for the Richmond, was born in
Sydney on the 13th July, 1845, and,
like so many other now well-known
citizens, received his education at
the Fort Street School, Sydney. At
the age of 16 he entered the office of
Messrs. Watkins & Leigh, whole-
sale merchants and importers, and
on leaving their service went to
Braidwood for several years. Re-
turning to Sydney, he carried on


business as a broker and general
commission agent on his own ac-
count. In 1876 Mr. Perry went to
the Richmond River district, and
selected land for sugar - growing ;
also commenced business as a
general storekeeper. After nearly
twenty years’ residence in the dis-
trict, Mr. Perry turned his attention
to politics, and in February, 1889,
he was returned to the Legislative
Assembly of New South Wales as
member for the electorate of the
Richmond, with Mr. Ewing and
Mr. B. B. Nicoll, which constituency
he has represented ever since. As
whip to the Opposition party Mr.
Perry's services were much valued,
and in August, 1896, they testified
their appreciation by presenting him
witlna gold watch, suitably inscribed.
Later he became chairman of the
Kerry & Co.
HON. J. PERRY, M.L.A.
Parliamentary Works Committee,
resigning this position in 1899 (Sep-
tember), to accept the portfolios of
Minister for Public Instruction and
also of Labour and Industry, in Sir
William Lyne’s Administration, con-
tinuing to hold those offices in the
late Sir John See’s Administration
until June, 1904 when he accepted
the office of Chief Secretary in Mr.
T. Waddell’s Ministry. Mr. Perry
is a director of Marshall’s Brewery
Company, and T. M. Hall & Co.
Limited.
Mr. JAMES FALLICK, eldest
son of Philip Fallick, was born at
Forchfield, near Cowes, in the Isle
of Wight, England, on the 2nd of
May, 1853. He was educated at New-
town and Carrisbrook; and after
learning the trade of a bricklayer,
worked on the island until 1874,
when he came out to New Zealand,
where he worked for two years.
During that time he was on the
Onemuri goldfields, and in 1876
left New Zealand for Sydney. In
1881 he commenced business as a
J. Saunders.
MR. J. FALLICK, M.L. A.
builder and contractor, and during
the next ten years built St. George’s
Hall, Newtown ; Trocadero, New-
town ; shops in Liverpool Street, and
the second addition to the Public
Works’ offices in Phillip Street. In
1886 he was elected as an alderman
for the municipality of St- Peters,
which position he held for seven
years. In 1888 he was elected
mayor. In 1893 he resigned his
position as an alderman, retired
from business, and left for England
with his wife and family, where he
J 7
remained for three years with his
parents. In 1896 left England to
return to Sydney. In 1901 he was
elected as the representative in the
State Parliament of New South
Wales for the Newtown-St. Peters
division. He is a freetrader, and
was always a great admirer and
supporter of Sir Henry Parkes and
his party. He sat in opposition the
first three years, a stanch sup-
porter of the Liberal Opposition.
In 1904, after the redistribution of
seats, his division was cut up, when
it was necessary to look out for
another constituency. He contested
the Singleton seat successfully, and
was elected to the Public Works
Committee in 1904. With the rest
of the committee, has investi-
gated and reported upon very im-
portant public works, various rail-
ways and tramways, and also the
Barren Jack water conservation and
irrigation works.
Mr. DANIEL LEVY, 8.A.,
LL.B., M.L.A., was born in London
in 1874, aR d arrived in this Stale in
1880. He received his early educa-
tion at the Sydney Grammar School,
of which he was dux. In 1890 he
matriculated at the Sydney Univer-
sity, winning scholarships in classics,
mathematics, and modern languages.
He graduated B.A. in 1893, with
first-class honours, and taking the
gold medal for classics. He then
proceeded to the Law School, and
won the Wigram Allen scholarship
in law, and took the LL B. degree
Freeman & Co.
MR. D. LEVY, M.L.A
with honours in 1895. Mr. Levy
at first adopted the higher branch
of the legal profession, and was
called to the Bar of New South
Wales in 1895. He was Judge’s
Associate from 1898 to igoo. He
then resumed private practice at
the Bar, and was Crown Prosecutor
on several occasions. In 1902,
having decided to enter the other
branch of the profession, he was
admitted as a solicitor, and has since
carried on business on his own
account at Athenaeum Chambers,
Castlereagh Street, Sydney. Prior
to that date, Mr. Levy had taken
considerable interest in political
matters, and in 1901 he was elected
member of the Legislative Assembly
for Sydney-P'itzroy division. He


was re-elected in 1904 for the new
division of Darlinghurst, embracing
the old Fitzroy and the old Bligh
divisions of Sydney. He is a mem-
ber of the Elections and Qualifica-
tions Committee, and the author of
the Registration of Firms Act, 1902.
He is an authority on the subject of
workman’s compensation, and has
drafted and introduced a Bill dealing
with that subject. Mr. Levy is an
active member of the council of the
Liberal and Reform Association.
Mr. Levy was for some time hono-
rary secretary of the New South
Wales Shakespeare Society, editor
of the Australasian Hebrew, honorary
secretary of the Sydney Jewish
Education Board, and president of
the New South Wales Jewish Asso-
ciation. He is also a member of the
East Sydney School Board, trustee
of the Rushcutter’s Bay Park, and
one of the trustees of the New South
Wales Public Library, Mr. Levy
is also president of a number of
amateur athletic and sporting bodies
in and around Sydney.
Mr. DAVID FELL, the sitting
Member for Lane Cove, is a son of
the late Captain John Wilson Fell,
and was born at Langside, Glasgow,
in 1869. He received part of his
education at Dollar Academy, near
MR. D. FELL, M.L.A.
Stirling, in Scotland, and attended
Fort Street School for a short period,
commencing life in one of the lead-
ing public accountant’s firms in
Sydney. Mr. Fell is now a promi-
nent public accountant and auditor,
and has been practising for many
years in Sydney. He is one of the
founders, and a member of the Cor-
poration of Accountants of Australia
(F.C.A.A.), and a Commissioner of
the Peace. Prior to his election
to Parliament, Mr. Fell took an
active interest in both civic and
public affairs, and has acted in an
honorary capacity for many well-
known public institutions. He was
an active factor in the municipal
reform movement in Sydney, which
had the effect of placing new and
up to-date aldermen in the City
Council. Mr. Fell was hon. secre-
tary and chairman for Sir James
Graham for his first political and
municipal election, when he was
returned to the Legislative Assembly
and Municipal Council respectively.
He is a member of the board of
directors of the Sydney Hospital,
and lias held the position of hon.
treasurer for some years. He is one
of the founders and honorary secre-
tary of the Women’s Hospital, and
is a director of several leading com-
mercial and industrial institutions in
the city. In his younger days Mr.
Fell was an active factor in rowing
and other athletic matters, holding
for a time the position of hon. trea-
surer and vice-president of the New
South Wales Rowing Association.
He also has taken a leading part in
musical societies, and is at present a
vice-president of the Philharmonic
Society. Mr. Fell takes a keen
interest in financial matters, and
having had a wide professional ex-
perience in accountancy and practical
business and financial methods, he
commands considerable influence in
the commercial community. Mr.
Fell was elected in August, 1904, as
the first member for the electorate
of Lane Cove of the Legislative As-
sembly, and represents the Liberal
side. Whilst holding Radical ideas,
he is a stanch Conservative in finan-
cial and economic matteis, and his
opinions in this connection command
the respect of the House generally.
His maiden speech in the House
placed him in one of the leading
political positions in the State.
Mr. john McFarlane,
M.L.A., was born in the Hunter
District in 1854, and is a son of
the late John McFarlane, for many
years teacher in the National Board
of Education at various schools in
the State, and afterwards one of the
pioneers of the Clarence District.
The subject of this sketch received
his education at the different public
schools where his father was teach-
ing, and after he resigned from the
service he attended other schools,
and studied privately under his
MR. J. McFARLANE, M.L.A
father’s tuition. Mr. McFarlane
went to the Clarence District with
his parents in 1861, and remained
there engaged in agricultural pur-
suits for 23 years, during which time
the country became transformed
from virgin scrub into rich agricul-
tural farms supporting a large popu-
lation. In 1884 le came to Sydney,
and for nearly 20 years carried on
business as a grain, produce and
timber merchant. In 1887, Mr.
John McFarlane was returned to
the Legislative Assembly for the
electorate of the Clarence, with
which district he has been so closely
associated, and has represented that
constituency ever since, having only
been opposed at three elections since
he was first returned. He was one
of the original movers and strongest
supporters of the North Coast Rail-
way Bill which has recently been
parsed, as his thorough acquaintance
with the district convinced him that
the railway would be the means of
opening up country, and bring good
revenue to the Government. Mr.
McFarlane was chairman of the
Works Committee one Parliament.
Mr. DAVID STOREY, born in
the County Monaghan. Ireland,
1856, shortly after arrival in Aus-
tralia joined Ross, Morgan & Robert-
son, where he gained his first know


ledge of local trade requirements.
During the time he remained with
this fii'in the business increased con-
siderably. and Mr. Storey was so
much impressed with the possibili-
ties of personal advancement that
he determined to start on his own
account. The position the firm of
David Storey & Co- occupies in the
trade and the commercial commu-
nity is evidence of how thoroughly
justified was Mr- Storey’s faith in
his own abilities when he laid the
foundation of the present business
in Pitt Street nearly 30 years ago-
Mr. Storey was first returned to the
Legislative Assembly as member
for Randwick at the general election
in July, 1894, when he defeated
Mr Edmund Barton (later the
Prime Minister of the Common-
wealth and now a Justice of the
High Court of Australia). Mr. Storey
heading the poll by over 400 votes,
and, notwithstanding the strong
opposition he has encountered at
each successive election, he has been
returned to each Parliament from
1895 to 1907- On the accession to
Freeman & Co.
MR. D. STOREY, M.L.A.
power of the Carruthers Govern-
ment Mr. Storey was offered the
portfolio of Chief Secretary, but
found himself unable to accept
office- Mr. Storey has always been
a strong supporter of freetrade, and
was for some time honorary secre-
tary of the Freetrade and Land
Reform League. He has also been
from its first inception an opponent
of federation. A somewhat striking
evidence of the esteem and respect
in which Mr. Storey is held was
given in the large attendance at the
banquet tendered to him in August,
190 L before the last election, when
prominent men in all classes of the
community were present, irrespec-
tive of any difference in their poli-
tical opinions. Outside of politics
and the more serious business of
life, Mr. Storey is equally popular.
He is a prominent member of the
Athenseum,. Civic, and Masonic Clubs,
and in 1893 was president of the
Commercial Travellers’ Club, with
which he has been connected for 20
years, besides being president, pa-
tron and supporter of numberless
athletic clubs and kindred associa-
tions, in all of which he takes great
interest. Mr. Storey was married
in 1883 to Miss Doig, only daughter
of the late Captain Doig, of Leith,
Scotland.
Mr. CHARLES WILLIAM
OAKES was born at Wagga Wagga,
New South Wales, on the 30th No-
vember, 1861, and is a son of the
late James Richard Oakes, an old
colonist and resident of Woollahra
for many years. He received his
education at the Superior Public
School, Paddington, and while still
a youth was apprenticed to the
jewellery and watch-making trade.
Over 17 years ago Mr. Oakes com-
menced business on his own ac-
count in the premises he now occu-
pies, and during his residence of
over 35 years in the district, by his
straightforward business conduct
and active interest in all matters
municipal, parliamentary, or having
for their object the advancement or
benefit of the community in which
he resides, he has gained general
respect and friendship. While still
a young man he joined the Wool-
lahra Literary and Debating So-
ciety, representing them on the
public platform at many inter-
society debates. For four years he
was an alderman of Paddington
municipal council, and on his retire-
ment received many expressions of
appreciation from the council and
ratepayers for his services. In 1901
he was able to comply with the re-
quests he had so often received to
offer himself as a candidate for Par-
liament, and, though he had only a
few weeks’ campaigning, he was re-
turned to the Legislative Assembly
as member for Paddington, and re-
elected in August, 1904. Mr. Oakes
has been connected for many years
with the friendly societies’ move-
ment, in which he takes a keen
MR. C. W. OAKES, M.L.A.
interest. He is also a member of
the organising committee of the
Liberal and Reform Association,
member of the Barrack Street Sav-
ings Bank Trust, the Clark and
Shark Island Trust, the Sydney
Cricket Ground Trust, and chairman
of the New South Wales Rugby
Union.
Mr. GEORGE THOMAS HIND-
MARSH. member for Rous in the
Legislative Assembly of New South
Wales, was born at Gerringong,
Illawarra, on 26th June, 1861. and
is the second son of George John
Hindmarsh, who is one of the oldest-
born Australians in that favoured
locality. Brought up on his father’s
farm, Mr. Hindmarsh had a good
opportunity of acquiring an expert
knowledge of stock of all kinds and
perfect experience of farm life in
New South Wales. At the age of
19 he removed to the Richmond
River, which was only in its pioneer
stage. He selected 640 acres of
cedar brush land in the famous Big
Scrub of the Richmond River in
1881, and there for ten years he
went through the hard work and
privations of a pioneer farmer. In
97
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


1890 he relinquished farming and
commenced business in Lismore as
an auctioneer and estate agent. In
this Mr. Hindmarsh’s experience in
stock and farm life stood him in
good stead. After a year or two
acquiring practical knowledge he
became one of the most popular
stock salesmen in the Lismore dis-
trict, and has passed under his
hammer many of the very fine dairy
cattle for which the Richmond
River is now becoming famous.
Owing to the sudden death of the
then sitting member in January,
1905, Mr. Hindmarsh was chosen
out of five local candidates to con-
test the seat against a. Sydney
candidate, and although he had
never previously taken any active
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. G. T. HINDMARSH, M.L.A
part in public life, was elected at
the top of the poll, owing to his
sterling business qualities and his
popularity amongst the farmers.
Mr. Hindmarsh is the father of four
daughters and four sons.
Mr. THOMAS EDGAR CRES-
WELL, Solicitor, Commissioner for
Affidavits for Victoria, Queensland,
and Tasmania, of Pitt Street, Syd-
ney, member for St. Leonards in the
Legislative Assembly of New South
Wales, is a son of the late Mr.
Thomas Creswell, who continuously
served in the employ of the one firm
of solicitors for upwards of forty
years. Mr. T. E. Creswell was
born at Hobart, Tasmania, on the
18th March, 1852. He was edu-
cated at the Collegiate School in his
native city, at which he took a
scholarship, obtaining, as a result,
one year’s tuition free. Subse-
quently he graduated to the Hobart
High School. Upon completion of
his schooling he entered the office
of a local solicitor, and in the year
1868 Mr. Creswell took the degree
of Associate of Arts, which, in pass-
ing, considerably reduced his term
of articles. He remained in this
office until his admission, in the year
1874. P'or upwards of six years
Mr. Creswell practised in the town
of his birth, but in 1880, considering
that Sydney offered further field for
his labours, he came over and ac-
cepted a position in the office of
Mr. John Dawson, being in the same
year conditionally admitted to prac-
tise in this State, and his admission
was confirmed the following year.
In 1888 he severed his connection
with this firm and established him-
self at his present address. Upon
his arrival in this State Mr. Creswell
selected North Sydney, not only as
a suitable place of residence, but on
account of its foreshores, offering,
as they did, splendid facilities for his
aquatic interests. He was soon in
active work in the interest of that
suburb, being twice elected a coun-
cillor in its municipal administration
and has taken part in two contests
for a seat in the State Parliament.
At the general election of 1904 he
was returned by a large majority,
the then sitting member and three
other candidates being his oppo-
nents. Mr. Creswell is a member
of the local Hospital Board and trea-
surer of the Benevolent Society of
North Sydney since its formation in
June of 1894, and also a member of
the committee of the local School of
Arts. He has always taken an active
part in the work of the Church of
England, having occupied the posi-
tion of churchwarden of Clarist
Church, North Sydney, since 1888,
and that of Parochial Nominator for
the past five years. He has also
represented his parish in Synod for
many years. Eor upwards of thirty-
six years Mr. Creswell has not only
interested himself in aquatics, but
has taken part in over fifty races, in
eight, four and pair oars and double
and single sculls, prom the yea!
1:873 up to the time of his leaving
Tasmania, in the year 1880, in addi-
tiou to others, he started in no less
than twenty principal races, with the
successful record of equal first and
second places. In addition to the
Tasmanian record, he possesses a
worthy career in connection with
rowing in this v State, and in 1887
was elected captain of the North
Shore Rowing Club, which position
he still holds, having been re-elected
annually from that date. Mr. Cres-
well also possesses trophies won at
the High School sports, Tasmania,
1874 and 187 s, as the winner of the
Old Scholars’ Cup for running three
distances, and also two trophies in
connection with the Southern Volun-
teer Artillery, of which corps he was
for some years a member. Mr.
Creswell was for some time a mem-
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. T. E. CRESWELL, M.L.A
ber of the committee- jof the New
South Wales Rowing Association,
and in the year 1890, besides repre-
senting the club as a delegate, was
an elected member of such com-
mittee. He also holds the Royal
Humane Society’s medal for saving
life in 1886, and on the 17th Novem-
ber of 1889 he was instrumental in
rescuing four young men who were
capsized from a dingey off Bradley’s
Head, Sydney harbour.
Mr. SYDNEY JOHN KEARNEY,
Solicitor, of Armidale, New South
Wales, son of Timothy Joseph
Kearney, solicitor, of that town,
was born at Sydney on the 18th
August, 1872. His education was
gained at the Armidale Grammar


School and St. Joseph’s College,
Hunter’s Hill, from whence he
matriculated with honours in
classics. On leaving college, he
entered the office of his father, to
whom he was articled for a term of
four years, subsequently entering
the office of Messrs. Abbott and
Dodds, where he remained for one
year. On his admission to practise
as a solicitor he returned to Armi-
dale and became a partner in the
business of his father. After two
years the latter retired from active
work, leaving a lucrative practice
to his son, by whom the reputation
of the family has been fully sus-
tained, as the first constitutional
point raised under the Federal Con-
stitution Act was raised by Mr.
Kearney in the Armidale Post Office
case (Regina v. Bamford), which
was argued before the Supreme
Court of New South Wales prior to
the establishment of the High
Court. The interest manifested by
him in political matters bore early
fruit, the electors of Armidale
honouring him by electing him as
their representative at a by-election
D. Solomons.
MR. S. J. KEARNEY, M.L.A
in 1903. His short term, however,
proved satisfactory, and he was
re-elected to Parliament at the
general election held in June, 1904.
Mr. Kearney has found time to
identify himself with movements
lor the welfare of the district, and
has been connected with every form
of athletic sport during his residence
in Armidale, having been for years
president of the New England
Cricket Association, president of
the New England Rugby Football
Union, vice-president of the Cours-
ing and Jockey Clubs and chairman
of the board of trustees of the
Armidale Sports Ground. Mr.
Kearney has been closely associated
with the Armidale Hospital for
m ny years, and is an active
worker in the charitable move-
ments of Armidale.
Mr. WILLIAM FLEMING
LAIIMER, M.L.A. for Woollahra,
son of \\ illiam Latimer, was born
at Enniskillen, Ireland, in 1858. and
obtained his education at the Eras-
mus Smith school, near Florence
Crown Studios.
MR. W. F. LATIMER, M.L.A.
Court, Enniskillen ; and at an early
age was apprenticed to a firm at
Black Lion, in the soft goods trade,
with which he has been associated
all his life. From 1877 1° he
served with three different firms ;
the first in Glasgow, the next in
Dublin, and the last at Mount Mel-
lick, Queen’s County, Ireland. On
the 17th March, 1883, Mr. Latimer
arrived in Sydney, and almost imme-
diately entered the employ of Wil-
liam Perry & Co., wholesale mer-
chants and warehousemen. At the
end of twelve months he decided to
test the possibilities of Woollahra as
a suitable place for starting business
on his own account, and commenced
business at Queen Street; but placed
a manager in charge, retaining his
position with Messrs. Perry & Co.
until 1886, when lie resigned to enter
into partnership in a business in
Redfern. At the end of thirteen
months the partnership was dis-
solved by mutual consent, and Mr.
Latimer then decided to take over
the control of the Woollahra busi-
ness himself, and concentrate his
energies in its management. In his
hands the business increased ; and
he was able to take a trip to the old
country, and revisit the scenes of his
youth. On his return to Sydney, in
response to the request of the rate-
payers of Woollahra, he offered him-
self as a candidate for election as an
alderman of the council, and was
elected in 1897. As evidence of the
esteem and respect in which lie is
held, Mr. Latimer has been elected
mayor for eight years in succession.
In July, 1901, Mr. Latimer was
elected a member of the Legislative
Assembly for the electorate of
Woollahra, and re-elected in August
1904. He is a deacon of the
Woollahra Congregational Church,
Jersey Road, and a member of the
local School Board, and has earned
the respect and friendship of all
classes of the community.
Mr. MARK FAIRLES MOR-
TON, M.L.A., son of the late Henry
Gordon Moiton (one of the early
Crown Studios
MR. M. F. MORTON, M.L.A.
pioneers of the Shoalhaven district),
was born on the 28th September,
1866, at Nowra, N.S.W.. and re-
ceived his education at the public
schools, and also at Hurstville Col-
lege, Goulburn, under Dr. J. D. Sly.
From school he entered the employ
of a firm of American engineers,
holding the contract for the Shoal-
haven bridge; but the engineering
99
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


profession having no attraction for
him, he joined the firm of Messrs.
Harrison, Jones & Devlin, with
whom he remained for ten years ;
during the latter portion of the time
acting as auctioneer for the firm.
Mr. Morton then returned to the
Shoalhaven district, and entered into
partnership with Mr. John Stewart,
with whom he established the firm
of Stewart, Morton & Co., auction-
eers and general estate agents, Mr.
Morton has been an alderman of
Nowra for many years, and in igoi
filled the office of mayor ; then an
opportunity presented itself to take
a step higher, and he contested the
election of that year, and succeeded
in obtaining the seat as member for
the Shoalhaven electorate in the
Legislative Assembly. On the re-
distribution of seats, in 1904, Mr.
Morton was returned for Kiama by a
substantial majority, and on his re-
turn to the House had the honour of
being elected a member of the elec-
tions and qualifications committee.
The firm of Stewart, Morton & Co.
are largely interested in the dairying
industry ; and have sent large num-
bers of the best dairy cattle to the
other States.
Captain WILLIAM MILLARD,
M.L.A., son of tlie late Richard
Crown Studios.
CAPTAIN W. MILLARD, M.L.A.
M illard, was born on the Hth Janu-
ary, 1844, at Wollongong, in which
district he has spent nearly all his
life. He was educated at the pub-
lic school, and then worked at his
father’s business of a tanner, in due
course carrying it on for himself for
some years Residing in a rich
agricultural and fertile district, it
is only natural that the subject of
this sketch should have become
interested in dairying, and carried
on in conjunction with his business
a dairy farm. In this line he gained
practical experience, which, materi-
ally enhanced the value of his
opinions on questions arising in con-
nection with the dairying industry.
Since Captain Millard’s election to
Parliament in 1891 as member of the
Legislative Assembly for Moruya, he
has always been an active supporter
of all legislation tending to the closer
settlement of the people on the land,
and the development of dairying,
with proper inspection of dairies.
Captain Millard was returned to
Parliament as a supporter of the
Reid Ministry, and through the life
of five Parliaments has consistently
followed and supported the party
whose policy was framed on the
lines of the Government he was
first returned to support- For
over twenty years Captain Mil-
lard was connected with the De-
fence Force of the State, join-
ing in the days when the first
volunteer regiment was formed,
and being elected an officer by the
regiment. On the constitution of
the forces under the Defence Force
Act his regiment became the 2nd
Infantry Regiment, and Captain
Millard was appointed to the com-
mand of “F” Company, winch
position he retained till about fifteen
years ago, when he resigned. As a
member of the Public Works Com-
mittee, he has taken part in con-
sidering some large works ; notably,
the Barren Jack Water Conserva-
tion and Irrigation scheme, several
railways, &c-
Mr. JOHN JACKSON
CALVERT, 1.5.0., Clerk of the
Parliaments of New South Wales,
is a son of the Very Rev. Thomas
Calvert, D.D., Dean of Manchester,
and Juliana, eldest daughter of Sir
Charles Watson, Bart., of Wratting
Park, Cambridgeshire, and “ Ful-
mer,” Bucks, who married Juliana
Copley, a sister of the Marchioness
of Abercorn and Lady Manners.
The baronetcy is at present held by
Sir Wager Watson-Copley —the two
baronetcies of Watson and Copley
being combined. Except the present
baronet, jMr. Calvert is the sole sur-
vivor of those specially named in
the effiail under the late Sir Joseph
Copley’s will. Upon the death of
Sir Wager both baronetcies will
become extinct. He was educated
at Shrewsbury School and Brasenose
College, Oxford, and arrived in New
Crown Studios. Sydney.
MR. JOHN JACKSON CALVERT.
South Wales in May, 1853, and was
appointed by Sir Charles Fitzroy to
the department of the Colonial Sec-
retary —an office then held by the
late Sir Edward Deas Thomson.
On the inauguration of responsible
government ne was transferred by
the Donaldson Ministry to the office
of Clerk of Select Committees in
the Legislative Assembly, of which
Mr. Richard O’Connor, father of
Mr. Justice O’Connor, was then the
clerk. On the death of Mr. John
Black, a brother of the Hon. Regi-
nald Black, M.L.C., Mr. Calvert was
appointed by Sir Charles Cowper to
the Legislative Council Department,
and gradually rose to his present
position on the retirement of Mr.
Richard O'Connor in 1871. He and
Mr. Clapin, the Clerk-Assistant of
the Legislative Council, are the only
officials who have continuously served
Parliament since the initiation of
responsible government. Mr. G. H.
Cox, the only member who had been
in Parliament during this period, died
in igoi. During bis long official
career Mr. Calvert has been inti-
mately associated with all the great
men whose names are indelibly
written in the history of the State —
Mr. Wentworth, Sir James Martin,
Sir J. B. Darvall, Sir Stuart Donald-
son, Sir Plenry Parkes, Sir Charles
Cowper, 6 Sir John Robertson, Sir


John Hay, Sir T. A. Murray, Mr.
William Forster, Mr. W. B. Dailey,
Mr. Joseph Docker and many others,
and his parliamentary reminiscences
of many of them would, if published,
doubtless prove full of interesting
matter. He has kept all the uecessa: y
notes for a constitutional history of
New South Wales under Responsible
Government, and hopes on his re-
tirement from office to publish a work
somewhat similar to the able publi-
cation with reference to Canada by
Mr. Todd. Mr. Calvert has taken
an active interest in all manly sports.
He was, in conjunction with the late
Mr. Peter Curtis, hon. secretary of
the Albert Cricket Club—the then
leading club in New South Wales.
For some years he was a vice-presi-
dent of the New South Wales
Cricket Association, and acted on
the selection committee in connec-
tion with the intercolonial cricket
contests. He has filled the position
of president of the New South
Wales Rugby Football Union for
upwards of thirty years, and acted
as referee in many of the early
matches between the Sydney and
University Clubs. He was president
of the first cycling club, and vice-
president of the original Amateur
Athletic Club. He acted as a
member of the Council of the Agri-
cultural Society when Sir William
Macarthur was its president, and
during all the exhibitions in Prince
Alfred Park he officiated as one of
the small committee who arranged
and conducted same. He was an
active member of the A.J.C. when
Mr. Buchan Thomson was its hon.
secretary and Sir Edward Deas
Thomson its president. At that
time Sir John Lackey, Mr. John
Lamb, Mr. Archie Thompson, Mr.
J. Rowley, Mr. W. McEnilly and
the Hon. W. Long were amongst
its influential supporters. In those
days lie contributed several articles
and letters to the sporting"'press
under the nom de plume, with regard
to the turf, of “ Newmarket,” and as
regards cricket, of “Old 1.Z.” He
still retains the strongest personal
interest in all legitimate sports. On
King’s Birthday, 1904, His Majesty
conferred on Mr. Calvert the dis-
tinction of the “ Imperial Service
Order.” Mr. Calvert married a
daughter of Mr, James Barker, a
member of an old and highly re-
spected family in New South Wales,
and has two sons and one daughter.
The latter is married and resident
in England.
Mr. RICHARD ALDOUS
ARNOLD, Clerk of the Legislative
Assembly, is a native of New South
Wales, having been born at Carlton
Cottage, Paterson River, in 1849.
He is a son of the late Hon. W. M.
Arnold, Speaker of the House from
1865 to 1875. Mr. Arnold’s primary
education was received at his home
by private tuition, and in the year
1858 he went to England and spent
six years at Rugby and subsequently
a year studying in Germany. In
1866 he returned to New South
Wales, and in January of the follow-
ing year was appointed to the public
service of the New South Wales
Government and served in the Roads
J . Hubert Newman . Sydney
MR. R A. ARNOLD.
Branch, Public Works Department,
under the late Mr. Christopher
Bennett, Commissioner and Engin-
eer for Roads. In October, 1868,
he effected an exchange and was
transferred to the temporary staff of
the Legislative Assembly Depart-
ment and four months later was
appointed on the permanent staff in
the capacity of clerk in charge of
printed papers. The various offices
of the department were, in due
course, held by the subject of this
sketch who, at the age of thirty-
eight, was appointed second clerk
assistant to the Legislative Assem-
bly and in January, 1888, he was
promoted to, and for the ensuing
fifteen years performed the duties
of, clerk assistant to that depart-
ment. In February, 1903, Mr.
Arnold was appointed acting-clerk
of the Legislative Assembly during
the absence on leave of Mr. F.
W. Webb, C.M.G., and on the
occasion of Mr. Webb’s retirement
from the position a year later, was
appointed by the Governor’s com-
mission to his present position.
Outside his official life the military
volunteer system of this State re-
ceived his personal attention, for, in
1868, he joined the Volunteer Ar-
tillery as a gunner, and after passing
the various ranks of the non-com-
missioned grade, eventually received
his commission as lieutenant and was
attached for duty to the No. 4 Bat-
tery, New South Wales Volunteer
Artillery, then stationed at Sydney.
After eight years’ service he was re-
luctantly compelled to resign his
commission owing to the duties of
his office on the Assembly staff pre-
venting him from attending the
necessary parades. Whilst belong-
ing to the Volunteer Force he took
considerable interest in rifle-shoot-
ing, organised many matches with
other corps, regularly competed at
the National Rifle Association’s
annual meetings, and on one occa-
sion was the proud winner of the
officers’ cup, shooting against all
commissioned officers. Mr. Arnold
takes a interest in football.
He was a prominent player and for
many years captain of the old Walla-
roo Club, of which he was one of the
founders. He was also instrumental
in starting the New South Wales
Rugby Union, in which he has held
office from its inception; he still
holds the post of honorary treasurer.
In 1900 the members of this union
presented him with a gold watch in
token of their esteem and as a fitting
memento of his twenty-five years of
honorary services on the executive.
In athletic sport, Mr. Arnold has
always taken and still takes a deep
interest. He, with a few kindred
spirits, initiated the Sydney Amateur
Athletic Club in 1872, and thus laid
the foundation of the wide-spread in-
terest now taken, both by numerous
athletic clubs and also by nearly
every school in the State, in athletic
sports. In this club Mr. Arnold
held the post of secretary for a
number of years. He has been
president of several of a similar
nature.
Mr. WILLIAM STEWART
MOWLE, Second Clerk Assistant
to the Legislative Assembly, was
born in Sydney in the year 1867, and
was educated principally at the
Sydney Grammar School. In the


year 1882 he entered the London
Chartered Bank of Australasia as a
iunior clerk. In 1884 he was ap-
pointed junior clerk in the office of
the Legislative Assembly. In that
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. W. S. MOWLE.
year he passed the Civil Service
examination, and from that date
received rapid promotion, passing
through the various offices, until, on
Ist February, 1903, he was appointed
to his present position that o!
Second Clerk Assistant to the Legis-
lative Assembly. In 1890 he joined
the Sydney A troop of the New
South Wales Regiment of Lancers
under Capt. A. T. Dodds, afterwards
served under Capt. (now Lieut-Col.)
W. L. # Vernon until the end of 1894,
having attained the non-commis-
sioned rank of sergeant. Mr. Mowle
is a son of Mr. S. M. Mowle, Usher
of the Black Rod, Legislative
Council.
Mr. ALEXANDER CAMP-
BELL BUDGE, J.P., Clerk of the
Executive Council of New South
Wales, is a native of Scotland, and
received a liberal education in Edin-
burgh. In 1858 he came to New r
South Wales and took up his resi-
dence at Sydney. Shortly after
his arrival he entered the govern-
ment service as a clerk in the
Survey Department, and during the
next few years made rapid pro-
gress. On 16th October, 1863,
he was appointed to the position
of clerk to the Executive Council,
the duties of which office he has
performed ever since In this position
he has been closely associated with
the administration of the govern-
ment of New South Wales for over
forty years, and has seen the rise
and fall of twenty consecutive
administrations. He has enjoyed
the confidence of every Governor of
the colony since Sir John Young
(Lord Lisgarj filled that exalted
position, and possesses many proofs
of their friendship. As clerk of the
Executive Council, Mr. Budge has
been brought into close personal
contact with many of the leading
public men of the mother State
of the Commonwealth since the at-
tainment of responsible government
in 1851; and he has been secretary to
all the Intercolonial Conferences
from 1867 to 1896, in which the duties
were very arduous, as neither the
press nor shorthand writers were
allowed to be present. He also
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. A. C. BUDGE.
assisted at the installation oi Lord
Hopetoun as the first Governor-
General of the Commonwealth, and
acted for some time as clerk of the
General Council of the first Common-
wealth Government. On three oc
casions he accompanied the Right
Hon. George H. Reid, as secretary,
to Tasmania and Brisbane when
federation was being considered.
Mr. Budge can claim the honour of
having been in the confidence of such
men ' as the Rev. John Dunmore
Lang, Sir James Martin, Sir Henry
Parkes, Sir Saul Samuel, Sir Charles
Cow'per, Sir John Robertson, J.
Squire Farnell, Sir Alexander Stuart
and many others whose names are
illustrious in the history of the colony
Mr. Budge has been content through-
out his lengthened official career to
confine his attention to the duties of
his high office, consequently he has
never taken any leading part in
public or social movements. He
is fond of a quiet country life, and
has always resided in one of
the less populous suburbs, wffiere
he can spend his spare moments
in adding to the attractiveness
of his home. Mr. Budge has
held a Commission of the Peace
for New' South Wales for over thirty
years.
Mr. LAURENCE JOSEPH
HARNETT, Sergeant-at-Arms,
Legislative Assembly of New South
Wales, is a son of the late Laurence
Harnett, Esq , J.P., of Rosebrook
Station, near Cooma, Monaro, New'
South Wales, who was one of the
early pioneers of the district. The
subject of this sketch was born at
Rosebrook He was educated, for
some time at the Goulburn Grammar
School, under Mr. Paterson, and sub-
sequently spent several years with
that able tutor, Mr. J. F. Castle, of
Calder House, Eveleigh. At the con-
clusion of his studies he returned to
Monaro, and remained for a short
time on the Rosebrook Station ; and
in the year iB6O he was appointed
a clerk in the Legislative Assembly.
After fourteen years’ service, during
w'hich time he passed through the
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR L. J. HARNETT.
various grades of the office, in 1874
he received the appointment, by
commission, as Sergeanl-at- Arms to
the Legislative Assembly.


FEDERATION.
The first step towards national greatness was
taken when federal union between the Australian
colonies was accomplished, at the end of the nine-
teenth century. The work of laying foundations for
a commonwealth necessarily comes but once in its
history as real political union between different States
must ever be made indissoluble. The narrow pro-
vincial spirit fostered for a long time within the limits
of any State is not, however, easily supplanted by
much wider sympathies. Acts of retaliation in the past
are also not easily forgotten or forgiven, even by ad-
joining settlements with similar origin. The experi-
ences of prior national unions consequently show
that States accustomed to legislating against each other
cannot all at once be induced to lay aside their wide
differences for a promotion of the common good.
Federal union has been sometimes forced by great
crises which make it imperative that adjoining States
should come together for their own mutual preserva-
tion. Happily Australian Federation was born peace-
ably, coming not because of imminent danger from
abroad or pressure from without, but from a firm
conviction that gross anomalies were being fostered
which could only be swept away by merging the various
Australian settlements again into one. Many political
problems were waiting that solution, only possible
when federal union was complete. Leading colonial
statesmen, realising these difficulties, saw but one way
of overcoming them, and so gave their powerful advo-
cacy in favour of early union.
For nearly fifty years from the settlement in
Australia the territory of New South Wales comprised
everything east of the 129th meridian of longitude,
including nearly the whole present extent of Queens-
land, Victoria, Tasmania and South Australia. Out
of this enormous territory the province of South Aus-
tralia, which has never yet been permanently settled,
was carved in 1836. Tasmania became a separate
colony in 1826. The Port Phillip and Moreton Bay
districts were settled from Sydney, and continued to
form part of New South Wales until the urgent demands
of the settlers for local self-government led to the
separation of Victoria in 1851, and of Queensland in
1859- Western Australia was settled in 1826 and
formed into a colony in 1829- The agitation in the
southern and northern portions of New South Wales
only proved successful owing to the importance of the
settlements, in which Melbourne and Brisbane formed
commercial centres, and the difficulty then experienced
of securing effective representation of local wants at
a distant seat of government, in the absence of the
system of ready communication available at the pie-
sent day.
The idea of Australian Federation is as old as the
fact of Australian subdivision. In the early days, of
course, there was no need of closer union, for the Aus-
tralia of that period was little besides a handful of
garrisons and prisons ; isolation was an object, and
intercourse was restricted to the utmost. The first
energy of pastoral pioneering did little to bring the
several parts of the British settlements in this country
together. Gradually, with the expansion of the con-
stitution, some form of common Australian action in
the larger affairs of the continent filled the minds of
our leading public men. But it was not until after
several tentative beginnings had failed, and one serious
scheme which was ratified by Imperial legislation had
broken down, not until the commanding influence of
Sir Henry Parkes, and the unswerving support of the
leading newspapers of the mother colony overcame the
inertia that the movement took definite shape. In-
difference to Federation, however, was not confined
to New South Wales- The tardy adhesion of Western
Australia and Queensland, the refusal to come in of
New Zealand, and the fact that minorities were found
J. Hubert Newman Ltd,
LORD HOPETOUN.
to oppose unification at every stage in all the colonies,
indicate that, as with all great measures of politics,
Federation was a slow and disputed evolution.
During the first half of last century the colonists
had many public demonstrations to endeavour to
secure from the Imperial Government the benefit of
representative institutions, independent judicial au-
thorities, freedom of the press, cessation of trans-
portation, opening of public lands and other desired
reforms, but the interests affected when federal union
was finally accomplished were far greater than those
involved in any previous agitation. In the early days
of New South Wales the Colonial Office in London was
opposed to some of the aims of the colonists, and was
slow to give effect to certain of their requirements-
But owing to the gold discoveries in the middle of last
century, and the consequent large increase in popu-
lation by immigration, responsible government had a
few years afterwards to be given to New South Wales,


Victoria, Tasmania, South Australia and Queensland.
The Imperial authorities were also desirous that the
self-governing dependencies in Australia should become
federated, owing, no doubt, to the difficulty of dealing
with so many different legislatures when uniformity of
action by them was needed in matters of general con-
cern. It was also urged by a local advocate for the
union of the States, besides the great boon of inter-
colonial freetrade, “ there would be gains in economy
and efficiency in defence, in the status and powers of
the colonies, in naturalisation, in the power to exclude
undesirable aliens, in economy and efficiency of postal
and telegraphic services, in quarantine, in marine, in
the control of the currency, in banking laws, in copy-
right, in trade marks and patents, in having uniform
marriage and divorce laws, in providing for facilities
for recovering debts and claims, in regard to the influx
of criminals, in the power to make treaties with other
countries, in the regulation of rivers, in the consoli-
dation of the debts of the colonies, and in regard to
the control of the railways.” These are advantages
sufficiently numerous and important to make the
federation desirable ; notwithstanding that, it must
necessarily take much time and wise administration to
secure in full all these benefits
It has been well pointed out that probably the
subdivision of the Australian colonies has not yet
reached its limit- As the population spreads itself
over the various areas that lie untouched and almost
unknown, the need for further subdivision may become
self-evident. Agitation, feeble and intermittent, for
separation, both in New South Wales and Central and
Northern Queensland has sometimes during the past
half-century occurred, but the great majority of the
peoples of these States were, and are now, largely
opposed to further dismemberment. The Northern
Territory of South Australia, on account of its isolated
position and tropical climate, is obviously destined to
form a separate colony* and the great size of Western
Australia makes further subdivision probable. But
the multiplication of States need not disturb the Fede-
ration, and may even make some of its problems easier
to solve at some distant date when increased population
and greater development justify such action.
To their lasting credit the past generation of our
public men saw as plainly as their most modern suc-
cessors the dangers of disunion, if not the means of
bringing about a lasting union. From the very begin-
ning of the separation epoch, colonial statesmen, whilst
recognising the need for subdivision, foresaw the neces-
sity for partial union for purposes of common concern,
and especially for the establishment of a common
tariff ; and they drew towards one another for aid in
the common and external concerns of these young
but aspiring and prosperous communities. The means
for common action was found in the intercolonial con-
ference, at which the political or the permanent heads
of the colony met and resolved upon what might be
advised either in legislation or administration. And
even when conferences were fruitless, as they often
were owing to strong divergences of interest or policy,
that failure did but emphasise the ultimate necessity
of some closer union. Jn England as well as in Australia
projects of constitutional union continued to be favour-
ably entertained ; but though the greater minds of the
time sought to advance such a consummation, the
people, not yet awakened to the growing necessities of
their colonies, refused to enter into anything more
than a voluntary and temporary partnership for some
one definite and immediate object. Perhaps they were
wise in their political instincts. Certainly a form of
federal union such as might have commended itself to
Wentworth’s committee of the old Legislative Council
of this colony would hardly have answered even for
New South Wales half a century later. These old
projects of Federation did little more than keep before
the abler minds of Australia an ideal of the broader
and more generous way of dealing with the joint con-
cerns of the Australian people.
In 1849 a committee of the Privy Council, at the
instance of Earl Grey, the Secretary of State for the
Colonies, inquired into the government of the Austra-
lian colonies, and had recommended that Victoria
should be formed into a separate colony with a separate
legislature : but that to provide for certain common
purposes there should also be a central authority,
consisting of a Governor-General of Australia and a
General Assembly, to legislate on specified subjects of
intercolonial interest. These recommendations were
embodied in a Bill introduced into the Imperial Par-
liament in 1850, granting partial self-government to
this colony ; but the clauses relating to the establish-
ment of a Federal Legislature, though actually carried
in both Houses, caused so much opposition that they
were abandoned by the English Government as pre-
mature, and the Act as passed providing for the sepa-
ration of Victoria, postponed the question of partial
reunion for further consideration.
Again, prior to responsible government being
granted in 1856 to New South Wales and Victoria,
statesmen in both colonies unsuccessfully advocated
that provision should be made for the establishment of
a General Assembly to legislate on matters of common
Australian concern. In 1852 a committee of the
Legislative Council of New South Wales, including
Wentworth, Martin, Cowper, Macleay and Macarthur.
appointed to draft the contemplated constitution of
this colony, brought up a report, one clause of which
advised the establishment of a General Assembly for
the colonies to make laws on matters of intercolonial
import. But the Constitution Acts were eventually
passed by the Imperial Parliament without any pro-
vision of the kind, the Home Government being of
opinion (to quote Lord Russell’s despatch) that “ The
present is not a proper opportunity, although they will
give the fullest consideration to any propositions on
the subject which may emanate in concurrence from
the respective legislatures.” In 1857 a committee of
the Victorian Legislative Assembly reported strongly
in favour of Federation ; and again in 1861 the New
South Wales Parliament passed an Act authorising the
Government to appoint one or more of its members to
represent this colony in a federal council of strictly
limited objects.
During the next two years the question of federal
union was kept before the legislatures of the several
colonies by means of select committees, royal com-
missions and reports. The leading spirits seem to


have been Sir E. Deas Thomson, in New South Wales,
and Sir Charles Gavan Duffy, in Victoria ; but the
movement was confined to a few far-sighted politicians,
and produced no general effect. Their efforts, how-
ever, helped to leaven the Parliamentary mind, and
the result was a period of intercolonial conferences,
dating from 1863 onwards, which were prolific in reso-
lutions in favour of some form of union, but led to no
definite scheme and no direct result. At this time the
late Daniel H- Deniehy—an Australian disciple of the
philosophic De Quincey—was lamenting, in an eloquent
plea for the federation of the colonies, the difficulty of
weaning many of the politicians of that day from the
sole advocacy of local wants. In 1870 a Royal Com-
mission appointed by the Victorian Ministry pronounced
favourably as to the practicability and desirableness
of Federation, Then in 1876 it fell to Sir Hercules
Robinson, as Governor of New South Wales, to deliver
at Albury a speech a pr >p -s of the border duties and
the failure of attempts to remove them—an appeal for
wider federal agreement- It was one of those states-
manlike speeches of his which, while hardly passing
beyond the limits imposed upon vice-regal public
utterances, would often lift a question into the minds
of political leaders. It is safe to assume the echoes of
that Albury speech lingered in the brain of Sir Henry
Parkes, and perhaps inspired the last and greatest
effort of his life.
The Federal Council.
The year 1883 brought the question of Federation
a step further forward ; for a conference of all the
Australasian colonies, including Fiji, was held at Syd-
nev in that year to consider the question of French
claims to the New Hebrides —a subject still of great
dissatisfaction in the Commonwealth —and the rela-
tions of foreign Powers, more especially in reference to
New Caledonia and New Guinea. The delegates pre-
sent were Sir Alex. Stuart, Sir George Dibbs and the
Hon. William Bede Dailey, representing New South
Wales ; the Hon- Sir Graham Berry, J. Service and Mr.
Giblin, representing Victoria; the Hons. Sir S. W-
Griffith and Sir J. F. Garrick, representing Queensland ;
the Hons. Sir John Downer and Sir J. Bray, represent-
ing South Australia ; the Hon. N- Brown and Mr-
Kerford, representing Tasmania ; the Hon. Sir M-
Fraser, representing Western Australia ; the Hons-
Sir H- Atkinson and Sir F- Whittaker, representing
New Zealand ; and Sir G. W- Des Voeux, the Governor
of Fiji. The New Zealand delegates had only a watch-
ing brief- Sir Henry Parkes was not a member of this
conference, nor does he appear at any stage to have
approved of the outcome- This convention led to an
Imperial statute being passed in 1885 for the creation
of a Federal Council of Australasia, with power to
legislate on a narrow list of matters, neither of Imperial
nor of purely local interest, such as fisheries, inter-
colonial legal process, and the influx of criminals- Its
purpose, as defined in the Imperial statute, was “ to
deal with such matters of common Australian interest,
in respect to which united action is desirable, as can
be dealt with without unduly interfering with the
management of the internal affairs of the several colo-
nies by their respective legislatures-’ ’ The Act thus
provided a kind of Federal Legislature ior such of the
Australian colonies as cared to join, and lor a few
years from 1885 formed a loose bond of union for legis-
lative purposes between Victoria, Queensland, Western
Australia and Tasmania- South Australia also joined
for a time, but afterwards withdrew- New South
Wales and New Zealand never would join- ibis
Federal Council consisted only of two delegates from
each colony represented, meeting at Hobart every two
years, and did not effect a true federation, but only a
loose confederation, like that of the American States
of 1771, “ which had no judiciary to enforce its acts,
and no executive head to represent and administer its
authority.” It had no real legislative powers since its
Acts had to be accepted and administered by the local
legislatures ; it had no executive power at all ; it had
no revenues ; it had no more effectual authority than
any ordinary intercolonial conference- It met six or
seven times and passed Acts dealing with fisheiies, the
military stations at Albany and 1 hursdav Island, legal
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
LORD TENNYSON.
process and some minor matters- But it never had
real life, and had no influence on Australian politics-
On these grounds New South Wales refused to join the
Federal Council, which partly for this reason, and
partly owing to its want of popular initiative, and its
imperfectly representative basis, achieved no important
work. This Federal Council, which remained as a
deliberative body up to the year 1899, holding its final
ordinary meeting at Melbourne early in that year,
proved emphatically that nothing short of complete
union could accomplish the end in view, as the Council
possessed no real power or machinery to carry out its
decisions.
Steps Leading to the First Convention-
The difficulties in approaching federation were
great owing to the legislation in each of the colonies,
the fiscal policies of which were so strongly at variance,
some being slightly protective, others strictly so, while
New South Wales had always maintained a freetrade
policy, which under the Premiership of Mr. George H.


Reid had been made still more pronounced than at any
other time- Thus one of the most difficult political
problems confronted the people of the mother State at
the outset, and, without some compromise, threatened
to block the way to Federation. Another question of
equal importance was the situation of the seat of
government, so that even the selection of the site for
a permanent capital is still a burning question owing
in' justice to the people of the parent State, should no
longer be delayed.
Every step taken in the direction of Federation
created the greatest interest, and received friendly
criticism from all parts of the British Empire- Keen
and experienced Imperial statesmen saw the initial
steps being taken towards welding into one common-
wealth the disjointed States of Australia, and gauged
LORD NORTHCOTE.
to the non-carrying out of the compact that it should
be in New South Wales Other and minor questions
there were, but when the Constitution Act was even-
tually passed the fiscal and federal capital questions
•evoked much strong controversy, and their final settle-
ment still remains to tax the efforts of astute states-
men so as to find those satisfactory solutions, which,
even more accurately than those engaged in the contest,
the colossal barriers that had to be surmounted, so
that each attempt to overcome them met with their
sympathy and support. The final settlement, how-
ever, remained with the Australian people, and when
the time came the national spirit evoked overcame all
difficulties that stood in the way. The question of


Australian naval defence was one that at various times
presented itself for settlement, and at a conference of
Australasian delegates, held in London in 1887, a
scheme of defence was approved, and a consequent
Imperial statute provided for the maintenance —
partly at the expense of the colonies —during a period
of ten years on the Australian station, of seven ships
of war, four of which were to be kept permanently in
commission, the other three being held in reserve in
Australian ports.
In 1889-90, under the hand of Sir Henry Parkes,
the federal movement of to-day took shape. The
breakdown of the Federal Council, the recent celebra-
tion of the centenary of Australia, and the visit of
Major-General Bevan-Edwards to advise upon defence,
offered the then Premier of the colony the opportunity
of launching Federation with fairer prospects than
ever before. It was in the course of a visit to Bris-
bane, in 1889, that Sir Henry Parkes publicly an-
nounced his leadership of the new federal movement.
The rest of the year was occupied in negotiations with
the other Premiers, but, instead of the usual inter-
colonial conference which had been wont to deal with
the relations of the colonies inter se, the method finally
adopted was a special meeting of the Federal Council
at Melbourne- This historic gathering took place from
February 6 to 14, 1890, and the delegates were For
New South Wales, Sir Henry Parkes and Mr. (since Sir)
Wm. McMillan ; for Victoria, Mr. Deakin and Mr. D.
Gillies ; for Queensland, Sir S'. W. Griffith and Mr- John
Macrossan ; for South Australia ; Dr. (since Sir John)
Cockburn and Mr. T. Playford ; for Tasmania, Mr.
Clark and Mr Bird ; for Western Australia, Sir James
Lee-Steere ; and for New Zealand, Captain Russell and
Sir John Hall Min Duncan Gillies was elected pre-
sident
The Victorian Premier, who had always been a
stanch advocate for and supporter of the existing
Federal Council, thought that its powers could bp
made effective for the purpose of controlling the land
defences, but it was discovered that the provisions of
the Federal Council Act were wholly insufficient for
this vitally important task, as no motive power existed
for combining under one command the scattered and
unconnected forces, locally maintained by the several
colonies, in view of a great common danger. As a
record the four resolutions of this meeting may be
given : —“ i. That in the opinion of this Conference
the best interests and the present and future piosps rit}
of the Australian colonies will be promoted by an eaih
union under the Crown, and while fully recognising the
valuable services of the members of the Conference of
1883 in founding the Federal Council, it declares its
opinion that the seven years which have since elapsed
have developed a national life of Australasia in popu-
lation, in wealth, in the discovery of resources, and in
self-governing capacity to an extent which justifies
the higher act, always contemplated, of the union of
these colonies under one legislative and executive
Government, based upon principles just to the several
colonies. 2. That to the union of the Australian
colonies, contemplated by the foregoing resolution, the
remoter Australasian colonies shall be entit et o
admission at such times and on such conditions as may
hereafter be agreed upon- 3. That the members of
the Conference shall take such steps as may be neces-
sary to induce the legislatures of their respective colonies
to appoint during the year delegates to a National
Australasian Convention, empowered to consider and
report upon an adequate scheme for a federal consti-
tution. 4. That the Convention should consist of not
more than seven members from each of the self-govern-
ing colonies, and not more than four members from
each of the Crown colonies.”
The Convention of 1891-
More than a year elapsed from the adjournment
of the Conference to the meeting of the Convention.
In the interim a severe accident had befallen Sir Henry
Parkes, and it was necessary to secure the appointment
in each colony of the Parliamentary delegation. How-
ever, at the instance of Mr. James Munro, the Premier
of Victoria, on March 2, 1891, the National Austral-
asian Convention commenced its sittings in the Legis-
lative Assembly Chambers, Sydney, and for the first
time crystallised the federal movement into a definite
shape by preparing a Draft Constitution to be recom-
mended for the proposed Commonwealth of Australia.
There were forty-five members of the Convention
altogether. These delegates were : —For New South
Wales : Sir Henry Parkes, Mr. (since Sir William)
McMillan, Mr- (since Sir George) Uibbs, and Mr. (since
Sir Joseph) Abbott, from the Assembly, and Mr. (since
Sir Edmund) Barton, Mr- W- H. Suttor and Sir Patrick
Jennings, from the Council For Victoria : Mr. Munro,
Mr. Gillies, Mr. Deakin, Mr. ( since Sir Henry) Wrixon,
Mr. W- C- Smith, Mr. Cuthbert and Mr. Fitzgerald.
During Mr. Wrixon’s absence from the colonies Mr.
Shiels temporarily replaced him in the Convention.
For Queensland : Sir Samuel Griffith, Sir Thomas
Mellwraith, Mr- Macrossan, Mr. (since Sir Arthur)
Rutledge, Mr. Macdonald-Patterson, Mr- Thynne and
Mr- Donaldson. For South Australia : Mr. T- Play-
ford, Sir J- C- Bray, Dr. (since Sir John) Cockburn,
Sir J. W. Downer, Mr. C- C. Kingston, Mr. Gordon, and
Mr. (since Sir Richard C.) Baker- For Western Australia :
Mr. (since Sir John) Forrest, Mr. Marmion, Sir James
Lee-Steere, Mr. Wright, Dr. Hackett, Mr. Alex. Forrest
and Mr- Loton. For Tasmania : Mr- (since Sir Phillip)
Fysh, Mr. Bird, Mr. Clark, Mr Moore, Mr. Douglas,
Mr. Burgess and Mr- N. Brown. For New Zealand :
Sir George Grey, Sir Harry Atkinson and Captain
Russell Sir Henry Parkes, at that time Premier of the
mother colony, was unanimously elected President of the
Convention ; Sir S- W- Griffith, Premier of Queensland,
was elected Vice-President , the late Sir J* P. Abbott,
Speaker of the New South Wales Legislative Assembly,
was elected Chairman of Committees ; and Mr. F. W.
Webb. Clerk of the Legislative Assembly of New South
Wales, was appointed Secretary. The Convention sat
until April 9, when a Federal Constitution Bill, brought
up by Sir Samuel Griffith as Chairman of the Committee
on Constitutional Machinery, based on resolutions
moved by Sir Henry Parkes, was finally approved.
It was agreed to send this draft measure to the various
Australian Parliaments, and then the Convention was
dissolved.


The First Constitution.
Lhe draft Commonwealth Bill, as adopted by the
National Convention of 1891, affirmed the following
principles : —l. The powers and rights of existing
colonies to remain intact except as regards such powers
as it might be necessary to hand over to the Federal
Government. 2. No alteration to be made in States
without the consent of the Legislatures of such States
as well as of the Federal Parliament* 3. Trade be-
tween the federated colonies to be absolutely free.
-1. Power to impose Customs and Excise Duties to be in
the Federal Government and Parliament- 5. Military
and naval defence forces to be under one command.
6. The Federal Constitution to make provision to enable
per annum. This fundamental compromise of the
federal system—giving the preponderance in the one
chamber to the majority of individual citizens, in the
other to the majority of States —is recognised in the
constitutions of the United States and of Switzerland,
and received a partial application in the Dominion of
Canada and in the federal empire of Germany. It
safeguards alike the interests of the smaller States,
who would otherwise have shrunk from joining in the
union, and the interests of the nation, which is supreme
in the national chamber of the Legislature. Two years
was fixed as the period within which the Queen might
disallow Acts assented to by the Governor-General.
The Executive was not necessarily to consist of mem-
FIRST AUSTRALIAN FEDERAL CONVENTION, SYDNEY, 1891.
each State to make amendments in its constitution, if
necessary, for the purposes of Federation- Further
clauses provided for the framing of a federal consti-
tution which should establish a Senate and a House of
Representatives (corresponding to that of the United
States), the latter to possess the sole power of origin-
ating money Bills- The Senators were to be elected
by the State Parliaments, on a basis of equality—the
smallest State sending as many as the largest,—to hold
their seats for six years, and to be paid £5OO each per
annum- The representatives were to be allotted one
to each 30,000 of the people, to sit for three years, to
be chosen by popular election, and also to be paid £5OO
beis of Parliament- The foim of Executive is on
the same lines as Canada, the British system of a minis-
try nominally appointed by the Crown (that is the
Governor-General) but in reality lesponsible to and
dependent on the confidence of the House of Repre-
sentatives. With regard to the relation of the Federal
Parliament to the State Parliaments, the Bill adopted
the principle established in the United States,where
the federal powers conferred by the constitution are
strictly delegated powers and the States retain all
rights not expressly and exclusively conferred on the
union. A Federal Supreme Court was to be estab-
lished which should have final appellate jurisdiction,


but the Sovereign might grant leave to appeal to the
Privy Council.
The Bill adopted by the National Convention of
1891 was adapted for a federation of the modern type,
but differed from the Canadian constitution in many
respects, as the earlier federal systems of the United
States and Switzerland were conceived to be more
suited to the circumstances of Australia, especially
with regard to the maintenance of State rights- This
Commonwealth Bill is admitted to have been drafted
in a masterly manner, although there had been great
difference of opinion expressed by the delegates in the
discussion which took place with regard to the delimita-
tion of central and provincial powers, and the right of
the Federal Senate to amend money bills. The ne-
should be discussed in detail in all the Australian Legis-
latures, then referred to a second Convention to har-
monise such amendments as might have been sug-
gested, and finally submitted for the acceptance or
rejection of the people of each colony. This process,
however, broke down- When Sir Henry Parkes met
his Parliament after the first Convention difficulties
began, as he found himself confronted with a formid-
able opposition. The aged Premier endeavoured to
put Federation in the front of his Parliamentary pro-
gramme, but under pressure of circumstances he was
compelled to substitute local politics, and the oppor-
tunity passed at once for five years. The Government
fell, and Sir George Dibbs formed a Ministry, of which
Mr. Barton was Attorney-General. He sustained the
GOVERNOR-GENERAL’S RESIDENCE, SYDNEY.
cessity for the exact relations of the States to the
general Government being properly defined, is illus-
trated by the fact that when the constitution of the
United States was being made, both Hamilton and
Madison left the power to deal with the institution
of African slavery open to doubtful construction,
which compromise afterwards led to the terrible
civil war between the Northern and Southern
States.
Opposition to the Federal Movement.
It was intended at the time that this draft Bill
hopes of federalists, but, however sincere and able,
Mr. Barton was confronted with circumstances which
proved too strong for any immediate advance.
Mr. Reid, now leader of the Opposition, besides not
being on good terms with Sir Henry Parkes, was by no
means in favour of the scheme of federation then
before the public- Sir George Dibbs, rather than
further the movement, made in 189-1 a unification pro-
posal to the late Sir James Patterson, Premier of Vic-
toria, that all the other colonies should re-enter the
borders of New South Wales ; an idea which found
but small support, as the great majority of Australians,


while favourable to the federation of the various State
Governments, were opposed to again amalgamating
under one central Government, with headquarters in
Sydney. The New South Wales Parliament was, as
it continued to be up to the dissolution of 1898, hostile
to Federation. Neither was sanction to the Bill sought
\ lx the domes, as their different Par-
liaments could not spare time in the pressure of pro-
vincial and party politics to discuss the Federal Con-
stitution in detail- Add to these conditions of im-
potence the commercial crisis that spread depression
throughout Australia, and the stagnation of Federation
is explained- Although such men as Sir Henry Parkes,
Mr- Barton, Mr- Wise, Mr- McMillan and others kept
alive the name and spirit of the Federal party, the
fortunes of the cause were from 1891 to 1894 at their
lowest ebb-
The Movement Spreads to the People.
At this stage Federation assumed a new phase by
spreading from the Parliament to the people- The
Commonwealth Bill had been an immense educational
influence, had given definite shape to the national
aspirations, and aroused the interest and the criticism
of a large proportion of the general public- At the
same time the financial panic and severe commercial
depression made prominent the weakness of isolation,
and suggested practical aTguments in favour of a speedy
national union The question neglected by the poli-
ticians began to be taken up by the citizens. Fore-
most in this new movement was the Australian Natives’
Association, who, taking advantage of their estab-
lished organisation, had already held a conference of
delegates from all its branches in the five colonies on
the continent, at the Melbourne Town Hall, on the
25th and 26th January, 1890, under the presidency of
the late Sir John Bray, when resolutions were passed
containing a proposed skeleton basis for a federal
constitution.
In 1893 an important conference of citizens was
held at Corowa, on the Murray, which was largely
attended, and at this gathering Dr. Quick’s momentous
proposal of a popularly-elected convention to frame a
new federal constitution, to be afterwards submitted
to a referendum, was unanimously carried- This
induced the new birth of Australian union. Federal
leagues to assist the movement had been formed in the
metropolitan, suburban axxd country centres, especially
along the Victorian border. The policy adopted by
these various branches of the Australian Federation
League, established at the instance of Mr. (now Sir)
Edmund Barton in June, 1893, with the Mayor of
Sydney ex-officio as vice-president, was to assist every
Government in power to carry measures for securing
the union of the colonies at the earliest possible date.
This Central League is still in existence, with Mr. Ed-
ward Dowling as its hon- secretary ever since its
formation- Affiliated leagues were also inaugurated in
Melbourne in July, 1894 (under the presidency of
Sir John Madden,, Chief Justice), with Mr. Alfred
Deakin as chairman of committee and Mr. R. J.
Toucher as hon. secretary ; one in Adelaide in August,
1895 (under the presidency of Mr. J. H- Synxon, Q-C.)
and with Mr. Alfred Odgers as hon. secretary ; one in
Brisbane, under the presidency of Sir Samuel Griffith,
and subsequently M,r John Leahy, M.P. There were
also federal organisations formed in Hobart, Perth,
and Auckland.
A motion in favour of Australian Federation, pro-
posed by Sir Henry Parkes, in the Legislative Assembly
of New South Wales on 30th November, 1894, was
supported by the Reid Government, and carried by
fifty-five votes to ten A Federal party was also sub-
sequently formed under the presidency of Sir Henry
Parkes, and for a short time carried on its operations
by holding meetings in the city and suburbs and some
country towns. The question of federal union became
the absorbing topic of the day. On train, tram and
steamboat, and in public meetings, the question was
discussed in all its bearings, till finally the people had
so familiarised themselves with the details of the sub-
ject, that they were fully prepared to give their vote
for or against Federation when the time came.
The Conference of Premiers.
When Mr. Reid came into power on the fall of the
Dibbs Ministry the Federal movement could not be
denied. Dr. Quick’s scheme for the direct election by
the people of a new convention was adopted heartily
in Victoria, and no less by the prominent federalists
here, among them Mr. Barton. Mr. Reid invited the
Premiers of the other colonies to meet for the purpose
of devising another scheme, and the Conference of
January 29-February 6, at Hobart, in 1895, was ar-
ranged. At this gathering there were present Mr.
Reid for New Soutlx Wales, Mr. (afterwards Sir George)
Turner for Victoria, Mr. (afterwards Sir Hugh) Nelson
lor Queensland, Mr, Kingston for South Australia, Sir
John Forrest for Western Australia, and Sir Edward
Braddon for Tasmania. Resolutions were proposed by
Mr. Reid and carried “ 1. That this Conference
regards Federation as the great and pressing question
of Australian politics- 2. That a Convention, consist-
ing of ten representatives of each colony, directly
chosen by the electors, be charged with the duty of
framing a Federal constitution. 3- That the consti-
tution so framed be submitted to the electors for ac-
ceptance or rejection by a direct vote. 4. That such
constitution, if accepted by the electors of three or
more colonies, be transmitted to the Queen by an
address from the Parliaments of those colonies praying
for the necessary legislative enactments. 5. That a
Bill be submitted to the Parliament of each colony for
the purpose of giving effect to the foregoing resolutions.
6. That Messrs. Turner and Kingston be requested to
prepare a Draft Bill for the consideration of this con-
ference.” An Enabling Bill was submitted accord-
ingly and adopted. But, owing to the pressure of local
politics, it was not until the end of the year that such
a measure was carried in this colony. It was passed
on December 23, 1895, and by Victoria, South Aus-
tralia and Tasmania during the year 1896 ; but it was
not in force for another year. Queensland stood aloof.
Mr. Reid even undertook a tour in the latter colony in
1896, in order to induce the Government to interest
itself in Federation ; but without success. In the
state of doubt and suspicion as to the real purpose of
the southern colonies which possessed the minds of


many opponents of Federation in this colony it did
not seem wise to go into Federation without Queens-
land, a,s it was thought that a similarity of interests
and a greater degree of sympathy would secure co-
operation between Queensland and New South Wales
in the Convention. Hence the year 1896 was merely
spent in marking time- A People’s Federal Conven-
tion —attended by more than 100 representatives,
local and intercolonial, some of whom were men of
leading—was held at Bathurst in November of that
year, at which the proposed election of Senators by the
States Legislatures, as in the United States, was
altered.
The Second Convention.
At length, It being vain to hope for the co-opera-
tion of Queensland at this stage, and moved by the
responsibility of New South Wales to keep faith with
the loyal colonies, Mr. Reid, on January 26, 1897,
proclaimed the Act to be in force, and called for nomi-
nations of candidates for the Federal Convention.
The election was held here on March 4, similar action
ensuing in the other assenting colonies, with the excep-
tion of Western Australia, where the representatives
were selected by Parliament- Here there were 49
candidates- For these 1,180,000 votes were cast, as
148,000 electors voted out of an enrolment of 264,000.
Mr. Edmund Barton led the poll, not only in New
South Wales, but for Australia, receiving 98,540 voths.
Sir George Turner was a creditable second, with 84,048.
In Victoria there were 29 candidates, in South Aus-
tralia 33, in Tasmania 32, and in Western Australia 17.
In each colony the voting was irrespective of party,
but all the political leaders were included, so that as
a whole the Convention of 1897-8 was almost as much
a Parliamentary body as that of 1891- The elected
candidates were : For New South Wales : Mr (since
Sir Edmund) Barton, Mr. G- H. Reid, Mr. J- H- Car-
ruthers, Mr. (since Sir William) McMillan, Mr. (since
Sir William) Lyne, Mr. J. N. Brunker, Mr. R. E.
O’Connor, Sir Joseph Abbott, Mr- J. T. Walker and
Mr. B. R. Wise. For Victoria : Sir George Turner,
Dr. Quick, Mr. A. Deakin, Mr. Peacock, Mr. I. A.
Isaacs, Mr. Trenwith, Sir Graham Berry, Mr. S- Fraser,
Sir W. A. Zeal and Mr. H. Higgins- For South Aus-
tralia : Mr. C, C- Kingston, Mr. (since Sir W. W.)
Holder, Ur. (since Sir John) Cockburn, Sir R. C. Baker,
Mr. Gordon, Mr- (since Sir Joseph) Symon, Mr- Glynn,
Sir J. W. Downer, Mr. Howe and Mr. Solomon For
Western Australia : Sir John Forrest, Sir James Lee-
Steere, Mr. James, Mr. Hassall, Mr. Schell, Mr. Leake,
Mr. Piesse, Dr. Hackett, Mr. Loton and Mr. Taylor.
During the Convention four of the Western Australian
delegates were changed, owing to resignations and
fresh elections, and hence Messrs Briggs, Crowder,
Venn and Hennings took part in the Conference.
The second Convention met in Adelaide on March
22, 1897- Mr. C- C- Kingston, Premier of South Aus-
tralia, was elected president, and Mr- Barton leadei.
Following the procedure of the Sydney Convention,
there was a debate on a series of general resolutions
covering the scope of the constitution, and these reso-
lutions agreed in many respects with those of Sii Hem \
Parkes When these were carried, a committee-
consisting of Mr- E. Barton, Sir John Downer and
Mr. R. E. O’Connor —was appointed to draft the Con-
stitution Bill, which was brought up on April 13. On
April 23' the Hill was adopted, and referred to the
several Parliaments for suggestions. The Convention
then adjourned for four months —while the Premiers
visited London for the Record Reign celebrations,-
and sat again in Sydney from September 2 to 24. On
this occasion the Bill was debated in light of the sug-
gestions made by the legislatures of the federating
colonies. In the course of the proceedings it was
announced that Queensland desired to come within the
proposed union ; and in view of this development, and
in order to give further opportunity for the considera-
tion of the Bill, the Convention again adjourned The
third and final session was opened in Melbourne on
January 20, 1898, the colony of Queensland being stdl
unrepresented, and, after further consideration, the
draft Bill was finally adopted by the Convention on
March 16 for submission to the people. Just over
twelve months had been occupied by the second Con-
vention, while the first took little over a month.
The Constitution of 1897-8.
In its main provisions the Bill of 1898 followed
generally that of 1891, yet with some very important
alterations. The Senate was made eligible by the
people, and not by the Parliaments of the States.
The remuneration of members of Parliament was
reduced to £4OO- The list of subjects confided to the
Commonwealth was increased The number of sena-
tors was reduced to six for each State- An Interstate
Commission was provided to control attempts at differ-
ential railway rates and other preferential trade
arrangements- In order to safeguard the States that
depended upon customs duties, it was provided that
the Commonwealth should return three-fourths of its
customs collections to the States- The High Court
was equipped with larger powers of final appeal- The
capital of the Commonwealth was left to the Parlia-
ment to determine- Public debts might be taken
over- The referendum was provided instead of a
convention, as in the Bill of 1891, for constitutional
amendments. And in almost every point where elas-
ticity could be bestowed without weakening the neces-
sary strength of the federal framework, the new draft
was far more liberal in spirit. Such was the Bill which
was referred to the people of New South W ales, \ ic-
toria and Tasmania on June 3, 1898, and to the people
of South Australia on June 4- It was to be a year
before Queensland voted by referendum on the Bill,
and nearlv two years in the case of W estern Australia.
The First Referendum.
The Bill was warmly received in Victoria, South
Australia and Tasmania, but in New South Wales all
was uncertain. This was the unhappy legacy of many
years of misunderstanding and conflicts with A ictoria ;
it was the Trojan attitude —“ Timeo Danaos et dona
ierentes ” Freetraders feared the loss of that policy
in the Commonwealth ; Parliament was hostile to the
creation of a Government which should eclipse >t ,
many apprehended a heavy increase of taxation-


Colony.
Affirma-
tive vote
Electors who Voted.
required.
For the Bill.
Against.
Informal
New South Wales ..
. . 80,000
71,000
66,225
834
Victoria
.. 50,000
100,520
22,099
1,008
South Australia
.. majority
35,800
17,320
722
Tasmania
6,000
11,726
2,689
262
Colony.
For the Bill.
Against.
Majority.
New South Wales ..
.. 107,420
82,741
24,679
Victoria
.. 152,685
9,804
142,831
South Australia
65,990
17,053
48,937
Tasmania ..
13,437
791
12,646
Colony.
For the Bill.
Against.
Majority.
Queensland
.. 35,181
28,965
6,216
Western Australia
.. 44,800
19,691
25,109
Consequently the campaign in this colony was unusually
severe. Pre-eminently to Mr. Barton the federal cause
owes a great debt. He at once took the field, and
prosecuted a vigorous campaign, with the aid of Mr.
Wise, Mr. O’Connor and other federal leaders. But
Mr. Reid held aloof, whilst his Attorney-General, Mr.
Want, and other colleagues threw their weight into the
scale against the work of the Convention. The occa-
sion is now historic when Mr. Reid, as and as
the man responsible for the new federal movement,
delivered in the Sydney Town Hall, before a vast meet-
J J
ing, his “ Yes-No ” speech, at the finish of which he
declared he would as an elector vote for the Bill, but as
Premier he could not undertake to recommend it to
the people. In the preceding session a private member
carried a Bill requiring that, before the draft Federal
Constitution Bill should be held to have been ratified
by the people of New South Wales, it should receive
at least 80,000 votes ; and it was apprehended that the
necessary number would not be reached. These fears
were proved to be well founded ; for on June 3, 1898,
the referendum resulted as —
Another Premiers’ Conference.
With such strong opposition to the Bill in the
mother colony, it was evident some alterations would
have to be made in the constitution before it could be
adopted by the people. Mr. Reid asked for a further
conference among the Premiers, and after some hesi-
tation this was agreed upon. Six months elapsed
before it could be held. Meanwhile the general elec-
tions, which turned solely upon Federation, resulted
in three Ministers being defeated and the loss of the
Government majority. As the campaign had dis-
closed serious objections to various features of the Bill,
the new Parliament adopted a series of resolutions,
moved by Mr. Reid, intended as suggestions for amend-
ment. That was on November 3. The delayed con-
ference took place at Melbourne from January 28 to
February 2, 1899, Queensland, now fearing isolation,
being represented. It sat in private, and when it
rose the chief amendments announced as having been
made in the Bill were these : —When in case of deadlock
the two Houses sit together as one (the Norwegian
system) an absolute instead of a three-fifths majority
shall decide. The duration of the arrangement known
as the Braddon clause, stipulating for the return to
the States of three-fourths of their customs revenue,
shall be ten years, or longer if Parliament does not
intervene- The clause respecting the federal capital
was altered, so that, instead of being left wholly in
the discretion of Parliament to fix the site, it was deter-
mined that it should be in New South Wales, but not
within 100 miles of Sydney. The boundaries of a
State and its representation in Parliament should only
be altered with the consent of a majority of the electors
of that State. Two other amendments provided for
a referendum when the two Houses disagreed on a
proposed constitutional amendment, and permitted
Queensland to create three districts for the election
of senators. The conference also decided that none of
the colonies represented should proceed until New
South Wales had signified acceptance of the amended
Bill.
The Second Referendum.
The whole movement being arrested while New
South Wales made up her mind, Mr. Reid lost no time
in urging on the amended Bill. On February 21 he
summoned Parliament together for a special session
and the Federal Enabling Bill went through the Legis-
lative Assembly unaltered. The Council, however,
made three amendments of the utmost importance in
the machinery clauses- The first postponed the refer-
endum for three months after the passing of the Bill ;
the second imposed a statutory minimum affirmative
vote of one-third of the entire electorate ; the third
stipulated that New South Wales should not go into
Federation without Queensland. The Assembly would
not accept any of these amendments ; the Council
refused to abandon them. Parliament was prorogued ;
twelve new members were appointed to the Council ;
and the Enabling Bill was now carried with one altera-
tion—that the referendum should not take place for
two months. April 22 was the date of assent to the
Bill, and the referendum was appointed for June 20,
this resulting in a complete triumph for the Bill. In
the four assenting colonies the returns of the second
referendum were —
The referendum of 1899 in Queensland and of 1900 in
Western Australia were the only ones once taken in
these colonies. They resulted thus —
Final Legislative Steps.
Mr. Reid called Parliament together, and on
August 2, 1899, moved an address to the Queen praying
for the passing of the Commonwealth Bill by the British
Parliament. The address was carried, and shortlv
7 J
afterwards Mt. Reid’s Government fell- Mr. (since
Sir William) Lyne came in, and, though not a billite,
he included Mr. Wise in his Cabinet and pledged him-
self to loyally further the cause. In the other federat-
ing colonies similar addresses had by this time been
carried, and at last the Australian Commonwealth
Constitution Bill was ready to be submitted for final
legislative approval to the Parliament of the Empire-
Though the Bill was favourably received by the
. ) %/ J
Imperial Government certain amendments, the most
important of which referred to the appeal to the Privy
Council, were proposed by Mr Chamberlain, Secretary
of State for the Colonies- He invited the federating
Governments to send home a delegation to discuss the
Bill before it should be presented to Parliament which
invitation a conference of Premiers on January 24,
1900, decided to accept Mr. (since Sir Edmund)
Barton went from this colony, Mr. Alfred Deakin


from Victoria ; Mr. C. C. Kingston from South Aus-
tralia ; the late Mr. (afterwards Sir James) Dickson
from Queensland, Mr. Parker from Western Australia,
the late Sir Phillip Fysh from Tasmania, and Mr. W. P.
Peeves representing New Zealand. The delegates were
officially received in England on March 15, when Mr.
Barton was appointed spokesman. New Zealand
pressed for such amendments as should assure her
admission into the Commonwealth at any time within
seven years as an original State- This, however, was
not conceded. Western Australia asked for the re-
a House crowded everywhere and the Colonial Secre-
tary spoke at his best. There were seven amendments
in the Bill as brought into the House of Commons,
most of minor importance, but two tended to essen-
tially limit the legislative and judicial authority of the
Commonwealth- The second reading was taken on
May 21, and Parliament rose for the recess- A change
now took place- On June 18, when the House of
Commons went into committee, it was found that the
British Government had receded from the amendments
excepting that relating to the Privy Council- Here
FACSIMILE OF LETTERS PATENT.
moval of the proposed shilling scale of customs applied
to that colony. This, likewise, was not secured- Nego-
tiations on the appeal question reached a deadlock,
the delegates insisting that they had no power to con-
sent to amend the Bill. The matter was referred to
the Premiers in conference Mr. Philp representing
Queensland, and on April 16 they decided that while
they had no power to alter the people’s Bill, the amend-
ment to widen appeals to the Privy Council was pre-
ferable to delay- On May 14 the Bill was introduced
into the House of Commons by Mr. Chamberlain and
read a first time, the scene was brilliant. There was
a compromise was come to, for a new clause (74) now
invested the Federal High Court with power to appeal
from its own decisions on constitutional interpretation
to the Privy Council. This settlement gave general
satisfaction.
On July 9, 1900, the Royal assent was signified
to the measure, her Majesty’s acceptance of this his-
toric constitution being most gracious. She was
pleased not only to sign in duplicate her commission
for assenting to the Bill (which ceremony was per-
formed by, among others. Lord Hopetoun,> shortly
afterwards designated as the first Governor-General of


the Commonwealth of Australia), but also to present
the duplicate and the table and inkstand and pen used
on the occasion as mementoes to the Federation- The
proclamation of the new commonwealth was made *at
Sydney on the Ist day of January, 1901. Sir William
Lyne, as Premier of the mother colony, was commis-
sioned to form the first Federal Government, but not
succeeding in this, he returned his commission to the
Governor-General, and Mr. (since Sir Edmund) Barton
then formed the first Federal Ministry, as follows :
The Right. Hon- Edmund Barton, P C-, K-C-, LL.D-,
Premier and Minister for External Affairs; the Hon
Alfred Deakin. Attorney-General; the Hon- Sir George
Turner, P C-, K-C-M-G-, Treasurer ; the Hon- Sir
William John Lyne, K-C-M-G-, Mi nister for Home
Affairs ; the Hon. Charles Cameron Kingston, P.C ,
Minister for Trade and Customs ; the Hon. Sir James
Robert Dickson, K-C MT , Minister for Defence ; the
Hon. Sir John Forrest, P-C,, G C M G-, Postmaster-
General; the Hon. R. E- O’Connor, Vice-President of
the Executive Council ; the Hon N- E. Lewis, Minister
without portfolio.
Representatives for New South Wales in hirst
Federal Parliament :—'Barrier, J. Thomas ; Bland, J. C
Watgon; Canoblas, Thomas Brown; Cowper, Frank
Clarke; Dailey, W H. Wilkes; Darling, W. G-
Spence ; East Sydney, Rt. Hon. G. H- Reid ; Eden-
Monaro, A. Chapman; Gwydir, G. A. Cruickshank,
Hume, Hon. Sir W- J- Lyne ; Hunter, Hon- Sir
Edmund Barton, P.C. ; Illawarra, G- W- Fuller ; Lang,
F- E- McLean ; Macquarie, Sydney Smith ; Newcastle,
D. Watkins ; New England, W. B. S. C- Sawers ;
North Sydney, D. Thompson ; Parkes, Bruce Smith ;
Parramatta, J- Cook; Richmond, T. T- Ewing;
Riverina, J M- Chanter ; Robertson, H- Willis ; South
Sydney, G. B- Edwards ; Wentworth, Sir William
McMillan; Werriwa, A. H. B. Conroy ; West Sydney,
W- M- Hughes.
The Commonwealth Constitution.
The constitution of the Commonwealth is con-
tained in the Commonwealth of Australia Constitution
Act of 1900, and provides for the admission of other
Australasian colonies and British possessions, such as
Fiji and New Guinea. The Legislative power is vested
in a Federal Parliament, consisting of the King, a Senate,
a House of Representatives ; a Governor-General, with
a salary of £IO,OOO per annum, represents the King.
The Senate consists of thirty-six members, or six for
each original State, directly chosen by the people of
the State voting as one electorate (Queensland having
the power to divide the State into divisions) for a term
of six years. The disqualifications of a Senator are
the same as those of a member of the House of Repre-
sentatives. The Senate cannot originate or amend
Bills appropriating revenue or moneys or imposing
taxation, nor can it amend any measure so as to in-
crease any proposed change or burden on the people.
Except in regard to Bills of this kind the Senate has
equal power with the House of Representatives- If the
Senate thrice rejects a Bill passed by the House of
Representatives or insists on passing it with amend-
ments to which the other House will not agree, the
Governor-General may dissolve the Senate and House
of Representatives simultaneously, but the dissolution
is not to take place within six months before the date
of the expiry of the latter assembly by effluxion of
time In the event of the Senate, after the dissolution,
insisting on the rejection of the Bill, or passing it with
amendments which the other House will not accept
the Governor-General hai power to convene a joint
sitting of the members of the two Houses, who are to
vote together and decide the point or points at issue.
The House of Representatives consists of seventy-five
members directly elected for three years by the people
of the Commonwealth, the number of members being
as nearly as possible twice the number of Senators, arid
the number m each State is determined in proportion
to the respective numbers of the people, New South
Wales being entitled to 27, Victoria 22, Queensland 9,
South Australia 7, Western Australia 5, and Tas-
mania 5- A person entitled to become a member of
the Assembly must be 21 years of age, and must be an
elector entitled to vote at the election of members of
the House of Representatives, or a person qualified to
become such elector, and must have resided within
the limits of the Commonwealth for at least three
years, and be a subject of the King, either natural-
born or naturalised under a law of the United Kingdom
or of the Commonwealth or of a State, and for their
services a Senator or member of the House of Repre-
sentatives receives an allowance of £4OO per annum-
Powers of Parliament.
The Federal Parliament has power to make laws
for the good government of the Commonwealth with
respect to trade, taxation, bounties, borrowing of
money, postal services, naval and military matters,
currency, banking, marriage, divorce, old age pensions,
immigration and emigration, &c- The State Parlia-
ment retains legislative authority in regard to all mat-
ters not transferred to the Federal Parliament. The
State Governors are still appointed by the Crown,
and they can correspond on State business directly
with the Secretary of State for the Colonies, the Gover-
nor-General being kept informed. When a proposed
law is passed by both Houses of the Federal Parliament
the Governor-General may assent, withhold assent, or
reserve the law for the King’s pleasure, or return it
to the House in which it originated, with any amend-
ments which he may recommend, and the Houses may
deal with the recommendation. The King may dis-
allow any law within one year from the Governor-
General’s assent, and such disallowance shall annul the
law from the day when the disallowance is made
known- A measure reserved for the King’s pleasure
is not to have any force unless and until within two
years from the day on which it was presented to the
Governor-General and the Governor-General makes it
known that it has received the King’s assent-
The Executive power of the Commonwealth is
vested in the King, and is exercised by the Governor-
General, as his Majesty’s representative, with a Federal
Executive Council, appointed by the Governor-General,
and holding office during his pleasure- The Ministers
of State are not to exceed seven unless Parliament
otherwise provides, and their salaries are not to exceed
in all the sum of £12,000 per annum The Command


in-Chief of the naval and military forces of the Com-
monwealth is vested in the Governor-General as the
King’s representative
Federal Judicial Powers.
The judicial power of the Commonwealth is exer-
cised by a Federal Supreme Court, called the High
Court of Australasia, and other courts vested with
Federal jurisdiction. The High Court has jurisdiction
to hear and determine appeals from judgments, de-
crees, orders, and sentences—(l) of any justice or
justices exercising the original jurisdiction of the High
Court ; (2) of any other Federal court, or court exer-
cising Federal jurisdiction ; or of the Supreme Court
of any State from which at the establishment of the
Commonwealth an appeal lies to the King-in-Council ;
(3) of the Interstate Commission, but as to questions of
law only—“ No appeal is permitted to the King-in-
Council from the decision of the High Court upon any
question as to the limits, inter se, of constitutional
powers of the Commonwealth and those of any State
or States, or as to the limits, inter se, of the consti-
tutional powers of any two or more States unless the
High Court shall certify that the question is one which
ought to be determined by his Majesty-in-Council.
Commerce, Customs, &c.
Trade, commerce and intercourse amongst the
Australian States are absolutely free ; an Interstate
Commission, when appointed by the Governor-General,
will have powers of adjudication and administration
for the execution and maintenance within the Com-
monwealth of the provisions of the constitution relat-
ing to trade and commerce and of all laws made there-
under- The Commonwealth makes uniform customs
and excise duties, and of the net revenue from those
duties not more than one-fourth may be applied to-
wards its expenditure. A State cannot coin money
nor make anything but gold and silver coin a legal
tender in payment of debt- The Commonwealth can-
not make any laws for the establishment of any re-
ligion, or for imposing any religious observance or
prohibiting the free exercise of any religion, and no
religious test is required as a qualification for any office
or public trust under the Commonwealth.
The Federal Parliament.
The first Parliament of the Commonwealth of
Australia was auspiciously and satisfactorily opened
by his Royal Highness the Duke of York on the
9th March, 1901, at the Exhibition Building in Mel-
bourne, in pursuance of authority entrusted to him by
her late Majesty Queen Victoria, and ratified by his
Majesty King Edward VIT. The streets of Melbourne
were magnificently decorated with arches and other
emblematic devices, and crowds from all the States
assembled to show their loyalty to the Empire and the
Commonwealth-
The arduous work of inaugurating the new form
of government for the Commonwealth was entrusted
to the Right Honourable Edmund Barton, on Sir Wil-
liam Lyne (then Premier of New South Wales) return-
ing the commission to form the Federal Cabinet to the
Governor-General. There were many difficulties to be
overcome in organising the new departments for the
Federal service and bringing in a different order of
things amongst a group of States which for many
decades had been separate and rival colonies- The
first Prime Minister, in answer to many complaints,
explained to his constituents some of these difficulties
in the following words : ‘‘ There were many people
who anticipated that under the new conditions of
national life they would reap the fruit of ages in the
first season The common sense of the people would
recognise the dangers and difficulties which the Federal
Government had to face in administering a new con-
stitution. The sweeping away of the old order of
things and the introduction of new features of govern-
ment carried in their train many disappointments, but
the people of Australia would soon become accus-
tomed to the new state of affairs.”
That Australian Federation has not, so far, accom-
plished all that was desired, and but little that it is
destined yet to attain, need therefore excite little
J 7
surprise ; however, good work has been already done
in laying down the lines of a future federal system.
A quarter of a century may consequently elapse before
the old provincial spirit will be entirely lost and anti-
federal opposition be quite allayed, so that future
statesmen controlling the destinies of this continent
can properly develop that broader vision of affairs
not obtainable within the narrow limits of any one
State- The work of educating the people in each
State regarding the proper working of a Federal con-
stitution must go on, as, unlike the residents of Upper
and Lower Canada, they have not had a neighbouring
confederacy to familiarise them with the benefits to
be derived from a united political system, or to threaten
them with the possibility of absorption in case of war.
Any great work of evolution must necessarily be slow,
but the people of Australia have already shown that
spirit of patriotism of which nations are made, and so
proved that they are capable of working out their own
destiny in a proper manner when left to themselves-


Rt. 1 Hon. Sir SAMUEL WALKER
GRIFFITH, G.C.M.G., P.C., Chief
Justice of the High Court of Aus-
tralia, was born at Merthyr Tydvil,
Wales, on 21st June, 1845, and
arrived in Australia in 1854 with
his father, the late Rev. E. Griffith,
a well-known Congregational minis-
ter, who, with his family, settled in
Ipswich, Queensland, removing after
a time to Maitland, New South
Wales, and subsequently settling in
Brisbane. Sir Samuel Griffith was
educated at Mr. Robert Horniman’s,
Sydney ; afterwards at the High
School, West Maitland, where he
was a distinguished scholar, and
subsequently, in iB6O, proceeded to
the Sydney University, where he
had a brilliant career, taking the
B.A. degree with first-class honours
in classics and mathematics in 1863,
and winning in 1863 the Mort Tra-
velling Fellowship ; M.A. 1870. On
his return to Queensland in
1863 he took up the profession
of law, being articled to Mr. A.
Macalister (afterwards Premier of
Queensland). After visiting Eu-
rope in compliance with the
terms of his fellowship, he was,
in 1867, called to the Queensland
bar, where he soon acquired a large
practice, and was appointed Q.C.
in 1876. He is also a member of
the bars of New South Wales and
Victoria. Sir Samuel entered the
Parliament of Queensland in 1872
as member of the Legislative Assem-
bly for East Moreton. In Novem-
ber, 1873, after the dissolution of
Parliament, he was elected member
for the newly created seat of Oxley,
and in August, 1874, appointed
Attorney-General in the Macalister
v/
Ministry. In 1876 he was appointed
Secretary for Public Instruction,
being the first minister to hold that
office, which was created under the
State Education Act of 1875, °f
which he was the author. In the
Thorn and Douglas ministries he
continued to hold the offices of
Attorney-General and Secretary for
Public Instruction, and in Septem-
ber, 1878, became Secretary for
Public Works, but resigned on the
defeat of the Douglas ministry in
1879. From 1879 to 1883 he led
the Opposition in the Legislative
Assembly. In 1878 he had been
elected member for North Brisbane,
for which constituency he sat until
lie was appointed Chief Justice ot
Queensland, in 1893. On the resig-
nation ot the Mcllwraith Ministry,
in 1883, Sir Samuel Griffith formed a
Liberal ministry, accepting for him-
self the offices of Premier, Colonial
Secretary and Secretary for Public
Instruction, afterwards holding the
offices of Premier and Chief Secre-
tary, and for some time that of
Treasurer also. In December, 1883,
he attended the Federal Convention
held in Sydney, and took a promi-
nent part in the important business
of that convention, which led to the
establishment of the Federal Coun-
cil of Australasia. In February,
1886, with the late Sir James (then
Falk
RT. HON. SIR S. W. GRIFFITH
Mr.) Dickson, he represented Queens-
land at the first session of the
Federal Council, which was held at
Hobart, and was elected Chairman
of the Standing Committee of the
Council, formed for the transaction of
business during the recess. In July,
1886, he was created a K.C.M.G. In
January, 1887, he, with the late
Sir James Garrick, then Agent-
General for Queensland, was ap-
pointed to represent that colony at
the conference of representatives of
her Majesty’s colonial possessions,
which met in London in March of
that year, under the presidency of
Sir Henry Holland (now Viscount
Knutsford) to consult upon ques-
tions of general Imperial interest.
In the deliberations Sir Samuel’s
large experience of intercolonial
affairs proved of great value, and
it was largely owing to his efforts
that some matters of pressing im-
portance, such as the proposal for
the administration of British New
Guinea and for the establishment of
the Australian Auxiliary Squadron,
were brought to a definite issue. He
was elected President of the Federal
Council in the session of 1888, and
again in the sessions of 1891 and
1893. He resigned office as Pre-
mier in June, 1888, after the general
election, at which he had been
re-elected for North Brisbane, and
led the Opposition party in the
Assembly until August, 1890, when,
on the resignation of the Morehead
Ministry, he formed a Government in
conjunction with Sir Thomas Mcll-
wraith, taking the office of Premier,
Chief Secretary and Attorney-Gene-
ral, which he continued to hold
until March, 1893. Sir Samuel was
one of the representatives of Queens-
land in the Federation Convention
held in Sydney in 1891, of which he
was elected vice-president. He was
also chairman of the committee
appointed to frame a constitution
for the proposed Australian federa-
tion. On the 13th March, 1893, on
the retirement of Sir Charles Lilley,
he was appointed to the office of
Chief Justice of Queensland. On
Ist January, 1895, Sir Samuel
Griffith was advanced to the first
class (Grand Cross) of the Order of
St. Michael and St. George
(G.C.M.G.); and in September, 1899,
was appointed Lieutenant-Governor
of Queensland. He administered the
Government in 1899-1900, and again
in 1901-2, was made a Privy Coun-
cillor (P.C.) on Ist January, 1901,
on which day the Commonwealth
was established, and on sth Oc-
tober, 1903, was selected by
the Commonwealth Government
to fill the high office of the
first Chief Justice of the High
Court of Australia. He is the
author of the Queensland Criminal
Code, which has also been adopted in
Western Australia. In 1870 Sir
Samuel Griffith married Julia Janet,
daughter of Mr. James Thomson,
Commissioner of Crown Lands, East
Maitland, New South Wales.


The Right Hon. Sir EDMUND
BARTON, G.C.M.G., P.C., D.C.L.,
LL.D., M.A., Senior Puisne Judge
of the High Court of Australia, is a
son of the late William Barton, of
Sydney, and was born at the Glebe.
Sydney, on the 18th January, 1849.
He was educated at the Fort Street
Model School, the Sydney Grammar
School, and the University of Syd-
ney, where, like the Chief Justice,
he had a brilliant career. He was
Lithgow Scholar, 1866 ; Cooper
Scholar, 1867 ; University Medallist
for classics in 18(18, taking his B.A.
degree same year, and M.A. in 1870.
Called to the bar IS7I, and ap-
pointed Q.C. 1889. He was elected
to represent the university in the
Legislative Assembly in 1879, but
Swiss Studio
RT. HON. SIR E. BARTON.
in the following year the new Elec-
toral Act abolished all special repie-
sentation. In 1880 he was elected
as member for Wellington, New
South Wales ; and in 1882 as mem-
ber for East Sydney. He was
Speaker of the Assembly from
1:883-7 1 member of the Legislative
Council. 1887-91 ; returned again
to the Assembly by the electorate
of East Sydney, 1891 to 1894 ;
member of the Upper House, 1897
to 1898, and elected again as a
member of the Assembly, 1898, by
the electorate of Hastings-Macleay.
In 1889 he was appointed Attorney-
General in Sir George Dibbs’ ad-
ministration, and as the represen-
tative of the Government in the
Legislative Council ; and was Attor-
ney-General in Sir George Dibbs’
second administration from 1891
to 1893. Sir Edmund was leader
of the Opposition in the Assembly
from 1898 to 1899, and a member
of the Parliamentary Federal Con-
vention, held in Sydney, 1891, and
the senio’- representative of New
South Wales at the national con-
vention which framed the federal
constitution, being elected leader
and was chairman of the drafting
committee. He went to London as
the delegate of New South Wales,
being associated with delegates bom
the five eastern States to advocate
the passage of the Commonwealth
Constitution Bill through the Im-
perial Parliament, and on that visit
received the distinction of the
honorary degree of LL.D., Cam-
bridge. Sir Edmund was entrusted
with the formation of the cabinet
for the first Federal Parliament and
was the first Prime Minister, hold-
ing also the office of Minister lor
External Affairs from January, 1901,
to September, 1903, when he re-
signed, on his appointment to the
first Federal Judiciary. In 1901
the honour of the degree ot M.A
was conferred on Sir Edmund by
the Melbourne University. He is
also a fellow of the Sydney Univer-
sity Senate, which honour he has
held, with a break of three or lour
years, since 1880, and was appointed
P.C. in igoi. He was present at
King Edward’s coronation, and at
the conference in London of colonial
Premiers in 1902. During that visit
he was made G.C.M.G., also an Hon.
Bencher of Gray’s Inn, London ; an
Hon. D.C.L., Oxford University ;
an Hon. LL.D., Edinburgh, and a
Freeman of the city of Edinburgh.
In December, 1877, Sir Edmund
Barton married Jean, eldest daugh-
ter of David Ross, of Newcastle.
New South Wales. There are Icm
sons and two daughters, all living,
as issue of the marriage.
The Hon. RICHARD EDWARD
O’CONNOR, one of the Justices of
the High Court of Australia, and
first President of the Commonwealth
Conciliation and Arbitration Court
(1905), is a son of the late Richard
O’Connor, who w T as many years
Clerk of Parliaments in New South
Wales and an authority on Aus-
tralian parliamentary law and pro-
cedure, and was born at Sydney on
the 4th August, 1851. He was
educated at Lyndhurst College,
Sydney Grammar School, and then,
like his New South Wales col-
leagues on the bench, proceeding
to Sydney University, taking the
degree of BA., 1871, and M.A.,
1873. Prior to taking up the legal
profession, Mr. O’Connor was from
1871-3 a clerk in the Legislative
Council of New South Wales,
and also for some time a leader-
writer on the Sydney Echo,
and was also for some time con-
nected with the Freeman’s Jour-
nal. He was called to the bar in
New South Wales in 1876, and
appointed Q.C. 1896 ; was a mem-
ber of the Legislative Council of
New South Wales, 1887-90 ; held
office of Minister for Justice in Sir
George Dibbs’ Administration from
1891-3. Mr. O’Connor took a leading
Johnstone, O’Shannessy & Co.
HON. R. E. O’CONNOR.
part in the movement for federation,
and, like his brother judges, was
a member of the convention which
framed the constitution in 1897-8.
He was also one of the committee
of three which drafted the consti-
tution of the Commonwealth and
managed the business of the Fede-
ral Convention. In March, 1901,
he was returned as a member for
the Senate in the first Federal Par-
liament and in the Commonwealth
Government he was appointed Vice-
President of the Executive Council
and leader of the Senate until his
appointment in September, 1903,
as the third Justice of the High
Court of Australia. In 1879 Mr.
Justice O’Connor married Sara,
youngest daughter of the late John
Square Hensleigh, of Bendoc, Vic-
toria.


The Hon. ISAAC ALFRED
ISAACS, Puisne Justice of the
High Court of Australia, is a son of
the late Alfred Isaacs, of Auburn,
Victoria, and was born in Melbourne
on the 6th August, 1855. He was
educated at the Yackandandah
State School and Beechworth Gram-
mar School, afterwards proceeding
to the Melbourne University, where
he gained the scholarship in law,
with first-class honours, in 1880.
He is LL.M. of the Melbourne Uni-
versity.- For some years prior to
entering the university he was en-
gaged in the Education Department
of Victoria, in which he obtained a
teacher’s qualification. In 1875 he
was appointed to a position in the
office of the prothonotary of the
Supreme Court, which he held until
1882, in which year he commenced
practice as barrister, having been
called to the bar in 1880. His pro-
fessional success was immediate and
continuous. He was appointed
Q.C. in 1899. In political life, as at
the bar, he was in the front rank.
In 1892 he was returned for the
electorate of Bogong as a member
of the Legislative Assembly of Vic-
toria, representing that constituency
until 1901, being re-elected in the
sessions of 1892, 1894, October,
1897, and again in November, 1899,
on his acceptance of office. He
was Solicitor-General in the Patter-
son Government in 1893, and Attor-
ney-General in Sir George Turner’s
first administration, from 1894 to
1899, and also in the second Turner
Government, holding office from
1900 until his resignation upon
entering the first Federal Parlia-
ment. During Sir George Turner’s
absence attending the late Queen
Victoria’s Jubilee celebrations in
London Mr. Isaacs was Acting Pre-
mier of Victoria. He took a very
prominent part in promoting fede-
ration, and was a member of the
Australian convention which framed
the Commonwealth constitution,
and in March, 1901, was elected as
a member of the House of Repre-
sentatives of the first Federal Par-
liament being re-elected without op-
position for the second parliament.
Mr. Isaacs was a member of the
Parliamentary committee on proce-
dure in 1894. and author of several
progressive measures, including the
Amending Companies Act of Vic-
toria, 1896, designee! for the protec-
tion of the investing public, and
largely the outcome of the disas-
trous boom legislation of 1887-90.
In July, 1905, he was appointed
Attorney-General in the Common-
wealth Government, which office he
held until appointed a Justice of
the High Court of Australia.
The Hon. HENRY BOURNES
HIGGINS, Puisne Justice of the
High Court of Australia, second
son of the late Rev. John Higgins,
of Ballina, County Mayo, and of
Anne, daughter of Henry Bournes,
of the same county, was born at
Newton Ards on the 30th day of
June, 1851. He was educated at
St. Stephen’s Green, Dublin, and
after arrival in Australia proceeded,
in 1871, to the Melbourne Uni-
versity. Like his colleagues on the
Bench, Mr. Higgins’ University ca-
reer was- brilliant. Besides taking
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
HON. H. B. HIGGINS.
his 8.A., M.A. and LL.B. degrees,
he was scholar in Languages and
logic, also in history and Political
economy in Shakespeare, and on
several occasions exhibitioner, and
was placed first in the class lists
each year. He was called to the
Bar of Victoria in 1876, to the Bar
of England at the Inner Temple in
1886, and to the Bar of New South
Wales in 1899. In 1885 he married
Mary Alice, daughter of Dr. George
Morrison, of Geelong, and has
one son. Mr. Higgins was a bright
star in the political horizon of Vic-
toria, being returned first by the
electorate of Geelong as a member
of the Victorian Legislative Assem-
bly. This constituency he repre-
sented from 1894 to 1900, when he
lost his seat for condemning the
iniquity of the Boer war. He was
also a member of the convention
which framed the constitution for
federation, 1897-8 ; and in March,
1901, was elected as member for the
constituency of Northern Melbourne
to the first House of Representa-
tives ; and re-elected in 1903 to
the second Parliament. He held
the office of Attorney-General of the
Commonwealth in Mr. Watson’s
Ministry in 1904. Mr. Higgins was
chairman of the Royal Commission
for the reform of legal procedure,
1897-9, and he has been a member
of the council of the Melbourne
University since 1887 (four elec-
tions). In 1904 Mr. Higgins founded
a scholarship for the study of poetry
at the Melbourne University, and
is president of the Literature
Society of Melbourne. In 1906
Mr. Higgins, at the expiration of
the second Parliament of Australia,
accepted appointment as a justice of
the High Court of Australia.
The Hon. JAMES THOMAS
WALKER, Senator for New South
Wales, to which position he has
been twice elected by large
majorities, is of Scottish descent,
having been born in Leith Walk,
Midlothian on March 20, 1841, and
is the fifth son of John William
Walker, wine merchant, Leith. In
1845 the late Mr. J. W. Walker
came to New South Wales, and
took up Castlesteads station, Bur-
rowa. The subject of this sketch
was educated at Circus Place
School, Edinburgh, Edinburgh In-
stitution, and King’s College, Lon-
don, and then spent some years in
the service of the Bank of New
South Wales in London and Aus-
tralia. He rapidly advanced in
their employ, and from 1866 to
1878 was manager at Townsville
and Toowoomba. From this posi-
tion he advanced to that of assist-
ant inspector of the Queensland
branches, until appointed first
general manager of the Royal Bank,
Queensland. From this position he
resigned in 1887, shortly after the
death of his cousin, the late
Thomas Walker, Yaralla, Concord,
New South Wales, in order to


discharge the duties of executor
and trustee devolving upon him.
Mr. Walker has always taken a
deep interest in federal matters,
and was a member of the People’s
Federal Convention, Bathurst, in
1896, and of the National Conven-
tion which framed the Common-
wealth Constitution in 1897-8. In
Kerry & Co.
SENATOR J. T. WALKER
March, 1901, he was elected at the
head of the poll as one of the Sena-
tors of New South Wales in the first
Commonwealth Parliament, and
was re-elected in 1906. Mr. Walker
is the owner of Mount Übi estate,
Queensland, and in commercial
circles holds a high and important
place, being a director of the
Bank of New South Wales, the
A.M.P. Society, Burns, Philp & Co.,
and Harrison, Jones & Devlin ;
he is also local director (and
chairman in Sydney) of the Indem-
nity Mutual Assurance Co. Ltd.,
also Norwich Union Fire Insur-
ance Co. In matters of social and
philanthropic nature Mr. Walker
is prominent, and is chairman of
several institutions, including the
Thomas Walker Convalescent Hos-
pital, the Finance Committee of the
Presbyterian Church of Australia in
New South Wales, and combines the
duties of chairman and hon. trea-
surer of the Women’s College at
Sydney University, and is coun-
cillor and hon. treasurer of St.
Andrew’s College. Mr. Walker is a
Fellow of the Institute of Bankers
(London), a director of the Royal
Prince Alfred Hospital, and presi-
dent of the Australian Golf Club.
In 1868 he married Janette Isabella,
fifth daughter of the late Thomas
Palmer, J.P., of Summerhill, County
Mayo, Ireland.
Hon. ALBERT JOHN GOULD,
Senator of the Common wealth of
Australia, is a native of New South
Wales, having been born in Sydney
in 1847. He was educated under
Dr. Woods, F.L.S., Parramatta,
and afterwards at the Sydney Uni-
versity. He studied law with his
father, the late Mr. John Morton
Gould, at Maitland, w.th whom he
served his articles, and was duly
admitted by the Supreme Court in
December, 1870. In the early part
of the following year he commenced
the practice of his profession at
Singleton, where he remained until
1896, when he came to Sydney and
established the firm of Messrs. Gould
and Shaw. He was elected to repre-
sent Patrick Plains in the Legislative
Assembly in 1882, and sat continu-
ously in that Chamber for that and
the electorate of Singleton until 1898-
when, at the general election of that
year, he was defeated, mainly because
of the attitude he saw fit to take with
regard to the Commonwealth Bill.
In April, 1899, he was called to a
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
SENATOR A. J. GOULD.
seat in the Legislative Council of
New South Wales. He joined the
fifth Parkes Administration as Minis-
ter for Justice, in 1889, which re-
mained in power until 1891,-and the
Reid Ministry, again as Minister for
Justice, in 1894, resigning in 1898,
upon the occasion of his defeat
already referred to. He took an
active interest in the great movement
that preceded federation, but opposed
both Commonwealth Bills on the
ground that the interests of New
South Wales had not received ade-
quate tecognition. In 1891 he was
selected by the Freetrade and
Liberal Party of New South Wales
as one of the six candidates for the
Senate, and was returned third on
the list. Mr. Gould has taken a
deep interest in military matters.
He joined, as a private, the West
Maitland Company of Volunteers in
1865, and upon taking up his resi-
dence at Singleton, he was trans-
ferred to the company in that town
and appointed to the rank of ensign.
Upon the formation of the 4th
Infantry Regiment he took command
of the Singleton company, subse-
quently attaining to the position of
major. He retired under the new
regulations in 1902 with the rank of
lient.-colonel. During his residence
at Singleton he filled the position of
President of the MechanicsTnstitute,
Vice-President of the Northern Agri-
cultural Society, and has served on
the Committee of the District Hos-
pital. He was associated in all
movements for the advancement of
the town and district, in which he
took the deepest interest. He was
one of the early agitators for the
construction of the railway from
Sydney to the northern line. In all
matters connected with the progress
of the Anglican Church in New
South Wales, Mr. Gould has ren-
dered important service. He is a
member of the Diocesan Synod of
Sydney, and also of Newcastle, a
member of the Provincial Synod of
New South Wales, and of the
General Synod of Australia. He is
Chancellor of the Diocese of New-
castle, a position he has held for
very many years. In 1879 he joined
the Lodge of St. Andrews, S.C., of
the Masonic Order, of which lodge
he became Master in 1883. He is
also a Mark Mason and a R.A.M.
He is a member of the Board of
Management of the Royal Prince
AJfred Hospital, also that of the
Royal Alexandra Hospital for Chil-
dren. Mr. Gould is a member of
the Great Cobar Copper Alining
Syndicate, also a Director of the
City Bank of Sydney. He married
at Maitland Miss J. J. Maitland, by
whom he has a family of two sons
and three surviving daughters. In
igoo he received authorisation to
retain the title of “ honourable ” for
life.


Mr. DUGALD THOMPSON,
M.H.R., is a Londoner by birth,
though of Scottish descent. When
only two years of age his parents
came out to Australia, landing at
Adelaide. They were, however,
scarcely settled when the excite-
ment and unrest caused by the
discovery of gold swept the land,
and the Thompson family came
over the border to Victoria. After
some time his parents decided to
send the son to England to be
thoroughly educated and trained
for business. At the close of his
school life he entered a merchant’s
office, but the spirit of adventure
was upon him, and the lad left and
went to sea, and, after two years of
this life he made his reappearance
Talma
MR. D. THOMPSON, M.H.R.
in Australia, being then 19 years of
age. He again entered into mer-
cantile pursuits, and in 1877 came
to Sydney and opened up the firm
of Robert Harper & Co., merchants.
He became resident managing part-
ner until 1892, when, on the expiry
of the partnership—in consequence
of the effects of a severe accident —
he retired from the firm and from
mercantile pursuits. Mr. Thompson
first entered into public life in 1894,
in response to a request from the
electors from the Warringah divi-
sion of the old St. Leonards elec-
torate ; and was again returned
after the dissolution of 1895, when
Mr. Reid took his party to the
countrv. At the 1898 election he
«/
differed with Mr. Reid on the Fede-
ral policy, and was opposed by a
Government candidate, but was re-
turned by a large majority. On the
establishment of the federation Mr.
Thompson was asked to stand for
the Federal Parliament. At first
unwilling, he subsequently assented,
with the result that he was returned
to the House of Representatives for
North Sydney by a very large ma-
jority. During the whole of his
residence in the State Mr. Thompson
has given time and attention to
public matters. About 30 years ago
he, with Mr. J. P. Garvan, started a
co-operative ferry company of North
Shore shareholders ; this step led to
the formation of the North Shore
Ferry Co., and the present splendid
service is due to their efforts- He
was a member of the Wharfage
Improvement Association, the ob-
jects of which were the resumption
of Darling Harbour wharf frontage,
and also a member of the Railway
Extension League, which for many
years actively, but vainly, endea-
voured to have the railway ex-
tended from Redfern to Circular
Quay. In 1907 Mr. Thompson was
chosen as one of the representatives
to the conference in London, other
representatives being the Prime
Minister, Mr. Alfred Deakin, the
Minister for Home Affairs, Sir Wil-
liam Lyne, and Mr. W. M- Hughes,
M.H.R
Senator Colonel the Hon.
JOHN CASH NEILD second son
of the late Dr. J. C. Neild, M.D.
and Ch.D., Berlin University, and
M.R.C.S., Eng., was born at Bristol,
England, 4th January, 1846, and
comes of an old Cheshire family
closely connected with the Scottish
peerage. As his mother belonged
to a prominent Irish family, he is
fairly representative of the United
Kingdom. In 1853 the future sena-
tor’s family settled in Taranaki,
New Zealand, where they experi-
enced the vicissitudes which befell
the early settlers, especially during
the first stage of the Maori war. In
iB6O they removed to Svdney. The
«/ •J
subject of this sketch was educated
by tutors and at private schools,
and at an early age entered the
office of the late Hon. 8. A. Joseph,
merchant. In 1865, when under 20
years of age, he started in business
on his own account as agent for
several well-known English firms,
and later on undertook the manage-
ment of extensive insurance opera-
tions in New South Wales and
Queensland. In 1876 he was elected
an alderman of the borough of
Woollahra, and was re-elected four
times. He served twice as mayor,
and resigned in 1890. In 1885 he
was elected to the Legislative As-
sembly as senior member for Pad-
dington, which constituency he re-
presented almost continuously until
June, 1901. During this period he
introduced a large number of bills
—nine or ten of which became law,
including the Children’s Protection
Acts (2) and Divorce Extension Act,
and several other bills which
passed the Assembly, but were de-
feated in the Legislative Council.
Swiss Studio
SENATOR HON. J. C. NEILD.
It was due to his labours, 1895-9,
that the Old Age Pension Act was
passed. In March, 190], he was
returned as one of the New South
Wales senators of the Common-
wealth, and was, in 1903. re-elected
for six years, becoming senior Sena-
tor of the Commonwealth. Senator
Neild was Executive Royal Com-
missioner for New South Wales to
the Adelaide Jubilee International
Exhibition, 1887-8 ; was a member
of the New South Wales Parliamen-
tary Standing Committee on Public
Works ; deputy - chairman Legis-
lative Assembly, 1894 ; member of
the Civil Service Board, 1895 ; mem-
ber of the Elections and Qualifi-
cations and Joint Library Commit-
tees 1895-1900. He was Honorary


Commissioner (sole) on old age pen-
sions, State insurance and Chari-
table Relief (Europe), 1896-8. As a
Senator, he has been a member of
the Joint House Committee from
1901 and a member of the
Committee of Disputed Returns and
Qualifications, and deputy chairman
of the Senate from 1903. In
1896 he raised the St. George’s
English Rifle Regiment, of which he
was Major Commanding, 1896-7,
and Lieutenant-Colonel Command-
ing, 1898, until he resigned in 1905,
when he was appointed Hon. Colonel
of the regiment, a life appointment.
In 1904 he was created Honourable
for life by Royal appointment.
Senator Neild has been twice mar-
ried, first, Clara M. G., daughter of
the late Rev. P. P. Agnew (Church
of England), and, second, Georgine
Marie Louise, second daughter of
the late George Richard Uhr, High
Sheriff of New South Wales. He
has one son and one daughter.
The Hon. JOHN CHRISTIAN
WATSON, M.H.R., Leader of
the Federal Parliamentary Labour
Freeman & Co.
HON. J. C. WATSON, M.H.R.
Party, was born at Valparaiso on
the 9th April, 1867, and is the son
of George Thomas Watson. He
received his education at the Pub-
lic School, Oamaru, New Zealand,
and, having learnt the trade of
printer, he came over to New South
Wales, and in 1886 was employed as
a compositor in the daily newspaper
offices. In July, 1894, he was re-
turned to the Legislative Assembly
of New South Wales as member for
Young, and represented that con-
stituency continuously until 1901.
For three years he was a member of
the Parliamentary Standing Com-
mittee on Public Works. Mr. Wat-
son first came into prominence as a
labour leader when he acted as
chairman of the New South Wales
conference, which framed the pledge
and formed the Solidarity Labour
Party. He was president of the
Sydney Trades and Labour Council,
1893-4 ; president of the Australian
Labour Federation, 1895 ; and
leader of the Federal Parliamentary
Labour Party since the caucus
meeting of 1901. In that year Mr.
Watson was returned to the House
of Representatives in the first Com-
monwealth Parliament as member
for Bland, New South Wales, and
re-elected in 1903. In April, 1904,
he was called upon to form an
administration, and held the office
of Prime Minister and Treasurer of
the Commonwealth, his ministry
remaining in power until August.
Mr. WILLIAM HENRY KELLY,
M.H.R. for Wentworth, son of the
late T. H. Kelly, of Glenyarrah,
Double Bay, was born in 1877, and
had the advantage of being edu-
cated at Eton College, one of the
Falk
MR. W. H. KELLY, M.H.R.
most famous educational establish-
ments in England- In 1903, at the
early age of 26 years, and without
any previous parliamentary experi-
ence, he was elected for Wentworth
to the second Federal Parliament,
securing the second largest majority
of votes polled- And at the follow-
ing election, in 1906, was re-elected
for the same constituency—and had
the satisfaction of learning that he
had lost none of his supporteis, as
he again gained the second largest
majority. On his return to the
House he was elected by the Parlia-
mentary party as whip of the
Federal Opposition. Mr. Kelly’s
contributions to the press on the
defence of Australia prove him to
be a man capable of looking at large
questions from a national stand-
point, and in the best interests of
the Commonwealth.
Hon. BRUCE SMITH, K.C.,
M.H.R., fourth son of William
Howard Smith, Melbourne, born
1851, educated Wesley College, Mit-
cham and Finchley, England ; en-
gaged in commerce, Melbourne, 1867
to 1872 ; matriculated Melbourne
Tesla
HON. B. SMITH.
University, 1873, entered as a stu-
dent at Middle Temple, London,
1874 ; called to Bar, England, 1877 ;
began practice in Melbourne, 1879 ;
settled in Sydney, 1881 ; elected
M.L.A., 1882; retired from Bar
temporarily, 1884-8, during which
time he filled the position of man


aging director of Howard Smith
and Sons ; returned to Bar, 1888 ;
re-entered Parliament of New South
Wales; Secretary in the Public
Works Department in Sir Henry
Parkes’ ministry from Bth March,
1889, to 14th August, 1891, on
which date he succeeded Sir Wm.
McMillan as Colonial Treasurer,
holding office until ministry retired.
Between 1890 and 1900 took an
active part and returned to first
House of Representatives as mem-
ber for Parkes in 1900, and re-
elected in 1904 by largest majority
of votes given to any member ;
opposed “white Australia’’ policy,
“white ocean’’ legislation, immi-
gration restriction, compulsory arbi-
tration, &c. Publications: “Liberty
and Liberalism,’’ “ Our Common-
wealth,” “ Honour to whom honour
is due,’ 1 ’ &c.
Mr. EDWARD DOWLING, J.P.,
was born in Sydney in 1843, on the
eve of the first Parliamentary elec-
tion held in Australia. After serv-
ing for three years in the office of
the late Mr. Allan McGan, a Sydney
merchant, Mr. Dowling entered the
Government printing office at the
introduction of responsible govern-
ment in 1856, taking up a position
vacated by the late Bishop of Ben-
digo. During the 27 years he was
engaged on the Government press
he acted as assistant publisher,
compositor, reviser, corresponding
clerk and accountant, besides com-
piling several works on the history
and resources of New South Wales.
As far back as 1867 he was awarded
a prize given for the encourage-
ment of colonial literature by the
late Mr. Samuel Bennett. He was
the hon. secretary of the first
mutual improvement society, es-
tablished in Sydney in 1861, which
had several educational classes in a
rented building next to the Pitt
Street Congregational Church ; and
afterwards held a similar office in
the Young Men’s Christian Associa-
tion on its being resuscitated by his
motion in 1869. In order to secure
better provision for the education of
all classes he secured election on the
committee of the Sydney Mechanics’
School of Arts ; and in 1869, on his
motion, the first classes in mineral-
ogy, geology, chemistry and physics
were successfully formed at that,
institution. At the annual meeting
of the School of Arts in February,
1873, he moved a motion for the
establishment of a technical or
working-men’s college, and when
new buildings were erected for the
purpose acted as chairman of the
college committee. When a board
of technical education for New
South Wales was selected by Mr.
G. H. Reid, Minister of Public In-
struction in 1883, Mr. Dowling was
appointed its secretary, and under
the direction of the very able and
representative men constituting the
board organised the departments of
the Sydney Technical College with
the branch suburban and country
schools, until industrial instruction
was taken over by the Government
at the latter end of 1889. In 1887
he was compelled, under medical
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. E. DOWLING.
direction, to take the long sea
voyage to England, and whilst there
he visited the principal technical
institutions in the United Kingdom,
and recommended on his return that
systematic courses of instruction
should be imparted during the day-
time as well as in the evening. In
1890 Mr. Dowling severed his con-
nection with the work of technical
education owing to continued ill
health, and Sir William Windeyer,
in a paper subsequently read before
the London Society of Arts, stated,
from his intimate knowledge as
president of the Sydney Mechanics’
School of Arts, and a member of the
late Board of Technical Education,
that the founding ana success of the
m o
system of industrial instruction in
New South Wales was principally
due to the labours of Mr. Dowling.
When retiring from the vice-presi-
dentship of the Sydney Mechanics’
School of Arts —the oldest and
largest institution of its kind in
Australia —he was elected an honor-
ary life member, a distinction only
conferred on a few of its officers
during an existence of three-quarters
of a century. After attending as a
delegate a conference on Australian
Federation held by the Australian
Natives’ Association in Melbourne
in January, 1890, at which the
branches in all the colonies were rep-
resented,he was commissioned by the
New South Wales branch to inquire
into the working of federal institu-
tions in" the United States and
Canada, and whilst in Washington,
amongst other representative men
interviewed Major McKinley- He
acted as hon. secretary of the Aus-
tralian Natives’ Association of New
South Wales for several years when
its principal mission was to encou-
rage colonial literature, science and
art, and to secure the union of the
colonies, but resigned office after
forming it into a benefit society. As
a delegate to the Corowa Federal
Convention, and hon. secretary of
the Central Federation League and
the Australian Natives’ Association,
he supported Dr. Quick’s motion
for a statutory convention to pre-
pare a Federal constitution. When
in June, 1893, after a deputation
from the Australian Natives’ Asso-
ciation, Sir Edmund Barton (then
Attorney-General in the Dibbs Go-
vernment) formed the Australian
Federation League, Mr. Dowling
was elected one of its hon. secre-
taries, and continues in office up to
the present time in order to carry
out its rules in defending the Fede-
ral constitution. Mr. Dowling is a
justice of the peace, and for some
years sat as an honorary magistrate
on the Burwood bench. He is also
a member of the Government board
for the protection of the aborigines.
He took an active part in founding
the Australian Historical Society.
He went to live at Blue’s Point
when married, nearly forty years
ago, and is one of the few early
residents spared to witness the
astonishing settlement now obtain-
ing in that and other villages on the
northern shores of Port Jackson.


GEOGRAPHICAL AND TOPOGRAPHICAL.
Owing to Captain Cook’s idea that some of its
coastal outlines were not unlike South Wales, New
South Wales, the mother-colony of the Australasian
group, was so called by the great navigator when he
first explored its rugged shores in 1770. New South
Wales, or Notasia, as it was termed in the early days
of the settlement, originally included the whole of the
eastern portion of Australia, but is now restricted to
the southern half of the eastern coast- The colony of
the present day lies between the 28th and 37th degrees
of south latitude, and the 141st and 154th meridian of
east longitude. Its northernmost limit (Point Danger)
is in 28 degrees 10 minutes south and 153 degrees 29
minutes east ; its easternmost point (Cape Byron)
being in 28 degrees 27 minutes south and 157 degrees
37 minutes east ; the most southerly limit of the State
(Cape Howe) is situated in latitude 37 degrees 28 min-
utes south and longitude 150 degrees 8 minutes east.
The boundaries of New South Wales constitute an
irregularly-shaped, four-sided figure, the southern fron-
tier deviating most widely from a right line. The
extreme length of the country, measured diagonally, is
900 miles ; its greatest breadth something less than
850 ; and its mean breadth about 500 miles. Its
superficial area is 323,437 square miles. New South
Wales is about three times the size of Great Britain
and Ireland, and larger than any State in Europe,
except Russia, Germany (federated), and Austro-
Hungary. One of its outlying districts within the
frontier —the Albert —is alone larger than England and
Wales together. Taken as a whole, the State is nearly
equal in extent to Canada —before the days of the
Dominion. The entire length of the coastline is
about 800 miles. Its bays and inlets from Port Danger
to Cape Howe, are about eighteen in number. On the
coastline there are eleven inlets, with narrow open-
ings, which formerly were occasionally closed to navi-
PORT CURTIS.
It has well-defined natural boundaries on every side,
except the western border and part of the northern
boundary, west of the Mclntyre River, where the
29th parallel of latitude touches that river. On the
north it is separated from Queensland by the Mac-
pherson Range, the Dividing Range, the Dumaresq
River, the Karaula (or Mclntyre) River, and the 29th
parallel of south latitude. On the east it is bounded
by the Pacific. On the west it is separated from the
territory of South Australia by the 141st meridian of
east longitude. On the south New South Wales is
divided from Victoria by a line drawn from Cape Howe
to the nearest source of the Murray, and by the wes-
terly course of that river- Ihe position of New South
W r ales in south latitude corresponds to that respectively
occupied bv Cape Colony, and by the lower portion of
La Plata and Chili, in South America —the south ot
Spain, Italy and Greece lying in a corresponding zone
of north latitude.
gation after heavy gales from seaward. These salt-
water lagoons were generally, but somewhat improperly,
known as lakes. In the interior there are several
extensive fresh-water lakes The islands on the coast
are few and unimportant. The principal harbours are
the ports of Sydney and Newcastle, that of Sydney
(Port Jackson) being one of the best and most exten-
sive in the world.
As regards the physical features of the country,
the surface of New South Wales may be divided into
three parts—(l) the Coast district ; (2) the Tablelands ;
and (3) the Plains of the Interior. The coast district
is a comparatively narrow slip of undulating land,
lying along the sea-coast —often not more than 35
miles wide, and sometimes considerably less. A high
plateau, or elevated district, furrowed here and there
with precipitous valleys next succeeds, frequently
presenting on the seaward side nearly perpendicular
escarpments. The most important series of these high


lands traverses the entire length of the State. In
width this elevated region extends westward to about
the 151st meridian. Its shape is irregular, and its area
is not easily estimated- On this tableland, at a dis-
tance of from 60 to 70 miles from the coast, are to be
found our loftiest mountains, while from the 151st
meridian to the westward there is a gradual fall to the
great inland plains. These plains are for the most
part thinly timbered, but well watered, covered with
luxuriant grass and herbage, and forming admirable
cattle and sheep stations. They are the great pasture
lands of New South Wales.
In the central district or tableland the climate is
cold in winter, particularly in the more mountainous
tracts. On the Muniong Range, in the district of
Monaro —a range generally known as the Australian
Alps —snow frequently lies from May to October, but
is, however, seldom seen in summer, although some-
times known to fall even in December and January-
THE GAP, SOUTH HEAD.
liHtheseI iHthese Alpine districts tremendous storms not in-
frequently occur, followed by very heavy rains. Al-
though in the tablelands the winters are rather severe,
as a rule the climate of New South Wales is warm and
dry, the difference of mean temperature not being
more than 25 degrees. In the coast region, to the
east of the Great Dividing Range, the mean annual
temperature stands higher than on the tablelands.
The heat of the summer is here, however, moderated
by the proximity of the ocean In the vast plains of
the interior the alterations of heat and cold are always
more distinctly marked. Hot winds are more or less
prevalent throughout the low lands during the summer,
and whilst they last they have been known to raise
the temperature to 125 degrees Fahr. Notwithstanding
this occasional inconvenience, the climate is universally
regarded as both healthy and pleasant, and one of its
chief characteristics is a peculiar lightness and purity
of atmosphere, seldom experienced elsewhere.
Mountains.
The mountains of New South Wales extend over
an immense area, but their average elevation is prob-
ably not more than 3,500 feet, although some peaks
are much higher. The highest (Mount Kosciusko, in
the Muniong Range), attains an altitude of 7 ; 300 feet —
about 700 feet below the perpetual snow line. The
Great Dividing Chain, or Cordillera, separates the
eastern and western watersheds, but does not consti-
tute the sole important feature of the system- The
mountains of New South Wales may be conveniently
distinguished under four heads, viz. (1) The Interior
Ranges ; (2) the Great Dividing Range ; (3) The Coast
Range ; and (4) The Isolated Peaks and Groups. The
ranges of the interior, near the western boundary of the
colony, form the western watershed of fhc Darling
River. Of these the principal are —(1) Grey Range,
and (2) Stanley or Barrier Range. In Grey Range the
chief elevation is Mount Arrowsmith, 2,000 feet high ;
and in Stanley Range the highest peak is Mount Lyell
about the same elevation.
The Great Dividing Chain has seven main branches,
viz. : —(1) The New England Range
(highest print, Ben Lomond, 5,000
feet) ; (2) the Liverpool Range (highest
point, Oxley’s Peak, 4,0C0 feet) ; (3)
the Blue Mountain Range (highest
point, Mount Beemarang, 4,100 feet) ;
(4) the Cullarin Range (highest point,
Mundoonen, 3,000 feet) ; (5) the Gou-
rock Range (highest point, Jindulian,
4,000 feet) ; (6) the Monaro Range
(highest point, head of Kybean River,
4,100 feet) ; (7) the Muniong Range
(highest point, Mount Kosciusko,
7,308 feet-) The main branches are
again subdivided as follows :—(1) The
New England Range, with its five late-
ral branches —1, Macpherson’s Range ;
2, Macleay Range ; 3, Nandewar, or
Hardwick Range ; 4, Hastings Rnnge :
5, Moonbi Range. (2) The Liverpool
Range is divided into the three chief
lateral branches of—l, Peel Range ;
2, Mount Royal Range ; and 3, War-
rumbungle Range. (3) The Blue Mountain Range is sub-
divided into the three chief lateral branches of—l. Hun-
ter Range ; 2, Mittagong Range 3, Macquarie Range.
(4) The Cullarin Range is subdivided into—l, Western
Range ; and 2, the Mundoonen Range- (5) The Gou-
rock Range of a broken and rugged appearance, cannot
be easily subdivided. (6) The Monaro Range is sub-
divided into—l, the Western Range ; and 2, the North-
western Range. (7) The Muniong Range—the northern
portion of the Wanagong Mountains of Victoria—con-
tains on the north side of the frontier—l, the Murrum-
bidgee Range ; 2, the Tumut Range ; and 3 the Murray
Range. All this series is connected with the Cordillera,
dividing the eastern and western watersheds In one
portion of it there is an inland slope, at Lake George,
to the south-west of the city of Gonlburn, where there
is no outlet. Here an area of 300 square miles is
drained by the Turallo and Butmaroo Creeks. From
the Muniong, Monaro and the South Coast Ranges the
Margalong or Snowy River —having for affluents the
rivers Eucumbene, Crackcnback, Mowamba, Tongaro,
Moyengul, Ingeegoodbee, Wulwye, Bodundarra, Mac-


Laughlan, and, lastly, the Bombala, with its tribu-
taries, Cambolong, Columbooka and Mahratta —flows
away across the frontier to the south. With these two
exceptions all the waters of New South Wales either
pass away into the ocean on the eastward, or, accu-
mulating on the westward side of the Great Cordillera,
fall into the River Murray at Wentworth, which itself
reaches the ocean near Adelaide.
On the east side of the Great Dividing Chain, and
parallel to it for a very considerable distance, lie ranges
which, from their situation, are called the Coast Ranges.
They generally form the edge of the elevated tableland,
upon which lies the Great Dividing Chain, and they are
thus distinguished : (1) The Northern Coast Range ;
(2) the Illawarra Range; (3) the Coekabilly Range ; and
(4) the South Coast Range, which attains an elevation
Creeks, already referred to, it will be correct to say
that all the rivers of New South Wales have their
sources in the Great Dividing Chain, or Cordillera, and
How thence to the sea, with a curious variety of direc-
tion, by the eastern or the western watershed. The
</reat rivers of the western watershed are : (1) The
Darling and its numerous affluents ; (2) the Lachlan and
its tributaries, comparatively few in number ; (3) the
Murrumbidgee and its branches ; and (4) the Murray or
Hume and its affluents- All these great western rivers
eventually unite their streams with the Murray, which
receives its last tributary, the Darling, at the frontier
town of Wentworth, passing which it flows into Lake
Alexandrina, near Adelaide, in South Australia. The
drainage of the western watershed may be readily
understood by the following analysis
SCENE ON THE RIVER, FORT HACKING.
of 3,712 feet- The most remarkable of the isolated
mountains and groups are Mount Doubleduke,
Whoman, Elanie, Yarrahappini, Kibbors, the Three
Brothers, Mount Talawah, Dromedary, Mumbulla, and
lastly, Inslay or Baloon, 2,900 feet high. The above
is a very brief outline of the mountain system of New
South Wales, but it may serve to give some idea of
the vast extent of the country, and may also render
the description of the river system more intelligible.
Rivers.
With the comparatively trifling exception of the
Snowy River and its affluents, and the two incon-
siderable streams known as Turallo and Butmaroo
1. The Darling. —The Karaula, Calew r atta, or
Mclntyre River, rises at the foot of Ben Lomond, not
far from Stonehenge, in the pastoral district of New
England. It flows first in a north-westerly direction
for about 130 miles, and, having received the Severn,
it reaches the northern boundary of New South Wales,
and runs for a considerable distance westerly, receiving
succesively the Dumaresq, Boonie, Whalan and Gilgi 1-
Its course thenceforward is for the most part southerly
and south-westerly. The united stream is here called
the Barwon or Upper Darling—almost down to the
site of the township of Brewarrina, to the north-east
of Bourke. The river then receives the Mooni, the
Gwydir or Bundarra, also called the Kindur, the Namo:


or Peel and its affluents, the Castlereagh, the Mac-
quarie (the Wambool) and its numerous tributaries, the
Narran, the Bokhara, the Culgoa, the Bogan, the
Warrego, and several other large creeks. From Bre-
warrina down to Wentworth the main stream is known
as the Darling. The estimated length of the Barwon
is 510 miles ; that of the Lower Darling, or Darling,
properly so called, is 650 miles ; giving a total of 1,160
miles. The Darling falls into the Murray at Went-
worth, in latitude 34 degrees 6 minutes south, and
longitude 142 degrees 2 minutes east. The area of
basin drained by the Darling and its affluents i 5198,000
square miles. The length of the Mclntyre is 350
miles ; of the Gwydir, 445 miles ; of the Namoi, 600
miles ; of the Castlereagh, 365 miles ; of the Macquarie,
750 miles ; and of the Bogan, 450 miles.
The River Lachlan, or Calare, is the next main
stream, but much inferior in length and extent of
basin to the Darling. It rises on the western side of
the Cullarin Range, in the county of King- It re-
ceives, first the Jerrawa Creek, and is then called the
Narrawa River, and afterwards the Crook well and
Abercrombie, and finally the Lachlan. The Boorowa
and Belubula are the last of its principal affluents.
Sweeping round to the west and south-west the Lachlan
falls into the Murrumbidgee, flowing in the latter por-
tion of its course through vast plains. The total length
of the Lachlan is 700 miles ; area of basin, 27,000 square
miles. The Murrumbidgee rises in the Muniong Range,
and in the neighbourhood of Cooma trends suddenly
to the northward. It receives the Umaralla, the
Queanbeyan, the Yass, the Goodradigbee, the Tumut,
the Adelong, the Nacka Nacka, and the Tarcutta-
After the first 300 miles it pursues a westerly course,
and, joining the Lachlan west of Maude, falls into the
Murray, 20 miles to the south-west of BalranahL The
estimated length of the Murrumbidgee is 1,350 miles,
and it drains a basin having an area of 25,000 square
miles, the river being navigable for 500 miles. The
principal source of the Murray (known also as the
Millewa, Hume, or Indi) is in the Muniong Range, near
Kosciusko, and not far distant from the head of the
Murrumbidgee waters. It flows westerly and north-
westerly through the entire breadth of New South
Wales, and receives almost all its western waters. The
Murray and Murrumbidgee are connected by ana-
branches in the lower part of their course. The Murray
has several considerable affluents in the upper portion
of its course, and it forms the southern frontier of the
colony from Monaro to the south-western limit. Its
length is 720 miles, and it drains an area of 270,000
square miles. The width of the stream from Moama
to Albury in the summer months is about 240 feet, and
it is navigable by small steamers as far as the last-
mentioned town.
The rivers of the eastern watershed drain an area
of not more than 50,000 square miles. These rivers all
flow into the Pacific. The most considerable are the
Hawkesbury, the Hunter, the Shoalhaven, and the
Clarence. The length of the Hawkesbury is 330 miles,
and it drains an area of about 8,700 miles. The length
of the Hunter (Coquon) is 300 miles, and the area
drained about 8,000 square miles. The Shoalhaven is
260 miles in length ; the Clarence, 240 miles ; the Mac-
leay, 190 miles; and the Manning, 100 miles. The
Hastings, the Richmond, the Karuah, the Clyde, the
Moruya, the Turon, the Bega and the Towamba, all
more or less navigable, are none of them 100 miles in
length. Most of these eastern rivers have sand bars at
their mouths, and their navigation is attended with
danger in temptestuous weather. The Hawkesbury
(Decrubbun) is remarkable for its singularly tortuous
course and its great beauty —it is the Rhine of Aus-
tralia- Its basin has three distinct slopes in the east-
ern watershed —a northern, eastern and western slope.
The main stream comes from the northern slope, and it
is first called the Wollondilly- It receives the Mul-
warree, the Cookbundoon and the Cox Rivers, and is
then called the Warragamba- When the Cowpasture
River has contributed its waters the river is called the
Nepean, which name it bears until its junction with
the Grose, flowing from the Blue Mountains, and thence-
forth it is known as the Hawkesbury, the name first
bestowed, in order of time, upon the stream of many
aliases After receiving the Colo and MacDonald
Rivers and other minor tributaries, the Hawkesbury
finally discharges itself into the Pacific Ocean at Broken
Bay- Owing to the immense area which it drains, and
the flatness of the country in the lower portion of its
course, but chieflv in consequence of the confined and
tortuous channel below Windsor, through which the
enormous volume of flood water is not discharged with
sufficient rapidity, this river is liable to sudden floods-
The alluvial lands in the valleys of the Hawkesbury
and of the Hunter are renowned for their extraordinary
fertility.
Topography.
The topographical distribution of the vast area of
New South Wales has not followed any uniform system.
Originally Cumberland County represented the whole
of the colony, as known to the first residents, and this
was divided into two districts, with, later on, two sub-
divisions of each. Then the counties of Northumber-
land and Camden were proclaimed. Beyond these
areas was termed the waste lands of the territory, until
settlement pushed across the Blue Mountains and along
the coastal districts. The newly-populated country,
together with the old centres, became known as the
settled districts, and was partitioned in 1829 into the old
historical nineteen counties : these being St. Vincent,
Camden, Cumberland, Northumberland; Gloucester and
Macquarie, the six coast counties ; Durham, Brisbane
and Bligh, the north-west inland counties ; Cook, Rox-
burgh, Westmoreland, Wellington, Bathurst, Hunter
and Phillip, the western counties ; and Georgiana,
King and Argyle, the south-western counties. To this
last group the county of Murray was added, and subse-
quently a division of the unsettled districts took place,
under which the number of counties was increased to
118. Those additional, or, as they were then termed,
“new” counties absorbed the lands of the thirteen
pastoral districts —Monaro, Murrumbidgee, Lachlan,
Wellington, Bligh, Liverpool Plains, Gwydir, New
England, Macleay, Clarence, Darling, Albert, and
Warrego —which included the whole area of the colony
outside the afore-mentioned twenty counties proclaimed
under the Orders-in-Council of 1847. With new Land


Acts a rearrangement of the lands of New South Wales
became necessary, and for the purposes of adminis-
tration these great pastoral provinces had to give way
to the still greater grouping of the Crown lands —into
the Western, Central and Eastern divisions.
The Western Division embraces the following
counties (with their chief towns) : —Poole ; Toncowoko ;
Delalah ; Thoulcanna ; Irrara ; Culgoa (Barringun and
Corella, the chief towns) ; Narran (Brewarrina) ; Finch ;
Evelyn (Milparinka) ; Yantara ; Ularara ; Barrona ;
Gunderbooka ; Fitzgerald ; Landsborough ; Fame 11 ;
Mootwingie ; Yungnulgra (Tarella) ; Killara ; Yanda
(Louth) ; Cowper (Bourke and Byrock) ; Young (Wil-
cannia) ; Rankin ; Robinson (Cobar) ; Yancowinna
(Broken Hill) ; Tandora ; Werunda ; Booroondarra ;
Livingstone ; Woore ; Mouramba (Nymagee) ; Menin-
dee ; Mossgiel (Ivanhoe) ; Blaxland (Mount Hope and
Gilgunnia) : Windeyer ; Perry ; Manara (Manfred) ;
Franklin ; Waljeers (Mossgiel) ; Tara ; Wentworth
(Wentworth) ; Kilfera ; Taila ; and Caira (Bal-
ranald).
In the Central District are contained counties
Staplyton : Benarba (Mungindi and Collarendabri, chief
towns) ; Burnett (Warialda) ; Courallie (Moree) ; Dur-
ham (Cryon) ; Jamieson (Wee Waa) ; Murchison (Bin-
garra) ; Nandewar (Boggabri) ; Baradine (Pillaga) ;
Leichhardt (Coonamble) ; Gregory (Canonba) ; Pot-
tinger (Gunnedah) ; Cowen (Gilgandra) ; Napier ; Ewen-
mar ; Oxley (Warren and Nevertire) ; Cambeligo (Giri-
lambone) ; Flinders (Nyngan) ; Lincoln (Dubbo) ; Nar-
rowmine (Trangie and Narrowmine) ; Kennedy ; Cun-
ningham (Condobolin) ; Ashburnham (Forbes, Parkes
Molong, Cudal and Cargo) ; Dowling (Cargilligo) ; Gipps
(Wyalong) ; Forbes (Grenfell) ; Nicholson (Booligal and
Hillston) ; Sturt (Currathool) ; Cooper (Narrandera) ;
Waradgery (Hay) ; Bourke (Coolamon) ; Mitchell (King-
ston and Yerong) ; Urana (Jerilderie, Widgiewa and
Lockhart) ; Townsend (Deniliquin) ; Wakool (Moula-
mein) ; Clarendon (Gundagai and Junee) ; Wynyard
(Wa gga Wagga and Adelong) ; Cadell (Moama) ;
Denison (Berrigan) ; Hume (Albury, Corowa, Culcairn,
and Howlong).
The Eastern Division includes the counties of Rous
(Lismore and Ballina, the chief towns) ; Puller (Mary-
land) ; Arrawatta (Ashford) ; Clyde (Tenterfield) ; Drake
(Tabulam, Solfeiino and Drake) ; Richmond (Casino
and Coraki) ; Clarence (Grafton and Maclean) ; Gough
(Glen Lines, Inverell and Emmaville) ; Gresham (New-
ton Boyd) ; Fitzroy (Woolgoolga) ; Hardinge (Tingha
and Bindarra) ; Clarke (Kookabookra) ; Darling (Ma-
nilla and Barraba) ; Sandon (Armidale, Uralla and Hill-
grove) ; Raleigh (Bellinger and Nambucca) ; Inglis
(Tamworth) ; Vernon (Walcha) ; Dudley (Kernpsey) ;
Parry (Moonbi and Nundle) ; Buckland (Murrurundi
and Quirindi) ; Macquarie (Port Macquarie, Wingham
and Taree) ; Brisbane (Muswellbrook and Scone) ; Bligh
(Cassilis) ; Hawes ; Durham (Singleton, Dungog and
Morpeth) ; Gloucester (Raymond Terrace, Stroud and
Gloucester) ; Phillip (Culgong and Cudgegong) ; Wel-
lington (Orange, Mudgee and Hill End) ; Hunter (Jerry’s
Plains) ; Northumberland (Newcastle and Maitland) ;
Roxburgh (Sofala and Rylstone) ; Bathurst (Bathurst
Blayney and Cowra) ; Cook (Lithgow and Hartley) ;
Cumberland (Sydney, Parramatta, Granville, Liverpool
Windsor and Penrith) ; Westmoreland (Oberon and
O’Connell) ; Georgiana (Tuena) ; Camden (Berrima,
Wollongong and Kiama) ; Bland (Temora) ; Monteagle
(Young) ; King (Yass) ; Argyle (Goulburn) ; Harden
(Cootamundra and Murrumburrah) ; Gordon (Welling-
ton) ; Murray (Queanbeyan and Bungendore) ; St. Vin-
cent (Braidwood, Nowra and Ulladulla) ; Buccleugh
(Gundagai and Tumut) ; Cowley (Tharwa) ; Goulburn
(Germanton) ; Selwyn (Tumbbrumba) ; Beresford
(Cooma) ; Dampier (Bodalla, Moruya and Cobargo) ;
Wallace (Kiandra, Jinderboine and Seymour) ; Welles-
ley (Bombala) ; Auckland (Bega). The enormous ter-
ritory represented by these counties contained, in
December, 1906, about 1,635 post-towns, one of them,
Euriowie, being 1,449 miles from Sydney, and five
other postal stations more than 1,300 miles distant
from the capital.
SYDNEY COVE IN THE THIRTIES.


Mr. JOHN MANIFOLD
GIBSON, Under Secretary in the
Chief Secretary’s Department of
New South Wales, was born in
Dublin in 1848. Fie received his
education mainly in England, first
at a preparatory school at Watford,
and afterwards at Cowley School,
near Oxford. He arrived with his
family in Sydney towards the end of
the year 1868, and almost imme-
diately entered the service of Messrs.
Edward Chapman & Co , where he
remained for some time. He sub-
sequently joined the clerical staff
of the European Insurance Co.,
and afterwards the old firm of
Messrs. John Frazer & Co. Mr.
Gibson entered the service of the
Council of Education on Ist Feb-
ruary, 1870, as accountant, and
remained in that position under the
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR J. M. GIBSON.
Department of Public Instruction
until the end of 1889. In January,
1890, he was promoted to the position
of chief clerk, which office he ad-
ministered until 27th May, 1900.
He acted from nth September, 1893,
to 10th April, 1894, as Under Sec-
retary for Education during the
absence, through illness, of the
late Under Secretary, Mr. Edwin
Johnson. In May, 1900, he was
transferred to the position of chief
clerk of the Chief Secretary’s De-
partment. Upon the demise of
Mr. Critchett Walker, in July, 1903,
Mr. Gibson was appointed Acting-
Under Secretary, and was subse-
quently confirmed in the position as
permanent head of the department.
Mr. WILLIAM GORDON
H A YE S-WI ELIA M S, Registrar-
General for New South Wales, is a
native of Otahuhu, near Auckland,
New Zealand, and was born in 1862.
At three years of age he lost his
father, a teacher by profession and a
graduate of Trinity College, Dublin.
Two years subsequently his mother
with her family came to Sydney and
established herself as a teacher.
After some private tuition and a
period of schooling at St. Stephen s
Denominational School, Newtown,
Mr. Hayes-Williams entered a mer-
cantile office, from which he passed,
three years later, into the office of
Mr. William Cope, solicitor, whose
managing clerk he became and from
whom he received hi? 'articles of
clerkship. In 1888, being still under
articles, he was appointed managing
clerk to Mr. Charles A. Laurence,
solicitor, who was joined a few
months later by Mr. J. C. McLach-
lan, the firm carrying on busi-
ness under the style of Laurence
and McLachlan. Immediately up-
on his admission as a solicitor
of the Supreme Court of New South
Wales in 1890, Mr. Hayes-Williams
became a partner in the business, and
the firm of Laurence, McLachlan
and Williams continued for four
years. Towards the end of 1894,
Mr. Hayes-Williams was offered
inducements to join another legal
partnership, with which he remained
until October, 1898, when the office
of Registrar-General and Examiner
of Patents was rendered vacant by
the death of Mr. Parry Long. This
vacancy placed the Government of
the day somewhat in a dilemma in
regard to the appointment of a
successor. The Cabinet was anxious
not to depart from the wholesome
and long-established principle of
promoting to the position some
well-deserving member of the pub-
lic service, providing of course
that such an officer could be found to
possess the necessary qualifications,
and that such a translation could be
effected without interfering with the
efficiency of the service. At that
moment the Government could not
see its way clear to make a satisfac-
tory appointment by promoting an
officer from another position without
creating a vacancy where a similar
difficulty would result. The Public
Service Board therefore decided to
seek outside the service for a gentle-
man possessed of the necessary legal
training and experience for the
position to be filled. In coming to
a decision the Public Service Board
sought the advice of seven of the
leading solicitors of Sydney, including
the then Crown Solicitor and the
president of the law institute. This
body unanimously advised the ap-
pointment of Mr. Hayes-Williams if
he, not being an applicant for the
post, should be willing to accept it.
The Public Service Board recom-
mended Mr. Hayes-Williams’ ap-
pointment, and this recommendation
was, in due course, confirmed by the
Government. The office of Regis-
trar-General is one of heavy responsi-
bility, the department including seve-
ral separate and distinct branches,
devoted to the administration of
the Real Property Act, the
Registration of Deeds Act, the
J. Hubert Newman Sydney.
MR W G HAYES-WILLIAMS.
Registration of Births, Deaths
and Marriages Act, the Com-
panies Act, the Trade Marks
Act and the Registration of Firms
Act, the staff numbering 166 officers
under the direct control of the Regis-
trar-General and including 240
officers partially under his control.
In connection with his various duties,
Mr. Hayes-Williams holds the offices
of Registrar of Joint Stock Com-
panies, Registrar of Trade Marks,
Registrar of Births Deaths and
Marriages, and Guardian of Minors.
For five-and-a-half years as Exam-
iner of Patents he also controlled the
State Patents Office, which has now,
however, under the Commonwealth
Patents Act, passed over to the Com-
monwealth. Mr. Hayes-Williams
128
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


married in 1883 Annie, youngest
daughter of the late Colonel James
Lister Laurence and sister of Charles
Albert Laurence and George Massett
Laurence, both well-known Sydney
solicitors. His family consists of
two sons.
Mr. EDWIN AUGUSTUS
CLEAVE SMITH, Solicitor, Ex-
aminer of Titles under the Real Pro-
perty Act, was born at the Manor
House, Crediton, Devonshire, Eng-
land, on the nth May, 1852. At
this old town the celebrated Apostle
and Archbishop, Wynfrid, St. Boni-
face, was born a.d. 680. Mr. Smith
was educated partly at the grammar
school of his native town and partly
at private schools. Part of the term
of his articles was served at Crediton
—where his family have practised as
solicitors for over a century, —when
he devoted himself almost entirely
to conveyancing, and the remainder
of the term in London in order to
obtain more varied legal expe-
rience. He was admitted as an
attorney and solicitor in England in
June, 1875. His appointment as
Examiner of Titles dates from No-
vember, 1888, and he has, there-
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. E. A. C. SMITH.
fore, held the position for over sixteen
years. jPrior to such appointment
he was, for many years, one of the
managing conveyancing clerks of
Messrs. Stephen, Jaques & Stephen,
formerly Stephen, Laurence & Jaques,
solicitors, of this city.
Mr. HARRY BINGHAM
THOMAS, B.A. (Cantab.), Solicitor
of the Supreme Court of New South
Wales and also of the Supreme Court
Judicature of England, Examiner of
Titles, Land Titles Office, Sydney,
was born in Boston, Lincolnshire,
England, in 1856. He was educated
at the Boston Grammar School, and
entered the Cambridge University in
1875 and graduated in 1878.
attaining his B.A, degree he was
articled to Mr. Snow, of the firm of
Paterson, Snow & Bloxham, Lin-
colns’ Inn Fields, London. Having
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney .
MR. H. B. THOMAS.
served his articles he was admitted
to practise in March, 1882. He came
to Sydney in 1884, and almost imme-
diately obtained an appointment with
Messrs. Norton, Smith & Co., solici-
tors, Sydney, as managing clerk with
that firm, which he retained for some
five years. He then established an
independent practice, which he car-
ried on for three years. In 1891 he
was offered and accepted the position
of Examiner of Titles in the Land
Titles Office of New South Wales,
which position he has occupied ever
since.
Mr. HENRY RALEIGH
COLBORNE, Solicitor of the
Supreme Court of New South Wales,
is one of the Examiners of Titles ap-
pointed under the provisions of the
Real Property Act, and was born at
Chippenham, England, in iB6O. He
was educated first at a private school
at Ramsgate, and afterwards at the
City of London School. He then
served his articles with nis uncle,
Mr, Thomas Colborne, a leading
solicitor,of Newport, Monmouthshire,
and in 1883 was admitted as a solicitor
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
NR. H. R. COLBORNE.
of the Supreme Court of judicature.
In 1887 he came to Sydney, and soon
afterwards obtained an appointment
with the firm of Messrs. Macnamara
and Norton, solicitors, subsequently
Macnamara & Smith, for whom he
acted as managing conveyancing
clerk. This position he filled for a
period of about twelve years. In
1899 Mr. Colborne was appointed to
his present position.
Mr. HAROLD WASHINGTON
WILLIAMS, Solicitor, Examiner of
Titles, was born in Sydney. He
received his education at Camden
College, and afterwards at the Sydney
Grammar School. Upon the termi-
nation of his school days he became
an articled clerk to Mr. Fred.
Chapman, who became Prothonotary
before his term expired. Mr. \\ il-
liams’ articles were in consequence
assigned to Mr Llewellyn Russell
Jones, who succeeded Mr. Chapman
m partnership with the late Mr. Edwin
Daintrey, and with whom he com-
pleted his articles. He was admitted
in 1884 to practise as a solicitor by the
Supreme Court of New South Wales,
but remained with Messrs. Daintrey
and Jones until the close of that year.


In 1885 he proceeded to Brisbane,
and was admitted to practise in the
colony of 'Queensland. He joined
the staff of Messrs. Hart & Flower,
solicitors, of Brisbane, with whom he
remained until 1888. Returning to
Sydney in that year, he received an
appointment in the office of Messrs.
Want, Johnson & Co., now Messrs.
Minter, Simpson & Co., as a manag-
ing clerk, in which position he
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. H. W. WILLIAMS.
continued until February, 1901,
when he undertook the dudes of his
present office.
Mr. WIFE!AM HENRY HARE,
Acting Statistician of the State, was
born in Sonora, in the Valley of the
Sacramento, California, in 1855, and
at the age of two years came with
his parents to New South Wales, and
was educated at the Model Public
School, Fort vStreet, of which he was
“ dux ” in the year 1871. In Sep-
tember of that year he was successful
in a competitive examination as a
cadet draughtsman in the Survey
Department, and entered upon that
profession, subsequently occupying
the charge of important branches in
the head office. On the passage of
the Crown Eands Act of 1884 he was
successively appointed to the im-
portant positions of Chief Draughts-
man at the District Survey Offices at
Tamworth and Wagga Wagga, and
in 1890 was installed as Inspector of
Eand Board and District Survey
Offices throughout the country. Plis
connection with the public service
was severed in 1893 ; but on the
inception of Mr. G. PE Reid’s direct
taxation, early in 1895, his expert
knowledge in land matters was
largely availed of in the compilation
of the ‘ ‘ Doomsday ’ ’ book, which
became the basis of the assessment
in connection with the lands of the
State under the Eand and Income
Tax Act. On the completion of
this work, his varied knowledge of
the business and personnel of the
several departments of the State
was availed of by the Public Service
Board during the first half of the
year 1896 in the grading of the
public service. ITe was then trans-
ferred to the Land Tax Department
for a period of about seven months
to assist in placing that department
in a satisfactory condition. In P'eb-
ruary, 1897, he was appointed sub-
editor of year books in the office of
the Government Statistician, and in
October, igoo, was further promoted
to the position of Assistant Statisti-
cian. On Mr. T. A. Coghlan’s leaving
the State to take up the duties
of Acting Agent-General, Mr. H ,11
assumed the responsibilities of Acting
Statistician, being gazetted thereto
in June, 1905. Those who are inti-
mately acquainted with him and his
J Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. W. H. HALE.
work will fully endorse the valedic-
tory encomium of Mr. Coghlan when
he said that Mr. Hall is ‘ ‘ a strict
disciplinarian and indefatigable
worker, with the faculty of getting
the best work out of his staff. His
knowledge of the theory and tech-
nique of statistics is, in my opinion,
better than that of anyone engaged
in statistical work in any of the other
vState offices.”
Mr. GEORGE EDWARD
BRODIE, appointed Inspector-
General of Charities in February,
1906, was born in New South
Wales in the year 1857, and was edu-
cated, first at the Parramatta Public
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
NR. G. E. BRODIE.
School, and finally by private tuition.
After passing the exami-
nation, he entered the Treasury in
IS7I as a junior under the presen'
Rt. Hon. George Houston Reid, P.C..
the Hon. Geoffrey Eagar being then
the Under for Finance and
Trade. The various grades of that
department were passed through by
Mr. Brodie, and in 1890 he was ap-
pointed to the position of Inspector
of Public Accounts, and six y'ears
later he was . promoted to the
chief inspectorship. The Treasury
and the Audit Departments
have at different periods had his
valuable services at their com-
mand. In the year 1897 he was
transferred with his staff of inspectors
to the Audit Department as Deputy-
Auditor-General and Chief Inspector
of Public Accounts. His services
being again required in the Treasury
he was re-transferred there in 1900
Two later he was for the
second time transferred to the Audit
Department, in this in tance with
his staff of inspectors to assist the
Auditor - General in administering


the new provisions in roduced and
embodied in the present Audit Act,
No. 26, 1902. The Public .Service
Board have made frequent claims
upon his services in conducting in-
quiries having reference to and bear-
ing upon matters of account and
government stores, the latter treat-
ing with matters of very great
importance. The subject of this
sketch is a member of the Public
Service Association, and during his
long official career has been connected
with many matters of great weight,
affecting the welfare of the public
service. Some years ago he asso-
ciated himself with one of the leading
dramatic clubs, at the hands of which
hospitals and charitable institutions
have received liberal donations. He
is a grandson of the late William
Bird Brodie, M.P., Salisbury, Eng-
land, who was a brother of Sir
Benjamin Collins Brodie, Bart.,
Sergeant-Surgeon to both William
IV. and Queen Victoria. Mr. Brodie
is also a nephew of Dr. George
Brodie, who has an extensive practice
in Bondon at the present time. The
wife of Mr. Brodie is the grand-
daughter of the late William Baw-
son, who, together with Blaxland
and W. C. Wentworth, formed the
first party to cross over the Blue
Mountains. This feat they accom-
plished in the year 1813, during the
administration of Governor Colonel
Bachlau Macquarie. The figures of
these men may be seen on the exter-
nal parts of the Bands Department.
Mr. ALFRED WILLIAM
GREEN, J.P., Chief Boarding Out
Officer, State Children’s Relief De-
Sydney.
J. Hubert Newman.
MR. A. W. GREEN.
partment, New South Wales, was
born in Geelong, Victoria, in 1857.
Coming with his parents to Sydney
while still young, he was sent to the
Fort Street School, where he acquired
a solid education. Upon its ter-
mination he entered the Government
Printing Office as an apprentice ;
here he passed through the various
branches, and acquired a thorough
knowledge of the trade. He re-
mained with the Government Print-
ing Office thirteen years. In 1884 he
was appointed Secretary to the State
Children’s Relief Board, which posi-
tion he occupied till 1896, when he
was called upon to fill the position
of Chief Superintendent of Govern-
ment Asylums. In igoi he was
appointed to his present position,
upon the separation of the Depart-
ment of Charities. He was given
charge of the juvenile portion of the
work under the State Children’s
Relief Board with the title of Chief
Boarding Out Officer. Mr. Green
has always taken a deep interest
in all sport. He is a member of the
Rugby Union Council, as well as
chairman of the executive of the
New South Wales Cricket Associ-
ation. He was one of the founders
and first hon. secretary of the
Sydney Amateur Orchestral So-
ciety, and is now a member of the
committee of management of that
body.
Mr. WILLIAM McINTYRE, Jun.,
Chief Electoral Officer for the State
of New South Wales, is the second
son of Mr. William Mclntyre, the
ex-deputy Chief Inspector of Schools
under the Department of Public
Instruction. The latter’s name will
long be remembered for the import-
ant part he took and the warm
interest he manifested in the system
of public instruction which now
embraces the whole of the State ;
Mr. Mclntyre, sen., being one of
sixteen teachers in Great Britain,
half of whom were chosen by Sir
Alex. McDonnell, Commissioner of
National Education, Dublin, selected
for service in New South Wales.
On arrival in the colony Mr.
Mclntyre’s first appointment was
Organising Master of National
Schools in the Hunter River district;
and it was during his residence in
Maitland that the son was born, on
15th July, 1858. The lad’s education,
however, was obtained at the Public
School, Goulburn, and afterwards at
Balmain. It was his privilege to
have as his instructors Mr. J. May-
uard and Mr.T. Dwyer, respectively.
In the year 1875 Mr. W. Mclntyre,
jun., sought and obtained a position
Sydney.
J. Hubert Newman.
MR. W. McINTYRE, JUN.
as charting draughtsman in the sur-
vey branch of the Department of
Bands. He remained there till 1887.
when lie was transferred, at the re-
quest of the then Chief Secretary,
under whose control the electoral
department then was, and with the
approval of the Secretary of Bands,
to the Electoral Office, where for
eleven years he served as assistant
to Mr. George Bewis. On the retire-
ment of that gentleman in 1896 he
was appointed to the position he
now holds.
Mr. ADOBPHUS BERCKEL-
MAN, Secretary and Executive
Member of the Government Stores
Sydney .
J. Hubert Newman.
MR. A. BERCKELMEN.


Supply and lender Board, was
bom at Engowra, near Forbes,
New South Wales, in 1867, and was
educated at the Superior Public
School and the Grammar School,
Windsor (N.S.W.) He entered the
public service as a clerk in the
office of the Inspector-General of
Police in 1883, an( i received seve-
ral promotions between that year
and 1888, when he was given the
additional appointment of secretary
to the Aborigines’ Protection Board
of New South Wales. In 1899 he
was promoted to the position of
secretary to the newly created Pub-
lie Service Tender Board. Here he
remained until 1900, when he was
appointed confidential clerk to the
then Principal Under Secretary, the
late Mr. Critchett Walker. The
Hon. Sir John See, upon his as-
sumption to the Prem’ership in
1901 appointed him his secretary.
This position he held until October,
1902, when he was selected to fill
the high and responsible position
of Secretary and Executive Mem-
ber of the Store ; Supply and Tender
Board, This Board exercises super-
vision and control over the supply
of all stores, stationery, and other
requisites for the public service,
and deals with all contracts and
tenders of the various departments,
involving the expenditure of some
hundreds of thousands of pounds
sterling annually,
COOMBING, NEAR CSRCOAR.


THE TREASURY.
The first Colonial Treasurer was William Balcombe,
who arrived in Sydney by the ship “ Hibernia ” on
sth April, 1824. He was appointed by Government
Order of 6th May, 1824- On 27th May, 1824. the
Sydney Gazette published a notice that payments
would be made at the Colonial Treasurer’s office,
O’Connell Street- The building was situated at the
corner of O’Connell and Bent Streets. The last re-
maining portions were recently removed to make way
for the present buildings of the Colonial Sugar Co.
Balcombe held office until his death on 19th March,
1829, his successors being—William Dumaresq, Act-
ing Colonial Treasurer from Ist April, 1829, to 31st
July, 1829 ; Campbell Drummond Riddell, Colonial
Treasurer from Ist August, 1829, to 28th April, 1856 ;
Francis Lewis Shaw Merewether, Acting Colonial
Treasurer (with Stephen Greenhill) from Bth May, 1841,
to 31st July, 1841 ; Merewether also Acting Colonial
Treasurer from 26th January, 1854, to February, 1856-
The duties of Colonial Treasurer before the establish-
ment of that office and the appointment of Bal-
combe, were discharged by the Commissary-General
and the Collector of Internal Revenue- By Govern-
ment and General Order, 26th September, 1825, regu-
lations for the guidance of financial officers were issued,
stating that quarterly returns of moneys received and
expended were to be furnished, all vouchers to be
taken in duplicate, vouchers to bo successively num-
bered, care to be taken not to blend sums received or
disbursed under different sources of revenue or heads
of expenditure, accounts in duplicate to be transmitted
within one month of termination of quarter. Then
follow the duties of the naval officers and officers in
charge of bonded stores, particulars of proceeds of sale
of Crown lands and slaughtering cattle, tolls of turn-
pikes and ferries, market duties, &c. The Treasury
building, Bridge and Macquarie Streets, was com-
menced in 1849, and completed towards the end of
1851- Since responsible government the office of
Colonial Treasurer has been filled by the following
Thomas Holt, 6th June, 1856, to 25th August, 1856 ;
Robert Campbell, 26th August, 1856, to 2nd October,
1856 ; Stuart A- Donaldson, 3rd October, 1856, to 7th
September, 1857 ; Richard Jones, 7th September, 1857,
to 3rd January, 1858 ; Robert Campbell, 4th January,
1858, to 30th March, 1859 ; Elias U Weekes, 18th April,
1859, to 26th October, 1859 ; Saul Samuel, 27th
October, 1859, to Bth March, 1860 ; Elias C- Weekes,
9th March, 1860, to 20th March, 1863 ; Geoffrey Eagar,
16th October, 1863, to 2nd February, 1865 ; Thomas
Ware Smart, 3rd February, 1865, to 19th October,
1865 ; Saul Samuel, 20th October, 1865, to 3rd January,
1866 ; Marshall Burdekin, 4th January, 1866, to 21st
January, 1866 ; Geoffrey Eagar, 22nd January, 1866,
RESIDENCE OF WILLIAM BALCOMBE, FIRST COLONIAL IREASURER.


to 26th October, 1868 ; Saul Samuel, 27th October,
1868, to 15th December, 1870 ; George Wm. Lord,
16th December, 1870, to 13th May, 1872 ; William
Richman Piddington, 14th May, 1872, to 4th Decem-
ber, 1872 ; George Alfred Lloyd, sth December, 1872,
to Bth February, 1875 ; William Forster, 9th February,
1875, to 7th February, 1876 ; Alexander Stuart, Bth
February, 1876, to 21st March, 1877 ; William Richman
Piddington, 22nd March, 1877, to 16th August, 1877 ;
William Alexander Long, 17th August, 1877, to 17th
December, 1877 ; Henry Emanuel Cohen, 18th Decem-
ber, 1877, to 20th December, 1878 ; James Watson,
21st December, 1878, to 4th January, 1883 ; George
Richard Dibbs, sth January, 1883, to 21st December,
1885 ; John Fitzgerald Bums, 22nd December, 1885,
to 25th February, 1886 ; Sir Patrick Alfred Jennings,
K-C-M G , 26th February, 1886, to 19th January, 1887 ;
John Fitzgerald Burns, 20th January, 1887, to 16th
January, 1889 ; James Patrick Garvan, 17th January,
1889, to 7th March, 1889 ; William McMillan, Bth
On November 18, 1895, an Act amending the
Audit Act of 1870 was assented to- This declared
“ that all appropriations from the Consolidated Reve-
nue Fund shall lapse at the close of the financial year
to which they refer, and from the first day of July,
1896, the cash receipts within the financial year shall
be considered as the actual income and the cash pay-
ments during the same period the actual outlay.’
This —according to Coghlan in the last edition of his
“ Wealth and Progress of New South Wales
amounted to a complete revolution in the system of
keeping the public accounts, introducing in the Trea-
sury accounts what is usually termed “the” cash
basis, a system which obtains in several of the other
States, and has been found to work in the vnterests of
economy and good government. Under the method
that this alteration superseded, the expenditure for the
services of a year and the actual expenditure during
that year could only be shown by two different systems
of accounts. When a specific appropriation was made
BRIDGE STREET—LOOKING EAST.
March, 1889, to 27th July, 1891 ; Bruce Smith, 14th
August, 1891, to 22nd October, 1891 ; John See, 22nd
October, 1891, to 14th December, 1893 ; the Right Hon.
George Houstoun Reid, P-C-, Q-C-, LL-D-, 3rd August,
1894, to 3rd July, 1899 ; Joseph Hector Carruthers,
3rd July, 1899, to 13th September, 1899 ; Sir William
John Lyne, K C M-G-, 13th September, 1899, to 20th
March, 1901 ; Thomas Waddell, 10th April, 1901, to
29th August, 1904 ; the Hon- Joseph Hector Carruthers,
30th August, 1904, still in office-
The Under-Secretaries during the same period
have been : —Henry Lane, from September 1, 1856, to
July 31. 1865 ; John Wells, from August 1, 1865, to
February 28, 1866 ; Henry Lane, from May 1, 1866. to
January 30, 1872 ; Geoffrey Eagar, from February 1,
1872, to February 28, 1891 ; Francis Kirkpatrick, from
May 1, 1891, to May 10, 1905 ; Charles James, Saunders,
who took office May II,! 905, and is still in this position.
for any service, the expenditure incurred under such
authorisation would be charged against the year for
which the vote was taken, irrespective of the date
when the payments were made ; and for this reason
the public accounts for any year could not be closed
until all appropriations lapsed, or were written off or
exhausted. As a matter of practice when the expen-
diture exceeded the income, there were frequent dif-
ferences of opinion between the incoming and outgoing
Treasurers as to the propriety of charging items, some-
times of large amount, to particular years, with the
result that conflicting and irreconcilable statements
were made, to the detriment of public credit. But
the Audit Act Amendment Act of 1895 having placed
the public income and expenditure on a cash basis, it
did away with the confusion that existed in the past,
and made it easy for the inquirer to ascertain the true
position of the finances of the State. A new Audit Act


was passed in 1902, repealing previous Acts and declar-
ing “ every appropriation out of the Consolidated Reve-
nue Fund for the services of any financial year shall lapse
and cease to have any effect for any purpose at the
close of that year ; and any balance of such appropria-
tion, which may then be unapplied, shall be written
off and cease to be a liability of the Consolidated
Revenue Fund for that vear, and the accounts of the
year shall then be closed-” This Act also created a
Public Accounts Committee “to inquire into and
report to the Legislative Assembly upon any question
which may have arisen in connection with the Public
Accounts and which mav have been referred to the
%/
Committee either by a Minister of the Crown or by the
Auditor-General, or by a resolution of the Legislative
Assembly ; also to inquire into and report upon
all expenditure by a Minister of the Crown made
without Parliamentary sanction or appropriation ”
gold- From 1853 to 1859 the revenue made great
strides, and amounted to £1,522,668 for the last year
mentioned- In December, 1859, the separation of
Queensland took place, and consequently a falling off
in the revenue occurred in the following year, the
amounted collected being £1,308,925- The gross
revenue for the intervening years undermentioned is
given by Coghlan as follows : —1865, £1,771,162 ; 1870,
£2,102,697 ; 1875, £4,121,996 ; 1880, £4,904 230 ; 1885,
£7,587,368 ; 1890, £9,494,584 ; 1895, six months ended
30th June, £4,943,847 ; 1900, £10,203,931- Under the
provisions of the Commonwealth of Australia Consti-
tution Act, the control of Customs and Excise and the
administration of the Post and Telegraph and Defence
Departments were transferred to the Federal Govern-
ment, the first-named on January 1, 1901, and the
others on March 1, 1901 ; consequently the revenue
derived from these sources, since the transfer, has
TREASURY BUILDING, BRIDGE STREET, AS IT APPEARED WHEN ERECTED.
The Audit Act defines all moneys received lor and
on account of the State, and all moneys coming
under the Act to be public moneys, and such are
included in the Treasurer’s General Banking Account.
For convenience, the accounts are divided into
Consolidated Revenue Account, Trust Account, Spe-
cial Deposits Account, and General Loan Account;
other accounts may be opened as the exigencies of
the service demand.
Reliable information respecting the revenue and
expenditure of New South Wales dates from 1815, in
which year the public receipts amounted to £21,6*39,
and the expenditure to £19,980. From 1815 to 1840—
the latter year being memorable in the annals of the
State as that in which transportation ceased—the
advance in the revenue was very rapid. In 1840 the
public receipts amounted to £638,112, a sum not
reached until 1853, two years after the discovery of
only been included to the extent of the balance paid
over to the State after deducting the expenditure
incurred in connection with transferred services, and
the proportion of other or new expenditure for which
the State was liable- The net expenditure corre-
sponding with those given above was as follows :- —
1865, £1,284,568 ; 1870, £2,550,002 ; 1875, £3,240,964 ;
1880, £5,460,315 ; 1885, £8,355,120 ; 1890, £9,389,346 ;
1895, for the first six months, £4,844,597 ; 1900,
£10,086,186- From 1872 to 1877 —years notorious for
the wholesale alienation of the public estate —the
yearly income was considerably in excess of the annual
payments, with the result that a large surplus was
created - The excess payments of 1878 and 1879
reduced the amount somewhat, but the surpluses of
1881 and 1882 considerably augmented the fund.
After the year last mentioned, however, large with-
drawals were annually made, and the fund became


practically exhausted at the end of 1885. Since that
date the existing deficit has been accumulating.
r The Revenue is classified under two heads, viz.,
Governmental and Business Undertakings of the State.
The former comprises receipts derived from taxation,
land, services rendered, and general miscellaneous
receipts ; and under the latter are grouped receipts
from railways and tramways, Sydney Harbour Trust,
Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage, and the
Hunter River District Water Supply and Sewerage.
Customs and excise duties, license fees, land and income
taxes, and stamp duties represent the various forms of
taxation in force in the State- The customs and excise
duties are dealt with in another section- The revenue
from licenses exhibits little variation from year to year,
the amount received during the year ending June 30,
“ Services rendered ” includes Mint receipts, fees
for escort and conveyance of gold, pilotage and harbour
dues, fees and dues of various kinds; all other items
which cannot rightly be classified are placed under the
heading of “General Miscellaneous Receipts,” the
chief of which are “rents, exclusive of land,’’ fines
and forfeitures, country towns water and sewerage
supply woidcs interest, contributions to the Public
Service Superannuation Fund, and similar accounts
under this head being chiefly made up of dues. The
total revenue has considerably increased of late years,
and so also has the expenditure the figures being not
wholly an index of progress- The business undertak-
ings of the State are self-supporting—that is to say,
yielding sufficient revenue to ccJver working expenses
and interest on capital debt —the railways and tram-
TREASURY BUILDING, MACQUARIE STREET, 1907 .
1901, being £124,196 In 1899 the Stamp Duties Act
was amended, the alterations being the adoption of
a graduation scale of duties on the estates of deceased
persons, classified as follows : —Where the value of the
estate exceeds £l,OOO and under £5,000, 2 per cent. ;
£5.000 and under £6.000, 3 per cent- ; for each £l,OOO
over £6,000 up to £lO,OOO, l-sth per cent- ; for each
£2,000 over £lO,OOO up to £40,000, l-sth per cent ;
for each £4,000 over £40,000 up to £lOO,OOO, 1-sth per
cent- ; over £lOO,OOO, 10 per cent aftbr deducting all
debts which may be deducted- The Bank Notes Act
of 1893 provided for the increase of the annual com-
position duty on bank-notes from 2 to 2.1 per cent, on
all notes issued within the State- As the Act lapsed
in November, 1895, the composition duty charged
since that date has been at the old rate-
ways showing a surplus for the year 1896-7 after an
interval of fifteen years, and again during the financial
year ended June 30, 1901.
The Trust Account once formed a very important
division of the public accounts, but by recent legis-
lation one portion, that is the Government Savings
Bank funds, has been removed from the Treasurer’s
control and placed under commissioners, the remainder
of the funds, comprising a number of funds of which
the Treasurer was the legal custodian, has also been
removed and placed under the control of the State
Debt Commissioner.
Another group, consisting of a number of accounts,
is included in a division known as “ Special Deposits,”
and represent departmental working accounts of sums
paid in for specific purposes—State advance accounts


Year.
£
Year.
£
Year.
£
1842
49,500
1865
5,749,630
1885
35,564.259
1845
97,900
1870
9.681.130
1890
48.343,333
1850
132,500
1875
11,470,631
1900
65,332,993
1855
1860
1,000,800
3.830.280
1880
14.903,919
1901
67,361,246
and moneys placed on deposit for short periods, upon
which interest is paid.
All items of expenditure to be provided for by
loan are authorised under Loan Appropriation Act,
in the same manner as the ordinary expenditure
chargeable to the general revenue is authorised,
while under the Inscribed Stock Act of 1883, the
passing of the Loan Estimates confers the power
of raising the money required without the necessity
of a special Loan Act. There is a further restric-
tion to the expenditure of money, whether from
loans or revenue, in the operation of the Public
Works Act of 1888- Under the provisions of this
Act the question of the advisability of carrying
out all works estimated to cost more than £20,000,
except those connected with military and naval de-
fence and the maintenance of railways, is referred by
resolution of the Legislative Assembly to the Parlia-
mentary Standing Committee, appointed during the
first session of each Parliament. The Loan Account
was not established until 1853, although the system of
raising money by loans was introduced as early as
1842- The first ten loans of the State, which were
issued under Gazette notices for immigration purposes,
were raised on the security of the land, or, as it was
called, the Territorial Revenue ; but only £329,700
was redeemed from that source, the balance being
made a liability of the Consolidated Revenue, and as
such eventually included in the Loan Account under
the head of 6fc Redemptions-’' From 1853 to 1870 the
proceeds of loans were paid into and formed part of
the Consolidated Revenue Fund ; but during the year
last mentioned a different policyl was introduced,
and a separate account was opened apart from Revenue
for each loan floated, while the amount then at credit
of the old loans continued to be operated on in con-
junction with the Revenue Account until 1891, when
the account was finally closed.
From the proceeds of all loans raised are carried
to a General Loan account, to be drawn upon for
service, duly authorised under a Loan Appropriation
Bill.
In the early stages of Australasian borrowing the
expenditure was moderate ; loans were hard to raise
and interest high ; but latterly, as the conditions under
which loans could be contracted became favourable,
especiallv since 1875, few of the States set any bounds
to their borrowing- It was a repetition of the old
experience, the opportunity engendeied the desire, and
the open purses of the investors tempted the States to
undue borrowing and lavish expenditure. W hat is
termed “ a vigorous public works policy ” was the
order of the day, and works were pressed forVard
which, under other circumstances, would not have
been undertaken, or have beten held back until the
growth of population warranted their construction.
Prior to 1875 the loan expenditure on works was mode-
rate. In the year named, however, the amount spent
was more than double tha't of 1874, and that year
may be considered the starting point of the policy just
alluded to.
When in 1831 it was decided to abolish the system
of free land grants, and to dispose of the public estate
by auction in lieu of private tender, it Was also decided
that the proceeds of land sales should be paid into
what was called the Land Fund, from which were to
be paid the charges incidental to the introduction of
immigrants; and it was from the inability of the Land
Fund to meet theste charges that the public debt of
New Sduth Wales first had its rise- From 1831 to
1841 the Land Fund was sufficient, but in the year
last named the engagements for immigration purposes
were so heavy that it became necessary to supplement
the fund in some way, and for this purpose it was
decided by the Governor to borrow on the security of
the Territorial or Land Revenue- Accordingly, on
December 28, 1841, a debenture loan of £49,000 was
offered locally under Gazette notice- This loan was
issued during 1842 in two instalments, the nominal
rates of interest being 5Jd. and 4d. per cent- respec-
tively per diem* The loan at the higher rate was
raised at par and the other at a discount of 2 per cent.
This was the first loan floated in the State, as well as
the first raised by any of the Australasian Governments.
Including those just mentioned, there were issued
between the years 1842 and 1855 ten loans, amounting
in the aggregate to £705,200, the proceeds of which
were devoted to the furtherance of immigration-
Debentures representing these immigration loans were
redeemed to the value of £329,700 from the- Territorial
Revenue, while the balance of £375,500 was taken over
as a liability on the general revenue of the State, and
ultimately became incorporated in the public debt.
In addition to immigration loans, there were others,
six in number, authorised by Acts of Council- These
were not all issued until after responsible government
had been proclaimed- Under the authority of the
above-mentioned Acts the ffirst instalment of a loan
for £683,300 was placed on the London market during
the years 1854-5- This was the first Australasian loan
issued in England, and the forerunner of numerous
others, representing a liability now of over £225,000,000
The public debt in November, 1855, when responsible
government was proclaimed amounted to £1,000,800.
The debt outstanding at each quinquennial period is
given in the subjoined table It will be seen that the
appetite for borrowing increased with the growth of
population- From 1850 to 1860 the average annual
increase of indebtedness was £370,000 ; from 1860 to
1870, £585,000 ; from 1870 to 1880 ; £522,000 ; from
1880 to 1890, £3,348,000 ; and from 1890 to 1900,
£1,695,000.
As previously mentioned loans have been raised
by Treasury bills, debentures and stock. The Treasury
bills are of a temporary character, and will in the course
of a few years disappear from the statement of the
public debt, either by subscription or ordinary stock
in lieu of them, when the temporary purpose for which
they were issued has been served, or by redemption
on maturity The practice of issuing Treasury bills,
either in anticipation of, or to make good, deficiencies
in revenue, is an old-established one ; but they have
been made to serve another purpose, and money has


been raised by their sale to meet certain obligations
for public works This is an innovation which could
not be well avoided in the disturbed markets of the
last few years. The Treasury bills are like the British
Treasury bills in name only, but they have some points
in common with the British Exchequer bills. The
amount current on Tune 30, 1901, was £5,881,584, of
which sum £1,877,584 represents bills in aid of revenue,
and £4,004,000 those issued for loan services- From
1842 to 1883 the practice followed was to raise loans
by debenture bonds. In the year last named, however,
the Inscribed Stock Act was passed in conformity
with the provisions of the Imperial “ Colonial Stock
Act of 1877,” and the system of raising loans by deben-
tures is rarely now followed as Invested Stock is pre-
ferred by investors on account of the greater security
from loss which it offers The amount of debentures
vestment. Another class of Treasury bills, which
represent short dated Loans, were issued for the
purpose of raising funds for Public Works, which
under other circumstances would have been obtained
by favourable issue of long-dated Loans. As late
as 1890 New South Wales could borrow in London
on very favourable terms, but a reaction was
setting in, and in 1892, when it became necessary to
borrow, the conditions were most unfavourable. To
tide over the difficulty the Government, during the
years- 1892-3 issued Treasury bills to the amount of
£4,000,000, under the authority of Act 55, Vic. No 7,
passed in December, 1891, and £3,250,000 were placed
on the market and the balance taken up bythe Savings
Bank of New South Wales. Of these bills there are
£4,000 outstanding overdue and not presented. In
1900 the London market was again unfiavourable
THE ROYAL MINT, MACQUARIE STREET, 1907 .
outstanding on June 30, 1901, was £9,247,850, which is
considerably less than one-fifth of the inscribed stock
current. The issue of funded stock is regulated by
four Acts —one passed in 1873, one in 1892, one in
1894, and the other in 1895- Stock issued under the
former Act is interminable ; that under the later Acts
may be redeemed at the expiration of twenty years
from the passing of the Act, on the Treasurer giving
twelve months’ notice of his intention to redeem Cur-
rency of later issues of inscribed stock is regulated
by the Act under which they were floated.
Treasury Bills outstanding were originally issued
to cover deficiencies in Revenue on account, 1886 and
previous years, year 1895, year 1905, and are paid off
annually at the rate of £300,000 per annum. The bills
were not issued to the public, as the Treasury had
large sums belonging to various trusts awaiting in-
owing to the South African war. Accordingly authority
was obtained under Act 46 of 1899 for the issue
of bills to the amount of £4,000,000, and the proceeds
of these have beeh used for the General Loan Services
of this State. The 1890 and 1891 issues were originally
placed at 4 per cent., but as the money representing
their purchase was entirely at the disposal of the Trea-
sury, being trust funds, the interest on all but £219,500
was reduced to 3 per cent- from January 1, 1895- The
amount at 4| per cent, was a loan by the Savings Bank
of New South Wales.
Royal Mint, Sydney Branch.
The Sydney branch of the Royal Mint was estab-
lished by an Order of her late Majesty in Council, dated
the 19th August, 1853, which was issued as the result
of representations made by the Legislative Council of


New South Wales and by the principal bankers and
other persons in London connected with the colony.
On the 18th October, 1854, there were issued two
Orders-in Council and Royal Proclamations approving
the designs for the new sovereign and half-sovereign,
and giving them currency in Australia, New Zealand
and Van Diemen’s Land. The designs so approved
were, for the sovereign :—Obverse : The effigy of her
Majesty with the inscription, “ Victoria D : G : Britan-
niar : Regina F : 1) : ” and the date of the year ; reverse :
“Australia” in the centre, encircled by a laurel
wreath and surmounted by the Royal Crown, with
the inscription, “ Sydney Mint. One Sovereign,” and
with a graining on the edge ; and for the half-sovereign
a design in every way similar except that on the reverse
the word “ Half-Sovereign ” should appear. Coins of
these designs continued to be struck until 1871, when
by the Royal Proclamation of the 14th January of that
year, published locally on the 15th June, 1871, currency
was given to coins of the same design as those coined
at the Royal Mint in London. Since then coins struck
in Sydney are only to be distinguished by the mint
mark, the letter “ S ” appearing on coins of the pre-
sent issue above the centre of the date. Gold coins
struck in Sydney were first made current in Great
Britain in 1866, and are now, together with those struck
in other Australian branch mints, on an equal footing
with the coins issued in London.
The Sydney Mint was opened to the public on the
14th May, 1855. The first Deputy Master was Captain
(afterwards Major-General Sir E. W.) Ward, the officer
in charge of the company of sappers forming the original
working staff. The mint is under the immediate con-
trol of the Lords Commissioners of his Majesty’s Trea-
sury, but all revenue collected is paid to the State
Government. The expenditure is met by an annuity
of £15,000, payable under the (consolidated) Sydney
Mint Act, 1902, from the Consolidated Revenue Fund
of New South Wales. The original Order-in-Council
establishing the mint was repealed by the Sydney
Mint Proclamation, 1900, which ordains that the gold
coins coined in Sydney shall be the same in all respects
as those coined in England, and shall have the same
currency ; that gold bullion shall be assayed and coined
upon payment of one penny the ounce standard, and
of such further charges for melting and refining as the
Governor of New South Wales in Council may fix ;
and that certain sections of the Coinage Act, 1870,
shall be applicable to the Sydney Mint. Under this
proclamation regulations for the receipt and coinage
of gold have been issued, imposing, in addition to the
coining charge mentioned above, a charge of one penny
to threepence the ounce gross for refining all bullion
“ not sufficiently refined and toughened for direct
conversion into coin,” together with an extra charge
of one shilling the ounce on all base metal when this
is present in a deposit in excess of 5 per cent. Power
is given to the Deputy Master to fix the price to be
paid for silver in excess of 8 per cent of the weight
of a deposit, the present rate (June, 1906) being one
shilling and sixpence the ounce fine. Provision is
made for the determination of the value of deposits on
the report of the mint assayer, for the payment of the
proceeds by cheque, or in coin, for even thousands of
pounds, and for the issue to the public of gold and
silver bullion. Of late years a large amount of fine
gold, in ten-ounce ingots, has been issued under these
regulations for export to India. Coin is issued either
direct to the depositor or to the mint bankers. From
each issue of coin one piece in two thousand is selected
and transmitted to London, where the specimen coins
for the year are subjected, at the trial of the pyx, to
an examination as to weight and fineness, in order to
ensure compliance with the legal standards.
The extraction of silver from deposits was made
economically possible in Sydney in 1870 by the intro-
duction of Miller’s chlorine refining process. The pale
greenish colour of gold coins struck up to that year
was due to the presence of silver as an alloy, instead of
the copper now used.
The receipts and issues of gold for the 51 years —
14th May, 1855, to 13th May, 1906 —have been as
follows : —Receipts : Weight, 31,041,013*22 ozs- (950
tons 4 cwt- 3 qrs-) ; value, £114.325,214 14s. 6d.
Issues :
£3,025,000; total coin, £109,142,500; bullion,
£5,368,311 10s. ; total issues, £114,510,811 10s.
In addition to the coinage of gold, the Sydney
Mint has acted as the agent of the London Mint since
1868 for the issue of Imperial bronze coin, and, since
1879, for the issue of Imperial silver coin.
The present site of the mint is in Macquarie Street,
the foundation-stone of the main building having been
laid by Governor Macquarie on the 29th October, 1811.
The building was originally the southern wing of the
“ Rum ” Hospital, so called from the contract for its
erection having been drawn in terms of “ rum,” which
was then an ordinary means of exchange. The build-
ing was afterwards used as the Army Medical Stores
Depot and as military staff offices, and in 1853 it was
assigned for the use of the mint.
British gold coins are made from an alloy of eleven
parts gold and one copper. The alloy, known as stan-
dard gold, or 22-carat gold, is valued at £3 17s. 10|d.
the ounce troy, and is the basis of all calculations as
to the value of gold bullion- Fine, or pure, gold is
worth £4 4s. the ounce troy. The sovereign
weighs 123*274 grains., there being a remedy, or devia-
tion from standard, of two-tenths of a grain allowed
under the Coinage Acts; 1224 grains is the lowest weight
at which the sovereign is legal tender. The half-
sovereign weighs 61*637 grains, has a remedy of *ls
grain, and a lowest current weight of 61J grains. The
technical description of the sovereign of the present
issue is as follows :—Obverse : His Majesty’s effigy to
right, with the inscription, cc Edwardus VIL I) : G :
Britt : Omn : Rex F : 1) : Ind : Imp : ” Reverse : The
image of Saint George armed, sitting on horseback,
attacking the dragon with a sword, and a broken spear
upon the ground, and the date of the year ; with a
graining on the edge. The half-sovereign has the
same obverse and reverse impressions as the sovereign.
The Department of Taxation.
The Department of Taxation was created by Act
of Parliament in 1895 for the administration of the then
newly-passed Land and Income Tax Assessment Act,
and is controlled by a Board of Commissioners,


consisting of Mr. L- S. Spiller, Chief Commissioner; Mr.
R. N. Johnson and Mr. C- J. Saunders Under their
direction is a staff of officers numbering two hundred,
whose aggregate salaries are an annual charge on the
revenue of £35,000. In addition to this sum, the con-
tingencies every year amount to £5,600 or thereabouts,
so that the cost of collecting the direct taxes imposed
upon the community represents, in round figures,
£40,000 per annum.
An income tax was first made law in New South
Wales by the Government of which the Hon. George
Houstoun Reid, P»C., K-C., was the Premier; it formed
part of a scheme of direct taxation brought into ope-
ration on the Ist January, 1896, consequent upon the
repeal of certain customs duties. The direct taxation
then imposed consisted of a land tax, assessed on the
societies not carrying on business for purposes of profit
or gain, except income derived from mortgages ; the
dividends and profits of the Savings Bank of New
South Wales, and of the Post Office Savings Bank ;
the funds and incomes of societies registered under
Part lIL of the Friendly Societies Act of 1873, or under
any Act relating to trade unions ; the incomes and
revenues of all ecclesiastical, charitable, and educa-
tional institutions of a public character, whether sup-
ported wholly or partly, by grants from the Consoli-
dated Revenue Fund or not ; income arising or accruing
to any person not resident in New South Wales from
Government debentures, inscribed stock and Treasury
bills ; income derived from the ownership of land sub-
ject to land tax under Parts 11. and lIL of this Act ;
income derived directly from the use or cultivation of
THE CUSTOM HOUSE, CIRCULAR QUAY, SYDNEY, 1895.
unimproved value of freehold lands (with certain
exemptions and deductions) and an income tax, with
exemptions, assessed (speaking broadly) on all incomes
exceeding two hundred pounds (£200) per annum,
except those derived directly from the ownership, use,
or cultivation of freehold lands. The two taxes were
intended to be complementary.
The Acts of Parliament imposing the land tax
and the income tax were the Land and Income Tax
Assessment Act of 1895, 59 Viet., No. 15, the Land
Tax Act of 1895, 59 Viet , No. 16, the Income Tax
Act of 1895, 59 Viet., No. 17, and the rate imposed
was sixpence in the pound on all incomes, &c., except
the following :—The revenues of municipal corpora-
tions, or other local authority ; the incomes of mutual
life assurance societies and of other companies or
land subject to land tax under Parts 11. and 111. of
this Act. The income of a married woman is liable
to assessment and taxation in like manner as if she
were unmarried.
By sections 3 and 4 of the Land and Income Tax
(Amendment) Act, 1904, the Legislature repealed the
hitherto existing method of assessing income tax, and
created a new method coming into effect with the
income tax for the year 1905. The old method (1896-
1904) was to take the income of the previous year as
an estimate of the probable income of the year of tax,
and if the actual income after the completion of the
year proved to be less than the basis so adopted,
the taxpayer was entitled to an amendment of the
assessment, and a refund of the amount representing
the difference between the tax assessed on (a) the


Period.
Net Yield.
Financial year ended —
£ s.
d.
30th June, 1896
27,657 19
10
j j j >
1897
279,801 6
8
»» > >
1898
144,236 18
1
> > »>
1899
171,498 19
11
> ? »>
1900
166,170 4
2
) y j»
1901
205,304 0
3
»> >5
1902
190,315 6
5
> > j >
1903
199,160 16
4
J» ) »
1904
193,240 4
5
Totals
• •
.. £1,577,385 16
1
Year.
No. of Taxpayers.
Net amount of
the Assessment.
£
1896 ..
22,101
13,126,760
1897 ..
20,812
11,862,080
1898 ..
22,034
11,991,240
1899 ..
21.387
12,004,187
1900 ..
21,379
12,958,376
1901 ..
22,141
13,154,904
1902 ..
22,519
13,340,274
1903 ..
22,266
13,319,321
1904 ..
23,572
13,418,575
basis, and (6) the actual income subsequently ascer-
tained : this right was given by section 53 of the Land
and Income Tax Assessment Act of 1895, taken in
conjunction with section 27 —To remedy what was
considered an anomaly sections 3 and 4 of the Land
and Income Tax (Amendment) Act of 1904 were passed
repealing direction and provision (1) of section 27 and
section 53 of the Land and Income Tax Assessment
Act of 1895, and substituting provisions which have
the effect of charging the tax for a year on the amount
of income ol the preceding year, without any subse-
quent amendment or rehash of any kind. It must be
noted, however, that although the taxpayer whose
income for a year of tax fell below the statutorily fixed
basis of the preceding year’s income was thus entitled
to a reduction of his assessment to the amount of the
tax on the lesser sum, and a refund of the difference,
the Government on the other hand had no power to
increase an assessment should the actual income prove
to be greater than the basis.
The total yield of the tax will be found in the
following return, made up to the end of 1904 :
The ensuing statement shows, in regard to the
New South Wales income tax, the number of tax-
payers and the total amount of the net income of the
country which was assessed to tax for each year, from
the inception of the tax in 1896 to the year 1904, in-
clusive :
Sections 9 and 40 constituted courts of review
for the hearing by a District Court Judge or a police
Magistrate of all appeals filed within thirty days of the
notice of assessment. The only courts of review con-
stituted under section 9 to date are the District Court
Judges. There are 85 towns in the State at which
sittings of the District Court are held, and at those
places only are courts of review held. The court of
review does not hold regular sittings like the District
Court, but when there are cases to be decided a date
is appointed for the sittings of the court- Speaking
generally, about two sittings of the court are held in
Sydney annually, and one each year at each other
centre ; at the majority of these other than Sydney,
however, there are not any cases for decision, and the
holding of the court is a mere formality. The Act
itself only provides for an appeal by the taxpayer to
the court of review, but the Commissioners of Taxation
considered that there might be a number of cases in
which matters of fact might only be in dispute—ques-
tions which although impossible of settlement before
assessment, might be capable of explanation and ad-
justment in an interview between the taxpayer and
an officer of the department, and they consequently
designed a system of iC objections ” which was author-
ised by regulation to meet the particular class of cases
indicated. Under this system the taxpayer who is
dissatisfied with his assessment forwards to the Com-
missioners of Taxation an “ objection 55 on a pre-
scribed form setting forth his grievance ; the case is
inquired into by the commissioners, and any personal
explanation which the taxpayer offers is considered ;
possibly a request is made that the commissioners will
cause an examination to be made of the taxpayer’s
books ; after full consideration of everything adduced
the commissioners give their decision on the objection ;
if this decision be accepted by the taxpayer the assess-
ment is settled ; if, on the other hand, the attempt to
secure an amicable settlement without recourse to the
courts of law does not satisfy the taxpayer, his objec-
tion becomes an appeal and is sent on to the court of
review for adjudication.
The land tax in New South Wales was imposed
by the Land Tax Act of 1895, taken in conjunction
with the relevant parts of the Land and Income Tax
Assessment Act of 1895. The first-named measure,
which is very brief, provided that from and after the
first day of January, one thousand eight hundred and
ninety-six, there shall be annually assessed, levied, and
paid under the provisions of, and subject to the exemp-
tions and deductions enacted in the Land and Income
Tax Act of 1895, and in the manner therein prescribed,
a land tax of one penny in the pound of the unim-
proved value of all lands as in the said Act specified.
Certain lands and classes of land were specifically
exempted from the operation of the land tax, as follow :
Lands being Crown lands within the meaning of the
Crown Lands Act of 1884, or of any Act regulating the
alienation or disposition of Crown lands and not sub-
ject to any rights of purchase ; also lands held by way
of conditional or special lease, and homestead selec-
tions under any such Act. Lands (not being Crown
lands as aforesaid) vested in her Majesty, or in any
person for or on behalf of her Majesty, by virtue of any
Act authorising the resumption of land by or on behalf
of her Majesty Lands vested in the Railway Com-
missioners of New South Wales. Public roads and
thoroughfares, public reserves for health, recreation or
enjoyment, public parks, cemeteries, commons under
the operation of any Act in force at the time being
regulating commons. Lands occupied, or used exclu-
sively for, or in conjunction with, public pounds, public
hospitals whether supported wholly or partly by grants
from the Consolidated Revenue Fund or not, and
which are not a source of profit or gain to the users or
owners thereof, benevolent institutions, public chari-
table purposes, churches, chapels for public worship,
universities, affiliated colleges, the Sydney Grammar


Financial year ended—
£
s.
d.
30th June, 1896
„ „ 1897
• •
• •
V. 139,031
12
9
,, „ 1898
• •
.. 364,163
4
6
„ ,, 1899
• •
.. 253,273
3
2
„ ,, 1900
• •
.. 286,224
8
3
,, „ 1901
• •
.. 288,368
16
1
,. ,, 1902
• •
.. 301,933
14
8
„ 1903
• •
.. 314.102
10
2
„ 1904
• •
.. 322,246
16
7
Total
• •
£2,269,344
6
2
School, mechanics’ institutes, and schools of art ; and
lands on which are erected public markets, town halls,
or municipal chambers, or any lands the property of or
vested in any council or municipality, public hospital,
university or affiliated college. Lands dedicated or
vested in trustees and used for zoological, agricultural,
pastoral, or horticultural show purposes, or other
public or scientific purposes.
The owner on the 31st December of any year is
the person liable to be assessed for the land tax of the
following year. In the case of change of ownership
within such year the division of the tax between the
v
parties proportionately to the parts of the year for
which it was owned by each is a matter for mutual
agreement and settlement ; it has nothing to do with
the department.
In the original Act it was intended that the first
assessment of unimproved land values should stand
for five years, and that thereafter there should be
quinquennial reassessments of the whole of the lands
liable to land tax in the State. It was found that the
values in some towns and districts altered little if at
all during the first five years, and as a result, power
was given by legislative enactment to permit of the
values being revised only when such a course seemed
expedient to the commissioners, provided only that no
reassessment should be made within less than five
years. The result enables the department to revalue
the whole State gradually, taking first those districts
which have shown the greatest advance both in land
values and number of transfers of land-
The following return shows the net collections of
land tax in the State of New South Wales from the
first imposition of the tax on the Ist January, 1896, to
the 30th June, 1904 —the end of the financial year
1903-4
Penalties are provided in the following sections :
60. If any person —(1) Fails or neglects to furnish any
returns within the prescribed time ; (2) knowingly and
wilfully makes any false statement in any returns, or
makes any false answer for the purpose of evading of
enabling any other person to evade assessment or
taxation ; or (3) by any falsehood, wilful neglect, fraud,
art, or contrivance whatsoever evades or attempts to
evade assessment or taxation, he shall be liable to pay
for each offence under subsection (1) a penalty not
exceeding twenty pounds, and for each offence under
subsections (2) or (3) a penalty not exceeding one
hundred pounds ; and in any case where the offence
was an evasion of assessment or taxation, or an attempt
to evade assessment or taxation, the person offending
shall be liable to be assessed and charged treble the
amount of the tax to which such person would other-
wise be liable. 61. Any person who obstructs or
hinders any officer acting in the discharge of his duties
under this Act or the regulations thereunder or refuses
or wilfully neglects to answer or gives any false or
evasive answer to any lawful question put by such
officer relating to any land, mortgage, property, or
income belonging to such person, shall be liable to a
penalty not exceeding fifty pounds
Returns of income are due about the end of the
first week in February, and consequently penalties for
the failure to furnish returns must be instituted by the
end of the first week in August ; the department
charged with the administration of the Act has thus
to cram into six months the whole assessment and
collection of the income tax of the year as well as the
discovery and punishing of defaulters. A special
power is needed, extending to two or even three years,
the right to recover penalties for neglect in furnishing
returns. So far there have not been many prosecu-
tions for failure to furnish returns ; before instituting
any such proceedings the Commissioners of Taxation
address a threatening circular to the defaulting indi-
vidual, and rarely is the neglect persisted in. In those
cases in which the commissioners have taken proceed-
ings they have secured verdicts with costs.
About 80 per cent, of the tax assessed in amount,
representing about 75 per cent- of the number of assess-
ments, is paid before the expiry of the 60 days of grace-
All those who have not then paid up are liable to a
statutory penalty of a fine once and for all of 10 per
centum of the amount of tax assessed. The last
amending Act conferred on the Commissioners of
Taxation power to remit fines in any cases wherein
the reasons tendered were in their opinion sufficient to
justify such a course- As soon as possible after the
debiting of the fines, a reminder is sent by post to each
taxpayer notifying him of his additional indebtedness,
and warning him that unless payment in full be forth-
coming within a period sufficient to allow him to reply
—say a fortnight—legal proceedings would be insti-
tuted for the sum declared to be due This course
enables any taxpayer who has merely overlooked pay-
ment, or who has erroneously held over payment
owing to a misunderstanding as to the effect of a pend-
ing appeal suspending the necessity for payment, to
remedy his omission or error without the additional
charge of legal expenses Failing payment within a
fortnight of such reminder the collection of unpaid
taxes is placed in the hands of the Crown Solicitor—
in this State a Government official—to recover the
amount duo according to process of law-


Mr. CHARLES JAM E S
SAUNDERS, Under-Secretary for
Finance Trade, and also Commis-
sioner of Taxation for New South
Wales, was born at Balmain in 1858.
He is a son of the late Charles Saun-
ders, and was educated at the public
school of that suburb in which he was
born. Upon the termination of his
J. Hubert Newman Sydney.
MR. C. J. SAUNDERS.
school career in 1873 h e entered the
Survey Office of New South Wales
by competitive examination as a
cadet and served as a draughts-
man. Gaining rapid promotion,
in 1887 he attained to the posi-
tion of chief draughtsman, and had
a large share in the reorganisa-
tion of the Department of Lands
which was then being effected. Some
years later he was appointed Chief
Inspector of the department. In
1901, upon the establishment of the
Commonwealth of Australia, Mr.
Lockyer passed over into the service
of the Federal Government as Col-
lector ot Customs. The vacancy
created by this change Mr. Saunders
was called upon to fill. In hiscapacity
as Commissioner of Taxation his
duties are both onerous and intricate.
The carrying out in its integrity of a
system of direct taxation is a matter
of most delicate character, and those
charged with the responsibility of
administering and controlling such a
department must of necessity possess
rare mental and educational qualifi-
cations, as well as the experience
and ability to organise and ad-
minister. Mr. Saunders has also
rendered the State important service
as an acting member of the Public
Service Board, besides serving on
many departmental boards. He has
also filled the position of chairman of
the Metropolitan Old Age Pensions
Board. In February, 1904, upon
the invitation of the Queensland
Government, he went to Brisbane to
assist in the reorganisation of the
public service of that State. In May,
1904, a very important convention
of representatives from the various
municipalities and local governing
bodies of the territory of New South
Wales met in Sydney to revise a
proposed scheme for local govern-
ment prepared under the direction
of the Attorney-General, Hon. B. R.
Wise. Mr. Saunders attended
throughout the deliberations of that
body and rendered considerable
assistance, especially when questions
of taxation and finance came for-
ward for review. Mr. Saunders
acted as one of the special commis-
sioners who in 1900 formulated the
Federal electoral division of New
Wales into electorates, under which
the first election for the Federal
House of Representatives took
place.
Mr. CARLTON GABBET
LIVINGSTONE BOYCE, Chief
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. C. G. L. BOYCE.
Accountant, Treasury Department,
was born at Newcastle. New South
Wales, in the year 1850; in which
city he received his education at
the Church of England Grammar
School. At the age of fifteen years
he entered the Australian Joint
Stock Bank at Newcastle as a junior,
where he remained nine years, and in
August of 1874 he came to .Sydney
and entered the Treasury as a clerk,
under the Hon. George Alfred Lloyd,
who occupied the position of
Treasurer at that time. His experi-
ence during the next thirty years was
of a very wide character, wherein he
manifested great skill and accom-
plishments in and through all the
stages of the Accountant’s Branch
of that department; and in 1902 his
services were suitably recognised,
he being appointed to the position he
now occupies, in succession to Mr.
John Vernon, the present Auditor-
General. The subject of this sketch
has represented the Parish of St.
Mark’s in the Church of England
Synod for some years ; holding on
numerous occasions positions of hon.
secretary and hon. treasurer of
various parochial institutions. He
is not only an athlete himself but
takes a deep interest in all athletic
sports, being particularly devoted to
yachting.
Mr. JAMES BURT, Chief Clerk.
Treasury Department, born in
Sydney in the year 1857, was
educated at the Balmain Public
School, where he studied for, and
successfully passed, the examina-
tion for entrance to the Surveyor-
General’s office. In the year 1873 he
took his seat in that office as a cadet,
remaining there until 1886. He
has, from time to time held depart-
mental positions outside the metro-
J. Hubert Newman . Sydney.
MR. J. BURT.


polis ; and upon the decentralisation
of the office in January, 1886, he
was appointed first draughtsman in
the district survey office, Goulburn,
in the following year being called
upon to take charge of a similar
office at Grafton. In 1895 a
new branch, viz., the Information
Bureau, was instituted in connection
with the department; being founded
by the Hon. J. H. Carfuthers,
M.L.A., then Minister for Lands.
Mr. Burt was thereupon entrusted
with the charge of the bureau,
which office he administered until
July, 1896, when he was appointed
an inspector. On the 6th January,
1905, he was transferred to the
position of chief clerk in the
Treasury. His energies have not
always been confined to depart-
mental duties, onerous though they
be, as he has taken a deep interest
in the Public Service Association,
of which council he was one of the
first members.
Mr. PERCY EDWARD
WILLIAMS, Comptroller of the
Government Savings Bank, was born
at Kilburn, London, in 1850. He was
educated at King Edward VI. Gram-
mar School, Henley on Thames, of
which the then headmaster was the
late Dr. Godby. In his examinations
he took honours in classics and
mathematics, and intended to grad-
uate at the University of Oxford.
An opportunity to travel on the
Continent, however, presenting it-
self, he took advantage of it, and
from 1867 to 1869 visited the various
countries of Europe, After a brief
sojourn in England he came to
Australia, arriving in Sydney in
August, 1870. In October, 1872, he
was appointed to a position in the
Treasury. For the first two years he
was attached to the revenue branch,
when he was transferred to the pay
department. In 1886 he joined the
inspecting staff, under the late
Mr. James Thomson. On the Ist
July, 1896, he was appointed pay-
master to the Treasury, and held
that position until he was transferred
to the Audit Office as senior in-
spector of public accounts. When
Government Savings Bank was
separated from the Post and Tele-
graph Department and transferred
to the Treasury as a sub-department
under the administration of the
Secretary for Finance and Trade.
Mr. Williams was appointed the
first comptroller under the new
order of things. Outside of his
public duties, Mr. Williams has
always taken a deep interest in
natural science. In botany es-
pecially he possesses a deep and
accurate knowledge. For more than
twenty years he has been a member
of the Linnaean Society, and for a
much longer period a member of
the Royal Society of New South
Wales. In Australian ethnology he
takes keen interest, and founded the
New South Wales Ethnological
Committee, of which he is honorary
secretary. His interest in general
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney ,
MR. PERCY E. WILLIAMS.
literature, especially in that of his
native land, is equal to that which
he evinces in natural science. In
all matters relating to art he also
takes great interest. As a writer
many of his articles upon natural
science and literature, and upon
other subjects with which he is
familiar, have found ready accept-
ance with leading English as well as
Australian periodicals. The father
of the Comptroller was a well-known
officer in the service of the ITonour-
able East India Company, and was
a man possessed of considerable
talents. The grandfather was the
well-known Captain Edward Eller-
ker Williams, the friend and com-
panion of Percy ByshheG Shelley,
with whom he was drowned on that
fatal yachting voyage to Spezzia.
Mr. RICHARD NICHOLAS
JOHNSON, Commissioner of Stamp
Duties and Commissioner of Taxa-
tion, was born in Sydney on 24th
March, 1848, and is a son of the late
Mr. John Johnson, who was also a
native of Sydney. He (Mr. Johnson,
sen.) was well known andjhighly
esteemed in social, shipping and
commercial circles. In his early days
he was actively engaged in whaling
pursuits, and was subsequently the
proprietor of the largest cooperages
in the colony, the coopering business
in those days being a leading industry.
The subject of this sketch was edu-
cated at various private schools ; the
last of which he attended was the
well-known academy 1 conducted by
the late Mr. Alfred Cane. Upon the
termination of his school days he
accepted an appointment in the house
Kerry & Co Sydney.
MR. RICHARD NICHOLAS JOHNSON
of Messrs. James- Moores & Co.,
general merchants and importers.
Here he remained for some years,
when he joined the public service, in
the year 1866, as a junior clerk in
the Stamp Duties Department, under
the then commissioner, the late
Mr. William Hemming, the late
Mr. Geoffrey Eagar being Colonial
Treasurer. After holding various
positions in this department he was
promoted to the position of account-
ant. Upon the expiration of the
Stamp Duties Act of 1865 by
effluxion of time, in the year 1874,
Mr. Johnson was transferred to the
Sheriff’s Department, wdiere he re-
mained until the reimposition of


stamp duties under the present Act
No. 27 of rBgB, when he returned to
the Stamp Duties Department* He
was appointed Deputy-Commissioner
on 13th September, 1886, and upon
the death of the then commissioner,
Mr. Hemming, in the year 1888, he
was called upon to fill the vacant
position. Upon the imposition of
the land and income tax duties in the
year 1895 Johnson was offered
and accepted one of the newly created
commissionerships of taxation, which
he administers conjointly with that of
commissioner of stamp duties
Mr. L I S C O M B E SOLE
SPILLED, First Commissioner for
Taxation in New South Wales, was
horn at Adelaide, South Australia,
1851. He is a son of the late
Emanuel Spiller, Esq., and was edu-
cated at one of the primary schools
of that city and at Whinlam College,
Adelaide. Entering the public ser-
vice of South Australia in 1868 as a
cadet in the Survey Department,
he rose rapidly in the service, and in
the course of a comparatively few
years reached the position of sec-
retary to the Forestry Board.
Subsequently he was transferred
to the Audit Office, and as a
clerk in that branch of the service
he again received a number of pro-
motions in succession, finally reach-
ing the position of chief clerk in the
Treasury. Here he remained until
November, 1884, in which year the
Taxation Act of South Australia
was passed, and Mr. Spiller was
selected to fill the position of chief of
the newly created department, that
of Deputy-Commissioner for Taxes.
This position he retained until 1896,
when he was offered by the New
South Wales Government and ac-
cepted the position of Commissioner
for Taxation in that colony. The
official career of Mr. Spiller in South
Australia may correctly be termed as
a brilliant one. On the 10th August,
1880, the then Treasurer of South
Australia, the Hon, Charles Mann,
in delivering the financial state-
ment of that province, acknowledged
his “indebtedness to the Unuer
Treasurer (Mr. Sheppard) and the
Chief Clerk in the Treasury (Mr.
Spiller), and especially to the Chief
Clerk—for the preparation of the
greatest part of the figures had
devolved upon him for the un-
wearying attention, zeal and ability
that had been shown in performing
a very difficult task.” On November
J Hubert Neuman . Sydney
MR. LISCOMBE SOLE SPILLER.
15, 1881, the then Treasurer of
South Australia, the Hon. L. Clyde,
in the House said (“ Hansard,” p.
i 486) “ he did not know whether
the credit of the new arrangement
was due to the Treasury or to the
Finance Commission. He was quite
prepared to share it with the Finance
Commission, but for the return
which they had before them the
credit was due to Mr. Spiller, the
Chief Clerk of the Treasury, who
thoroughly understood the work and
had done it well.” On August 1,
1882, the Hon. L. Clyde, Treasurer
of South Australia, and again on
August 12, 1884, the Hon. W. B.
Rouncevell, the succeeding Treas-
urer, each in his annual financial
statement bore testimony to the
high financial ability of Mr, Spiller,
and gave special expression to a
sense of his indebtedness for the
figures comprised in his financial
statement. While occupying the
position of Deputy-Commissioner for
Taxation—which here it should be
explained is the chief office in that
important department under the
Treasurer, and upon whom rests
its full administration —Mr. Spiller,
during the absence of the Under
Treasurer for six months from the
province, carried out the duties of
that position. While Mr. Holder
(now Sir Frederick, Speaker of the
House 'of Representatives) was
Treasurer Mr. Spiller was requested
to fill the position of Under Treas-
urer, but he preferred to remain in
the Taxation Department, which he
had practically organised and ad-
ministered. In 1896 the Reid
Administration in New South Wales
passed into law their comprehensive
system of direct taxation. In form-
ing the department the Prime Minis-
ter recognised that at least one of the
commissioners to be appointed should
possess a practical experience in ad-
ministering so intricate a department.
One of the commissionerships was
offered to Mr. Spiller. That the ac-
tion of the Reid Government in so
doing was a wise one found ample
confirmation in the fact that the
department was organised and in
smooth working order within six
months of its organisation. In igoi
the first Premier of the Common-
wealth, the Rt. Hon. Sir Edmund
Barton, P.C., K.C. (now Justice of
the High Court of the Common-
wealth), wrote: “I have a high
opinion of his (Mr. Spiller’s) ability
on financial matters, and gene-
rally. In his office of Commissioner
for Taxation (he is now Chief Com-
missioner) he has gained a high re-
putation for his tact in the successful
discharge of his difficult duties.”
Mr. Spiller was promoted to the
position of Chief Commissioner in
igoi. He holds a Commission of the
Peace for South Australia.


LANDS DEPARTMENT.
Legislation and Administration.
, Many have been the systems adopted for the settle-
ment of the population on the lands of New South
Wales, and they have differed widely at various stages
of the State’s progress In the early settlement of
New South Wales, prior to the year 1824, the Governor
had the sole power to dispose of Crown lands by grants,
orders and dedications, on payment of an annual quit-
rent ; practically when Crown conditions, which were
very easy, were fulfilled, grants were free- The powers
of the Governor, who represented the King, were al-
most unlimited. The first instructions issued to
Governor Phillip on April 25, 1797, authorised him to
make grants only to emancipated prisoners, in the
following terms :—“ To every man shall be granted
30 acres of land, and in case he shall be married 20
acres more ; and for every child who may be with them
at the time of making the said grant a further quan-
tity of ten acres, free of all fees, taxes, quit-rents, and
other acknowledgments for the space of ten years ”
The annual quit-rent to be paid on these grants was
afterwards fixed at 6d- for 30 acres- The first
settler was an emancipist, of the name of James Ruse,
who entered on his farm of 30 acres at Parramatta on
February 25th, 1789.
%J 7
Additional instructions were issued by the Sec-
retary of State on August 20, 1789, extending the
privilege of obtaining grants to such of the non-com-
missioned officers and men of the detachment of marines
serving in New South Wales as were desirous of remain-
ing in the territory after obtaining their discharge.
The Governor was further requested to facilitate the
settlement of free persons who might feel disposed to
emigrate with a view to becoming settlers in New
South Wales, by giving them grants of land not ex-
ceeding the maximum area granted to non-commis-
sioned officers, viz., 100 acres, subject to the same
quit-rent, the annual amount of which was Is. for
every 50 acres, payable at the expiration of five years
after the issue of a grant-
In the original instructions no mention of grants
was made to officers, but this omission was afterwards
rectified. These early grants were made on condition
that a certain portion of the land should be cultivated,
but although this condition was not always complied
with, no grants were ever cancelled in consequence.
As to the payment of quit-rents, Mr. Commissioner
Bigge, in his report on the administration of Governor
Macquarie, stated that from 1809 to 1821 no quit-rents
were collected. With regard to settlement in the
town of Sydney grants were not made until the year
1811, when the necessary authority to do so was given
in a letter from the Secretary of State dated July 26,
and allotments were granted on lease only for periods
of fourteen or twenty-one years Previous to the
building regulations issued by Governor Macquarie,
on August 18, 1810, no attention was paid to regular
admeasurement of town allotments, or to the for-
mation of streets- Quit-rents on leases and grants of
town allotments varied in amount according to the
Governor, at whose discretion they were imposed.
Leases of fourteen or twenty-one years were subject
to annual quit-rents of 2s. 6d-, ss-, 10s- and 20s- each,
and from 1811 to 1814 grants of town allotments were
charged at the rate of 2s- per rod per annum ; but on
March 21, 1814, the following scale of quit-rents for
town allotments was established by Governor Mac-
quarie :—Leases : Sydney, £2 to 10s- ; other towns,
£1 to 10s- Grants ; Sydney, £3 to £1 ; other towns,
£2 to 3s- 4d- Above 20 rods, per additional rod, but
not exceeding the maximum—2d. for leases in Sydney
and Id- in other towns ; and for grants, 4d- and 3d.
respectively-
The method of disposing of Crown lands, and the
scale of quit-rents chargeable suffered no alteration
until the issue of the Government General Order of
November 5, 1823- By this order the terms upon
which lands could be obtained in New South Wales
were modified, the annual quit-rent being raised to
3s- for every 20 acres, payable immediately if the
land had been obtained as an additional grant, but,
if otherwise, at the commencement of the sixth year.
Though a certain limit appears to have been fixed as
the area of grants, the early Governors often over-
stepped their instructions in this direction- Governor
Macquarie, in particular, was deemed to have disposed
of the Crown lands in too liberal a fashion, and the
result of an investigation into his administration led
the British Government to issue to his successors in-
structions of a more definite and stringent character.
These led to Sir Thomas Brisbane introducing the
principle of alienation of lands by sale to free settlers
who arrived in the State with a certain amount of
available capital ; and the grants were made on the
condition that a certain portion of the land should
be cultivated, or improvements of corresponding value
erected thereon, and a given number of convicts main-
tained free of expense to the Government.
On November Bth, 1824, it was further proclaimed
that a grant of 100 acres would be given to any settler
for every convict maintained by him free of expense
to the Government ; but applications for grants under
this condition became so frequent that the order was
rescinded on March 16, 1826. By a Government and
General Order dated March, 1825, land was allowed
to be sold by private tender, the minimum price being
ss. per acre, no person being permitted to purchase
more than 4,000 acres, nor any family more than 5,000
acres- The price of unlocated Crown lands in the
county of Cumberland or on the west of the Nepean
River was raised to a rate ranging from 7s- 6d. to 10s.
per acre, and the disposal of lands by sale did so interfere
with the ordinary method of alienating town allot-
ments that in 1825, under directions from the Secretary
of State, three commissioners were appointed, Sir
Thomas Mitchell, Surveyor-General, being president,
with instructions to divide the territory into counties.


Area
Area
Years.
Granted.
Area Sold.
Years.
Granted,
Area Sold.
Acres.
Acres.
Acres.
Acres.
1882
15.843
20,860
1837
6,090
370.288
1833
14,639
29,001
1838
63.160
277,486
1834
27.861
91,400
1839
16.832
234.272
1835
5,271
271,947
1840
5,243
105,900
1836
16,132
389,546
parishes, &c., with a view of classifying the lands and
fixing an average price for sale of all disposable areas.
The commissioners in three years completed their task,
having divided the available territory into 19 counties,
covering some 34,500 square miles 5 or 22,080,200 acres
of land. During this period certain modifications were
introduced ; the sale of land was suspended, and the
quit-rents charged on grants were altered to the rate
of 5 per cent, per annum on the value fixed by the
commissioners, whilst on grants in extension of pre-
vious grants, and on lands reserved to settlers for their
choice of purchase, a charge was made at the rate of
20s. per 100 acres. On August 28, 1828, the quit-rent
settlers were allowed to indicate lands within the settled
districts, which were submitted to auction and sold
to the highest bidder. In 1839 the upset price was
raised to 12s. per acre, and the practice was introduced
of varying this minimum according to the presumed
value of the land ; making it, as a general rule, from
10 to 20 per cent, less than the price of the last land
sold of the same quality, and in the same locality.
Until the year 1841 regulations for the sale of
Crown lands were issued by the Secretary of State,
but in that year the Governor, Sir George Gipps, and
Executive Council were empowered to issue regulations
for the disposal of public lands. Although grants had
YARRABUNDIE HOMESTEAD.
on primary grants was altered to an annual sum of
2d. per acre, and this rate remained in force until grants
were abolished except for public purposes, and the
principle of sale by public auction, in lieu of private
tender, was made the sole means of alienating Crown
lands. The Land Commission was abolished on
May 6, 1830.
The alienation of land by grant was abolished by
Viscount Goderich, Secretary of State for the Colonies,
in 1831. Under the order, dated February 14, 1831,
sale of lands by public auction was introduced, the
minimum price being fixed at ss. per acre ; intending
been virtually abolished in 1831, a certain quantity of
land was still being conveyed to settlers in virtue of
promises made by former Governors- The following
figures show the area of land granted and sold during
the period 1832-40 :


A new division of the territory had been made
under the land regulations issued by the Governor
and Executive Council on July 21, 1841, the Northern
District, including the country around Moreton Bay ;
the Middle District, the nineteen settled counties ; and
the Southern District, the Port Phillip settlement and
Gippsland. In the Middle and Northern districts the
upset price was maintained at 12s. per acre, but it was
raised to 20s. per acre in the Port Phillip district. The
order of February 14, 1841, was superseded by an
Imperial Act, entitled “An Act for Regulating the
Sale of Waste Lands belonging to the Crown in the
Australian colonies,” which came into operation in
1842. This Act maintained the sale of land by auction,
at an upset price of £1 per acre payable at once. Sur-
vey had to piecede sale, and provision was made for
the sale of unmeasured blocks of land containing 20,000
acres or more in one lot by private contract, at not
less than the minimum price. The Imperial Act of
1842 was amended in 1847, and a reclassification of
the territory was made into ( a) settled districts, ( b ) in-
termediate districts, and (c) unsettled districts. Under
this Act the leasing of lands for pastoral purposes was
introduced, the terms of lease varying according to the
district, viz., 14 years leases being granted in the un-
settled districts, 8 years in the intermediate districts,
and a yearly tenure in settled districts.
All previous land legislation in New South Wales
was swept out of existence by Sir John Robertson’s
Land Acts of 1861. The Occupation Act of that year
reduced the term of the leases in the intermediate and
unsettled districts from 14 years to 5 vears, and threw
all the pastoral leases open to free selection. The
Alienation Act of that year made provision for the
reservation of land for sites of cities, towns, &c-, dedi-
cation of lands for public purposes ; exemption from
sale of leased lands ; sales of improved Crown lands ;
closing and sale of unnecessary roads ; rescission of
reservations of water frontages and sale of land by
auction. Under this Act free selection, before survey,
was allowed in limited areas (40 acres to 320 acres),
the price being £1 per acre, 25 per cent, of which had
to be lodged with each application, interest at the
rate of 5 per cent, being charged on the outstanding
balance, which might stand over for ever. An Amend-
ing Act in 1875 fixed the payment for lands taken up
under it by annual instalments. The Crown Lands
Amendment Acts of 1875 and 1880 considerably altered
the conditions for lands taken up under them in con-
nection with conditional purchases, improvement pur-
chases, and the occupation of leasehold areas.
The Crown Lands Act of 1884, which came into
operation on Ist January, 1885, again revolutionised
land legislation. Free selection before survey was
maintained, but the maximum areas obtainable were
materially increased and made easier of acquisition
by permitting three-fourths of the area applied for to
be taken as a conditional lease with the ultimate
right of conversion into a conditional purchase;
but holders of pastoral leases were given better
tenure. Under this Act the colony was divided into
three divisions, viz., Eastern, Central and Western
divisions. New kinds of tenure were introduced ;
the administration was decentralised by the estab-
lishment of local land boards, from whose decisions
appeals could made to the Minister, the holders
of pastoral leases, which were called “runs,” were
given better tenure by the division of these runs into
what were termed pastoral leases and occupation
licenses, as nearly equal as possible ; the former were
secured to the tenant for certain terms, and the latter,
although held at a fee, were opened to selection by
the public. The new tenures introduced were home-
stead leases up to 10,240 acres for 15 years, confined
to Western division, annual leases for grazing purposes
up to 1,920 acres, special leases up to 320 acres for
declared purposes, such as jetties, saw-mills, stores
and factories. Provisions were also extended for the
reservation of lands for public purposes, roaos of access
and ringbarking by lessees. Amending Acts were
passed in the years iBB7-8 dealing with validations and
conditions attaching to various tenures.
The Crown Lands Act of 1889, which came into
operation on Ist December of that year, provided for
the appointment of a Land Appeal Court, consisting
of three members, to hear and determine all appeals
formerly dealt with by the Minister. Its provisions
otherwise mainly elaborated those of the Act of 1884
by extending existing tenures in the way of area, terms
and conditions. The new tenures created under this
Act were scrub leases, snow leases, leases of inferior
lands, artesian well leases, residential leases on gold-
fields, and exchanges.
The Crown Lands Act of 1895, while remedial,
made ailother departure from early legislation ; it
provided that certain lands should be classified and
surveyed with a view of being subsequently set ap rt
for homestead selection blocks, up to 1,280 acres, for
agriculture, sufficient for the maintenance of a home,
with a condition of perpetual residence and rent, and
for settlement lease farms for grazing, up to 10,240
acres, for term of 28 years with continuous residence.
Inferior lands weie to be let under improvement leases,
in areas up to 20,480 acres, for a term of 28 years.
Tenant-right in improvements was recognised.
The Crown Lands Amendment Act, which became
law on 29th December, 1899, provided for the
appraisement of fhe capital vadue of conditional
purchases, conditional leases homestead leases, and
settlement leases, for the reappraisement of rents of
conditional leases and for the setting apart of lands
for conditional purchases at special prices. It also
provided for permission being granted by the land
board for the enclosing of roads and watercourses
when unobjectionable. Under this Act the rate of
interest charged on overdue payments was reduced
from 10 per cent, to 5 per cent.
In 1902 that part of the State known as the 4 4 West-
ern Division” was placed under the control of a
board of three commissioners, appointed under the
Western Lands Act of 1901, to deal with pastoral,
homestead, improvement, scrub leases, inferior land
leases and occupation licenses in the Western division.
The terms of the leases in that division were extended
up to the year 1943.
The Crown Lands Act Amendment Act of 1903,
which came into operation on the sth December of that
year, made provision for the granting of increased




areas to residential holders of certain freeholds,
homestead selections, settlement leases and original
conditional purchases, powers being given to the
local land boards to grant whatever area they con-
sidered sufficient for maintenance of a home ; but
this provision was subsequently curtailed, and confined
to lands especially classified for the purpose under the
1905 Act. Further provision was also made for the
reduction of interest on all C.P. instalments to 2J per
centum on unpaid balances, and the reduction was
made retrospective in certain circumstances ; for alter-
ation of residence conditions and dealings with leased
lands ; for extension of settlement leases ; and for
conversion of annual leases.
Under the Closer Settlement Act of 1904 the
Crown may acquire, for purposes of settlement, private
lands by purchase or by compulsory resumption. The
lands so acquired and any adjacent Crown lands may,
after subdivision, be purchased in farms as agricultural
lands, grazing lands and township settlement allot-
ments, a deposit of 5 per cent, of the capital value of
the land must be lodged with the application ; payment
of the balance may be made at the end of the first
year or by annual instalments of 5 per cent., with 4 per
cent- interest added ; bona fide residence for 10 years
is attached to every settlement purchase. Under this
Act leases may be granted from year to year, not to
exceed 320 acres, the rent of which shall be appraised
by the local land board, but does not bar the land
from purchase.
The Crown Lands Amendment Act of 1905 ampli-
fied the provisions for setting apart Crown lands for
original and additional holdings, and in the case of the
latter holding provided that there should be no appeal
by applicants to the Land Appeal Court on a board’s
decision as to what was (1) a reasonable working
distance ; (2) an area deemed sufficient for main-
tenance of a home ; and (3) the area and position of
land allotted. This Act also provides for the setting
apart of Crown lands for disposal as conditional
purchase leases in blocks sufficient for the lessee to
establish and maintain a home. The lease to be for a
term of forty years, with rental of 2| per cent, per
annum on the capital value of the land ; such capital
value to be fixed every ten years. The residence to be
ten years, to commence within twelve months from
confirmation of application ; an extension to five years
can, however, be granted by land board. The
Minister has power to at any time suspend residence
with or without conditions. A conditional purchase
lease may at any time after confirmation be converted
into a conditional purchase. A lessee of a conditional
purchase lease cannot transfer such lease without first
having obtained the consent of the Minister, and then
only to a person qualified to apply for a conditional
purchase lease. The legislation relating to simul-
taneous conflicting original applications was also
repealed and replaced by powers vested in the local
land boards to determine—without any rights of appeal
—the eligibility and priority of applicants.
Synopsis of the Land Laws.
Under the land laws the State, which contains,
exclusive of Lord Howe Island, an area of 198,634,880
acres, has been divided into three territorial divisions,
namely, the Eastern, the Central, and the Western
Division. These territorial divisions run in a general
north and south direction throughout the entire length
of the State- The Eastern Division, which embraces
an area of 61,260,326 acres, occupies the whole of the
seaboard of New South Wales, and extends westerly
to the Central Division, a distance varying from about
150 to 200 miles. The Central Division, containing
an area of 57,055,848 acres, also stretches from the
northern to the southern boundary of the State, the
Murrumbidgee, Lachlan, and Darling or Barwon Rivers
defining part of its western boundary. The Western
Division embraces the remainder of the State, and
contains the largest area of the three divisions, namely,
80,318,708 acres.
Disposal of Crown Lands.
The principal methods by which Crown lands are
alienated are homestead selection, conditional purchase
(with associated conditional lease having right of con-
version into a conditional purchase), purchase by virtue
of improvements, purchase at auction, after auction
purchases, and exchange. The chief tenures under
which Crown lands are let are settlement lease, con-
ditional purchase lease (with right of conversion into a
conditional purchase), pastoral lease, occupation license,
conditional lease, improvement lease, scrub lease,
lease of inferior lands, annual lease, workmen’s blocks,
snow lease, special lease, and residential lease.
The Governor is invested with large powers of tem-
porarily reserving Crown lands either from sale or lease
generally, or from any specific kind of sale or lease.
Reservation takes effect immediately upon notification
in the Government Gazette. Revocation of reservation
from sale or lease does not mature until the expiration
of sixty days after Gazette notification. The purposes
of reserves are various, namely, for water supply, for
preservation of timber, for commonage, for the con-
venience of stock travelling through the country, &c.
Reserves of the last-mentioned description may be up
to one mile in width, and are associated with camping
reserves, usually 640 acres in extent.
Selection.
The intention of the authors of the various Land
Acts has been to provide land on easy terms for those
who might require it for their own bona fide use and
occupation. Unhappily, this intention has been too often
defeated, and the liberal provisions of the law taken
advantage of for speculative purposes, and for the
a ffg re ß a fi° n of large estates. To prevent a recurrence
of, or to limit this evil, stringent provisions were neces-
s&ry. These provisions may be summed up as follows :
(1) An applicant for an original homestead selection,
an original conditional purchase, or an original settle-
ment lease, is debited with the quantity of land already
held by him in fee-simple or under conditional purchase
or conditional lease from the Crown, and can take up
only such an area as, added to that already held, will
keep within the maximum area allowed for the class
of holding applied for. Provision is made against
defeat of this restriction by any fraudulent transfer.
(2) A person who, after Ist June, 1895, has applied


for and obtained an original homestead selection, an
original conditional purchase, an original settlement
lease, an original homestead lease, or a conditional
purchase lease, is precluded from obtaining another
holding of any of these classes unless he has obtained
a certificate that adverse circumstances compelled him
to abandon or surrender his holding, or has obtained
the written approval of the Minister to make an appli-
cation. (3) If his holding consists of a homestead lease
or a settlement lease, the disqualification will, how-
ever, in any circumstances, cease at the expiration of
the term for which the lease was granted. (4) So
that a selector may obtain a living area, the Crown
Lands Act Amendment Act of 1905 provides that the
maximum area mentioned hereafter as being that
which may be obtained with respect to a residential
conditional purchase series, homestead selection and
settlement lease, may be exceeded by means of an
additional holding, taken only on areas specially
classified for that purpose, which, together with all
other lands held by the applicant (except under annual
tenure), does not exceed such an area a« in the opinion
of the local land board is sufficient for the maintenance
of the selector’s home thereon in average seasons and
circumstances.
A person of, or over, the age of 16 years (of either
sex) may make a residential conditional purchase or
a homestead selection, but no person under the age of
21 years can apply for any lease other than a condi-
tional lease, or a conditional purchase lease. A condi-
tional purchase lease and a settlement purchase may only
be made by a male of 18 years or a female of 21 years
and upwards. Minors, between the ages of 16 and 21
years, so far as concerns their transactions in con-
nection with certain holdings under the Crown Lands
Act, enjoy the rights, and are subject to the liabilities,
of persons of full age.
A person who is not a natural-born or naturalised
subject of his Majesty is debarred from applying for
a conditional purchase, a homestead selection, a con-
ditional purchase lease, or a settlement lease, until he
has resided in New South Wales for twelve months,
and then at the date of application he must lodge a
declaration of his intention to become a naturalised
subject within five years from that date.
A married woman is disqualified unless she is
judicially separated and actually living apart from her
husband,, but with the consent of the Minister may, out
of moneys belonging to her for her separate use, acquire
by purchase or otherwise, other than by an original
application, a conditional purchase, conditional lease,
homestead selection, or settlement lease-
If a woman should, while unmarried, make a con-
ditional purchase, she will be entitled after, as well as
before, her marriage, to make additional conditional
purchases by virtue of it-
Where a person is the holder of two holdings of
any tenure under the Crown Lands Act, and a con-
dition of residence attaches to either or both holdings,
he may, with the consent of the board, and subject to
such conditions as the board may impose, perform the
condition or conditions of residence by residing on one
of such holdings.
In any case where two or more holdings situated
within working distance are held either under con-
ditional purchase (whether fully paid up or otherwise),
conditional lease, homestead selection, conditional
purchase lease, or settlement lease, by members of one
family, hona fide in their own separate interests, any
condition of residence required to be performed by
them in respect of their holdings may be carried out
on any portion of the land so held : provided the con-
sent of the land board is obtained in the prescribed
manner.
If a husband and wife each bold a conditional pur-
chase, a homestead selection, or a settlement lease,
the husband, by forwarding notice to the chairman of
the land board, may fulfil his term of residence upon
the land held by his wife ; or the wife, by forwarding
a similar notice, may fulfil her term of residence upon
the land held by her husband-
In the case of original holdings when two or more
persons simultaneously make application for the same
or part of the same land, the local land board pro-
ceeds to determine the priority of such applications
without requiring the attendance in person of the
applicant, and where, in the opinion of the board, any
such applications have equal claims to priority, it
directs that a ballot be held to determine priority
among the applications of those applicants it deems
qualified to satisfactorily occupy and develop the lands
applied for ; and at its discretion —(i) may confirm the
application which secures priority at the ballot;
(ii) may refuse the applications of those applicants it
deems not qualified as aforesaid and those applications
which fail to secure priority at ballot.
In the case of conflicting simultaneous applications
for additional conditional purchases and conditional
leases adjoining the basal series in unclassified areas
the board inquires into the merits of each application,
and, in dealing with the same, gives preference to the
applicant who is substantially more in need of addi-
tional land.
Where any original conditional purchase applica-
tion or applications is or are received simultaneously
with any conflicting additional conditional purchase
or conditional lease applications for the same land in
unclassified areas, the order of priority is determined
by ballot, and the applications will be dealt with in
such order. LLj
Homestead Selections-
The homestead selection system owes its intro-
duction to the Crown Lands Act of 1895, and offers
special advantages to the small capitalist, inasmuch as
the land may be held for the first six years, if the grant
has not issued, at the extremely low rental of per
cent- of its capital value- After the issue of the grant,
or after the expiration of the first six years, if the grant
has not previously issued, the annual rental is 2| per
cent, of the capital value of the land. The rental
period dates from the date of the commencement of
title, and the rent is payable in advance half-yearly.
The initial capital value of land set apart for home-
stead selection is determined and advertised before the
land is thrown open, and is not susceptible of alteration
until the expiration of the first period of ten years
after the issuing of the grant, except that any applicant


who is dissatisfied with the advertised value may
apply to the land board to have such value appraised.
A fresh appraisement of the unimproved capital value
of the land is made by the local land board for every
subsequent period of ten years. It is important to note
that no minimum value is fixed by law, and it is thus
made possible from the beginning, and throughout, to
accommodate the rent to actual and changing values,
an advantage which, during a period of depreciation,
must necessarily be of considerable value to the land
owner.
On and after a given date (which is notified in the
Government Gazette) the land may be obtained on appli-
cation to the local Crown land agent. At the time of ap-
plication one half-year’s rent and the whole or one-third
of a fee charged for survey have to be deposited. Pay-
ment of any balance of the survey fee is spread over
two years, one-half of such balance being payable
within the first, and the other half within the second
twelve months after the commencement of the title
of the homestead selection. The law requires that
the selector shall within the first eighteen months
after confirmation of his application, erect a dwelling-
house worth at least £2O, and that any special conditions
as to drainage, inigation, the clearing, cutting,
preservation, or planting of timber, or such other
special conditions as may be attached to the
holding, be carried cut. A condition of perpetual
residence, commencing within three months after date
of confirmation of the application, attaches to the
holding. Should the land selected contain improve-
ments at the date of application, the selector is required
to pay for them. Should the improvements be the
property of the Crown payment may be made in four
equal yearly instalments, with interest at 4 per cent,
per annum.
The title of a homestead selection is a freehold one,
but the grant contains provisions for c; the annual
payment by the grantee, his heirs, and assigns for ever
of a perpetual rent ; the performance by the grantee,
his heirs, and assigns for ever of an obligation to live
upon the homestead selection, having his or their home
and place of abode there ; and forfeiture to the Crown
of the lands granted in case the obligation to live
thereon or to pay any sum due as rent be not duly
performed.”
The issue of a grant in fee-simple is deferred for
five years from the date of confirmation of the appli-
cation, and its issue is contingent upon the land board
granting a certificate that the conditions attaching to
the selection have, up to the time of inquiry, been
properly fulfilled.
Provision is also made for the performance of
residence by deputy before grant. In these cases
survey fee is payable in full at date of application, the
rent up to issue of grant is 3| per cent, of capital
value, the dwelling-house has to be worth at least
£4O, and, in addition, one-tenth of the land has to be
in full tillage within three years after date of confir-
mation and one-fifth during fourth and fifth years after
that date.
Conditional Purchases.
The conditional purchase (or, as it is sometimes
called, the free selection) system dates back to the
year 1861. A conditional purchase is a purchase in
fee-simple subject to the fulfilment of certain con-
ditions before the grant can be obtained. These con-
ditions include residence for a term of ten years, the
fencing or other improvement of the land, and the
payment by annual instalments of the purchase money
with interest at 2| per cent, per annum. A conditional
purchase may be of land in the Eastern or Central
divisions, and may comprise unreserved country land
not held under pastoral or other lease- The fact of
land being held under annual lease or occupation
license or containing improvements is not a bar to
purchase, nor is survey or classification of the land a
necessary preliminary. If an applicant selects land
containing improvements, he accepts an obligation to
pay for them, but payment is usually spread over a
period and arranged for in instalments. In either of
the divisions mentioned the minimum area which may
be selected is 40 acres, the maximum area being in the
Eastern division 640, and in the Central division 2,560
acres. It does not follow, however, that the area first
selected cannot be increased, for the law provides that
a selector holding any area less than the maximum
may, if adjoining unclassified land is available, make
additional purchases of not less than 40 acres each up
to the stated maximum area. He may also make
application for an additional holding within an area
set apart for the purpose.
Land applied for under conditional purchase is
ordinarily available at the statutory price of £1 per
acre, but the law contains a provision for the setting
apart of what are termed special areas, and the price
of land within these may be fixed at 30s. per acre and
upwards. A conditional purchase within a special
area cannot exceed 320 acres in the Eastern or 640
acres in the Central division. Crown lands may also
be specially classified at prices above or below £1 per
acre, and set apart for any particular class of original
or additional holding application, but may not be
made available for both at the same time. Should an
applicant be dissatisfied with the capital value at
which he holds the land from the Crown he may on
certain conditions obtain an appraisement of an area
not in excess of a living area.
With an application (which has to be lodged with
the local Crown land agent) for a conditional purchase
of ordinary land valued at £1 per acre, a deposit
of 2s. per acre and a survey fee are required. No
other payment to the Crown is necessary for three
years. At the end of the third year from the
date of application an instalment of Is. per acre
is due, and thereafter a like instalment is payable
annually ; but it is also provided that the annual in-
stalment may be at the rate of 9d per acre. Three
months’ grace is allowed for the payment of each
instalment. The deposit and the first instalment are
devoted wholly to the reduction of the debt, interest
not being charged for the first three years. The bal-
ance, after payment of the first instalment, is therefore
17s. per acre- Out of each succeeding instalment
interest on the unpaid balance at the rate of 2-J- per
centum is taken and the residue credited in reduction
of the debt. The interest is computed on the balance
as reduced from year to year, and is, consequently, a


diminishing quantity. Under this system it takes
twenty-three instalments of Is. per acre, together
with the original deposit, to clear off the debt ; but the
holder of the land may, after he has obtained a cer-
tificate from the local land board that he has fulfilled
his conditions, pay off two or more instalments, or the
whole of his balance, and obtain a grant in fee-simple
of the land.
On a conditional purchase within a special or
classified area, a deposit of 10 per cent, and annual
instalments, each 5 per cent, of the price of the land,
are required. A survey fee is payable at the date of
application.
Under the Conditional Purchasers’ Relief Act, a
resident conditional purchaser may, in certain circum-
stances, reduce his annual instalment of Is. to 9d. per
acre, and, in some cases, to 6d. per acre- A similar
privilege may, under special circumstances, be extended
to conditional purchasers not in residence.
while the land is held by the original selector, even
though now resident on his holding.
The condition of residence on any conditional pur-
chase or conditional lease may be suspended by the
local land board for a period not exceeding six months
in case of illness, drought, or for other sufficient cause.
In the event of the holder of any conditional pur-
chase obtaining on appraisement a reduction of the
capital value of the land a further term of residence
of five years is attached to the conditional purchase,
unless he is the original applicant for the conditional
purchase, or has inherited it from the original
applicant, and there has been no transfer of the
land except by way of hona fide mortgage. This
term of residence may be reduced by any period
not exceeding two-and-a-half years, according to
the time the applicant for the appraisement was
in continuous and hona fide residence immediately prior
to the date of his application ; and in cases in which
A FLOOD DEPOSIT.
The material has dried and cracked, and vegetation (couch, lucerne, &c.) is coming up between the blocks.
Every original or additional conditional purchase
or conditional lease or additional conditional purchase
in conversion of a conditional lease taken since
Ist June, 1895, is subject to a condition of residence
for ten years.
The term of residence is computed so as to expire
ten years from the date of application, and although
the applicant may, at his own risk and if his appli-
cation is valid, enter into residence immediately, he
is not required to do so until his application has
been confirmed by the land board. He then has three
months’ grace to do so. Residence is defined as
“ continuous and hona fide living on the land as the
holder’s usual home without any other habitual resi-
dence,” and in the case of all additional holdings the
period is reducible to five years by prior residence on
the holding, and in certain circumstances is waived
the local land board decides that the circumstances
warrant the conditional purchaser being excused from
further residence, no residence is imposed. Land held
under conditional purchase or conditional lease has to
be fenced within three years from the date of con-
firmation of application ; but the selector may dispense
with fencing, provided that he effects substantial
improvements to the value of 6s. per acre within the
first three years after the date of confirmation, and
brings their value up to 10s. per acre within the next
two succeeding years. Conditional purchases and con-
ditional leases held by a parent and child may, without
the imposition of any extra conditions, be enclosed
together with a ring fence- Local land boards are
empowered to extend the period for fencing in any
case, and in case of illness, &c., &c., to suspend the
condition of fencing or improvements-


Provision is made for conditional purchases ex-
empt from any condition of residence- The mini-
mum area which may be selected is 40 acres, the maxi-
mum area 320 acres. The price, deposit, and annual
instalments are double those which would be payable
for the same land if taken up under residential con-
ditions. This does not apply to the survey fee. Within
twelve months after the date of confirmation of the
application the land must be fenced, and within five
years from that date improvements (excluding the
fencing) have to be made to the value of £1 per acre.
With the permission of the land board the fencing
may be dispensed with, in which case the improve-
ments within the five years referred to are required to
be of the value of £1 10s- per acre. Anyone who has
made any conditional purchase is disqualified from
making or holding a non-residential conditional pur-
chase ; and the making of a non-residential conditional
purchase disqualifies the conditional purchaser from at
any time thereafter making either a residential or
another non-residential conditional purchase unless
the latter is necessary to enable him to reach his maxi-
mum area. A non-residential conditional purchase does
not carry a right to a conditional lease, and cannot be
made by anyone under the age of 21 years.
Conditional Leases.
Conditional leases are associated with residential
conditional purchases, and subject to similar conditions:
and may not be sold or held apart from their basal
conditional purchase. The maximum area that can
be leased is limited to an area three times as great as
that of the conditional purchase, but the area of the
purchase and lease combined must not exceed 1,280
acres in the Eastern, or 2,560 acres in the Central
division except by means of an additional holding.
With his application the applicant is required to pay,
if the has not been notified, a deposit of 2d. per acre
(which is taken as a provisional rental until such time
as the land board appraise the yearly rental of the land),
and also a survey fee. The lease has a term of forty
years and is subject to the same conditions of resi-
dence, fencing, or improvements as are attached to a
conditional purchase. The selector may reside on either
the purchase or the lease. The lessee has the right at
any time to convert his lease either wholly or partly
into a conditional purchase, subject to certain resi-
dential conditions if the lease has been applied for
since Ist June, 1895.
Auction Sales and After Auction Purchases.
Crown lands may be sold by auction ; but from
considerations of policy the law provides that during
any one year not more than 200,000 acres shall be
disposed of by this method. Lands are put up in
blocks, each not exceeding in the case of town
lots, 20 acres in the case of suburban lands, and 640
acres in the case of country lands. The blocks are
offered at upset prices, which necessarily vary accord-
ing to their situation and advantages ; but such upset
prices cannot be lower than for town lands £8 per acre,
suburban lands £2 10s. per acre, and country lands
15s. per acre. If town or suburban lands or country
portions containing less than 40 acres are not sold
when offered they may be pm chased at the upset
price, after auction, on application to the Crown land
agent.
In all cases a deposit of 25 per cent, is payable by
the purchaser at the time of sale.
Purchases by Virtue of Improvements on Gold-
fields-
Under the provisions of the Mining Act persons
are authorised to occupy small areas for residential
purposes ; and these areas they are permitted—under
the Crown Lands Act —to purchase in fee-simple by
virtue of the improvements. Application is made to
the local Crown land agent with a deposit of £1 and
a survey fee of £l. The holders must be in residence
on the land ; but the place of residence, though it must
be of substantial materials, need not exceed a few
pounds in value- Indeed, so far as the actual require-
ments of the Land Acts are concerned, it will be suffi-
cient if the improvements should be of the value of
£8 per acre on town, and £2 10s- on other lands. The
purchasable areas cannot exceed J-acre of town or
village lands, or two acres of other lands. The value of
the land is subject to appraisement by the local land
board, but cannot go below £8 per acre for town land,
and £2 10s- per acre for other lands or for any block con-
taining less than one acre- The purchase money is pay-
able within three months after notification in the
Government Gazette that the purchase has been ap-
proved. No person can make a subsequent purchase
within three miles of a prior purchase by him.
Conditional Purchase Lease.
This is the most recent form of tenure, and has
been created by the Crown Lands Amendment Act of
1905. The land is set apart and subdivided into blocks
on the basis of a living area, full particulars being noti-
fied in the Government Gazette as to the areas of the
blocks, attached conditions, capital values, rentals and
estimated values of improvements, together with the
date when the land becomes open to application.
The term of the lease is forty years, the rental being
at the rate of 2J per cent, per annum of the capital
value. This latter is fixed by the Minister for the
period of the first ten years (subject to reappraisement
by the local land board on lessee’s application within
six months from confirmation), and is re-determined
every succeeding period of ten years of the lease
by the local land board. Ten years’ residence
is required, commencing within twelve months after
confirmation of application. Residence, however, may
on certain conditions be deferred for any period up to
five years, and on application the local land board may
permit residence to be performed in any adjacent vil-
lage or town, such permission being given conditionally
or unconditionally.
Provision is made for the conversion of the lease,
at any time after confirmation, into a conditional pur-
chase on payment of a deposit of 5 per cent, of the
capital value as approved for current period of lease,
a like instalment (which includes 2| per cent,
interest on the balance) then being due annually
until balance of purchase money is paid. A deposit of
one half-year’s rent and survey fee must be lodged


with an application for a conditional purchase lease, or,
if preferred, the survey fee may be paid in five equal
annual instalments, with interest at 4 per cent, per
annum added.
Any person not being under 18 years of age, if a
male, or 21 years, if a female, may apply for a con-
ditional purchase lease, provided he or she does not
come within the disqualifications mentioned in con-
nection with homestead selections, settlement leases,
original homestead leases, and original conditional pur-
chases, and if not the holder of any land except town
or suburban lands as defined by the Crown Lands Act,
or land held as a tenant from a private owner. An
applicant must not for the purpose of qualifying for
applying under the tenure have divested himself or
herself of any land held by him or her within twelve
months before date of application, The applicant,
if a female, must be unmarried or widowed, or, if
married, must be living apart from her husband
under an order for judicial separation.
Settlement Leases for Agricultural or Grazing
Purposes.
This land does not become available for original
or additional settlement lease applications until after
classification and notification in the Gazette . The
quantity of land which maybe taken up as an original
settlement lease is regulated by the size of the
farms into which the land may be subdivided. Where
the land is suitable for agriculture, the land cannot be
subdivided into farms exceeding 1,280 acres in extent ;
but where it is suitable for grazing a farm may contain
up to 10,240 acres.
The lease has a term of forty years divided into
four periods each of ten years. The annual rent of the
first period is notified by the Minister before the land
is made available for lease, and the lessee may, if dis-
satisfied with the amount so notified, within three
months require the rent to be determined by the local
land board ; and the annual rent for each succeeding
period may, on the application of the lessee, or on a
reference by the Minister, be separately determined in
accordance with the provisions of section 6 of the
Crown Lands Act of 1889. In addition to payment of
rent, the conditions of the lease are : That the lessee
shall pay the value of improvements which may be on
the land at date of application, either in one sum or in
three equal yearly instalments, with interest at 4 per
cent, per annum ; that he shall reside on the farm and
make it his hona fide residence during the whole term ;
that he shall fence it within five years ; that he shall
not assign or sublet without the Minister’s consent ;
and that he shall conform to any regulations made by
the Minister relating to keeping the farm clear of rab-
bits or other noxious animals, and also to clearing the
farm of scrub and noxious weeds. Upon the expira-
tion of the full term of the lease the last holder is given
tenant-right in improvements, and after the first five
years of the lease the holder may convert 1,280 acres
into a homestead selection.
Pastoral Leases and Occupation Licenses.
After the Act of 1884 came into operation every
pastoral holding in the State was subdivided. The
lessee was left in occupation of the whole area under
new rentals, but his tenure of one-half differed entirely
in character from his tenure of the other. Of one
(called the leasehold area) he was granted a lease for a
definite term and without risk of disturbance. Of the
other (called the resumed area) he was granted an
occupation license, renewable annually, but as the
land remained open to the public under the various
provisions of the Crown Lands Acts the area over
which the license operated has been liable to constant
diminution. This is characteristic of all occupation
licenses, including those that may come into existence
in future, as well as those in existence now. Leases in
the Eastern division were granted for five years, those
in the Central division for ten years, and those in the
Western division for fifteen years. The Eastern leases
expired in the year 1890, and the land is for the most
part held under occupation license, a preferential right
to which was granted to the outgoing lessees, together
with ownership in improvements The Central leases
expired in 1895, but by virtue of a provision of the Act
of 1889 some of the lessees by improving their holdings
earned an additional term, which varied in different
cases from less than one up to five years. These im-
provements became the property of the Crown when
the extended term of lease expired. Such outgoing
lessees as did not apply for, or did not obtain, or with-
drew their applications for, an extension of lease were
entitled to remain in occupation of the land on the
same terms as outgoing lessees in the Eastern division.
With respect to the Western leases the term of fifteen
years was by the Act of 1889 converted, on application
by the holders, into a new term of twenty-one years,
and by the Act of 1895 an additional term of seven
years was added. This term of twenty-eight years
dates from the year 1890, and is divisible into seven-
year periods, the rent applicable to each period being
subject to reappraisement. On the expiration of the
term of a Western lease, the last holder is given tenant-
right in improvements. During the last year of the
lease 640 acres may be applied for under homestead
selection. There is also a provision in the Act of 1895
under which a resumed area in the Western division
may be re-attached to the leasehold area. It will be
understood from the foregoing that the term of the
pastoral leases brought into existence under the Act
of 1884 varied with the situation of the land, being
shortest in the Eastern, longest in the Western, and of
intermediate duration in the Central division. In this
way a progressive supply of land was kept up extend-
ing from the coast to the interior, and a further pro-
vision was made in the Act of 1895 for withdrawing
land from pastoral lease in either the Central or West-
ern division, the lessee obtaining by way of compen-
sation an extension of lease of the residue of the lease-
hold, proportioned to the area withdrawn, and a right
to a preferential occupation license of the land with-
drawn. In the case of a Central division lease up to
one-half, and in the case of a Western division lease
up to one-eighth of the area may be resumed. The
Minister may direct a reappraisement of the rent of
an occupation license at any time. With regard to the
Eastern and Central divisions the Crown Lands Act
Amendment Act of 1903 provides that the holder of a


pastoral lease, preferential occupation license, or occu-
pation license may apply for a lease of an area not
exceeding one-third of the total area of the land com-
prised within his lease or license or lease and license
at date of expiration of the pastoral lease. The grant-
ing of the lease is subject to the recommendation of
the local land board, and the board is required to report
as to whether the land is required for closer settlement
or to enable present holders to obtain a living area.
The lease has a term of twenty-eight years and is sub-
ject to such rent and conditions as may be determined.
Respecting pastoral leases and occupation licenses in
the Western division the foregoing explains the law
as existing up till the Ist January, 1902, on which
date the Western Lands Act came into operation and
placed the management and control of the Western
division lands under the Western Land Board of New
South Weles. This Act gave to holders of pastoral
leases or occupation licenses in the Western division
the right to apply within six months of the commence-
ment of the Act to bring their leases or licenses under
its provisions, and by so doing have the term of any
lease or of any part thereof extended up to the 30th
June, 1943. All new or extended leases under the
Western Lands Act contain amongst other conditions
covenants making provision for the destruction of
rabbits, dogs, and other vermin, noxious weeds, and
for fostering and cultivating edible shrubs. The
commissioners determine the rents, which in the case
of new leases will be for periods not exceeding ten years.
With respect to existing leases, the rent will be deter-
mined for the unexpired portion of such leases and ir
the case of leases extended under the provisions of
the Act, for the periods ending 30th June, 1930, and
30th June, 1943. No rental or license fee will be less
than two shillings and sixpence (2s. fid.) per square
mile, and in no case can the rent or license fee be fixed
at a higher rate than sevenpence (7d.) per sheep on
the carrying capacity, estimated on a sheep basis
determined by the commissioners. The rent so fixed
in the case of existing leases, and in the case of new
leases the rent fixed for the first term, cannot on re-
appraisement be either increased or decreased more
than 25 per cent, at the first reappraisement. This
provision applies at each subsequent reappraise-
ment of rent last fixed. Before the end of the year
1904 the commissioners will determine the rent or
license fee on each lease or license brought under the
provisions of the Act —provisional rental or license fee
having been determined for the period ending 31st
December, 1904. The Minister may, after report by
the commissioners, cause a revaluation of any lease
or license to be made, if he is of opinion that the value
has been enhanced by the execution of any local public
works. Vacant Crown lands in the Western division
will not be available for lease until so declared by
notification in the Government Gazette, in which par-
ticulars will be given as to making application, rent, &c.
Power is given in the Act to withdraw an area not
exceeding one-eighth of the area of the original lease,
and as compensation for such withdrawal the lease
may be extended for a period not exceeding six years.
Upon expiration of any new or extended lease all the
improvements thereon become Crown property, but
the Minister on the report of the commissioners may
grant tenant-right in the following improvements
effected with the Minister’s consent, viz., artesian,
and other wells, tanks and dams, scrubbing, clearing
noxious growths, ringbarking and fencing.
Leases of Scrub and Inferior Lands and Improve-
ment Leases-
These leases are classed together, having regard to
the fact that, although there are separate provisions
in the Crown Lands Act applying to each, they all
have features in common. Some of the scrub-infested
lands in the State are of a high-class character, and
the aim of the law is to offer such land on terms and
conditions calculated to render their occupation pro-
fitable both to the lessee and to the Crown. The
disposal of land as improvement or scrub leases is
subject to the recommendation of the local land board :
and in connection with inferior lands a report from the
board has also to be first obtained. There is no limi-
tation as to the area of a scrub lease or of a lease of
inferior lands, but an improvement lease cannot exceed
an area of 20.480 acres. Scrub leases may be granted
on application or disposed of by auction or tender.
Leases of the other two classes can be disposed of by
auction or tender only The rent of a lease obtained
by application is appraised by the local land board.
A lease offered by auction or tender of course ordinarily
falls to the highest bidder or tenderer. In all cases
the rent is payable annually in advance- The initial
rent of an improvement lease or a lease of inferior
lands applies throughout the whole term of the lease,
and this may be the case with respect to a scrub lease ;
but it is in the power of the Minister when offering a
scrub lease to arrange that the term of the lease shall
be divided into periods, and that the rent for each
period shall be determined by appraisement. The term
of the lease is fixed by the Minister, and cannot exceed
twenty-eight years. Indeed, scrub leases or leases of
inferior land are limited in the first instance to twenty-
one and twenty years respectively, but under the Act
of 1895 the Governor now has the power of extending
the term to twenty-eight years after once a lease has
been granted. A condition of residence is not usually
attached to a scrub or inferior lands or improvement
leases. The conditions imposed are directed principally
to the destruction of scrub or the improvement other-
wise of the land. The provisions of the law in this
respect are :—Scrub Leases- —Every holder of a scrub
lease shall as a condition of his lease be required to
take all such steps as the local land board shall from
time to time, subject to appeal, direct, for the purpose
of destroying any scrub as may be specified in his lease
or promise of lease, in and upon the land under scrub
lease, or in and upon any land within the boundaries
of the lease, or in and upon any reserves or roads within
such boundaries ; and when so destroyed to keep such
land free from the same ; and shall commence to destroy
the same within three months after the commencement
of the lease. And if the rent thereon shall not be
paid within the time allowed, or if in the opinion of
the Minister, after report by the local land board,
subject to appeal, the holder shall have failed to com-
ply with any condition of his lease, the Minister may,
V *


by notification in the Gazette , declare such lease to be
forfeited ; and all improvements on such lands shall be
the property of the Crown. Improvement Leases. —The
lease may contain such covenants and provisions as
to the Governor may seem expedient, according to the
circumstances of each case, and all such covenants
and provisions shall be notified in the Gazette , and in
a local newspaper, before the lease is offered for sale
or tenders called for. The lease shall contain covenants
and provisions for the improvement of the land leased,
and for the expenditure of money thereon, for the
payment of rent, and for the determination of the lease
upon any breach by the lessee of the covenants and
provisions thereof.
The last holder of an improvement lease is granted
tenant-right in improvements, and the Governor may
grant tenant-right to the holder of a scrub lease or a
lease of inferior lands. With respect to any of these
leases, 640 acres may be converted into a homestead
selection in certain circumstances. Any leases for
which tenders have been called but none received,
or which have been offered at auction and not sold,
may be applied for on the same terms and conditions.
The granting of any such applications is discretionary
with the Minister.
Other Leases.
Annual leases of unoccupied land not reserved from
lease may be obtained for grazing purposes on appli-
cation to the local Crown land agent and payment
of a deposit of £1 10s. for every 320 acres or less area,
or may be offered by auction or tender. They carry
no security of tenure, but are somewhat largely availed
of for temporary purposes ; and if the land should not
be absorbed by conditional purchase, &c., they are
renewable from year to year by payment of rent in
advance on or before the 30th September. No one
lease can comprise more than 1,920 acres ; but there
is no limit to the number of leases any one person
may hold. No conditions of residence or improve-
ments are attached to them, the only conditions being,
as already explained, payment of rent annually in
advance. With respect to a lease applied for, the
land is allotted, and the rent appraised, by the local
land board. The Minister may refuse any application,
and, after three months’ notice, terminating at the
end of the then current year, cancel any annual lease.
The law provides for a class of leases termed spe-
cial leases. Such leases are chiefly to meet cases where
land is required for some industrial or business purpose
—such, for example, as for a brick-kiln, tannery, wool-
washing establishment, irrigation works, tramways
&c., &c. Land under the sea or under the waters of
any harbour, lake, river, &c., is deemed to be Crown
land, and may be leased for the erection of wharfs,
bathing-places, &c. A special lease may be obtained
on application or disposed of at auction or by tender.
The term of the lease cannot exceed twenty-eight
years. The conditions attached to these leases are
accommodated to the circumstances of each case, and
the rent is payable annually in advance. Application
for a special lease is made to the local Crown land
agent, with a deposit of £3 and a survey fee according
to the prescribed scale.
A “residential lease” of land within a gold or
mineral field may be granted to the holder of what is
termed a “ miner’s right ” or “ mineral license.”
Such right or license is obtainable under the provisions
of the Mining Act- Application for the lease is made to
the local Crown land agent, with a deposit of £l, a
provisional rent of Is. per acre, and a survey fee ac-
cording to the prescribed scale. The maximum area
which may be leased is 20 acres, and the maximum
term of the lease is twenty-eight years. The rent is
appraised by the land board, and is payable annually
in advance. The Minister may at any time direct a
reappraisement of the rent. The principal conditions
of the lease are residence during the currency of the
lease, and the erection within twelve months from the
commencement of the lease of such buildings and fences
as are necessary for the performance of this condition.
The lessee is given tenant-right in improvements. The
maximum area (20 acres) may be acquired under one
or more applications, or by purchasing or otherwise
acquiring adjoining residential leases. Subject to the
approval of the local land board a residential holder of
an area, freehold or otherwise, on a goldfield, may
obtain a residential lease, but in that case the total
area of the freehold and lease must not exceed 20 acres.
The condition of residence attached to the lease may be
fulfilled on the lease or on the land on which the appli-
cant has already been residing.
Exchange of Land between the Crown and
Private Holders.
This can be secured by the Crown accepting a
surrender of private lands, and granting lands in
exchange elsewhere. An exchange may apply to land
actually granted, or land held under conditional pur-
chase or conditional lease. Any proposal for exchange
before finally maturing has to be made the subject of an
investigation by the land board, and while the private
owner’s interests are fully respected, the Crown’s
interests are not less jealously guarded. The carrying
of an exchange into effect ultimately depends upon
the mutual agreement of the private owner on the
one hand, and the Crown on the other. The provisions
with regard to exchange extend to cases where the
Crown is desirous of securing lands for public purposes,
and in such cases the question of consolidation of
lands does not necessarily enter.
Working-Men’s Blocks.
This form of tenure has been created by the Block-
holders Act, under which workmen may secure a lease
of a block for a period of 99 years. Blocks may be
made available in areas not exceeding ten acres. An
applicant can acquire only one block. Only a person
who gains his livelihood by his own labour, and who
is not less than 18 years of age, is competent to apply.
The rent is fixed by the Minister, being not more than
5 per centum on the capital value of the land as
determined by the local land board, and may be altered
(subject to appeal) after each twenty years of the
lease. The lessee, his wife, or child, must reside on
the land for at least nine months in every year. A
dwelling-house, shop, or warehouse of the value of not
less than £IOO must be erected by the lessee within


twelve months of the execution of his lease, and the
lease must be fenced within two years with a batten
or paling fence- A blockholder may obtain a loan
from the Crown, but, together with interest, the loan
must not at any time exceed the sum of £SO- The loan
bears interest at 5 per cent, per annum, and is repay-
able by five equal annual instalments, commencing at
the beginning of the sixth year after the loan is ob-
tained. A blockholder may have his block protected
from seizure for debt except for rates and taxes, pro-
vided the debt is incurred after the protection is ob-
tained. A lessee cannot transfer, assign, sublet or part
with possession of any of the land without the Minis-
ter’s consent.
Snow Leases.
The area of a snow lease cannot be less than 1,280
acres or more than 10,240 acres, and the lease is granted
for a term of seven years, but the lessee, by giving
notice twelve months prior to the expiration of his
term of his intention to claim an extension of the lease,
has the right to a further term of three years, unless
the Minister desires to terminate the lease, which he
can do by giving the lessee notice to that effect twelve
months prior to the date on which the term of the
lease expires- Not more than two snow leases may
be held by or in the interest of one person. These
leases may only be obtained at auction or by after-
auction application.
Closer Settlement Act.
Under this Act any owner of private land may
offer to surrender the same, and the Minister, w r ith the
sanction of the Governor and the approval of both
Houses of Parliament, may, if agreed to by the owner,
make a contract for the purchase of such land, or any
part thereof, at the price approved by Parliament ;
or private land exceeding in value £20,000, exclusive
of improvements thereon, may, with the approval of
both Houses of Parliament, be resumed. In the case
of resumption the owner has the right to retain land
not exceeding in value £IO,OOO, exclusive of the value
of the improvements. The area, situation and boun-
daries of the land to be retained are determined by the
Closer Settlement Board. Should it be proposed to
resume part only of the land held by an owner in one
contiguous area, such owner has the right to require
that not less than the whole of such area (if any) shall
be resumed. The Closer Settlement Board, after
inquiry in open court, makes a valuation of the land
proposed to be purchased or resumed, and of the im-
provements thereon. In the case of land proposed to
be resumed the purchase price is the value of the land
and improvements as reported by the Closer Settle-
ment Board, but the owner or mortgagee of the land
may appeal against such valuation to a court con-
sisting of one of the judges of the Supreme Court and
two assessors, one of whom is appointed by the Gover-
nor and the other by the appellant. The decision of
the said judge and one of such assessors is final,
whether such price be greater or less than the Closer
Settlement Board’s reported valuation.
Any male person not being under 18 years, and
any female not being under 21 years, and not married,
or, if married, living apart from her husband under a
judicial order, and not being the holder of any land
held under lease, as provided in the Closer Settlement
Act, or a township allotment thereunder, or land held
as a tenant from a private holder, or other land not
exceeding forty acres, may apply subject to the
following provisions. If any person holding more than
forty acres divests himself of land within twelve
months prior to date of his application, for the
purpose of applying for a settlement purchase, his
application will be disallowed.
A condition of residence for ten years attaches to
every settlement purchase, and commences at any time
within twelve months after the decision of the land
board allowing the purchase, but this term may be
extended to any date within five years of the allowance
of purchase on such terms and conditions as to im-
provement and cultivation as may be agreed upon
between the land board and the purchaser. Residence
is taken to mean continuous and bona fide living, as the
purchaser’s usual home, upon any settlement purchase,
or upon any township settlement allotment in the same
settlement area. Residence may be permitted in any
adjacent town or village either conditionally or un-
conditionally.
If the land be unimproved, the purchaser must
make substantial and permanent improvements thereon
to the value of 10 per centum of the capital value
within two years from the date of commencement of
purchase, and to an additional 5 per centum of said
value within five years, and to a further additional
10 per centum within ten years from same date. Exist-
ing improvements on the land to the amount of their
value shall be held to fulfil this condition ; and every
such purchase shall be subject to such other conditions
and restrictions relating to mining, cultivation, de-
struction of vermin and noxious weeds, insurance
against fire, or other matter or matters as may be
prescribed.
A deposit of 5 per centum of the notified value of
a settlement purchase must be lodged with an appli-
cation. At the end of the first year from date of appli-
cation, or within three months thereafter, an instalment
on the purchase money at the rate of 5 per centum of
the capital value of the land, and thereafter in like
manner a like instalment annually until the balance of
purchase money, together with interest at the rate of
4 per centum per annum thereon, has been paid ; but
two or more instalments may be paid at the same time.
No person, unless qualified to make a settlement
purchase, can acquire, by way of transfer or other-
wise, a settlement purchase under the Act, nor can
any person make, hold, or acquire more than one
settlement purchase.
Before grant, no holder of settlement purchase
shall transfer, convey, or assign or lease such purchase,
or mortgage or charge the same with the repayment of
moneys advanced on the security thereof, without the
written consent of the Minister. Any mortgagee who
has under power of mortgage submitted any settlement
purchase for sale by public auction, and any execution
creditor who has seized under process of any court, any
such purchase and so offered the land for sale may, if
interest in the land bo not then sold to a qualified pur-
chaser, go into possession of the land. If a condition


of residence attaches to the settlement purchase it
shall, for a period of two years after commencement of
possession or further approved period, be deemed to
be fulfilled if a nominee of mortgagee or creditor (to be
approved by chairman of land board) resides on the
land. Mortgagee or creditor shall, within two years
or further approved period, sell mortgagor’s or debtor’s
interest to a bona fide purchaser, who must be qualified
to hold under the Act, and be subject to all conditions
affecting the original holder. In default of sale the
settlement purchase shall be liable to forfeiture.
The Governor may set apart and lease land under
this Act in areas not exceeding 320 acres. Leases shall
be applied for in the prescribed form, with a deposit of
£3, and subject to such conditions as may be deter-
mined. Improvements are not to be effected without
consent in writing of the Minister or chairman of the
land board. A lease is to be for the current year and
expires on 31st December, but may be renewed from
year to year by payment of yearly rent in advance not
later than 10th December of next preceding year.
The rent to be appraised by land board. The granting
of a lease not to exempt land held thereunder from
being granted as settlement purchase. Lease of so
much of land the subject of a valid application for a
settlement purchase shall cease from date of that
application, and rent of lease shall be adjusted.
Out of lands declared a settlement purchase area,
any area necessary for township settlement may be set
apart by notification in the Gazette , and allotments
therein not exceeding one half-acre each in extent may
be sold at auction. Except by way of mortgage no
person may hold more than three such allotments.
Department of Lands.
Secretary for Lands, the Hon. James Ashton ;
Under-Secretary and Chief Surveyor, E. MacFarlane,
J.P., L.S. (R. McDonald, J.P., L.S., acting) ; Chief In-
spector, C- E. Rennie, J-P- ; Chief Draftsman and In-
spector, A. J. Hare, J.P. ; Chief Clerk, W- H- Capper,
J.P. ; Inspectors, R. H- DeLow, J.P., E. A. Bronsdon,
J.P., G. H- Gibson, J.P. ; Clerk-in-charge Lease
Division, J. E. O’Dwyer ; Clerk -in - charge Sales
Division, J. R. Yorke, J.P. ; Accountant, V. Cohen, J.P.
Western Lands Board. —Chief Commissioner and
Chairman, C. J. McMaster ; Commissioners, R. McDon-
ald, H- Langwell ; Secretary, E. C. Landers.
Officials of the Lands Department.
The administration of the laws relating to Crown
lands and surveys in connection therewith were, under
directions from the Governor, for the time being, and
subsequently by the Governor and the Executive
Council, carried out by the Secretary’s office (afterwards
known as the Colonial Secretary’s office) from the
establishment of the colony until the year 1856, when
the Department of Lands and Works was formed.
This department continued in existence until the year
1859, when the present Department of Lands was
established. The first Surveyor-General of the colony
was Mr. Augustus Alt, a military officer, who was
appointed to the position in the year 1787, from which
he retired in the year 1803. Mr. Alt was succeeded by
Mr. Charles Grimes, who was Surveyor-General from
1803 until 1811. During Mr. Grimes’ term of office
the following gentlemen acted at different times as
Surveyors-General, viz. :—G. W. Evans, 1803 to 1805 ;
H. Williams, 1805, and J. Meehan, 1810. Mr. J. Oxley
was appointed Surveyor-General in 1812, and held the
position until 1828 ; whilst Surveyor-General he carried
out several explorations into the interior of the colony.
Major-General Sir Thomas L. Mitchell, Kt., D.C.L.,
who succeeded Mr. Oxley, was Surveyor-General for
27 years, viz., from 1828 until 1855, when he retired.
During Sir Thomas Mitchell’s regime the following
gentlemen acted as Deputy Surveyors-General, viz. :
R. Hoddle, 1828 ; Captain S. A. Perry, 1839 to 1853 ;
T. S. Townsend, 1853, and J. Thompson, 1853 to 1859.
Lieutenant-Colonel G. Barney was, on the retirement
of Sir Thomas Mitchell, appointed Surveyor-General,
and held the position until 1859.
The following statement gives the names of the
Ministers and prominent officials attached to the
Department of Lands and Works from 1856 to 1859
and of the Department of Lands from 1859 to 1905 :
Secretaries for Lands and Works. —1856, T. Murray, J.
Hay ; 1857, J. Hay, T. A. Murray ; 1858, T. A. Murray, J.
Robertson ; 1859, J. Robertson.
Secretaries for Lands. —1859, J. Robertson, J. Black ;
1860, J. Black, J. Robertson ; 1861-2, J. Robertson ; 1863,
J. Robertson, J. B. Wilson ; 1864, J. 13. Wilson; 1865, J. B.
Wilson, John Robertson, W. M. Arnold ; 1866, John Robert-
son, J. B. Wilson ; 1867, J. B. Wilson ; 1868, J. B. Wilson, W.
Foster ; 1869, W. Foster ; 1870, W. Foster, John Robertson,
J. B. Wilson ; 1871, J. B. Wilson ; 1872, J. B. Wilson, J. S.
Farnoll ; 1873-4, J. S. Farnell ; 1875, J. S. Farnell, T. Garrett ;
1876, T. Garrett ; 1877, T. Garrett, E. A. Baker, R. Driver, T.
Garrett, E. A. Baker, J. S. Farnell ; 1878, J. S. Farnell, J.
Hoskins ; 1879-80, J. Hoskins ; 1881, J. Hoskins, Sir John
Robertson, K.C.M.G. ; 1882, Sir John Robertson, K.C.M.G.;
1883, Sir John Robertson, K.C.M.G., J. S.Farnell ; 1884, J. S.
Farnell ; 1885, J. S. Farnell, J. P. Abbott, G. Spring ; 1886,
G. Spring, H. Copeland ; 1887, H. Copeland, T. Garrett ;
1888, T. Garrett, J. N. Brunker ; 1889, J. N. Brunker, W. J.
Lyne, J. N. Brunker; 1890, J. N. Brunker; 1891, J. N.
Brunker, H. Copeland ; 1892-3, H. Copeland ; 1894, H. Cope-
land, J. H. Carruthers ; 1895, J. H. Carruthers ; 1896, J. H.
Carruthers, Dr. A. Garran, LL.D. (Acting); 1897-8, J. H.
Carruthers ; 1899, J. H. Carruthers, J. H. Young, T. H.
Hassell; 1900, T. H. Hassell; 1901, T. H. Hassell, W. P.
Crick ; 1902-3, W. P. Crick ; 1904, W. P. Crick, E. W.
O’Sullivan, J. Ashton ; 1905, J. Ashton.
Under Secretary for Lands and Works. —1856-9, M. Fitz-
patrick.
Under Secretaries for Lands.—lBs9 to 18th December,
1869, M. Fitzpatrick, G. J. Armytage (Act.) ; 1870, A. O. Mori-
arty, to 9th September, W. W. Stephen, from Ist October ;
1871 to 6th November, 1880, W. W. Stephen, C. N. J. Oliver,
from 7th November ; 1881-5, C. N. J. Oliver ; 1886, C. N. J.
Oliver, S. Freeman (Assistant LLS.) ; 1887, C. N. J. Oliver, S.
Freeman (Assistant U.S.) ; 1888, C. N. J. Oliver to 23rd Oc-
tober, S. Freeman 23rd October, W. Houston (Assistant U.S.) ;
1889, S. Freeman, W. Houston (Assistant U.S.) ; 1890, S. Free-
man, W. Houston ; 1891-9, W. Houston ; 1900, H. A. G. Curry,
(Ist March, 1900) ; 1901, H. A. G. Curry, R. McDonald (Assist-
ant U.S.) ; 1902, H. A. G. Curry, E. MacFarlane (Assistant
U. ; 1903, H. A. G. Curry, E. MacFarlane (Assistant U.S.) ;
1904, H. A. G. Curry to Bth June, E. MacFarlane from 9th
June ; 1905, E. MacFarlane.
Surveyor-General. 1856-8, Lt.-Col. G. Barney; 1859,
Lt.-Col. G. Barney, A. G. McLean (Acting) ; 1859-60, A. G.
McLean (Acting); 1861, A. G. McLean; 1862, A. G. McLean,
W. R. Davidson (Acting) ; 1863, W. R. Davidson (Acting) ;
1864-7, W. R. Davidson ; 1868-86, P. F. Adams ; 1887, P. F.
Adams, E. Twynam (Acting); 1888-9, E. Twynam (Acting).
In 1890 the title was changed to “ Chief Surveyor,* ’ and held :
1890 to 20th January, 1901, E. Twynam; J. W. Allworth,
from 21st January, 1901, to 14th October, 1904; 1904-5, E.
MacFarlane, from 15th October, 1904.


Mr. WILLIAM HOUSTON, Com-
missioner of the Land Appeal
Court of New South Wales and
Deputy - Administrator of Norfolk
Island Affairs, was born in Sydney
in 1847, and is a son of the
late Dr. William Houston, a well-
known Sydney medical practitioner,
and a nephew of Dr. Hugh Houston,
for many years resident physician
and surgeon, Sydney Hospital. He
was educated by the late Dr. Creeney
and read classics and higher mathe-
matics with the late Dr. Stanley,
LL.D. In 1863 he entered the
Surveyor-General’s office as a cadet,
and in 1875 he was appointed to an
important position with a large staff
of draughtsmen and clerks under
him. In 1876 he proceeded to Urana
as the Surveyor-General’s represen-
tative at the opening of the Riverina
lands for selection, and received
warm commendation from the then
Minister for Lands, Mr. T. Garrett,
for the efficiency of his arrange-
ments. In 1878 he was commis-
sioned to remodel the then numerous
branches of the department dealing
with land administration. He did
so on a system which afterwards
proved to be an invaluable prepa-
ration for the decentralised form of
administration, following upon the
introduction of the Crown Lands
Act of 1884. In 1883 he was ap-
pointed to assist a commission to
inquire into the operation of the land
laws. Later he was called upon to
assist with Mr. Parnell's land bill,
which came into operation in 1885.
He was then appointed inspector of
Local Land Boards and Crown Land
Offices, and was selected to carry into
effect the important provisions of the
new Land Act relating to the pastoral
runs of the colony. This under-
taking was the pivot of the Act,
and much anxiety was felt as to
how and when it would be accom-
plished. The organisation was, how-
ever, so thorough that the staff,
which included over one hundred
persons, completed the great bulk
of the work in six months. This
work marked one of the greatest
and most important projects in the
history of land administration in
Australia. In 1886 he was promoted
to the position of chief inspector of
the Lands Department and acting-
chairman of Local Land Boards; and
in November of that year was ap-
pointed a member of a commission to
L.quire into the organisation of the
Lands Department with a view to
general retrenchment, which resulted
in an annual saving of £73,390.
Another board including Mr. Hous-
ton, was appointed by Mr. Garrett
in 1887 to reconstruct the country
offices ; and, in addition to laying
down an improved system of busi-
ness methods, a further annual
saving of £30,000 was effected. In
1888 he was appointed Assistant
Under Secretary for Lands, and dur-
ing 1889 filled the position of Act-
ing-Under Secretary. In 1890 Mr.
Houston was appointed Under Sec-
retary for Lands by the last Govern-
ment of which Sir Henry Parkes
was Premier, and in April of that
year he prepared a further scheme of
reorganisation of the administrative
divisions of the department. During
J. Hubert Newman Sydney.
MR. W. HOUSTON.
Mr. Houston’s term of the office of
Under Secretary for Lands, which
he occupied about ten years, no
less than twenty-nine bills were
prepared for Parliament by succes-
sive Ministers for Lands. As per-
manent head of this great depart-
ment, one of the most difficult to
administer, no praise could be too
freely lavished upon Mr. Houston
for his industry and untiring energy.
His great strength of character and
prudence enabled him to settle many
delicate issues and to gain the confi-
dence and trust of those with whom
he came in contact. In 1896, owing
to ill-health, he was compelled, on
medical advice, to take a sea trip ;
and toured for six months Japan,
China, and portion of India. In
March, 1897, the then Minister for
Lands appointed Mr. Houston to
assist in the administration of Nor-
folk Island; probably the only Crown
colony under the absolute dominion
of a Governor, who, as paramount
authority, may adopt for its govern-
ment such laws as he considers the
exigencies of the people demand.
In 1896 and again in 1899 Mr. Hous-
ton served as a deputy-Public Service
Commissioner, and in the following
year he was appointed a commis-
sioner of the Land Appeal Court.
Mr. Houston was appointed in
1902, by his Excellency Sir H. H.
Rawson, K.C.8., “ Deputy Adminis-
trator of Norfolk Island Affairs,” and
at the same time a commissioner to
make full and complete inquiry
into all matters and things, as his
Excellency might from time to time
direct. In March, 1903, he received
a Royal Commission from the Gover-
nor-General of Australia to distribute
the State of New South Wales
into divisions in accordance with the
new Commonwealth Electoral Law,
which he successfully carried out ;
and in August of the same year he
presented a report to the Govern-
ment, that has since been described
as a monument of care and skill.
At the beginning of the same year
there had been manifestations of
disaffection at Norfolk Island, which
culminated in the resignation of the
Council of Elders (the local governing
body), and had already been pro-
ductive of injurious consequences.
Mr. Houston was accordingly directed
by his Excellency to proceed to
the island under his special com-
mission, and arrived there with the
late Mr. Lindsay Thompson (secre-
tary) and a shorthand writer, by
H.M.S. “ Phoebe,” under the com-
mand of the Hon. C. Addington, R.N.
After an inquiry lasting some weeks,
assisted by a local committee, Mr.
Houston drew up a report upon the
condition of the islanders, which has
since proved of assistance in the gov-
ernment of the island. An instalment
of this report was presented to his
Excellency on his arrival at the
island with Vice-Admiral Fanshawe
by H.M.S. “ Royal Arthur ” ; and
his Excelle cy was enabled within
a short time of reading h to announce
his intentions in no uncertain tones,
and with such sound judgment and
tact as to at once dispel hostile feeling
and gain the confidence of the


people. Mr. Houston has from time
to time received generous acknow-
ledgment from Sir Harry Rawson of
his services as Deputy-Administra-
tor. Mr. Houston is a trustee of the
Sydney Cricket Ground and of the
historical Captain Cook’s landing
place at Botany Ray. His forty odd
years’ service to this State has been
marked by characteristic conscien-
tiousness and great determination.
From 1864 to 1880 Mr. Houston
held a commission as lieutenant in
the Artillery Brigade, and in 1875
acted as adjutant to the Campbell-
town encampment. He is a lover
of field sports and boating. He was
also keen on athletics, and excelled
at boxing and fencing. Mr. Houston
married the second daughter of the
late John Williams, Grand Master of
the Freemasons, and has four sons
and five daughters.
Mr. EDWARD MacFARRANE,
J.P., Under Secretary for Rands,
was born at Sydney on the nth
January, 1850. He is the second
son of the late John MacFarlane,
M.D. He commenced his educa-
tion at what is now known as the
Fort Street Model School, which has
been responsible for the training of
so many of the men occupying fore-
most positions in all departments of
our civil life. Mr. MacFarlane was
a member of the class taught by
the late Mr. F. Bridges, the late
Under Secretary for Public Instruc-
tion. He subsequently attended the
Sydney Grammar School for nearly
eight years, and in August, 1865,
after successfully passing a com-
petitive examination, entered the
Surveyor-General’s office. He here
gave evidence of unusual excellence
as a draughtsman, v and during his
office career formed one of a small
coterie of exponents of the finer
branches of the draughtsman’s art, of
which we have no counterpart at the
present day. Promotion by merit was
the order of the day under the late
Mr. P. F. Adams, the then Surveyor-
General, and was earned by Mr. Mac-
Farlane in competitive examinations.
In 1872 he took up the position of
field assistant, serving, first, with
Mr. District Surveyor Fisher, and
afterwards with Mr. J. M. Tarves.
On completion of his field probation
in 1875, he passed first in the exami-
nation of candidates for license to
survey. Having obtained the license
his first charge was the drought-
stricken district, having Canonbar as
its centre. In July, 1876, he effected
an important survey of a pastoral
district boundary, the nearest point
of which was more than twenty-five
miles from permanent water. On
the 19th October, 1876, he was
appointed to the field staff of the
Surveyor-General’s office, with head-
quarters at Dubbo. In August,
1879, he was under orders to pro-
ceed to Rourke, when heavy rains,
followed by great floods, intervened,
so that the mail route, Dubbo to
Bourke, was impracticable ; and a
very interesting journey, following
the flood waters of the Bogan River
from Bulgandanine to Bourke, re-
sulted. From that time dates
Air. MacFarlane's connection with
Bourke. In January, 1881, he
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. E. MAcFARLANE.
acted as district surveyor at Bourke,
and in 1885 was appointed dis-
trict surveyor for Bourke, Cobar
and Brewarrina land districts. In
1887 the land district of Wilcannia
including the present land districts
of Willyama and Wilcannia, was
added to the district under his
supervision, so that he had charge
of survey in more than fifty-nine
million acres. The droughts of 1876
1884, 1888 and 1896, and the floods
of 1879, 1890 and 1893 are among
his western experiences. In 1893
he was elected an associate of the
Institute of Civil Engineers, London.
In 1895 and 1896 he experienced
the full effect of the heat wave in
which Mr. G. C. Tompson, chair-
man of the Bourke land board dis-
trict, died at Kallara. Mr. Mac-
Farlane’s chairmanship of that
board dates from 4th February,
1896, and he also performed the
duties of district surveyor to Octo-
ber, 1896. In 1899 the health and
welfare of his family demanded
their removal from Bourke, so from
October, 1899, h e act ed as chairman
of lands boards at Tamworth, in the
beautiful climate of which he had
the comfort and pleasure of the
society of his wife and family. Out-
side Iris departmental duties, he
has taken a deep interest in muni-
cipal matters, having been twice
elected as alderman. He has been
an active member of the Public
School Board at Bourke from its
inception. In Tamworth he was
president of the Philharmonic So-
ciety and vice-president of a local
cricket club ; he was also president
of the Tamworth branch of the
Public Service Association. He
married in 1883 the younger of the
daughters of James Horsfall, for-
merly of Bournefield, Victoria, and
afterwards of Bourke, New South
Wales, and has living four children.
Mr. MacFarlane also takes a lively
interest in the Institute of Surveyors
in New South Wales, being year after
year elected to the position of corre-
sponding councillor of that institu-
tion. He is a brilliant conversa-
tionalist ; as a writer he commands a
pretty turn of literary expressions.
He was appointed to the position of
Acting-Under Secretary for Rands
on the 4th of September, 1903, and
Under Secretary on the 9th of June,
1904.
Mr. ROBERT HENRY De ROW,
Inspector, Rands Department, is
a native of England, where he
was born in the year 1847. When
still a lad he arrived in Sydney
with his parents, and was edu-
cated mainly at Fort Street Public
School. Upon completion of his
early training, and having passed
the government examination, as
prescribed by the Department of
Public Instruction, he entered the
public service as a pupil teacher in
1564; and after serving in this capa-
city for ten years was transferred
to the Stock and Brands branch of
the Department of Rands. In 1877
he entered the head office of this
department as a junior clerk. The
many and varied graded positions


leading up to the position of inspect-
or were each in turn, accomplished
with honour by the subject of this
sketch, who in June of 1900 was
appointed to his present position.
Mr. De Low resides at Parramatta,
where he takes very deep interest
in the local School of Arts ; in fact,
the present institution owes its
existence mainly to his support and
personal supervision in the capacity
of secretary and president, which
positions he filled for a period of four
or five years. The office of treasurer,
also, he has held for many years, and
in addition to the before-mentioned
posts, he has lent a very ready help
ing hand in the raising of large sums
to further the cause of the institution.
Parramatta as a suitable residential
district has commanded the respect
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. R. H. DE ROW.
of Mx. Dc Row for the past thirty-six
years He is one of the few remain-
ing residents of the early seventies.
Mr. VICTOR COHEN, Chief
Accountant and Inspector of the
Department of Rands, New South
Wales, was born at Sydney in 1851.
He was educated, first by private
tuition, then at Fort Street Public
School, and subsequently at one of
the best known scholastic institutions
of Sydney in the sixties, known as
the Sydney Academy, and conducted
by the late Mr. Alfred Cane. While
at the school he competed for and
obtained a scholarship in the Sydney
Grammar School, in which institu
tion he completed his education. In
1865 he was appointed by the late
Mr. (afterwards Sir) Saul Samuel to
a junior position in the Treasury,
where he remained for twelve years,
when he entered commercial life in
partnership with his brother, which
firm carried on extensive business
operations for several years. Amongst
other enterprises, this firm erected
the Sydney Arcade, the first struc-
ture of its kind in the city of Sydney.
Upon the dissolution of this firm by
mutual consent Mr. Cohen, at the
special request of the government of
the day, accepted an appointment as
accountant to the Stamp Duties
Department, in which position he
rendered invaluable assistance in the
reorganisation of that branch of the
service and in making provision for
the working of the Stamp Duties Act
of 1880, the main features of which
are still in operation in New South
Wales. At the expiration of two
years he was again selected for
special work, this time by Mr.
Charles Oliver, now Chief Commis-
sioner for Railways, then Under
Secretary for Lands, seeking him as
accountant in that department. In
1888 the late Mr E. M. G. Eddy,
the first chief commissioner for
railways, upon the special recom-
mendation of Mr. Oliver, selected
Mr. Cohen to investigate the ac-
counts of the locomotive branch of
the department, and to, at the same
time, devise a new system of ac-
counts, especially in relation to the
cost of materials required in that
branch. He succeeded in this work
to the entire satisfaction of the late
chief commissioner, and has received
high commendations in respect to it
from the present accomplished chief
accountant, Air. Hall. Among other
important services he has been able
to render the public, because of his
extensive knowledge of the lands
administration of the State, has been
in connection with several public
trusts. He was, with the Hon.
John Macintosh, M.L.C., the first
to move in the work of forming
the well-known Rushcutters’ Bay
Park, and upon the appointment of
that trust he was appointed honorary
secretary. For over eight years he
filled the position, when the work
became so heavy that the appoint-
ment of a paid secretary became
absolutely necessary. Upon his
resignation as honorary<• secretary
tht late Hon. Henry Copeland, the
Minister for Lands, appointed him a
member of the trust. Mr. Copeland
also recognised Mr. Cohen’s capa-
bilities and intelligent knowledge of
the administration of public parks
and reserves that he induced him to
accept the honorary secretaryship of
the island reserves of Port Jackson,
and it is to Mr. Cohen’s initiative
that the principal improvements
which now constitute Clark Island
one of the most attractive harbour
spots for the citizens of Sydney are
due. He has also been associated
with the reservation and beautifica-
tion of the historical spot where
Captain Cook first landed, and was
first honorary secretary to the
reserve. While acting in this
capacity the centenary of the
establishment of the colony was
celebrated in the reserve, which
included the identical snot where
1.
Captain Cook first set foot on Ans-
Exchange Studios Sydney
MR. V COHEN.
trahan soil,and upon which occasion
the reserve was dedicated and
thrown open for all time to the
Australian public, where, to use the
words of the Hon. J. H. Carruthers,
“ it is a relief to know that in future
they will not be trespassers when
they visit this sacred spot.” The
importance of that demonstration
was considerably enhanced by the
presence of Sir Frederick Darley,
Chief Justice and Acting-Governor
of New South Wales, the Admiral
of the Australian station, and the
Hon. J. H. Carruthers, Minister for
Lands, historical speeches being
delivered by these august person-
ages. The Admiral of the Fleet
unfurled the flag of the same service
of the Royal Navy which Captain
162
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


Cook on the same spot unfurled and
planted a hundred years previously.
Upon the formation of the first
Commonwealth Government Sir
William J. Lyne, first Minister of
State for Home Affairs, selected
Mr. Cohen to formulate a system of
accounts for the newly created
Commonwealth service and to assist
in the preparation of the first esti-
mates to be presented to the first
Commonwealth Parliament. Upon
the completion of this work he
received the highest commendations
for the manner in which his duties
in this connection were performed,
not alone from Sir George Turner,
Treasurer, but from Sir William J.
Lyne as well. Outside of his duties
as a public servant, Mr. Cohen has
taken a deep interest in national
cricket, and for eleven years filled
the position of honorary treasurer of
the New South Wales Cricket Asso-
ciation. He also acted as manager
for the Australian eleven which
visited England and America in
1893. He holds a commission as
lieutenant of the Naval Brigade, in
which branch of the service he has
been associated since 1878, retiring
on his rank in 1903. Mr. Cohen is
a magistrate of the State, and a son
of the late Mr. Phillip Joseph Cohen,
of Maitland; who, it is interesting to
note, was the first minister ordained
to celebrate marriages in accordance
with the ritual of the Jewish faith
in Australia. This was in 1830.
The building in which he officiated
is still standing in Bridge Street,
Sydney. In the formation of the
Public Service Association Mr.
Cohen took an active part ; and it
was upon a resolution moved by him
at a largely attended meeting of the
public service, held in the Masonic
Hall in 1895, the initial note
was sounded which brought that
organisation into existence.
Mr. JOSEPH WITTER
ALLWORTH, Chief Surveyor and
Director of Trigonometrical Survey
Staff, is a son of the late Rev.
William Allworth, for many years an
Anglican clergyman of Sydney, and
was born at Adelaide, South Aus-
tralia, in 1847. He arrived in New
South Wales with his parents in
1851, and at an early age commenced
his education at King’s School,
Parramatta. Subsequently he at-
tended Calder House, one of the
leading schools of the metropolis of
that era, then under the control of
the late Mr. J. F. Castles. Upon the
termination of his school career he
entered the Department of Lands as
a cadet. A year later he was ap-
pointed a draughtsman, and in 1865
he was sent into the country as field
assistant, first to Mr. E. H. Von
Arnheim, and subsequently to Mr.
J. C. Dalglish, graduating as a
licensed surveyor in 1869. In 1872
he was commissioned to carry out
extensive surveys on the Shoalhaven,
an undertaking of considerable mag-
nitude because of the exceedingly
rough nature of the country. Upon
completion of this work he was
offered and accepted the position of
staff surveyor in the Department of
Lands, and was appointed to the
Armidale and Glen Innes districts.
In 1878 he removed to Muswell-
brook. In 1880, upon the death of
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. JOSEPH WITTER ALLWORTH.
Mr. Thomas Evans, he was ap-
pointed district surveyor at Mait-
land, a position he occupied many
years, during which period he has
taken an active part in the many
changes that have been effected in
the methods of administering the
public estate. In 1889 Mr. Allworth
was appointed a member of the board
of inquiry appointed to consider the
question of reorganising the Lands
Department, in place of Mr. Wm.
Houston, who was subsequently ap-
pointed Under Secretary. As a
member of that board he had to deal
more particularly with matters affect-
ing the trigonometrical survey and
the general and detail surveys of the
colony. In 1892 he was appointed
Acting-Chief Surveyor, Director of
Trigonometrical Surveys, and Metro-
politan District Surveyor during the
absence of the permanent occupant
of that office, Mr. E. Twyman, on
extended leave. In 1897 he again
took temporary charge of his duties,
also again in October, igoo. In the
following year the permanent appoint-
ment to the position was confirmed
to him Outside of nis duties as an
officer of the public service, Mr.
Allworth serves his fellow-citizens in
many ways. He is an ardent sup-
porter of the Anglican communion in
this State. For many years he has sat
as a member of the Sydney and New-
castle General, Diocesan and Provin-
cial Synods of the Church of England.
For ten years in succession he acted
as chairman of committees for the Dio-
cesan Synod. He also filled the posi-
tion of trustee and honorary treasurer
for the Clergy Widows’ and Orphans’
Fund. In him all healthy and manly
field sport has found an active
supporter, In 1873 Mr Allworth
married a daughter of the late Dr.
Hayley, of Goulburn.
Mr. ARTHUR JOHN HARE,
J.P., Chief Draughtsman and In-
spector, Lands Department, was
born in 1855, at Blandford, England,
and was educated principally at Fort
Street School, Sydney. In the year
1872, at the age of seventeen, he
commenced his career in the Sur-
veyor-General’s Office, having suc-
cessfully passed a competitive
examination for the position of cadet
draughtsman. In the following year,
after passing another competitive
examination, he received a staff
appointment as draughtsman. Hav-
ing gained experience in the several
draughting branches of his depart-
ment, he was, in 1881, placed in
charge of one of the Geographical
Divisions of the State. On the intro-
duction of the Crown Lands Act of
1884, with its system of decentralisa-
tion, he was appointed as draughts-
man-in-charge of the district survey
office at Moree; subsequently occupy-
ing similar positions at Orange and
Wagga Wagga. In the year 1901
he left the last-mentioned town to
take the chief draughtsmanship of his
department in Sydney. In addition
to this, he was, in 1903, appointed
inspector of land board and district
survey offices. The character of his
duties and varied country experience
have given him a general and prac-
tical knowledge of the working of the


Crown Lands Acts. Apart from his
official life he has always taken an
active interest in all local matters
in the various centres where he has
resided, particularly in literary and
municipal affairs. He was an aider-
man at Orange during the six years
of his stay in the town, and took a
special part in the management of
the School of Arts in each of the
three towns mentioned. He was
president of the rifle club at Wagga
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. A. J. HARE.
Wagga, and, until recently, a mem-
ber of the council of the Public
Service Association.
Mr. EDWARD ARNOLD
BRONSDON, Inspector, Lands
Department, was born in iB6O near
Newbury, England, and edu-
cated at the renowned Fort Street
School. At the age of sixteen he
passed the necessary examination
and entered the Survey Department
as a cadet draughtsman. He served
the first nine years of his profes-
sional career in this department,
and energy, combined with ability,
earned for him rapid promotion.
In the year 1885 he was removed to
the district survey office at Glen
Inne.L, and two years later was
transferred to Armidale, where he
remained until his return to Syd-
ney, in 1890, to take up the ap-
pointment of officer-in-charge of
the Alienation Branch, Lands De-
partment. Upon completion of
eleven years’ service in that ca-
pacity; he was in July, 1900, made
officer-in-charge of the Lease Divi-
sion ; and in September of 1903 was
promoted to the position of in-
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. E. A. BRONSDON.
spector, an office he still discharges
in connection with that of officer-
in-charge of the Lease Division.
Mr CHARLES GEORGE
IRELAND, Draughtsman-in-charge
of the Parish Map Division, Com-
piling Branch, Lands Department,
Sydney, was born in India in
the year 1846, and educated at
Edinburgh, Scotland, at the Edin-
burgh Institution School. Upon
completion of his early education,
he served his time as a practical
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. C. G. IRELAND.
engineer under Messrs. Hawthorn
and Co., of Leith. Then he under-
went a course of surveying and
levelling, and after passing all the
necessary examinations pertaining
to this profession, he proceeded to
and spent a few years in Mauritius
with his uncle in mercantile pursuits,
and in the year 1875 'he came to
Sydney, and having passed the neces-
sary examination required by the
New South Wales Government, he
was appointed to the Lands Depart-
ment as a temporary draughtsman. H e
did not remain long in this capacity
being placed on the permanent stall
the following year. He was by this
acknowledgment assured of his posi-
tion ; the course to advancement was
thus similarly opened to him as to
many others, and with perseverance,
combined with ability, he passed the
various stages leading up to his
present position with credit.
Mr. JAMES ED M UND
O’DWYER, Acting-Head of Leases
Division, Lands Department, is a
native of Dublin, where he was born
in the year iB6O. While still a child
he arrived with his parents in
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. J. E. O’DWYER.
.Sydney, and was educated at Fort
Street School. At the age of sixteen,
having passed the junior and senior
University examinations, he entered
the Lands Department as a cadet,
taking up his post in the Occupation
Branch, where he remained for
nearly five years. In the year 1881
his services were transferred to the
Miscellaneous Branch, in which
164
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


there are numerous grades; but
the subject of this sketch has,
with untiring efforts, passed each
successive grade, and in the year
1903 earned the well-deserved pro-
motion to the position he now
occupies.
Mr. ERNEST STAFFORD
VAUTIN, J.P., President of the Pub-
lic Service Association, Draughtsman
in charge of the Compiling Branch of
the Lands Department of New South
Wales, was born at the Union Bank,
Port Adelaide, South Australia, in
November, 1856. He received his
education at schools at Adelaide,
Ballarat Melbourne and Hobart.
Upon its completion he entered upon
mercantile pursuits. Removing with
his parents to Ballarat, a year later,
he entered a solicitor’s office in that
city, but subsequently he obtained an
appointment in Kenworthy’s Bond,
Melbourne. Here he remained until
he entered the service of the well-
known firm of Messrs. Alexander
Stewart & Co., ships’ chandlers of
Sandridge. In 1874 he removed with
his parents to Sydney, and obtained
an appointment with Messrs. W.
Saber & Sons. He subsequently
qualified himsett as a draughtsman,
and in 1875 obtained an appointment
in the Lands Department and steadily
advanced until he was appointed
Draughtsman-in-Charge of the Mis-
cellaneous Compiling Branch. In
the reorganisation of the department
in 1887, he was selected by the board
of inquiry to report upon the prac-
ticability of using zinc plates in lieu
of lithographic stones for producing
maps and official plans, also upon the
utility of film negatives in photo-litho-
graphic work. When the Public
Service Board came into existence he
was again appointed to report upon
various matters connected with the
administration of his department.
He was also associated with Mr. G.
A. McKay, chief mining surveyor, in
a mission to Melbourne, whence he
was sent by the Government to make
certain inquiries with respect to
the Board’s proposed reorganisation
scheme. hor many years he has
acted as secretary of the Board of
Examiners for probationers foi the
Lands Department. He was also a
member of the Board of Examiners
who had to deal with the qualification
of temporary draughtsmen. In 1902
he was a member of the general com-
mittee appointed by the draughtsmen
in the Lands, Mines, Public Works,
and Chief Secretary’s Departments,
to inquire into and report upon the
relative value of the various classes
of draughting work performed in the
service. At the request of the Sur-
veyor-General of Queensland, and
with the approval of the Minister for
Lands, Mr. Vautin went to Brisbane,
and reported upon the working of the
Survey Branch of the Lands De-
partment of Queensland. Upon his
report the branch was reorganised.
Both the Surveyor-General and the
Public Service Board of Queensland
referred in highly complimentary
terms to the valuable work Mr.
Vautin performed. During the
Commonwealth celebrations, Mr.
Vautin acted as secretary of a commit-
tee appointed to make all arrangements
for the effective decoration of the
Lands and Mines Departments in
honour of that historic occasion. He
was recently appointed one of the
Inspectors of Stores under the Audit
Act, also to the general and execu-
tive committee of the Lord Mayor’s
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. ERNEST VAUTIN.
Drought Relief Fund, representing
the public servants, who subscribed
upwards of Mr. \ autin is
the founder of the Draughtsmen’s
Association, and was its president
for several years. Upon the forma-
tion of the Public Service Associa-
tion, he became a member of the
council, representing the Lands
Department, and worked actively
towards placing it upon a permanent
basis. In 1902 he was elected its
chairman, and again in 1903, giving
much time and attention to the
superannuation trouble. Mr. Vautin
married in 1880 Miss Lamartinere,
daughter of Captain Lamartinere of
France, and has two sons and two
daughters. In July, 1904, he was
appointed secretary to a committee
of public service officers whose
function it was to inquire into closer
settlement proposals, and to suggest
estates for compulsory closer settle-
ment.
Mr. RICHARD DALRYMPLE
PIAY, Chief Forester and Officer-in-
eharge of the Forestry Branch in
the Lands Department of New South
Wales, was born at Goondiwindi,
Queensland, in 1861, and educated
at the Eaglesfield College, Darling-
hurst, then conducted by the late
Professor William Stephens. He
served his articles as a licensed
surveyor and passed the necessary
examinations for that profession in
1886, when he was appointed a
surveyor in the Survey Department
of the State, and during the ensuing
nine years he served in various parts
of the State. He has taken a deep
interest and made a close study of
the forests and the indigenous woods
of the colony; and contributed essays,
articles and letters on this subject.
When in 1895 the Forest Depart-
ment was reorganised the selection
by the Government of a suitable
officer to take control fell upon
Mr. Hay. His first duty was the
organisation of a staff for the
work of conservation. In this he
succeeded, and during the seven
years of his administration he has
increased the revenue of the depart-
ment from about £6,000 to £2,6,000
per annum ; while in no year has the
expenditure for management ex-
ceeded the revenue. The total
surplus of revenue over expenditure
up to 1904 amounted to
But the most important service that
Mr. Hay has rendered the public
since accepting control of the
Forestry Branch has been in the
conservation of valuable timber
forests in the State. In the revision
of the reservations, all lands not
containing timber of value have
been thrown open ; while the total
area of reserved forest lands has
been increased by nearly two million
acres. During Mr. Hay’s regime,
for the first time in the history of
the State, forest conservation and
improvement work has been carried
out upon scientific lines ; and no less
than two hundred thousand acres of
forests have been so improved under
his direction. Mr. Play supplied im-
portant data and information upon
which the proposed Acts of Forest
Legislation are based. The principles
165
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES


that have mainly guided him in his
important work are, to systematise
the functions of this department
with the direct purpose of conserv-
ing the valuable forests of the State,
and to rigidly protect immature
timbers from destruction. Mr. Hay
also has rendered important service
in the conservation and regeneration
of the State’s edible trees, the in-
estimable value of which found
ample proof in preserving the life of
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney .
MR. R. D. HAY.
stock in the interior of the State
during the drought which continued
from 1895 to 1903. In his literary
work he supplied articles on forestry
for the annual reports of the depart-
ment for 1902-3; these contain
important information regarding the
timbers of the State and what is
being achieved in their conservation ;
as well as with regard to the ad-
ministration of the department
generally. The article containing an
epitome of information on the
forests of the State which appears
in the “ Year-Book of Australia” is
from the pen of Mr. Hay, and an
article on the same subject for the
“Australian Hand-Book” is also
from his facile pen. Mr. Dalrymple
Hay is descended from a well-known
Scotch clan, the principal represen-
tative of which is his uncle, Sir
John Dalrymple Hay, Bart., late
Admiral of the Mediterranean fleet.
Mr. HARRIS ADAM GRAY
CURRY, President of the Land
Appeal Court, was born at Appin,
New South Wales, on April 16, 1857,
and received his education first at a
school presided over by a Mr.
McLennan, then at St. Paul’s School,
Cobbitty, and afterwards at the
Sydney Grammar School. He
passed the Civil Service examination
and in 1871 entered the government
service as a cadet in the Department
for Lands. After serving in a junior
capacity for some years he was ap-
pointed clerk under Mr. Lindsay
Thompson, in the Improvement
Purchase Branch of the department.
Here he remained until 1884, when,
upon the passing through Parliament
of the comprehensive Land Act of
that year and it coming into opera-
tion, he was promoted to the control
of the Pre-emptive Lease Branch.
In 1886 he was appointed Chief In-
spector, the duties of which office
were of a very miscellaneous
character, and upon the transfer of
Mr. Houston to the Land Appeal
Court in 1899, Mr. Curry was called
to fill the position of Under Secre-
tary for Lands. This position he
continued to administer until June,
1904, when, upon the lamented death
of Mr. Alex. Oliver, Mr. Curry was
appointed to the high office of Presi-
dent of the Land Appeal Court of
New South Wales. In private life
Mr. Curry takes a deep interest in
literature.' In his early days, even
from the time of leaving school, he
continued his studies and systemath
Tahma . Sydney.
MR. HARRIS ADAM GRAY CURRY.
cally read the English classics. He
possesses a facile pen and is well
versed in general literature, particu-
larly with matters connected with
the political and social history oi
Great Britain. In 1886 he married
Miss Esther Edweena Norris and
has one son.
CULTIVATION PLOTS, PERA BORE, IRRIGATION FARM, BOURKE.


DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE.
The genesis of the Agriculture Branch of the
Department of Mines and Agriculture occurred about
twenty years ago, in the selection of sites for
experimental or demonstrating farms in various
agricultural districts of the colony ; the reports at the
same time to the Minister for Mines making it obvious
that the condition of the farming, as then in operation,
necessitated the formation of a department to deal
entirely with agricultural matters. It was not, how-
ever, until four or five years subsequently that the
present branch of the department was actually created.
For some little time, and as might be expected, notwith-
standing the many attempts made to bring the depart-
ment into touch with the farmers, most of them were shy
of these efforts on their behalf. However, this shyness
has worn away, and the work of the department is not
only recognised but valued. The establishment of an
Agricultural College, foreshadowed eighty years ago by
Mr. W. C. Wentworth, has proved to be most useful
and effective as a means of spreading abroad, through
the intelligence of the students, the information they
glean there ; for the training at the Hawkesbury College
of a large number of young men annually in the techni-
calities of their future business cannot fail, in course of
time, to make a favourable and appreciable improve-
ment on old practices ; and this will influence, no
doubt, to a considerable degree the future prosperity
of the Commonwealth.
At this College, whether a lad be willing or unwill-
ng to take advantage of his opportunities, he cannot
but imbibe some information that will eventually prove
beneficial to him, if only by association in the daily
routine of work. The opportunities offered, whereby
excellence can be attained by anyone who desires to
do so in various branches of agriculture, scientific as
well as practical, can hardly be over-estimated and
these opportunities are availed of by many. Should
a lad desire, he can afterwards take a course of prac-
tical farm work at the Experimental Farms at Wagga,
Bathurst, Cowra, or Berry Stud Farm, where pupils are
admitted for a practical training only. At the
Hawkesbury College accommodation is provided for
200 students, at Wagga 50, and Bathurst and Wollongbar
each 12, and the accommodation is always over-
applied for. The Berry Stud Farm has no accommo-
dation for resident students.
At the Wagga Experimental Farm extensive
operations are carried out in the cultivation of wheats,
as well as other cereals. Experiments on an extensive
scale are being made with manures, in various methods
of cultivation, in thick and thin sowing, and so on.
Experiments, too, on a smaller and more exact scale,
which are under the special control of the Chemist and
Bacteriologist, should, in course of time, prove most
valuable. Then there are experiments in the making
of new wheats, with the object of improving their
milling qualities, their resistance to rust, to smut, and.
perhaps the most important of all, to droughts. These
particular experiments are of singular importance to
all the colonies, and so far they promise satisfactory
results. Experiments are being conducted with exotic
and native fodder plants and grasses, and tests of all
sorts of farm and market-garden crops likely to prove
useful to the district. Here, too, instruction and
important experiments are being carried out with
hundreds of varieties and kinds of fruits ; in fruit-
canning and in drying ; in the manufacture of olive oil,
and in various other horticultural matters and already
the fact has been demonstrated that dried fruits, such
as raisins, sultanas, prunes, and peaches, as well as
olive oil and other commodities, can be produced in
this climate and soil, of remarkably good quality and
which bring high prices.
At the Bathurst Experimental Farm similar work,
to a great extent, is being conducted, but with a marked
difference in climate, soil, and surroundings. Here
market-garden experiments are carried out extensively,
and various other matters, as well as sheep-breeding
and fattening, are attended to.
At the Wollongbar Experimental Farm, Richmond
River district, the complete change in climate, soil, and
surroundings to those at any of the other farms is most
O J
striking. Here luxuriate the pineapple, bananas,
sugarcane, and all sorts of plants generally associated
with the tropics. Here various strange productions
may be seen, wonderful luxuriant grasses, and beautiful
vegetation on all sides. At this farm arrangements are
being made for the accommodation of pupils for in-
struction in dairying and work suitable for the district
and climate.
In the dry Western country between Nyngan and
Bourke is situated an Experimental Farm, near Coola-
bah, where attempts are in progress to solve important
problems which may prove of the greatest value to
settlers in that climate, as well as to those in climates
somewhat similar but not so severely dry. Trials with
fodders, wheats, &0., are being carefully made, but
proper determinations cannot be arrived at until many
experiments have been carried through. About eight
miles from Bourke is situated a small experimental
farm at Pera, within the artesian basin, where irrigation
experiments are being made with the artesian water,
chiefly in connection with fruits, many of which, in-
cluding dates and oranges, so far, are thriving well.
At Berry, in the South Coast district, Shoalhaven
River, is situated the small farm used as a stud farm,
for a number of dairy cattle of different kinds imported
from England a few years ago by the Agricultural
Department, for the purpose of infusing new blood
into the dairv herds. Here advanced students in
*/
dairying can obtain instruction at a large dairy factory
in the vicinity, where butter is manufactured by means
of the most improved appliances. Such are the experi-
mental farms at present carrying out a vast number of
important investigations which cannot fail to produce
an important factor for future guidance, and the wel-
fare of our agricultural population directly, and the
whole community indirectly. There are also Experi


mental Farms at Cowra, Glen limes, Grafton, Moree,
and a viticultural station at Howlong.
It is a pleasing thing to record here that the
greatest interest is taken in the operations carried on at
the Hawkesbury Agricultural College and departmental
farms annually by hundreds. Every information asked
fo r is afforded, and fr.se access is given everywhere. The
object lessons prove infinitely superior to all the in-
structions in writing that could possibly be given ; the
things themselves are there in full view, and there is
no possible mistake. Here, perhaps, can be seen a
huge board, and printed upon it will be Ten acres,”
kind of manure used, so and so, cost Is. and 9d. per
acre. Another board with ” Ten acres, no manure,”
and so on, and the final results, with full particulars of
temperature, rainfall during progress of crop, and also
prior to sowing, with amount of seed sown, and every
particular that could be desired can always be supplied
by the manager. Full particulars of all experiments
and trials being carried on at these huge agricultural
educational establishments would necessitate the pub-
lication of a large volume. Thanks to the Railway
Commissioners, special concessions are made, by which
parties of farmers, not less than six, are conveyed from
any part of the colony to any of these farms at a single
fare for the return journey.
At headquarters, in Sydney, the reins are gathered
together, and the departmental work is administered by
the Hon. S. W. Moore, Minister for Agriculture, the
Under Secretary being Mr. E. F. Pittman, A.R.M.S.,
wi th Mr. W. S. Campbell, Director of Agriculture. In
this office the Chemist, his bacteriological and other
assistants, carry on a vast number of most valuable
and important investigations, analyse soils, manures,
determine the strength and value of flours and wheats,
and answer innumerable questions relating to various
subjects.
The Pathologist, the Entomologist, the Fruit Expert,
the Dairy Expert, the Viticultural Expert also carry on
their work, when in town, at headquarters. The Vege-
tation Diseases Act, and also the Stock Acts, are ad-
ministered by the Minister for Agriculture, under
«/ v) '
whom, also, the Export Board has its shelter. The
departmental vehicle for the dissemination of valuable
information amongst the farmers and settlers is the
Agricultural Gazette , which has a monthly circulation
of about 7,000 copies, and is edited by Mr. Percy
Hunter and Mr. F. G. Chomley.
Few persons who read this are probably aware of
the numerous duties carried out under the Department
of Agriculture, or of the extensive field of its
operations ; but its present work is nothing compared
to that which clearly lies before it. When agriculture
becomes properly recognised as the true backbone and
the true dependence of the Commonwealth, the value
of an energetic Department of Agriculture will be
better realised. By degrees the greater part of New
South Wales will be diverted to agriculture, for the
huge pastoral areas must, in the nature of things, give
way to smaller agricultural holdings. The important
pioneer work the pastoralists have effected has pre-
pared the way for a more dense population, which, like
the flocks and herds of the old times, will not submit
to temporary boundaries, but swirl over and over
huge areas now devoted entirely to pasture. The
flocks and herds will by no means become less —rather
on the contrary, they will increase, perhaps enormously,
but under different conditions ; and not only will they
increase, but will improve as necessity may demand.
Not to-day, nor to-morrow, but gradually, perhaps
very gradually, come they will, and before another
century has rolled away the change will occur, in-
finitely greater than ever before, probably fostered and
brought about, to a considerable extent, through the
agency of the combined efforts of the Departments of
Agriculture
His Excellency Governor Phillip had a hard row
indeed to hoe when he attempted to initiate agriculture
in New Holland, or New South Wales, with the extra-
ordinary material at his command.
The first work performed was the planting of seeds
and plants obtained on the voyage from England at
Rio de Janeiro and the Cape of Good Hope. These
consisted of coffee plants and seeds, cocoa (coco ?) in
the nut, cotton seed, banana plant, oranges (various
sorts, both seeds and plants), guava seeds, tamarind,
prickly-pear with cochineal on it, eugenia, ipecacuanha
(three sorts), jalap, the fig tree, bamboo, Spanish reed,
sugarcane, vines of various sorts, quince, apple, pear,
strawberry, oak, myrtle.
“ Some ground having been prepared,” wrote
Judge-Advocate Collins, “ near his Excellency’s house
on the east side” —of the present Circular Quay—
“the plants were safely brought on shore, and the
new settlers soon had the satisfaction of seeing the
grape, the fig, the orange, the pear, and the apple,
those delicious fruits of the old, taking root and estab-
lishing themselves in the new world.” The farm con-
tained about nine acres. This historical spot, the birth-
place of Australian farming, is situated on the margin
of the little creek which still trickles through our Bo-
tanic Gardens. It has been converted by art into one
of the most beautiful places in the world. Probably
no better situation in the world than that selected by
Phillip could have been chosen as a site for a city ;
but it would not have been easy to find a more unsuit-
able place on which to begin agricultural operations.
Phillip soon found out that, in order to make the
settlement self-supporting and successful, it was abso-
lutely necessary that a proper class of persons —those
who understood something about farming—should be
induced to settle in the colony. Accordingly, he urged
and strongly urged, then and frequently afterwards,
that proper settlers should be encouraged to emigrate.
Dissatisfied with prospects of obtaining any good
results with his attempts at farming amongst the rocks
and stones about Sydney, Phillip made excursions
inland, and found a place he considered to be suitable
“ near the head of the harbour,” or, as it is now called,
the Parramatta River. This place he named Rosehill,
and afterwards Parramatta.
Progress seems to have been highly satisfactory at
Rosehill, where Tench found, on visiting it during the
middle of November, thatabout 1788, 200 acres of land
had been cleared and cultivated —fifty-five in wheat,
barley, and a little oats, thirty in maize, and the re-
mainder cleared or occupied by buildings, gardens.
&c. In December, 1789, the wheat was harvested and
found to be very good ; 200 bushels wheat and 60
bushels barley, a small quantity of flax, Indian corn,


PRODUCTS OF THE HAWKESBURY AGRICULTURAL COLLEGE.
169
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


and oats, all of which was preserved for seed. Phillip,
being quite dissatisfied with the general results of his
farming venture, wrote to the Home authorities again,
urging the imperative necessity for good settlers. He
proposed to place any settlers who might emigrate
from England on the banks of the Hawkesbury, a river
which he had lately discovered in one of his excursions,
and where, at a place he named Richmond Hill, he
had observed some excellent land. At the same time
he had an acre of land cleared at Rosehill and put in
the possession of an emancipist, James Ruse, who was
promised a grant of thirty acres if he made farming a
success.
That Ruse soon succeeded is shown in Judge-
Advocate Collins 5 History, for that authority says :
Some time in March, 1781, James Ruse, the first
settler in this country, declared himself desirous of
relinquishing his claim to any further provisions from
the store, saying that he was able to support himself
by the produce of his farm.” But prior to this, on the
22nd February, 1790, Phillip granted him thirty acres
of land, including the cultivated area. This was the
first grant issued in Australia, and in this grant Ruse 5 s
land is described as “ Experiment Farm, 55 by which
name it is known in the locality to this day. The land
remains in much the same condition as when Ruse
laboured there ; and in the place he grew his little crops
some industrious Chinamen are now raising fine vege-
tables for market. Adjoining this farm is another
spot of as great historical interest as Ruse 5 s farm.
This is “ Elizabeth Farm, 55 owned originally by Cap-
tain John Macarthur.
Ruse afterwards obtained another grant at the
H awkesbury, where he became one of the first settlers.
This he sold and afterwards worked on the same farm
as labourer. He died at Cambelltown in 1837, where
his tombstone, in a good state of preservation, may be
seen. The successes of Ruse exercised a considerable
and beneficial influence on the progress of agriculture
in the infant colony. Hitherto doubts had been enter-
tained as to the capabilities of the land for farming
purposes. The Home Government had instructed
Phillip to afford every encouragement to non-commis-
sioned officers and men of the Marines to settle and
farm, and he was authorised to issue free grants of
100 acres to every non-commissioned officer and fifty
acres to private men, under certain easy conditions.
Settlers were to be encouraged also by free grants and
privileges ; but notwithstanding these inducements no
one seemed inclined to take advantage of them until
Ruse 5 s success was assured. Rain having fallen in
June, 1791, 116 acres of wheat were sown on the public
account at Parramatta. Up to that time the ground
was so hard and dry it was not possible to cultivate.
Another small settlement was established at Prospect
Hill in August about four miles from Parramatta and
another at 66 The Ponds, 55 about two miles north-east
of Parramatta.
In November Phillip reported that the settlers
were doing well, and that within four miles of Parra-
matta thirty-seven had been granted land from twenty
acres to 140 acres in extent each. The return of ground
in cultivation at Parramatta is given as follows
351 ac. 2 r. 5 p. in maize, 44 ac. 1 r. 8 p. in wheat, 6 ac.
1 30 p. in barley, 1 ac. in oats 2 ac. 0 r. 3 p. in pota-
toes, 4 ac. 2 r. not cultivated (cleared), 4 ac. 2 r. 15 p.
mostly vines, 6 ac. Governor garden (partly sown
with maize and wheat), 80 ac. garden ground belonging
to individuals, 17 ac. land in cultivation (N.S.W. Corps),
150 ac. cleared to be sown with turnips, 91 ac. 3 r. 2 p.
ground in cultivation by settlers, 28 ac. ground in cul-
tivation by officers (civil and military), 134 ac. en-
closed (timber thinned for feeding cattle.)
Notwithstanding Phillip 5 s expectations that the
crop sown in 1790 would prove a failure, the harvest
turned out to be satisfactory. “ Our last yearns crop
of maize, 5 ! 5 he reported, “ notwithstanding the long
drought, was 4.844 J bushels ; of which bushels
have been issued as bread for the colony, 695 bushels
reserved for seed and other purposes, and not less than
1,500 bushels were stolen from the grounds.”
In October, 1792, the Surveyor-General made an
accurate survey of the whole of the ground in culti-
vation by the Crown and settlers. There was under
wheat, acres ; barley, 24J ; maize, 1,1864 ; garden,
12li ; ground cleared of timber, acres ; being a
total of 1, acres. The area granted to settlers
amounted to 3,470 acres. By a vessel named the
“ Bellona 55 five settlers arrived at the end of 1792,
whom Grose settled upon a place between Sydney and
Parramatta, which was named Liberty Plains, some-
where about Homebush and Strathfield, The parish
still retains the name of Liberty Plains. This was given
to the settlement because those settlers were all free
people whose passages were paid by the Home Govern-
ment. An assortment of tools and implements were
also furnished them, and various other privileges.
The area of land granted from the time of Phillip’s
departure —11th December, 1792—until April, 1793,
“ amounted to 1,575 acres, 830 of which lay between
the towns of Sydney and of Parramatta, the Lieutenant-
Governor wishing and purposing to form a chain of
farms between these settlements. 55 Within this chain
were the “ Bellona 55 settlers at Liberty Plains, “ and
although they had only taken possession of their farms
about the middle of February, they had got some good
ground ready for wheat, and by their industry had
approved themselves deserving of encouragement 5 5
About Toongabbie 380 acres of wheat was sown in the
middle of July, and last season’s wheat having been
threshed showed the result to be from seventeen to
eighteen bushels per acre. The amount of wheat
raised by settlers turned out to be 1,381 bushels.
The settlement at the Hawkesbury increased con-
siderably, for in June, 1795, the Lieutenant-Governor
reported the number, with their families, to amount
to upwards of 400, and the farms extended thirty miles
on both sides of the river. They were a good deal
annoyed by the blacks, who went there in large num-
bers to plunder the settlers of the corn. The ground
sown with wheat on June 14th, 1795, was Govern-
ment, at Parramatta, 340 acres ; private, at Parra-
matta, 1.214 acres ; private, at Hawkesbury, 548 J
acres ; private, at Sydney, 618| acres ; total,
acres.
At the end of December, 1797, Governor Hunter
took a trip up the Hawkesbury by water, and arrived
at the main settlement on Ist January, 1797. A rate
of wages was fixed, or attempted to be fixed, in March


by the Governor, as follows ;—Falling forest timber, per
acre, 9s. ; falling brush ground, per acre, JOs. 6d. ;
burning off open ground, per acre, £1 ss. ; burning off
brush ground, per acre, £1 10s. ; breaking up new
ground, per acre, £1 4s. ; chipping fresh ground, per
acre, 12s. 3d. ; chipping in wheat, per acre, 7s. ; break-
ing up stubble or corn ground, l|d. per rod, or. per
acre, 16s. Bd. ; planting Indian corn, per acre, 7s, ;
hilling, Indian corn per acre, 7s. ; reaping wheat, per
acre, 10s. ; threshing, wheat per acre, 6d. ; yearly wages
tor labour, with board, £lO ; wages per week, with pro-
visions consisting of 4 lb. salt pork, or 6 lb. of fresh,
and 24 lb. of wheat, with vegetables, 6s. ; a day’s
wages, with board, Is., without board 2s, ; a day’s
wages to a Government man allowed to officers or
settlers in their own time, lOd.
At the end of 1798 the land in cultivation was—
in wheat, 4,658 acres ; maize, 1,453 acres ; and barley,
57 acres. In January, 1799, the continued drought
played havoc with the crops. The wheat proved little
better than chaff and the maize was burnt in the ground
for want of rain. No such heat and drought had been
experienced since the foundation of the colony. Writ-
ing to the Duke of Portland, Ist May, 1799, Hunter
stated that there had been no rain for ten months, the
whole country in a blaze of fire, pasturages for a time
destroyed, and streams of fresh water dried up.
The Governor forwarded the following to the Duke
of Portland :—“ At a meeting held at Hawkesbury this
14th day of January, 1800, by the undersigned inhabit-
ants from the different districts of the settlement
(Hawkesbury), the following average prices for labour
and other necessaries of life were considered and con-
cluded by them in a fair and impartial manner to have
been paid as follows ;—To wit—for the cultivation of
one acre of wheat as, by average computation, to
produce twenty-five bushels:—Cutting down and clear-
ing weeds, £1 ; breaking up and tilling the ground,
£1 6s. Bd. ; chipping or covering the wheat, and sowing,
£1 2s. ; reaping, £3 ; carrying home, stacking, and
thatching, £2 ; thrashing and carrying in the barn,
£2 2s. 6d. ; carriage to his Majesty’s store, porterage,
&c., £1 19s. 7d. ; one bushel and a half of seed, 15s. ;
total, £l3 ss. 9d. There is no allowance for first clear-
ing of the land in the above estimation which is, per
acre, £6. Prices of provisions are :—Wheat, per bushel,
10s. ; barley, Bs. ; maize, ss. ; sheep mutton, per lb., 2s ;
goat mutton. Is. Bd. ; fresh pork, Is. 6d. ; salt pork, Is, ;
potatoes from 16s. to 20s. per 100 lbs., and all other
kinds of vegetables proportionately dear.”
Ensign Cox, who was Paymaster to the New
South Wales Corps, and who purchased some of
the Cape merinos from Captain Waterhouse, was
another pioneer. He carried out farming to a con-
siderable extent at Brush Farm, which he had pur-
chased from the original settlers at the locality.
It lies about a mile to the west of the Eastwood
railway station, well situated, with extensive and
beautiful views from almost all parts. This well-
known old farm remained intact until comparatively
recently. In October. 1801, the Public Records de-
scribe the farm, Mr. Cox purchased from settlers
1,380 acres—4oo acres cleared, 248 acres wheat and
maize—24 horses, 20 head of horned cattle, 1,000
sheep, and 200 hogs.
Captain Cox, the grandfather of the Hon. G. 11.
Cox, M.L.C., purchased the Rev, Mr. Johnson’s farm,
known as Canterbury, which was described as adjoin-
ing Brush Farm ; but there seems to be some doubt
about the position, and it is possible that this Canter-
bury Farm was situated near George’s River, where
the present Canterbury exists.
On the arrival of Governor King it soon became
evident in the colony (to resume matters in connection
with consecutive events) that Governor King inter-
ested himself considerably in agriculture and its desir-
able progress by taking active steps to encourage
improvement. His efforts to promote the culture of
flax, for the purpose of establishing the manufacture
of linen met with success. In October, 1801, from a
small quantity of European flax, a sufficiency had
been grown to make 279 yards of fine and 36?|
of coarse linen “ Every woman who can spin has
been employed since October, 1800.” This manu-
facture of linen from colonial-growng flax, in the very
early days of the colony, will, doubtless, be read with
surprise by many ; and the fact that spinning was
carried on extensively by women here is interesting.
In August, 1804, nine looms were at work, turning
out 100 yards of linen weekly, and it was expected that
if the cultivation and manufacture continued so satis-
factorily the inhabitants could be supplied with all
the linen they might require. Two thousand one hun-
dred and sixteen yards, worth £264 10s., had been sold
to settlers in lieu of wheat. Indian hemp had been
tried and succeeded well, producing two crops a year-
In a long and valuable report by Governor King
on the state of the colony in 1801 appear the following
remarks: —‘‘Out of 10,800 acres of land cleared of
timber by individuals not more than 7,195 acres were
cultivated in 1800, and 8,421 in 1801, from whence it
will appear that many farms are totally deserted for
want of ability in the possessor to cultivate them.
The floods in February took away 3,589 bushels of
wheat and 588 acres of maize ; the floods in October
took away 484 acres of w r heat and 766 acres of maize
-making a loss of 12,269 bushels of wheat and 27 000
bushels of maize, besides a great quantity of stock,
dwellings, &c.”
There was a most plentiful harvest, March, 1802,
to the comfort of the colony. In June, 1802, King
reported that he had begun a new settlement at Castle
Hill, “which is doing extremely well ; the country and
soil being well adapted for agriculture.” The herds of
tame cattle were increasing so fast that new stock-
yards were constantly being erected. About this time
inducements were held out by the English Government
for free settlers to proceed to New South Wales, the
terms being : —“ A free passage and rations for each
member of a family ; a daily ration for each member of
a family for twelve or eighteen months after arrival ;
agricultural tools, two ewes, six bushels of wheat, and a
proportion of other seeds ; labour of two convicts for
eighteen months after arrival ; a certain aid towards
building a dwelling ; a grant of land of from 30 to 100
acres, or upwards, as means of clearing and cultivating
the grant maybe made to appear.” The Governor, on
7th August, 1803, reported agricultural progress to be
good, both at the Government farms at Castle Hill,
Toongabbie, and the Hawkesbury.and that the growing


crops amongst the settlers promised a great increase
everywhere. His returns for July 25th and 30th show
the number of acres sown with grain, pasture, and in
fallow to be :—The Crown, 82,099 acres ; Lieutenant-
Governor, 100 acres ; settlers, 125,476 acres.
George Caley, who was engaged as botanist and
collector, and whose services were paid for by Sir Joseph
Banks, throws a good deal of light on the methods of
farming about the end of 1803 in a most interesting
letter to Sir Joseph Banks :—“ On viewing the colony
from its commencement,” he wrote. cc to the present
time, I find its progress has not been rapid. I think,
I may venture to assert that it produced more supplies
for its inhabitants some years ago than it does now,
in proportion to the number at that time and at present.
The methods of farming is conducted upon a bad prin-
ciple, and carried on in a slovenly manner. I have
never seen any people weed their wheat, though it is
generally overrun with weeds ; particularly a species
of Lclium. In the cultivation of Indian corn they
succeed better, not owing to the management, but to
the nature of its growth. Barley I know but little
about, for I have not seen much cultivated, but what
there is is chiefly confined to the Hawkesbury. Oats
I do not know that they have yet cultivated, even
upon trial. They are generally a pest in wheat crops.
Hay is an article I have not seen attempted at, and
yet, in the winter, the cattle are half-starved. Garden-
ing, that useful branch so subservient to mankind, is
in an infant state. Potatoes were very bad and stink-
ing on my first coming here, but of late are much im-
proved ; and no doubt but if the seed was exchanged
often, and by proper attention, they will still improve.
Pampions and water-melons are much thought of.
Onions do not bear good seed, and this obliged to be
got from Norfolk Island, These are the chief vege-
tables in use. As for varieties, they are but in few
gardens. Apples seem to do well, and so do figs ; but
peaches are beyond expectation by succeeding so well,
and no doubt they will in a few years supply the colon-
ists with a good beverage, and, by proper management,
there is great hopes that culinary plants will be culti-
vated advantageously.”
From Caley’s report the free emigrants from Eng-
land did not turn out to be the persons needed : “ The
description of men that are most wanted are a few good
millwrights, colliers, and farmers who are well ac-
quainted with breeding cattle,” According to Gover-
nor King, in March, 1804, “ the general cultivation of
potatoes, as well as every other vegetable, the settlers
and inhabitants at large have, within the last two
years, attended more to than they have ever done
before, which has added greatly to the general com-
fort,”
The total number of settlers was 628, including
thirty-four officers ; and the total number of persons
employed in cultivation and belonging to the cultiva-
tion families was 2,820 out of a total population of
7,085. The increase of ground located to individuals was
11,208 acres, exclusive of that held by the Government,
making altogether 136,584 acres, and the increase of
ground under cultivation 1,847 acres. It is evident
that some favourable attention was being directed to
New South Wales in England at this time, for several
noteworthy capitalists emigrated Of these were the
well-known colonists John and Gregory Blaxland, who
agreed to settle in New South Wales and bring each
a capital of £6,000. on the condition of passages for
themselves and wives, with a grant of 8,000 acres of
land, with one convict for every 100 acres to clear and
cultivate it, “ to be clothed and victualled for eighteen
months, according to the custom of the colony.”
The wheat harvested in 1804 and stacked, it was
discovered during August, 1805, had been severely
attacked by a moth called the “ Fly Moth,’ 5 which
Mr. Froggatt thinks must have been the “ Wolf Moth,”
Tinea granella. This destroyed at least a third of the
last year’s wheat, and unfortunately, in October the
crop of wheat when in flower was badly attacked by
“ the blights and lightning later on the grain was
found to be injured by smut and rust. Consequently
the Governor had a large area of maize sown as a stand-
by.
In March, 1806, a terrible flood occurred at the
Hawkesbury, there having been continual rains from
January. It is said that wheat rose in price until it
reached 70s to 80s. per bushel. Bread at the Hawkes-
bury was 4s. 6d. to ss. per loaf, and barely procurable
at that price. Hardly any vegetables were obtainable,
and numbers of people were reduced almost to a state
of starvation. The Rev. Samuel Marsden estimated the
losses at the Hawkesbury at £30,000. In consequence
of severe losses of grain the Governor issued an official
order respecting the baking and delivering of bread by
the bakers. Amongst other matters was the following :
“ They are not to bake any cakes, biscuits, nor any
kind of pastry whatever, nor are any to be exposed for
sale, on penalty of £5 for each offence, and to have
their ovens taken down and their license and securities
forfeited.” Notwithstanding the losses of settlers at
the Hawkesbury they could not be prevailed upon to
abandon their farms, their contention being cc that one
good crop will repay two bad ones.”
In February, 1807, Governor Bligh found the har-
vest to be considerably short of that expected, attribut-
able to damage of seed-wheat by the “ Fly Moth ”
the season being so wet that a deaf of the seed rotted
in the ground —and also to the late Hawkesbury floods.
Five thousand and forty-six acres of wheat was sown
last season, which produced but 53.198 bushels, or a
little more than ten bushels to the acre. The Governor
fixed the price of wheat at 14s. 9d. per bushel, but the
farmers were slow at delivering at that rate. He also
offered cattle for wheat, and endeavoured to adopt
means to secure a sufficiency of wheat for future con-
sumption of persons under Government. The little
wheat brought to market realised from 20s. to 245. per
bushel. Bligh, who seemed to take much interest in
agriculture, purchased a farm for himself near Pitt
Town both for profit and example.
On Ist January, 1809, Lieutenant-Governor Colonel
Paterson took in hand the government of the colony,
and, at that time, agricultural matters continued much
the same as previously. Unfortunately, in August,
1809, another very severe inundation took place at the
Hawkesbury, causing great losses and damage to
properties. One farmer alone lost 300 head of wine,
100 sheep, 1,000 bushels of wheat, threshed or in stacks,


a stack of barley, besides other valuable property.
This flood attained a height of eighty-six feet above
ordinary level, and exceeded that of March. 1806, by
six or eight feet of perpendicular height. The district
about George’s River was inundated at the same time.
The statements made by Mr. W. C. Wentworth,
in his work on New South Wales during Governor
Macquarie’s term of office, afford a valuable insight
into the condition of agriculture about that time, thus :
“ The period at which this colony was able to raise
VIEWS ON THE BATHURST EXPERIMENTAL FARM.
At the end of this year Governor Macquarie arrived,
and during his twelve years of administration of the
colony many important events occurred which greatly
affected the future of the agricultural and pastoral
industries of New South Wales.
a sufficiency of grain for its consumption may be dated
so far back as 1804. The harvest of that year was so
abundant, and the surplus of grain so excessive, that
no sale could be had for more than one half the crop.
During the greater part of the following year wheat


sold at prices scarcely sufficient to cover the expense
of reaping, threshing, and carrying it to market ; pigs
and other stock were fed upon it, and these two years
of such extraordinary abundance involved the whole
agricultural body in the greatest distress. Grain was
then their only property, and it was of so little value
that it was invariably rejected by their creditors in
payment of their debts. Many who had till then
devoted their sole attention to agriculture, abandoned,
at this period, all tillage but such as was necessary for
the support of their households, and employed the
funds they had acquired by the former successful cul-
tivation of their farms in the purchase and rearing of
cattle. Many, again, abandoned their farms altogether,
and hired themselves as servants to such richer indi-
viduals as had occasion for their service ; while others,
and undoubtedly the greater part of them, cultivated
but a small portion of the land, and afterwards travelled
in search of labour till harvest time, at which period
they returned, reaped, threshed, and disposed of their
crops, and after recultivating the same spot, sought,
during the rest of the year, employment as before,
wherever it could be found ; and this is the mode of
life which a great number of the poorer settlers pursue
to this day.”
In a Parliamentary report of a Committee of the
House of Commons, 12th July, 1812, the population of
the colony of New South Wales was given as 10,454 ;
of this number 5,513 were men, 2,220 women, and
2,721 children, the land in cultivation amounting to
rather more than 21,000 acres and 74,000 were held in
pasture. Whilst in the territory Governor King paid
some attention to hops, and was anxious for the settlers
to engage in their cultivation. A plantation was made
by a Mr. Squires, of about five acres, situated about
midway between Ryde and Gladesville (formerly
Kissing Point and Tarban Creek). These succeeded
very well, for in 1812 they yielded 1,500 Ib. weight of
good hops.
The most important event which took place during
Governor Macquarie’s administration was the discovery
of means of crossing the hitherto impenetrable Blue
Mountain Range by Messrs. Wentworth, Blaxland and
Lawson, in May, 1813. Bass, as well as Caley, the
botanist, had attempted this some time previously,
but unsuccessfully. The Governor, on the 25th April,
1815, made his memorable journey over the mountains
by Mr. Cox’s road, accompanied by Mrs. Macquarie
and a large party. He arrived at Bathurst Plains on
4th May, and on 7th fixed on a site suitable for the
erection of a town, to which he gave the name of
Bathurst. Very soon the fertile country around
Bathurst became occupied by settlers, chiefly graziers,
and then Macquarie followed up the discovery of this
fine country by other explorations, one of which re-
sulted in the discovery of the Lachlan River. Further
important explorations by Surveyor-General Oxley
opened the way for a vast expansion of the pastoral,
and to a lesser degree that which should be, where
possible, its concomitant, the agricultural industry.
In May, 1816, another severe flood occurred at the
H awkesbury, and the water rose nearly as high as on
the last occasion. Great damage was done to the crops,
and wheat rose towards the close of the year to 31s,
per bushel, maize to 20s, per bushel, and potatoes to
31s. 6d. per cwt. About this time the value of land in
an advantageous position—such as proximity to a
town or river—was worth about 10s. per acre ; flooded
land double that sum ; but on the banks of the Hawkes-
bury, as far as the river was navigable, the land in a
state of nature was worth from £3 to £5 per acre, and
that which was in a state of cultivation from £8 to
£lO ; the latter, rental from 30s. to 60s. per acre.
A noteworthy event occurred in the year 1822, in
the establishment of a society designed the “Agri-
cultural Society of New South Wales,” on sth July.
4/ J
A few years later—on 22nd February, 1826—its name
was altered to that of “ Agricultural and Horticultural
Society.” During 1824 the Australian Agricultural
Company was founded in England, chiefly through the
instrumentality of Captain John Macarthur. The
primary object of the society, as stated in the proposals
agreed upon by its members and the Government was
the production of fine merino wool as an article of
export to Great Britain. In the next place, it was
proposed to promote —subordinate to the raising of
wool —the cultivation of the olive, vine, and such pro-
ductions as might appear best adapted to the climate
and soil ; to encourage and assist the immigration of
useful settlers and female servants ; to promote, to the
utmost of their power, a system of rural industry, and
to diffuse the knowledge and practice of the same
among all classes of the inhabitants. The capital of
the company, which proposed to effect so many and
such great objects, and to confer such benefits on the
colony, was £hooo,ooo sterling, divided into 100,000
shares at £lO each. In return for their outlay, and
their exertion in the promotion of the interests of New
South Wales in particular, and of the Empire in general,
they were to receive a grant of land in the colony to
the extent of 1,000,000 acres. The members of the
company included in their ranks the Attorney-General
and Solicitor-General of England, with twenty-eight
Members of Parliament, among whom were Mr.
Brougham and Mr. Hume, The land allotted to the
A. A. Company was held under letters patent until the
year 1847, when deeds of grant were issued. The first
selection made at Port Stephens amounted to 464,640
acres. Then selections were made at Warrah, county
of Buckland, 249,600 acres ; and at the Peel River,
near Tamworth, county of Parry, 313,298 acres. After-
wards, 2,000 acres were obtained at Newcastle, the
total area being 1,029,538 acres. The harvest in 1830
was one of the most abundant known.
Dr. Lang has given us an admirable account of the
condition of agriculture in the various settled districts
of the colony about the time of Governor Bourke’s
administration, i.e., 1831-7. ‘‘At the Hawkesbury,”
he says, “ wheat, year after year for twenty years, and
sometimes wheat and maize in succession, off the same
ground during the same year, is the sangrado system
of husbandry that prevails. The district of Hunter
River comprises a much larger extent of flooded land.
The land in this district is divided for the most part
into large farms of from 500 to 2,000 acres and upwards.
In this district grain—chiefly wheat and maize—is
cultivated to a great extent, but in the upper'parts of
the district, at a distance from the navigable part of


the river, the settlers depend chiefly on their flocks
and herds, and cultivate only so much grain as is re-
quisite for the supply of their respective establish-
ments. In ordinary seasons the return of wheat per
acre varies, according to the nature of the soil, from
fifteen to forty bushels. Forty-five and even fifty have
been heard of in the district of Argyle ; and Dr. Lang’s
brother’s crop, on the Hunter River, averaged one year
thirty-five bushels per acre. In the year 1836, when
there was a general failure of the crop from drought
over a considerable part of the territory, his brother
reaped 3,500 bushels of wheat from 150 acres of land.
Maize, at the time he wrote, could be obtained at the
Hunter at from Is. 6d. to 2s. fid. per bushel. The
cultivation must become more intense than at present,
when the vast areas of virgin soil now available have
been scratched over
In the year 1837, when Governor Bourke made
way for Sir George Gipps, the number of acres in crop
throughout New South Wales was 92.125; in 1838,
92 763; in 1839, 94,882; in 1840, 122,906; in 1841,
110,249; in 1842, 118,755; in 1843, 133,585; in 1844,
128,406; in 1845, 138,237; in 1846, 151,034; in 1847,
128,598; in 1848, 123,499; in 1849, 135,806; in 1850,
144,647 ;in 1851, 152,057. In the year 1841 the land
under produce was cropped as follows :—Wheat, 82,110
acres, producing 1,407,465 bushels ; maize, 25,017
acres, producing 707,053 bushels ; barley, 6,725 acres ;
POULTRY, SHEEP AND CATTLE ON THE WAGGA EXPERIMENTAL FARM.
average price for wheat per bushel in 1828 was 10s. BJd«
In 1829 it was 9s. 4d. :in 1830, 6s. s|d. ;|'iiff 1831, ss. 7d.;
in 1832, 4s. B|d. ; in 1833, 4s. 3fd. ; in 1834, Bs. 3d. ;
and in 1835, Bs. 6|d. Potatoes were by no means culti-
vated extensively, and were but little used by the
lower classes. Specimens of cotton, the produce of
New South Wales, have been manufactured with yarn
under the superintendence of a Scotch manufacturer,
in the city of Glasgow, and pronounced of superior
quality. The production of cotton, although the plant
has been found to thrive admirably in many parts of
the colony, has never been undertaken on a commercial
scale ; but it is not unreasonable to expect that it will
be when population becomes more dense, and when
oats 2,470 acres, producing 49,069 bushels ; rye, 245
acres, producing 4,891 bushels ; millet, 54 acres, pro-
ducing 731 bushels ; potatoes, 4,079 acres, producing
13,644 tons ; tobacco, 731 acres, producing 12,530 cwt. ;
hay, 30,625 acres, producing 38,605 tons. Indicating
how far the agricultural productions of the colony ten
years later was equivalent to the consumption of the
country, it may be mentioned that in 1851 the import
of breadstuffs and potatoes was in estimated value
£66,882, while that of exports of the same articles was
£22,856,
In 1838 a society was started in Sydney named
the Australian Floral and Horticultural Society, and
a copy of its fifth report, published 1844, is still in the


possession of Mr. P. L. C. Shepherd. M.L.C. Sir George
Gipps was patron, and Mr. Win. Macarthur was pre-
sident. Shows were held annually, and seem to have
been successful ; but the condition of this society did
not appear to be very flourishing. Its first show was
held in 1838 at Mr. Thos. Smart’s auction-rooms, and
was a great success. This society struggled along for
a time, and then another, named the Australasian
Botanic Society, was formed. Then, in 1854, the Hor-
ticultural Improvement Society was born, and his
Excellency Sir William Denison accepted the office ol
president. In 1856 the two societies, the Botanic and
Horticultural, amalgamated under the name of ‘‘ The
Australian Association for the Promotion of Agricul-
ture and Horticulture,”, such association to have for
its object the promotion in every way of the productive
capabilities of the soil. However, its name eventually
became “ The Australian Horticultural and Agricul-
tural Society.’ ’
A great effort was made by this society, backed
up by Sir William Denison, to establish a model or
experimental farm in the Domain at Parramatta,
where 200 acres was to be selected and set apart for
the purpose. The ambition of the society was to carry
this out without any expense to the country. A dinner
was held, and the sum of £9OO subscribed in the room,
but the scheme eventually fell to the ground from want
of necessary support, and, strange to say, there was a
deal of opposition to the project. Shows were held
periodically, but the efforts made to keep enthusiasm
alive proved futile, and in course of time the society
resolved itself into simply a horticultural society, in
which interest was kept up with difficulty. The agri-
cultural section seems to have been fanned up into life
as a separate institution, and was very strongly sup-
ported a few years later, and held some excellent ex-
hibitions —a particularly fine international one in 1870
—and then, with a few ups and downs, it blossomed into
the present Royal Agricultural Society, which has
become renowned, for its splendid annual exhibitions,
throughout the colonies.
Generally speaking, matters were not particularly
bright in the colony towards the close of 1858, and
prognostications made about that period were rather
dismal. The agricultural statistics for the last year
show a lamentable falling-off in the number of acres
under crop of wheat. In the year 1856 there were
106,124 acres; in 1857 only 89,195 acres; and the
product of the first year was 1,756,964 bushels, while
the product of 1857 was only 1,289,044 bushels.
The area of land under wheat in 1859 was 128,829
acres, an increase of 12,901 acres over that of the pre-
vious year. This area yielded 1.581,597 bushels, or at
the rate of twelve bushels to the acre. It was con-
sidered a low yield, attributable to severe floods during
the wheat season. The average yield of wheat during
the previous five years (1854 to 1858) was a little more
than fifteen bushels to the acre. In 1859 the yield
was only about half that required for consumption.
In the year 1825 the total area under wheat cultivation
in the colony was 45,5 1 acres ; in 1835 this had in-
creased to 79,256 acres ; it steadily increased to 163,979
acres in 1845 ; in 1855 the area was 171,100 J acres ; it
continued to increase, and in 1860 the quantity was
260,798 acres. In 1871 the total area under crop was
397,389 acres, and the produce was valued at
£2,220,000 ; in 1881 the increase was to 829,280, valued
at £3.829,660 ; the increase continued steadily to 1891,
when 852,704 acres were under crop, the produce of
which was valued at £4,136,887.
The continued increase in area has been well main-
tained—so much so that in 1899 the total area under
crop was 2,206,500 acres, valued at £4,827,700. The
seasons had been very unfavourable for two or three
years previous to this, severe droughts having pre-
vailed and which totally destroyed, or severely affected,
many of the most important wheat-growing districts
in the colony. A certain impetus to wheat-growing,
chiefly in the southern portion of the colony, has re-
sulted, within the last few years, from the “ share
system,” whereby several of the large landowners
make arrangements with farmers or others for the
growing of wheat on shares. The area of wheat unaer
cultivation in March, 1906, was 1,939,447 acres, yield-
ing 20,737,200 bushels.
The reader will remember that maize was relied
upon to a great extent for food at the very earliest
period of the colony ; tor when the wheat failed maize
was found to be a most useful substitute. Probably
nowhere else, not even in its American home, can
better maize be produced than in this colony, where
the yield, in the most favourable localities, is very
great, 80 to 100 bushels being by no means uncommon.
The general average is kept to its present limit by a
considerable quantity being grown in places where the
yield cannot be anything but light, owing to climate
and situation, but the quality of the produce of these
elevated districts is excellent. The Statistician gives
the average yield of the colony for the period 1863 to
1899—thirty-seven years —as 30 43 bushels per acre.
The average yield of maize in the United States for the
last thirty-four years—lß66 to 1899 —was 24'6 bushels
%J v
per acre, and the average value per bushel was Is. Bd.
In 1899 the average yield was 25‘3 bushels per acre—a
little higher than the general average.
For the year 1900, in New South Wales, which cor-
responds to 1899 in the United States, the yield was
27'8 bushels per acre—a difference in favour of this
colony of 2| bushels. The area under maize in 1848
was 20,222 acres, which produced 258,412 bushels ;in
1851 it was 25,017 acres, which produced 717,053
bushels. In 1860 this area had increased to
acres, which yielded 1,484,467| bushels. The average
area, 1863 to 1867, was 101,245 acres, which yielded an
average of 3,047,478 bushels. In the period, 1873 to
1877, the average area was 117.155 acres, yielding an
average per annum of 3,804,463 bushels. From 1883
to 1887 the average area was 127,416 acres, yielding
4,029,410 bushels. The area under maize in 1890 was
173,836 yielding 5,354.827 bushels ; and in 1899
the area under maize, which had reached its maximum
in 1897 with 211,382 acres, with a yield of 5,754,217
bushels, had receded to 193.286 acres, yielding 6,064,842
bushels, and in March, 1906, the area stood at 189,353
acres, yielding 5,539,750 bushels.
Of barley and oats for grain, we produce but a
comparatively small quantity ; however, in view of
the admirable quality of our malting barley produced


in some districts, which are exceptionally well adapted
tor its growth, an effort has lately been made by brewers
to induce a more extensive cultivation of this cereal.
In 1848 the area under barley was 5,954 acres, which
produced 108,816 bushels ; in 1851 the area had in-
creased to 6,725 acres, producing 133,944 bushels ; in
grain, although more largely cultivated than barley,
are not grown to a very considerable extent. In 1848
the area under oats was 4,252 acres, producing 37,866
bushels ;in 1851 but 2,470 acres were under crop, pro-
ducing 49,069 bushels ; in 1860 the area had increased
to 6,534| acres, producing 98,814 bushels. In the
CHERRIES.—WAGGA EXPERIMENTAL FARM.
1860 barley had fallen to 2,860 acres, producing 39.801 J
bushels. In 1891 the area had risen to 4,937 acres,
producing 81,383 bushels ; in 1900, 7,154 acres were
in cultivation, producing 132,476 bushels ; and in 1906
9,519 acres producing 111,266 bushels. Oats for
period 1863 to 1867 the area under oats averaged
12,592 acres, producing an average of 204,979 bushels ;
1883 to 1887 the average area was 20,032 acres, pro-
ducing an average of 460,003 bushels. In 1890 the
area under oats was 22,358 acres, which produced


543,330 bushels ; and in 1899 an area of 19,874 acres
produced 461,784 bushels. During the year 1900, to
31st March, there was an increase of area under oats,
it being 29,125 acres, producing 554,048 bushels, and in
1906 38,543 acres produced 883,081 bushels. The hay
crops grown for year ending March, 1906, of wheat,
barley, oats and lucerne, yielded 459,182 tons off
438,036 acres.
The cultivation of the potato has never been so
extensive as might be expected, considering the many
places well suited for its growth. Enormous yields of
potatoes have been obtained in some districts ; but
being remote from a market, with no railway com-
munication, it has been found useless to grow them,
except for local consumption. In the year 1848 the
total area under the potato crop was but 3,197 acres,
which produced 7,614 tons ; in 1851 the area had in-
creased to 4,079 acres, producing 13,644 tons ; in 1860
there was a further increase to 9,228| acres, which
produced 28,127| tons. During the period 1861 to
1872 the average annual area under this crop was
15,552 acres, which produced an average annual yield
of 39,465 tons. In the period 1888 to 1892 the average
area was 19,170 acres, producing an annual average of
52,693 tons ; in the year 1899 the area had increased to
27,978 acres, which produced 61,900 tons, or an average
of 2‘21 tons per acre, and in March, 1906, 26,374 acres
produced 50,086 tons.
The cultivation of peas, beans, and other legumes,
except lucerne, is insignificant, except in market gar-
dens for use in a green condition. The chief leguminous
crop grown in this colony is lucerne, the value of which,
as a fodder, is becoming more and more recognised.
It has been grown for very many years, and for a long
time was chiefly confined to the Hunter River district
and to Tamworth. At both these places, on the allu-
vial river flats, the lucerne grows to perfection. At
the Hunter no fewer than eight cuttings are generally
obtained in the course of the year, producing about
seven tons of dry lucerne hay per annum per acre in
good seasons, and four in bad seasons, averaging about
five tons all through. At Tamworth, and other locali-
ties of milder climate, returns are not quite so heavy.
At this place the seed raised is renowned for its quality,
and consequently in much demand. At Mudgee a good
deal of lucerne is grown for hay, and throughout the
colony, even in the dry districts, extensive areas are
sown with lucerne for pastoral purposes. Large areas
are cultivated for wheat for a season or two, and then
lucerne is sown and thrives well, provided it once has
a good start. The area of land laid down with lucerne
for hay has been steadily increasing for the last ten
years; for in 1891 the acreage under crop was 20,014
acres, which produced 44,536 tons of hay ; in 1900 the
area had increased to 32,362, which produced 73,363
tons. The average yield for the colony for the last
ten years was 2*3 tons to the acre. In March, 1906,
the area under cultivation was 33,562 acres, producing
59,090 tons.
Some attention has been given by farmers to the
cultivation of such plants as rye, millets, pumpkins,
and so on, ever since the establishment of the colony,
with more or less success, according to season and the
skill applied in producing them. As a rule, small
things are avoided, especially small things which give
a good deal of trouble, but which may be more profit-
able by far than the “ big 5 ’ crops, such as wheat,
maize, sugarcane, dairying, and so on ; but there are
indications that the settlers are inclined to produce
something else but the one crop, and this is becoming
apparent with respect to poultry.
The breeding of poultry for market has within a
very short period improved immensely, and is being
entered upon systematically by many persons as a sole
means of support, as well as by farmers as an adjunct
to their usual productions. In 1897 a small start was
made by the Export Board as an experiment by send-
ing a few samples of poultry to London. This was so
successful that next year, 1898, the number of 17,307
head was sent, value £2,164 ; in 1899 the number sent
was 23,107 head, value £3,000 ; and in 1900 40,000
head, value £6,700, were sent. As there is a great
demand in England for birds of a certain quality,
it is probable that this trade may, in a few years,
attain enormous dimensions.
The minor branches of agriculture will become
more and more recognised the more the rural popu-
lation increases ; and there are indications that this is
gradually taking place, judging from the numerous
inquiries made to the Department of Agriculture.
The potentialities of our soils and climates are so great
that, whenever the time comes for an effort to be de-
sirable, any sort of produce can be raised. There is
good reason to hope for a good future in the raising of
raw products of all sorts, such as ramie, sisal hemp,
jute, flax, cotton, hemp, and silk. Proof has suffi-
ciently well established the fact that these can be raised
here of most excellent quality.
A good instance of the value of small things which
are but too often neglected in the colony, is illustrated
in the attention of late years directed to the useful
little honey-bee, which is gradually but surely creeping
into general favour with the settlers. Here and there,
in different parts of the colony, may be seen* many
little collections of beehives, and in not a few instances
such collections are the sole means of the support of
their owners. Statistics show how great is the quan-
tity of the honey already produced in the colony,
although this industry is but yet in its infancy. In
1894 there were 44,693 productive, and 8,790 unpro-
ductive, hives of bees ; the yield of honey amounted
to 1,139,557 lb, weight, and also 39,242 lb. weight of
beeswax, the yield of honey averaging 25*5 lb. weight
per hive. In 1900 there were 48,997 productive, and
9,813 unproductive, hives, which produced 2,795,141 lb.
weight of honey and 55,988 lb. weight of beeswax, the
average yield of honey being 57 lb. weight, and in
1906 36,548 productive hives and 12,043 unproductive,
producing 1,841,236 lb. honey and 39,620 lb. of
beeswax. Besides their value as producers of honey
and wax, bees are of great use as pollinators to our
horticulturists, for without their assistance losses may
frequently occur in deficiency of the supply of fruits
and some varieties of vegetables.
The early settlers about Sydney very soon dis-
covered that many kinds of fruit succeeded well, par-
ticularly peaches and oranges ; but they had difficulties
with grape vines, which, under modern treatment, do


not now occur in the production of the fruit, for certain
kinds are so plentiful during the height of the season
that frequently grapes can be retailed for from Id. to
3d. per lb., although, at the same time, grapes of the
best quality are retailed at from 6d. to Is., or even
more, per lb. So it is with all other kinds of fruit, for
from that of inferior, or even fairly good, to that of the
best quality a remarkable difference in price exists ;
and even during the time of glut, superior fruit in-
variably demands a high price.
The orange, which thrives well in all the warmer
parts of the colony, even in its dry western limits,
when sufficient moisture is available for its require-
ments, has long been the fruit chiefly relied upon, and
it is that which is most largely exported. The reasons,
probably, are that it has proved most profitable. It
will stand a good deal of rough carriage, and it thrives
well within a short distance of the metropolis and port
of shipment. From the earliest times it has been
grown about Sydney, chiefly around Kissing Point
(a name now all but forgotten), about Dundas, Pennant
Hills, Castle Hill, and Baulkham Hills. Of late years
its cultivation has extended to the Kurrajong, Dural,
Kenthurst, and other places, all still within easy dis-
tances of Sydney. Some of the best oranges are grown
about the Paterson River, the Bulga, the Manning
River, and, to a small extent, along the coast. Under
irrigation, splendid specimens have been produced in
the Bourke district, and also in many places at head
stations in the dry western country, where a sufficient
supply of water is available. In the year 1879 the area
of orchards devoted to the orange was 4,289 acres.
In 1891 this had increased to 11,288 acres, in 1900 to
14,389 acres, and in 1906 to 17,849 acres ; and there
are prospects that this would be largely increased
if an export trade to Great Britain can be established.
Oranges have been sent successfully, but several large
shipments have been failures, However, in view of
the success attained in other countries with the car-
riage of this fruit to long distances by sea, even as
general cargo, there is every reason to think that
before long present obstacles may be successfully
overcome. In the western districts, under irrigation,
in the driest climate we have, excellent fruits of
many kinds can be produced. The orange thrives
admirably ; and should an export trade in oranges
to Europe be brought into effect, it is possible
that the most magnificent oranges may be produced
within the great artesian basin area. Little more than
one hundred years ago oranges sold in Sydney at six-
pence each. A short time ago fine samples of oranges
from California sold in Sydney at sixpence each.
In the vicinity of Sydney, and for miles around,
many other kinds of fruit besides oranges are grown
which are perfectly at home ; of these the peach, nec-
tarine, persimmon, Japanese plum, grapes, figs, quince,
'oquat, and passion fruit are most generally planted,
although several varieties ol pears and apples succeed
well, and some kinds of apricots. All about the Great
Dividing Range, which forms the watershed between
the eastern and the western waters, generally known
as the tableland, apples, cherries, pears, apricots, goose-
berries raspberries, strawberries, plums, and, indeed,
all fruits from cool and temperate climates thrive to
great perfection. Further to the west and south-west,
grapes, figs, almonds, apricots, raisin grapes, &c,, suc-
ceed splendidly ; and to the north, in the coastal dis-
tricts, pineapples, mangoes, bananas, passion fruits,
strawberries, and other warm-climate fruits are grown
in great excellence. From this it may be supposed
that it is indeed a difficult matter to name many eco-
nomic fruits that will not succeed in New South Wales.
Should we ever be pinched for the want of tea we can
grow it here very well ; and as for coffee, there would
be no difficulty in meeting all demands should outside
supplies cease.
About fifty years ago old Mr. Scott (he lived to
the age of about 112 years), of Brisbane Water, who
was well known in connection with sugarcane
cultivation, used to grow bananas, for which he re-
ceived sixpence each in Sydney. To-day we can obtain
in the fruit-shops, retail, good Fiji, South Sea Island;
and Queensland bananas at threepence per dozen,
and this very day, in the street, two dozen excellent
bananas for the same money, in any quantity, are
being retailed. In the year 1898 we imported bananas
to the value of £59,709. These bananas are distributed
about the country to the most .outlying places, hun-
dreds of miles inland. In the year ending 31st March,
1899, the total value of fruit imported was £333,336,
whilst the value of that raised in the colony is computed
at £316,000 by the Statistician. In the year 1860 we
exported 33,222 packages of fruit, valued at £61,545,
In 1898 we exported 590,620 packages, valued at
£132,240, and imported 423,887 packages, valued at
£133,557.
The total area in the colony devoted to fruit-
growing in 1906 was as follows : —Oranges, productive,
15,054 acres ; unproductive, 2,795 acres ; other fruit,
25,798 acres ; not bearing, 3,577 acres. The orangeries
produced a total of 738,744 cases. Other fruits pro-
duced £189,195, an average of £7 10s. per acre.
Vegetables can be grown to great perfection in the
colony, but their cultivation has almost entirely fallen
into the hands of Chinese gardeners, who grow for size
or weight without respect to quality. The total area
devoted to market gardening in 1900, to 31st March.,
was 7,748 acres ; besides this, 448 acres was under
green peas ; 280 acres for the production of dry peas
and beans ; 4,635 acres under pumpkins and melons.
The value of produce of market gardens was £185,472,
an average of £23 19s, per acre. The green-pea pro-
duction was valued at £15,464 ; and the pumpkins and
melons at £14,390.


Mr. EDWARD FISHER PITT-
MAN, A.R.S.M., Under Secretary
for Mines, Government Geologist
and Warden, was born in Melbourne
on the 31st July, 1849, and was a
pupil in the Scotch College, and
whilst there passed the Civil Service
Examination. From the college he
entered the laboratory of the Geo-
logical Survey Department, Victoria,
and during three-and-a-half years he
obtained a good knowledge of ana-
lytical chemistry and mineralogy. On
the abolition of that Department
Mr. Pittman spent two or three years
mine surveying, and in 1873 visited
England and entered as a student at
the Royal School of Mines, London,
taking the usual three-years’ course,
and securing first-class passes in all
Kerry & Co.
MR. E. F. PITTMAN.
subjects contained in the curriculum.
In the first year he was successful in
winning a scholarship, and in the last
was awarded the Associateship of the
Royal School of Mines. The subjects
of study included chemistry (under
Professor Frankland), mechanical
drawing (Professor Edgar), applied
mechanics (Professor Goodeve),
mineralogy (Professor Sir Warring-
ton Smyth), physics (Professor
Guthrie (father of the present
chemist to the Agricultural Depart-
ment of New South Wales), geology
(Sir Andrew Ramsay), metallurgy
and assaying (Dr. Percy). Returning
again in 1876, to Sydney, he secured
an appointment in the Lands Depart-
ment, as a temporary draughtsman.
In 1878 he was promoted to the
position of Geological Surveyor;
that office he filled until 1880, when
he resigned in order to take charge
of the Bendigo School of Mines. A
year after an offer was made to
him to return to his former position
in the public service of New South
Wales. The offer was accepted. In
1883 Mr. Pittman was appointed
Chief Mining Surveyor, a position
he occupied until 1891, when on the
death of Mr. Wilkinson, he was
appointed Government Geologist.
In 1892 he was made Lecturer on
Mining at the Sydney University,
and on the transference of Mr. D. C.
McLachlan to the Commonwealth, he
was chosen to become Under Secre-
tary for Mines and Agriculture, and
at the same time fill the position
of Government Geologist. , Mr.
Pittman is a member of the Loyal
Society of New South Wales, to
which he has contributed several
papers. In literature he has done
some useful work, his principal con-
tribution being a valuable book
entitled “The Mineral Resources of
New South Wales.” Besides that
volume he has produced many mining
reports and official publications.
Mr. H. W. POTTS was born in
the vale of the Tyne, Northumber-
land, England, in 1855, and was
educated at Newcastle-on-Tyne.
He first arrived in Queensland,
and after spending a few years there
in the practice of his profession, he
went to Victoria, where, on the in-
auguration of the present dairy
industry and factory system of butter-
making, his services were secured by
the dairy associations, as a Con-
sulting Chemist, to introduce the
system of payment by results, Pas-
teurisation and other scientific aids
to the new industry. He subse-
quently joined the Department of
Agriculture, as a scientific instruct-
or in dairying. During this period
he was engaged at the Melbourne
University, with Doctors Cherry and
Bull, in bacteriological research
work, relating to the preservation
and export of dairy products. At
the request of the late Sir Edward
Braddon, he visited Tasmania and
organised the dairying service of
that island, and was one of the band
of teachers who assisted Mr. F.
Tate, Director of Education, to suc-
cessfully introduce Summer Schools
for Teachers in Australia. In 1898,
Sir George Turner, then Premier of
Victoria, appointed Mr. Potts to the
Royal Commission to inquire into
the administration of the mining,
agricultural, trades and arts
schools of the State, and to report
upon the question of technical edu-
cation generally in its relation to
mining, agriculture, dairying, and
manufactures, in order to provide a
better system of graduated technical
instruction. This occupied three
years. He was appointed editor of
the “Journal of rhe Department of
Agriculture.” He occupied a seat on
the board appointed to inquire into
faulty methods of manufacture and
other causes alleged to be lowering
Falk.
MR. H. W. POTTS.
the quality of exported dairy products.
In 1902, Mr. Potts was offered and
accepted the position of Principal of
the Hawkesbury Agricultural College.
This useful institution under his
direction has rapidly grown and
developed. In addition a Summer
School has been founded for a hun-
dred teachers to attend during the
mid-summer holidays. A mid-winter
course of training in live stock and
agriculture of four weeks is provided
annually for a hundred farmers. He is
a Fellow of the Chemical Society,
London, Fellow of the Humane
Society, London, and has contributed
largely to the agricultural literature
of the Commonwealth.


FORESTRY.
New South Wales is one of the most richly-en-
dowed countries in the world as regards its forest
wealth. With a small population, it possesses large
areas of practically virgin forest ; and in many places
as the trees are cut out numbers of young trees are
coming forward and flourish without hindrance, thus
ensuring the stability of supply. Its woods are as
varied as they are valuable, ranging from the iron-
barks, unmatched for hardness and durability, to
kinds suitable for the most delicate work. With the
development of settlement came the ruthless destruc-
tion of the best specimens of brush and hardwood ;
and this led in 1871 to the first timber reserves, to pro-
tect the forests of the Murray River and Clarence
districts, being proclaimed. The office of Forest Ranger
was created in 1875. Regulations were first made
regarding the cutting and use of timber, and a small
branch was established for administration purposes
in the year 1877. The State was subdivided into a
number of forest districts, and these were inspected
and controlled by forest rangers, who are
assisted by the mounted police force. In its
earlier stages this branch was attached to the
Lands Department ; in September, 1878, it
was transferred to the Department of Mines ;
on January 1, 1888, it was again attached to
the Department of Lands ; on April 17, 1889,
it was proclaimed a department and taken
over by the Colonial Secretary ; but breaking
down under the expense of management, on
May 2nd, 1892, it was again transferred to
the Department of Mines, and in October,
1897, it was attached to the Department of
Lands, where for the present it remains.
The Forest Conservation Branch is charged
with the direction of a State forest nursery, 65
acres in extent, at Gosford, where the acclima-
tisation of valuable foreign timbers, and the
conservation of such of the best indigenous
trees likely to disappear receive attention. For
the purposes of a museum where the timber resources
of the State can be displayed the old hospital buildings
in the Domain are utilised, but the lack of adequate
space precludes anything in the shape of elaboration,
and restricts exhibits to the severely useful. So far
as the timber areas of the State have been brought
under official rule, four zones have been marked
off. One time it was sufficient to accept the
Dividing Range as the boundary ; later the country
was divided into brush forests and open forests ; but
now the official map shows four zones of timber-pro-
ducing districts, with much space still uncharted.
The coastal zone runs from south to north the full
length of the coastline ; the brush zone begins about
Dungog, and runs north-east to the Queensland border ;
the highland zone runs the full length of the State from
south to north, and is greater in area than both the
others taken together, while the zone of interior
timber covers about twice the area of the three
zones named. A rough estimate shows that the
forest lands of New South Wales comprise fully
20,000,000 acres, of which only about one-third have
been examined and reserved for the perpetuation of
timber supplies.
The timber industry of the Commonwealth comes
to about £3,000,000 a year —that is to say the raw
material only,—and of this the output of New South
Wales represents one-fifth. In 1904 this State ex-
ported £28,274 worth of its share of this primary
wealth ; but in the same year it imported £565,615
worth from outside. Some idea of the opulence of
New South Wales in valuable timber is realised from
the fact that there are sixty varieties of trees of high
commercial value, almost one-half of which are hard-
woods. Yet the value of the industries founded on
our timbers comes to only a few shillings per head of
the population. In forestry pure and simple 1653 per-
sons were employed at the census of 1891, and 2.431
at that of ten years later. This partly explains the
fact that the people of the State import more timber
per head than they do tea ; it comes to Id. per head of
HAULING TIMBER.
intoxicants, timber being 7s. lOd. per head, apart from
the manufactured article. The principal commercial
timbers include the following twenty-six varieties
Ironbarks : White, red, narrow-leaved and broad-
leaved. Stringybarks : White, red, mountain and mess-
mate. Pale Hardwoods ; White mahogany, blackbutt,
tallow-wood, grey box, yellow box, mountain ash,
spotted gum, and mountain gum. Red Hardwoods :
Red mahogany, grey gum, blue gum, forest red gum,
Murray red gum, Sydney blue gum, red box, woollybutt
and bloodwood. Intermediate Hardwoods : Brush box
and turpentine. The remaining timbers include the
following classifications : —Cedars, &c. : Red cedar
rosewood, red bean, onionwood, white beach, colonial
pine, brown pine, cypress pine. Oak class : Silky oak,
beefwood, needlewood, honeysuckle and she oaks
Black bean, &c. : Black bean, myall, blackwood, briga-
low and yarran. Miscellaneous brush timbers : Tulip-
wood, muskwood, cudgerie, yellow-wood, native teak,
blueberry ash, holly gum, maiden’s blush, red ash,
sassafras, coachwood and marara.


HEWING SLEEPERS.
182
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


WATER CONSERVATION AND IRRIGATION.
There are few countries in the world where greater
necessity exists than in New South Wales for the con-
servation of water and the development of irrigation,
in order to combat the disastrous effects of periodical
droughts ; there are still fewer countries where less has
been practised in these directions. Until recent years
comparatively nothing was done —either by the State
or through individual effort. In the State the irrigable
area of land suitable for agriculture, if water were
available, exceeds 43,000,000 acres, and, owing to the
absence of large quantities of water, the proportion
possible for reclamation by irrigation, though small in
comparison with the total extent of the irrigable area,
is capable of sustaining a large population. While the
settlement of the Eastern division depends only in a
small measure upon the question of water conservation
and irrigation, the Central division, and in a larger
degree the Western division, of the State can only be
permanently settled with safety by a proper system of
water conservation and utilisation of the available
supply, whether it be derivable from the surface or
underground. So far as fair seasons prevailed the
people were content to continue on under existing
conditions, but the recurrence of periods of drought
has brought home to the settlers the necessity for
protecting themselves against bad seasons, and the
intermittent agitation for schemes of water conser-
vation and utilisation, maintained for the past twenty
years, is going to now bear good fruit.
The pioneer work in connection with water con-
servation was made in 1866, when £2,900 was spent in
sinking wells, so as to render practicable the route from
the Darling to the Lachlan and the Warrego. Tanks,
dams and wells were constructed from time to time
from 1866 to 1884, the total expenditure in developing
the western stock routes being £115,000. Public
attention, it may be said, became aroused in 1884,
when a Royal Commission was appointed, under the
presidency of Mr. (now Sir W- J ) Lyne, “ to make a
diligent and full inquiry into the best method of con-
serving the rainfall, and of searching for and develop-
ing the underground reservoirs supposed to exist in
the interior of this colony, and also into the piactica-
bility, by a general system of water conservation and
distribution, of averting the disastrous consequences of
the periodical droughts to which this colony is from
time to time subject.” This commission, which re-
mained in existence for a period of four years, dealt
with the subject in a very exhaustive manner, and
issued three valuable reports, the particulars in which
formed the nucleus of the mass of reliable data that has
since been collected. Two prominent features marked
the work of the commissioners—(l) the utilisation of
the waters of the Murray, and (2) the possibilities of
storing water on the Murrumbidgee for distribution on
the plains below Narrandera- Following the work of
this commission, the Department of Works went on
preparing data from which other schemes were evolved,
but nothing was done to focus matters until 1897,
when the Government of the day arranged with Colonel
Horne, an Indian officer of large experience, to visit
the colony and to report upon these various schemes,
and generally upon the prospects of water conservation
and irrigation. Colonel Horne selected two projects
as those most likely to prove successful. These were :
A canal leaving the left bank of the Murrumbidgee,
below the off-take of the Yanko Creek, and a canal
from the right bank of the Murray River at Bungo-
wannah, seven miles below Albury. He recommended
an alteration of the site of off-take of the Murrum-
bidgee canal, and in both projects the provision of
storage to ensure the maintenance of a permanent
supply. On the suggested storage sites —at The Gull,
Umaralla River, and Barren Jack —he remarked re-
garding the latter, cc this site has the advantage cf
being much nearer to the proposed off-take of the
canal than either of the other two, and appears likely
to prove also the cheapest.” The next development
of public import took place in 1902, when the Corowa
Conference was convened by the Murray River Water
Canal League. At this a number of prominent states-
men were present, including the Prime Minister of the
Commonwealth and the Premiers of New South Wales,
Victoria and South Australia ; and as a direct result of
the proceedings the Royal Interstate Commission on
the Murray River question was appointed for the pur-
pose of inquiring and reporting into the conservation
and distribution of the waters of the River Murray
and its tributaries for the purposes of irrigation, navi-
gation and water supply, and to report on the just
allotment of the waters of the Murray basin to the
use of the States affected. The commissioners were
Mr. Joseph Davies, M.LC.E., Under-Secretary for
Public Works, N.S.W-, president ; Mr. Stuart Murray,
C.E., Chief Engineer for Water Supply, Victoria ;
and Mr. F. N. Burchell, Department of the Engineer-
in-Chief, South Australia. Although the recommen-
dations of the commission have not been acted upon,
the information they collected and the data collated
gave the irrigation movement a decided step forward.
Unlike the sister State of Victoria, New South
Wales has hitherto constructed no works for water
conservation or irrigation that could be classed as
national from the sense of their importance, although
smaller works have been carried out which have
afforded facilities for permanent occupation of the
land. Irrigation schemes were started during 1890-3
under Acts of Parliament, and trusts established at
Wentworth, Hay and Balranald. These settlements
resulted in failure, partly through the indifferent qual-
ity of land, but mainly on account of the men who
settled on the irrigated areas lacking practical experi-
ence. An important step was taken in 1896, when
the Reid-Carruthers Ministry passed the Water Rights
Act, vesting in the Crown, under certain riparian reser-
vations, the right to the control of the water in all
rivers and lakes in the colony, and licensing private
works in the shape of dams, weirs, &c. Under its
provisions such helpful works to the community gene-
rally as those carried out by Sir Samuel McCaughey,


M.L.C., at North Yanko became possible. Since the
inception of this Act Sir Samuel has done more by his
own individual efiorts to bring home to the community
the great benefits of irrigation than anyone else in
Australia. The See Government, at the end of 1902,
further promoted practical work by passing the Water
and Drainage Act, which provided for the establish-
ment of trusts to administer irrigation works, and
authorised a yearly expenditure of £200,000 for a
the Lake Cudgellico works, constructed at a cost of
£30,000 ; and the Booberoi Creek weir, on the Lachlan,
which backed the water up for a distance of twenty
miles. In 1903, and again in 1905, Mr. Robert Gibson,
backed by two Victorians —the Hon- W. Cam, M.L.C.,
and Sir Malcolm McEachern —approached Parliament
as the promoter of the Northern Water Supply and
Irrigation Bill, a scheme to establish a system of irri-
gation and water supply in the district lying between
THE FIRST ARTESIAN BORE.—MAKING AN OASIS IN THE DRY WEST.
IRRIGATION CHANNEL SUPPLIED BY AN ARTESIAN BORE.
period of five years. In all up to the end of 1905 a
net sum of £112,559 was expended under this measure
in works for water conservation and water diversion,—
whilst, in addition, another £253,334 was laid out in
cuttings, dams, weirs, regulators, &c., under the Public
Works Act of 1902. The most important of these
undertakings—for stock and ordinary supply purposes
only—wore Tuppel Creek cutting, 4 h miles in length ;
the Murrumbidgee and the Lachlan by constructing a
storage reservoir by means of a dam near the Barren
Jack Mountain ; to construct a weir across the Mur-
rumbidgee River at a point about nineteen miles in a
direct line above Narrandera, at the head of Bun-
didgery Creek, and to construct a canal, with other
subsidiary works, leaving the Murrumbidgee near
Narrandera and running in a north-westerly direction


for a distance of about 100 miles. The project was
referred to a Select Committee, who amended it in
several important respects —chiefly as regards the
construction of the reservoir and the weir, which it
was considered should be undertaken by the Govern-
ment. The matter came before the Parliamentary
Standing Committee of Public Works at the end of
1905, the Department of Public Works having mean-
while made further material alterations in Mr. Gibson’s
Bill. In the following year the committee recom-
mended that the entire work be carried out by the
Government, according to the Department scheme,
with additions recommended by Mr. Stuart Murray
(Victoria) and approved by Mr. Leslie A. B. Wade,
A.M Inst.C E., Principal Engineer for Rivers Water
Supply and Drainage, at a cost, exclusive of land re-
sumptions, not- exceeding £1,574,000. They also
favoured the erection of the dam to a height of 200 feet,
and suggested that the excavations for the canal and
its distributaries should be so carried out as to provide
facilities for actual irrigation when the dam has been
constructed to a height of 70 feet, or sooner if practicable.
An Enabling Bill was put through Parliament before
the do? j of the 1906 session, and steps are now being
taken co complete the first national work of irrigation
in this State. According to the official estimate, it
will take fifteen years from the time when the water
is first available for this scheme—which will command
356,870 acres and be sufficient to settle a population of
25,000 —to commence full operations.
Artesian Water.
Artesian water takes its name from Artois, in
France, where the first overflow well was excavated by
boring. Before practical work proved the accuracy of
their conjecture scientists had forecasted the proba-
bility of water being obtained in the Triassic formation
underlying the whole of the north-western portion of
this State- In 1879 the first actual discovery was
made near a mud spring at Wee Wattah, on the pastoral
holding between Bourke and Wilcannia. Four other
bores were put down at Wee Wattah, and a similar
number at Mullyeo, on the same run, a flow of water
being obtained from all. The supply on Wee Wattah
was tapped at a depth of 140 feet ; it rose in the pipes
to a height of 26 feet, and gave an outflow of 160,000
gallons per diem. Mr. W. W. Davis, of Kerribee
Station, Barrona County, was, however, the first to
demonstrate the success of artesian boring on an ex-
tensive scale. The first bore put down by him in 1881
was sunk to a depth of 1,073 feet, and yielded 350,000
gallons of water a day : the second was still more suc-
cessful, for at a depth of 1,340 feet a flow estimated at
1.750.000 gallons was obtained.
The Department of Mines first commenced boring
in 1883, for the purpose of providing water along roads
and stock routes, but since 1891 the work has been
done by contract. Public watering places, consisting
of dams, wells and artesian bores, have been established
along all the main stock routes, there being at the end
of 1905, 61 flowing bores, with an approximate flow of
26.250.000 gallons per diem, and costing about
£160,000 ; 17 pumping bores, which cost £46,315 ; and
405 tanks, wells and dams. In addition, 16 bores
were constructed, which cost £44,129 and proved
failures. The deepest bore constructed by the Govern-
ment is at Uolgelly, on the Moree-Boggabilla road,
where a depth of 4,086 feet has been attained, with an
average daily flow of 682,200 gallons ; but during the
year 1904-5 there was completed at Eureba, in the
Moree district, about 16 miles to the north of Garah,
a 6-inch hole, carried to a depth of 4,002 feet and giving
an approximate flow of 1,000,000 gallons a day, which
in regard to diameter is a record for Australia- The
Kenmare bore, Bourke-Hungerford road, 2,050,000
gallons, is the most satisfactory daily supply the Depart-
ment obtained. In addition to the Governmnt bores,
203 flowing and 24 pumping bores have been consti ucted
AN ARTESIAN BORE AT MOREE
enterprise, besides 19 failures. Of these the
Conbadelo, the Lila Springs No. 3, the Lissington,
No. 4, at Culgoa, each discharge approximately
4,000,000 gallons daily. The tanks have a storage
capacity of up to 5,000,000 gallons, ranging in depth
from 15 to 20 feet, and are so constructed as to be fed
during rainy weather by surface drains. Of the various
public watering places, over two hundred have been
let on lease for various terms, at rentals ranging from
£1 to £235, the total revenue from this source being


more than £6,500 per annum. Of the remainder, 28
are under trusts, and about 120 are open without any
fee. Under the Artesian Wells Act assistance is given
to groups of settlers in the construction of bores and
distributing drains ; Upon the completion of the work
the Land Board assesses the benefit to be derived by
cash property and the amount to be paid by each
occupier. The total of the charge as assessed is
limited to 6 per cent., and in the the bore
proving a failure the whole cost is borne by the Crown.
The catchment area of the artesian supply consists
of porous sandstone, and extends from the neighbour-
hood of Dubbo in a north-north-easterly direction to
the Queensland border, where its most easterly outcrop
can be seen in the banks of the Sovereign River, about
15 miles west of Texas. The Government Geologist,
Mr. Pittman, calculates that the available supply of
water in this artesian basin would amount to
3,580,273,972 gallons per day, which is believed to be
leaking to the ocean.
PIPE HEAD BASIN, GUILDFORD.


MINING AND THE MINERAL INDUSTRY.
In referring to the history of mining in New South
Wales we touch the keynote of the State’s advance-
ment and prosperity. It was the discovery of large
quantities of easily-won gold in the ye ar 1851 which
awakened this country from its lethargy, and led to
the influx of population and the realisation of the
wonderful resources of the State. The mining industry
has established communities throughout the length and
breadth of New South Wales, and paved the way to
the development of the agricultural and pastoral in-
dustries. In the words of the late C. S. Wilkinson,
Government Geologist, “ many of the mountains of
New South Wales are furrowed by deep precipitous
ravines, opening out in places into broad valleys,
clothed with luxuriant pastures and cultivated fields,
whilst amidst all—in the valleys, mountains, plains,
and the coastal districts—inexhaustible deposits of
mineral wealth abound. So widely distributed are
these mineral deposits, and so associated are they with
the pastoral and agricultural areas, that they appear
to have been designedly thus disposed, in order that the
mining, pastoral, and agricultural industries might
contribute to each other 5 s advancement ; and that their
development might occupy, and reward with pros-
perity, the energies of a large and increasing popu-
lation.” The value of the mineral output for the
year 1906 was £8,169,628, this being an increase on
that for the year 1905, and which previously stood as
a record, of no less than £1,083,737. In the course of
the years 1905 and 1906 the mineral industry has thus
shown an expansion of £1,777,860. The aggregate
value of all the minerals won in this State to the end
of 1906 was £172,560,388. The total number of persons
employed in and about the mines of the State during
the year was estimated at 42,546, being 3,614 in excess
of the number employed in 1905.
The earliest enactment dealing with mining in New
South Wales was that passed by the Governor and
Executive Council before the days of responsible Gov-
ernment, and which was assented to on the 28th
December, 1852. This Act vested the control of min-
ing operations in the Commissioner of Crown Lands,
and fixed the digger’s license fee at thirty shillings per
month. An Amending Act was assented to on the
28th September, 1853, the license fee being reduced to
ten shillings per month. Subsequently, on the estab-
lishment of responsible government Parliament passed
a somewhat comprehensive measure which received
the Royal assent on the 11th March. 1857. Under
this Act the miner’s right was brought into operation
—the fee being ten shillings per annum, —resident gold
commissioners were appointed and local mining courts
established. Under the Crown Lands Act of 1861
provision was made for the purchase in fee simple of
lands without reservation of minerals, other than gold.
On the 27th September, 1866, the Gold Fields Act was
assented to, which repealed all previous Acts and
liberalised the conditions of mining; the administra-
tion of this Act being vested in the Secretary for Lands.
Such was the growing importance of the mining in-
dustry, however, that the year 1874 saw the estab-
lishment of the Department of Mines. The enabling
measure was assented to on the 16th April, 1874. This
Act, was in force thirty-three years but has now been
superseded by the Mining Act, 1906, which, consolidates
the various Acts, and liberalises the conditions of
mining tenures.
The Ministers who have held office as Secretary
for Mines, and the term of their administration, are as
follow :—R. P. Abbott, 27th July, 1874, to Bth Feb-
ruary, 1875 ; John Lucas, 9th February, 1875, to 21st
March, 1877 ; G. A. Lloyd, 22nd March, 1877, to 16th
August, 1877 ; E. A. Baker, 17th August, 1877, to
19th November, 1877, and 21st December, 1878, to
13th August, 1881 ; A. H. Jacob, 20th November, 1877,
to 17th December, 1877 ; W. H. Suttor, 18th December,
1877, to 20th December, 1878 ; F. B. Suttor, 30th
August, 1881, to 11th October, 1881 ; A. Renwick, 12th
October, 1881, to 4th January, 1883 ; J. P. Abbott, sth
January, 1883, to 6th October, 1885 ; F. A. Wright,
7th October, 1885, to 17th October, 1885 ; George
Thornton, 13th November, 1885, to 21st December,
1885 ; R, M. Vaughan, 22nd December, 1885, to 25th
February, 1886 ; James Fletcher, 26th February, 1886,
to 23rd December, 1886 ; C. K. Mackellar, 24th October,
1886, to 19th January, 1887 ; F. Abigail, 20th January,
1887, to 16th January, 1889 ; J. M. Chanter, 17th
January, 1889, to 7th March, 1889 ; Sydney Smith, Bth
March, 1889, to 22nd October, 1891, and 3rd August,
1894, to 15th August, 1898 ;T. M. Slattery, 23rd Oc-
tober, 1891, to 2nd August, 1894 ; J. Cook, 27th August,
1898, to 13th September, 1899 ; J. L. Fegan, 10th
April, 1901, to 29th August, 1904 ; S. W. Moore, from
30th August, 1904, to present time.
The first Under Secretary of the department was
Mr. Harrie Wood, who held that office from Ist Sep-
tember, 1874, to the sth March, 1896. On his resig-
nation he was succeeded by Mr. D. C. McLachlan, who
relinquished the position on the sth May, 1902, to take
up the appointment of Public Service Commissioner
under the Federal Government. Mr, E. F. Pittman,
A.R.S.M., was then appointed Under Secretary, at the
same time retaining his previous office as Government
Geologist.
The principal officers of the department are :
E. F. Pittman, A.R.S.M., Under Secretary and Govern-
ment Geologist ; A. A. Atkinson, Chief Inspector of
Coal Mines; J. B. Jaquet, A.R.S.M., Chief Inspector
of Metalliferous Mines and Superintendent of Diamond
Drills ; J. E. Came, F.G.S., Assistant Government
Geologist ; H. B. Sullivan, 8.A., Chief Clerk ; R. H.
Cambage, Chief Mining Surveyor and Chief Draughts-
man ; E. H. Ray, Registrar ; J. C. H. Mingaye, F.C. S.,
Assayer and Analyst. The officers employed in the
Department of Mines number 123, and the salaries
amount to £28,840 per annum.


The Mines Department is charged with the ad-
ministration of the Mining Act of 1906 (which consoli-
dates and repeals all previous Acts relating to mining
titles), the Coal Mines Regulation Act (1902), the
Mines Inspection Act (1901), the Miners’ Accident
Relief Act (1900) and Amending Act, and all
business relating to mining generally. Other matters
controlled by the department are Geological and
mining surveys, the Mining and Geological Museum,
the Assay and Metallurgical Laboratory, the inspection
of collieries and mines, and the prospecting vote.
Geological Survey.
With the early history of the geology of this State
the names of Count Strzelecki. Samuel Stutchbury, and
the Rev. W. B. Clarke are indelibly associated.
The geological survey under the Department of
Mines was inaugurated in 1875, Mr. C. S. Wilkinson
being appointed Geological Surveyor, and subsequently
Government Geologist, and on his death, in 1891, he
LOCALITY WHERE PAYABLE GOLD WAS FIRST DISCOVERED
was succeeded by Mr. E. F. Pittman, the present occu-
pant of the office. Since the inception of this branch a
considerable area of the State has been surveyed and
reported on in connection with the development of
the mineral resources. Among the more important
works of this nature reference may be made to :
“The Geological Survey of the Vegetable Creek Tin-
field,” “Memoirs on the Iron Ore Deposits, the
Kerosene Shale Deposits, and the Barrier Range
Silver-field ; 5 5 also “The Surveys of the Hunter
River, Southern, and Western Coalfields.” In con-
nection with the pastoral industry, attention has
been directed to the artesian water-bearing strata;
and with a view to obtaining definite information
on this subject, a geological survey of the intake
beds of this area is now in progress. Geological
reports on various economic minerals have been pub-
lished, viz., copper, tungsten, cobalt, chrome, mercury,
and molybdenum, and also a most comprehensive work
on the mineral resources of the State. Reports have
also been issued on the Wyalong, Kiandra, Yalwal and
Hillgrove mining fields. Apart from the reports
enumerated, many special and economic report's on
various mining fields have been made, and a large
mass of highly interesting information of this nature
is to be found included in the annual reports of the
department. The results of the more strictly scien-
tific investigations have been embodied in the “ Re-
cords ” and “Memoirs” of the geological survey.
Both geological and mineral maps of the State have
been published, and also various other geological maps
of special localities. Connected with the Geological
Survey is a very fine Geological and Mining Museum,
which serves the double purpose of affording infor-
mation and instruction to the mining community, and
of being a reference collection for the use and guidance
of the officers of the department. There is
also a complete analytical and chemical
laboratory under the control of the branch.
The department has for many years ex-
amined, free of charge, any specimen of min-
eral that may be submitted, either person-
ally or through the post, and whenever
deemed advisable and necessary, assays —
that is exact determinations of the amount of
valuable metals present —are made. That
this privilege is greatly appreciated by the
mining community is shown by the fact
that, during the year 1905 over 5,570
samples were received for assay and analysis.
The following tabulated statement shows
in chronological order the geological for-
mation at present known to exist in New
South Wales.
Classification of the Sedimentary Rocks
of New South Wales.
Cainozoic .
(1) Post Tertiary .
(a) Recent. Auriferous soils and alluvial
deposits in the beds of existing
rivers.
(b) Pleistocene. Alluvial leads containing gold, tin,
and gem stones.
(2) Tertiary-
(a) Pliocene. Alluvial leads frequently covered by
basalt, and containing gold, tin, and gem
stones.
(b) Miocene- Quartzites with plant remains at
Dalton, near Gunning.
(c) Eocene. Marine limestones and calcareous sand-
stones of the Lower Darling ; plant beds of the
New England district.
Mesozoic-
(l) Cretaceous.
(a) Upper Cretaceous (Desert Sandstone). Contains
precious opal deposits.


(b) Middle Cretaceous. Auriferous alluvial leads at
Mount Brown.
(c) Lower Cretaceo us (Rolling Downs formation).
Home of the beds are porous sandstone and
contain artesian water.
(2) Jurassic.
Talbragar fish-bearing shales.
(3) Triassic-
(a) Hawkesbury series and their equivalents.
(a) Wianamatta shales (contain fire clays).
(b) Hawkesbury sandstone (building stone).
(c) Narrabeen shales.
(b) The Ipswich coal measures.
(a) Form the base of the artesian water basin.
(b) These measures contain thin coal seams, not at
present worked in New South Wales.
Palcezoic-
(l) Permo-Carboniferous-
(a) Upper or Newcastle coal measures.
(b) Dempsey series.
(c) Middle or Tomago coal measures.
(d) Upper marine series.
(e) Greta coal measures.
(f) Lower marine series.
The productive coal seams of New South Wales
occur in these measures-
(2) Carboniferous-
(a) Rhacopteris beds and associated marine beds.
(b) Gympie daystones (of Queensland).
(3) Devonian.
(a) Upper Devonian.
(b) Lower Devonian.
(4) Silurian.
(a) Upper Silurian.
(b) Lower Silurian.
All the metalliferous lodes and reefs occur in the
Silurian, Devonian, and Carboniferous formations, or
in such igneous rocks as granites, quartz-porphyries,
felsitics and diorites.
The Mining Act, 190 G.
The Mining Act, 1906, deals with all classes of
mining upon Crown or private lands, and came into force
on 15th July, 1907. Part I. relates to formal matters,
definitions, &c , and Part 11. relates to holdings under
Miner’s Right. This part and the regulations made
thereunder authorise the issue to any person of a miner’s
right for any term not being less than six months, or
exceeding twenty years, the fee being 2s. 6d. for six
months or ss. per annum This right secures to the
holder the privilege of entering upon Crown lands not
specially exempted and mining for gold or any other
mineral; of occupying for residence an area of one-quarter
of an acre in a town, or 2 acres outside of a town ; of
diverting and using water required for mining or domestic
purposes; of erecting any building or structure; and
using any timber, stone, &c., required for mining pur-
poses from any Crown land not by law exempted from
mining occupation, or protected by prohibitory procla-
mation. The occupation of Crown land under miner’s
rights is, in terms of the regulations, divided into certain
classes, which embrace gold claims in alluvial ground,
river and creek claims, quartz claims, mineral claims,
water rights, residence, dam, reservoir, tramway, road,
tunnel, and machinery areas. The area which may be
held for prospecting for alluvial gold ranges from 600
feet square to 1,400 feet square, according to the distance
from the nearest gold-producing claim. On the discovery
of payable gold the prospector is entitled to a reward
claim half the length and half the width of the prospect-
ing area. Alluvial claims in new ground cannot be of
greater area than 800 feet by 800 feet, but in old and
abandoned ground possession can be taken of areas up to
5 acres. In quartz claims the width must not exceed
400 feet, but the length may, according to the location of
the claim, extend up to 480 feet.
For the purpose of searching for any minerals other
than gold or opal 40 acres of Crown land may be held, and
for the search for opal an area 400 feet by 400 feet. For
the purposes of mining and winning any mineral other
than gold or opal, the area of Crown land which may be
taken possession of is 10 acres for a reward claim and 4
acres for an ordinary claim, and for opal an area of 150
feet by 150 feet as a reward claim or 100 feet by 100 feet
as an ordinary claim.
Business licenses are issued at a cost of 20s. per
annum, or 10s. for six months from the dale of issue.
These licenses entitle the holding for purposes of resi-
dence and carrying on business, of one quarter of an acre
in township sites, and one acre on other Crown lands.
Part HI. relates to Crown land leases.
Any person may apply for a gold-mining or mineral
lease of Crown lands. An ordinary gold lease may be
granted for an area not exceeding 25 acres, and for a term
not exceeding 20 years, but it may be renewed for a
further period of 20 years. The rent is ss. per acre, and
the first year’s rent must be lodged at the date of appli-
cation for lease, together with survey fees, which range
from £1 for an area of less than one acre up to £3 10s.
for 25 acres. The labour to be employed is determined at
the discretion of the Secretary for Mines, but the
minimim is one man for every two acres held under lease.
A mineral lease is granted for the purpose of mining
on Crown land for any mineral other than gold. The
area which may be granted in one lease cannot exceed 640
acres for the purpose of mining for coal, or 80 acres for
mining for other minerals. The maximum term for
which a mineral lease may be granted is 20 years, with
the right of renewal for a further period of 20 years. The
rent payable is ss. per acre per annum for minerals other
than coal or shale. The rent of coal or shale leases is Is.
per acre per annum, with a royalty of Gd. per ton upon
all shale or large coal raised, and 3d. per ton on all small
coal ; but the amount of rent already paid for any one
year may be deducted from the royalty payable for that
year. The labour conditions are fixed at the discretion of
the Minister, subject to the minimum of one man to 10
acres.
Special leases to mine for gold or any mineral, except
coal and shale, may be granted for extended areas where
it is shown that unusual difficulties exist in working the
ground, or where costly and expensive appliances have to
be provided.
Part IV. —Mining on Private Lands.
All lands alienated or in process of alienation from
the Crown, and all lands conditionally leased are open to
mining for gold. In respect of all other minerals (with
the exception of coal and shale) the land is open to mining
if the Crown grant contains, or when issued will contain,


a reservation to the Crown of all minerals in the land.
Lands within the boundaries of any town or village are
exempt from the operation of this Act until brought under
its provisions by proclamation in the Government Gazette ,
and mining cannot be permitted within stipulated
distances of a garden, orchard, or principal residence,
without the owner’s consent. To secure a title to mine on
private land, it is necessary for the holder of a miner’s
right to apply to the warden for an authority to enter
such land, and a fee of 5s. is payable on such application.
The warden is then required to determine the area and fix
the term of the authority, and assess the rent to be paid to
the owner and the compensation to be paid to owner and
occupier. The authority may be converted into a lease,
the annual rent being £1 per acre for that part of the
surface leased, which is paid to the owner. The term of
the lease cannot exceed 20 years, but may be renewed for
a similar period. The labour conditions are similar to
those in Crown lands leases. The owners of private lands,
and the occupiers with the owner’s consent, may take out
leases for gold or minerals, including coal and shale, with-
out payment of rent. They are also at liberty to enter
into agreements with the holders of a miner’s right to
mine on their land without taking out a lease from the
Crown ; but every such agreement is subject to the
Minister’s concurrence and must be registered.
Part V. —Dredging Leases .
Leases may be granted to mine for gold or any other
mineral on land not held under any mining title forming
the bed of any river or lake, or under any tidal water, or
under the ocean contiguous to the coast line, or of the
land contigous to any such place, and this whether the
land belongs to the Crown or is alienated with a reser-
vation of minerals. If the land desired to be leased
embraces private lands, or land held from the Crown
under tenure other than for pastoral purposes, an author-
ity to enter must first be obtained from the warden, the
applicant depositing £10 as evidence of bona fdes. The
authority is available for fourteen days from date of issue,
and during this time the land desired to be leased must
be marked out, but mining operations cannot be entered
upon until the lease has been granted. The maximum
area which may be acquired under one lease is 100 acres.
The rent is 2s. 6d. per acre per annum for the Crown
lands embraced, but the warden determines, at an inquiry
held in open court, the amount of compensation and rent
which has to be paid to the owner for the private land
included. Royalty at the rate of £1 per centum of the
value of all gold or minerals won is payable to the Crown.
Suspension of Labour Conditions .
Lessees employing labour in excess of the stipulated
number of men are entitled to one month’s exemption
from labour conditions for excess labour equal to six
months’ stipulated labour ; but such exemption is limited
to an aggregate period of six months at any one time.
The warden may grant suspension of the labour
conditions for any period not exceeding six months, upon
being satisfied, by evidence on oath in open court, that
the claim or lease is unworkable from any cause, or that
the owner is unable, by reason of sickness or unavoidable
absence, or other sufficient cause, to work the same. He
may grant suspension for any period not exceeding six
months at any one time upon being similarly satisfied
that substantial expenditure has been incurred in regard
to any claim , and that it cannot be profitably worked,
owing to the low price of the product of such claim, or
that the bolder is unable to continue mining operations,
and requires reasonable time to make necessary arrange-
ments; and, in like case, can recommend to the Minister
the suspension of labour conditions in respect of any lease
for a similar period. The Minister may grant such sus-
pension, and particulars thereof are published in the
Gazette.
Suspension and exemption applications are heard by
tlie warden in open court, and all orders with respect to
leases are registered at the Department of Mines, Sydney.
Mining Courts .
All complaints and matters in dispute in relation to
mining titles, &c., are dealt with by the Warden’s Court ;
and appeal from the warden’s decision is allowed, under
certain conditions to the District Court, sitting as a
Mining Appeal Court. Appeals on points of law are also
allowed to the Supreme Court.
Inspection of Coal and Shale Mines.
At the end of 1905 there were 105 coal and shale mines
in operation in the State. The measure dealing with the
inspection of coal and shale mines is a very comprehensive
one, and is known as the Coal Mines Regulation Act of
1902. In the administration of this Act a chief inspector
and four inspectors are employed. The Act provides for
the employment of only certificated managers, under-
managers, and winding engine-drivers; the ventilation,
timbering and security of mines; the inspection of
machinery and all working places; the limitation of the
ages at which boys are to be employed ; the prohibiting of
the employment of females ; the precautions to be taken
against explosions by inflammable gas or coal dust ; the
method of using and handling explosives underground ;
the manner in which payment is to be made for the
mineral gotten; the keeping of plans of mines; and,
generally, the safeguarding of all persons employed in or
about the mines.
Inspection of Metalliferous Mines.
There is a special Act dealing with the regulation
and inspection of mines, other than coal and shale
mines, which is known as the Mines Inspection Act of
1901. The number of men engaged in metalliferous
mining during the year 1905 was 24,795, and in the
supervision of such operations a chief inspector and
seven inspectors are engaged. The Mines Inspection
Act provides for the granting of certificates to managers
and engine-drivers ; the ventilation, timbering, and
construction of mines and mining works ; the drainage
and sanitation of mines ; the testing of boilers ; the
examination and inspection of all machinery used in
and about mines, and also dredges ; the restriction of
the employment of boys, and the prohibiting of the
employment of females ; the keeping of plans ; the pre-
vention of lead poisoning ; the method of using and
handling of explosives ; the use of safety cages and
appliances ; and generally all matters involved, or
connected, with the control and working of mines, and
of smelting and reduction works.
Miners’ Accident Relief A*ct.
The Miners’ Accident Relief Act. which came into
force from January, 1901. applies to all mines in or


about which fifteen or more persons arc employed, and
on the 31st December, 1905, 135 mines were subject
to its provisions. Every employee in such mines has
to contribute per week out of his wages ; owners
of mines contribute, quarterly, a sum equal to 50 per
centum of the aggregate amount paid by employees,
and this fund is subsidised by the Government by an
amount equal to that paid by the owners. The bene-
fits payable are as follow : —(1) In cases of fatal acci-
dent : (a) A funeral allowance of twelve pounds ; (6) an
alio wance of 10s. weekly to the widow, if any, or to
father, mother or sister dependent upon the deceased
at the time of his death for support ; (c) an allowance
of 3s. weekly in respect of each child of the deceased
while under the age of fourteen years. (2) In cases of
disablement, an allowance of 15s. per week to the
person disabled. (3) In cases of permanent disable-
ment an additional allowance of 3s. per week in respect
of each child under the age of fourteen years. During
the years 1901-5 the sum of £67,730 was expended
from the fund in the relief of beneficiaries, and on the
31st December. 1905, the accumulated funds amounted
to £137,000.
Financial Aid to Prospectors-
Assistance is allotted by the Government to pros-
pectors for the work of sinking and driving with the
object of opening up and proving the mineral resources
of the State. The rules under which the prospecting
vote is distributed provide that the assistance allotted
must not in any case exceed half the actual cost of the
work ; also that the site of operations must be pro-
perly acquired and defined, and the approval of the
Prospecting Board first given to the proposed work.
The annual vote is now £15,000, and to the end of
June, 1905, the amount distributed to Prospectors
totalled £358,948. The Government also offers a
reward of £5OO, subject to certain special conditions,
to any person who shall discover a new reefing, or
alluvial gold, or tin field, or a new deposit of silver,
copper, diamonds, or precious opal.
Diamond Drills.
The Department of Mines contracts for all classes
of boring by diamond drills, and during the last ten
years has put down some 150 bore-holes upon the
mining fields of New South Wales. Drills of modern
design, capable of boring to a depth of 3,000 feet below
the surface are available, and smaller drills for boring
at any angle underground can also be obtained. Hand-
boring plants, capable of putting down small bore-
holes through alluvium or soft rock to shallow depths,
are loaned to prospectors by the department, on con-
dition that delivery is taken free of expense, and a
deposit of £5 lodged as an evidence of bona fides and as
a security for the safe return of the plant.
The Mineral Industry.
There are probably few countries in the world
which have been endowed with such a diversity of
mineral wealth in proportion to its area as the State
of New South Wales- Some idea of the importance of
the industry may be formed when it is stated that,
according to the figures published by the Under Sec-
retary for Mines, the value of the mineral products won
to the end of 1905 amounted to £164,322,800. The
progress of the mining industry during the past fifty
years is illustrated by the following statement of the
value of the output for each decade :—1856 to 1865,
£16.049,515 ; 1866 to 1875, £17,769,684 ; 1876 to 1885,
£21,565,857 ; 1886 to 1895. £45,006.328 ; 1896 to 1905,
£56,989,837.
At the present time the State is divided into twelve
mining districts, and these again are subdivided into
about 125 divisions. The districts include the Albert
(Broken Hill, &c.), the Bathurst, Clarence and Rich-
mond, Cobar, Hunter and Macleay, Mudgee, New Eng-
land, Peel and Uralla, Lachlan, Southern, Tambaroora
and Turon, and the Tumut and Adelong. In these,
the Albert, Bathurst, New England, Peel and Uralla,
Lachlan, and Tumut and Adelong districts produce
gold, silver (including lead and zinc), copper and tin ;
the Cobar, Mudgee and Southern districts, gold, silver
and copper ; the Clarence and Richmond and Hunter
and Macleay districts, gold, copper and tin ; and the
Tambaroora and Turon district, gold and silver. With
the exception of the Albert and the Hunter and Mac-
leay, dredging for gold is carried on in all these dis-
tricts. Of the minor ores, antimony chiefly is found
at Taylor’s Arm. near Bowraville, in the Kempsey
division ; Pauli’s Creek, Grafton division ; and Pretty
Gully, Drake division; bismuth principally occurs at
Jingera, Whipstick ; Deepwater, New England ; Kings-
gate, Glen Innes division ; and Mount Solitary, Cobar
district; chromium in the Gundagai and Bingara
divisions; platinum at Fifield (Lachlan); molybde-
num at Kingsgate, and Warrall Creek. Macksville.
tungsten, at Torrington, Deepwater division, and the
Gulf. Emmaville division ; alunite, at Bullahdelah
(Hunter and Macleay) ; graphite, at Undercliffs. Wil-
son’s Downfall; gypsum, at Yanco Glen, in the
Broken Hill division ; and barytes at Cobargo. Dia-
monds occur in the Oberon and Bingara divisions, and
opals are obtained in the White Cliffs and Wallangulla
(Walgett) fields.
Gold.
Gold is present in greater or less quantity in rocks
of almost every geological age in New South Wales.
The gold-bearing rocks cover a very large area of the
State ; from the goldfield of Tibooburra. in the north-
west corner, to that of Pambula, on the south-east
coast, is a distance of about 690 miles, while from the
Delegate goldfield, in the south, to Murwillumbah, on
the Tweed River, in the north, is about 650 miles. It
is probable that the occurrence of gold in Australia
was known to the Portuguese and Spaniards more
than 350 years ago, but the first definite record of the
discovery of gold is that made by Mr. James Mcßrien,
assistant surveyor, in a field-book which he used while
making a survey of the Fish River, between Rydal
and Bathurst. The note is dated February 15th, 1823,
and reads as follows : cc At 81 chains 50 links to river
and marked gum tree. At this place I found numer-
ous particles of gold in the sand in the hills convenient
to the river.”


Sixteen years, or more, anterior to Surveyor
Mcßrien’s entry the Sydney (iazeUe (November 9, 1806)
%/ J * ' c C 1
contained the following shoit paragraph: At the
sales by auction on Thursday last a small complement
of virgin gold was purchased at about £3 19s. per ounce.
At that time an order was in force prohibiting anyone
from crossing the Nepean River, and prob-nbly this
will account for the paper giving no information as to
the seller and from whence he came into possession of
this “ virgin gold.” Numerous reports —some of
which are referred to in the historical section of this
work —of the discovery of gold are subsequently re-
corded, until, under date the 3rd April, 1851. Mr. E. H.
Hargraves wrote to the Colonial Secretary offering to
point out, for a consideration of £5OO, localities where
he had discovered gold, the localities afterwards being
stated as Lewis Ponds, Summer Hill Creek, and the
Macquarie River, in the districts of Bathurst and Wel-
lington. According to the evidence given by Har-
GOLD DREDGING, JEMBAICUMBENE.
graves before the Legislative Council Select Committee,
a month after his return from California he visited
Guyong and called at an hotel kept by a Mrs. Lister-
He promised her son that if he would take him to Emu
Creek, Lewis Ponds, and Summer Hill Creek they
would find gold- Hargraves said he had visited these
places seventeen years before, and whilst in California
was struck by the resemblance of their formations to
those of the places where the Californian gold rushes
had occurred. They reached Lewis Ponds on Feb-
ruary 12, 1851, and on washing stuff from the creek,
found about five grains in the dish. Subsequently, ac-
companied by James Tom, he went to Burrandong, on
the Macquarie River, following the latter up to its
junction with Summer Hill Creek. He found sufficient
gold to justify him in bringing the matter under the
notice of the Colonial Secretary. Hargraves, however,
first visited Wellington, Dubbo and Mitchell’s Creek,
returning thence to Guyong- He there showed Tom
and young Lister how to make a cradle, such as was
used by the Californian miners, and left for Sydney-
During his absence Tom and Lister again went to
Summer Hill Creek, with their cradle, and soon ob-
tained payable gold. It was about this time Hargraves
told the Colonial Secretary that payable gold had been
discovered. The announcement caused as much ex-
citement as that produced in California by the dis-
covery of payable gold. People rushed in thousands
from Sydney to the sites ; sailors deserted their vessels
in hundreds, and in a very short time thousands of men
were on the road for the “ Pond ” and the Creek-
On the 14th May, 1851, Mr. Stutchbury, the Gov-
ernment Geologist, forwarded a report to the Colonial
Secretary confirming the discovery ; and in a further
report on the 25th May, stated that there were not
less than a thousand persons on Summer Hill Creek,
many of whom were getting large quantities of gold,
and that the largest nugget found to that
date weighed four pounds. Two months
after Hargraves had named the site of his
discovery an educated aboriginal shepherd,
in the employ of Dr. Kerr, of Wallawa,
picked up in the same locality, 106 lbs. of gold
in three blocks, the largest of which —a foot
in diameter and 75 lbs. in weight —yielded
60 lbs. of pure gold. This find is known
in the annals of gold-mining as Kerr’s Hun-
dred-weight- Hargraves acted wisely in
trusting to the generosity of the Govern-
ment, as, in addition to being granted £lO,OOO
from the State funds, he was appointed a
Crown Lands Commissioner. Some years
later he received another award of £2,300
from the Victorian Government.
Early Goldfields.
The news of the discovery of payable
gold spread with amazing rapidity, and with
such energy were prospecting operations
prosecuted that within the next few years
goldfields were discovered in all parts of
the colony except the far west. The
whole of the districts bordering upon the
Macquarie, the Turon, and the Meroo
rivers were found to be auriferous, the Turon in
July, 1851, producing a piece of reef gold which
weighed 1,272 ozs. This extent of country included
the Apple-tree Flat, the Pipeclay, the Two-mile Flat.
Bushman’s Hill (Parkes), the Gulgong and Tallawang,
the Upper and Lower Pyramid, Hall’s Hole. Maitland
Bar, Louisa Creek, the Gulf. Palmer’s, Oakey, Spring
Creek, Big and Little Oakey, Nuggety Hill and Wattle
Flat, the Ophir, Burrandong (where the largest nugget
ever found in New South Wales—weighing 1,286 ozs.
8 dwts., and giving 1,182 ozs. 6 dwts. of pure gold-
came from), Stony Creek and the Ironbarks goldfields
—all highly remunerative in the early days, but rarely
heard of now, except as reminiscences. Tambaroora, a
tributary of the Macquarie, deserves special mention,
not only by reason of the richness of its alluvial work-
ings during the years 1855-65, but on account of its
extraordinary rich reefs at Hawkins’ Hill, which gave


returns varying from 10 to 100 ounces to the ton. The
first alluvial leads necessitating deep sinking were dis-
covered at Forbes in 1862. In January of that year
rich alluvial gold was found at the surface near the
base of the low hills on the north bank of the Lachlan
River, and the deposit was soon traced down into a
deep lead. The result of this discovery was that within
four months there was a population of 28,000 people
encamped on the field. Southward of the Ophir were
found the strange deposits of the Wentworth group of
mines at Lucknow, seven miles east of Orange. Here
the gold was in a regular ironstone lode, and incor-
porated with the stone as with quartz. The lode,
which was exceedingly irregular, occupied a vertical
position in a mass of alluvium, which had filled up the
interstices formed by a deep rent in the bed rock,
traced down to a depth of nearly 200 feet. The stone
gave from 20 to 60 ounces to the load. Beyond
the Lucknow, round the eastern slopes of the Canoblas
Mountains, by Canowindra and thence to the Lachlan,
numerous alluvial deposits proved profitable workings.
On the Lachlan and Abercrombie Rivers were the dig-
gings of Cargo, King’s Plains, Tuena and Trunkey’s
Creek. Some of the stone at the latter was highly
auriferous, while in the early sixties the wondrous
yields of the Lachlan goldfield astonished the whole of
Australia. Crossing the Lachlan, the rich reefing dis-
trict of Emu Creek was opened up—a gold-producing
area, which sent away from it in the early days a larger
amount of retorted gold than any other district of the
colony. Within a few miles of Emu Creek were the
extensive alluvial workings of Lambing Flat, or the
Burrangong goldfield, which for the time they were
working, furnished the record output of any field of
a similar extent in the colony. Beyond Lambing Flat
to the south were the Eurongilly, Junee and other
reefing areas, extending beyond Wagga Wagga. Turn-
ing eastward from these were the reefs of Adelong and
the Tumut ; and then from the Tumut by Tumbarumba,
where large alluvial deposits were found, from the head-
waters of the Snowy River, the rich and extensive gold-
field of Kiandra was reached. Here occurred, perhaps,
the largest rush that was ever known in the colony ;
but the weather in these lofty ranges proved so in-
clement in the winter season that the place soon got
thinned of its population. From Kiandra eastward to
the coast, and thence northward, were several diggings
in the first plateau of the coast-fall of the tableland,
the principal of these being in the Nerrigundah and
Moruya districts. Further north was the Araluen field
where the work of the miner was done more systemati-
cally and effectually than in any other workings in New
South Wales.. For several years after Araluen Creek
was opened the yield kept up very steadily at 1,200 ozs.
per week, but it afterwards fell off to about £3,200 per
month, and later on dwindled down to insignificance.
Bell’s Creek and Major’s Creek, both tributaries to
Araluen Creek, were first worked as alluvial diggings,
and then claimed attention to their quartz reefs, which
averaged 2 and 3 ozs. of gold to the ton, the reefs vary-
ing from Bto 12 feet in thickness. The Mongarlowe or
Little River, a few miles east of Braidwood, was a good
lasting alluvial field in early mining days, and its reefs
gave some wonderful yields of gold from small
quantities of stone, some rich veins struck having
returned at the rate of 50 and 60 ozs. to the ton. Be-
tween Braidwood and Bungonia were the Jacqua reefs.
Turning next to the Northern district, on the
head-waters of the Hunter River, and about 22 miles
from the town of Scone, were the Denison diggings—a
reefing district, averaging about 1| ozs. to the ton.
The Peel River was found to be auriferous from its
head-waters down to within a dozen miles of Tamworth,
and on both sides of the river. Several quartz reefs
were opened—the chief reefs being those on Foley’s
Folly, worked under the amalgamated claims system.
The upper part of the river, about Nundle. and the
tributaries which here join it, proved very rich, and
in the days of water supply were extensively sluiced.
On the tableland above the river was the Hanging
Rock field. To the north-west of Tamworth were the
Woods reefs, and further on, in the same direction,
were the Upper and Lower Bingera diggings, which
fell into the hands of the Chinese about the beginning
of the seventies. In the former of these was discovered
one of the most remarkable auriferous deposits met
with in the colony On an extensive flat the gold was
found in large pieces almost on the surface, and barely
covered with the soil, with no deposit whatever below
it, and with no indication of deposits on any of the
adjoining hills. A little off the main Northern Road,
and 22 miles south of Armidale, were the old Rocky
River diggings—at one time fabulously wealthy in
their Pleistocene deposits. In 1858 these yielded
17,277 ozs., and 16,101 ozs. in the following year. North
of Armidale, on the eastern fall of the coast range, the
streams at the head-waters of the Clarence and Rich-
mond formed the extensive goldfield known as the
Timbarra, and extending from Oban, on the south, up
to the borders of Queensland. Such were the prin-
cipal centres of auriferous wealth in New South Wales
up to the time (1870) when reefing began to be pro-
perly developed by the conjunction of capital with
discreet and intelligent management ; and from these
sources the output of gold between the years 1851-69
was as follows :—lßsl, 144.120 ozs, ; 1852, 818,751 ozs. ;
1853, 548,052 ozs. ; 1854, 237,910 ozs.; 1855, 171,367 ozs.;
1856, 184,600 ozs.; 1857, 175 ; 949 ozs.; 1858, 286,798 ozs.;
1859, 329,363 ozs.; 1860, 384,053 ozs.; 1861, 465,685 ozs.;
1862, 640,622 ozs.; 1863, 466,111 ozs.; 1864, 340,267 ozs.;
1865, 320,316 ozs.; 1866, 290,014 ozs.; 1867, 271,886 ozs.;
1868, 255,662 ozs.; 1869, 251,491 ozs. The gold won in
this State to the end of 1906 amounted to 12,786,638 ozs.
fine, valued at £54,314,152. The yield recorded for
1906 was 253,987 ozs. fine, valued at £1,078,866, this
being 20,280 ozs. fine and £86,147 in value less than in
1905. These figures do not, however, accurately re-
flect the position of the industry, as gold to the further
value of £160,118 was purchased from the mines within
this State, but was not lodged at the Mint, and could
not be included in the official figures for 1906. This
gold has, therefore, to be carried forward to the year
1907. The yield was contributed by the established
mines, no new find of importance having been recorded
during the year. The Cobar district may be said to
be the chief producing centre, and the value of the
output for the year amounted to £224,052. The Mount
Boppy mine, Canbelego, contributed by far the largest


yield of any gold mine in the State. The value of the
yields from the other more important divisions was as
follows Wyalong, £83,92] ; Araluen, £57,551 ; Hill-
grove, £52,39d ; Wellington, £43,987 ; Stuart Town,
£35,445; Adelong, £34,711; Forbes, £27,067; Peak
Hill, £26,709 ; Orange, £21,557.
Dredging.
Mr. C. L. Garland was the first to start dredging
for gold in this State. He commenced operations in
1899 on the Macquarie River, near Stuart Town, and,
although considerable difficulties were met with, the
venture proved satisfactory. Since then dredging for
tin and gold has become an important industry, the
principal centres being the Araluen, Adelong, Tumba-
rumba, Sofala, Tingha and Wilson’s Downfall divisions.
The value of the vield obtained during the year 1906
was £261,762 —an increase of £74,768 on that of the
previous year. Since 1900 the dredges have furnished
an output valued at £952,474.
The Araluen division, where 14 plants are at work,
is still the chief centre of gold dredging operations, the
value of the production in 1906 being £54 478. The
dredging for tin has given very gratifying results, the
quantity of tin won totalling 1,032 tons, valued at
£120,661. There were 68 dredging plants in operation
in the State at the close of the year, valued at £315,537.
Silver, Lead, and Zinc.
So far as records show Count P. E. De Strzelecki
was the first to discover the presence of silver in New
South Wales. Writing to Mr. Thomas Walker, October
16, 1839, he says ; “ On this side the Dividing Range
the variety of rocks and embedded minerals augment ;
indications most positive of the existing silver and
gold veins are met with.” And from another letter
the Count addressed to Captain P. King, R.N., from
Wellington, October 26, 1839, the following extract is
taken : “ I have specimens of excellent coal, some of
fine serpentine with asbestos, curious native alum and
brown hematite, fossil bones, and plants which I digged
out from Boree and Wellington caves ; but particularly
a specimen of native silver in hornblende rock, and gold
in spec in silicate, both serving as strong indications of
the existence of those precious metals in New South
Wales.” In a book published in 1845 Strzelecki also
recorded a similar discovery of native silver at Piper’s
Flat. Since the Count’s time silver, both native or
free, and in a chemically combined state in galena and
other ores, has been discovered in a great many locali-
ties in the State :-At Boorook, near Tenterfield; Borah
Creek, near Inverell ; Broken Hilt, Barrier Ranges ;
Little Plant Creek (Webb’s), near Emmaville ; Moruya
(Guy’s mine) ; Pye’s Creek, near Deepwater ; the
Peaks, Burragorang ; Rivertree ; Rockvale, near Armi-
dale ; Sunny Corner, near Rydal ; Wallah Wallah, near
Burrowa ; Howell, in the Tingha district ; and Yerran-
derie, in the Picton district.
It was in the Moruya mine, in 1864, that the first
attempt was made to test the commercial value of our
argentiferous deposits. At the time the mine was
opened there were no facilities for treating a refractory
ore of its character locally, and the company shipped
120 tons to London, where it averaged 22 ozs. silver and
1,128 dwts gold per ton. However, as freight and
charges absorbed nearly the whole of the money realised
mining operations were suspended. The ore is now
being satisfactorily treated at the Wallaroo Smelting
Works, South Australia. In 1876 Mr. P. Green, of
Wilcannia, discovered a lode of silver-lead ore at Thac-
keringa, about 20 miles south-west of the present town
of Broken Hill. Some of the ore assayed 35 ozs. of
silver per ton and 60 per cent, of lead. As a conse-
quence a rush occurred in 1882, when a large number
of leases were applied for. None of the mines proved
of permanent richness, though considerable yields
were for a time obtained ; they led to further prospect-
ing, however, and to the discovery in the following
year of the celebrated Broken Hill lode. The Boorook
lodes, 26 miles north-east of Tenterfield, were originally
worked for gold, but in 1878 it was discovered that
they contained considerable quantities of silver. Only
three mines in this field were worked to any depth,
viz., the Golden Age. Addison’s, and the Silver King,
and their united products in 1884 represented 34,000
ozs. silver and 738 ozs. gold.
The Sunny Corner lode, Bathurst district, was
another originally worked for gold, being originally
taken up for this purpose in 1875 by Messrs. Winter
and Morgan, who, report alleged, did well out of the
auriferous deposits. Eleven years afterwards it was
taken up by the Sunny Corner Silver-mining Company,
who in ten years paid £IOO,OOO in dividends, when the
ore becoming poorer, the mine was let in tribute, and
ultimately the tributors obtained the ownership of the
mine. The principal mines on this deposit were the
Sunny Corner, the Nevada, the Silver King, Tonkins’,
the Cornstalk, and the Silver Hill. The rush to the
silver-lead deposits of Thackeringa in 1882 was fol-
lowed by another rush to Silverton and the Apollyon
Valley. Silverton was proclaimed in 1883, and before
the end of the year an area of 5,180 acres had been
taken up in mineral leases. A number of slugs were
found on the surface, some of them containing over
55 per cent, of silver. It was ascertained, however,
that the lodes were of small dimensions and that the
rich ore did not extend to any depth. At the Pin-
nacles, Thackeringa. and Umberumberka mines the
lodes were of a more permanent character, though the
ore was of a lower grade.
The Little Plant Creek, or Webb’s silver-mine, is
about seven miles from Emmaville, New England dis-
trict, and was discovered in 1884. Webb’s Silver-
mining Company was formed to work the property,
and subsequently the mine was acquired by the White
Rock Silver-mining Company, who have mastered the
difficulty experienced by their predecessors in treating
the complex ores. The deposits formerly worked by
the Webb’s Consols Silver-mining Company were dis-
covered about the year 1885. and are situated about
eleven miles to the south of Emmaville. Operations
were stopped in 1892, owing to the proportion of zinc-
blende increasing as the workings deepened. At Pye’s
Creek, 21 miles north-east of Emmaville, are silver
lodes somewhat similar in character to those at Little
Plant Creek. The argentiferous deposits of Rivertree


were discovered in 1887, and are situated on the Upper
Clarence River, Among the principal lodes are the
Phoenix, the Mount Pleasant, the Dunlop, the Wonga-
bah, McDonald’is Wongabah, and the Philippines.
The field suffers from the disadvantage of being situated
in a very rough and remote district, so much so that
ores containing less than 60 ozs. per ton do not pay the
cost of treatment. It is said that between £60,000
and £70,000 has been expended on the field in ma-
chinery and development without any material return.
The Wallah Wallah lodes, Burrowa, were known for
many years before 1888, but it was not until the silver
boom that they attracted any attention. In 1900 the
property was acquired by a company called the Wallah
Wallah Silver and Lead Mines.
At the Peaks, Upper Burragorang, county West-
moreland silver-bearing lodes were discovered thirty
years ago, but they had to be abandoned owing to lack
of facilities for treating the ore. More recently several
other lodes have been discovered, Bartlett’s
mine, known as “The Colon Peaks’’ being
the one from which the most satisfactory
results have been obtained. This field is
now known as Yerranderie and is reached
from Picton, forty-two miles by rail from
Sydney. This mineral area contains no large
lodes, but such as there be, all hitherto
have proved rich. Bartlett commenced to
work the deposits in 1898, and the lode,
although varying from two feet to an inch,
proved a payable one, shoots being found in
some places assaying several hundred ounces
to the ton. The output of this field during
the past seven years exceeds £160,000 in
value A valuable silver-bearing lode
occurs at Borah Creek, 17 miles south
from Inverelb The deposit was discovered
in 1890, but it was not until 1897 that
systematic work was undertaken. The
Conrad Silver-lead Mining Company and
the King Conrad are the principal mines
on this field.
The Broken Hill Mines.
The great Broken Hill lode was taken up by a
local man of no mining experience, but stimulated by
the enormously rich assay values of some of the surface
slugs found in the district after the Silverton rush. In
September, 1883, Charles Rasp, a boundary rider on
Mount Gipps station, marked out an area of 40 acres,
believing the extensive outcrop of manganese to be tin.
On informing the general manager, Mr. McCulloch, of
what he had done, it was determined to form a syndi-
cate of seven persons, all station hands, each putting
£7O into the venture. A mineral lease of the land
taken up by Rasp was applied for, together with six
other 40-acre blocks on the same line ; and these seven
blocks —originally applied for by George McCulloch,
George Urquhart. Charles Rasp, Jas. Poole, Philip
Charley, David James, and Geo. M. Lind—constituted
the Broken Hill proper. Work was commenced, and
assays made for tin, with no beneficial results. It was
then decided to sink for silver ; but the result being
discouraging, coupled with the fact that the capital
subscribed, was exhausted, Lind retired, his interest
being taken by McCulloch and Rasp, and Urquhart
also gave in. It was now determined to increase the
syndicate to fourteen, and with the augmented capital
work continued till towards the end of 1884, when
chlorides were discovered in Rasp’s shaft, at a depth
of about JOO feet. Shortly after rich chloride was
found in the cap of the lode at a different part of the
mine.
The site selected for Rasp’s shaft was on one of
the poorest portions of the lode, and the ore for a con-
siderable time only gave 12 ozs. of silver per ton. The
shares consequently were at a discount, and there were
many offers to sell at rates which, in the light of sub-
sequent events, appear ridiculous. One gentleman
bought three 14th shares for £320 ; for the first of these
he paid £lOO, and for the other two £llO each. He
sold one of the shares for what it cost him, and another
BROKEN HILL SILVER LODE.
for £2OO, retaining the third share. About a year
later this share was worth £3O 000, and within six years
its market value, with dividends and bonuses added,
was about £1.250.000, But the cheapest sale of all was
that of two of the original l-7th shares, which were
disposed of for less than £ 100 each, and which were
afterwards worth £2.500,000 each. Towards the end
of 1884 rich chloride ore was discovered in the outcrop
of the lode to the south of the shaft ; further important
discoveries followed, and the Broken Hill silver mines
soon overshadowed all the other mines on the field.
On August 10, 1885, the Broken Hill Proprietary
Silver-mining Company was floated with 16,000 shares
of £2O each ; the 14 shareholders receiving 1,000 shares
each, paid up to £l9. The remaining 2,000 shares were
offered to the public at £9 per share on allotment,
such shares to be then considered as paid up to £l9,
after which all shares alike were liable to a call of £1


on the formation of the company. The original pro-
prietors were paid £3,000, in addition to their 14,000
shares for expenses. The company therefore started
with a working capital of only £15,000.
Operations were immediately commenced on an
extensive scale, water-jacket furnaces being erected for
smelting the ore. Only one call was ever made, viz., in
1889, and the gross profits from the mine for the first
six months were £89,912. On January 31, 1889, the
number of shares was increased to 160,000, by dividing
each £2O share into 10 shares, of the nominal value of
£2, these being issued as paid up to £1 18s., and towards
the end of the same year a call of 2s. per share was
made. In February, 1890, the number of shares was
increased to 800,000, while their nominal value was
correspondingly reduced from £2 to Bs. New shares
to the number of 160,000 were also issued, making the
total number of shares in the company 960,000. The
BROKEN HILL PROPRIETARY SILVER MINE
seven original 40-acre blocks were known as Blocks 10,
11. 12, 13, 14. 15 and 16. In 1887 Block 14 was sold
to the Broken Hill Proprietary Block 14 Silver-mining
Company, whose capital of £500,000 was distributed
among 100,000, which were issued as paid up to £4 10s.
Of these, 96.000 shares were divided pro rata among
the shareholders of the parent company. Towards
the end of the same year Blocks 15 and 16 were sold to
the British Broken Hill Proprietary Company, with an
authorised capital of £1,320,000 and the subscribed
capital of £1,200,000. The shareholders of the parent
company received, in payment for the two blocks,
shares to the value of £400,000 and the sum of £576,000
in cash. In March, 1888, Block 10 was sold to the
Broken Hill Proprietary Block 10 Company, whose
capital was £1,000,000, in 100 000 shares of £lO each.
The shareholders in the parent company divided 96,000
shares in payment for the block, and the proceeds of
the sale of the remaining shares formed the working
capital of the new company. The Broken Hill Pro-
prietary Company, therefore, now holds only three
blocks of the seven originally pegged out, but there is
no doubt that the portions retained were the richest
of the lot, although Block 10 also proved to be a very
valuable mine.
Since its formation in August, 1885, up to the end
of 1906 the Broken Hill Proprietary Company, with
an authorised capital of £384,000, has produced
52,798 ozs. of gold ; 137,252,743 ozs. of silver, 831,331
tons of lead, 8.082 tons of antimonial lead, 4.576
tons of copper in matte, and 76,310 tons of zinc
concentrates —the total value of this output being
£29,174,287. It has during the same period (20J
years) distributed amongst its shareholders in diyi
dends and bonuses £9,152,000. In addition its
shareholders have received shares in Block 14, in the
British, and in Block 10 companies of the nominal
value of £1,744,000. The principal mines in
the Broken Hill lode, to the south of the
Proprietary mine, are Block 10, the
Central, and the Broken Hill South, while
to the north of the big mine are situated
Block 14, the British, the Broken Hill
North, the Junction, and the Junction
North. In addition, there are at Broken
Hill, the Broken Hill South blocks, and the
New Australian Broken Hill Consols The
aggregate authorised capital of all these is
£3,939,000 ; their total operations from
inception to the end of 1906 represents
£17,624,313; and the amount of dividends
they have declared during the corresponding
period is £2,805,935. With these phenom-
enal returns it is comprehensible that the
Broken Hill field stands out as the chief
centre of mining in this State. The av-
erage number of men employed there
during 1906 was 8,457 —a greater number
than during any previous twelve months,
although the total output for the year was
considerably affected by underground fires
and creeps in some of the mines.
Other Mines.
The Yerranderie mines during 1906 furnished an
output somewhat below that of the previous year, but
a substantial advance was shown in the value of the
yield. Tbs Cobar field for the first time slip plied lead
ore in quantity, the output coming principally from
the C.S.A. Mine. The Conrad Stannite Mines Ltd., at
Howell, carried on active work, and a large tonnage
of ore was dealt with. The total value of the production
of the silver-lead mines to the end of 1906 is £44,12/,033.
The number of men employed in this branch of the
industry during the year was 9,414.
In 1906 the value of the exports from our silver-
lead mines was as follows —Silver silver-lead, con-
centrates, ores, &c., £2,862,973 ; lead (pig) £1.084 ;
zinc (spelter and concentrates), £292,806 —a total value
of £3,156,863. This exceeded the value of the output
for 1905 by £438,999, and since the year 1903 the value
of the output has increased by £1,530,287.


Copper.
Copper was the first metal to be worked in New
South Wales, the earliest attempt to mine for cupri-
ferous ore being made, about 1844, in the Orange
district, where, later, outcrops of copper carbonates
were found over an area of 20 miles square, and the
lodes were worked more extensively than in any other
district in the colony. In 1845 mines were being-
proved at Copper Hill, near Molong, and at Lipscombe,
Pool’s Creek, near Canowindra. In 1847 copper min-
ing was being carried out on the Summer Hill Estate,
near Hockley, and twelve months afterwards the pros-
pectus of a company to work the deposits there ap-
peared in the Bathurst Advocate. By the end of 1867
numerous other mines had been opened in the Yass,
Carcoar, Ophir, Lake George, Cowra, Delegate, Wel-
lington, Albury and Tumbarumba districts ; but none
enjoyed a long lease of life, although there was plenty
of black sulphate ore, and nothing by way of expense
was spared in making the works as complete as pos-
sible. Freights to Sydney in those times varied from
£25 to £4O, according to the distance from the railway,
so that only mines of extraordinary richness could
continue producing under such a severe handicap.
In 1869 the first great copper mine—the Great
Cobar—was discovered, and this has proved the main-
stav of the industry. Its discovery furnishes no excep-
tion to the general history of colonial mining. Two
Danes, Thomas Hartman and Charles Campbell, were
engaged boring for water in the district. It was known
as “ Cobar ” or “ Copar,” which in the aboriginal
dialect signifies “ raddle ” —earthy iron oxide, Here
the aborigines from near and far obtained the material
for painting their bodies with various colours during
corroborees. In course of time their incursions into
the ochreous outcrop led to the formation of a basin ;
the hill, where the workings of the Great Cobar mine
are now erected. Camped at this primitive well one
evening Hartman and his companion noticed the rusty
sediment at the bottom, as well as the blue and green
stains on the side of the well. Neither was acquainted
with copper ores, but they thought there might be
some value in the stone, so, taking with them specimens
of the coloured rock, they started for Bourke. On
their journey they fell in with the wife of a countryman
—Mrs. Kruge, a Cornish woman —who, recognising the
true nature of the ore, informed them of its value.
They immediately returned to the site and, in conjunc-
tion with Joseph Becker, of Fort Bourke, pegged out
40 acres of the land, which was secured on October 6,
1870, as a mineral conditional purchase. Shortly after
work was started Mr. Russell Barton inspected the
show and purchased an interest in the mine.
Rich ores—more than 3,000 tons—were extracted
from near the surface, sent to the Port Adelaide Smelt-
ing works via the Darling River (Bourke), and there
sold at a profit. In January. 1876, the company
amalgamated with the South Cobar Mining Company.
Two 40-acre blocks were secured on the north and
south, and the joint property became known as the
Great Cobar Copper Mining Co, Limited, in 80,000
shares of £1 each. Misfortune overtook the company
in 1889, owing to the failure of the Societe des Metaux
who had agreed to purchase the output of the mine
for three years at £6O per ton, f.o.b. at Sydney and
the consequent slump in the copper market. Alter
lying idle for four years, the mine was let on tribute to
a syndicate, the leading spirits of which were the Messrs.
Longworth Biros. —two capable Swansea smelters.
Operations were commenced when copper was down to
£39 a ton. But Mr. W. Longworth, recognising the
blunders of the old company successfully introduced
the cheaper and more rapid blast-furnace method of
reduction which has revolutionised the copper industry
at Cobar, and it is to his ability that the syndicate’s
venture turned out so successfully. During the ope-
rations of the company from 1876 to 1893, 213,182
tons of ore were raised, 23,610 tons of copper produced,
and £154,000 paid in dividends. Since the syn-
dicate took over charge to December 31, 1905, 1,272,000
tons of ore were treated, producing 35,738 tons of
copper, 116,105 ozs. of gold, and 646,514 ozs. of silver.
The working expenses during this period—exclusive of
plant cost —was £1,862,700 ; and, including the Lith-
gow treatment works and the Rix Creek coke works,
as well as the labour on the Chesney mine, acquired in
1903, over 1,000 men, maintaining about 4.000 per-
sons, were found constant employment. In the latter
portion of 1906 all the properties of the syndicate were
acquired by English capitalists, whose representative
Mr. Rolker, now controls operations. Under his
regime the smelting plant has been considerably
augmented and a new vertical hauling shaft is being
sunk; it is anticipated with the increased facilities the
output will be doubled, if not trebled. The other
principal properties on the Cobar field are the Queen
Bee, Growl Creek, the Mount Hope, the Girilambone,
the Nymagee (recently purchased by an English com-
pany), and the Budgery mines. In the Bathurst
district the Lloyd mine, in the Burraga division, and
the Cadi a mine, in the Orange division, attract most
attention.
The value of the output of copper from the mines
of this State for the year 1906 was £789,527, an increase
of £262,184 on that of the previous year. The total
amount of copper produced in New South W ales to the
end of 1906 was £8,472,629. The men employed in
copper-mining during 1906 numbered 3,047, or 876
more than in the previous year. The Cobar field fur-
nished an output valued at £516,320, representing an
advance of £71,462 on that of 1905. The production,
however, from this field does not come up to that of the
preceding year, and the residt shown is due to the
enhanced value of the metal. The output of the Queen
Bee mine has been considerably augmented. The
mines held by the Nymagee Copper-mining Syndicate
and the Growl Creek Company were also actively
worked. The Girilambone and Mount Hope mines
were reopened during the year, and copper to the value
of £11,966 and £14,672, respectively were, obtained.
Great interest was aroused during the year by the dis-
covery made in the Budgery mine, situated about
three miles from Hermidale, and 108 applications for
mineral leases were made for areas in this district.
From the Lloyd copper mine, Burraga, an increased
output is recorded, and the indications are favourable
to the production being well sustained. Among other


copper mines which come prominently into notice
during the year, mention may be made of the Cadi a
mine, in the Orange district, and the Cangai mine, in
the Grafton district. Much attention is being devoted
to prospecting and in further developing the numerous
copper lodes throughout the State, and altogether the
outlook is a very encouraging one.
Tin.
As far back as the year 1849 the late Rev. W. B.
Clarke foretold the probable occurrence of tin in New
South Wales. In iB6O a considerable quantity of
stream tin was obtained from the alluvials at Oban, but
it was in the year 1871-2 that public interest was
aroused by the discovery of tin at Elsmore and Vege-
table Creek. In 1871 some samples of ore, which Joe
Wills, a shepherd in the employ of Mr. Anderson,
Newstead station, New England, had picked up were
found to contain 76 per cent, oxide of tin. A syndicate,
consisting of Messrs. Barron & Austin (Macquarie
Place, Sydney), Messrs. Brown (Pyrmont Ironworks),
and Mr. C. S. McGlew, was formed to open up the
mine near the present Elsmore mine, and from June 25
to July 8, 1871, a parcel of 6,396 lbs. of clean tin ore
was obtained. This was the first output of any im-
portance secured in the colony. Then commenced the
rush to the New England tin-fields. The stream tin,
under the title of 44 black sand, 55 had long been familiar
to gold-miners in New England, at Oban and else-
where, where its weight, rendering it difficult of removal
from the sluice-boxes, had caused it to be regarded as
worse than a nuisance. As knowledge of its value spread,
eager prospecting led to its presence being proved over
wide areas—areas which were constantly extended
from 1872 until the finding of tin at Gumble, near
Molong, in 1885. At that time the stanniferous area of
New South Wales was about 8,700 square miles. Vege-
table Creek, in the Emmaville district, is only 34 miles
distant from Elsmore. In March, 1872, Thomas Car-
lean first discovered stream tin here, near the source
of the creek, and since then the district has produced
large quantities of ore annually. Tingha, which up to
the end of 1900 came second to Emmaville in the value
of its annual output, has now taken the lead. In
the Emmaville division several of the areas which
in the past supported numerous parties of work-
ing miners were acquired during the year for
dredging purposes. The withdrawal of the men from
these areas pending the completion of arrangements
for commencing dredging is responsible for a temporary
decrease in the output of this division. Satisfactory
increases were recorded in the output from the Deep-
water, Wilson 5 s Downfall and Glen Innes divisions.
The success which attended the operations of the
dredges goes to show that the tin and tin-ore recorded
as having been produced during 1906 represented
£255,744, an amount in excess of that of the previous
year by £29,634. This output exceeded that of any
other year since 1888. The satisfactory returns se-
cured by the dredges are chiefly responsible for the
gratifying output recorded, and the industry generally
has been greatly helped by the high price ruling for
the metal. The dredges, as already stated, won 1,032
tons of tin-ore, valued at £120,661, against 532 tons,
valued at £50,904, in 1905. The bulk of the yield was
drawn from the Tingha-Inverell divisions, and the
production from these centres for the year has been
estimated at 1,481 tons of ore, valued at £169,871.
Of this quantity the dredges won 943 tons, valued at
£110,582, there being 27 plants in operation. The
balance of the yield from these divisions represents the
result of the efforts of a large number of men, who,
owing to the sustained price of the metal, were able to
make our tin-fields capable of maintaining a large
output of ore for some years ahead. The value of the
output from the tin-fields of this State to the end of
1906 was £7,744,509, and the number of men employed
in this branch of the industry during 1906 was 3,795,
an increase of 911 compared with the previous year.
Coal.
Perhaps the most important of the varied mineral
resources of New South Wales is coal, for not only is
the quality of our fossil superior to that found in the
other States, but in extent also the deposits here are
very much greater than in any other portion of Aus-
tralia. In fact, it is estimated that there is available
for fuel in this State over 115,346,880,000 tons of coal.
The possession of such immense stores of first-class coal
appears to be a guarantee that this State will, in the
near future, become the manufacturing centre of the
Commonwealth. The coal from the different New
South Wales coalfields varies somewhat in character
and composition, and while in some districts the fuel
is most suitable for steam-raising, in others it has a
special value for gas-making, or for household pur-
poses. One special advantage about these deposits is
that, for a distance of about 200 miles, they extend
along the seaboard, so that they are excellently situ-
ated for export purposes.
The discovery of coal in New South Wales dates
back to August, 1797, the locality where it was first
found being Coalcliff, on the coast of the north to Wol-
longong, in the southern coalfield. About a month
later seams of coal were discovered in the cliffs at
Newcastle. The earlier discovery is thus spoken of by
Collins in his work 44 An Account of the English Colony
of New South Wales, 5 5 1798 : 44 Information was also
received through the same channel 55 (letters from New
South Wales in 1797) “that a ship called the 6 Sydney
Cove 5 had been fitted out for Port Jackson from Ben-
gal ; but, springing a leak at sea, she was run ashore
on the southernmost part of the coast of New Holland.
Seventeen of the crew attempted to get to Port Jackson
in their long-boat, but were driven on shore and lost
their boat. They then attempted to reach it by land,
in which hazardous attempt only three of them suc-
ceeded, the others either dying on the route or being
killed by the natives. They were eighty days in per-
forming this journey, and reported that in their way
they had found great quantities of coal. This was
afterwards confirmed by the surgeon of the 4 Reliance 5 ,
who went down to the wreck and brought specimens of
it back with him, having found immense strata of this
useful article. 55 In a second edition, published in
1802, the author says: 44 He (the surgeon, Mr. Bass)
proceeded about seven leagues to the southward of
Point Solander, where he found in the face of a steep


cliff, washed by the sea, a stratum of coal, in breadth
about six feet, and extending eight or nine miles to the
southwards. Upon the summit of the high land, and
lying on the surface, he observed many patches of coal,
from some of which it must have been that Mr. Clarke
was so conveniently supplied with fuel.” The dis-
covery of the coal at Newcastle is fully detailed in the
section dealing with Newcastle.
Surgeon Bass, in reporting the discovery of coal on
the South Coast added : “ But from its almost inacces-
sible situation, no great advantage could ever be ex-
pected from it, and, indeed, were it even less difficult
to be procured, unless some small harbour should be
near it, it could not be of much utility to the settle-
ment.” A deep-water harbour has been constructed at
Port Kembla, where the smallest colliers and largest
ocean-going steamers can ride in safety in the roughest
weather. But it was not until 1861 that the Bulli
Company made the first effort to tap the seams of
Wollongong coalfields, as they were then termed, and
not until two years later that the first shipment of coal
was made. In 1862 the South Bulli mine was opened
by Messrs. Taylor and Walker, the workings being
connected with the sea-board by a private line,
miles long About 40 miles south of Sydney lie the
Wollongong coal measures, of which before 1870 out-
crops had been traced for a distance of 30 miles to the
south extending westward as far as Nattai. In that
year the Osborne-Wallsend, or the Mount Keira, owned
by Messrs. Robson & Co. ; the Mount Pleasant, the
Hon. James Byrnes, proprietor ; the American Creek,
belonging to Mr. John Graham, the South Bulli and
the Bulli mines were all in full work ; the seam of the
former running from 6 to 8 feet in thickness and the
mine giving out from 120 to 150 tons of coal per day.
In 1888 the collieries in the Illawarra district produced
399.958 tons of coal, of the value of £161,765 ; and
found employment for about 800 miners. Ten years
further on the output had increased to 1,068,367 tons,
valued at £254,687.
The Rev. W. B. Clarke was the first to argue on
a scientific basis the probable occurrence of coal under
Sydney. Subsequent geologists supported his argu-
ment, and advanced the opinion that the Illawarra coal
measures were the equivalent of the Newcastle seams,
the fields being continuous under Sydney, The only
doubt was as to what depth the coal here would be found
to occur. Efforts were made to solve the problem by
boring for coal at Newington, on the Parramatta River ;
at Botany ; at Narrabeen, north of Manly ; at Rose
Bay, Sydney Harbour ; but all these attempts resulted
in failure, through a sufficient depth not being attained.
Successful bores striking the seam were then put down
at various periods during the years 1884-90 ; at Camp
Creek, near the Waterfall railway station ; at Dent’s
Creek, on the Holt-Sutherland Estate ; at Moorebank,
near Liverpool ; and at Cremorne Point, Sydney Har-
bour ; the latter penetrating a seam of coal at 2,801 ft.
A second bore at Cremorne proved the fact of the con-
tinuity of the northern and southern coalfields, and
thus added an enormous coal-bearing area to the re-
serves of the colony. The results of these two last
bores led to the formation of the Sydney Harbour
Collieries Company at Long Nose Point, Balmain, in
1903. for working the coal under the waters of Port
Jackson.
The Hartley coal measures, the outcrop of which
was traced by the Rev. W. B. Clarke over an area of
ten square miles, belong, according to that geologist,
to the lower portion of the western section of the upper
measures of the great coalfield of New South Wales.
It has been described as non-caking coal approaching
to splint, and intermediate between the lower New-
castle and the Anvil and Dal wood Creek seams. The
seam, running from 9 to 11 feet in thickness, was being
worked in 1869 by Saywell & Grand, at Bowenfels ; by
Woolley & Anderson, at the Hermitage Colliery, Lith-
gow Valley; by Thomas Brown, in the same valley ;
and by Andrew Brown at Coerwale—only four mines
whose product that year totalled 1,360 tons. In 1888
there were 11 collieries at Lithgow and 3 at Hartley,
their united output for the twelve months being 38,935
tons, of the value of £94,970, and the hands they em-
ployed numbering about 1,300 men. At the end of
the next decade these figures had decreased to 282,284
tons, valued at £59,985 —the market price receding as
well as the production. This falling off occurred
mainly between the years 1891 and 1895, when the
output was only 190,864 tons ; but this proved the
turning point, as since then steady progress has been
maintained.
The fields now worked in the Maitland district and
known as the Greta measures were first found and
developed by the father of the late Mr. H. C. Russell,
Government Astronomer, about half a century ago.
That was at Homeville, near West Maitland. Subse-
quently coal was discovered and worked at Greta, near
Branxton. Coal was also known to be in a creek called
Deep Creek, some nine miles to the south-west of Mait-
land ; and this subsequently became the property of
the Silkstone Coal mining Co. The measures at Mait-
land did not prove very satisfactory, and work there
ceased ; but the Greta pit, now idD, was worked for
many years. The Silkstone secured Parliamentary
authority to connect by rail with Maitland, but, unfor-
tunately for the shareholders, financial aid could not
be obtained, and their schemes had to lapse. The pro-
perty involved is worth £500,000 to-day. Messrs.
Hebblewhite, owners of the adjoining freehold, sank a
shaft, exposed the seam and secured mineral leases.
Further mineral leases were taken up by Messrs. Wil-
kinson & Taylor and Adams & Trenchard whose inter-
ests were formed into the Heddon & Stanford Greta
Syndicate, which proved the outcrop of the coal mea-
sures and sunk adits upon them. Later on the outcrop
was traced to within miles of West Maitland, on
Mr. Hungerford’s freehold. Another syndicate was
formed and that seam also opened up. It developed
into the present East Greta Company, which provided
capital to open up successful collieries. Subsequently
the property of the Heddon & Stanford syndicate fell
into the hands of Messrs. Adams, Trenchard and Clift,
who further opened up the seams, which now form the
Pelaw-Main, Stanford-Merthvr and Heddon-Greta
' J
mines. Messrs. J. and A. Brown purchased the west-
ern portion, or Pel aw Main, now one of the best opened
collieries on the line of seam, A large area wa<* next


taken up by a Newcastle syndicate, and the collieries
at Hebburn, Aberdare, Abermain and Wickham and
Bullock Island were in due course established.
The development of the field is largely due to Pro-
fessor David’s discovery of the coal in Deep Creek.
The result of his promptitude and acumen was that the
whole coal-bearing area was reserved for coal-mining
purposes ; otherwise it would have been secured as
freeholds. He estimated the 20,000 acres already (1890)
taken up to contain 466,154,000 tons of recoverable
coal, representing £132,076,966. Since then the coal
area has been found to run under the range and to
extend out Cessnock way ; and a later estimate of the
Professor’s reached the enormous sum of £360,000,000.
To realise what the Maitland field stands for, it is
necessary to inspect the magnificent plants that have
been erected, and to visit such rapidly rising towns as
Kurri Kurri, Cessnock, Weston and Hebburn.
The coal raised during 1906 was 7,626,362 tons,
valued at £2,337.227, and exceeds that of the previous
year by 994,224 tons and £333.766 in value. The out-
put from the respective districts was as follows :
Northern, 5,336,188 tons, valued at £1,718,178 ; Sou-
thern, 1,783,395 tons, valued at £494,871 ; and Western,
506,779 tons, valued at £ 124 178. The coal exported
during the year amounted to 4,901,760 tons, valued at
£2,076.223. This shows an increase of 1,183,707 tons
on that for 1905. The number of persons engaged in
the mining for coal during 1906 was 14,929 —an increase
of 910 compared with 1905.
Coke.
This industry is assuming considerable proportions,
and to the end of 1906 the value of coke manufactured
was £1,106,365, Investigation has shown that the
coke made in New South Wales is superior to the im-
ported article, and which it has now displaced from the
markets of the Commonwealth.
Kerosene Shale.
Kerosene shale, a variety of torbanite or cannel
coal, or boghead mineral, is found at a number ol
places within the State, and has been worked prin-
cipally at Hartley, Katoornba, Joadja Creek, Capertee
district, and the Wolgan Valley. A company known
as the Commonwealth Oil Corporation, with a capi-
tal of £BOO,OOO has recently been formed to exploit
the extensive deposits in the Capertee and Wolgan
Valleys, and a great stimulus has consequently been
given to the industry. The value of the kerosene shale
produced from 1865 to 1906 is £2,135,445.
Iron.
A survey of the iron-ore deposits of this State has
conclusively shown that there is sufficient ore in sight
to produce all the iron required by the Com-
monwealth of Australia for many years.
The estimated minimum quantity of ore
available is 59.317,000 tons Two series
of deposits stand out prominently above
all others, namely, those at Carcoar and
Cadia. As the result of inducements held
out by the Government, Win. Sandford
Ltd. has erected iron smelting works at
Eskbank, near Lithgow. Smelting opera-
tions were commenced in May, 1907. The
estimated output of the furnace is 700
tons a week, which it is calculated will re-
quire 1,400 tons of iron-ore, 500 tons of
limestone, and 800 tons of coke per week.
Other Metals and Minerals.
The value of the other minerals pro-
duced during 1906 was as follows :—Alu-
nite,£4..637 ; antimony, £52,645 ; bismuth,
£5,700 ; diamonds, £2,120 ; iron (from
scrap), £112,848 ; lime, £15,573 ; limestone
flux, £7,463 ; portland cement, £128,487 ;
marble, £1,518 ; molybdenite, £4,798 ; opal,
£56,500 ; platinum, £623 ; scheelite, £7,647 ;
wolfram, £9,057 ; sundry minerals, £2,704.
Precious Stones and Gems.
The mining for precious opal gives profitable em-
ployment to a large number of men, the centre of
operations being the White Cliffs field and Wallangulla,
or Lightning Ridge, Walgett division. To the end of
1905 the value of the precious opal won in this State
amounted to £932,600.
Diamonds have been found in numerous localities
throughout the State, and invariably in water-worn
gravels or drifts. The principal deposits worked in
recent years occur at Bingara and Copeton. The
largest diamond so far discovered weighed carats,
and was found at Mount Werong during 1905. The
o o
value of diamonds won to the end of 1905 represented
£101,970. Emeralds, turquoises and sapphires are also
met with in this State.


Name of Colliery.
Mois-
ture.
Vol.
Hydro-
carbon.
Fixed
Carbon.
Ash.
Sulphur.
Mount Kembla
•84
20 17
69 90
8-67
410
Mount Pleasant
110
2450
65 40
9 00
•370
Osborne-Wallsend ..
•97
24-55
65-11
9 36
•466
Coalcliff
85
21-62
64-07
13-46
•274
Metropolitan
115
18 54
70*83
9-48
*370
SOUTHERN COAL-FIELDS.
The discovery of coal was made shortly after the
first settlement was formed in New South Wales. The
early records show that the first officially-reported
discovery of the precious fuel was made in August,
1797, the locality where it was first found being Coal-
cliff, on the coast, to the north of Wollongong. It was
scarcely possible for the discovery to be long delayed,
for the seam outcrops on many parts of our coast.
The story of the discovery is interesting. It seems
that the ship “ Sydney Cove,” making a voyage from
Calcutta to Sydney, was driven ashore on some part
of the Australian coast. Her crew of seventeen made
an attempt to get to Sydney in a boat, but were again
driven ashore ; of the number only three readied
Sydney. One, Mr. Clarke, a supercargo of the wrecked
vessel, stated that on their journey they met with
quantities of coal, with which they had been able to
make fires on the beach. The report was verified by
Mr. Bass, who was sent out for that purpose. The
quality of the coal was considered good, but the almost
inaccessibility of its situation would, it was thought,
render the discovery of little value. Notwithstanding
the unfavourable opinions then expressed large quan-
tities of excellent coal have for many years been ex-
ported from this field, the loading being carried on
from jetties. About a mouth after the discovery at
Coalcliff, coal was found at the site of the present citv
of Newcastle. Mr. E. F. Pittman, A.R.S.M., Govern-
ment Geologist and Under-Secretary for Mines, iu
“ The Mineral Resources of New South Wales,” gives,
as a result of twenty-one analyses of coal in different
parts of the Southern district, embraced by the ope-
rations oj the Southern Coai Owners’ Agency, the
following average . —Water, .97 ; volatile hydro-carbons,
23.10 ; fixed carbon, 65 26 ; ash, 10.67 ; total, 100.
The trace of sulphur present was represented by the
Hiding formula of .462. The individual analyses of
the various Agency mines, as taken by Professor W. A,
Dixon, F.1.C., in 1893. and also as recorded by Mr.
E. F. Pittman in his works published in 1901, are as
follows :
Southern Coal Owners’ Agency.
The Southern Coal Owners’ Agency was estab-
lished on March Ist, 1893. It was formed to act as a
selling 1 agency for the following companies, viz.
Mount Kembla Coal and Oil Company (owners of the
Mount Kembla colliery), Mount Pleasant Coal and
Iron Mining Company Limited (owners of the Mount
Pleasant colliery). Metropolitan Coal Company of
Sydney Limited (owners of the Metropolitan colliery),
and E. Vickery & Sons Limited (owners of the Osborne-
Wallsend and Coalcliff collieries). The Southern Coal
Owners’ Agency are also the lessees of the Austinmer
and Bulli Pass collieries. The directors of the Agency
are Mr. C. J. Byrnes, chairman (managing director
Mount Pleasant colliery), Sir William McMillan (chair-
man of directors of the Metropolian Coal Co.), Mr.
Joseph Vickery (Mount Kembla Coal Company).
Mr. G. B. Vickery (Osborne-Wallsend colliery), Mi. E.
Vickery (Coalcliff colliery), with Mr. W. A. firth as
manager. The product obtained from the above-
mentioned group of mines is essentially a steam coal,
and for that purpose is considered the best in Australia.
It bears carriage well, and has never been known to
fire in the ship’s hold. The seams range from 6 feet
to 10 feet, have a good roof, vary little in character,
and are practically free from “bands,” faults
MR. C. J. BYRNES.
and “ jumps.” All the mines are worked from
“ adits,” with the exception of the Metropolitan,
which is worked by a shaft.
The companies forming the Southern Coal Owners’
Agency are also the owners of the following steam
colliers: —S.S. “Mount Kembla.” 700 tons;
s.s. “Palmerston,” 500 tons; s.s. “ Kurrara,” 430
tons; s.s. “ Herga,” 250 tons, and also two hulks—
one of a carrying capacity of 1,300 tons and the other
of a carrying capacity oil 500 tons —all of which are
replete with every requisite for quick loading and
discharge of coal. An excellent instance of the great
resources at the command of the Agency mines is
furnished bv the fact that in May, 1900, the Agency


supplied four troopships for the Admiralty with about
14,000 tons in nine days, besides maintaining their
contract supplies to the New South Wales Railways
of about 250.000 tons per annum and the mail steamers.
In addition to the local demand, the coal is now
being largely shipped to the various States of Australia,
Hongkong, Singapore and Shanghai markets, and the
volume of business done for the twelve months ending
31st December, 1906, totalled one million and thirty-
four thousand and eighty-two (1,034,082) tons. The
Agency are contractors for the Royal Navy at Sydney,
and also a number of the mail and other large steam-
ship companies trading to Australia. Of late years
the Question of the supply of coke has been of con-
siderable importance throughout the Australian colo-
nies. Practically the whole of the small coal of the
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR, W. A. FIRTH.
Southern district mines associated with the Southern
Coal Owners’ Agency —with the exception of that
obtained from the Metropolitan mine, which is used
by the Railway Commissioners of New South Wales
in connection with the tramway services—is made
into coke, large contracts for the supply of “ small ”
having been made with the Mount Lyell Mining and
Railway Company of Tasmania, whose coke works
are at Mount Kembla, the Federal Coke Works at the
Osborne Wallsend mine, and E. Figtree & Sons, at the
Mount Pleasant mine. The offices of the Southern
Coal Owners’ Agency are situated at 40 Pitt Street,
Sydney, and their London agents are Messrs. Cheney,
Eggar and Forrester, 23 Billiter Street, London, E.C.
MOUNT KEMBLA COL LIE BY.
The Colliery, belonging to the Mount Kembla Coal
and Oil Company Limited, is regarded as the most south-
ern of the Illawarra group of collieries. It is a very large
and important enterprise, and has occupied! an im-
portant position in the industrial development of New
South Wales. The output is equal to 1,100 tons per
day. During 1906 the company employed 253 hands
under ground and 87 above ground, for a total output
of 261,561 tons. The coal is shipped at Port Kembla
Mount Kembla Colliery and Incline.
where there are two jetties, at the largest of which
any-sized steamer can load, whilst at the smaller jettv
(formerly known as the Mount Kembla Company’s
jetty) suitable steamers up to 3,000 tons capacity can
load in safety. Great improvements have recently
been made. For many years much of the coal ob-
tained from the Southern collieries was transhipped
at iSydney, but now the largest ocean-going steamers
can be loaded in very little time. The mine has had
a very long life, having been opened since 1882, but
has yet vast supplies of coal to draw upon, and seams
are still available which as yet are practically un-
touched.
MOUNT PLEASANT COLLIERY.
The Colliery, belonging to the Mount Pleasant
Coal and Iron Mining Company Limited is located
at Wollongong, and the output of late has in-
creased to 650 ions per day, and will still
further increase owing to the additional rolling
stock which the company are pioviding, and
the company think that during the next twelve months
their output will be equal to 800 or 900 tons per day.
The colliery is equipped with every appliance for eco
nomical working. The coal is shipped at Wollongong
and brought to Sydney in steam colliers. In the year
1906 the company employed 173 men and boys under
ground and 65 above ground for a total output of
146,831 tons. At the mine there are two winding
engines, the one manufactured by Messrs. Tangve and
Co., to bring the coal out of the pit, and the other to


haul the skips from the pit-mouth to the screens, about
T, miles. The latter pair of engines were designed by
Mr. Selwyn Byrnes, the resident engineer of the com-
pany, and manufactured by Mort’s Dock Engineering
Company. Each of the cylinders is 20 inches in dia-
meter, with a stroke of 45 inches, the total horse-power
being equal to 500 tons.. An electric pump was
erected five years ago for the purpose of draining the
mine. This pump is a Quintry No. 4, with a speed of
1,200 revolutions per minute, and capable of delivering
120 gallons per minute to a height of 123 leet. The
driving power is obtained from an inches by |-inch
Westinghouse automatic engine of 30’ h.p. The ven-
tilating plant consists of a Walker’s patent indestruc-
tible ventilating fan, of 12 feet diameter, fitted with
anti-vibration shutter aOid drawn by duplicate single
high-pressure engines by the same makers.
Mount Pleasant Colliery, Loco. Sheds
Mount Pleasant Colliery.


03B0RNE-WALLSEND OR MOUNT KEIRA COLLIERY.
Messrs. E. Vickery & Sons Limited are the pro-
prietors of the Osborne-Wallsend or Mount Keira Col-
liery, which is situated at Wollongong. The colliery
is thoroughly equipped for a large output, and the
present daily output is equivalent to 800 tons per day.
During 1906 the mine gave employment to 273 men
and boys under ground and 76' above ground, the
output being 170,321 tons. The coal is brought to
Sydney by steam colliers.
Oshorne-Wallsend or Mount Keira Colliery.
COALCLIFF COLLIERY.
Messrs. E. Vickery & Sons Limited are the owners
of the Coalcliff colliery, which is situate at Clifton,
and is capable of supplying 200 tons of coal per day.
The product of the mine is taken from the company’s
private jetty at Coalcliff and brought to Sydney for sale.
The Caalcliff Colliery.


METROPOLITAN COAL CO OF SYDNEY LTD.
The Metropolitan Coal Co. of Sydney Ltd. holds
22,000 acres of mineral land partly under lease from
the Crown and partly under lease from the late Hon.
E. Vickery. The colliery is situated in a valley about
one mile from the Helensburgh railway station, on the
shaft-sinking and equipping the colliery. Of the two
shafts put down, the main one is 1,100 feet deep and
16 feet in diameter, and the other —the air shaft-
also 1,100 feet deep, but a foot s'maller in diameter.
The mine is exceptionally well equipped. The winding
engine is the largest of its kind in Australia, and lifts
a load of seven tons to a height of 1,100 feet in 28
Metropolitan Colliery, Helensburgh.
South Coast line. The company has two boards of
directors —one in London and the other in Sydney.
The chairman of the former is Sir Jas. Ferguson, and
of the latter Sir William McMillan. Mr. D. A. W.
Robertson is the general manager, and Mr. M. F. Daw-
kins secretary to the company, whose Sydney office is
at 15 Macquarie Place. Operations were begun by the
company in 1887, the first five years being occupied in
MR. M. F. DWKINGS.
seconds. It has a cylinder of 34 feet by a 5 feet
6 inches stroke, and a drum 15 feet in diameter. Three
powerful haulage engines, driving endless rope drums,
with many miles of rope, are in constant use, and so
likewise are the nine big Lancashire boilers, three
powerful feed pumps, and two locomotives. Extensive
screening arrangements with automatic creeper chains
for handling loaded and empty trucks are also provided.
The air shaft is located at the foot of the hill on the
opposite side of the valley to the mine, and there is
in connection with it two Walker-Schide fans, with
independent engines, driven by rope gearing. The
combined capacity of these engines, one of which is
kept in reserve for any emergency that may arise, is
800,000 cubic feet of air per minute. Steam is sup-
plied by three large Lancashire boilers, and the wind-
ing engine is always under steam, thus affording an
alternative outlet for the workers under ground in the
event of the main engine being disabled. The whole of
the machinery in connection with the fan, and the
main shaft, is enclosed in substantially erected brick
buildings ; in fact, all the structures belonging to the
mines are of a permanent character. There is a pri-
vately-owned railway which connects the colliery with
the Illawarra line at a point a little south of the Helens-
burgh railway station. The coal seam is 11 feet in
thickness, and of this from 6 feet to 7 feet have been
worked. Its depth from the surface ranges from 11
feet to 1,600 feet and as the seam encounters many
faults and dykes, operations are surrounded with excep


tional difficulties. The mine is worked on the pillar
and stall principle. It is estimated that there are
between 40 and 50 miles of roadway under an area
approaching 2,000 acres, which is about the extent of
the area dealt with up to the present. The extremely
gaseous nature of the seam necessitates a constant
circulation of from 350,000 to 400 ; 000 cubic feet of air
per minute through the workings, and the most rigid
discipline besides. No lights, other than that afforded
Vickery by the Bellambi Co., which had for some years
previously opened and developed the northern portion
of the property, then known as the Bellambi mine,
which is also connected with the shipping port of Bel-
lambi by a private railway line, of about the same
length as that of the South Bulli. The daily output
of the two mines at present averages 2,000 tons per
working day ; the output last ye r amounted to
442,000 tons. The property is developed by a number
Metropolitan Colliery, Helensburgh.
by safety lamps, are used in the colliery, which gives
employment to over 500 workmen. The coal won
from this mine is of excellent quality for steam pur-
poses. The railway authorities take over 200,000 tons
of it annually, and the demand for Sydney trade and
naval purposes serves to give constant employment to
the miners. For many years the Metropolitan colliery
has worked without cessation, the demand at times
frequently exceeding the supply.
Bellambi and South Bulli Collieries.
The Bellambi Coal Company Limited is the owner
of the South Bulli and Bellambi coal properties in the
southern coal-mining district of New South Wales,
embracing an area of some 3,700 acres of freehold and
leasehold land. It has a capital of £250,000, of which
£175,000 has been issued, and is fully paid up. The
South Bulli mine was originally opened in 1862 by
Messrs. Taylor and Walker, and the workings are
connected with the seaboard by a private line, the
property of the company, constructed under Act of
Parliament. This line is about 3| miles long. The
mine was purchased in 1901 from the Hon. Ebenezer
of tunnels, or adits, driven into the coal, which is then
run by gravity down inclines, from the foot of which
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. F. G. WALEY


it is hauled by locomotives to the port of shipment.
The haulage plant consists of six locomotives and some
550 box and hopper waggons, having a total capacity
of 3,000 tons, in addition to which storage bins and
bunkers for small coal hold 1,200 tons. The analysis
of the South Bulli coal, according to Pittman’s “ Mine-
ral Resources of New South Wales,” gives 25.40 per
cent, of volatile hydro-carbons, 66 per cent, of fixed
water gauge. The electric plant generates 3-phase
current, which is conveyed under-ground by special
insulated, leaded, and armored cable, and the whole
of this installation was furnished by the Australian
General Electric Company to the company’s speci-
fications. The water is kept under control by electri-
cally-driven, direct-acting and turbo pumps, capable of
dealing with very much heavier rushes of water than
Brow of Incline, South Bulli Colliery.
carbons, and 7.60 per cent, of ash, with a specific
gravity of 1.353, 73.60 per cent, of coke, and an evapo-
rative power of 13 lb. of water per pound of coal. It
makes a very excellent and valuable coke, and the
Broken Hill Proprietary Co. has erected a complete
coking plant, with 100 ovens, using entirely the small
coal from the South Bulli mine, of which the ovens
convert some 1,600 tons every week, all of which
is shipped to the smelters at Port Pirie. The six
locomotives range in weight from 18 to 34 tons, and
are of modern construction, and a large number of
are likely to be experienced. The mine is worked
throughout with safety lamps, and a complete me-
chanical cleaning and electric-lighting system for these
lamps is provided. Electrically-driven coal cutters
are now being introduced, the firot having just landed,
and it is expected that a large increase of this form of
mechanical labour will be made at an early date. The
*/
company’s jetty extends 1,630 feet into water, giving
a draft of 24 feet at low water at the outer shoot, and
receives a shelter and protection from the weather by
a natural reef lying a little to 1 1 south-east of the
View of Pit-Top, South Bulli Colliery.
the waggons are built to Government specification and
run over the Government railway when required.
The mine plant has been greatly modernised of late
ye '.is, the underground traction being largely electric,
and on the endless-rope system. Ventilation is pro-
vided by a Walker’s 26 feet x 8 feet fan, driven by
engines of 540 horse-power, and having a capacity of
400,000 cubic feet of air per minute, against a 6-inch
jetty, it is fitted with two separate shoots, a number
of steam-driven winches, &c., and, like the mine itself,
is electrically lighted. Loading operations proceed
day and night, and under favourable circumstances
500 tons per hour have been shipped in the company’s
colliers. Vessels up to 3,500 tons can be loaded there
with despatch, provided the weather is favourable.
The company’s fleet of steam colliers and lighters


embraces four steamers, classed 100 A 1 at Lloyd’s,
having a total capacity of 3,600 tons, an iron hulk,
carrying 1,900 tons, and a steam lighter and water
tank of 90 tons, and its contracts embrace, among
others, the Orient, Nord-Ueutscher Lloyd, Japanese and
Oceanic (American) mail lines, the Liverpool, White
Star, Federal, and Houlder cargo lines, and the Aus-
trian and German imperial naval contracts, its total
bunkering contracts representing some 400,000 tons
per annum. The company employs 1,000 men in its
mines, steamers, &c., and the sum disbursed annually
for wages exceeds £IOO,OOO. The board of the com-
pany consists of Sir Malcolm McEacharn, K.B. (chair-
man), the Hon Nicholas Fitzgerald, Messrs. David
Syme and J. C. Stewart ; and the Sydney board :
Colonel James Burns and Mr. Adam Forsyth. Mr.
W. W. Gudgeon is secretary of the company, which is
registered in Melbourne. The colliery manager is
Mr. A. E. Sellers, and the company’s business is con-
trolled by the general manager, Mr. F. G. Waley, at the
Sydney office, No. 9 Bridge Street.
Corrimal-Balgownie Colliery.
This colliery, owned by the Conimal-Balgownie
Collieries Limited, is situated 45 miles from Sydney,
on the Illawarra line, and is connected with the Govern-
ment main line by a short private railway. The area
having an excellent roof. The seam outcrops imme-
diately under the bold headland called Broker’s Nose,
at a height of 375 feet above sea-level, and is worked
by the usual adit or tunnel, common to the majority
of the Southern mines. The workings extend to a dis-
tance of over two miles from the tunnel mouth. The
output at the present time is 800 tons per day, but
arrangements are being made to considerably increase
the output in the near future. The colliery is worked
on the usual bord and pillar system, some 350 miners,
wheelers and surface men being employed daily. The
company owns about 120 hopper waggons capable of
holding from seven to nine tons each, and four power-
ful locomotives, both locomotives and waggons ful-
filling the requirements of the New South Wales Gov-
ernment railways in order to allow them to run over
the Government line, The coal is drawn to the surface
by endless haulage, operated by' five powerful multi-
tubular and Cornish boilers. On arrival at the pit’s
mouth, the skips pass over a weighbridge, and after
being weighed are carried by a self-acting endless rope
down an incline 40 chains long, having a fall of 355 feet
to the screens, where the small coal is separated from
the large, the coal then being taken by the company’s
own locomotives to Port Kembla, Wollongong, or
private jetties at Bulli and Bellambi. The workings
of the colliery, extending as they do for several miles,
necessarily need effective ventilation, which is provided
Train-load of Coal leaving Corrimal-Balgownie Colliery.
owned and leased by the proprietary consists of 8,748
acres, of which only a comparatively small portion has
yet been worked, the colliery having an extensive field
of virgin coal untouched. The coal is recognised as
being in the front rank of the Southern coals, being of
excellent steaming quality and much harder than some
of the other Southern coals, and consequently better
able to stand handling. The seam is the Upper or
Bulli seam, and ranges from 7 feet to 8 feet 6 inches in
thickness, being absolutely free from band or dirt, and
by one of Walker Brothers’ indestructible fans, 12 feet
in diameter by 5 feet wide, connected by rope gearing
to the flywheel of an engine with a cylinder 14 inches
in diameter with a feet stroke, At the present
time the fan produces 80,000 cubic feet of air per minute
under a resistance of 1.5 inches water gauge with the
engine running 50 revolutions per minute. This pro-
vides more than sufficient fresh air to comply with the
Government regulations, but as the fan is: capable of
providing double this quantity of air, it has ample


power to cope with the extension of the workings,
besides which the proprietary have commenced the
work of sinking a ventilating shaft on their freehold
property, which will reach the coal at a depth of 850
feet from the surface and act as an intake, thus assist-
ing the operations of the fan. Safety lamps are used
MR D. H. PROSSER.
throughout the mine, and only permitted safety ex-
plosives are used for shooting the coal, The lamps are
electrically cleaned, locked and lit, A powerful plant
is installed at the mine furnishing electric power for
the lamp-room, engine-houses, and the various stations
in the main haulage road. The stables are clean, airy
and up to date, capable of accommodating 50 horses,
and are lighted by electricity. The small coal pro-
duced at the mine is converted into coke at the works
of the Australian Coke-making Company Limited,
situated at Unanderra, and managed by the same
agents. The coke produced is admittedly of superior
character for smelting purposes being able to carry
very heavy charges. Large contracts are held for the
supplies of the various smelting companies at Broken
Hill, Mount Morgan, Wallaroo and Port Augusta,
whilst considerable exports of the coke have been
made to San Francisco, Japan, and other Eastern
ports. The manager of the colliery is Mr. W. B,
Pendleton ; the under-manager is Mr. H. Sheppard ;
and the general management of the colliery and the
sale of the coal is vested in the firm of Messrs. G. S,
Yuill & Company Limited, 6 Bridge Street, Sydney,
of which Mr. D, H. Prosser is manager.
The Bulli Colliery.
The Bulli Colliery and Coke Works, the site of
which is 43 miles from Sydney, on the South Coast
line, is the property of the estate of the late Mr. George
Adams, the mine having been acquired by him from
the old Bulli Coal Company after the great disaster
some 20 years ago. Mr. Adams commenced working
and producing coal from the reconstructed mine in
1895, and having previously purchased the Bulli Coke
Works from the original Bulli Coke Making Co., he
worked the mine in conjunction with the coke works
from that date. The area of the workings of this col-
liery comprise some 4,600 acres, and the annual output
of coal during the past eight years has averaged over
100,000 tons. The Bulli coal is largely favoured for
marine work on account of burning to a fine white ash ;
of late years it has in common with all southern coal,
greatly increased in demand for high pressure and
continuous steaming work- The colliery is now work-
ing the 4-foot seam, and this coal is giving excellent
results in both marine and land boilers, being one of
those fuels which, while giving a high steam-generating
force, is economical in use on account of lighter fires
being required and the percentage of ash being below
the average of southern coal. During the past few
years large sums have been expended exploiting the
areas to the west of the old Bulli Company’s original
holdings. This new land comprises some 3,400 acres,
and the prospect of opening up in the near future far-
ther coal-producing areas is particularly promising.
An electrical plant has been installed to expedite this
prospecting, and those interested are sanguine that
their hopes of vastly increasing the colliery’s output
will be realised. The coke works attached to the mine
manufacture about 15,000 tons annually. The Bulli
coke has been used in large quantities by all the prin-
cipal smelting companies, including Broken Hill Pro-
prietary, Mount Lyell, Dapto Smelting Co., Sulphide
Corporation, and Great Cobar Ltd. The coke-making
plant consists of 40 rectangular ovens of a modified
Coppee type, capable of producing 60 tons per day, and
are operated upon by a hydraulic ram for discharging-
Another product of this colliery is a smokeless
coal, which has proved itself to be a coal of excellent
steaming qualities, and has been used with success,
amongst other places, by the Palace Electric Lighting
Station, Sydney. In this, it is claimed, lies the solu-
tion of the smoke nuisance in thickly-populated centres,
and will no doubt become an important product. The
colliery has its own jetty, and by that means most of
its coal production is shipped. This jetty is also used
MR. W. J. ADAMS.
for the shipment of large quantities of other southern
coal. The steamship “ Governor Blackall ”is worked
in conjunction with the mine, and the property is
managed, together with other properties of this estate
in New South Wales, by Mr. W. J. Adams, as managing
trustee, and the office in Sydney is 253 Pitt Street.
The colliery manager is Mr. Gibson C. Youll.


Sydney Harbour Collieries Limited.
In the year 1890 a syndicate was formed for
the purpose of putting down bores to prove the depth
at which the coal lay under the mining authorities
in Sydney harbour, which had been granted to
R. 1). Adams, Esq., in the year 1878. A bore put
down at Cremorne, on the northern shore of
Sydney harbour, proved the Southern or Illawarra
SYDNEY HARBOUR COLLIERIES.
coal measures, at a depth of 2,801 ft. 9 ins., and the
section of the Top Bed, or Bulli seam of coal, was
found to be 10 ft. 3 ins. in thickness.
After much preliminary work, which fully proved
the theory held by such eminent geologists as Mr.
E. F. Pitman, Government Geologist, and Professor
T. W. E. David, of the Sydney Universitv, sinking
• J * 7 r-
operations were commenced, and a pair of the deepest
and most up-to-date shafts, 18 feet diameter in the
clear, have been sunk to a depth of 2,950 feet,
wherein the coal seam of excellent quality and
second to none for steaming purposes was struck at
a depth of 2,880 feet
At the face of the present workings the seam
shows 4 ft. 9 ins. of coal of excellent quality, and was
considered by the late Dr. Helms, M.A., to be one
of the most anthracitic coals from the vicinity of
Sydney he ever analysed —a fact corroborated by the
Government Analyst, who gives the percentages as
follows ; —“ Moisture, 0 - 52 per cent. ; volatile hydro-
carbons, 18 - 85 per cent.; fixed carbon, 74 - 6fi per
cent. ; ash, 5 - 97 per cent. ; specific gravity of D 346;
80.63 per cent, of coke, with an evaporative power of
13.2 lbs. of water per lb. of coal.” On the surface, and
near the top of the upcast shaft, is erected one of the
largest mine-ventilating fans in the English-speaking
colonies. It is of the Walker Indestructible type,
having a diameter of 24 feet by 8 feet wide, guaran-
teed to produce 400,000 cubic feet of air per minute,
against 44 inches water gauge ; this is driven by a
compound engine having high and low pressure
cylinders, 19 inches and 35 inches in diameter respec-
tively. The winding engines erected at the upcast
shaft are a pair of horizontal, coupled, direct-acting,
high-pressure engines having cylinders 30 inches di-
ameter by 5 feet stroke, with a rope drum 14 feet in
diameter. The winding engines erected at the down-
cast shaft are of the same
pattern ; the cylinders are
28 inches diameter by 5
feet stroke. The headgear
erected at the upcast shaft
is of iron bark timber
throughout, and stands 54
feet high, surmounted by
15 feet rope pulleys. The
headgear erected at the
downcast shaft is of steel
lattice construction, and
stands 70.1 feet above the
pit-top level, at the top of
which 18 feet diameter rope
pulleys are erected. The
boilers, five in number,
with accommodation for
ten more, are of the Lanca-
shire type, 30 feet long and
8 feet in diameter, construc-
ted for a working pressure
of 120 lbs. per square inch,
and fitted with all the
latest improvements, the
chimney - stack standing
J O
nearly 200 feet above the
%/
collierv vard. The distance
9J •'
from the pit mouth to the quay wall is less than 300
feet, the length of the quay wall is 580 feet, and the
largest ships coming to the port can lie alongside almost
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. B. SOKEHILL, Manager.
William Corry,Bart., Mr. John Fleming,Mr.Herbert W.
Harper, Mr. E. K. Wilson, and the Hon. B. R. Wise.
at the pit mouth, when
loading operations can
be carried on day or
night, and in all
weathers, with all
modern and up-to-
date conveniences.
The Sydney Board
of Directors com-
prises : Mr. James In-
glis (chairman), Colo-
nel James Burns, Mr.
R. D. Adams, Mr.
John Gillies, M.L.A.,
and Mr. D. C. Simp-
son ; the general man-
ager is Mr. B. Soke-
hill, and the secretary
Mr. I). W. C. Shiress.
The London board
consists of Mr. E. T.
Ing h a m (c hair m a n),
Mr. Jersey Barnes, Sir


PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT.
Upon the inauguration of Constitutional Govern-
ment in New South Wales the Public Works Department
was under the administration of the Minister
of Lands, and it remained so until the second
Cowper ministry took office. Then, in October, 1859,
it was detached from the Lands and formed into a
separate branch of the service as the Department of
Public Works. Prior to this period the portfolio of
Lands and Works was held successively by the Hons.
G. R. Nichols (August 21, 1856, to August 21, 1856) ;
Terence R. Murray (August, to October 2nd, 1856) ;
John Hay (October 3, 1856, to August 7, 1857) ; and
T. R. Murray and John Robertson, who were in office
at successive periods, from September 7, 1857, to
September 30, 1859. The Hon. Ed. Flood was the
first Secretary of Works, and he retained his portfolio
for little more than three weeks —October 1 to Oc-
tober 26, 1859. Following Mr Flood in the order
named the Ministers of this important department
have been : The Hons. Geoffrey Eagar (October 27, 1859,
to March 3, 1860) ; Win. M. Arnold (March 9, 1860, to
October 15, 1863) ; Arthur T. Holroyd (October 16,
1860, to February 2, 1865) ; Win. M. Arnold, succeeded
in the same ministry by Thos. W. Smart (February 3,
1865, to January 21, 1866) ; Jas. Byrnes (January 22,
1866, to October 26, 1868) ; John Sutherland (October
27, 1868, to October 15. 1870) ; Jas. Byrnes (October 16,
1870, to May 14, 1872) ; John Sutherland (May 15, 1872,
to February 8, 1875) ; John Lackey (February 9, 1875,
to March 21, 1877) ; Jas. Hoskins (March 22, 1877, to
August 13, 1877) ; Ed. Coombes (August 17, 1877, to
December 17, 1877) ; John Sutherland (December 18,
187", to December 20,1878); John Lackey, December 21,
1878, to January 4, 1883) ; A. Stuart, followed by
T. A. Wright (January 5, 1883, to February 23, 1886);
W. J. Lyne (February 26, 1886, to January 19, 1887) ;
John Sutherland (January 20, 1887, to January 16
1889) ; J. Fletcher, (January 17, 1889, to March 7,
1889) ; Bruce Smith (March 8, 1889, to August 13,
1891) ; W. J. Lyne (October 29, 1891, to March 2,
1894) ; and J. H. Young, followed by C. A. Lee (August
3, 1894, to July 7, 1899). E. W. O’Sullivan held the
portfolio in the three following ministries, being in
office from July 14, 1899, to April 29, 1904, when, on
the Carruthers Government coming into power, the
present Minister of Works, Mr. C. A. Lee, assumed
control. From this list it will be seen that in the com-
paratively short period of 51 years there have been no
less than 31 changes in the direction of the Public
Works Department. Not that this condition of affairs
is at all exceptional under the present system of party
government. Other branches of the service have had
a greater number of administrators ; but this only
emphasises the case against party government. For-
tunately, the evils attendant upon such repeated al-
terations in the political heads of Government offices
are to a very large extent nullified by the fact that the
secretarial voice behind ministerial direction is the
actual master of the situation —the controlling power
looking after the administration of national affairs.
In the Works, while Ministers have come and gone
with shadow-like speed, there have been in the course
of these fifty years but five Under-Secretaries, as fol-
low :—Captain Martindale, from October 21, 1859, to
January 14, 1861; Mr. John Rae, from January 15,
1861, to March 31, 1888 ; Mr. J. Barling, from April 1,
1888, to January 15, 1896 ; Mr. R. R. P. Hickson, from
March 5, 1896, to February 28, 1901 ; and Mr. Davis,
from March, 1901, to May, 1907, when he was ap-
pointed inspecting engineer in England.
The scope of the Public Works Department is a wide
one, including the following branches and services :
Rail way Construction Branch, Government Architects
Branch, Land Valuers’ Branch, Roads and Bridges,
Ferries, Public Watering Places, River Dredging, Water
Supply and Drainage Branch Biloela, Government
Dockyard, Biloela, and Public School buildings the
later being transferred to the Works as late as 1905.
In constructing and maintaining the works attaching
to these various public services the department in that
year let no less than 3,604 contracts. On the perma-
nent staff there were 451 officers, and on the temporary
staff 116 officers, their salaries for the twelve months
aggregating £127,154. The papers registered at the
head office numbered 71,351, most of them having to
be dealt with several times ; and no less than 16,631
official letters were sent from the office of the I nder-
Secretary of formal acknowledgments.
Included in the professional staff were 65 District
Assistant Engineers, to whom was entrusted the super-
vision of all Government works, excepting railways and
large undertakings. During the year 1904 there was
a complete reorganisation of the country officers, with
a view to more economical working, and in place of
having, as formerly, two or three officers in the same
town, each representing a separate branch of the de-
partment, one responsible officer was placed in charge
of each district. This rearrangement scheme led to
the services of no less than 439 officers being dispensed
with.
In the early days of the colony, and up to the era
of responsible government, all matters in connection
with road construction, as well as other public works,
were carried out under the direction of officers in the
Imperial service, generally belonging to the Royal
Engineers, and many of the best roads in the colony
O y v
bear testimony to their skill. Although much good
work was done by the early road engineers, the real
engineering history of the colony dates fronj the for-
mation of the Public Works Department in 1859.
Since that year the Government have been actively
engaged in improving the roads already in existence
and opening new means of communication to meet
the demands of the increasing population. As an
illustration of what has been done, it may be pointed
out that since the year 1857 up to 1903-4 the large sum


of £22,939,254 has been expended on road, bridges and
public watering-places works alone. To give anything
like an adequate statement of the immense amount of
road work that has been carried out would be impos-
sible in the limits of a short article like this, and refer-
ence can, therefore, only be made to some of the most
important of them. One of the earliest works to estab-
lish communication between the coastal districts and
the interior was the Western Road, running over the
Blue Mountains to Bathurst, ope' ed to the latter
township in 1815. This road, which now extends to
Warren, a distance of 342 miles, is still maintained as
the main trunk road running westward into the in-
terior. The other main roads are the main Southern
Road, from Sydney to Albury, 365 miles, and the main
North Road, running from Sydney, through the Hawkes-
bury and Wollombi districts, and giving access to the
rich and fertile districts of the Hunter River and Liver-
pool Plains, and thence to the north and north-western
parts of the colony. Both these arteries are macada-
mised for the whole of their lengths, and are fully
bridged, so that communication is always open. The
southern tableland of the colony has been tapped at
various points from the coast. One of the first roads
to be constructed in this direction was that from Clyde
River, Nelligen, ascending the tableland to Braidwood
—then the centre of an important mining district.
This highway abounds, as do all these coast roads, in
great natural beauties. A road from Eden, Twofold
Bay, gives access to the Monaro district, and passing
through Cooma and Kiandra, leads to Tumut and
Gundagai, where it strikes the southern railway system.
From Moruya there is another road giving access to
Braidwood via Araluen—the seat of the gold-dredging
industry. In the fertile district of Shoalhaven the
chief road, from Nowra, runs over the Cambewarra
Range, crossing the Kangaroo Valley and ascending
Barrengarry Mountain to the tableland at Moss Yale,
where it reaches the main Southern Road. The work
on this road was of the heaviest character, the moun-
tain passes being some eight miles in length, and it
traverses a fertile country which, not much more than
thirty years ago, a horseman could hardly cross with
safety in wet weather. North of this there is a good
mail-coach road from Kiama to Moss Vale, and at the
northern end of the Illawarra district the most important
road of communication is that from Campbelltown, via
Appin and the Bulli Pass. The grades of this pass are
somewhat severe, being as sharp as 1 in in places.
There is also the South Coast Road from Sydney, which
is trafficable by vehicles to Twofold Bay. All the
rivers intervening are either bridged or provided with
suitable ferry accommodation to carry over heavy
loads.
Northward from Sydney it is possible to travel by
the North Coast Road to Murwillumbah, on the Queens-
land border—a distance from the starting-point at
Hexham of 800 miles. The northern tableland, which,
roughly speaking, extends from a little below Tam-
worth to the Queensland border, is connected with the
coast at various intervals. From Ballina a good road
crosses the Clarence at Tabularn, and connects with
Tenterfield —the cuttings at Sandylands on this route
being especially severe. The formation of the road
from Grafton to Glen limes was commenced about
1863. This road, known as the Newton Boyd, is one
of the largest works of its kind undertaken by the
Public Works Department. It consists generally of
a series of long heavy mountain cuttings, one of the
bluffs being so severe that the expedient of tunnelling
on a common road had to be resorted to. This
thoroughfare was followed subsequently by similar
roads from Grafton to Armidale, Bellinger to Armidale
—tapping the Don Dorrigo Scrub, —and from Kempsey
to Armidale.
Mention should also be made of the road from Port
Macquarie to the New England district, one of the
earliest connecting roads made in the north. In the
interior a vast amount of work has been done in pro-
viding branch roads to the main arteries ; roads be-
tween townships and for access to the railway system ;
and routes for stock purposes. On many of these
latter a large sum has been expended in providing
tanks and wells for watering travelling stock, and
artesian bores have successfully been put down for the
same purpose. Owing to the nature of the soil in some
portions of the colony and the absence of suitable
stone, the cost of road construction has always been
high, so much so in some parts that it has been found
cheaper to construct light railways. On the whole,
however, expenditure under this head has been mate-
rially reduced of late years. During the last decade
the mileage of the main and minor roads increased
from 27,420 to 32,921 miles, or a total of 5,501. Not-
withstanding this, the votes in these respective years
were £405,501 and £314,000, or a reduction of £91,507.
The bridges are constructed in a very substantial
manner, timber being used wherever possible. The
hardwoods of New South Wales are eminently suited
for bridge-work and structures of a like character.
Ironbark, which is mostly used, has a tensile strength
of about one-third that of wrought iron, while the
durability may be gauged from the fact that some
bridges, 50 years old, totally unprotected from the
weather, are still carrying traffic. One of the largest
timber bridges was completed over the Murrumbidgee
at Wagga Wagga, at a cost of £13,200, in the middle
of the nineties, to replace a wooden structure built 34
years before. The most important iron bridges yet
contracted in New South Wales are the Hawkesbury
railway bridge—erected by an American firm of con-
tractors, at a total cost approaching £400,000 —and the
Pyrmont-Glebe Island swing bridges. The cost of these
two last exceeded a quarter of a million sterling. An
iron bridge, consisting of five 150-fect independent
wrought-iron lattice girders and a swing span with
two 60-feet clear openings, was finished at Parramatta
in 1881, a similar bridge being opened at Iron Cove,
Sydney, in 1882. The total cost of these bridges com-
plete was £IIO,OOO. The Lane Cove bridge, consisting
of five 60-feet spans, with a swing-span pivoted on one
abutment, and finished in 1885, cost £42,700. Less
costly bridges have been constructed over the Shoal-
haven River, at Nowra ; the Namoi River, at Manilla,
at Gunnedah, at Yellow Rank, and at Bingera ; the
Murrumbidgee, near Yass ; the Snowy River, at Buck-
ley’s Crossing ; and the Lachlan River, at Cowra.
Bridges have also been constructed over the Murray


and Darling Rivers at various points—Wentworth,
Brewarrina, Bourke, Wilcannia &c.,—which are so
designed as to permit of navigation at all states of the
river, without offering the obstruction of a swing
span in times of high flood. The design adopted is a
still lift bridge, placed five feet clear of the maximum
flood. The following figures aptly illustrate how, with
the progress of the colony, the Roads and Bridges
Branch of the Public Works Department has grown
Total expenditure up to 1857, £IOO,OOO ; in 1867,
£186,417; in 1877, £465,175; in 1887, £764,426; in
1897-8, £616,097 ; in 1902-3, £897,781 ; and in 1903-4-
when expenditure had to be severely limited—£494,9s9.
Of equal importance to the maintenance of com-
munication by means of roads, &c., is the keeping open
of the navigation of the rivers, which serve some of the
richest portions of the colony, carrying a considerable
population. The Government is obliged to keep a
large dredging plant for the purpose, and this with
harbour works form another branch of the department.
by convict labour, the breakwater having been ex-
tended 520 feet at a cost ol £43,919. The prison erected
by the Public Works for these long-sentence prisoners
cost very nearly £BO,OOO. At Sydney, owing to its
magnificent natural facilities, very little has been
required to provide for shipping beyond the construction
of wharves. But at Wollongong and Kiama harbours
have been constructed for the southern coal trade, and
Government wharves are to be found at all the chief
centres of population. From 1857 to 1903-4 the total
expenditure in the Harbours and Rivers Branch
amounted to £13,982,792.
The construction of railways and tramways, and
the work incidental to the completion of the water
supply and sewerage system for the city of Sydney
and the Hunter River district are dealt with in separate
articles treating of these subjects. In the matter of
public buildings in the metropolis and in the country
the people of the colony have every reason to be proud.
Probably no city for its age contains such a large num-
KANGAROO RIVER SUSPENSION BRIDGE.
A great deal of dredging is also performed in Sydney
and Newcastle. Sand pump dredges have been adopted
for the coastal rivers with great success, enabling more
work to be done at a greatly reduced cost. Costly
works, too, have to be carried out owing to the shifting
and dangerous nature of the bars. At the entrance to
the Clarence and Richmond Rivers improvement
works have been carried out in accordance with schemes
proposed by that eminent hydraulic engineer the late
Sir John Coode. These works are of a very extensive
character, as will be gathered from the fact that the
estimated cost in the case of the Richmond River is
£326,000. Newcastle furnishes a remarkable example
of what can be done by judicious engineering skill.
Thirty years ago it was shunned by foreign vessels ; it
is now second only to Port Jackson in all its shipping
appointments and nautical requirements. At Trial
Bay some years ago a harbour of refuge was completed
her of stately buildings showing fewer lapses from
good taste as Sydney. In every township of any im-
portance throughout the country commodious court-
houses, lock-ups. police quarters, post offices and
public schools have been erected, and in certain dis-
tricts expensive gaols. It may be made a subject of
comment that much is done by the central Government
in New South Wales which in other countries is left to
the local authorities ; but the reason for this is ap-
parent. The scattered population of the interior is
so small in comparison with the immense area, that it
has hitherto been impossible for the people themselves
to carry out what local works are required, except in
the townships. The recently passed Local Shires Act
is a legislative effort to discontinue this condition of
affairs, and decentralise road construction and other
works undertaken from Sydney, but whether this
innovation will prove enduring has yet to be seen.


Mr. J. DAVIS, M. Inst. C.E.,
Under Secretary of the Public
Works Department of New South
Wales, was born near Birmingham,
England, in 1854, and educated at
Dudley Grammar School. After
leaving school, he spent a short time
with his father, who was at that time
a colliery-owner and practising as an
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney,
Mr. J. Davis.
engineer. Subsequently he served
his articles with Messrs. William
North & Son, consulting and mining
engineers, Rowley Regis and Lon-
don. In 1876 he became assistant
to Mr. Jacob Forrest, M. Inst. C.E.,
of Mold, North Wales. In 1879 he
was engaged at the Park Lane Iron
Works in design and construction.
In 1880 he was given charge of the
Dudley Sewerage Scheme, a work of
considerable magnitude, which he
carried out in conjunction with the
late Mr. H. T. Martin, M. Inst.
C.E., of Wolverhampton and Lon-
don. In 1883 he came to Australia
under a provisional agreement to
construct a railway in Queensland,
but upon arriving in Sydney he was
offered a position in the Public
Works Department by the late Mr.
W. C. Bennett, M.1.C.E., Com-
missioner for Roads and Bridges,
which he decided with the con-
currence of the Queensland company
to accept. In 1890 he was appointed
supervising engineer in charge of the
Sewerage Construction Branch, oc-
cupying that position until 1895,
when the branch was transferred to
the Water and Sewerage Board. Mr.
Davis was then placed in charge of
the country towns water supply and
sewerage. Upon the reorganisation
of the service, in 1896, this branch
was again restored to the control of
the Public Works Department, and
Mr. Davis was appointed Engineer-
in-Chief of the Sewerage Construc-
tion Branch. In 1896 a Royal
Commission was appointed to in-
quire into the administration of the
Public Works Department. A
number of serious charges had been
made in Parliament regarding its
administration in the matter of
certain sewerage contracts, and Mr.
Davis conducted the case for the
department. In February, 1900, he
obtained six months’ leave of absence
in order to visit England. While
there he made full inquiries respect-
ing the subject of sewage disposal,
devoting special attention to the
septic system, arrangement of abat-
toirs, and isolation hospital. The
ordnance survey of England also
came within the scope of his in-
quiries, but he found that the system
in New South Wales was more
accurate. Upon the transfer of Mr.
R. R. P. Hickson, M. Inst. C.E., in
1901, to the chairmanship of the
Harbour Trust, Mr. Davis was
appointed to the Under Secretary-
ship for Works, his present position.
Among his special duties since as-
suming the Under Secretaryship for
Lands has been that of President of
the Royal Interstate Commission on
the Murray River, which was ap-
pointed by the three State Govern-
ment of New South Wales, Victoria
and. South Australia, to report upon
the apportionment of the Murray
basin between the States concerned,
and other questions arising there-
from. Mr. Davis is a member of the
Institute of Civil Engineers, Eng-
land ; a member of the Institute of
Mechanical Engineers, England ;
fellow of the Sanitary Institute,
England ; and member of the Royal
Society of New South Wales.
Mr. WILLIAM JOHN
HANNA, Commissioner for Roads,
and Principal Engineer for Roads
and Bridges in the Public Works
Department of New South Wales,
was born near Belfast, north of
Ireland, on September 22, 1854. He
was educated at the Drumaness
National School, the Belfast Acad-
emy, and the Royal Belfast Aca-
demical Institution. He served five
venrs with his uncle, the late Mr
Hugh Planna, civil engineer and
surveyor, of Clarendon Place, Bel-
fast. Mr. Hanna, notwithstanding a
brilliant prospect of succeeding to his
uncle’s extensive practice, came to
New South Wales in 1878, intending
to remain but a year or two. He
was however induced to accept an
appointment by the then Engineer-
in-Chief for Roads, Bridges and
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. WILLIAM JOHN HANNA.
Sewerage, the late Mr. Bennett, as
Road Superintendent at YMung, in
which position he remained till July,
1883, when he was promoted to the
charge of the Wilcannia district
which includes an area of over 66,000
square miles. When in this district
the enormously rich deposits of silver
and lead on the Barrier Ranges were
discovered and a large population
was attracted to that locality in a
short space of time. Mr. Hanna’s
headquarters were therefore removed
to Broken Hill, and upon him de-
volved the responsibility of providing
water supplies for the rapidly grow-
ing population at the various mining
centres, which he accomplished with
most satisfactory results. Owing to
a long continuance of drought prior
to completion of the works for
Broken Hill water supply, the cost
of water ranged from 10s. to 15s. per
hundred gallons. Mr. Hanna de-
signed and carried out a scheme
for bringing in water by rail from
the Rat Hole Tank about eighteen
miles from Broken Hill. In Feb-
ruary, 1890, Mr. Hanna was called
to head office and promoted to the
position of divisional engineer, in
charge of the north-eastern divi


sion. In the following year an appli-
cation for six months’ leave of absence
was approved, which
spent in Great Britain and Europe.
On return he was placed in charge of
the combined north coast and western
divisions, subsequently the south
coast, and afterwards the southern
division. In 1898 he was promoted
to the position of principal assistant
engineer, and in igoi to that of com-
missioner and principal engineer.
Mr. Hanna has taken an active
interest in military matters. While
at Broken Hill he assisted in the
formation of a company of mounted
rifles and also a company of infantry.
The military authorities, however,
owing to the extreme distance of
Broken Hill from Sydney, were
reluctantly compelled to decline their
services. The companies were con-
sequently disbanded. After his re-
moval to Sydney, the Civil Service
Corps was formed by Major Hickson,
and Mr. Hanna appointed to the
command of B Company. Upon the
retirement of Major Hickson in 1902,
he took over the command of the
corps with the rank of captain. In
sporting, Mr. Hanna has taken an
active interest in aquatics, and as a
member of the Sydney Rowing Club
has participated in no less than
twenty-seven wins since 1891, Mr.
Hanna has filled the position of cap-
tain of this club for a number of
years.
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. G. McRAE.
Mr. GEORGE McRAE, Prin-
cipal Assistant Architect, Public
Works Department, is a native of
Edinburgh, Scotland, where he was
born in 1858. He was educated at
the Edinburgh Normal School, and
afterwards at George Watson’s Col-
lege, of the same city. Upon leaving
school he was articled to Messrs.
George Beattie & Sons, architects,
of Edinburgh, and afterwards he
established for himself a private
practice in that city, which he carried
on for a number of years. He came
to Sydney in 1884, and almost
immediately obtained an appoint-
ment as principal assistant in the
City Architect’s office, Town Hall,
Sydney. After acting in that capa-
city for five years he was, upon the
demise of Mr. T. H. Sapsford, called
upon to fill the position oi city
architect and city building surveyor.
While engaged in the City Archi-
tect’s office Mr. Mcßae supervised
the completion of the Centennial
(Town Hall), Sydney, and designed
and supervised the erection of other
important municipal buildings, such
as the market buildings and cattle
yards, Sussex Street; fish markets,
Woolloomooloo; the Belmore agri-
cultural produce and fruit markets,
and the Queen Victoria markets,
George Street, besides a number of
minor structures. In 1897 he re-
ceived the appointment of principal
assistant architect in the Public
Works Department of New South
Wales.
Mr. STEPHEN HENRY
WEEDON, First-class Assistant
Engineer, Public Works Depart-
ment, New South Wales, was born
at Bisham, Berkshire, England, in
1851, and was educated at Crauford
College, Maidenhead, England. He
came out to Brisbane, Australia,
and after a few years’ bush experi-
ence he passed the Queensland
licensed surveyors’ examination in
1878, and was engaged upon railway
and other survey work until 1881,
in which year he was appointed by
the firm of Messrs. J. & A. Overend,
contractors, as their engineer on the
first section of the Warwick-Stan-
thorpe railway, then in course ot con-
struction ; when completed he was en-
gaged as engineer and manager by
the contractors for the construction
of the Bundaberg-Mount Perry rail-
way, second section. In 1883 he
entered the railway construction
branch of the Queensland Public
Works Department as resident en-
gineer, and in that capacity carried
out the construction of the Mitchell-
Dalvadilla and first section of the
Brisbane-Gympie railway. Upon
the completion of these undertakings
he accepted a remunerative engage-
ment as engineer for Messrs. T. Jesser
J Hubert Neuman. Sydney,
MR. S. H. WEEDON.
and Co., contractors for sections Nos.
2 and 3 of the Brisbane-Gympie
railway, the total lengths of lines
thus constructed by him amounting
to about two hundred miles, including
heavy bridging and tunnelling works.
In 1 8gi, owing to the cessation of
railway construction in Queensland,
he came to Sydney and received an
appointment in the Public Works
Department, New South Wales, as
resident engineer on the sewerage
works, then in full progress. Con-
tinuing in this position until 1896,
he was transferred to the water sup-
ply branch. Whilst in this branch
he laid out a number of water supply
schemes for country towns, and also
constructed, under the day-labour
conditions, the water supply to live
towns as well as several minor
works, which occupied him until
1902, when he was engaged reporting
upon and preparing several schemes
of water conservation and drainage.
Since the reorganisation of the Public
Works Department, early in 1904, he
has held, and still holds, the position
of investigating engireer in connec-
tion with the Water Conservation and
Drainage Works of the Public Works
Department, New South Wales.
Mr. OWEN CARROLL, J.P.,
Paymaster, Public Works Depart-
ment, was born in Sydney, 21st Feb


ruary, 1851, and was educated at the
Fort Street Public School He
entered the Lands Department as a
junior clerk on 16th June, 1867, and
for some years served under the late
Mr. Michael Fitzpatrick, then Under
Secretary. He was subsequently
transferred to the inspection of stock
branch, then under the charge of
Mr. Bruce, Chief Inspector of Stock,
where he remained two years. He
then returned to the roads branch,
and was later on transferred to the
Public Works Department. Passing
through the various grades in that
department he finally attained to the
position of accountant of the roads
and bridges branch. This position
he administered for many years. On
the amalgamation of the various
account branches he was appointed
paymaster of the Public Works
Department, his appointment dating
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney
MR. O. CARROLL.
Ist of April, 1895, an office he still
continues to administer. This posi-
tion is one of the highest importance
and of considerable responsibility,
and Mr. Carroll, as officer in charge,
has virtual control of the receipts
and disbursements of the entire de-
partment. In private life Mr. Carroll
takes a deep interest in charitable
organisations. He has been a resi-
dent of Manly for a great many
years and is closely identified with
the marvellous progress that has
been made by that picturesque sub-
urb. For nine years he sat as an
alderman of the Manly Council, and
upon only one occasion did he find it
necessary to contest an election;
upon all other occasions he was
returned unopposed. He is a trustee
of the Manly Cottage Hospital since
its inception and is treasurer of the
Manly Benevolent Society, also a
trustee of the Manlj cemetery.
Mr. Carroll was one of four gentle-
men to undertake the erection of the
Victoria Hall, Manly, at a time when
the “ Village ” was sadly in need of
such a building.
Mr. ARTHUR EDWARD
CUTLER, Superintendent of Fitz-
roy Dock, was born in Dorsetshire,
England, in 1863, and received his
education at Maryborough College,
and subsequently at St. Paul’s Col-
lege, London. When sixteen years
of age he secured a position in the
engineering establishment of Messrs.
R. & W. Hawthorne (now Messrs.
Hawthorne, Leslie & Co.), of New-
castle-on-Tyne, one of the premier
ship-building firms of the north of
England. Upon the completion of
his apprenticeship he accepted an
appointment to proceed to North
Queensland to superintend the erec-
tion of machinery for one of the large
sugar mills of the northern State.
Upon the successful installation of
this machinery, he remained for some
time in charge of the works, when he
decided to come to New South Wales.
Upon his arrival in Sydney he was
appointed to a position in the Eve-
leigh works, from which he was after-
wards transferred to the Harbours
and Rivers Department. He sub-
sequently accepted an offer by the
Colonial Sugar Company to proceed
to Fiji, to assist in the erection of
machinery there. After a short so-
journ in Sydney he went to Croydon,
North Queensland, where for some
time he was engaged in the erection
of mining machinery and the con-
struction of dams for various mining
proprietors. He subsequently accept-
ed an engagement with the engineer-
ing firm of Messrs. McCredie and
Chambers, of Brisbane, under whose
instructions he designed several
sewerage schemes and also training
walls for the Brisbane River. Re-
turning to Sydney, and after a brief
engagement with Messrs. G. & A.
McCredie, engineers and architects,
he obtained a temporary appointment
in the Colonial Treasurer’s Depart-
ment, during which he prepared the
designs for the new abattoirs at Glebe
Island. In 1891 he was appointed to
the sewerage construction branch as
leading mechanical draughtsman,
under the then chief engineer, Mr. C.
O. Bagge. In 1895 he was promoted
to the position of chief draughtsman,
and in igoi assumed the post of
principal assistant engineer for sewer-
age construction and water supply.
During Mr. Cutler’s connection with
this department, he rendered inval-
uable service in the design and con-
struction of various sewerage systems
in the city and suburbs, involving in
the aggregate an expenditure of over
During the years of
1902 and 1903, when the city of
Sydney and suburbs were threatened
with a water famine through the long-
continued drought, Mr. Cutler gave
evidence before a Royal Commission,
regarding the improvement of the
supply. Many of his suggestions
were subsequently incorporated in
the commissioners’ recommendations
Falk, Sydney.
MR. ARTHUR EDWARD CUTLER.
to the Government. In 1893 he was
appointed superintendent to the
Fitzroy Dock. He has also a seat
on the managing committee of the
dock, his colleagues being Mr. R. R.
P. Hickson, chairman of the Harbour
trust, and Mr. T. W . Keele, president
of the Water and Sewerage Board.
Mr. Cutler is a member of the
Engineering Association and of the
Electrical Association, also an Asso-
ciate Member of the Institution of
Civil Engineers, and a member of
the Institution of Mechanical Engin-
eers.


METROPOLITAN WATER SUPPLY.
In “ Collins’ New South Wales,” published in
1798, it is said that “ the spot chosen (for the settle-
ment) was at the head of the cove, near the run of fresh
water, which stole silently along through a very thick
wood, the stillness of which had then for the first time
since the Creation been interrupted by the rude sound
of the labourer’s axe, and the downfall of its ancient
inhabitants.” At the head of Sydney Cove, and on
the banks of the clear running stream, the tents and
huts of the infant settlement were erected. It was not
long before the supply of water became a source of
anxiety, for the stream was scanty, and doubtless
sometimes stopped running but we are told that the
people soon began to dig wells, and were successful in
finding springs.
As the town increased wells were
multiplied, and the rivulets falling into
other parts of the harbour were laid under
contribution, particularly the copious
stream running into Blackwattle Swamp ;
but for a number of years the Tank
Stream was the main dependence, and
strenuous efforts were made from time to
time to husband the supply and preserve
its purity. Three reservoirs or tanks were
excavated in the rock at the mouth of the
stream, close to the point where Hunter
Street and Pitt Street now intersect. Pro-
fessor Smith, in a paper read before the
members of the Royal Society in 1868,
says ; —“ I have not discovered the exact
date of the construction of these tanks, but
it mint be, at least, as early as 1802, for a
‘ General Order ’ was issued on 14th
October of that year as follows : —‘ If any
person whatever is detected in throwing any
filth into the stream of fresh water, clean-
ing fish, washing, erecting pig-sties near
it, or taking water up but at the tanks,
on conviction before a magistrate, their
houses will be taken down and forfeit £5 for each offence
to the Orphan Fund.’” Further general orders were
issued on 16th October, 1803, and 15th September,
1810, notifying all sorts of pains and penalties if the
stream of water in the tanks is polluted.
During the year 1824 the colony was visited by a
very severe drought, only 19 inches of ram having
fallen during the whole year. Public attention was
thus drawn more strongly than ever to the deficient
water supply. The despairing attempts to preserve
the Tank Stream and the pathetic way in which the
Gazette holds up its condition have not a little of the
comic element. “We actually beheld, says the
Gazette, “ upwards of half a dozen boys bathing m the
stream from which, it is most probable, the next
moment many of the inhabitants of Sydney were
obliged to supply themselves with water for culinary
purposes.”
These representations were in vain, nothing could
save the Tank Stream. Its inevitable destiny was to
become a filthy sewer, and in that capacity it has long
been covered over and hidden from public view. After
1826 no further reference can be found to this as a
source of water supply ; indeed, when its limited drain-
age view is considered, it is remarkable that it should
have served Sydney so long. If a person start from
the Custom House, and proceed by Bridge and Mac-
quarie Streets to the middle of Hyde Park, then across
to Bathurst Street, then to George Street and around
by the New Markets to York Street, thence to Church
Hill and back to the Custom House by way of Bridge
Street, he will have enclosed (in a circuit of about two
miles) the whole area drained by the Tank Stream,
OLD TANK STREAM, SYDNEY.
amounting to no more than 178 acres. Part of this
area, however, was well fitted for the retention of
water, a spongy swamp stretching from about the
position of King Street, back towards Park Street, and
laterally towards George and Castlereagh Streets, such
a swamp as may still be seen in several places near
Sydney, giving rise to streams of a remarkably per-
manent character.
In 1824 Mr. John Busby arrived in the colony
with the appointment of Mineral Surveyor to the
Government, and his labours were soon turned by
Sir Thomas Brisbane to a search for water. After
examining several localities near Sydney he ultimately
reported (in 1826) in favour of the Lachlan Swamp,
which now comprises the Centennial Park. He pro-
posed driving a tunnel from Hyde Park to the swamp ;
this was adopted, and the work commenced in Sep-
tember, 1827. From the unmanageable and unskilful


character of the labourers employed (convicts), and
from the unforeseen difficulties in the strata that had
to be gone through, the undertaking was much more
tedious and difficult than had been anticipated, and it
was not till June, 1837, that it was brought to a suc-
cessful termination. The tunnel, however, began to
supply Sydney with water as early as 1830, by virtue
of drainage from the surrounding rocks. The length
of the tunnel is 12,000 feet, upwards of 2f miles, with
an average width of 4 feet, and height 5 feet. The
tunnel remains to the present day, but is not now made
use of. An important feature of the original scheme
was to have a reservoir excavated at Hyde Park cap-
able of holding 15,000,000 gallons, but this was never
carried out.
The increasing deficiencv of water led the authori-
ties to look about for some fresh source, and the dam
at Cook’s River was begun about 1838. Up to the
year 1849 the tunnel seems to have supplied Sydney
with abundance of water, but in that year there was
BUSBY'S BORE.
another severe drought, the rain gauge only recording
21J inches, while the average was 50 inches, and the
population had increased to 20,000, or double what it
was when the Lachlan Swamp was first tapped. After
inquiries and reports by a special committee of the
City Council, and a commission of five gentlemen
appointed by Sir Charles Fitzroy, it was decided to
construct the Botany dams, which was accordingly
done, and in November, 1858, pumping engines were
set to work, comprising three steam engines of 100
horse-power each, to raise water through a 30-inch
main to the Crown Street reservoir, and these continued
to do duty until 1887. Before then —in 1867 —fears
began to be entertained as to the sufficiency of the
supply from the Botany Swamps to meet the wants of
the rapidly increasing population of Sydney and sub-
urbs, and various schemes for improving the supply
were propounded by a number of gentlemen, and in
order to decide which was the best, a Royal Commission
was appointed in September, 1867, by the then Cover-
nor, Sir John Young, consisting of the following gentle-
men : —Professor Smith (president), Ed. Monarty,
W. C. Bennett, P. F. Adams, F. H. Grundy and T.
Moore.
In May, 1869, twenty months after their first
appointment, the members of the commission pre-
sented their report, in which they found that the
Botany supply was inadequate and uncertain, and
not to be relied upon in all seasons, and recommended
for adoption the Upper Nepean scheme as best fulfill-
ing the desired conditions. This report appears to
have been placed aside for some years, and in the mean -
time Sydney was being visited by distressing droughts,
which engendered grave anxieties regarding the suffi-
ciency of the Botany supplies, the residents having
frequently to be placed on short commons, and all
sorts of devices to be resorted to, to keep up the supply
from the swamps. In 1876 the Government was
again aroused to a sense of duty, and the services of
Mr. W. Clark, an eminent engineer from England, were
secured to advise as to the best scheme to be adopted.
Mr. Clark arrived in November, 1876, and at once got
to work, and on lsth May, 1877, he furnished his report,
wherein he endorsed the recommendation of the com-
mission which had dealt with the question just eight-
years previously. The report of Mr. Clark was
adopted, and soon after the necessary funds were
provided, and the works were commenced in 1878, and
pushed on with all speed until 1887, when the residents
had the satisfaction of knowing that the Nepean waters
were flowing into the engine pond at Botany, and,
therefore, all fears of a water famine set at rest.
The sources of this scheme are the Nepean. Cor-
deaux and Cataract Rivers, which take their rise mostly
in swampy flats on the western slopes of the Illawarra
Ranges, and receive the drainage of the elevated tract
of tableland which extends from Madden’s Plains, near
Bulli, on the north, to Mittagong, on the south —a length
of about 30 miles, and having a mean width of about
13 miles. The Nepean from its source to its junction
with the Cordeaux at the Pheasant’s Nest, flows in
a channel nearly parallel to, and distant about 16
miles from, the coast range of Illawarra; from this
point it winds away to the north-west, and, after a
circuitous course round the county of Cumberland,
falls into the sea at Broken Ray.
At the Pheasant’s Nest, which is 425 feet above
the sea-level, is built a concrete dam 10 feet high, which
diverts so much of the water as may be required, by
means of a tunnel 8 feet high, 94 feet wide, and 4i
miles lo g, into the channel of the Cataract at Brough-
ton’s Pass, where the three streams are then united
at an elevation of 421 feet above the sea. Immediately
below the outlet of the Nepean tunnel, a concrete and
masonry dam is constructed, similar to that on the
Nepean ; this turns the water into a second tunnel, the
same height and width as the first tunnel, and about
If miles long, leading out on the southern slopes of the
main dividing range, separating the waters of the
Nepean from those of the Georges River, along, and
following which, it is conducted by a series of open
canals, aqueducts and tunnels, now on one side of the
range, again on the other, as the country is found


OLD BOTANY PUMPING STATION.
219
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES


most favourable, to the Prospect Reservoir, a distance
of about 40| miles ; of this distance 11 miles are tun-
nels and 28| miles of open canal ; several gorges also
are crossed on the way by inverted syphons and
wrought-iron pipe aqueducts, about 8 feet in diameter.
The valley of Prospect spreads out into a broad
flat basin, bounded on the north-west and south by a
semi-circular amphitheatre of low hills, forming the
‘‘ divisio aquarium ’’ of Botany Bay, the Hawkesbury
and Port Jackson. Lower down, where the dam is
placed, the valley contracts to about 1J miles in width.
The dam is earth with a clay puddle core, and is 7,300
feet long, the maximum height being 82 feet, and the
width on top being 30 feet. The reservoir, when full
covers an area of 1,300 acres, and has a capacity of
nearly eleven thousand million gallons, or years’
supply at the present rate of consumption. The top water
level is 195 feet above high water mark. The ofl-take
from the reservoir is at 170 feet ; there is, therefore,
25 feet of the water available for supply by gravitation,
about seven thousand million gallons.
The water is drawn off from the Prospect Reser-
voir through a valve tower into pipes placed in a brick
tunnel, carried outside and around the northern end
of the embankment, and is discharged through con-
trolling valves into a basin ; at the end of this basin
is placed a gauge weir, from which can be read the
quantity passing over daily ; it then proceeds by an
open canal for five miles to the pipe head basin near
Guildford, situated 16J miles from Sydney, and is
then conveyed by two wrought-iron pipes, each 6 feet
in diameter, to Pott’s Hill, a distance of five miles.
The water is delivered here into a balance reservoir, of
a capacity of one hundred million gallons ; this tank
is built partly in excavation and partly in bank, and is
desi rued to tide the city over any interruption of the
supply from Prospect, as well as to prevent fluctuation
of head of pressure.
The water coming direct from the sandstone coun-
try requires no filtering, but in order to prevent the
entrance into the distributing mains and service reser-
voirs of the larvae of insects, small fish and shrimps,
which come down with the water, a screening tank is
constructed alongside the Pott’s Hill Reservoir ; this
tank is of brick, built in two concentric rings. The
water is delivered into the outer ring, and passes
through a series of copper gauze screens of 840 meshes
to the°square inch. These screens are so arranged that
the orifice which they fill can be closed and the screens
taken out and scoured, which is being done continually.
From this tank the water passes into two 48-inch cast-
iron mains, which are capable together of passing
down to the city thirty million gallons within the 24
hours. The 48-inch main first laid continues with
the same diameter o Lewisham, where it bifurcates,
one branch (48 in.) leading to Petersham Reservoir, the
other (42 inch) continues to the Crown Street Reservoir.
The new 48-inch main was completed in 1893, and is
worked alternately with the old. The two trunk
mains are connected at New Canterbury Road, Peter
sham.
The Crown Street Reservoir, into which the trunk
mains discharge, is built of brick, and contains three mil-
lion gallons ; the top water level is 121 feet above high
water mark. At this place is situated the main pumping
plant, consisting of three compound high duty pump-
ing engines. One is utilised for raising water to the
first high level reservoir, of a capacity of two million gal-
lons, situated at Centennial Park, at a height of about
250 feet above high water mark. The second performs
a similar duty to the Woollahra reservoir, at a height
of 484 feet, with a capacity of one million gallons ; and
the third raises water to the Waverley Reservoir, at a
height of 360 feet, and with a capacity of 1,087,000
gallons.
Up to the end of th Q year 1891 North Sydnev was
supplied from the Paddington Reservoir by a 10-inch
submarine pipe laid across the harbour to Milson’s
Point ; but until latterly it was supplied from the Pott’s
Hill Reservoir, the water being delivered into a balance
reservoir, near the Ryde railway station, containing
2,116,000 gallons. But since the great drought which
resulted in the temporary diminution of the supply to
the northern suburbs, in December, 1902, the Board
has had a 32-inch pipe laid specially for this district
from Pipe Head at Guildford, through Parramatta
(thus avoiding the river) and round to the Ryde
pumping station. From this point it is raised to a
one-million gallon wrought-iron tank at Ryde Village,
at a height of 234 feet above the sea, and by a con-
tinuation of the same pumping main into a pair of
wrought-iron tanks, each of a capacity of 1J
million gallons, at Chatswood, at an elevation of
370 feet above high water mark. From the tank at
Ryde Village the whole of Ryde, Gladesville and Hun-
ter’s Hill and the heights of Balmain get their supplies,
while the tanks at Chatswood afford a liberal supply
to Willoughby, North Sydney and Mosman. The
popular residential districts along the Milson’s Point
railway line, extending from Chatswood to Hornsby,
and from the latter place to Thornleigh and Beecroft,
are also supplied from Chatswood, a special pumping
plant having been installed at the latter place for their
special benefit ; from this point the water is raised to
a one-mllion gallon tank at Wahroonga, at a height of
720 feet above sea-level.
A part of Ashfield is too high to receive a supply
by gravitation from Pott”s Hill level, therefore the
loftier portions are supplied from an elevated tank,
which is charged with water from the Woollahra Reser-
voir. For the supply of Kogarah and the heights of
Hurstville also it has been found necessary to erect a
special tank at Penshurst, to which water is sent from
the pumping station at Carlton. The towns of Camp-
belltown, Liverpool and Smithfield are supplied direct
from the canal, the two former from above Prospect
reservoir and the last-named from the canal above the
pipe head basin.


Mr. THOMAS WILLIAM
KEELE, M. Inst. C.E., President
of the Metropolitan Board of Water
Supply and Sewerage, was born at
Mudgee, New South Wales, in 1850.
He is the eldest son of the late Mr.
Charles W. Keele, and was educated
under the late Rev. G. F. McArthur,
M.A., at Macquarie Fields College.
Subsequently Mr. Keele continued
his studies under the late Mr.
Horniman, M.A., and the late Mr.
J. Kinloch, M.A. In April, 1868,
he entered the Harbours and Rivers
Department as an engineering
cadet, under the late Mr. E. O.
Moriarty, M.1.C.E., engineer-in-
chief. In 1873 he obtained his
diploma as a licensed surveyor. In
1874 was appointed engineering
assistant to Mr. C. W. Darley,
M.1.C.E., then resident engineer of
the Newcastle district. In 1875
was recalled to Sydney, in order to
participate in the preparation of the
proposed comprehensive scheme for
the sewerage of the city and suburbs,
and personally conducted the trial
surveys for the proposed main
sewers, and for the four-mile tunnel to
Bondi. In 1876 Sir Will iam Jervois,
R.E., was commissioned to devise a
scheme for the military defence of
Port Jackson, and upon Mr. Keele
devolved the responsibility of fixing
trigonometrically the pivot of every
gun then mounted on both shores of
the harbour, also of making in con
junction with Lieut. Richards, R.N.,
the marine survey of the Eastern
Channel, Sydney Harbour. From
1878 to 1880 he was engaged
in making trigonometrical and
hydrographic surveys of the en-
trances to Lake Macquarie and
Moruya River, also in the same year
he devised a scheme and executed
a survey for a water supply for
Orange from Canoblas Mountain.
In 1880 he was entrusted with the
alignment and construction of the
Nepean tunnel for the Sydney water
supply. The successful completion
of this work is considered to be one
of the greatest triumphs of engineer-
ing in Australasia. The tunnel is
miles in length, feet high, and
gh feet wide, and is true in line and
level to a hairbreadth. His success
in this undertaking resulted in his
appointment as district engineer in
charge of the alignment and con-
struction of all the tunnelling opera-
tions, amounting to nearly twelve
miles, the whole costing £336,000.
In 1889 he was appointed engineer
of the Richmond and Tweed River
districts, including the Brunswick
River and Byron Bay. In
January, igoo, he was recalled to
the head office, and in March,
igoi, he was appointed principal
engineer of the Harbours and Rivers
Branch. During the three years he
occupied this position, he expended
a sum of £1, 112,000 on works for
the improvement of the harbours
and rivers of the State. These
works were being carried out in
addition to the extensive dredging
operations, on which alone over
Z”ioo,ooo was expended annually.
He was a member of the Royal
J. Hubert Newman . Sydney,
MR. T. W. KEELE.
Commission on Sydney water supply
in 1902, and originated the scheme
for the great dam on the Cataract
River, and carried it successfully
through an exhaustive inquiry by the
Public Works Committee. As a
marine engineer, Mr. Keele’s advice
has been sought by other States oi
the Commonwealth. In 1902 he was
selected by the Government of
South Australia, to join the late
Mr. C. Y. O’Connor, M. Inst. C.E.,
Engineer-in-Chief of Western Aus-
tralia, and Mr. C. Napier Bell,
M.I C.E., of New Zealand, in
reporting on a scheme for an outer
harbour at Port Adelaide, which is
now being carried out. In 1903,
the same Government employed
him in conjunction with Mr. A.
B. Moncrieff, M.1.C.E., Engineer-in-
Chief of South Australia, and Mr.
W. Davidson, Inspector-General of
Public Works, Victoria, to report on
the question of a barrage at the
mouth of the River Murray, In
January, 1904, the Government of
Western Australia requested him to
report independently on the question
of a graving dock for Fremantle. In
March, 1904, he was offered and
accepted the position of President of
the Metropolitan Board of Water
Supply and Sewerage. He still
retains his seat on the Board of
Reference of the Public Works
Department, and as one of the
managing committee of the Fitzroy
Dock. Mr. Keele was elected an
Assoc., M. Inst. C.E., on December
4, 1883, and a full member of the
Institute, on December 18, 1888.
He is also a member of the local
advisory committee of the Institute,
and a member of the Royal Society
of New South Wales since 1873.
Hon. JACOB GARRARD, J.P.,
ex-President of the Metropolitan
Water Supply and Sewerage Board,
was born at Harwich, Essex, Eng-
land, in 1846. He arrived in New
Zealand with his brother in 1860,
and soon afterwards was apprenticed
to the engineering. In 1867 he
came to Sydney and filled engage-
ments with some of the leading
engineering firms of Sydney, includ-
ing Mort’s Dock Engineering Co.,
Messrs. P. N . Russell & Co. and the
A.S.N. Co. While actively follow-
ing this employment he took a
prominent part in securing the
adoption of the eight-hour system
in connection with the iron trades.
He also rendered important service
as an arbitrator in several labour
disputes. In 1879 he was elected an
alderman for the South-east Ward of
the municipality of Balmain. In
1880 he was elected to the New
South Wales Legislative Assembly
as the representative for the Balmain
constituency. At the next general
election, Balmain in the meantime
becoming entitled to two members,
he was elected senior member for
the same constituency, and again in
1885 he was returned at the head of
the poll. When Balmain returned
three members he sat continuously
in the Legislative Assembly, first
for Balmain and afterwards for
Central Cumberland and Sherbrooke
constituencies, until 1898. In 1885
he accepted the portfolio of Public
Works in the Robertson Adminis-
tration, and in 1894 that of Minister
for Public Instruction and Labour
in the Reid Administration. During


most of the time he was not in office
as a Cabinet Minister he acted as
Deputy-Chairman of Committees of
the House. Upon the death of
Colonel Rowe, President of the
Metropolitan Board of Water Sup-
ply and Sewerage, he was offered
and accepted the vacant position,
which he retained until March, 1904.
In 1889 he was appointed by the
Government one of the trustees for
the land granted to the Trades Hail.
He is also a trustee for Kuring-gai
Chase, the National Park, the
Temperance and General Life
Assurance Society, and for two
recreation reserves at Balmain,
J Hubert Newman. Sydney.
HON. JACOB GARRARD.
which were obtained through his
instrumentality while he was a
representative for that electorate.
Mr. ROBERT GEORGE
WATKINS, J.P., Alderman of the
city of Sydney and Vice-President
of the Metropolitan Board of Water
Supply and Sewerage, is a native of
Hereford County, England, where
he was born in 1850. He arrived
with his parents while still a lad in
Melbourne. His father, the late
Mr William Watkins, sat in the
Legislative Assembly of Victoria as
representative for Evelyn. The
subject ot this sketch was educated
under the Rev W B. Millar, of
Fitzroy Upon arriving at the age
of fifteen years he was apprenticed
to the engineering, and when out of
his indentures he accepted an ap-
pointment in the employ of the
well-known firm of Messrs, james
McEwan & Co., in the southern
capital. After attaining to a position
of responsibility in this service, he
accepted an engagement to take
charge of the Sydney business of
Messrs. Drysdale & Roberts now
Messrs. Briscoe & Co. Ltd., who
had purchased a portion of the
concern of Messrs. P. N. Russell and
Co. After managing this business
for some years under power of
attorney, he established himself
independently under the style of
Messrs. Robert Chalmers & Co.,
having with him Mr. R. J. Alcock,
now of Messrs. James Service & Co.,
of Melbourne, and late President of
the Chamber of Commerce, Mel-
bourne. Upon the dissolution of
this firm in 1892 he started the
business which is still being carried
on under its present style (Messrs.
R. G. Watkins & Co.) at 107 Kent
Street, Sydney. In 1891, in response
to an influential requisition, he con-
tested the Paddington constituency
for a. seat in the Legislative Assem-
bly, but was defeated by a combi-
nation of four candidates. On this
occasion the Hon. J. H. Want
headed the poll, followed by the
three gentlemen who were allied
with him. Mr. Watkins subse-
quently represented the Bondi Ward
of the Waverley Municipal Council,
which seat he retained until 1901,
when he resigned in order to devote
the whole of his attention to the
affairs of the City Council, he having
been elected first in 1898 to represent
Gipps Ward in that Corporation.
Upon the reorganisation of the City
Council under the new Act of 1901,
he was re-elected under the extended
franchise by a very large majority,
while at the election of 1903 he was
again returned. Since his first
arrival in Sydney Mr. Watkins has
taken an active interest in municipal
matters. He was appointed a mem-
ber of an important conference to
deal with the Greater Sydney
scheme, which proposed to consoli-
date the city and suburban councils
within the metropolitan area in one
powerful administrative body. In
1902 he was appointed by the City
Council as one of its representatives
on the Metropolitan Board of Water
Supply and Sewerage, of which
body he was elected vice-president
in 1904. While in Melbourne
Mr. Watkins associated himself
with the Masonic Order by becoming
a member of the Australia Felix
Lodge, I.C. In the great dispute
that arose in 1893 between the
Government and Mr. McSharry, a
government contractor, in which
the enormous sum of was
involved, an arbitration board was
appointed, upon which body Mr.
Watkins sat as arbitrator lor (he
contractor. This case lasted seveial
months, and proved by far the
greatest case of its kind that has
yet occurred in Australia. In this
matter Mr. Watkins rendered in-
valuable service in the final settle-
ment of the case, and has since acted
in several similar cases in this State
as well as in Queensland.
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. R. G. WATKINS.
Mr. JOHN M ACPHERSON,
J.P , member of the Metropolitan
Board of Water Supply and Sewer-
age, is a native of Kingussie, Inver-
ness-shire, Scotland, and arrived in
Sydney in 1849. For some time he
devoted his attention to gold-mining,
both in Victoria and New South
Wales; was for over forty years
connected with the great ironmon-
gery business known throughout
Australia under the title of Holds-
worth, Macpherson & Co. For some
thirty years Mr. Macpherson sat as
an alderman of the borough of
Waverley, and for eleven years he
filled the position of mayor of that
municipality. In 1896 he was ap-
pointed a government representative
upon the Metropolitan Board of
Water Supply and Sewerage. Mr.
Macpherson has always taken a deep


J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. J. MACPHERSON.
and active interest in national poli-
tics, and lias often been urged to
allow himself to be nominated for a
seat in Parliament. He has never,
however, seen his way clear to accept
this honour, owing to the' heavy
demand upon his time and attention
which his commercial interests en-
tailed. He has acted as Returning
Officer in the Eastern Suburbs for
over thirty years. For twenty-five
years he has been a member of the
Board of Management of the Rand-
wick Asylum, for six years filling the
position of president of that institu-
tion. Mr. Macpherson is also inter-
ested in several important financial
institutions, amongst others, he is
a director of the North Queensland
Insurance Co., the Australian Drug
Co., and also of the Standard Life
Assurance Co. Ltd.
Lieut-Colonel W. HOLMES,
D. S. 0., Secretary, Metropolitan
B oard of Water Supply and Sewer-
age, was born at Sydney, New South
Wales, in 1862, and is the son of the
late Captain William Holmes, of the
New South Wales General Military
Staff. On the 24th June, 1878,
young Holmes was appointed junior
clerk in the Roads and Bridges
Branch of the Public Works Depart-
ment, New South Wales. He continu-
ed in the service of this department
for a period of ten years, having at-
tained the position of record and
correspondence clerk. At the in-
ception of the Metropolitan Board
of Water Supply and Sewerage, in
April, 1888, he was selected, out of
forty applicants, for the position of
chief clerk. The duties of this post
he performed, together with those of
paymaster, until June, 1895, when,
on the retirement of Mr. Henry
Bloxsome from the office of secre-
tary, Mr. Holmes was promoted to
the combined office of secretary and
chief clerk—a position he still holds.
In 1887, ' ie married Susan Ellen,
daughter of Lieutenant Henry
Green, Reserve of Officers, New
South Wales, late Royal Horse
Artillery. [For military career see
Military Section.]
Mr. JOHN MOORE SMAIL,
M. Inst. C.E., Chief Engineer, Metro-
politan Water Supply and Sewerage,
is a son of the late Mr. Alexander
Smail, of Millers’ Point, where he
was born 26th January, 1850. He
acquired a liberal education, first at
the Fort Street National School, then
under the presidency of the late Mr.
Gardiner, who subsequently attained
to the position of chief examiner
in the Department of Public Instruc-
tion ; afterwards at the Jamieson
Academy, Mr. R. S. Cannon head-
master ; and later still at the Sydney
Grammar School, then under the
headmastership of the late Mr. W. J.
Stephens. Entering the city engi-
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. J. M. SMAIL.
neer’s office, then controlled by
Mr. Edward Bell, M. Inst. C.E., he
served a pupilage term of five years
in the Department of Water Supply
and Sewerage. He then obtained an
appointment as an assistant in the
city engineer’s office. Shortly after-
wards be was promoted to the
position of assistant city surveyor,
under Mr. Thomas H. Bradridge,
city surveyor. In July, 1875,
Mr. Smail left the service of the
Corporation in order to join the
Roads and Bridges Department, then
controlled by the late W. C. Bennett,
M. Inst. C.E. This step was taken
with a view to an appointment as
an assistant in the lately formed
department which controlled the
new system of sewerage for the city
of Sydney and suburbs. In 1879
Mr. Smail was transferred to the
newly organised Sewerage Depart-
ment, and immediately entered upon
the important work of laying down
the lines of the southern division.
In order to carry out the vork of
establishing a complete and compre-
hensive sewerage system it was
necessary to obtain legislative sanc-
tion, and in the preparation of the
amending measure Mr. Smail, as a
representative of the engineer-in-
chief, Mr. W. C. Bennett, collabo-
rated with Messrs. Alexander Oliver
and H. W. Williams in drawing
up the bill. In February, 1888,
INIr. Smail was admitted a full mem-
ber of the Institute of Civil Engineers
of Great Britain. When in 1889 the
city sewerage system was transferred
to the newly appointed board the
position of engineer was offered
Mr. Smail, who accepted the re-
sponsibility. The duty of organising
the new department rested upon
Mr. Smail, and under his control
the system has been largely extended
and improved, especially in the direc-
tion of the ventilation of the service.
In conjunction with Mr. Hamlet, the
Government Analyst, Mr. Smail
devoted considerable attention to the
biological system of treating the
sewage of a large city, and a number
of important experiments were ma.de
and subsequently adopted. Upon
the retirement of Mr. Trevor Jones,
engineer for the water supply branch
of the Board, Mr. Smail was ap-
pointed Engineer-in-Chief to the
Metropolitan Board. Mr. Smail is
also a member of the Association of
Municipal and Country Engineers of
Great Britain. He is also a member
of Royal Society of New South
Wales, and has filled the position of
chairman of the engineering section
of that organisation. Outside of his
professional duties, Mr. Smail has
taken considerable interest in mili-
tary matters. He was one of the
original members of the Duke of
Edinburgh’s Highland Brigade, the
forerunner of the present Scottish
Rifles. More recently he joined the
New South W ales Field Battery,
and in the partially paid artillery,
upon the retirement of Major Chap-
man, he succeeded to the command
of B Battery, Mr. Smail at pre-
sent holds the rank of major in the
reserve of officers.


Mr. LESLIE AUGUSTUS
BURTON WADE, M. Inst., C.E.,
Principal Engineer for Water Supply
and Sewerage Construction, is a son
of the late Mr. W. B. Wade who for
many years was connected with the
construction branch of the Public
Works and Government Railways of
New South Wales. He was born at
Singleton, New South Wales, in
1864, and was educated at King’s
School, Parramatta. He was ar-
ticled to the late Mr. W. C. Bennett,
Commissioner for Roads and Engi*
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. L. A. B. WADE.
neer for Water Supply and Sewerage
Construction, Public Works Depart-
ment. He served his articles during
the progress of the first contracts for
the metropolitan sewerage system,
1880 to 1883, and remained in that
service in various capacities until
1890. In that year he was trans-
ferred to the newly formed Water
Conservation Branch as Assistant
Engineer. He rejoined the W ater
Supply Branch in 1896 as Assistant
Engineer, and in igoo he was ap-
pointed to take charge of the Water
Supply and Sewerage Construction
Branch of the Public Works De-
partment, the scope of which was
the construction of all the major
works in connection with the water
and sewerage of the metropolis and
country towns and all works of
water conservation and irrigation in
the State. He was appointed a
Member of the Metropolitan Water
Supply and Sewerage Board, where
his professional knowledge and wide
experience rendered him a valuable
acquisition. In 1903 the works per-
taining to harbours and rivers within
the State were, in addition, placed
under his supervision. Mr. Wade
was responsible for the design and
carrying out of the recently com-
pleted Cataract dam ; an additional
storage reservoir for the supply of
water to the city of Sydney. The
great Barren Jack storage reservoir
and the Northern Murrumbidgee
irrigation scheme is at the present
time being constructed under Mr.
Wade’s direction.
Mr. PERCY ALLAN, M. Inst.
C.E. (London), M. Am. Soc. C.E.
(New York), younger son of the late
Maxwell Rennie Allan, Principal
Under Secretary of New South
Wales, was born in Sydney in 1861,
and was educated at Calder House,
then conducted by Dr. Sly, LL.D.
Having passed the necessary exam-
ination, he entered the Roads and
Bridges Branch of the Public Works
Department in September, 1878, and
was trained under the late Mr. \\ . C.
Bennett, M. Inst. C.E., Engineer-in-
Chief. From 1881 to 1885 he was
engaged as engineering draughtsman
and for the following twelve months
acted for the engineer for bridges,
being then appointed Chief Draughts-
man, a position he held until 1893,
when upon the retirement of the
engineer for bridges, he was placed
in charge of the designing, under
Mr. Hickson, M. Inst. C.E., of all
highway bridges and ferry punts
in New South Wales, being in
1896, gazetted Engineer-in-Charge
of Bridge Design, an office he filled
until 1899, when he was, under
Mr. Darley, M. Inst. C.E., placed in
charge of the construction of the
Pyrmont and Glebe Island bridges.
Up to this date he had designed 528
various engineering works costing
£ 686,000 complete, amongst these
being the Brewarrina, Inverell,
Wagga Wagga, Swan Hill, Morpeth,
Albury, Dunmore, Kempsey and
Glebe Island bridges; the wood-
paving of portions of Circular Quay,
Sydney, and King Street, Newtown,
and the steam ferry punt at George’s
River, the largest of its kind in the
State; it is, however, in connection
with the designing and construction
of the Pyrmont Bridge (costing
he is better known, the
swing span being considered by
European and American authorities
the fastest and most up to date in
the world ; weighing no less than 800
tons, it can be opened by electricity in
thirty seconds, the current for opening
and closing swing span and gates
costing but three farthings for one
complete cycle of operations, the
whole being controlled by one man.
In 1903 he was appointed to act as
Principal Assistant Engineer for
Water Supply and Sewerage, and
since then, under Mr. L. A. B.
Wade, has had charge of the carry-
ing to completion of the low level
sewerage system of Sydney, includ-
ing nineteen pumping stations, with
electrically driven pumps lifting 3f
million gallons of sewage per diem;
the scheme having been constructed
by the Public Works Department of
this State, at a total cost of £ 200,000.
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. P. ALLAN.
In his early days Mr. Allan was a
prominent and popular member of
the old Warrigal Football Club, and
took part in many well-fought
matches, when that team was
amongst the first-grade teams of the
day.


225
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


EDUCATIONAL.
“ In no part of the world,” said Sir Richard
Bourke in 1832, “ is the general education of the public
a more sacred duty than in New South Wales.” It
was more than five years after the landing of the first
fleet before this “sacred duty” received practical
recognition at the hands of the authorities. On Feb-
ruary 18, 1793, the first school in Australia was opened
by the Rev. Mr. Johnson’s church at Sydney ; the
%/ %J *
teachers being Messrs. W. Webster and W. Richardson
and Mrs. Susannah Hunt. When the church was burnt
down some time afterwards, the school was held in the
Court-house in George Street. In 1797 there were
three schools in New South Wales, and of these pioneer
educational institutions Kettle, in his lively account of
the first thirty years of the settlement, affords us a
J . '
brief glimpse. “ There were,” he writes, “ at this
time” (December, 1797) “in the town of Sydney
when the Commissioner held his inquiry there were
900 children of both sexes attending schools in the
colony not supported by the Government. In 1820
the National School system was introduced in all the
Government schools, at the instigation of the Rev. T.
Riddell, who four years afterwards was appointed
Director-General of Public Schools. This same year
the Rev. T. W. Scott was appointed first Archdeacon
of New South Wales. At the period of his arrival
there were still only seventeen schools in operation,
and the two orphan schools, with 1,037 scholars on the
books, the average attendance being but 420, while
the total number of children in the colony under twelve
years of age was 4,724. The expenditure on account
of these schools for the year 1825 amounted to nearly
£lO,OOO, and, notwithstanding this high figure, their
general management was extremely deficient.
A TYPW OF SUBURBAN SCHOOL (MARRICKVILLE),
With Teacher’s Residence attached, erected under the Council of Education.
three schools for the education of children, and on
breaking up for the Christmas holidays the Governor
was gratified with the sight of 101 clean and neatly-
dressed children, who came with their several masters
and mistresses and paid their respects to his Excellency,
who examined the progress of the elder scholars.”
Education hardly kept pace in those early years
with the expansion of the colony, and it appears to have
been as unpopular with parents as with their offspring.
By the report of Commissioner Bigge it appears that
in 1819-21 there were 17 schools within the territory,
established by the Government, at which were edu-
cated 291 boys and 243 girls. In this number was
included: the first boarding-school, opened by a Mr.
Cook in 1808 ; a free school, established in 1810 ; the
Female Orphan School, founded in 1801 by Governor
King; and the Male Orphan School, established in
1819 by Governor Macquarie- It further appears that
From the arrival of Archdeacon Scott in the colony
may be dated the commencement of even an approach
to an efficient provision of the means of education.
To establish a good system he laboured assiduously
against obstacles and discouragements of every kind,
arising in no slight degree out of legal technicalities,
and encouraged by parties from whom he ought to
have met with support. But, notwithstanding this
opposition, there were at the period of his departure
in'lß29 253 children in the two orphan schools, and
1,807 children regularly in attendance at 36 parochial
schools ; while the expense of the school department
was reduced in that year to £5,600, and the general
efficiency greatly increased. The first infant school in
New South Wales was established at Sydney in the year
1824 by the Rev. Rich. Hill, but mainly through the
exertions of Mr. Saxe Bannister, then Attorney-Gene-
ral. In 1829 there were five of these schools in the


colony. To Lady Darling is owing the establishment
of the Female School of Industry at Sydney. In 1833
there were 34 primary free schools, besides the two
orphan schools, wholly supported by the Government;
the School of Female Industry, supported by voluntary
contributions, and the King’s School at Parramatta,
partly supported by Government. The total expenses
defrayed by the Government on account of these schools
during that year amounted to £5,792, and the number
of scholars enrolled was : males, 1,209 ; females, 857 ;
total, 2,066. The method of instruction in use in the
primary schools was that known as the ” Madras sys-
tem.” In 1835 the Normal Institution was founded,
and the following year Dr. Lang established the Aus-
tralian College, with the aid of a Government grant of
£2,000.
In 1841 the denominational school system was
resorted to and, after a three years’ trial, was suc-
ceeded by the national system ; or, to be more correct,
what was called such, each school still being left in the
hands of the various churches, and quite independent
of the others. All received aid from the State, and
there was a perfunctory supervision exercised by
Government officials, but an entire absence of any
recognised system of control. How education ex-
panded under these conditions may be gathered from
the following statistics :—ln the year 1840 there were
in the colony 159 schools, with 4,639 male and 3,935
female scholars ; total, 8,547. In 1841, 192 schools,
with 4,935 male and 4,124 female scholars ; total, 9,059.
In 1842, 232 schools, with 5,698 male and 4,635 female
scholars ; total 10,333. In 1843, 279 schools, with
6,286 male and 5,703 female scholars ; total 11,389.
In 1844, 313 schools, with 6,814 male and 5,776 female
scholars ; total, 12,590. In 4845, 327 schools, with
7,813 males and 6,641 female scholars ; total, 14,452.
In 1846, 338 schools, with 8,613 male and 7,650 female
scholars ; total, 16,263. In 1847, 376 schools, with
9,848 male and 8,752 female scholars ; total, 18,600.
In 1848, 382 schools, with 10,267 male and 8,722 female
scholars ; total, 18,989. In 1849, 444 schools, with
10,721 male and 9,250 female scholars ; total, 19,971.
In 1850, 493 schools, with 11,214 male and 10,170
female scholars; total 21 ? 384. In 1851 423 schools,
with 11,118 male and 10,002 female scholars;, total,
21,120. These schools consisted of : The Protestant
and Roman Catholic orphan schools, with 345 scholars,
maintained by Government at an expense of £52,120;
the Church of England denominational schools, with
4,998 scholars, receiving £5,321 from Government and
paying £2,324 by voluntary contributions; the Wes-
leyan schools, with 891 scholars, receiving £SBB from
the Government and £665 from voluntary contribu-
tions , the Roman Catholic schools, with 3,310
scholars, receiving £2,576 from the Government and
£985 from voluntary contributions; the national
schools, containing 2,861 scholars, receiving from
Government £6,766 and £1,179 from voluntary con-
tributions; private schools, consisting of 227 in num-
ber, containing 6,721 scholars.
The institution of a proper national system may
be said to have dated from the incorporation of the
Board of National Education in 1848. For 18 years
two classes of schools (National and Denominational),
each supported by the State and each the rival of the
other, continued to exist under two distinct controlling
bodies. Several attempts to form a general system
were made from time to time, but it was not until
the introduction of the Public Schols Act in 1866 that
the change was effected. Under this Act the ad-
ministration of primary education was committed to
one governing body—the Council of Education, —a
board of five members, to whom was entrusted the
expenditure of all moneys appropriated by Parliament
for primary education.
The Public Schools Act recognised two distinct
classes of schools—public schools (including provisional
and half-time schools) and denominational schools
(which were required to follow the course of instruction
prescribed for public schools, and to be open to inspec-
tion in the same manner). The Council of Education
took over 259 national schools and 310 denominational
schools. Although fair progress was made under this
Act, the continuance of the two classes of schools
proved unsatisfactory, there being a growing repug-
nance in the minds of a large section of the commu-
nity to the principle of granting State aid to religious
schools. Moreover, it was felt desirable that the work
of public instruction should form a separate Govern-
ment department and be placed in the hands of a
Minister directly responsible to Parliament. Accord-
ingly, in 1880 an Act embodying these principles was
passed under the leadership of Sir Henry Parkes, and
the Public Instruction Act, now in operation, became
law.
Under the Public Instruction Act provision was
made for the establishment and maintenance of : public
schools to afford primary instruction to all children
without sectarian or class distinction ; superior pub-
lic schools, in which additional lessons in the higher
branches might be given ; evening public schools
and high schools for boys and girls, in which the
course of instruction should be of such a character
as to complete the public school curriculum or to pre-
pare students for the university. It was provided
that in all schools the teaching should be strictly non-
sectarian ; but general religious teaching, as distin-
guished from dogmatic theology, was prescribed to
form part of the ordinary course of instruction. It
was also provided that any recognised clergyman or
other teacher authorised by his church had the right
to give the children of his own denomination one hour’s
religious instruction daily.
It is compulsory for parents to send their children
between the ages of 6 and 14 years to school for at
least 70 days in each half-year, unless just cause for
exemption can be shown. Penalties are provided by
the Act for breaches of this provision. Until quite
recently a weekly fee of 3d. per child was charged;
such fees not to exceed one shilling in all for the
children of one family. By decision of Parliament,
however, the collection of fees was abolished from Bth
October, 1906. Primary education in the State is now
free and compulsory. School children are allowed to
travel free by rail to the nearest public or private
primary school ; to the nearest superior public school,
provided they are sufficiently advanced to be enrolled
in the sixth class ; and to the high schools.


A review, however brief, of the growth of the
State educational system would be incomplete without
some mention of the names of a few prominent
officials who have stamped their impress upon its
development. Among others may be cited Mr. William
Wilkins, for many years Secretary to the Council of
Education and the first Under Secretary of Public
Instruction ; Mr. Edwin Johnson (b. 1835, d. 1894),
Chief Inspector of Schools and Under Secretary ; Mr.
John Charles Maynard (b. 1835, d. 1906), Under Sec-
retary; and Mr. Frederick Bridges (b. 1840, d. 1904),
who filled many responsible positions, including those
of Superintendent of Technical Education. Chief
Inspector, and Under Secretary.
Other sections of the Act permit of the establish-
ment of provisional schools and the appointment of
itinerant teachers in remote and thinly-populated dis-
were carried approving of : (1) The gradual termination
of the pupil-teacher system and the introduction of
the system of previous training ; (2) the establishment
of a Chair of Pedagogy in connection with the Sydney
University ; (3) the provision and equipment of a
normal school, and practising school attached ; (4) the
organisation of local training schools in country dis-
tricts to provide suitable teachers for small country
schools ; (5) the establishment of a kindergarten col-
lege for the training of teachers ; (6) the sending of
students to Europe —( a ) to study and report on the
best methods of training teachers as adopted in the
most renowned normal colleges, (6) to study the theory
and practice of Sloyd ; (7)~ the extension of science
teaching, Nature study, and, in girls’ departments,
domestic economy ; (8) the establishment of truant
schools, and of schools for the feeble-minded ; (9) im-
A MODERN CITY SCHOOL (BLACKFRIARS) ,
Erected under the Department of Public Instruction.
tricts. The multiplication of small schools in the interior
has, however, recently fallen into disfavour as it is
recognised that one central school would offer the dual
advantage of greater economy and increased efficiency.
The educational revival which, during the past
decade has extended through the old world, has re-
cently been experienced in New South Wales. In 1902
a commission was appointed to inquire into and report
upon the methods of instruction pursued in the chief
continental countries and in America and Great Britain.
The commissioners (Messrs. G. H. Knibbs and J. W.
Turner) presented an interim report in 1903, and the
recommendations contained therein formed the subject
of consideration at a large representative conference
held at Easter, 1904. At this conference resolutions
provements, as recommended by the commissioners in
regard to school hygiene ; (10) the introduction of a
monthly school paper.
The reorganisation of the higher offices of the
department took place early in 1905, when the follow-
ing appointments were made :—Mr. P. Board, M.A.,
Under Secretary and Director of Education ; Mr. G. H.
Knibbs, F.R.A.S., Superintendent of Technical Edu-
cation ; Mr. J. Dawson, M-A., Chief Inspector ;
Mr. J. W. Turner, Assistant Under Secretary ; and
Mr. D. J. Cooper, M.A., Principal Senior Inspector.
Some modifications were subsequently made ; Mr.
Knibbs being appointed as Statistician to the Federal
Government, and Mr. Turner succeeding him as Super-
intendent of Technical Education.


Throughout the whole school system strenuous
attention is now being devoted to improvements in
method ; to substitution of the concrete for the ab-
stract, and to the correlation of the various subjects
of study. Greater stress is laid on the development
of the self-activity of the pupil and upon the cultiva-
tion of the powers of observation. The old style of
object lessons is being replaced by courses of Nature
study, and the actual environment of the child itself
more frequently used as an educative factor. The
teaching of manual subjects has also been brought
more into accord with modern ideas. A tangible
evidence of what has already been done in this direc-
tion was manifested recentlv in the public schools’
display at the A.N.A. Exhibition ; also at the State
Schools Exhibition, Melbourne, and the Christchurch
(N.Z.) Internationa] Exhibition.
Naturally, the inauguration of the “ new edu-
cation ” is beset with a considerable amount of diffi-
culty. In the first place many teachers require
to become familiar with the new methods. As regards
schools, with 740 departments ; 34 evening public
schools, with 34 departments ; 195 subsidised schools,
with 195 departments ; and 3 industrial and reforma-
tory schools, with 3 departments.
Of these schools 58 per cent, were small schools,
averaging less than 30 in daily attendance. Owing to
the migration of families it was found necessary to
close a number of the schools, and in such cases the
regulation permitting the granting of subsidies in
isolated districts has been availed of.
The number of individual pupils on the rolls of
State schools for 1905 was 237,493. The mean quar-
terly enrolment numbered 207,741, and the average
attendance 151,261. A feature of the attendance at
schools is the large number of what may be termed
senior pupils. When all the children enrolled are
arranged in age groups, it is observed that from the
age of 7 there is a gradual increase to the maximum,
which occurs between the age of 11 and 12. A slight
diminution occurs during the two following years (12 to
SYDNEY COVE, 1823.
the metropolis, much has already been done through
lectures and practical demonstration by experts. So
fstr as country teachers are concerned, a complete
course of instruction was arranged for during Christmas
vacation. The Hawkesbury College was also utilised
for the purpose of imparting a practical knowledge of
agriculture to a number of teacher-students, while
vacation summer schools were held at various country
centres.
Important changes have been made in the methods
of school inspection. The process of exhaustive ex-
amination hitherto adopted has given place to a more
general inspection of the work and management of the
school. Under the new system the inspector is enabled
to co-operate with and advise the teacher, and thus
assist in giving effect to the true spirit of the syllabus
—the production of good citizens.
At the close of 1906 there were 1,901 schools in
existence, according to the following classification
Four high schools, with 4 departments ; 1,908 public
schools, with 2,124 departments ; 740 small country
14) but after the age of 14 the attendance rapidly drops.
In England and Wales the attendance at primary
schools is greatest between the age of 6 and 7 years.
After the latter year it gradually diminishes. A com-
parison shows that the average school life in New
South Wales ranges from the child’s 7th to his 12th
year, while in England and Wales it ranges from his
4th to his 12th year. For the year 1906 the expendi-
ture on State education was : \a) for school premises
(sites, buildings, &c.), £89,975 ; (6) for maintenance of
schools (teachers’ salaries, &c.), £737,040 ; (c) for ad-
ministration and training of teachers, £54,565 ; total,
£881,580. The school fees received up to Bth October,
when fees were abolished, were £64,135, leaving a net
expenditure of £817.44?, or £5 Bs. Id. per head per
annum of each child in average attendance. There
were at the close of 1906 5,563 teachers in the service,
of whom 3,164 were males and 2,399 females. The
average number of pupils per teacher on the basis of
the mean quarterly enrolment was 37, and the average
attendance per teacher 27,


Mr. FREDERICK BRIDGES, late
Under Secretary for the Department
of Public Instruction of New South
Wales, is a native of the State,
having been born at Windsor in
1840. In 1849 he became a pupil
in the Fort Street School, then but
recently established, consequently
Mr. Bridges is one of the oldest
scholars of that school to-day in
New South Wales. In it he was
educated and afterwards trained as
a pupil teacher. In it he received
his appointment, first as a pupil
teacher and afterwards as an as-
sistant, and a few years subsequently
as its headmaster To-day, in a
very definite sense, Mr. Bridges re-
tains his connection with the school
as Under Secretary for the Depart-
ment of Public Instruction. In July,
1857, Mr. Bridges was appointed
first assistant at the William Street
Public School, where he remained
for two years, returning in iBsg to
Fort Street as first assistant. In
March, 1861, he was appointed to
open the national school at Bal-
main. Commencing with two pupils
only, in ten months the Balmain
School had an attendance of no
less than 300 scholars. In 1862
he was appointed to the charge
of the Mudgee School. In 1865 he
was brought back to Sydney to take
charge of what is now known as the
Cleveland Street Superior School.
Upon assuming control that school
had barely an average attendance
of 160. Upon leaving, two years
later, the numbers had increased to
750. In the year 1867 Mr. Bridges
had the peculiar satisfaction of beii g
appointed headmaster of the Fort
Street Model School, in which insti-
tution, seventeen years previously,
he had entered upon his career as a
teacher. He continued in this posi-
tion for ten years, during which
period he shaped the policy and laid
down the lines upon which, mainly,
the school has ever since been con-
ducted. The new system of public
instruction, inaugurated under the
Public Instruction Act of 1880, was
followed by the appointment of seven
district inspectors, of whom Mr.
Bridges was one. He was appointed
to the district of Wellington, which,
in those days, comprehended the
vast area of territory bounded by
the Blue Mountains on the east, the
Darling River on the west, and by
the Turon River on the south and
the Queensland border on the north..
In 1882 he was transferred to the
district of Bathurst. Here he re-
mained for two years, when he was
recalled to Sydney to occupy the
position of Deputy-Chief Inspector
of Schools. In iBBg the Govern-
ment selected Mr. Bridges to inaugu-
rate the new system of technical
education in New South Wales of
which he was appointed to the posi-
tion of superintendent. Under his
direction the cause of technical
education developed rapidly. The
Technical College at Ultimo, one of
the finest establishments of its kind
in the world, was built in 1890. The
curriculum of technical education
was, at the same time, enlarged and
the staff of teachers increased. In
addition the Technological Museum
was transferred to the college and
became a valuable adjunct for
practical class purposes and as a
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. F. BRIDGES.
bureau of information on colonial
resources. In 1894 r - Bridges was
called upon to occupy the important
position of Chief Inspector of Public
Schools, the duties of which office
he continued to administer for nearly
ten years. In 1902 the Government
despatched two commissioners,
Messrs. J. W. Turner and G. H.
Knibbs, to Europe and America to
inquire into and report upon the
educational systems in operation in
the leading countries of the world.
In April, 1904, a conference of in-
spectors and teachers was held in
Sydney, which sat for over a fort-
night, and considered the commis-
sioners’ report. The outcome of this
movement will eventually prove a
complete remodelling of the system
of public instruction in this State.
In the work of the commission and
the subsequent sifting of the evidence
and suggestions offered by the con-
ference Mr. Bridges took an active
part. Heartily approving of the
step taken by the department in
despatching the commission, his
clear and definite method of dealing
with the evidence in the conference
largely guided that body in coming
to reasonable conclusions. In Mr.
Bridges every teacher finds a
personal friend. While Chief In-
spector it was simply astonishing
where and when he found time to
meet and confer with teachers of all
ranks, even down to the modest
pupil teacher who came to him for
information, advice or guidance.
On the Ist of October, 1893, his
service to the cause of education was
recognised by the Government when,
upon the departure of Mr. Maynard
upon leave of absence, and in antici-
pation of his retirement from the
position of Under Secretary, Mr.
Bridges was appointed Acting-Under
Secretary—the permanent position
being confirmed to him a few months
later.
Mr. JAMES McCREDIE, Act-
ing-Chief Inspector, Department of
Public Instruction, New South
Wal es, was born in 1845, near
Belfast, Ireland, whither his parents
had removed from Scotland, some
years earlier. He commenced his
education at a commercial school
at Belfast, but his family emigrating
to New South Wales, in 1855, he
attended a private school in Sydney
for three years, and subsequently
the national schools at Violet Hill
and Fairy Meadow, in the Illawarra
district, then under the control of
his brother-in-law, the late Mr. John
McCredie, afterwards District In-
spector. In 1861 he entered the
Fort Street Model School, then
under the headmastership of the
late Mr. Thomas Harris, who subse-
quently attained the position of an
Inspector. In the following year he
was appointed a pupil teacher, and
for four years he was employed
successively in the William Street,
Balmain, Fort Street, and Cleveland
Street national schools. In 1866
he was promoted to the rank of an
assistant teacher, and during the
next four years taught in succession
in the Glebe, Fort Street, and
Goulburn public schools, While


employed in the last - mentioned
school as assistant, he was as-
sociated with Mr. J. C. Maynard,
who for a few years was head-
master of that school. In January,
1871, he was appointed Teacher of
the Burwood school. Here he
remained nine-and-a-half years.
Upon the opening of the school in
1871, the total enrolment of chil-
dren only amounted to 67; when he
left in June, 1880, it had reached
530. In presenting a testimonial
and a purse of sovereigns to Mr.
McCredie, upon the occasion of his
departure from Burwood, on behalf
of the residents and parents of the
scholars, the late Professor Smith,
President of the Council of Educa-
tion, bore record to the remarkable
progress made by the Burwood
school under Mr. McCredie’s head-
mastership. He pointed out that
the augmentation of attendance at
the school, was not alone the in-
crease of population in the suburb,
but was in a large measure owing to
the number of children who came
to the school from Sydney, and from
stations along the line as far as
Parramatta, Blacktown, Rooty Hill,
and even Picton. In July, 1880,
Mr. McCredie was appointed In-
spector of Schools at Yass, where he
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. JAMES McCREDIE.
remained nearly two years, and in
May, 1882, he was promoted to the
office of District Inspector, and was
appointed to Grafton. In January,
1888, he was removed tc the
Bathurst district, where he remained
until 1901. In May of that year he
was promoted to the position of
Deputy-Chief Inspector. Upon the
retirement of Mr. Maynard, in
October, 1903, from the office of
Under Secretary, and the consequent
promotion of Mr. Frederick Bridges,
Chief Inspector, to administer that
position Mr. McCredie was selected
as Mr. Bridges’ successor.
Dr. ROBERT NEWTON
MORRIS, 8.A., LL.D., Chief
Examiner, Department of Public
Instruction, was born at Jamberoo,
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney .
DR. R. N. MORRIS.
New South Wales in 1844. His
education was commenced at 111a-
warra House Academy, Kiama,
under the late Mr. J. D. Hustler.
For four or five years he was engaged
in business pursuits, continuing
meanwhile his studies privately, until
he entered Camden College. While
there he matriculated at the Sydney
University. During his course there
he held three scholarships and grad-
uated in 1869 in the three schools of
classics, mathematics and science,
being placed first in the first class in
each school, and winning the gold
medal for science. For some years
he was in the Congregational minis-
try, and occupied for two years the
post of principal of Camden College.
After the death of Professor Thomson
he was requested by the Senate of
the University to carry on his work
till the arrival of Professor Liversidge.
He subsequently purchased the
Yass Grammar School, and later,
at the request of a number of
people of Goulburn, he established
a grammar school there. In 1881
he was appointed by the late Sir John
Robertson, the first Minister of Public
Instruction, an inspector of schools.
From 1885 to 1890 he acted as
inspector in the metropolitan district,
and in the latter year received the
position of examiner. From 1896 to
Igo 1 he also performed the duties of
superintendent of technical education.
In 1884 he obtained the degree of
Bachelor of Laws, gaining the
Fawcet prize of and in 1886
was made Doctor of Laws.
Mr. JAMES SVEN WIGRAM,
J.P., Architect to the Department of
Public Instruction, was born in
London, and was educated princi-
pally in Warwick, and completed at
Hart's Training Academy and the
North London Collegiate School.
He was articled to a leading firm of
engineers in London. After serving
about two years he decided to accom-
pany his father to Australia. Arriving
in Sydney in 1858 he, with his father,
was engaged in several mining enter-
prises in the western district of New
South Wales. He then took up
building and contracting, and for
some years was a member of a firm
of contractors who carried on ex-
tensive building operations in the
J Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. J. S. WIGRAM.
northern districts of the colony. He
subsequently obtained an appoint-
ment as a draughtsman in the office
of Mr. G. Allen Mansfield, Architect
for Public Schools under the Council
of Education, and in course of time
was entrusted with the control of this


architectural branch. He remained
in this position for nine years, and
when the Government took over the
whole of the school work was ap-
pointed Chief Draughtsman under
the late Mr. Edward Kemp, who was
appointed Architect of Public Schools
by the late Sir John Pobertson, the
then Minister for Public Instruction.
In this position he remained until
1896, when he received the appoint-
ment to his present position. Nearly
all the public school buildings of the
State erected since the establishment
of the present public school system
have been built under Mr. Wigram’s
supervision. Mr. Wigram has always
taken an interest in military affairs.
In 1874 he received a commission as
lieutenant in No. 2 Company of
Field Artillery, under the land order
system. Upon the inception of the
partially paid system he continued in
the same rank under the altered
conditions. Passing the necessary
examinations, he received his com-
mission as captain in the Garrison
Artillery, and was subsequently pro-
moted to the rank of major. He first
became associated with the Garrison
Artillery in 1882, and after filling the
position of senior officer in that body
for several years, he retired in 1903
with the rank of Lieut.-Colonel. He
now holds the V.D. decoration for
long and meritorious services.
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. J. D. BRADLEY.
Mr. JOHN DALLISON
BRADLEY, Deputy-Chief Inspect-
or, Department of Public Instruction,
New South Wales, was born in 1840,
and received the elementary portion
of his education at the Fort Street
National School, then under the
management of the late Mr. William
Wilkins afterwards for many years
permanent head of the Education
Department. Under Mr. Wilkins
also, he became a pupil teacher at
Fort Street, from ist January, 1853;
he was little over 12 years of age,
and probably no other entrant into
the service commenced so early as a
salaried officer. In 1856, while still
a pupil teacher, he was transferred to
the William Street National School.
In a reminiscent mood he will recall
frequent visits to this school of the
then Governor, Sir William Denison,
who took a keen interest in the efforts
of our early educationists; Sir William
would watch intently the teacher at
work, and would occasionally try his
hand as an instructor. From 1858
to 1861 Mr. Bradley served as assist-
ant teacher at the schools already
mentioned, and then in 1862 he was
appointed headmaster of the Bal-
main National School (the “ Pigeon
Ground,” now Gladstone Park). Here
he remained until 1867, when he be-
came training-master at Fort Street:
in this capacity he prepared for their
future service in the department,
several of the foremost teachers of the
colony, including some who have since
risen to the rank of inspector. In
1870 he was appointed an inspector,
working at first in Sydney as junior
to the late Mr. Edwin Johnson, sub-
sequently Under Secretary; later, he
had charge of the Maitland and the
Armidale districts. Upon the passing
of the Public Instruction Act of 1880,
when the late Sir John Robertson
undertook the inauguration and ad-
ministration of the new system, Mr.
Bradley became a district inspector,
and was stationed at Armidale where
he remained until 1903, when he
accepted the office of deputy-chief
inspector. While “in the field” as
an inspector, he travelled over all the
northern half of the State, which he
knows intimately; his work, which
was in a special sense pioneer work,
was very onerous and responsible ;
he had to establish schools in remote
places and often to find teachers for
them. In his professional career of
nearly 52 years, Mr. Bradley has had
an important share in the develop-
ment of the system of primary edu-
cation in New South Wales.
Mr. J. W. TURNER, for over
ten years Principal of the Fort Street
Training College in connection with
the Department of Public Instruction
of New South Wales, was born at
Parramatta in 1849. Removing with
his parents at an early age to Cam-
den, he commenced his education
under the late Mr. H. P. Reeves,
headmaster ofthe'Church of England
School of that town. After passing
J. Hubert Newman Sydney
MR. J. W. TURNER.
through the various classes, he was
trained as a pupil teacher. In 1864
he was appointed to the Church of
England School at St. Peters, Cook’s
River, under the headmastership of
Mr. R. W. Guide. Making rapid
progress in his profession, he was in
1866, upon the recommendation of
the late Rev. Thomas Smith, se-
lected by the late the Very Rev.
Dean Cowper to fill the position of
assistant in St. Barnabas’ Church of
England School, George Street West,
Sydney. In the year 1869 he was
selected to take charge of a public
school then just provided for at
Tarana. At that time the place was
a mere railway camp, and the diffi-
culties to be overcome were numerous
and great, but within twelve months
his success obtained ample recog-
nition in his promotion to the more
important town of Wellington. Here
he established a considerable repu-
tation as a teacher, and settlers from
all parts of the north-western district
sent their children to be educated
under Mr. Turner. After twelve
years at Wellington he was promoted
to the George Street West Public
School, then conducted temporarily
in the St. Barnabas’ School Hall.
Upon the completion of the new


school on the Blackfriars Estate, one
of the largest and most palatial
school buildings in New South
Wales, Mr. Turner assumed charge.
In a very short while the school, both
in point of numbers and efficiency,
ranked among the most important in
the city, and Mr. Turner’s reputation
as a successful teacher was consider-
ably increased. In 1889 he was
called upon to fill the position of
headmaster of the historic Fort
Street Model School, the leading
government school of New South
W ales. In 1893 Mr. Turner received
an additional important appointment
as principal of the New South Wales
1 raining College. The combination
of the two offices was decided upon
by the department when it was
realised that the dual position could
be more advantageously administered
by one officer, providing he possessed
the ability and energy to carry out
the duties. In 1902 the Minister of
Public Instruction, the Hon. John
Perry, with a view to bringing the
system of education in New South
Wales up to the level of the more
advanced systems of the world, de-
cided to send to Europe and America
a special commission to inquire into
the educational methods in vogue
elsewhere. The Minister wisely
determined that this investigation
should be an exhaustive one, and
that of the two commissioners to be
appointed one at least should be an
experienced and trusted officer of the
department, who should possess a
thorough and practical knowledge of
the New South Wales system. After
consulting with the chief officers of
the department, Mr. Turner was
selected for this important work.
His appointment gave the utmost
satisfaction to the teaching profession
throughout the State and to the
general public as well. His fellow-
commissioner was Mr. G. H. Knibbs,
of the Sydney University, whose
appointment likewise met with uni-
versal approval. The CDinmissioners
visited Great Britain and Ireland
and all the principal countries of
Europe, as well as the United States
of America and Canada, making an
exhaustive inquiry into the systems
and methods obtaining in the various
countries through which they tra-
velled. Upon their return several
months were taken up in preparing
an exhaustive report. Upon its
presentation to the Minister a con-
ference of university professors,
heads of religious bodies, inspectors
and teachers was called, and the
recommendations of the commis-
sioners considered in detail. The
results of these investigations will
prove far reaching, and will probably
affect the future destiny of New
South Wales to an extent hardly
possible to realise. Mr. Turner is a
member of the Public Service Asso-
ciation, and upon the retirement
of Mr. C. J. Delohery from the
chairmanship of that body he was,
unanimously elected to that posi-
tion.
Mr. r ALBERT EDWARD BASSAN
is an instance of the possibilities
that are always open to ability and
application. Entering the account
branch of the Department of Public
Instruction at the age of fourteen,
he has climbed, step by step, to the
MR. A. E. BASSAN.
position of chief accountant of the
department, with the handling of
nearly a million of money. He was
born at Nundle, New South Wales,
on 25th April, 1864. Four years
later he came with his family to
Sydney, where he attended the
Cleveland Street, William Street,
and Paddington schools. Having
already passed the Junior Exami-
nation he successfully competed
for the Council of Education’s en-
trance examination, and received
an appointment in the office of the
Council in 1879. His long connec-
tion with the financial side of edu-
cation is best shown by a compari-
son of the position then and now.
In 1879 there were 2,038 officers
and teachers, 1,265 schools, and an
annual expenditure of £351,000.
At the present time there are 6,029
officers and teachers, 3,000 schools,
and the Public Instruction vote is.
£988,000 ! In 1887 Mr. Edwin
Johnson, the then Under Secretary,
as a result of educational investiga-
tions in England, suggested the
establishment of Schools Savings
Banks. Mr. Bassan was selected to
work out the details of a scheme,
and his efforts were so successful
that the children’s savings—chiefly
in pennies—have aggregated the
enormous sum of £260,000 ! As
the children leave school, they
withdraw their savings, the amount
thus withdrawn being £250,000.
Much of the success of the scheme
is due to the simplicity of Mr.
Bassan’s system. As a result of
exceptional ability shown in this
and other matters, he was ap-
pointed assistant accountant in
1891, and on 14th May, 1893. was
promoted to chief accountant,
which position he still holds. He
is one of the most valued financial
experts in the public service, and
the Public Service Board has in-
vited his assistance on several im-
portant committees- He is per-
sonally extremely popular, and
represents the department on the
council of the Public Service Asso-
ciation, where his keen insight and
sound sense are of great assistance
to the service generallv.
A Lieutenant-Governor’s House, Pitt Street, 1792.


Technical Education.
Half a century ago the subject of technical edu-
cation in Great Britain was in an embryonic condition,
practically unborn. The great exhibition of 1851
brought it into prominence. In the succeeding years
public attention was so strongly impelled in the direc-
tion of providing artisans and the people generally
with the means of acquiring a scientific knowledge of
the various handicrafts, that technical schools sprang
up all over Great Britain, some under the direct pa-
tronage of the State, others being founded by the
wealthy societies or guilds of the great English cities.
Results following the establishment of these schools
proved so excellent that it was not long ere similar
institutions were loudly demanded in Australia, where
predated throughout the State. It provides excellent
accommodation and an abundance of floor space.
The main building is utilised for offices, science and
art classes, and a students’ reference library, contain-
ing several thousand volumes on technical subjects.
The museum attached comprises everything that such
an establishment should be. There are three main
floors, 183 feet long by 50 feet wide, and the collec-
tions chieflv exemplify the botanical, mineral and
animal wealth of the State. The ground floor contains
mineral specimens, arranged on a technological basis,
together with the manufactures and industries con-
nected with them, as well as models of mining ma-
chinery, models illustrating metallurgical processes,
with examples of tools, mineral dyes and the like.
The botanical collections are arranged on the first
TECHNICAL COLLEGE MUSEUM, SYDNEY.
a sound and practical knowledge of the manual arts
has ever been a practical necessity.
The institution of technical education in this
State originated in a few classes taught at the Sydney
School of Arts. As far back as 1873 the establish-
ment of a technical college in connection with that
institution was decided upon, and a few years later,
in 1878. Parliament voted the sum of £2,000 in aid
of the project. These classes were continued until
1883, when they were transferred to the control of a
Board of Technical Education. At the close of 1889
this board was dissolved, and thenceforward technical
instruction came under the direct administration of
the Public Instruction Department.
The existing college at Ultimo, erected while the
Hon. J. H. Carruthers was Minister, was opened in
January, 1892, and its influence is now felt and ap-
floor, and include specimens of timbers—over 5,000,
from all parts of the world —with manufactured pro-
ducts in their various stages, fruit, agricultural pro-
ducts, dyes, tans, narcotics, spices, beverages, drugs
(leaves, fruits, seeds, flowers, roots), models of the
types of various natural orders of plants,, &c. The
herbarium contains over 50,000 specimens. Native
flowers are exhibited in vases in a fresh state, and
labelled with their local and scientific names. The
animal products include a unique collection of Aus-
tralian, American and European wools, over 10,000
specimens, an entomological collection, with expla-
natory notes and life histories, specimens of horn,
bone, ivory, furs, &c. The number of specimens at
present in the museum amounts to 150,000. These
are exhibited so as to stress the economic and indus-
trial rather than the scientific aspect of its specimens.


These are arranged so as to bring out clearly and im-
mediately the practical means as to the exploiting of
our resources. The institution, however, does some-
thing more than merely collecting and labelling natu-
ral products. It undertakes systematic research work
so as to make the most of what we have. It further
disseminates these results as widely as possible. For
this purpose its staff is always waiting to be consulted
—by the squatter who wishes to improve his wool by
the settler who has some by-product to find a market
for, and so on. A striking example of the value of this
activity is to be seen in the results of the long and
arduous researches on the essential oils of the eucalypts
and in the fact that upwards of two hundred original
papers have been published from the museum.
Teachers, students and visitors from the country are
admitted in the mornings for special study of the col-
lections and to draw from the specimens. The college
is open to both male and female students. Laet year
(1905) there were in operation 122 classes, with 78
teachers, while the weekly attendance averaged 4,468
students. The course of instruction comprises classes
in agriculture, art (including drawing in all branches),
architecture, carpentry, and other building trades,
book-keeping, mathematics, assaying, blacksmithing,
boiWmaking, botany, geology, chemistry, cookery,
decorative art and design, dressmaking, mechanical
engineering, electrical wiring and engineering, far-
riery, fitting and turning, elocution, languages, inspec-
tion of meat and animals, ironfounding, lithography,
photo-lithography, mine-surveying, mining, wood and
stone carving, wool-classing, and other training in con-
nection with sheep and wool. For these workshops
are provided, containing the necessary machinery,
tools and apparatus.
In addition to the central institution, branch
colleges, giving special attention to th Q needs of each
district, were opened in Newcastle, in February,
1896 ; at Bathurst in June, 1898 ; and at Albury in
1899. Since the latter dates other branches on a
smaller scale have been established at Broken Hill,
Goulburn and West Maitland. Apart from these, 176
classes are in operation in public schools, and 327
in suburban .and country districts. The gross expen-
diture upon technical education fox 1905 was £37,353,
this sum being made up of £29,224 from public
funds and £8,129 r°ceived as students’ fe°s.
The late Mr. F. Bridges was the first superin-
tendent of technical education, and was succeeded
by Dr. R. N. Morris, who held the dual position of
superintendent and examiner of the Education De-
partment. In the course of time it became necessary
to separate the two branches of work, and Mr. D. J.
Cooper was placed in charge of the technical education
branch. In connection with the reorganisation of
the higher offices of the department in 1905, Mr. G.
H. Knibbs became superintendent, and upon his
resignation, in June, 1906, Mr. J. W. Turner was
appointed to the vacant office. Under his direction
are Mr. R. T. Baker, F L.S., Curator and Economic
Botanist ; Mr. H. G. Smith, F.C.S., Assistant Curator
and Economic Chemist ; and the Registrar, Mr. G.
Hooper, with,a staff of clerks.
Colleges and Schools.
Primary education in New South Wales, it has
been remarked before, can be divided into four periods.
During the first, 1790 to 1848, the system was denomi-
national, pure and simple ; and the Government
granted to the heads of religious bodies proportionate
assistance to their total expenditure. As early as
1834 there had been attempts to bring about a change,
and these so far succeeded that five years later a grant
was made for the purpose of imparting instruction,
free from sectarian influence, to the children of those
parents who looked for more than denominational
teaching. Not, however, till 1844 were any definite
steps taken in the direction of altering the national
policy of education. Then, under the undenomi-
national or national system of education two boards
were constituted, one to look after the denominational
or private schools, and the other to supervise the un-
denominational or public schools ; and it was not
until 1866, when the Public Schools Act threw private
schools partially on their own resources, that this
anomaly of the two rival boards was done away with.
This Act ushered into existence the third period of
instruction. Its provisions, whilst continuing the two
distinct classes of schools, placed all receiving any aid
from the State under the Council of Education. This
system was essentially one of transition, and it was
soon found impossible to maintain its duality, not
only on account of its intrinsic defects, but because
the feeling of the people was repugnant to State aid
to any educational establishments of a religious tinge.
Accordingly, in 1880 State aid to denominational
education was abolished by an Act passed under the
auspices of Sir Henry Parkes, and the State entered
upon the present period in the educational history of
New South Wales.
From the above it will be seen that at the outset
the schools established by the Rev. Mr. Johnson, and
those that followed in the course of the next few years,
were to all intents and purposes State schools, inas-
much as that they were open to all sections of the
community and they placed no financial responsibili-
ties upon the promoters. The exact time when the
first private school —most probably a day-school —
opened is not quite clear. There were no school
advertisements in those days, and the only news-
paper in the territory was virtually the Government
Gazette . But this knowledge has come to us —that
the first boarding-school was opened by a Mr. Crook
in what is now the upper end of Bridge Street, during
the year 1808. It proved ephemeral, as did many
others succeeding it, the reason for their non-success
being easily discovered. The class creating distinc-
O J __ . G .
tions was too insignificant numerically speaking to
maintain such institutions, and the bulk of the people
could hardly be expected to pay for the education of
their offspring when it could be obtained for nothing.
Accordingly, when the national school system was
introduced by the Rev. T. Riddell, in August, 1820,
the private school made a very small factor in the
question of educating the community.
But men of learning and experienced teachers
were pouring into the country, and the classes were
235
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


multiplying, so out of these circumstances was evolved
the foundation of the Sydney Grammar School —with
Dr. Halloran as headmaster. This was in 1825.
About the close of the year most of the civil officers
and many other gentlemen residing in Sydney and its
vicinity formed themselves into a societv or bodv of
trustees for the erection and endowment of a grammar
school in Sydney. On announcing the object of their
association to Sir Thomas Brisbane, who was then
Governor of South Wales, a piece of ground near
the Racecourse in Hyde Park —in College Street as a
matter of fact —was immediately granted for the erec-
tion of the necessary buildings. Dr. Halloran and an
assistant master were forthwith appointed for the
immediate commencement of the school in a house
rented by the trustees. A train of untoward circum-
stances unhappily threw this plan a long time into
complete abeyance, and even threatened its entire
dissolution. In 1828 a prospectus was submitted to
THE NATIONAL SCHOOL,
Founded 1849.
a meeting of trustees by Dr. Bland —to whose libe-
rality and unremitting activity in its behalf the insti-
tution was throughout its existence under the highest
obligations, —but from the depression of trade, and a
continuous drought in the colony, which powerfully
affected the whole of the community, the trustees
were precluded from carrying the Doctor’s plan into
effect. Before the close of 1829 things had improved
for the better, a fresh and favourable current of public
feeling in regard to the establishment immediately
ensued, and a meeting of the trustees and friends of
education in general took place January 14, 1830.
At this meeting it was deemed expedient to adopt an
alteration of name for the institution. The Grammar
School gave way to the more pretentious title of the
Sydney College, when, on January 26, 1830, the first
stone was laid by Chief Justice Forbes.
This establishment being the first private school
of any importance in Australia, and, as a matter of
fact, the forerunner of the University, some attention
may be given to its constitution as displayed in what
was then termed the “unchangeable resolutions
passed at the meeting.’ ’ The most important of these
were : —That the sum of £IO,OOO be raised for the
establishment of the College in 200 shares of £SO each ;
that 10 per cent, be paid upon each share at the time
of subscribing, and the remainder by such instalments
as the Committee of Management and as the purposes
of the institution may require ; that each share shall
entitle the holder thereof, his or her executors, ad-
ministrators and assigns, to the right in perpetuity of
having one boy or student at the College ; that each
share of £SO shall entitle the holder thereof to one
vote at all general meetings, but that no trustee shall
have more than five votes, and that each trustee be
privileged to vote by proxy, provided such proxy be
a trustee and produces an authority in writing from
the trustee in whose behalf he is authorised to vote ;
that the entire control of the establishment be vested
in the trustees, and that a president, treasurer, secre-
tary, and a committee of fifteen members, be elected
annually by the aggregate body of trustees for the
management of the funds, and for the regulation and
superintendence of the concerns of the institution ;
and that five members form a quorum ; that the insti-
tution be available to all parties, of whatever religious
persuasion, and that no religious book be used by
authority except the Old and New Testament, without
note or comment ; that the committee be authorised
to send powers of attorney to such places abroad, as
in the mother country, as they shall think fit, consti-
tuting agents for the Sydney College. Other resolu-
tions were passed, intended to be suitable for the
occasion and not unchangeable ; and on these com-
bined the rules of the management in the establish-
ment were founded.
The course of education was determined as fol-
lows : —(1) Greek and Latin languages ; (2) English
grammar, elocution, and elements of English com-
position ; (3) writing, arithmetic, book-keeping, geo-
graphy, and drawing ; (4) mathematics and natural
philosophy. For these four masters of high scholastic
attainments were appointed, their salaries being regu-
lated by the shareholders. While the headmaster had
the superintendence of the pupils in all stages of pro-
gress, each master was independent of all others in his
own department, and amenable only to the Committee
of Management for the improvement of pupils placed
under his special care by the headmaster. All matters
relative to the internal discipline, such as the sub-
division of classes, the regulation of the course of study,
and the use of particular class-books, were left under
the control of the masters themselves, subject to the
approval of the Committee of Management.
With regard to the cost of instruction, the sum of
£5 was paid annually for the education of such pupils
nominated by a trustee ; the terms for a student not
so nominated being £l2 per annum if he were ten years
of age, and £lO if under, leaving the difference of these
charges from £5 to £l2 maximum interest of a £SO
share, as no trustee, whatever his number of shares,
had any claim or title to cash dividends. The revenue


arising from the pupils was converted to the payment
of salaries and other expenses ; and any surplus funds
were to be either added to the masters’ nominated
salaries, or converted to the payment of additional
matters as necessitated. The various shares remained
in one common fund to be appropriated exclusively
to the completion of additional buildings, or to be
invested in the manner considered most advantageous
for the institution. In 1838, when the Sydney College
was nearly at the height of its success, 131 shares had
been deposited in this fund, besides £SOO bequeathed
to it by Mr. Solomon Levy for the benefit of orphan
children. The educational staff then consisted of
Mr. W. T. Cape, headmaster, a scholar who might not
inappropriately be termed the Dr. Arnold of Australia ;
Mr. J. Murray, teacher of English grammar and mathe-
matics ; Mr. J. M. O'Brien, teacher of writing, geo-
graphy, and natural philosophy ; and Mr. (afterwards
Dr.) W. Woolls, classical department.
Although the first important institution to receive
public support and commence educational work, the
Sydney College can hardly claim to be the first initiated.
The quick observance of Dr. Lang had shown him how
deficient the settlement was in first-class schools, and,
with characteristic energy, he roamed the country
collecting funds from the colonists for the establish-
es
ment of a seminary which would combine the elemen-
tary with a gradually extending provision for the
higher branches of education.
On December 23, 1831, he had the satisfaction of
seeing opened, with much ceremony and flourish of
oratory, the Australian College, having succeeded in
inducing Viscount Goderich, then principal Secretary
of State for the Colonies, to grant from the colonial
revenue an amount equivalent to the total of sub-
scriptions he could collect in Australia. With £7,000
thus raised he reared an extravagant edifice that in its
capacious appointments would worthily meet the
requirements of the colonists for the next quarter-cen-
tury. The buildings were sufficient to accommodate
upwards of a hundred boarders, and from the moment
the doors of the College were opened up to the end of
the thirties each quarter’s report presented a gradual
increase of students. In short, in its early years the
Australian College was such a success that it was not
only able to pay all salaries and other current ex-
penses from its ordinary revenue, and to afford a
bounty of 8 per cent, to the shareholders, but year
after year a considerable balance was left to accumu-
late in the hands of the treasurer.
A subscription of £25 constituted a shareholder,
and every holder of two such shares was entitled to
send a pupil to the highest class at the fee of £8 per
annum. The annual class fees were : —English ele-
mentary class alone, £6 ; writing and arithmetic with
the above, £8 ; mathematics, £lO ; Latin and Greek,
with all the others, £l2. The terms for board, exclu-
sive of education, were —For boys under nine years of
age, £25 per annum ; above nine and under twelve,
£3O per annum ; above twelve, £35 per annum ; with
extras £4 per annum for each student. These fees had
to be paid quarterly in advance, and a quarter’s notice
to be given previous to the removal of any boarder.
The College Council was a strong one, and was
composed in the early years of the following : —Messrs.
C. 1). Riddell, M.C., Colonial Treasurer, chairman ;
R. Jones, M.C. ; A. Berry, M.C. ; Thomas Barker, J.P. ;
Thomas Walker, J.P. ; D. Ramsay, of Dobroyd ; Geo.
Bowman, of Richmond ; R. Campbell, tertius; Rev. R.
Wylde, A.M., and the Rev. D. Mackenzie, A.M. The
Rev. Dr. Lang was the secretary. The teachers in the
institution were the Rev. H, Carmichael, A.M., after-
wards succeeded by the Rev. R. Wylde, A.M., classical
department ; the Rev. Thos. Aitkin, A.M., English
department ; the Rev. D. Mackenzie, A.M., mathe-
matics and natural philosophy ; Monsieur Duvauchelle,
French ; and Mr. Elyard, drawing.
Like the Sydney College, the Australian College,
evidently reflecting the growing spirit of the age, had
a leaning rather to secular instruction. It was neither
a theological institution nor confined in its advantages
to any particular denomination ; but was open to
pupils of every creed. There was no catechism of any
sort, and the only religious book allowed to be em-
braced in the course of instruction, and that very
sparingly, was the Bible. For years the institution
enjoyed a prosperous career, but the restless activity
of Dr. Lang could not keep him from meddling with
the teachers, and their constant defection and hostile
rivalry engendered by this action on the part of the
Doctor ultimately culminated in disastrous days over-
taking the college.
As an outcome of Dr. Lang’s quarrelling the
Normal Institution in Hyde Park, may be said to
have sprung into existence, as it was very largely
through the influence and labours of the Rev. H. Car-
michael that it became established in 1835. The
school was formed with the express view of plying
exclusively the business of a secular instruction, and
as such it was the forerunner of the present national
scheme of education, into which it merged after many
years of independent existence. At the time of its
formation it was expected that a well-equipped school
on strictly secular lines would become popular, and
this forecast did not turn out incorrect, as the older it
grew the more stable seemed to be its hold on the
community. The curriculum included Greek and
Latin, and extra classes were provided for any of the
modern or oriental languages, portrait painting, draw-
ing, &c., &c.
With the expansion of the colony began the de-
centralisation of educational forces, and colleges and
schools sprung up in all directions, commencing from
Parramatta, where the King’s School had been pro-
moted by the Church of England as early as 1830.
Most of these institutions in the course of years ceased
to continue instructional work, but the most prominent
old-time schools and colleges in existence now are the
Sydney Grammar School, established by Mr. W. T.
Cape in 1857, in continuation of the Sydney College ;
the King’s School, Parramatta, the oldest and one of
the most vigorous training grounds in the antipodes ;
and Moore College, Liverpool. Of modern schools
their number is legion, and space does not permit of
their particularisation in this limited article.


The Sydney University.
The Sydney University, situated on a hill to the
south of Sydney, within the area formerly known as
Grose Farm, presents to the eye a magnificent range
of buildings. The Great Hall transferred to the colony
O %/
some of the best traditions of university architecture,
and it is worth more than a passing remark that the
Gothic style which dominates some of the university
buildings was settled at the outset, as far as we can
sav, for ever.
%/ *
Principally through the exertions of William
Charles Wentworth, the Sydney University was estab-
lished and endowed, and became, what we may con-
sider with pride, the.first colonial university in the
British Empire. In the year 1849 Mr. Wentworth
presented a petition to the mixed Legislative Council
Council was shortly afterwards prorogued, and the
measure consequently lapsed for that session.
In 1850 the bill, which was based mainly on the
charter of University College, London, was re-
introduced by Mr. Wentworth, and, after some dis-
cussion and a few amendments, was passed, receiving
the Royal Assent on the Ist October of the same year.
The endorsement was given for “ defraying the sti-
pends of teachers in literature, science and art,” and
for administrative purposes, there being no provision
made for teaching any other branch. Power was,
however, given to examine and to grant degrees after
examination in law and medicine, as well as in arts.
The University was to be strictly undenominational,
and the Act expressly prohibited any religious test for
admission to studentship or to any office or for par-
ticipation in any of its advantages or privileges. Resi-
Edmund T. Blacket.
SYDNEY UNIVERSITY.
from certain shareholders of a proprietary school
known as Sydney College, praying for the appoint-
ment of a select committee of the House “ to consider
the best means of carrying on the institution so as
to afford the youths of the colony the best means of
obtaining instruction in the higher branches of
literature andscience.’ ’ The committee was appointed,
but it received somewhat different instructions, being
directed to consider and report how best to institute
a university for the promotion of literature and science,
to be endowed at the public expense. The committee,
after a few weeks’ deliberations, brought up its report,
recommending the establishment of a university with
a permanent endowment of £5,000 per annum, out of
the general revenue, and a bill was brought in by
Mr. Wentworth in accordance with the report. The
dence was not contemplated otherwise than in affili-
ated colleges, but authority was given to license tutors
and masters of boarding-houses with whom students
of the University might live.
A senate of sixteen Fellows was constituted to
govern the University, and it was empowered to elect
from its members its own chancellor and vice-chan-
cellor. The Fellows were in the first instance nomi-
nated by the Crown, but were to be replaced as vacan-
cies arose by the Fellows themselves until there should
be one hundred graduates holding the degree of Master
in Arts or of Doctor in Law or Medicine. The first
senate commenced its labours at the close of the year
1850, with Mr. Ed. Hamilton, M A., as Provost, and
Sir Charles Nicholson, M.D., as Vice-Provost. Com-
mencing its labours at the close of 1850, it established


chairs in classics, mathematics, chemistry, and experi-
mental physics, and sent to England for competent
professors to fill them.
Ar rangements were made for holding the first
matriculation examination on October 4th, 1852.
A notification announced that in mathematics the
candidates would be examined in the ordinary rules
of arithmetic, vulgar and decimal fractions, the first
four rules of Algebra, and th a first book of End'd.
In classics the candidates would be examined in the
sixth book of Homer’s Iliad, the first book of Xeno-
phon’s Anabasis, the first book of Virgil’s iEneid, and
the Bellum Catilinarcium of Sallust. Also in geo-
graphy and history connected with these portions of th 3
above works. A number of rules were also framed.
The College lectures, which all students matricu-
lated in 1852 would require to attend, were to com-
mence on Monday, November 11th, and terminate on
Saturday, December 11th; the matriculated students
were to be divided into two classes, according to their
several degrees of proficiency. Each professor would
deliver a lecture to each division daily ; the subjects
for the lecturers were : —For the first division, Thucy-
dides, Book 1., Sophocles, Antigone, Sallust, Bell. Jug.
and Horace’s Epistles; for the lower division, Xeno-
phon Anabasis, Horace, Book 1, Cicero d 3 Senec-
tute, Virgil HLneid, Book 1. In mathematics lectures
would be given in the first four books of Euclid, arith-
metic, algebra ; and in science, chemistry and natural
and experimental philosophy. It was further notified
that six scholarships of £5O a year, tenable for three
years, would be open for competition to matriculated
students by an examination on December 6th, 1852, in
the following subjects : Mathematics, arithmetic, al-
gebra (as far as quadratic equations), the first four
books of Euclid, the popular elements of statics and
dynamics ; Classics —Greek —the Medea of Eury-
pides, Xenophon’s Anabasis ; Latin —first six books
of Virgil’s iEneid, Cicero de Amicitia, Roman Antiqui-
ties ; translation from English to Latin, and questions
in Ancient History connected with the foregoing.
“ The inauguration ceremony took place on Mon-
day, October 11th, 1852, in the Great Hall, College
Buildings, Hyde Park, in the presence of a numerous
audience. Soon after 11 o’clock the doors at the
western entrance were opened . . . and the ceremony
of registering the names of the matriculated students
was gone through. Professor Smith presented each
of the young gentlemen to the Registrar, by whom
their names were entered on the Matriculation Book,
as follows : —Messrs. Fitzwilliam Wentworth, George
Leary, Joseph Leary, James William Johnson,
Chas. L. Allen, Alex. Roby Riley, W. C. Windeyer,
James Affrialt Wilson, W. H. Abbott Hurst, W. H.
Forshall, G. Andrew Moore, John Kinloch, G. Cyprian
Curtis, Thomas Henry Coulson, Robert Sealy, R.
Marsden Fitzgerald, Alex. Oliver, Rodney Riddell,
Marshall Burdekin, Robt. Speir Willis, Ed. Lee,
David Scott Mitchell, H. Wyatt Radford, and T. B.
Clarke. The matriculation entries having been made,
the procession of those who were to take part in the
official proceedings of the day was formed in the
apartments of the Principal, and entered the hall in
the following the band of H.M. 11th Regiment
playing the National Anthem : —-The Beadle, the
Registrar, Professors Pell and Smith, the Rev. Dr.
Woolley (the Principal) ; the Fellows of the
Senate, viz., Mr. W. C. Wentworth, M.L.C., Mr. Justice
Therry, the Colonial Secretary, the Attorney-General,
the Postmaster-General, Mr. J. B. Darvall, M.L.C., Mr.
Broadhurst, M.L.C., the Right Reverend Dr. Davis
Dr. O’Brien, Mr. Stuart A. Donaldson, M.L.C. ; the
Vice-Provost (Sir Charles Nicholson) ; his Excellency
the Governor-General and suite ; the Chief Justice
(Sir Alfred Stephen), his Honor Mr. Justice Dickin-
son, and their Associates ; Lieut.-General Wynyard and
the Colonial Treasurer ; Colonels Bloomfield and Mac-
arthur, and the officers of the staff.
“ The Vice-Provost conducted his Excellency to
the State chair, on either side of him being seated
the Fellows of the Senate. Before them agam sat
clergymen of all denominations. . . . On the left was
a numerous body of naval and military officers of
the garrison and port. Near them were the French
and other foreign consuls, their glittering uniforms
contrasting admirably with the black gowns of the
Solicitor-General and other leading members of the
bar and of the young Alumni who occupied the front
seats. The Vice-Provost occupied a State chair on
the right, a little in advance of his Excellency, and
was supported by Professors Pell and Smith. On the
extreme right of the reserved space was the Principal’s
chair ;on the left the Registrar’s. A large portion of
the area was reserved for the ladies. . . . Over the
Governor-General’s chair was a shield bearing the
Royal arms of England, and on his right and left two
others, with the arms of the Universities of Oxford and
Cambridge. Over Dr. Woolley’s chair was a shield
bearing the arms of his own college —University Col-
lege, Oxford, the oldest in the world. Immediately
opposite, over the Registrar’s, was the pure white
shield of the Sydney University, no arms yet em-
blazoned thereon, but bearing the significant motto,
‘ I will achieve.’
“ In the course of a comprehensive address the
Vice-Chancellor said : ‘ There is one point further in
connection with the comprehensive character of our
foundation to which I must refer. I allude to the
liberal provision that is made for the endowment of
18 scholarships of the annual value of £5O each, ten-
able for three years. These are thrown open to the
competition of the youth of the whole colony. In our
universities at home it is generally the practice to limit
the competition for presentations to those educated in
particular foundations. No such restrictive rule is
here applicable. . . The terms of admission to our
classes and the scholarships we have founded are cal-
culated to afford every facility and encouragement to
candidates, of whatever degree who may be desirous
of participating in the advantages which are held out
to them. . . No sooner had the Fellows become
invested with the important and responsible functions
entrusted to them, than they proceeded to the estab-
lishment of chairs in their various branches of lite-
rature and science, which are considered of funda-
mental importance in every system of academic train-
ing. Professorships were, therefore, instituted in Greek


and Latin, in mathematics and chemistry, and experi-
mental philosophy. To secure the services of able
and accomplished teachers was an object of earnest
solicitude on the part of the Senate. After much and
careful reflection they resolved to entrust the selection
of their first professors to a committee of gentlemen
in England, consisting of Sir John Herschell, Bart.,
Professor Airey, Astronomer-Royal ; Professor Malden,
of University College, London ; and Henry Denison,
Esq., formerly Fellow of All Souls, Oxford. The
trust and duty imposed on these distinguished indi-
viduals were undertaken and have been discharged
with a zeal and cordiality which demand the most
grateful acknowledgments on the part of all who feel
an interest in their examinations. After a most
patient and laborious examination of the credentials
of the various candidates who came forward (and
whose number amounted to upwards of one hundred
and sixty), the choice of the committee was finally
fixed upon the Rev. J. Woolley, D.C.L., the head-
master of King Edward the Sixth’s School at Nor-
wich, and formerly Fellow of University College, Ox-
ford, as Classical Professor ; on M. B. Pell, Esq., Bache-
lor of Arts and Fellow of St. John’s College, Cambridge,
as Professor of Mathematics ; and on John Smith, Esq.,
Doctor of Medicine, Assistant Professor of Chemistry,
Ma rischal College, Aberdeen, as Professor of Chemis-
try and the Philosophy of Physics. All these gentle-
men have acquired high academic distinction, have
had considerable experience in teaching and possess
in the most eminent degree ell those high moral
qualities essential for the proper discharge of their
several duties. ’ ’ ’
In 1858 a Royal Charter was granted, recognising
the degrees in arts, law and science as equivalent to
degrees granted in any British University. The public
endowment of the University stood at £5,000 per
annum until 1880, when £I,OOO was added for assist-
ant lectureships.
In 1877 a bequest of £6,000, producing £3OO a
year, was made by Mrs. Hovel!, widow of the ex-
plorer, for instruction in geology and physical geo-
graphy, and this sum, together with fees, enabled the
Senate to divide the chair of chemistry and experi-
mental physics into two.
In 1882 a further sum of £5,000 (subsequently
increased to £7,900) was voted from public funds for
the establishment of a school of medicine and engineer-
ing. The sum of £2,000 per annum was also granted
for evening lectures in arts. Principally out of this
latter sum a system of extension lectures to non-
matriculants was commenced in 1886, first in the
metropolis and afterwards in the country districts. It
is not improbable that these lectures will eventually
form a very prominent feature of the work of the
University.
There are three denominational colleges affiliated
with the University. St. Paul’s College (C.E.), estab-
lished in 1854 ; St. John’s (R.C.), established in 1857 ;
and St. Andrew’s (Presbyterian) in 1867. The Wes-
leyan body, for whom an equal had been set apart,
declined to accept it, and in 1873 some twelve acres
of the land originally intended for a site for their col-
lege were resumed by the Crown, and provision was
made by the University for the establishment of a
medical school in connection with Prince Alfred Hos-
pital.
The Women’s College —a college within the Uni-
versity —was opened in March, 1892, and provides
accommodation for 26 res ; dent students. The Go-
vernment granted £5,000 towards the buddings, and
pays the salary of the principal.
The University has from time to time received
liberal endowments from private individuals Among
the first were gifts of £I,OOO each from Mr. Thomas
Barker, Sir Daniel Cooper and Sir Edward Deas
Thomson. Upwards of £60,000 in cash has been
presented to the present date. In addition, £3O 000
was left by the late Mr. Thomas Fisher for a library,
and £6,000 by the lato Sir W. Macleay for a curator-
ship of the Natural History Museum. Bequests of
property other than money amount to between fifty
and sixty thousand pounds. Above all, the late Mr.
John Henry Challis left his residuary estate to the
University. In December, 1890, £200.000 was handed
to the University. An additional £30,000, set apart
for certain annuities, will ultimately accrue to the
University funds. Under this bequest new chairs
have been established in law, modern literature, his-
tory, logic and mental philosophy, anatomy, engineer-
ing and biology. During 1896 Mr. P. N. Russell
devoted £50,000 towards a school of engineering, and
this gift was in 1904 supplemented by a further grant
of £50,000.
An extensive addition to the University buildings
has been made for the use of the School of Medicine.
It provides the most complete accommodation for
medical students, and the Prince Alfred Hospital,
erected on the University grant, affords them the
necessary means of practical study. A School of
Mines was opened in 1895, and a School of Dentistry
in 1901.
In the Faculty of Arts two degrees are granted.
o o
viz., Bachelor of Arts and Master of Arts. The curri-
culum of study for the degree of B.A. extends over a
j o
period of three years, during which students are re-
quired to attend lectures and pass examinations. In
the faculty of Law two degrees are granted, viz.,
Bachelor and Doctor of Laws, the curriculum extend-
ing over a period of five years, or two years in the
Faculty of Arts and three in Law. In the Facultv of
V *■
Medicine three degrees are granted. Le., Bachelor and
Doctor of Medicine and Master of Surgery. For the
lower degrees the period of study extends over five
years. In the Faculty of Science the degrees of Bache-
lor and Doctor of Science and Bachelor and Master of
Engineering are given. The curriculum for Bachelor
of Science and Bachelor of Engineering —in civil engi-
neering—takes up a period of three years, and in
mining, mechanical and electrical engineering four
years. In the School of Dentistry after four years’
curriculum a degree in dental surgery is given.
Although little was done to extend the field of
work until 1865, when in the Faculty of Arts, several
subjects were added by 1876 the University had 100
graduates. It is an interesting sidelight in the demo
cratic feeling of these early years, that Dr. Woolley,
in his desire to add to the small number of students,


for two years held evening classes at the School of
V O
Arts with a view to preparing men for matriculation.
That eminent scholar was succeeded by Dr. Badham,
who taught from 1867 to 1884 —a man in the forefront
of classical philologists of his day. He found under
40 students, but again the democracy of letters was
illustrated, for scholar of European reputation as he
was, the Professor offered to teach through the post
Latin and French to any teachers, clerks, or mechanics
who cared to take advantage of his offer. In 1871 he
pleaded for the admission of women to degrees, and,
to quote Professor Butler’s account, “ he loved to see
the first women undergraduat s in his lecture-room.’
Finally, in the year before his death, he strongly ad-
vocated the institution of evening lectures.
the examination. They, too, must satisfy the Minis-
ter for Education that their own and their parents
means are unequal to the expense of a university
education. If he lives too far from a university to
travel to and fro daily, he will receive a full bursary,
but otherwise only part will be awarded. He must
matriculate at the University and attend lectures, and
must pass creditably the examinations at the end of
the first and second year, after matriculation. These
bursaries are for the arts or science courses only, be-
cause their term is only three years. But if the bursar
wished to study in the other faculties he may have the
full value of his bursary to help him.
Last year (1906) 970 students, including 135
women, attended lectures. The staff consisted of the
THE FISHER LIBRARY.
The Department of Education in New South
Wales began the bursary and scholarship system about
1889, and in 18 years there have been awarded about
1,400 bursaries and scholarships, entitling the holders
to education in secondary schools, and about 200
bursaries under which the holders obtained a univer-
sity education. Of the number of State bursaries
awarded each year, twelve give a three years course
at the University. These are divided equally between
girls and boys, and are awarded annually at the ma-
triculation examination. The candidates must be
under eighteen years of age, and must have attended
the high school the public school, or as State bursars,
the Sydney Grammar School for the year previous to
following Professors ; —Greek, W. J. W oodhouse,
M.A. ; Latin, Thos. Butler, B.A. ; Mathematics, H. 8.
Carslaw, M.A. ; Chemistry, A. Liversidge, M.A. ;
Physics. J. A. Pollock, B.Sc. ; Geology and Physical
Geography, T. W. Edgeworth David, B.A. ; Physiology,
T. P. Anderson Stuart, M.D. ; Anatomy. Jas. T.
Wilson, M.B. ; Pathology, D. A. Walshe, M.A. ; En-
gineering, Win. H. Warren, M.I.C.E. ; Modern Litera-
ture, M. W. McCallum, M.A. ; Biology, Wm. A. Has-
well, M.A. ; Law, Pitt Cobbett, M.A. ; History, G.
Arnold Wood, M.A. ; Director of Military Science,
Col. H. J. Foster, R.B. In addition there are 65 lec-
turers, assistant lecturers, demonstrators and curators
in the various departments of the University.


The Public Library.
Eighty years ago the nucleus of the first library in
Australia was formed. It has increased wonderfully
since then in value and size. On February 3rd, 1826,
a meeting was held at the Sydney Hotel for the pur-
pose of forming a subscription library, and the merit
of its origin is due to Mr. Thomas de la Condamine,
private secretary to Governor Darling. He mentioned
his proposal to the Rev. Win. Cowper and the Rev.
Richard Hill, chaplains of Sydney, some few mer-
chants and Government officers, and it obtained their
immediate approval and co-op ration, as well as the
sanction of the Governor, who became its most zealous
friend and patron. Rules were drawn up and printed,
and amongst the names of the first committee was
that of Dr. James Mitchell, of H.M.’s 48th
Regt., father of Mr. David Scott Mitchell (donor
of the Mitchell Library to this State) and who possessed
a copy of these rules. The first chairman of committee
AUSTRALIAN SUBSCRIPTION LIBRARY .
was Mr. John Mackaness ; the treasurers were Messrs.
Berry and Wollstonecraft; and the secretary Lt. De la
Condamine. Mr. Alex. McLeay, the Colonial Secre-
tary, was appointed president. Funds were soon col-
lected by subscription and remitted to England with
an order for such standard works in history, literature,
biography and science as seemed the most fitted to
form the nucleus of a public library, while liberal dona-
tions were forwarded from Governor Darling, who
shortly after its opening granted to the trustees the
use of some valuable allotments of land, the first two
being situated in Hyde Park, and two in Rushcutters’
Bay, in aid of the building fund. The latter was sold
by auction in 1840 for £3,384, for the purpose of erect-
ing a suitable building. Those in Hyde Park were
disallowed, and cancelled by Sir Richard Bourke.
A correspondence was entered into with the Govern-
ment on the subject, and kept up for several years,
and was finally settled by Sir George Gipps granting
the site on which the present building is erected.
By the judicious arrangement of the commit-tee,
furthered by liberal donations of books left by the
will of Mr. F. Campbell, also donations by Archdeacon
Scott, Mr. Roger Therry, Lt. De la Condamine, Saxe
Bannister, Mr. James Busby (first British resident in
New Zealand and eldest son of John Busby, who con-
veyed the water to Sydney from the Lachlan Swamp),
Assistant Commissary General Hayward, Captain P. G.
King, R.N., and many others, the library was opened
on October Ist, 1827, at No. 1 Terry’s buildings, Pitt
Street, these buildings being held conjointly with the
Sydney Dispensary, the officer of which in the first
instance acted as temporary librarian daily from 1 to
4 o’clock in the afternoon, the entrance fee being £5.
and £2 annual subscription. Admission was by ballot,
but its use was not so offensively exclusive as was
generally imagined.
In October, 1827, it was advertised that the
Sydney reading-room attached to this library was
shortly to be opened in the stores of Mr. Sparke, and
that there were 1,000 to 1,200 volumes
of choice works ready for a commence-
ment, which had been forwarded to the
institution. In 1836 Colonel Shadford.
of H.M.’s 57th Regiment of Foot,
was secretary. In December, 1831,
the house occupied by the subscrip-
tion library, in Terry’s buildings,
Pitt Street, was taken by the com-
missioners 'protem. for the use of the
King’s School, and the library was
moved to a building in George Street,
part of which was used as the Genera]
Post-office, which stood on the site of
the present General Post-office. Here
it remained until May, 1836, when
it was moved to a building previously
occupied by the Chief Justice, Sir
Francis Forbes, in Bridge Street.
The Lands Office marks the site.
On February 14, 1843, the founda-
tion-stone of the old library build-
ing was laid by the president, Mr.
Alex. McLeay, and the building
was ready for use in 1848. It was built, at a
cost of £5,000, of light-coloured freestone, after the
design of Mr. Henry Ginn, and adorned with numerous
carved pilasters in the composite order of architecture.
The library-room occupied the entire eastern side
facing Macquarie Street, and was lighted by fifteen
windows, its size being 80 feet by 40 feet, and 35 feet
in height, and was surrounded by a gallery. The
reading-room, which was of smaller dimensions, had a
south-western aspect. The librarian’s quarters and
a small garden faced Bent Street, and extended as far
as Phillip Lane.
In 1869 the Australian Library offered their col-
lection of books to the Government, who purchased
some 16,000 volumes for £1,500. At the same time
the Australian Library building was leased by the
Government for one year at £3OO, with the option of
purchasing it within that year for £3,600. This pur-
chase was completed on September 24, 1869, and on
the 30th of the same month the institution under


Government was formally opened by Governor Bel-
more, the origination of this acquirement being mainly
due to the efforts of Sir John Robertson, K.C.M.G.
Interim provisions for the foundation of a library had
been made eight years previously, and the sum of
£25,000 was voted in 1862, Provisional regulations
had been made and a list of books, which had been
prepared by the librarian of the former institution, was
printed ready for circulation on the opening day.
On March 10, 1870, the first trustees of the Free
Public Library having been appointed, their names
were gazetted as follows : —Rev. Chas. Badham D.D.,
Rev. W . B. Clarke, M.A., Hon. W. B. Dailey,
M.L.C., Rev. J. D. Lang, D.D., Sir William
Macarthur, Knt., Mr. Win. Macleay, M.L.C., Mr. W. A.
Duncan, Hon. Robt. Owen, M.L.C., Mr. N. D. Sten-
house, M.A. ; and on September 21 following Mr.
W. A. Stephens, M.A.. was gazetted as such. The last
survivor of these first ten trustees, Mr. Wm. Macleay,
ing year, 1888, the trustees received the intimation
that the contract for the new wing in Macquarie Street
frontage was given to Mr. Charles Moyers. This in-
volved the sum of £10,435, and the removal of the old
building was completed in October. On the 15th of
that month the first stone of the new masonry was
set for the foundation of one of the partition walls in
the basement at the north end of the new library.
This building was completed on December 23, 1889,
and opened on May 1, 1890. In 1895 the name of the
library was altered to the Public Library of New South
Wales, and it was incorporated in 1899.
The first librarian of the Free Public Librarv was
«/
Mr. Robert Walker, who retired in 1893 after having
held office for 24 years, his place being filled by Mr.
H. C. L. Anderson, who was appointed on September
Ist of that year. In 1874 it was proposed to establish
a lending branch in connection with the institution,
both branches to be distinct establishments, worked
PUBLIC LIBRARY, BENT STREET.
died on December 7, 1891. In 1870 Messrs. Trubner
and Co., London, were appointed to procure books for
the library, and in 1879, the Copyright Act coming
into force in the colony, the trustees added consider-
ably to their stock through it. In 1880 the trustees
urged the Government to obtain another site and new
building. The building was not only considered badly
c , 17 • ci 1
ventilated, but the wall facing Macquarie Street was
unsafe. Four years later, on December 9, the con-
tract for the building of the wing facing Bent Street
was signed for £12,247 ; and on June 20, 1885, £6,000
was placed on the supplementary estimates to defray
expenses. The moving of books to this wing took
place on June 1, 1886. In 1887, owing to the repre-
sentations to the Government by the trustees regard-
ing the unsafe condition of the Macquarie Street wing,
tenders were called for a new building, and the follow-
and conducted under one head. In the estimates of
1878 an amount was set down for the establishment of
a lending branch. This commenced with a stock of
2,133 volumes, and its work was first carried on in the
basement of the old building, which existed on the
site now occupied by the Reference Library. It was
opened at first for six hours daily, there being 1,225
borrowers at that period ; but as years went by both
books and borrowers increased, and the library was
moved to the iron church, opposite Hunter Street, in
Macquarie Street, known as St. Stephen’s Presby-
terian Church, in 1880, when it came into the hands
of the Government, and the Minister for Public Instruc-
tion handed it over for the use of the lending branch.
The building was formerly the old Wesleyan Chapel,
first opened by that body on July 1, 1821, but in 1847
used by a party of Presbyterians, when it became


vacant in 1878, and was occupied as a tweed factory,
being afterwards utilised by the Government for the
above purpose.
In 1899 premises were rented in Queen Victoria
Markets, and both the lending branch and newspaper
room were accommodated on the second floor, and
about 25 000 volumes were removed to new quarters.
This new home for the Lending Library was opened on
June 17, 1899, by Mr. Hogue, then Minister for Edu-
cation, and to the public on the 19th of the same
month. The scope of this institution was further
extended by the introduction of a system which was
introduced in August, 1883, by which country libra-
ries and mechanics’ institutes might obtain a loan of
works of a select kind which perchance they were
unable to procure. Under this system boxes are
made up containing from 40 to 100 books, and for-
warded to country libraries on application, to be re-
turned or exchanged within a given period. All
charges are defrayed by the Library.
Early in January, 1899, Mr. D. S. Mitchell handed
over to the State his valuable library of 40 years’
collection, to form the nucleus of a special wing of a pro-
posed national library, with a certain sum for its main-
tenance, admission to this wing to be as near as prac-
ticable similar to the conditions governing access to
the British Museum Library. The residence of the
principi librarian, which adjoined the library, was
taken as a temporary lodging for the books, and in
September, 1899, the first instalment was handed over
by the donor, consisting of 10,025 volumes of general
literature together with 50 pictures and engravings
of Australian interest. The collection is one of the
most valuable to the student, especially of Australian
history, and has many priceless MSS. referring to the
early days. This, with the valuable collection already
on the shelves of the Public Library, will tend to make
the work of students in all branches of literature not
only easy, but complete.
The total number of books in the Public Library
exceeds 160,000 volumes, and the popularity of the
institution can be gauged from the fact that every year
about 300,000 visits are paid to the reference branch,
and another 350,000 or more to the newspaper room,
while the lending branch contains, roughly estimated,
30,000 volumes. Mr. Frank M. Bladon succeeded
Mr. Anderson as chief librarian when the latter as-
sumed control of the Intelligence Bureau a couple of
years ago, and the assistant librarian is Mr. Hugh
Wright. The lending branch is under the control of
Mr. G. H. Giffard.
THE AUSTRALIAN MUSEUM.


The Australian Museum.
The Australian Museum, the oldest institution of
its kind in the colonies, was founded in the year 1836
by a number of gentlemen interested in the promotion
of science in Australia, who dedicated it to advance-
ment of natural history and the instruction of the
public. It received the cordial support of Governor
Bourke, who had placed on the annual estimates a
sum of money for its support and extension. The
first president was Mr. McLeay, the Colonial Secretary
and a scientist of wide knowledge and old-world re-
pute. The museum was originally domiciled in a small
room attached to the Legislative Council, and Mr.
Surgeon Bennett was appointed director, an office he
continued to fill for several years with great advantage
to the institution. It was at this time connected with
the Botanical Gardens, of which Dr. Bennett was the
curator. In a short time, the specimens having in-
creased, the museum was removed to two rooms in
the Surveyor-General’s office, and while there Dr.
Bennett resigned in favour of Mr. Wm. Sheridan Wall,
who continued to superintend its management for
many years. In the year 1840 Mr. Wall, at the re-
quest of Governor Gipps, again removed the museum
to apartments prepared for it in the Supreme Court
building at Darlinghurst The collection of specimens
under the able management of the committee and
Mr. Wall, the curator, so rapidly increased in extent
and value that £3,000 was placed on the estimates in
1841 for the erection of a Museum at the corner of
William and College Streets. This design was pre-
pared by Mr. Wm. Mortimer Lewis, the Colonial Archi-
tect. The sum voted was found to be utterly
inadequate for the purpose and a supplementary vote
of £1,500 was passed in the year 1848. This was also
found to be insufficient, and the troubles that rose in
connection with the expenditure led to the retirement
of Mr. Lewis. The exhibits were removed from Dar-
linghurst to the new site in CoPege Street, facing
Hyde Park, in 1849. They then consisted of a col-
lection of minerals, colonial and foreign ; a collection
of shells, also of dual classification, and geological
specimens arranged by the Rev. W. B. Clarke. But
at this early date the museum was chiefly rich in its
extensive ornithological and zoological collections,
comprising several thousands of specimens Later on
these were supplemented by Dr. Nicholson’s gift of a
collection of casts of the most celebrated specimens of
the Italian School of Sculpture. In common with
several other departments of the public service the
Museum lost heavily in its ethnological branch by the
destructive and mysterious Garden Palace fire of
1882. A fine collection of native weapons and imple-
ments were on loan there, some of them not to be re-
placed ; of course, they went to the winds in that fiery
blast. But the most interesting exhibits now in the
institution are the relics of Captain Cook, and where
they are grouped is the “ Nelson’s Corner” of the
Museum. The collection is formed of his private
things, his coat, his hanger, and the collection of curios
he had made, and many rare and interesting relics.
The popularity of the institution is evinced by
the increasing number of persons by whom it is visited
—on an average, about 750 daily. The Museum is
open to the public every day except Monday, and on
Sundays the visitors are numerous. The manage-
ment sin>ce its incorporation in 1859 has been vested
in a board of trustees, Mr. J. C. Cox being the presi-
dent. The curator is Mr. Robt. Etheridge, and the
secretary Mr. S. Sinclair.
The Royal Society.
The first institution established in Australia for
the advancement of knowledge was the Royal Society.
In 1821 it commenced as the “ Philosophical Society
of Australia,” a very lofty title for its dozen founders
and members. It then, in 1850, after a long interval
of silence, came out as the “ Australian Philosophical
Society,” till in 1856, still contracting its territorial
limits, it became represented by the ‘‘Philosophical
Society of New South Wales,” merging itself in that
which now represents it, on May Ist, 1866. At that
time only one member survived to connect it with the
present institution. In 1825 a volume was published
in London, containing geographical memoirs by
various writers, which had been read before the first
society. Since then a volume of “ Transactions of
the Philosophical Society of New South M ales, con-
sisting of a selection of twenty-six papers, read be-
tween 1861 and 1866, was published in the latter year,
and separate volumes of the ‘‘ Transactions of the
Royal Society” have appeared in print annually.
The object of the existing Royal Society at its incep-
tion was slightly different from the former societies
inasmuch as art and literature, as well as science and
philosophy, especially such subjects as tend to de-
velop the resources of Australia, and to illustrate its
natural history and productions, took the place of
art, science, commerce, and agriculture in Australia.
The latter branch of science later on became the main
object of the Agricultural Society, but the fact
that agriculture came for awhile within the scope of
the Royal Society exemplifies what a dearth existed
of associations for the promotion of knowledge until
comparatively recent date. In its early days the
Royal Society had to struggle with difficulties, among
which was the res augusta d r mi, that great hindrance
to all voluntary efforts in a new country ; but stability
came with the passing of years, and in 1870 the presi-
dent, in his address, was able to say : “ We do not
know whether any previous session of this or the pre-
vious Philosophical Society has exhibited a heartier
desire to turn the channel of our thoughts more freely
towards practical results ; and thanks are due to those
members of it who laid before us their able researches
in the various branches of science and literature which
they have cultivated for such advancement of the
claims which this society have to the respect and sup-
port of the community.” The Royal Society that
year numbered 118 members ; and its muster has
since steadily increased. The present direction of this
popular organisation is vested in the following offi-
cials : —Patron, his Excellency, Henry Stafford Baron
Northcote, G.C.M.G., G.C.1.E., C.B. ; Vice-Patron, his
Excellency Admiral Sir Harry Holdsworth Rawson,
K.C.B. ; President, Henry Deane, M.A., M. Inst. C.E. ;
Vice-Presidents, Prof. T. P. Anderson Stuart, M.D.,


LL.D., H. A. Lenehan, F.R.A.S., F. H. Quaife, M.A.,
M.D. ; Prof. T. W. E. David, 8.A., F.R.S. ; Hon. Trea-
surer, D. Garment, F.1.A., F.F.A. ; Hon. Secretaries,
J. H. Maiden, F.L.S., F. B. Guthrie, F.T.C., F.C.S. ;
Members of Council ; R. T. Baker, F.L.S., Joseph
Brooks, F.R.A.S.. F.R.G.S., A. Duckworth, F.R.E.S.,
W. M. Hamlet, F.1.C., F.C.S., T. H. Houghton, M. Inst.
C.E.. Prof. Liversidge, M.A., LL.D., F.R.S., Henrv G.
Smith, F.C.S., Walter Spencer. M.D., H. D. Walsh,
8.E., M. Inst., C.E., Prof. Warren, M. Inst., C.E., Wh.
Sc. ; Assistant Secretary, W. H. Webb..
The Mechanics’ School of Arts.
The idea of forming a school of arts was first
broached in 1823, by the Rev. H. Carmichael and
Mr. Bland. But it was not until ten years later, till
March 22, 1833, that the first institution of this kind
was opened in Australia, under the name of the Sydney
Mechanics’ School of Arts. It was then established in
apartments in the Surveyor-General’s office, on Church
Hill (lent for the purpose by Major Mitchell, the presi-
dent of the institution), by a bunch of Scotch mechanics,
who were warmly supported by Governor Bourke and
the Rev. Mr. Carmichael. The first secretary was
Mr. Robert Bland, and the first treasurer Mr. Peter
Gardner ; the earlier presidents being —Major Mitchell,
1833 to 1837 ; Major Baring, 1838 to 1843 ; Dr. Nichol-
son, 1844 to 1851; Arthur a’Beckett, 1852 to
1854 ; Colonel Sir Thomas Mitchell, 1855 ; G. K. Hol-
den, 1856 to 1865 ; Dr. Woolley, 1866 ; N. D. Sten-
house, 1867 to 1873 ; and W. C. Windeyer, 1874. The
subscription originally was 12s. per annum, and, under
excellent management, the institution continued to
flourish and to increase the number of its members.
A library was established on a solid basis, and, in spite
of the later opposition of the Free Public Library, it
rapidly grew to large dimensions as far back as 1860,
when the members enrolled numbered 1,800 ; the
works for circulation exceeded 16,000, whilst between
40,000 and 50,000 books circulated annually. Weekly
classes were established for instruction in Latin, mathe-
matics, French, English grammar, writing and arith-
metic, shorthand, singing, architecture, drawing and
design. The reading-room contained the principal
British, foreign and colonial papers and periodi-
cals, with a large and valuable reference library. To
some the most attractive features attaching to the
Mechanics’ School of Arts was its very choice and
extensive collection of fossils and geological speci-
mens ; and, in connection with the lecture-room, a
complete apparatus for the illustration of lectures in
chemistry, mechanics, &c., which cost upwards of
£SOO. During the first twenty-five years of its exist-
ence the Rev. H. Carmichael, Dr. Geo. Burnett, Dr. L.
Leichhardt, Dr. Nicholson, Judge Therry, Dr. Woolley,
Sir W. Denison, Messrs. Arthur a’Beckett, W. C.
Windeyer, D. H. Deniehy, Arch. Michie, W. T. Cape,
and J. Rae, with other able men, occupied the plat-
form of the lecture-hall. A motion for the founding
of a Technical or Working-man’s College, proposed by
Mr. E. Dowling, was adopted at the annual meeting
on February 3, 1873, but its inauguration did not take
place until the new buildings, which cost £4,000, were
completed in 1879.
There are now schools of art or literary institutes
to be found in almost every township in the State.
Among the other scientific societies are the New South
Wales Zoological Society, inaugurated in 1879 ; a
branch of the British Medical Association, founded in
1881, a branch of the British Astronomical Associa-
tion, whose first meeting was held in 1895 ; and a
branch of the Anthropological Society of Australasia.
The Australasian Association for the Advancement of
Science, and the Royal Geographical Society of Aus-
tralia also have branches in New South Wales.
The Society.
The study of the botany and natural history of
Australia has attracted many enthusiastic students,
and the Linnsean Society of New South Wales was
established in 1874 for the special purpose of further-
ing the advancement of these particular sciences. The
society is housed in a commodious building at Eliza-
beth Bay, one of the most beautiful sites near the
city, and possesses a library and museum. Mr. Thos.
Steel, F.Z.S., was president for the two years’ term
ending March, 1907, when he was succeeded by Mr.
A. H. S. Lucas, M.A., mathematical and science mas-
ter of the Sydney Grammar School. Sir Wm. Macleay
has liberally endowed this scientific body. Not content
with being one of its most munificent supporters, he
was also an indefatigable worker in the field of science.
The papers read before the society are published
regularly in its proceedings, these being illustrated
by excellent plates.


POST AND TELEGRAPH DEPARTMENT.
For twenty-three years after the establishment of
the colony there were no regular post-offices ; the bulk
of the letters consisted of official communications, and
these w n re forwarded by constables, settlers occasion-
ally being allowed to avail themselves of the same mode
of transit. The Sydney Gazette for July 10th, 1803,
contained regulations for the Passage Boatmen be-
tween Sydney and Parramatta, and the charges they
were entitled to. Private letters were fixed at 2d. each.
This is the first official mention of postal affairs ;
nothing further appeared until April, 1809, when Mr.
Isaac Nichols, assistant to the Naval Officer, was ap-
pointed Acting-Postmaster, and for the discharge of
this office a code of regluations was drawn up. For re-
ceiving and delivering home letters he was authorised
to charge Is. ; for every parcel under 20 lb. 2s. 6d., and
for all over that weight ss. The following year Gover-
nor Macquarie confirmed Mr. Nichols in his appoint-
ment ; reduced the above rates to Bd., Is. 6d., and 3s.
respectively ; imposed a fee of 4d. for every colonial
letter from any part of the territory ; and ordered the
erection of a regular post-office in High Street, asGtorge
Street was then called, near the Queen’s wharf. This
building was only demolished at the end of the eighties.
This office was merely to deal with letters, &c., arriv-
ing in Sydney, their conveyance to and from the in-
terior, depending on constables and private individuals.
Mr. Nichols, on November Bth, 1819, being succeeded
by Mr. George Panton, who as wharfinger discharged
both these duties in a small apartment on the King’s
wharf. No measures towards additional postal ser-
vices were taken till Sir Thomas Brisbane introduced
an Act in 1821, authorising the establishment of a
general post-office for all her Majesty’s dominions in
the antipodes, with power to establish post-offices in
various parts of the colony, and to fix the rates. At
this time the annual amount of letters received at
Sydney was estimated to be between 1,000 and 1,200.
Postage was regulated according to distance, the lowest
single inland rate for a 4-oz. letter being 3d., and the
highest 3d., these charges being proportionately in-
creased according to weight. Letters to and from New
South Wales and Van Diemen’s Land were rated at
3d., and newspapers at Id. ; other ship letters were
charged 4d. single rate, and 6d. for any excess, in
addition to the inland fee Letters despatched from
the colony had to be prepaid ; franking was granted to
the chief public officers ; masters of vessels could claim
a gratuity of Id. for each letter and 2d. for each parcel,
“ rs an encouragement ” for prompt delivery, and
all postmasters received, in lieu of salary, 10 per cent,
on the postage collected. The Sydney postmaster
received, in lieu of percentage, &c., a salary of £4OO per
annum. At this time the entire staff of the depart-
ment consisted of a Postmaster-General, eight country
postmasters, one clerk, and two letter-carriers; the
one at Parramatta charging as his sole remuneration
Id. for each letter delivered. During 1828 the miles
travelled by the mails inland was 40,560, the postal
revenue being £598 2s. 4-Jd. On March 3, 1828, daily
mails commenced being forwarded from the post-office
in Bent Street to Parramatta and Liverpool, to Wind-
sor and Campbelltown twice a week, to Newcastle, per
packet, twice a week, and to Penrith and Bathurst
once a week. This office, a wooden structure, like
“ a military sentry-box set into the wall,” was at the
rear of the present Department of Public Instruction
and was demolished about 25 years a.go in the widen-
ing of the footpath in that part of the street. Indeed,
so small wer a the whole premises that if the mail hap-
pened to be unusually bulky, some portion was taken
to the post-office, while the balance was carried on
the shoulders of the sailors to the private residence of
Mr. Panton, then overlooking Campbell’s wharf. On
April 24, 1829, Mr. Panton died, and Mr. James Ray-
mond was appointed his successor. The following year
MR J. RAYMOND.
the extension of the postal system throughout the
colony became general : from Port Macquarie, the
northern boundary, to Inverary, 120 miles from Syd-
ney to the southward, and to Wellington Valley to the
westward. The mails were now conveyed from Bent
Street to the new general post-office —a handsome build;
ing in the centre of George Street —in well-appointed
coaches and four. This building, formerly the Policc-
offic-q stood on a portion of the land on which the pre-
sent post-office stands. It was acquired by Governor
Macquarie “ for a hogshead of brandy ” and £3O or
£SO. The letter-carriers first wore a uniform in this
year. During 1831 a regular Twopenny Post delivery
was established twice a dav, throughout Sydney, and
unpaid “ receipt boxes ” were fixed at different
parts of the town and visited twice a day, but the only
place where letters could be post paid was the General
Post-office. In 1835 Sir Richard Bourke framed
another Act to provide for the conveyance and postage
of letters, under which the following fees were levied :
A single |-oz. letter conveyed 15 miles, 4d. ; 20


miles, 6d. ; and so on up to 300 miles, when Is. was
the charge, with Id. extra for every additional 100
miles. Packets forwarded from one part of the colony
to another were charged at 4d. each ; but newspapers
posted within seven days of publication were charged
free ; otherwise they were charged as a single letter.
Ship letters, in addition to the inland postage, required
an extra, of from 3d. to 6d., according to the weight.
The general tendency of this Act was to reduce the
rates of postage on letters both inland and ship, and
to abolish the tax on newspapers. It was also the
first statute to penalise masters of vessels delaying the
delivery of the mails. As remuneration they were
allowed one penny on each private communication
received and despatched. The Act also gave the post-
office the exclusive right to convey letters or packets
for hire weighing not more than 9 oz. ; and it was to
become null and void in the event of the Postmaster-
General deeming it expedient to erect and c ‘ settle ”
a post in the colony. In 1836 the postal establish-
ment, hitherto a paying one, ceased to be so, not that
SYDNEY POST OFFICE, GEORGE STREET, 1830,
On site of present building.
the revenue had decreased, but that the general ex-
penditure had increased in a greater ratio. During
1838 overland communication was established between
Melbourne and Yass, the mail running once a fortnight.
The revenue, which in 1828 —that being the year in
which the department was first officially recognised as
a Government establishment —was only £598, had
increased to £8,390 ; while the expenditure, which in
the former case was only £B9O, had augmented to
£10,357. Forty post-offices were established —five
times as many as existed ten years previously —and the
number of miles travelled by the mails in the year was
253,830, against 40,560 miles, travelled in 1828. The
first record of town letters appears in this year, 14,967
being delivered during the twelve months. Stamped
covers were also introduced, and sold at Is. 3d. per
dozen, and a letter enclosed therein was allowed to
pass free in Sydney. They were simply half-sheets of
paper, foolscap size, in the centre of the upper part of
which was embossed, in relief only, without colour, and
before the paper was folded, the stamp in question,
These letter-sheets, which it is interesting to note ceme
into use two years before the introduction of postage
stamps in any other portions of her Majesty s do-
minions, were continued till 1852. In 1839 the daily
delivery by e postman on horseback was extended to
Darlinghurst, Surry Hills, and Newtown. On June 10,
1841, steam communication with Melbourne was
established by the “ Sea Horse,” and the postage
thereto was made the same by sea as overland, viz.,
Is. 3d. the single letter ; the revenue thereby increasing
considerably. Six months later the first steam mail
started for Moreton Bay.
In 1844 two commissioners —Messrs. E. D. James
and R. R. Smith—were sent out by the authorities of
the London Post-office to inquire into the state of the
postal establishment in this colony, with the view of
placing it under the control of the Postmaster-General
of the United Kingdom. Their visit, however, resulted
in the office remaining under local control. In the
middle (June 11) of this year the first monthly contract
packet, the “ Mary Sharp,” arrived from the United
Kingdom. At the beginning of 1847 the overland
mail between Sydney and Adelaide was initiated, the
postage rate for the 750 miles being Is. 6d. per single
letter. This year the department, which since 1844
had produced a net revenue, again became non-paying.
During the government of Sir C. A. Fitzroy an Act to
establish a uniform rate of postage was passed. This
statute repealed all former ones. The weight of a
letter charged with a single rate of postage was now
fixed at \ oz. ; the fee being 2d. on inland and Id. on
town letters. Franking was abolished ; newspapers
were again subject to a tax of Id. ; and the exclusive
right of the post-office to transmit letters and packets
for hire was now extended from the weight of 4 oz. to
16 oz.
With the discovery of gold in 1851 Port Phillip
was separated from New South Wales and all post-
offices in the new colony passed from the supervision
of the General Post office in Sydney. Mr. Raymond
died on May 29, 1851, his successor being Mr. F. L. S.
Merewether, who, two years later, in his transfer to
the office of Auditor-General, created a vacancy, which
Major W. H. Christie was deputed to fill. Under a
new Act, passed in 1851, postmasters were authorised
to refuse every packet or letter weighing more than
10 oz. ; and newspapers, with the old proviso, were
again to pass free? In 1852 the overland mail service
with Great Britain was initiated. Two companies—
the P. & 0. and the Royal Australian Steam Packet
Co. —were entrusted with the service ; their respective
steamers, the “ Chusan ” and the “ Australia ” being
the first steamboats to take and deliver the European
mails This arrangement continued until the Crimean
war, in 1854, when the mail boats were chartered for
the conveyance of troops, and their places taken by
the clipper ships of the Black Ball and White Star
lines, which carried on the service in an admirable
manner. On October 1, 1856, in addition to the mail
for Parramatta mails for intermediate post-offices
were transmitted by rail.
The population of the colony in 1856 was 266 189,
and the proportion of letters to population was 10|
to each person. About 2,817,448 letters and 1,726,619


newspapers were delivered. A fresh contract was
entered into by the Imperial Government with the
European and Australian Royal Mail Co. for the con-
veyance of the Australian mails by the overland route.
This service did not prove satisfactory, and the P. & 0.
Co. again contracted to take up the work, during
the last eight months of 1859 their steamers bringing
the mail. By the returns for 1858, the letters, pac-
kets, and book parcels passing through the 22 post-
offices of the colony amounted to 3,551,733, and
newspapers 2,808,140. Gold escorts were regularly
established, and the revenue for the year amounted to
£39,953, with an expenditure of £69,507. It was
only a matter of time when enlarged premises must be
acquired, and in October, 1863, the old post-office
building in George Street was abandoned, and the
department moved into a temporary building in
Wynyard Square, of which we give an illustration.
30, 1882, to January 4, 1883 ; F. A. Wright, January
25, 1883, to May 27, 1883 ; W. J. Trickett, May 28,
1883, to May 1, 1884 ; Jas. Norton, May 2, 1884, to
October 6, 1885.
Upon the Postmaster-General becoming an inde-
pendent officer the Money Order Department, which
had been established in 1862 under the superintend-
ence of Mr. F. W. Hill, was placed under his control.
Three years later tin Electric Telegraph Department
was transferred from the Minister of Public Works to
the Postmaster-General; and on September 1, 1871,
the system of Government Savings Banks under the
control of the latter official was established.
Arrangements for a postal route to Europe and
America via Panama were concluded in the early part
of 1866 ; but the service ceased in 1868, owing to the
inability of the company to complete its contract.
WOODEN BUILDING, ON SITE NOW OCCUPIED BY WYNYARD PARK,
Used as a Temporary Post Office while the General Post Office, George Street, was being erected.
In 1864 an Act was passed, imposing after April 1,
a charge of Id. each upon all newspapers posted within
the colony. On October 1, 1865, in consequence of
the retirement of Major Christie, the Government
determined to make the office a political one. The
first political head was the Hon. J. A. Cunneen, his
successors during the next twenty years being as
follows : —J. Docker, from January 22, 1866, to Sep-
tember 27, 1868 ; A. A. P. Tighe, September 29, 1868,
to October 26, 1868 ; Daniel Egan, October 27, 1868,
to October 16, 1870; Joseph Docker, December 16,
1870, to May 13, 1872 ; G. A. Lloyd, May 14, 1872, to
December 4, 1872 ; Saul Samuel, December 5, 1872,
to Februarv 8, 1875 ; J. F. Burns, February 9, 1875,
to March 21, 1877 ; Saul Samuel, March 22, 1877, to
August 16, 1877 ; John Davies, August 17, 1877, to
December 17, 1877 ; J. F. Burns, December 18, 1877,
to December 20, 1878 ; Saul Samuel, December 21,
1878, to August 10, 1880; F. B. Suttor, August 11,
1880, to November 13, 1881 ; S. C. Brown, November
14, 1881, to August 22, 1882 ; Alex. Campbell, August
Experimental services were shortly afterwards estab-
lished from Sydney to New Zealand and California, and
from Sydney to California via Fiji, but both were
short-lived. Later on. however, in 1873, bonds were
signed in London for a mail contract to England via
New Zealand, Fiji, Honolulu and America, and this
route was successfully established, the first steamer
leaving Sydney for San Francisco on January 13, 1874.
During the whole of 1875 the contract was carried out
by the Australasian Steam Navigation Co. ; but this
line gave way then to Pacific Mail Steamship Co., the
successful tenderers for a permanent service. In 1874
the Queensland Government established a line via
Torres Straits, so that at this time New South Wales
had the choice of three routes. The service performed
by the P. & 0. Co. between Melbourne and Ceylon
was increased in 1881 to a fortnightly one, and in 1883
the Orient Co. contracted for another fortnightly
delivery to alternate with the P. & 0. Co., thus estab-
lishing a regular weekly mail to and from England,
which has since endured.


The destruction by fire of Fraser’s stores, Wyn-
yard Square, in 1865, nearly wrecked the temporary
General Post-office, so the new building in George
Street was commenced in the year following upon
land of the resumed value of £779,000, from the de
signs of the Colonial Architect, Mr. James Barnet,
and completed in 1887, at a total cost of £335,000,
or together with land resumptions £1,114,000.
This handsome building, situated between George and
Pitt streets, has a northern front of 353 feet 6 inches.
Its eastern end, fronting Pitt Street, is 108 feet ; its
western end, fronting George Street, 78 feet, and its
height 80 feet. The clock tower, in the centre, is 25
feet square, and rises to a height of 242 feet 6 inches,
being surmounted by a flagstaff, used to signal the
arrival of mails by Sea. The opening was celebrated
by a conversazione on the evening of September 1,
1874, when upwards of 1,500 persons were entertained
by the Postmaster-General, the Hon. (afterwards Sir)
Saul Samuel. The new building was subsequently
for the use of the Telephone and Telegrajph branches.
The total expenditure upon such additions amount-
ed to about £'20,000.
The whole of these latter works were carried out
by day labour, the officer-in-charge being Mr. A. S.
Cook/Assistant Architect, under the instructions of
Mr. W. L. Vernon, Government Ardhitect,
Great changes, consequent upon the federation of
the colonies in 1901, were made in the Post and Telegraph
Departments, these being the first transferred, and brought
under the control of the Federal Government, this was
accomplished on March Ist, 1901. The first Postmaster-
General under the Commonwealth was the Hon. J. S.
Dickson, and upon his decease, while still in office, the
position was accepted by the Hon. James George Drake,
who was again, after a short term, succeeded by the Hon.
Hugh Mahon, but political changes being rapid he was
replaced by the Hon. Sydney Smith, and on the formation
of the Deakin Ministry, the control of the department
was taken over by Mr. Austen Chapman.
GENERAL POST OFFICE.
thrown open for a few days for the inspection of the
general public.
In 1896 the need for additional accommodation
having become imperative through the growing
necessities of this great business department, a block
of land adjoining the main building, and with a front-
age to George street was acquired, with the result
that the frontage to that street was added to and
made equal in extent to the frontage m Pitt Street.
During the year 1898, and subsequently, extensive
additions have been made in every direction to the
building, a subway having been constructed to the
basement under Martin Place, and two new floors
added throughout the entire building. The additional
accommodation thus obtained being mostly required
MR. S. H. LAMBTON.
MR. G. P. UNWIN.


The Telegraph Department.
The electric telegraph was first used by the public
of New South Wales on the 26th January, 1858, when
the line from Sydney to Liverpool, 22 miles in length,
was brought into operation under the direction of the
late Mr. Cracknel!. Ha arrived in Adelaide as assistant
to Sir Charles Todd, and shortly afterwards came over
to New South Wales to take charge of the system upon
its introduction here. The first lines which were
erected connected the Merchants’ Exchange with
South Head and with Liverpool. These lines were
opened on th) 26th January, 1858, and were worked
by means of the Henley’s Magneto system, and samples
of the instruments, which were actually in use, are still
in the office. It was after considerable opposition and
upon the recommendation of a select committee of the
Legislative Assembly, of which the late Sir Henry
Parkes was chairman, in December, 1856, that it was
decided to construct a line to connect Sydney and
Melbourne, and a sum of £38,000 was placed on the
estimates for the purpose. The first contract for the
construction of the line from Liverpool to Albury, to
connect the Victorian line to Melbourne, was entered
into in 1857. The work was pushed on by Mr. Crack-
nell, and on the 28th October, 1858, the line was com-
pleted to Albury, and on the following day communi-
cation was established with Melbourne. In the same
year the construction of lines to the north and west
were also commenced. The value of the telegraph was
quickly appreciated, for in the first half-year of 1859
there were no less than 17,509 messages transmitted,
yielding a revenue of £3,876, <*r more than 16 per cent,
on the capital of £25,000 invested. The through line
to Brisbane was completed in November, 1861, but in
the meantime the lines had been extended to New-
castle, Bathurst, and other large towns of the colony.
Bourke was connected with Sydney on the 2nd August,
1873, and in order to give some idea of the character
of the means of communication of that time, it may
be mentioned that it took the officer six days to reach
Bourke from Sydney, travelling day and night in the
old mail coaches. A guarantee of interest from the
more sparsely populated districts desiring the exten-
sion of the telegraph was insisted on and found to work
well. Five per cent, guarantee on the cost of con-
struction and working had also to be forthcoming, and
this arrangement, too, tended to increase business. The
Sydney head office remained in the Merchants’ Ex-
change for some time, till the business was found to
have increased sufficiently to warrant the establish-
ment of more commodious premises, which were sub-
sequently found in a portion of the old post-office in
George Street. The ordinary Morse system soon re-
placed the Henley’s instruments, and the former was
the only system used for many years. Subsequently,
Wheatstone A.B.C. instruments were introduced for
minor offices, and a few are still in use, but upon the
introduction of telephones they replaced nearly the
whole of the alphabetical instruments. As the bush
ness of the department increased some provision had
to be made to handle the traffic more expeditiously
than could be done with the ordinary Morse. With
this object in view, the late Mr. Cracknell introduced
the English Wheatstone automatic system, in 1874,
between Sydney and Albury and Sydney and Tenter-
field. This system was worked for a couple of years,
ladies being employed as “ punchers,” but as neither
of the other States saw their way to introduce the
system, and on their sections the traffic was still trans-
mitted by Morse key, the automatic instruments were
dismantled ; and in 1878 the American system of
quadruplex working was introduced between Sydney
and Melbourne, with automatic repeaters at Albury.
From this out the system of quadruplex working has
been gradually extended, and has been found up to the
present to be the most suitable form of fast speed
instruments for our particular traffic. It is probable,
however, that the Wheatstone automatic system will
be again introduced, in order to cope with the heavy
pressure of press traffic which is gradually developing
between the different State capitals.
There are at present in the Sydney office eleven
sets of quadruplex, three duplex and forty-three Morse
instruments ; and at the different country offices in the
State there are ten sets of quadruplex, six sets of du-
plex, and a considerable number of automatic Morse
repeaters, in addition to the ordinary Morse instru-
ments and telephones, which are still used for small
offices. The capacity of the quadruplex is between
eighty and ninety words —of five letters each —per
minute, including stoppages for corrections, with four
operators at each end ; whilst the later pattern of
Wheatstone automatic is capable of handling 400 words
per minute, not including time occupied for corrections.
It takes six punchers to keep the Wheatstone trans-
mitter going at the above rate, together with a trans-
mitting operator to attend to the instrument, and six
writers,
The Morse system adopted is the closed circuit
system, which is the most serviceable for the requir e _
ments of a country such as this, where long lines witp
many stations on them, are in use. The relays us e( j
FIRST GOVERNMENT TELEGRAPH OFFICE, GEORGE STREET.


—
Miles.
Messages
transmitted.
Value.
Revenue. Stations
1858 ..
372
9,141 ..
—
£1,932 .. —
1860 ..
1,173
53,981 ..
—
.. £12,136 .. —
1870 ..
5,247
.. 173.812 ..
£28,550
.. £32,037 .. 86
1880 ..
13.188
.. 1.319,537 ..
—
.. £84,110 .. 289
1890 ..
23,958
.. 3,592,519 ..
£222.306
.. £180,022 .. 628
1900 ..
46,763
.. 5.034,703 ..
£586.490
.. £168,757 .. 961
1906 ..
74,754
• • • •
—
.. — .. —
are the Siemen’s (Berlin) Polarised 500 ohm relay and
the ordinary American Pattern Neutrel relay of 500
ohms on long lines ; whilst on shorter lines the wind-
ings are to 250 and 150 ohms. At country stations,
tape recording instruments are in use, while at the
larger offices (such as Newcastle. Wagga, and Bathurst)
and the chief office, sounders only are used, and the
whole of the work is done by operators at these sta-
tions bv sound reading ; the messages on the heavy
lines being type-written direct from the sounder. The
working currents on the long country lines, where 500
ohm relavs are used, range from about fifteen to twenty
milli-amperes, while on the direct working instruments
they average about one hundred milli-amperes.
The Duplex system, of which there are about six
sets in operation, is of the Polar Duplex type with one
exception, viz., between West Maitland and Newcastle,
where a Steam’s Duplex is installed and is used in
cases of emergency for repeating into the No. 2, i.e ., the
neutral side of a quadruplex.
Direct Quadruplex working is carried on between
Sydney and Melbourne, 600 miles, and between Sydney
and Brisbane, 720 miles, without the interposition of
repeaters, except on one of the Brisbane lines, which
consists of a 500 lb. galvanised iron wire, and on which
c.
automatic repeaters are used at Armidale. The two
direct quadruplex systems between Sydney and Mel-
bourne are worked, one on a 300 lb. hard drawn copper
wire, the other on an 800 lb. galvanised iron wire, as
far as Albury, where both wires are connected to 800 lb.
galvanised iron lines on the Victorian side. The line
used for the direct Brisbane Quadruplex is a
300 lb. hard drawn copper wire through to Brisbane,
and for the second quadruplex a 500 lb. galvanised
iron wire. Between Sydney and South Australia
the system adopted at th present time is a duplex,
using the polar side of a quadruplex between Sydney
and Wagga, and then through automatic repeaters to
Adelaide. Other relief lines have at the present time
to be provided to carry this business, but a 400 lb.
copper wire has now been erected between Sydney and
Wagga to join a similar copper wire thence to Ade-
laide, on which it is proposed to instal a quadruplex
for the South Australian and international service,
using automatic repeaters at Deniliquin.
The batteries in use for telegraph purposes are the
Meidinger gravity cell for main, and the Minotti for
locals, there being about 5,300 Meidinger and about
725 Minotti in the head office battery room, and about
13.900 Meidinger and about 2,100 Minotti in the
suburban and country offices at the present time.
One of the greatest difficulties which the telegraph
service has had to contend against in this city of late
years has been the problem of making room for the
enormous number of wires that have to be carried upon
the poles ; and for the last nine or ten years the depart-
ment has been gradually extending an admirable
system of underground tunnels in order to meet the
growing requirements. We have now close on ten
miles of tunnels constructed, accommodating ninety-
two and a quarter miles of paper insulated lead-
sheathed cable, representing 5,067 miles of conductors.
These tunnels accommodate both telegraph and tele-
phone cables, but of course by far the greater number
are in connection with the telephone system.
In September, 1880, the construction and the
maintenance of the telegraph lines of the State, hither-
to in charge of the Secretary of Public Works, was
transferred to the Postmaster-General, and since that
date the whole of the construction and maintenance
has been carried out by the Telegraph Department.
The construction in the early days, and for many years
subsequently, consisted wholly of the ordinary twenty-
eight feet bush poles with brown earthenware insu-
lators. and it was not till about 1860 that the latter
gave way to the white porcelain insulators now used.
Galvanised iron wire was used from the first. Iron
poles for the wires along the railways were introduced
about 1870, and these poles have been in use ever
since, and are still in excellent condition.
The construction and maintenance work in the
metropolitan district is carried out by an inspector of
lines, under whom are two assistant inspectors, these
having under them gangs of five men in charge of
gangers. New lines and extensive repairs in country
districts are carried out under contract.
Mr. Murphy is manager of the telegraph depart-
ment ; Mr E. D. Thompson, mechanician. The chief
clerk is Mr. H- C. bsher, and the receiving clerk, Mr.
F. W. Hulme.
The following statistics give an idea of the growth
of the telegraph system of New South Wales
The miles of wire in each of the States at the end
of 1900 were as follows : —New South Wales, 46,76 3
miles (including 5,679 miles railway wire maintained
by this department) ; Victoria, 27,741 ; Queensland,
19,000 ; South Australia, 17,700 (includes 2,407 miles
railway wires).
Telephones.
In connection with the telegraph department tele-
phone exchanges have been established in the metro-
polis and other important centres of population, one of
the most complete being that on the Richmond River.
The total number of exchange lines connected with the
telephone system on 31st December, 1904, was 13,873,
of which 11,401 were in Sydney and suburbs, and 2,472
in the country. There were 61 telephone exchanges,
and the number of telephones in use was 17,323. The
approximate length of lines open at the end of 1904
was given as 20 850 miles. A trunk telephone line
between Sydney and Melbourne was opened, after
being talked about for many years, on July 11, 1907.
The telephone branch and the electrical engineer-
ing portion of the telegraph branch are under the
electrical engineer, Mr John Y. Nelson, the assistant
electrical engineer being Mr. J. S. Fitzmaurice. The
manager of the telephone branch is Mr. W. D.
Blackstone ; the assistant manager, Mr. E. A. Lange-
schwerdt ; and the line inspecter, Mr. S. J. Salter.


RAILWAYS AND TRAMWAYS.
The railway system of New South Wales consists
of three distinct divisions —the Southern, the Western,
and the Northern. The southern main line is the
most important of the railway lines in the State, as it
not only passes through the richest districts in the
country, but places Sydney, Melbourne and Adelaide
in direct communication. The connecting branch lines
are from Junee to Hay, Junee to Finley, Culcairn to
Corowa, Culcairn to Germanton, The Rock to Lock-
hart, Cootamundra to Wyalong, to
Tumut, Murrumburrah to Blayney— connecting the
southern and western systems, —Murrumburrah to
Grenfell, Goulburn to Cooma, Goulburn to Crookwell,
and Campbelltown to Camden. The western system
was appointed to report on the possibilities of a line
between Sydney and Goulburn which it was estimated
would yield a net profit of £60,000, or 8 per cent, upon
a required capital of £60,000. It was not, however,
until January 27, 1848, that the committee appointed
for the purpose, brought up a report showing that pre-
liminary surveys had been made for lines from Sydney
to Goulburn, Windsor and Penrith, including three
separate routes between Sydney and Bong Bong, near
Moss Vale. Nearly eight months afterwards, on Sep-
tember 11, 1848, a number of gentlemen assembled
at the Gas Company’s office, Commodore Lamb in the
chair, and formed themselves into the Australian and
Southern and Western Railway Company, Mr. (after-
TURNING THE FIRST SOD
throws out branches from Blacktown to Richmond,
from Wallerawang to Mudgee, from Orange to Con-
dobolin, from Orange to Forbes, from Dubbo to Coo-
namble, from Nevertire to Warren, from Nyngan to
Cobar, and from Byrock to Brewarrina. The northern
system originally commenced at Newcastle, but a
connecting line between Strathfield and Hamilton
makes Svdney the head of the whole of the railway
systems of the State. Maitland to Morpeth, Werris
Creek to Inverell, Werris Creek to Cryon, and Tam-
worth to Manilla complete the connections of this
system.
The first attempt to introduce into New South
Wales the advantages of railway communication was
in 1846, when on August 26 of that year a committee
wards Sir) Charles Cowper, M.C., was appointed chair-
man of the committee, and a deputation, consisting
of Messrs. Cowper, Walker, Lamb, Mansfield, Holt, and
Icely were named to wait upon the Governor to see
what support the Government would be disposed to
give the undertaking. The object of the company was
the construction of railways to Parramatta and Liver-
pool, with possible extensions, in course of time, to
Bathurst and Goulburn. In 1849 the City Railway
Bill was laid before the Council, and referred to a
select committee, of which Commodore Lamb was the
chairman. Evidence was taken for the projection of
lines to Parramatta and Liverpool, with the result
that the Sydney Railway Company was formed under
the Act assented to October 10, 1849, with a capital


of £IOO,OOO to begin with, and upon which the Govern-
ment guaranteed interest for ten years at 5 per cent.
The estimated cost was not to exceed £6,000 per mile,
and the profits were calculated at 8 per cent, return
to the promoters of the company. Amongst the pro-
visional committee were Mr. T. S. Mort, Mr. James
Norton, Commodore Lamb, Messrs, Win, Bowman
(Richmond), Thos. Barker (manufacturer), Jas. Byrnes
(Parramatta), Sir Daniel Cooper, Frederick Darvall,
Thomas Holt,' E H. Hood, Thos. Icely, M.L.C., Arthur
Jeffreys, Chas. Kemp, Wm. Lithgow, Robert Lowe,
Samuel Lyons, Sir Arch. Michie, A. Moses, Sir George
Macleay, Sir T. A. Murray, Sir Chas. Nicholson, Geo.
Oakes (Parram itta), Henry O’Brien (Yass), John N.
Oxley (Camden), Robert Porter, F. Rossi (Goulburn),
Jas. Simmons, H. G. Smith, Wm. Walker, and E.
Weston.
No time was lost in breaking ground, and on
July 3, 1850, the Hon. Mrs. Keith Stewart, daughter
of Governor Sir harles Fitzroy, turned the first sod
of the first railwa} begun in Australia. The spade used
THE LATE MR. E. M. G. EDDY.
.in the occasion was made from iron obtained locally.
Then the first gang of men were set to work on the
railroads of the colony, numbering in all no more than
five. At the first meeting of the shareholders, held
on November 13 1849, in the company’s office, at
21 Elizabeth Street, the following were appointed
directors : —Sir Charles Cowper, Sir Charles Nicholson,
Sir Daniel Cooper, Commander Lamb, and William
Bradley. Sir Cl■ aides Cowper was elected president
and manager, bat subsequently only retained the
latter office, and Mr, Lamb was elected to the presi-
dency. The original administrative staff was a very
-mall one, consisting of Sir Chas. Cowper, as aforesaid,
Mr. Thos. Ebsw( rth, accountant ; Mr. John Lamb,
Jerk ; and a ycuth, George Dowling. Mr. F. W.
Shields, city engineer, resigned that position to take
flie appointment of first engineer, which he held till
1852, when he resigned. Mr. Mars was temporarily
appointed to the office until Mr. Wallace arrived from
England in July of that year. Messrs. William Wallis
and William Randle commenced contracts in 1851 for
the construction of a line between Sydney and Parra-
matta, but had to discontinue a few months after-
wards owing to the increase in the price of labour and
material. Owing to the gold discoveries work pro-
ceeded very Wages rose from 6s. to £1 per
diem, and 500 navvies had to be imported from Eng-
land, their passages being paid out of the territorial
revenue. The report of the select committee of 1849
had stated that the construction of the railway would
be more economically and efficiently carried out under
a railway company than under the supervision and
control of the executive government. Notwithstand-
ing this, progress was so much delayed that the Gov-
ernment had no option but to take over the un
finished work, and to give a loan of £150,000 worth ol
public moneys in proportion to two-fifths subscribed
by private capitalists. Under this new arrangement a
board of control was established, consisting of Sir
Charles Cowper, Mr. Charles Kemp, and Mr. T. W.
Smart, representing the shareholders, and Messrs.
Thomas Barker, H. D. Smith, and F. L. S. Merewether,
who were appointed by the Government. Mr. Mere-
wether was declared by the Governor to be president
on an equality of votes being given for Sir Charles
Cowper and he. In 1854 a Government guarantee of
5 per cent, was given in perpetuity on the whole capital
of the company, which had been increased to £200,000,
but the growth of New Soutjp Wales had been so rapid
during the previous three years that it became neces-
sary foT the railways, as the best means of rapid loco-
motion to be nationalised, and the company in a few
months after the last guarantee had been given ceased
to exist. Upon this a new official board of direction
was established, consisting of three commissioners, viz ,
Captain Ward, chief commissioner, and Messrs. Thos.
Barker and Charles Kemp, assistant commissioners.
In the following year Captain Mann succeeded to the
chief commissionership upon Captain Ward’s transfer
to the Melbourne mint, and he held office until Captain
Martindale, R.E., took his place in 1857.
Amongst some of the causes which delayed the
prosecution of the work was the change in the site of
the Sydney terminus from Hay Street to Cleveland
Paddock, with an extension across Parramatta Street
to the navigable water on the western side of Darling
Harbour, which alterations caused a surrender to the
Government of the land granted to the company north
of Devonshire Street, and in lieu thereof an additional
grant of 21 acres in Cleveland Paddock was given.
Then, owing to the great demand locally for iron work,
the rails were not made to time, and wooden rails had
to be substituted, which had to be changed every
month. However, in 1854 the first load of iron rails
arrived from England, and when the line was finished
to Parramatta it was opened by Governor Denison on
September 26. 1855, amid much pomp and ceremony,
and with a salute of 21 guns, also the waving of flags,
handkerchiefs, &c. During the interval another com-
pany, under the presidentship of Mr Charles Kemp,
had been promoted in 1853 with the object of con
structing a railway from the city of Newcastle to Mait
land but it met with no greater success than the
Sydney company, and shared the same fate. In Mel


bourne a line from Flinders Street to Port Melbourne,
miles, had already commenced running on Septem-
ber 13, 1854, and this was the first railway opened in
Australia.
At the period when the Sydney-Parramatta railwav
was opened Sydney was a comparatively small place,
and the drivei of the first train, relating his experience
of the opening day, stated that the country between
the metropolis and Parramatta 44 was nearly all bush,
with a stray public-house here and there on the road-
side.’' The largest crowd —on the basis of population
—that ever collected in Sydney witnessed the opening
ceremony and displayed much jubilation. On that
day no less than 2,000 passengers travelled from ter-
minus to terminus, Governor Denison setting the
example to show the people there was nothing to fear
in using such a mode of conveyance. There were three
classes of carriages—first, second, and third ; the train
being only 178 feet long, and drawn by a No. 1 four-
wheel locomotive, from the workshops of Robert
Stephenson & Sons, Newcastle-on-Tyne. In going to
Parramatta 39| minutes time was occupied, and the
return journey took an additional 64 minutes. The
rolling stock at the start consisted of only four loco-
motives, with a total traction power of 37,784 lbs. ; 28
passenger carriages with an aggregate seating capacity
of 924 persons ; and 51 goods vehicles, with a gross
carrying capacity of 306 tons. Evidently the pre-
science of the Government did not allow sufficiently
for development, but the S.M. Herald took a broader
and more enlightened view. Writing of the opening
in the following morning’s issue, that paper said :
4 4 It is very difficult to record with quiet and unexcited
feeling an event of this description. The great fact of
Saturday in this colony will prejudice —the substantial
national benefit to be derived from it will defeat —
party spirit. New South Wales has advanced quickly
in the stage of community. Little more than half a
century has elapsed from her birth, and she has through
many difficulties, become a great colony. Give her
railroads and she will become a great nation. The
railway to Parramatta is now complete. This cost the
colony more than half a million of money. None who
have tried the railway to Parramatta will be content
to stay there.” The cost of construction was more
than six times as much as would complete the whole
134 miles to Goulburn ; and what was worse, after a
comparatively short time the line had to be relaid at
an expenditure which made the cost of the railway
not less than £50,000 per mile. Whilst the passenger
traffic was satisfactory at the start, the same cannot be
said of the goods traffic. For the first three months
that the line was opened 140 tons of general mer-
chandise was carried, with £156 as the earnings, the
carrying capacity of each waggon being only 6-J tons.
The progress of railway construction was very
slow, owing to some extent, no doubt, to lack of enter-
prise, but also to the engineering difficulties connected
with the first sections out of Sydney, as the southern
and western ranges had to be crossed within a hundred
miles of the metropolis, the western one involving the
construction of the track across the Blue Mountains,
necessitating, amongst other works, the use of the
zigzags known as Lapstone Hill (since cut out) and
the Great Zigzag into the Lithgow Valley. These
were designed and given practical effect to by a former
chief engineer, Mr. John Whitton, whose skill, pluck,
and perseverance in prosecuting the difficult under-
taking are referred to frequently in the State’s official
records. The blasting operations which were neces-
sary have been set forth by Mr. John Rae, M.A., who
was commissioner for railways at the time, in a report
which was presented to Parliament on April 21, 1873,
in the following words : “ In the execution of these
works two gigantic masses of rock —the one estimated
to contain 40,000 tons, and the other 45,000 tons —
had to be blasted ; and the contractor, after estimating
the cost, determined to call in the aid of electricity for
the purpose. The first mass to be operated upon was
a spur of the mountains a few hundred feet from the
first reversing station, which blocked up a portion of
what is now the middle line of railway. Preparations
were accordingly commenced by excavating a trench
on the top of the rock, in the line where the division
was required to take place, and drilling in this trench
25 triangular holes, 30 feet deep, and of sufficient
capacity to be charged with tons of blasting powder
in all. Mr. Cracknell, superintendent of telegraphs,
fired the blast on January 5, 1867. It tore the
mountain asunder, heaving huge masses of rock into
the valley, and left the parent face of the mountain
almost as nlain as if it had been cut with chisels. Mr.
Whitton.. himself a strong-minded man, met in Gover-
nor Sir Win. Denison another. The Governor was
opposed to the chief engineer’s proposal to take a
locomotive over the Blue Mountains, and he denounced
the scheme as an impossible one. Mr. Whitton there-
fore awaited the arrival of the new Governor, Sir John
Young, to whom on July 31, 1861, he submitted fresh
railway proposals, and won his cause.
At the end of 1869 the length of the lines in ope-
ration had only reached 318 miles, the extension being
at the rate of about 21 miles per year. The lines con-
structed were —Granville to Liverpool, 8 miles 64
chains ; near Newcastle to East Maitland, 17 miles
8 chains ; near Newcastle to Newcastle. 1 mile ; Liver-
pool to Campbelltown. 11 miles 68 chains ; East Mait-
land to West Maitland, 2 miles 11 chains ; West Mait-
land to Lochinvar, 6 miles 11 chains ; Parramatta to
Blacktown, 7 miles 17 chains ; Blacktown to Rooty
Hill, 3 miles 65 chains ; Lochinvar to Branxton, 8
miles 12 chains ; Rooty Hill to South Creek, 5 miles
8 chains ; South Creek to Penrith, 3 miles 57 chains ;
Campbelltown to Menangle, 6 miles 47 chains ; Branx-
ton to Singleton, 14 miles 39 chains ; Menangle to
Picton, 12 miles 30 chains ; East Maitland to Morpeth,
3 miles chains ; Blacktown to Richmond, 16 miles
19 chains ; Picton to Mittagong, 25 miles 20 chains ;
Penrith to Weatherboard, 26 miles 63 chains ; Mitta-
gong to Sutton Forest, 8 miles 64 chains ; Weather-
board to Mount Victoria, 15 miles ; Sutton Forest to
Marulan, 29 miles 28 chains ; Singleton to Muswell-
brook, 31 miles ; Marulan to Goulburn, 17 miles 70
chains ; and Mount Victoria to Bowenfels, 20 miles 33
chains. Fifteen years it took the Government to take
the line to Goulburn, a project which the promoters of
the railway company contemplated carrying out right
away from the start. Not a single mile of railway was


opened in 1865, 1866, and it may be said that it was
subsequent to 1869 before the extension of our iron
roads received any maintained impetus.
On February 3, 1870, a select committee was
appointed to inquire and report upon railway expan-
sion generally. At that time, it can be seen from the
above, the railway system of the colony only extended
to Goulburn on the south, Bowenfels on the west, and
from Newcastle to Muswellbrook on the north —in all,
318 miles. The members of that committee, after
taking exhaustive evidence, reported to the Legis-
lative Assembly that they found their choice of a
MR. SIXSMITH,
Driver of First Train.
means of transit superior to the common roads of the
country was limited to a class of locomotive railway,
of narrow gauge and low power and speed, or a very
cheap and light railway adapted to horse traction,
and they recommended that the main trunk lines
should not 44 for the present ’’ be extended beyond
Goulburn, Bathurst, and Murrurundi, but that rail-
wavs of a 3-feet gauge, and operated by horses, should,
66 without unnecessary delay.” be extended from
Goulburn to Cooma and Wagga Wagga, from Bathurst
to Carcoar and Dubbo, as well as a branch from the
Western line to Mudgee, and from Murrurundi to
Tenterfield —and they gave as a reason for their recom-
mendation 44 That a horse railway will be quite equal
to the heaviest demand upon it for years to come may
be exemplified bv taking the highest estimate of traffic
upon the line of road where the traffic is likely to be
heaviest. The line from Goulburn to T ass, cu voute
to Gundagai and Wagga W agga, cannot at the present
time be estimated to have an annual goods traffic
exceeding 10,000 tons, including up and down traffic.
This would, at 300 working days in the year, give
about 33 tons as the daily traffic, or 16£ tons each way ;
so that, as a horse can draw on a level rail on a most
moderate estimate 19 tons, the entire actual work
upon the Yass line, if at all level, would not be beyond
the power of one horse.” Fortunately wiser counsels
prevailed, and it was decided, although with less haste,
to continue the extension upon the standard gauge.
In the next decade the additional mileage opened was
as follows 1870, 21 miles; 1871, 19 miles; 1872 ;
38 miles ; 1873, 5 miles ; 1874, nil ; 1875, 33 miles ;
1876, 73 miles ; 1877, 90 miles ; 1878, 90 miles ; 1879,
45 miles —making a total of railway lines at the begin-
ning of 1880 of 734 miles. In that year, with an ad-
ditional 115 miles of the iron road at the conclusion
of the twelve months, the railways carried 5,449,138
passengers and 1,712,971 tons of goods and live stock,
for a gross revenue of £1.161,017, whereas during the
financial year 1904-5 they carried 35,158,150 passen-
gers and 6,724,215 tons of goods and live stock for a
revenue of £3,684,016. Here, then, in 25 years one
finds the railways carrying six-and-a-half times the
number of passengers and four times the volume of
goods traffic for somewhat less than three-and-a-
quarter times the revenue. In that period the mileage
increased from 849 miles to 3,280 J, but, as may be
assumed, the great majority of the extensions were
carried into thickly populated parts of the country.
Of the 3,300 miles in operation on June 30, 1905,
there were 3,096 miles of single line, 194 miles of
double line, and 8| miles of line with four tracks. The
quadruple lines, which extend from Sydney to Flem-
ington on the suburban line, were brought into use
during the year ended June, 1902. As before stated,
in 1855, there were four locomotives, with a total
traction power of 35,748 lbs ; 28 passenger carriages,
with an aggregate seating capacity of 924 persons ;
and 51 goods vehicles, with a gross carrying capacity
of 306 tons. At the close of 1904-5 the engine stock
numbered 620, with a traction power of 12,101,791 lbs.
The stock of passenger carriages stood at 681. capable
MR. WEBSTER,
Fireman of First Train.
of seating 36,629 passengers ; and the total number of
waggons was 12,181, which provided for 108,373 tons
of loading. These figures do not take in a small num-
ber of engines and vehicles which, though still capable
of service, are of obsolete types and classed as dupli-
cates. With respect to the amount of traffic carried,
while in the first three months that trains were running
in 1855, only 140 tons of general merchandise, in


1904-5 the department carried 6,724,215 tons of such
class ol goods, with £2,214,998 ae the earnings. The
wool carried on our railways in 1856 was nil; last year
560,426 bales were thus transferred to the metropolis.
Tn the year 1855 the acreage under all crops was
171,000, while in 1905 the acreage under wheat alone
was 1,800,000, and of that product 14,232,356 bushels
were carried by rail. Similarly with coal. The
amount raised in 1855 was 137,076 tons ; in 1904-5
the Railway Department carried 4,136,537 tons of
this mineral. And with live stock the story is the
same. None were carried in 1855 ; fifty years later
their truckings represented 33,458 horses, 253,934
cattle, 3,273,126 sheep, and 81,351 pigs.
The progress of the accommodation afforded by
the State railways may be fairly gauged by comparing
the number of persons to each mile of line open for
traffic at different periods, and the average number
of trains run per inhabitant. Thus in 1861 there were
4,979 persons to each mile of line, but by the end of
the year 1880 the work of construction had proceeded
at a rate so much faster than the increase of the popu-
lation that the average number of persons per mile had
fallen to 882, so that the facilities afforded by the
railways were more than five times as great as in the
year first named ; while by 1905 the average popula-
tion per mile of line stood at 451. The decrease in the
area of territory to each mile of line open has also been
very rapid, falling from 4,438*6 square miles in 1860
to 94*70 square miles in 1905.
According to the Government Statistician, Mr.
W. H. Hall’s last returns the average cost of the whole
of the lines is about £10,904 per mile, including all
charges, except those for rolling stock, machinery,
furniture, and workshops ; an amount which, consider-
ing the character of the country through which some
of the lines have been carried, and the cost of labour,
which is considerably greater in Australia than in
most other countries, is by no means a high one. In
examining in detail the figures given it is of interest to
note the comparatively low cost per mile of some of
the extensions through pastoral country. The line
from Nyngan to Cobar, a distance of 81 miles, averaged
£3,272 ; that from Molong to Forbes, 72 miles, was
£5,212 ; from Junee to Hay, 167 miles, £5,842 ; from
Werris Creek to Narrabri, 96 miles, £6,046 ; and from
Dubbo to Bourke, 225 miles, £6,019. But the lines
of the “ pioneer ” class in a special way show that in
certain districts of the State railways capable of carry-
ing the traffic can be constructed at an average cost
far below what had previously been attempted. The
average cost of the line from Nevertire to Warren, 124
miles, was £3,271 ; that from Narrabri to Moree, 63
miles, £2,434 ; that from Moree to Inverell, 95 miles,
£3,260; that from Jerilderie to Berrigan, £2,143;
that from Berrigan to Finley, 13 miles, £2 609 ; that
from Parkes to Condobolin, 62 miles, £1,975 ; and
that from Tamworth to Manilla, 29J miles, £2,884.
In connection with the Culcairn-Corowa line, a dis-
tance of 474 miles, which averaged £4,538 per mile,
the betterment system was brought into operation.
The Campbelltown to Camden, the Kogarah to Sans
Souci, the Yass and the Tarrawingee lines were con-
structed cheaply for tram lines, and ranged in cost
from £5,800 to £625. The amount expended on
rolling stock to the 30th June, 1905, was £5,649,976;
for machinery, £372,301 ; on workshops, £658,349 ;
for furniture, £10,036 ; and store advance account,
£600,000 ;or £7,290,662 in all. This makes the total
cost for all miles open for traffic, £43,062,550, or an
average of £13,126 per mile. The growth of the
capital expenditure on lines open is shown in the fol-
lowing figures : —1855, £515,347 ; 1865, £2,746,373 ;
1875/ £7,245,379; 1885,' £21,831,276; 1895,
£36,611,366; and 1905, £43,062,550. The total
debt on the railways account at the end of 1904 was
£49,000,000, the tramways absorbing £6 000,000 of
this amount.
The contrast between the present; position of the
New South Wales railways and their humble begin-
ning in 1855 is a remarkable one. In 1856 the num-
ber of passengers on the railways was only 350,724,
whilst in the year ended June 30, 1905, the number
was 31,180,769, or more than 89 times greater. But
the tonnage of goods carried represents a very much
larger increase, having grown from 2,469 to 6,549,791
—the traffic having expanded to 2,652 times its ori-
ginal volume since the first full year of railway opera-
tions. For the first ten years of the period under
review the larger part of the railway earnings was
obtained from the passenger traffic no doubt owing
to the fact that the first railways were almost entirely
suburban. It was not until the line crossed the moun-
tains and opened up the far interior that the propor-
tions and the goods traffic became the prin-
cipal source of revenue of the railways. This change
began to take place in 1867. Two years prior to that
year (in 1865) the gross earnings represented £166,032,
and the working expenses £108,926 ; in 1875 these
figures respectively were £614,648 and £296,174 ; in
1885, £2,174,368 and £1,458,153; in 1895, £2,878,204
and £1,567,589 ; and in 1905 the gross earnings were
£3,684,016, and the working expenses £2,192,147. In
the years 1902, 1903 and 1904, the drought years,
the proportion of working expenses to gross earnings
was considerably less than for the period anterior to
the vesting of tht railways in the commissioners. Of
th a non-paying lines in 1904-5 there were no less than
thirty sections, representing a total mileage of 1,921
miles 20| chains, and a total loss of £3Bl 276. The
heaviest loss was on the Junee to Hay section, amount-
ing to £51,049 for the twelve months, and tin smallest
loss, £466, on the line from West Tamworth to Manilla.
The betterment system as applied to railways was
first introduced in the construction of the Culcairn to
Corowa railway. No special Act was passed for the
general establishment of this principle ; but by a pro-
viso in a clause of the Public Works Act the Govern-
ment was empowered to apply the principle to all
railways constructed subsequent to the date of the
passing of the Act. In estimating the enhanced value
of the land adjoining the Culcairn to Corowa railway
line, the stations were assumed to be ten miles apart,
the betterment area having a five-mile radius from
each station, and the land in the vicinitv of each sta-
tion being considered to have an enhanced value of
25 per cent., graduating to 5 per cent, at the limit of
the radius. In the case of the extension of the railway


along the southern coast it is found that the enhanced
value does not reach so high a percentage, owing to
the facilities which exist for the transport of produce
by water.
It has always been the principle in New South
Wales to keep the railways under State management
and control and at the present time there are only
three private lines in operation with the exception of
short lines to connect coalmines with the main rail-
ways. In the year 1874 Parliament granted permis-
sion to a company to construct a line from Deniliquin,
in the centre of the Riverina district, to Moama, on
the Murray, where it meets the railway system of
Victoria. A considerable proportion of the wool and
other produce of Riverina reaches the Melbourne
market by this route ; the line, which was opened in
1876, being 45 miles in length The land required
was granted by the State, right being reserved for the
purchase of the line at any time after twenty-one
years from the passing of the Act. The total capital
expended is £162,672, of which £40,000 was raised by
debentures, £30,000 now being outstanding. There
is a reserve fund of £14,000. The dividends formerly
paid averaged 10 per cent., but of late years they have
fallen as low as 2 h per cent. During the year 1888 a
line of 35 miles 54 chains in length was laid down
from the Barrier Silver-mine, Silverton and Broken
Hill to the South Australian border. The total capital
expended is £385,017, of which £BO,OOO was raised by
debentures. The reserve fund amounts to £50,000.
Since its opening the lin has had large support, and
in 1891 a dividend of 70 per cent, was declared. A
short line connects Liverpool with the Warwick Farm
Racecourse. Authority was obtained during 1893 for
the construction of a private line from Menindie to
Broken Hill in the western district, and one from
Rosehill to Dural, being a continuation of the Clyde
to Rosehill line, in the Parramatta district. Nothing
has been done in respect of the former, but the latter
was opened for traffic as far as Carlingford under the
control of the railway commissioners, the Govern-
ment having purchased the line on August 1, 1901.
Since its first days, a number of experiments have
been made in regard to the control of the Railway
department. At the outset, and for a brief period,
there were three commissioners ; but subsequently
single commissioners had charge of the system, imme-
diately under ministerial control. The last commis-
sioner, prior to the appointment of the Board of Com-
missioners, was the late Mr. Charles Goodchap, who
was sole commissioner for nearly eleven years; but
he was largely hampered in his management by poli-
tical interference which the present Railway Act was
passed to abolish, and ensure the railways being worked
on business lines and in the best interests of the State.
This Act, introduced by Sir Henry Parkes in 1888,
appointed a board of three commissioners, and gave
them practically independent powers, whereby they
are enabled to administer the railways and appoint
and control the staff without any political interference.
REDFERN RAILWAY STATION, 1870,


The first three commissioners under the Act were
Messrs. E. M. G. Eddy, chief commissioner, and
Messrs. Charles Oliver and W. M. Fehon. On the
death of Mr. Eddy, Mr. Charles Oliver became chief
commissioner, and Mr. David Kirkcaldie was appointed
to the board.. The inharmonious relations of the three
commissioners necessitated the appointment, in 1906,
of a Royal Commission to inquire into the general
working of the department. The result of the inves-
tigation led to the Government retiring Mr. C. Oliver
and Mr. W. M. Fehon. Mr. T. R. Johnson was brought
out from England in 1907 to fill the position of chief
commissioner with absolutely undivided authority ;
and Messrs. David Kirkcaldie and Harry Richardson
were made assistant commissioners to assist in the
work of control.
Mr T. R. JOHNSON, Chief Railway Commissioner
for New South Wales, is a member of the Institute of
Civil Engineers, and held for a number of years an im-
portant position in the Great Northern Railways
(England). He was unanimously selected by the com-
mittee appointed by the Government, consisting of Sir
Sydney’s Tramway System—lts Growth and
Progress.
The actual birth of the tramway system took
place in 1861, when a line was constructed along Pitt
Street. It was owned and operated by a private com-
pany, and proved a disastrous failure. The cars, which
were drawn by horses, were imported from England,
as also were the rails, which were found to be unsuit-
able, having a flange groove of only g of inch, whereas
the flange of wheels was one inch deep. To remedy
this defect the rail was reversed, which proved so detri-
mental to vehicular traffic that in 1866 Parliament
recommended the discontinuance of the service.
This first attempt to endow the city with a
tramway service having failed, owing to the class
of rails adopted, attention was directed to flat-
grooved rails offering no obstruction to the street
traffic.
In 1873 Parliament introduced a bill to enable a
“ Sydnev and Suburban Street Tramway Company,’’
with a capital of £95,000, to lay down tramways, for
horse traction only, on seven routes. After a select
Railway Station, Sydney, 1907.
George Gibb, the Earl of Jersey, Mr. Cecil Darley, and
Mr. Cogblan, Agent-General of the Stale. The selection
having received the endorsement of leading railway
managers, the appointment was made by the Carruthers
Government; and the new Chief Commissioner took up
the duties appertaining to Lis office on April 4, 1907.
Mr. Johnson is a man in the prime of life, being 49 years
of age, and has gained a large experience on the railways
of the old world ; having been for thirty-five years in the
service of the railway company mentioned. Since 1900
be held the position of assistant-engineer of the Great
Northern Railways, with special charge of about 1,200
miles of lines. Mr. Johnson has visited the great railway
systems in America, France, Germany, Belgium and
Switzerland; and in addition possesses large experience of
railway rating. The Act providing lor the dissolution ot
the Bojird of Railway Commissioners and the appoint-
ment of a Chief Commissioner at a salary of £B,OOO per
year, with an Assistant Railway Commissioner, and nn
Assistant Tramway Commissioner, each at £1,500 per
year, came into force, by proclamation, on April 4, 1907.
On that date the existing commission was dissolved and
the new commissioner assumed control.
committee had reported on the subject, the scheme
was abandoned. In 1877 the Sydney Omnibus
Company put forward a similar proposal ; but on
the second reading of the bill (in February, 1879) the
House was counted out, and this project also lapsed.
A month later, however, a bill to enable the Govern-
ment to construct a line from Redfern station, via Pitt
Street, Belmore Park, and Elizabeth Street, to Hunter
Street was on the first reading carried by a large ma-
jority. The division on the first reading of the bill
was taken on 13th March, 1879, and the line was
opened on the 16th September of the same year a day
prior to the opening of the Exhibition. Four steam
'motors and six cars were ordered from America. The
motive power employed at first was horses, and after-
wards, when motors arrived, was steam, the cars being
of the double-decked type. The length of line was
1 mile 31 chains, and was single throughout, with two
crossing loops, fitted with spring points.
This may be called the commencement of the
steam ora, which, during the three-and-a-half months
it was in use to the end of 1879, yielded 33 per cent,
on the capital invested. There were 443,311


passengers carried, and the miles run totalled 13,270.
The earnings during this period were £4,416 and the
working expenses £2,278, leaving a net profit of £2,138
on a capital expenditure of £22,269. It was evident
that the line could be run at a profit ; and so this line,
which was constructed to meet extraordinarv require-
ment., became the nucleus of the vast system of to-day.
The success of this line induced the Sydney Omnibus
Company to make another effort to secure the right to
lay tramways through the principal streets of the city
and suburbs. On 25th November 1879, a bill for this
purpose was submitted to Parliament, but through the
agency of Sir John Lackev, Minister for Public Works,
the H ouse considered the expediency of entrusting this
power to the Government. The bill embracing this
proposal, and authorising the construction of fifteen
lines of tramways became law on 28th April, 1880.
On 14th September, 1880, the first extension was
opened to traffic, and consisted of a line branching off
the existing line at corner of Elizabeth and Liverpool
Streets, via Oxford Street and Moore Park, to Rand-
wick Racecourse, the length of added track being 2
miles 49 chains, or a total for the system of 4 miles 3
chains. The miles run during this year totalled
84,094. The next year (1881) saw the length of track
more than doubled, for during that period four new
extensions of the existing track and one outside line
were open to traffic. The dates of opening were as
follows : —l9th March, 1881, Randwick Racecourse to
High Street, Randwick, distance 1 mile 6 chains ;
12th March, 1881, Darlinghurst junction to Ocean
Street, Waverley, distance 1 mile 47 chains ; 13th
April, 1881, Ocean Street to Waverley, distance 1 mile
25 chains ; 15th September, 1881, Oxford Street to
Cleveland Street, via Crown Street, distance 66 chains;
31st December, 1881, Newtown Railway Station to
Illawarra Road, Marrickville, distance 1 mile 69 chains.
Total length of line now open, 10 miles 56 chains.
The miles run totalled 296,906, as against 84,074 for
nrevious year.
The next year practically saw the extension of the
system to the western suburbs, as on 17th May the
line was opened to traffic between Redfern Railway
Station and Botanv a distance of 6 miles 66
«/ •/ '
chains ; on 15th August from Terminus Street, near
Redfern Railway Station, to Forest Lodge, 1 mile 26
chains, and from Glebe junction to Glebe Point, dis-
tance 78 chains, and city terminus extended from
Hunter Street to Bridge Street, distance 19 chains ;
on 2nd October from Newtown Road junction to New-
town Railway Bridge, distance 1 mile 27 chains. This
last extension connected the local Marrickville line to
the city system. Total length of line now open, 2]
miles 32 chains, and miles run, 670,649.
In 1883 there were only two extensions opened to
traffic. On 25th January the Randwick line was ex-
tended from High Street to Coogee Bay, distance 1
mile 35 chains ; and on 18th June a line was opened
from Derwent Street on Forest Lodge line to Johnston
Street, Leichhardt, dist.ance 1 mile 33 ch ins. Total
length of line now open, 24 miles 20 chains, and miles
run, 1,076,096.
On Ist May, 1884, the Leichhardt line was ex-
tended to Short Street, a distance of 1 mile 2 chains ;
and on 24th May a line was opened from Bondi junc-
tion to Fletcher Street, distance 1 mile 12 chains,
making total length of line open 26 miles 34 chains.
The mileage run during this year was 1,242,491, and
the total capital expended had risen to the sum of
£708,109.
On 22nd May, 1886, the first portion of the
North Sydney lines was opened to traffic, viz ,
from Milson’s Point to the Public Reserve at Ridge
Street, a distance of 1 mile 31 chains. This line was
worked by cable on account of the steep grades to be
negotiated.
In 1887 considerable additions were made to the
length of tramway track, including 4 miles 71 chains
between Kogarah and Sandringham, and 7 miles 31
chains at Newcastle. The Sydney lines were extended
in four directions. On 14th June, from McPherson
Street, Waverley, to Allison Road, Randwick, distance
I miD 18 chains ; on same date, from Waverley, former
terminus, to McPherson Street, distance 12 chains ;
on 28th September, from Fletcher Street, Bondi, to
Bondi Aquarium, distance 25 chains ; and on 10th
December, from Short Street to present Leichhardt
terminus, distance 39 chains. Total mileage of city
lines now open, 29 miles 79 chains. On 14th August,
1889, the Marrickville line was extended from Illa-
warra Road to Dulwich Hill, a distance of 75 chains,
making total mileage open 30 miles 74 chains. On
14th October, 1890, a line from Marion Street (Leich-
hardt) to Fivedock, a distance of 2 miles 39 chains,
was opened to traffic ; and on 20th October the Waver-
ley line was extended from McPherson Street to Waver-
ley Cemetery, a distance of 49 chains. This brought
the total up to 34 miles 2 chains.
In the year 1891, on 25th August, two further
extensions were opened to traffic —one between Castle-
reagh Street on Botany line, via Cleveland Street to
Randwick Road on Coogee line, length 1 mile 6 chains ;
the other from Randwick Road to the Cricket Ground,
a distance of 20 chains. On 24th December a distance
of 63 chains from Newtown Railway Station to St.
Peters Railway Station was opened to traffic, and wa*
worked by one tram drawn by horses. The total
length of city lines at the end of this year was 36 miles
II chains. In addition to these extensions, a line
was constructed and brought into use between Liver-
pool Road, Ashfield and Enfield, the length of which
was 1 mile 78 chains.
The year 1892 saw the Balmain line reach its present
terminus at Gladstone Park. The work was done in
two sections which were opened on May 2nd and Oc-
tober 24th respectively.
The year 1893 witnessed the introduction of the
application of electricity as the motive power. The
line chosen for the purpose was the Waverley-Rand-
wick extension. The cars were worked by the over-
head trolley system, the power being supplied by a
small generator in the Randwick workshops. The
experiment did not give unqualified satisfaction, but
was sufficiently successful to warrant the whole plant
being transferred to North Sydney, where it was used
for the Ridge Street-Spit Road line, 2 miles 6 chains in
length, which was opened to traffic on 20th September,
1893. This year also saw the extension of the North


Sydney cable line from Ridge Street to Lane Cove
Road, a distance of 60 chains, on 17th July and of the
steam line from Fivedock to Abbotsford, a distance of
1 mile 25 chains, on Ist August. Hi addition, the
Newcastle lines were extended from Perkins Street to
Parnell Place, a length of 50 chains, which took place
on 23rd December. The total mileage open on the
citv lines at end of this year was 43 miles 8 chains.
This year practically saw the last growth for some
years of the steam tram system, as all further progress
was made in the direction of the extension of the elec-
tric system. After 1894 no cars were built for the
steam service, and at the end of 1896 the work of
building the rolling stock for the electric lines was com-
menced.
In 1894. on 19th February, the Bondi line was
* j *
extended from Bondi Aquarium to the beach, a dis-
tance of 45 chains. On the 19th April the Newcastle
lines were increased in length by two additions, —one
from,Union Street to Merewether, 1 mile 70 chains in
length, and the other from Hannell Street to Tighe’s
Hill, a distance of 1 mile 78 chains. On 19th Septem-
ber a line was constructed and brought into use which
added 2 miles 32 chains to the city’s total. This was
the line from the foot of King Street to Ocean Street,
via Darlinghurst ; it was worked by cable
In 1896 an Act was passed authorising the Rail-
way Commissioners to convert the whole of the tram-
ways from steam and cable to electric traction. On
24th August the Crown Street line was connected
with the Cleveland Street line at the south end of
Crown Street, a distance of 4 chains. On 12th Decem-
ber the Glebe Point line was extended to Leichhardt
Street, a distance of 4 chains. Total length of lines
open at end of 1896 was 46 miles 13 chains.
On Ist March, 1897, the Ridge Street to Spit Road
electric line was extended to Mosman Bay a distance
of 1 mile 40 chains. On 25th April, 1898, the North
Sydney cable system was converted to electric traction
and extended from Lane Cove Road to Willoughby, a
distance of 2 miles 45 chains. On Ist July the local
service of horse trams between Newtown Railway
Bridge and St. Peters was withdrawn and line con-
nected to Dulwich Hill line at Newtown Bridge, and
through steam service from Bridge Street substituted
for horse traction. On 4th October a line was opened
between Ocean Street and Rose Bay, a distance of
1 mile 24 chains. It was worked by electric system,
and connected with cable trams at Ocean Street.
These earlier electric tram lines were all single-track
lines, with the overhead wire carried on a single row
of poles on one side of the line, every car having its
trolley pole rising from the side of the car.
The real commencement, however, of the electric
era of our tramway development came on Bth Decem-
ber, 1899, with the opening of the line from Circular
Quay, via George Street, to Pyrmont, which added a
length of 3 miles 20 chains to the system. This lint
was the first line through the heart of the city to be
operated by electricity. On 15th September also of
this year the line from Enfield to Ashfield was extended
to Ashfield Railway Station, a distance of 13 chains.
In 1900 the extensions opened to traffic were : —Bth
January, George Street junction to Redfern Railway
Station, 16 chains ; 24th February, Lane Cove junc-
tion to Gore Hill, I mile 4 chains ; 25th June, Water
Road (North Sydney) to Neutral Bay, 74 chains ; 6th
August, St. Peters Bridge to Cook’s River, 1 mile 75
chains ; 13th August. Belford Road (Newcastle) to
Adamstown, 1 mile ; 10th September, Rose Bay to
Dover Road, 1 mile 3 chains ; 12th September from
junction of Coogee and Cleveland Street lines to Ken-
sington Racecourse. 1 mile 30 chains ; 22nd October,
Kensington Racecourse to Rifle Range, 1 mile 38
chains; 27th October, Spit Road junction to Spit (North
Sydney), 1 mile 50 chains ; 26th December, Bunnerong
Road to Randwick Racecourse, 60 chains ; in addition
to these extensions, the Marrickville, Dulwich Hill, and
St. Peters lines were converted from steam to electrical
working on 2nd April, and the sections and fares were
revised on King Street cable and Willoughby lines.
These events following one another in quick succession
caused the year 1900 to stand out as the most pro-
gressive in the history of the city’s tramway develop-
ment.
The progressive development of the system which
took place in 1900 was continued with unabated vigour
in 1901. On 14th January was opened the line froir
Tighe’s Hill to Mayfield (Newcastle), distance 77 chains;
19th August, the George Street electric line was ex-
tended from fire station near Circular Quay to Millers’
Point, 55 chains ; 16th September, Enfield to Mort-
lake, via Burwood, 5 miles 30 chains ; 18th December,
the service between Circular Quay and Railway Sta-
tion was diverted to the new lines laid down in Pitt
and Castlereagh Streets, which added 2 miles 70 chains
to the grand total ; 19th December, Rifle
Range junction to Little Bay, 3 miles 65 chains. Dur-
ing this year the Leichhardt line was converted from
steam to electric traction, and all-night trams were
run to western suburbs.
The following extensions were made in 1902 :
22nd January, opening of line from Raglan Street
(Botany line) to St. Peters Railway Bridge, through
Alexandria, 1 mile 34 chains ; 15th February, opening
of line Oxide Street to South Street (Broken Hill),
3 miles 2 chains ; Ist March, opening of line from
Circular Quay to Fort Macquarie car shed, distance
30 chains ; 10th August, Balmain line converted from
steam to electrical working; 11th August, line opened
Little Bay to La Perouse, 1 mile 2 chains ; 11th August,
Old Botany terminus to Cemetery (Springvale), 2 miles
47 chains ; 18th August, opening of line Parramatta
Railway Station to Baulkham Hills, 4 miles 37 chains ;
7th September, introduction of all-night trams to
Paddington and Bondi junction, and conversion of
Waverlev and Bondi lines to electrical working ; 7th
October, conversion to electrical working of Waverlev
to Randwick line ; 2nd November, opening of line past
new Central Railway Station along new Belmore Road
(now called Eddy Avenue), distance 8 chains ; 3rd
November, extension of Newcastle lines —Darby Street
junction to Patrick Street, Merewether, 1 mile 14
chains, and Patrick Street to the beach, 13 chains ;
17th November, Coogee line converted to electrical
working ; 18th November, duplication of Crown Street
line from Oxford Street to Foveaux Street ; 20th No-
vember, conversion of Crown Sreet line to electrical
working ; 24th November, opening of line Gladstone
Park to Nicholson Street, Balmain, 48 chains ; 22nd


December, opening of line Foveaux Street junction to
Bourke street, Zetland, 1 mile 45 chains, and exten-
sion of city terminus of east and south suburban lines
from Bridge Street to Young Street, Circular Quay, a
distance of 25 chains ; opening of line from this ter-
minal to Fort Macquarie car-shed, via Albert and
Macquarie Streets, distance 23 chains ; 24th December,
opening of extensions of Broken Hill system, Oxide
Street to Murton Street, 1 mile 45 chains, and South
Street to Whittaker Street, 61 chains ; 29th December,
opening of line Rozelle junction (Darling Street) to
Gladesville Bridge, Drummoyne, 2 miles 12 chains.
The year 1903 may be shortly summarised as
follows: —14th February, line opened East Esplanade
(Manly) to Curl Curl, 1 mile 23 chains, worked bv
steam motors till 20th July same year, when steam
service was withdrawn and horse traction substituted.
19th April, Botany 1 ine as far as Bay Street converted
from steam to electric working. The rest of this line
from Bay Street to Botany was converted on 31st
May. On 6th May the mileage of Broken Hill lines
was increased by the opening of the section from
Chappie Street to Kaolin Street, 69 chains in length.
On 11th May the electric line from Ocean Street to
Dover Road was extended to Watson’s Bay, its pre-
sent terminus, an increase to the mileage open of 1
mile 71 chains. Several portions of this line which
had been single track were in this year duplicated,
viz. : —2Bth August, Ocean Street to William Street ;
12th September, William Street to Rose Bay ; 3rd
October, Rose Bay to Beach Loop ; and Bth November,
Lyne Park to Dover Road. On 14th September the
Balmain line was extended to Darling Street wharf, a
distance of 7 chains, a local service being ran from
Nicholson Street.
In the year 1904 there were no extensions of the
system, save a small line, 14 chains long, along Ross
Str et, Forest Lodge, connecting the Leichhardt and
Balmain lines. This was opened on Ist April, and was
not for passenger traffic. On 10th November in this
year the Bundy Time Recorder was first introduced for
registering arrivals and departures, the first machine
being located near Church Street, Balmain. They
were later brought into use on all main lines. In 1905
the 15th of January was the date of the conversion of
the King Street-Ocean Street cable line to electrical
working, the most important step in tramway develop-
ment for some time. And on the 16th January an
electric service was inaugurated between Redfern Rail-
way Station and Bondi Junction, thus connecting the
eastern suburbs directly with the terminus of the
railway system of the State. On 19th March the
city terminus of Watson’s Bay line was extended from
King Street to the intersection of Erskine and Dav
Streets, a distance of 6 chains. On 16th April the
Abbotsford line was converted from steam to electric
traction, and cars run through from Circular Quay.
On 19th April the first step towards a new mode of
locomotion was taken, for on this date were ordered
the chassis (or under carriages) of four motor ’buses of
the Clarkson steam type. On 19th June the line from
Kensington to Little Bay was converted from steam
to electrical working. Ist July saw the introduction
of advertisements in the tramcars. On 7th August
the La Perouse line, between Little Bay and Botany.
converted from steam to electric traction. This, with
the exception of a small length of line to the Rifle
Range, was practically the last of the city lines to be
brought under the spell of the electric current. On
4th December was inaugurated the motor omnibus
service, but did not turn out a success.
The track is laid to the standard railway gauge of
4 ft. 64 in., and the rails are mostly 80 lbs. to the yard.
The headquarters of the electrical power supply
arp situated in Harris Street, Ultimo near to Darling
Harbour. There are installed here 48 boilers of Bab-
cock Willcox make, and provision has been made
for the installation of a dozen more if required. Each
boiler is rated at 250 horse power and has a heating
surface of 2,852 feet. The engines are four cross-
compound condensing engines (manufactured by
Allis-Chalmers Co.) for the direct current supply, each
capable of 100 revolutions per minute and rated at
1,250 horse power each There are also three cross-
compound vertical condensing engines (manufactured
by same company), each of which is rated at 2,850
horse power, running at 75 revolutions per minute,
and each driving a 1,500 Kilowatt three-phase rotating
field alternator, which produces current at 6,600 volts
with a frequency of 25 cycles per second. There are
also two standard exciter engines. It is customary to
keep one unit of each type in reserve, in case of acci-
dents, and to operate each unit in work up to 25 per
cent, overload for a little while each day. In addition
to these engines, there has been installed a Parsons
turbo-generator (or turbine driven generator) of the
latest type of 1875 Kilowatt nominal output, but the
contract provides that it can give 2,250 Kilowatts
(equal to 3,000 horse power at the switchboard) for
two hours. This Parsons turbo-generator is the largest
yet imported into Australia, and is of the latest com-
pound condensing pattern, and consists of steam tur-
bine, alternator, condensor and air pumps, all of
Messrs. Parsons & Co.’s design and manufacture.
The overhead trolley system is the one employed.
The overhead wire suspension is effected in three ways
—by side poles, centre poles, and by span wires attach-
ed to poles on both sides of the streets. The poles are
placed at intervals of 40 yards. Some of the poles are
of steel, but the majority are of wood, ironbark being
used. The copper overhead wire used throughout is
of '132 square inch sectional area.
From the following statistics the growth of the
tramway system in the colony can be gauged. In
1879 the gross earnings represented £4,416, and the
capital invested £22,269 ; in 1885 the figures respec-
tively were £223,340 and £708,109 ; in 1895, £230,583
and £962,037 ; and in 1905 the length of line was 73J
miles ; the number of fares collected, 120,973 934 ;
the tram mileage, 14,413,273 ; the total earnings,
£697,971 ; the working expenses, £583,369 ; the earn-
ings per tram mile, 1D62 ; the working cost per tram
mile, 9 71 ; the percentage of working cost to gross
earnings, 83‘58 ; the net earnings, £114,611 ; and the
capital spent on lines open, £2,931,583. The mileage
in the figures of 1905 refer only to city lines. The
length of single lines for the whole system is 183 miles,
or, including sidings, loops and cross-overs, the total
length of track is 212 miles, in working which under the
railway commissioners a staff of 4,133 is employed.


Mr. CHARLES OLIVER,
Chief Railway Commissioner in New
South Wales, is an Australian, and
was born in 1848. In April, 1866,
he entered the public service as a
clerk in the Lands Department.
His promotion was rapid, for eleven
years later, that is in 1877, we find
him appointed to the important posi-
tion of Inspector of Land Offices.
In July, 1880, he was appointed
Acting-Under Secretary for Lands,
a position that was confirmed to him
permanently a few months jater.
For the ensuing eight years Mr.
Oliver controlled this large and im-
portant department of Stale with
marked ability, and effected its com-
plete reorganisation. It was during
his occupancy ot this position that a
radical change was made in the
land laws of the colony. In 1882
the Parkes-Robertson Government
decided to introduce into Parliament
a comprehensive measure that would
replace all previous legislation. In
the preparation of the bill Mr. Oliver
rendered special service. The land
policy of the Government, however,
not commending itself to the country,
a defeat was sustained, and a new
administration under the late Sir
Alexander Stuart succeeded to
power. A new Land Bill more con-
sonant with the will of the people
was necessary, and Mr. Oliver’s
services were invaluable in its pre-
paration. Parliament sat almost
continuously for twelve months con-
sidering this measure. Finally, in
1884, it was passed into law. Upon
the completion of this important
act of legislation Mr. Oliver received
from the late Right Hon. William
Bede Dailey, P.C., Q.C., who was
Attorney-General, and at the time
Acting Premier of New South Wales,
the following letter, accompanied by
a goblet suitably inset ibed ;—-
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
31st December, 188
My dear Mr. Oliver,
Will you accept at my hands on
this the closing day of a year eventful in
legislation, which your intelligence and in-
dustry largely contributed to make effective,
and I trust valuable to the country, this
small memorial of my own personal grati-
tude for your very great and always cheer-
fully accorded assistance ?
Yours very sincerely,
William B. Dalley.
In 1888 the Government of the day,
of which the late Hon. Sir Henry
Parkes was Prime Minister, passed
into law the Railway Act, which
vested the management and control
of the railways of the State in a
body consisting of a Chief Commis-
sioner and two colleagues. It was
decided that for the chief position a
gentleman, expert in all railway
administration, should be obtained
from Great Britain. To this high
office die late Mr. E. M. G. Eddy
was appointed. With regard to the
remaining members of the commis-
sion, it was, in the opinion of the
late Sir Henry Parkes, desirable
that some member of the public
service thoroughly acquainted with
the requirements of the State, and
one who had already proved himself
skilful in organisation should be
appointed to one of the remaining
positions. After mature considera-
tion the choice of the Government
fell upon Mr. Oliver, who however
at first declined the offer, but was
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. CHARLES OLIVER.
subsequently induced to accept the
position with its heavy responsibility.
In June, 1897, upon the demise of
Chief Commissioner Eddy, much
consideration was given to the ques-
tion of the appointment of a suc-
cessor. It was discussed in and out
of Parliament, and there was a sug-
gestion that the Government should
again look to England for a chief
commissioner. The feeling, how-
ever, predominated that after an
experience of ten years under the
commissioner’s management, there
was no necessity to take this course.
Mr. Oliver, who had acted as Chief
Commissioner during Mr. Eddy’s
absence in England, and again after
his decease, was a few months later
permanently appointed to the posi-
tion. Upon the expiration of Mr.
Oliver’s second term of office as a
commissioner and his first as chief
commissioner in 1902, he was re-
appointed Chief Commissioner fora
further period of seven years. In
1900 Mr. Oliver represented the New
South Wales State railways at
the International Railway Congress,
which was held in the French
meti opolis. Altogether Mr. Oliver
has spent thirty-eight years of his
life in the public service of New
South Wales. After holding various
positions in the Lands Department
of New South Wales he attained
the high office of Under Secretary
for Lands, the duties of which office
he administered with conspicuous
ability for eight years. For the last
sixteen years he has been associated
with the management and control of
the State railways and tramways,
for ten years as a Commissioner,
and nearly six as a Chief Commis-
sioner, the latter period having been
the most difficult and trying ever
experienced in the history of the
railways. During that time the
responsibilities in connection with
the tramways have also increased
very considerably owing to their
marvellous expansion, resulting
largely from the substitution of elec-
tricity for steam as the motive power
which has taken place since Mr.
Oliver’s accession to the Chief Com-
missionership, to the great advan-
tage and comfort to the citizens of
the metroDolis and subuibs.
Mr. DAVID KIRKCALDIE,
J.P., one of the Commissioners for
Railways in New South Wales, was
born in December, 1848, within a
few miles of the town of Kirkcaldy,
in Scotland. He received his edu-
cation in his native town, and enter-
ed, as a cadet, the service of what
was then known as the Leven and
East of Fife Railway, which was
subsequently amalgamated with the
North British Railway, one of the
two leading Scotch lines. In the
service of that company, where, as a
young man, he was contemporary
with such men as Mr. McNicoll, the
vice-president of the Canadian Pa-
cific Railway, Sir David Hunter, the
general manager of the Natal Rail-
ways, and Mr. Thallon, the Queens-
land Railway Commissioner, he re-
mained for fourteen years. While
there he got a thorough grounding
into traffic working in all its


branches, which has stood him in
good stead in his subsequent career.
About two years before he came to
Australia, Mr. Kirkcaldie was select-
ed, from amongst a large number of
applicants, to fill an important
appointment on the Great Indian
Peninsula Railway, at Bombay, but
his health having become consider-
ably impaired by over-work, together
with the effects of exposure to a
rigorous climate, he was compelled
by his medical adviser to forego the
appointment on the ground that the
climate of Bombay would be detri-
mental to his health, but he was
advised to come to Australia, where
he arrived towards the end of 1876.
About a month after his arrival in
Sydney, he obtained an appointment
in the office of the then traffic
manager for the southern and west-
ern lines. In those days there was no
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. DAVID KIRKCALDIE.
railway connection between Sydney
and Newcastle, and the northern line
was worked under independent
management. Six years subsequent-
ly Mr. Kirkcaldie had risen to the
position of assistant traffic manager.
In 1889 the railways were vested in
commissioners by the Railway Act
of 1888. Almost simultaneously
with this change in the management
of the railway system of the State,
the southern and western lines were,
by the completion of the bridge over
the Hawkesbury River, connected
with the northern, and Mr. Kirk-
caldie was the first officer selected
by the commissioners to undertake
the duties of chief traffic manager of
the whole of the lines of the State.
This position he held until October,
1897, when, consequent upon the
death of the late Mr, Eddy, he was
appointed by the Government, of
which Mr. G. H. Reid was Premier,
to his present position as one of the
commissioners. Of Mr. Kirkcaldie
it may be said that he has grown
with the railways of the State, as he
has for upward of a quarter of a
century been intimately associated
with their management. He has
seen their revenue expand from less
than per annum to nearly
669,000, their extension from 509
miles to 3,280 miles of line, and the
annual number of passengers carried
from 1,727,730 to 32,384,138. The
tramway system, which is also vested
in the commissioners, was non-
existent when Mr. Kirkcaldie enter-
ed the service. He has, therefore,
seen their initiation and growth to
their present great proportions. To-
wards the end of 1901, Mr. Kirk-
ealdie received an offer of a still
more important position on the rail-
ways of another State, but Sir John
See’s Government had such a high
appreciation of the services he had
rendered the service, with which he
had been officially connected for so
many years, that he was induced to
remain. In this connection the
Parliament paid him the unique
honour of passing a special Act
which materially increased his re-
muneration, and this was done, not-
withstanding the fact that his salary,
in common with his brother com-
missioners, had already been fixed
by the Railway Act of 1888.
Mr. WILLIA M M EEKE
FEHON, J.P., one of the Railway
Commissioners of New South Wales,
was born in London in March, 1834.
He was educated at Brixton School,
then under the headmastership of
the late J. J. Miller. At an early
age the subject of this notice entered
upon a commercial career, having
secured an appointment with a large
mercantile firm in the city of London.
For several years he retained this
position, until an opportunity pre-
sented itself oi entering the service
of the Eastern Counties Railway, a
corporation that was finally taken
over and merged into the Great
Eastern Railway Company. This
appointment took place in 1851, and
for a time he filled the position of a
clerk in the permanent-way depart-
ment of this service. Transferred
subsequently to the office of the
engineer of the company, who at
the time happened to be Mr. Peter
Ashcroft, the well-known inventor
of the fish plate, he gained further
experience in railway administration.
In 1856 Mr. Fehon was induced to
go to Ontario, Canada, where he
joined the service of the Great
Western Railways (Canadian). His
advancement in this service bade
fair to prove as satisfactory as
heretofore, for he was soon pro-
moted to an important position in
the freight department. About this
time, however, he received a com-
munication from his brother in
Australia holding out strong induce-
ments for him to try his fortune in
the new and progressive land 01 uie
South. Responding to the sugges-
tion, he arrived in Melbourne in
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney .
MR. W. M. FEHON.
1858, and in December of that year
he entered the service of the
Victorian railways as chief clerk,
goods branch. His first promotion
was to the audit branch, which he
retained for some years, when he
was promoted to the head office.
His advancement was particularly
rapid in the Victorian service, sub-
sequently filling the position of
Assistant Superintendent, and ulti-
mately that of Traffic Manager.
While holding the latter position he
was induced to join the well-known
carrying firm of Messrs. McCulloch
and Co. Here he remained until the
business was changed into a limited
liability company, when for three
years he filled the position of
managing director of that company.


He then resigned in order to visit
Europe. While in England the
Victorian Government sought his
advice and assistance in the selection
of a commissioner for their railways,
with the result that the late Mr.
Richard Speight was appointed.
Upon Mr. tenon's return 10 i\ew
South Wales he for a time devoted
his attention to pastoral pursuits and
sugar-growing. Owing, however, to
the heavy drought which afflicted
the greater portion of the country in
1885 and more or less the two
following years his ventures in this
direction were not successful. In
1888, upon the passage through
Parliament of the Railway Act,
which transferred the control of the
railway service of the State to three
commissioners, the Government ol
the day, of which the late Sir Henry
Parkes was head, offered Mr. Fehon,
for the statutory term of seven years,
one of the newly created positions.
Accepting, he entered upon his duties
on 22nd October of that year. Upon
the termination of this engagement
in 1895, ie Premier of the day,
the Hon. G. H. Reid, reappointed
Mr. Fehon a commissioner for a
similar term, and in 1902 the
Government of Sir John See again
confirmed him in his position. In
Mr. Fehon the State of New South
Wales has received faithful services.
He shares with his colleagues on
the commission the honour of
administering the great railway
department to the entire satisfaction
of, not only the Government and
Legislature of the State, but of the
people as a whole. Strong, active
and filled with energy, untiring in
the performance of his duties, it is
hoped that Mr. Fehon will be spared
to administer his office for many
years to come. Although he has
recently passed the “ three score
years and ten ” limit, he can still
peruse his official documents or his
morning paper without glasses.
Mr. Fehon is a magistrate of the
territory ; he also holds a similar
commission for Victoria. While in
Victoria it should be mentioned that
Mr. Fehon was a member ot the
Central Board of Health, returning
officer for the district in which he
resided, licensing magistrate, and
several other honorary offices.
Mr. HENRY DEANE, M.A.,
M. Inst. C.E., Engineer-in-Chief for
Railways and Tramways, New
South Wales, was born in London,
in March, 1847. After acquiring
the elements of his education at an
English primary academy, he enter-
ed at fifteen years of age for the arts
course in Queen’s College, Galway,
Ireland. Here he gained a mathe-
matical scholarship, tenable for
three years, at the end of which
term he obtained his B.A. degree,
securing honours in mathematics and
natural science. After a further two
years’ course in the department of
engineering of that college, and pass-
ing all the examinations, he returned
to London where he continued his
studies, attending classes at King’s
College. In 1867 he entered the
office of Mr. (afterwards Sir John)
Fowler as an articled pupil to Mr.
T. Alan Johnson, who was then
associated with Mr. Fowler in the
work of the Metropolitan Railway.
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. HENRY DEANE.
In July, 1869, upon the completion
of his pupilage, he obtained an
appointment with Messrs. Waring
Bros., concessionaires and contrac-
tors for the East Hungarian rail-
ways. Here he was occupied in the
construction of the Grosswardein-
Klausenburg line, upon the com-
pletion of which he obtained an
appointment with the Danube Steam
Navigation Co. at their works
at Altofen, near Buda Pesth, as
principal assistant to Mr. Murray
Jackson, engineer-in-chief aiid head
manager. In 1875 he returned to
England and until 1877 he was
engaged in survey work and ro d and
bridge designs For a portion of
this time he served under Mr. (now
Sir Benjamin) Baker, the eminent
engineer of the Forth Bridge. In
1879 he decided to proceed to Aus-
tralia, arriving in Sydney in January
of the following year. Within a
month his high recommendations
obtained for him an appointment
under the late Mr. John Whitton as
a rail way surveyor. He first worked
in conjunction with Mr. John Gum-
ming, in making the trial survey of
that section of the great northern
line, from Mullet Creek through
Gosford and Woy Woy to Ourimbah.
In 1881 he was appointed district
engineer in the Gunnedah-Narrabri
extension, and two years later he
was appointed district engineer in
charge of the Homebush-Hawkes-
bury line. In 1885 he was called to
fill the temporary vacancy caused
by the departure on leave of Mr.
Herbert Palmer, assistant engineer
for railway surveys. Upon that
gentleman’s return Mr. Deane re-
sumed his duties in connection with
the city railway. Upon the death
of Mr. W. B. Wade in 1886, inspect-
ing engineer, Mr. Deane was ap-
pointed to the vacant position, the
duties of which he continued to ad-
minister until 1889, when he was
appointed acting-engineer-in-chief.
The following year it was manifest
that the health of the late Mr. John
Whitton would not allow of his
resuming duty, Mr. Deane was
appointed engineer-in-chief which
position he has retained ever since.
Upon the transference of the control
of the railways to the commissioners,
Mr. Deane undertook the great
work of improving the grades and
curves of some of the lines, and of
duplicating portions of others. He
carried out the Lapstone deviation
on the great western line, which in-
volved the cutting out of what was
known as the first Zigzag. He
also re-located a certain portion of
the Mudgee line which was regarded
as unsafe. In 1894 Mr. Deane
visited America, the United King-
dom, and the Continent, for the pur-
pose of investigating the latest sys-
tems of light railway and tramway
construction. In July, 1899, he
took over the practical control of all
tramway construction work, since
which date all the tramways both in
the country as well as in the metro-
politan district have been constructed
under his supervision. In 1904 Mr.
Deane in the interests of the govern-
ment railways again visited Europe
and America, In 1880 Mr. Deane


received his M.A. degree from the
Queen’s University (Ireland). The
ad eundem degree of M.A. of the
Sydney University has since been
conferred upon him. He was elected
president of the Institute of Sur-
veyors in 1894-5, president of the
Linnsean Society, N.S.W., 1895-7,
president of the Royal Society,
N.S.W., 1897-8, president of the
Section of Engineers’and Architects’
A.A.A.S., Melbourne, in 1900, and
Member of Council for Australasia
of the Institute of Civil Engineers.
Mr. WILLIAM HUTCHINSON,
M.C.E., M. Inst. C.E., Inspecting
Engineer, Railway Construction
O ' J
Branch, Department of Public
Works, New South Wales, is a
native of County Meath, Ireland,
where he was born in the year 1856.
Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. W HUTCHINSON.
He is the younger son of the late
Rev. William Hutchinson, 8.A.,
Church of England clergyman, who
with his family arrived in Victoria in
1866, and who for a number of years
was engaged in church work in that
State. The subject of this sketch
received his education first at the
Melbourne Church of England
Grammar School, where he matricu-
lated, and afterwards at the Mel-
bourne University, where in 1877 he
completed the course for the certifi-
cate of civil engineer, and later on
obtained the degree of Master of
Civil Engineering. In the final
examination in 1877 lie proved to be
one of the first two in the honour
list, an attainment which under the
conditions then existing entitled him
to employment in the Victorian rail-
ways, where he remained for four
years on survey and construction
works. In 1881 he came to New
South Wales and received an ap-
pointment as engineer under Mr.
Proudfoot, contractor for the con-
struction of the Uralla to Glen Innes
section of the great northern railway.
In January, 1883, he resigned that
position to take an appointment
as district engineer under the late
Mr. John Whitton, M. Inst. C.E.,
engineer-in-chief, railway construc-
tion branch, Department of Public
Works, New South Wales, and on
his retirement continued under Mr.
Henry Deane, M. Inst. C.E., the
present engineer-in-chief. Mr. Hut-
chinson remained in the position of
district engineer from 1883 to igoo,
and during that period had charge of
the construction of various important
lines of railway, the outlay on which
exceeded In 1901 he
was promoted to the position of
inspecting engineer, and in April,
1904. was placed in charge of the
branch under the Under Secretary
for Public Works during the absence
of the engineer-in-chief in America
and Europe.
Mr. THOMAS HALL, F.S.S.,
London, Chief Accountant, New
South Wales Government Railways
and Tramways, is a son of the late
Mr. John Hall, who was employed
under the late Mr. George Stephen-
son in the construction of the first
railway from Liverpool to Man-
chester, and who continued in the
service of the London and North-
western Railway Company for over
fifty years. Mr. Hall was born at
Golborne, Newton-le-Willows, Lan-
cashire, in the year 1845, and was
educated at the Newton Grammar
School. At fourteen years of age he
entered the service of the London
and North-western Railway Com-
pany as a junior clerk in the Traffic
Department. Five years later he
was appointed secretary and staff
clerk to the District Goods Man-
ager, Liverpool, England. This
position he held for three years
when he was appointed chief ship-
ping clerk, which position he held for
six years. He was then appointed
chief accountant, holding that posi-
tion for six years. Later he was
appointed assistant goods manager,
which position he held for three
years. Finally he was appointed
superintendent of the stations in
the Southern 1 istrict of Liverpool,
which office he held for six years.
While still in this service, he, in
1887, was appointed general mana-
ger of the Argentine Great \\ estern
Railway, remaining in that country
until 1889, when he resigned his
position. Upon his return to
England, he was approached i>y the
late Sir George Finlay, and offered
an appointment in tihe New South
Wales railways to assist the late
Mr. E. M. G. Eddy and his col-
leagues in the financial department
of the service. He arrived in
Sydney in January, 1890, and im-
mediately entered upon the duties
of the office he still adi fillisters.
Mr. Hall is a Fellow of the Royal
Statistical Society of Uondon.
Forty-six years of active railway
Hubert Newman . Sydney.
MR. THOMAS HALL.
work with its attendant cares do
not appear as yet to have left any
visible signs of mental or physical
deterioration. On the contrary, Mr.
Hall is a well-preserved man, and
strikes one as having sufficient
vitality stored to enable him to cope
successfully for many years with the
various intricate problems of rail-
way life.
Mr. HARRY RICHARDSON,
Traffic Superintendent, New South
Wales Government Railways, was
born in December, 1848. He was
educated at Newington College (then
situated at Parramatta), and joined
the railway service in 1866. He was
appointed clerk in the Audit Office
in 1868, and three years later was


promoted to the position of audit
inspector. In 1873 was made
chief clerk to the traffic manager,
and in January, 1877, became traf-
fic inspector of the metropolitan
division. The growth of the railway
system led to the supervision being
strengthened by the appointment ot
two superintendents, one to control
the coaching and the other the goods
business. This was in 1883, and
Mr. Richardson was then raised to
the position of coaching superin-
tendent of the whole of the lines.
Five years later the railways were
invested in three commissioners.
The first chief commissioner was
Mr. E. M. G. Eddy, a British rail-
way expert, who reorganised the
service, enlarged Mr. Richardson’s
responsibilities, and made him out-
door superintendent to correspond
with the position of superintendent
of the lines on the English railways.
In 1900 another change occurred;
the present commissioners also re-
cognising Mr. Richardson’s abilities,
added to his duties, and his title was
then altered to Superintendent of
the Lines. Mr. Richardson took a
trip to the old country in 1884,
where he studied the working of the
leading British railways. The out-
come of this was the suggestion by
him of certain improvements, many
of which were subsequently adopted,
more especially the introduction of
J Hubert Newman. Sydney
MR. HARRY RICHARDSON.
the electric tablet apparatus, one
of the standard systems now almost
universally used for safe working of
trains on single lines. He has
always been a great advocate for
obtaining the best possible means of
securing safety of railway travel,
and it is not too much to say that he
is second to none in his knowledge
of safe railway working. Mr.
Richardson is known and respected
throughout the lines by the travelling
public, as well as by a very wide
circle of friends, and is the most
popular officer in the service be-
cause of the interest he has always
taken in the well-being of the em-
ployees and the fair way in which he
deals with them. Outside his official
duties he also takes part in public
and social matters.
Mr. JOSEPPI G. S. CORNS,
Goods Manager of the New South
Wales Government Railways, was
born in Liverpool, England, and was
educated at the Manchester Grammar
School. He joined the clerical staff
of the London and North-western
Railway Co. at the age of fifteen,
and having graduated through both
passenger and goods departments in
London, Liverpool, Dublin, &c., he
was, in 1879, appointed to the posi-
tion of rolling stock superintendent
of the entire system, with head-
quarters at Stafford, from which
centre he controlled and directed the
movements of the working plant for
the traffic of the line, and this position
he held until the close of 1889, when,
at the personal request of the late
Mr. E. M. G. Eddy, chief commis-
sioner for the New South Wales
railways (who had been for many
years a fellow-officer), he resigned
Ids connection of upwards of twenty-
liveyears with the London and North-
western Co. in order to join the per-
sonal staff of the New South Wales
Railway Commissioners. Shortly
after his arrival in Sydney Mr.
Corns was placed in charge, as locum
tenens of the metropolitan passenger
and general traffic working, and on
the return of Mr. Hornidge at the
close of the year he was appointed
goods manager for Sydney and dis-
trict. In October, 1897, on the
elevation of Mr. Harper to the post
of chief traffic manager in place of
Mr. D. Kirkcaldie, who had been
elected commissioner on the lamented
death of Mr. Eddy, Mr. Corns was
made goods manager for the whole of
the New South Wales railways. In
the administration of this office
Mr. Corns has control of the mer-
chandise, live stock, minerals, and
general produce traffic of the State,
the bulk of which converges at the
Darling Harbour depot, at which
place an extensive business is done,
especially in _ the wool and wheat
seasons, about half a million bales of
J. Hilbert Newman. Sydney.
MR. J. G. S. CORNS.
wool being handled, and heavy ship-
ments of wheat being despatched
from the Darling Island and Pyr-
mont wharves eacli year.
M r. W I L L I A M THOW,
M. Inst. C.E., is Chief Mechanical
Engineer of the Locomotive, Car-
riage and Waggon Department of the
New South Wales Government Rail-
ways. He was born in Liverpool,
England, and after a good general
education at leading scholastic insti-
tutions in Carlisle, he entered the
service of the Lancaster and Carlisle
Railway Company, under his father,
who was a railway engineer for
many years in the service of the
London and York, Western and
Lancaster and Carlisle Railway
Companies at Crewe, Carlisle and
Preston. Subsequently Mr. W.
Thow became a pupil of Mr. Alex-
ander Allan (a reputed locomotive
engineer, who was associated with
Trevithick in establishing Crewe
works in the early days of railway
development), and for a few years
completed his training under him
on the Scottish Central Railway at
Perth. He then obtained an ap-
pointment as draughtsman in the
manufacturing establishment of
Dubs Locomotive Works, Glasgow.
After a short time in these well-
known works, he again joined


Mr. Allan when the latter became
general manager for the Worcester
Engine Woiks Company, a fairly
large concern in the south-west of
England, devoted to locomotive,
bridge and general engineering.
After five-and-a-half years’ expe-
rience with that company in the
positions of ordinary and chief
draughtsman, he re-entered the
service of the London and
North-western Railway Company
at Crewe, as draughtsman, under
Mr. John Ramsbottom, and in 1871
received the appointment of in-
spector and mechanical assistant to
Sir John (then Mr.) Fowler, the well-
known civil engineer, who was
engaged at that time in railway,
canal and dock construction in
Egypt for the Khedive, Ismail
Pasha. After five years spent in
Mr. Fowler’s service, the South
Australian Government, through
•heir Agent - General, appointed
Mr. Thow, in 1876, to the position
of locomotive engineer of their
H ubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. WILLIAM THOW.
railways, which he held for twelve-
and-a-half years, and then accepted
a proposal by the late Mr. Eddy
and his colleagues and became head
of the locomotive department of
these railways in May, 1889; there-
fore so far as our rolling stock is
concerned Mr. Thow has been
intimately connected with the im-
provements and developments of
the last fifteen years. He was
sent by the railway commissioners
twice to England and America in
connection with railway questions
and also tramway traction develop-
ments under the cable and electric
systems. After his first visit in 1891
Mr. Thow’s report to the commis-
sioners strongly recommended the
electric system for any extension of
the tramway service in Sydney.
His second visit to America and
England, eight years afterwards, was
an investigation into the methods
and machinery of modern railway
workshops as applied to repairs and
construction. Some time ago, when
the railway commissioners took
charge of the electric tramways,
in addition to the existing steam
service, they appointed Mr. Thow
their mechanical advising engineer
in connection with the electric
power-house plant. He is a member
of the London institutions of Civil
Engineers and Mechanical Engi-
neers, and also of the Railway
Master Mechanics’ Association of
America.
Mr. JOHN THOMAS BRYANT,
Chief Paymaster of the New South
Wales Railways and Tramways, is
a native of New South Wales, hav-
ing been born in Sydney in 1839.
He is a son of the late Lieutenant
William Bryant, of the Imperial
army, who found it necessary to
resign his commission through ill
health and, for the same reason, to
seek the less rigorous climate of
Australia. The son received the
basis of his education at the Wes-
leyan Denominational School at
Redfern, at the termination of which
he obtained a junior clerkship in the
service of the government railways
at Redfern. His first appointment
was as a booking clerk at Redfern
station, after which he passed in
succession through the parcels and
goods departments. In 1884 he was
appointed station-master at Bur wood,
which position he held until the fol-
lowing year, when he was transferred
to the accounts branch at head office.
Some two years later he was ap-
pointed to fill the position of cashier,
the duties of which office he con-
tinued to perform for many years
subsequently. These included both
receiving and paying, but in the
course of time, and as the volume of
traffic began to show a great increase,
the duties were divided, and Mr.
Bryant was selected to fill the newly
created position of paymaster in the
government railways. Upon the
reorganisation of the department
under the commissioners in iBBq,
the position of chief paymaster was
created, to which office Mr. Bryant
was appointed, and which he still
occupies. The position of chief pay-
master of the New South Wales
Government Railways is a most im-
portant one. That officer has prac-
tically the charge of the expenditure
of the whole department. He is
responsible for all payments in con-
nection with the railways and tram-
ways throughout the whole State.
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. JOHN THOMAS BRYANT.
Mr. Bryant has been in the service
over forty-four years. He married
Miss Fannie Hall, a daughter of the
late Mr. Ralph Hall, of Surry Hills,
in 1867, by whom he had three sons
and three daughters, and who died
in 1896. In 1900 Mr. Bryant marred
Miss M. Black, of Dural, by whom
he has one son and one daughter.
Mr. WILLIAM ROOKE
ROW, chief officer of the Traffic
Auditors’ Branch of the New South
Wales Government Railways, was
born at Inslow, Devonshire, Eng-
land, in 1841, and was educated at
Barnstaple, Devonshire, at a private
academy. He entered the service of
the North Devon Railway Company
in 1856, remaining in it until the line
was taken over by the London and
South-western Railway Company in
1862. Before this change took place
he was for some years in the traffic
branch from which he passed into the
audit office. Upon the consolidation
of the line with the London and
South-western service, Mr. Row
was transferred to the audit office


Waterloo Station, London, where he
remained for twelve months, at the
termination of which period he return-
ed to the traffic department as reliev-
ing station-master, a position he con-
tinued to fill until 1864. He then
emigrated with his brother to Queens-
land, and for a number of years
ensuing he engaged in pastoral pur-
suits. For some years, from 1866,
he was in the employ of the E. S.
and A. Pastoral Investment Co., on
Bowen Downs, Thompson River,
when that country was taken up by
Landsborough and the late Mr.
Nathaniel Buchanan. In 1870, how-
ever, in consequence of the severe
depression caused mainly by the
phenomenal fall in the price of wool,
when pastoral properties were being
abandoned in all directions, and sheep
being sold at 6d. per head, with
J . Hubert Newman . Sydney .
MR. WILLIAM ROOKE ROW.
run and all improvements given in,
he abandoned the bush and came to
Sydney. In that year he entered the
service of the New South Wales
Government railways, and was ap-
pointed to a position in the audit
office. Two years later he was ap-
pointed travelling inspector of station
accounts, which position he held until
1883. In that year the Government
decided to create a railway revenue
audit branch in the Auditor-General’s
Department, the charge of which was
conferred upon Mr. Row. The duties
of this position he continued to ad-
minister until 1897, when, upon the
demise of Mr. Robert Sheridan, he
was offered by the Board of Railway
Commissioners, of which the late
Mr. E. M. G. Eddy was chairman,
the position of Traffic Auditor for the
New South Wales Government rail-
ways and tramways, an office he
still continues to administer.
Mr. D. C SIMPSON, M. Inst.
C.E., Engineer - in - Charge, Metro-
politan Division, New South Wales
Government Railways, was born at
Kintore, Scotland, in 1851, and was
educated first at a private school,
and afterwards at the Aberdeen Uni-
versity. Here he attended for four
years the lectures on various sub-
jects comprising the arts curriculum.
From 1870 to 1873 he served a
pupilage with the city engineer of
the borough of Aberdeen, during
which service he gained an invaluable
experience in railway construction
and in water and sewerage works.
In 1873 he was appointed assistant
engineer to Mr. Easton Gibb, con-
tractor for the Dundee water-works
and various railway construction
works. In 1874 he was offered and
accepted the position of assistant
engineer to Messrs. Blyth & Cun-
ningham, Ms. Inst. C.E., engineers
for new works on the Caledonian
Railway. In 1875 he accepted an
engagement with the New Zealand
Public Works Department as an
engineer in that service. During the
ensuing six years he was engaged in
railway explorations, surveys and
construction work throughout New
Zealand, also in the construction
and erection of rolling stock and of
workshops. He also assisted Sir
Peter Scratchley in the defence
scheme for New Zealand. In 1881
he came to New South Wales and
joined the engineering staff of the
government railways, under the late
Mr. John Whitton, M. Inst. C.E.,
engineer-in-chief. His first work
of importance in New South Wales
was in connection with the survey of
the Sydney to Newcastle railway,
section Hawkesbury to Dora Creek.
vSubsequently he was appointed
district engineer from Albury to
Cootamundra, and as such rendered
considerable service in the construc-
tion of new works in that part of the
State. From thence he proceeded
to the western division and revised
and improved the location of the
Nyngan to Cobar line. In connec-
tion with the scheme for extending
the railway from Redfern to the
Circular Quay, Mr. Simpson laid
out and prepared estimates of cost
for two independent routes. In
September, 1889, he took charge of the
southern division of the New South
Wales railways for maintenance
under the commissioners. In Oc-
tober, 1890, he was promoted to the
charge of the metropolitan division,
which position he still administers.
In 1890 and 1891, in addition to the
ordinary maintenance of way work,
he was engaged in the heavy under-
taking of quadrupling the lines
between the metropolis and Flem-
ington, also in the duplication of
lines elsewhere. During the past
thirteen years, whilst administering
the important duties of his office,
Mr. Simpson has carried out import-
ant work in additions and recon-
structions to station buildings, in
water and sewerage works connected
with the department, in the construc-
tion of wharves and railway buildings,
J. Hubert Newman . Sydney.
MR. D. C. SIMPSON.
as well as several other important
undertakings which have contributed
to the more complete equipment of
the railway service in the metropolis
of New South Wales. Mr. Simpson
has also had experience in the prepa-
ration of engineering cases for the
law courts, and was principal Crown
witness in the now famous McSharry
case, which lasted twelve months in
the hearing, Mr. Simpson’s exami-
nation alone lasting thirty-five days,
eleven of which were devoted to
cross-examination. M r. Simpson’s
experience as a railway engineer
covers all the ground necessary —-
reconnaissance, location, construction
and maintenance. Mr. Simpson took
a lively interest in the formation of a


railvvay corps, which the late Mr.
Eddy, in conjunction with the mili-
tary authorities, tried to establish,
the objects of the corps being to have
a complete railway unit for use in
case of necessity, accustomed to deal
with special duties, such as working
of trains under military rule, dispens-
ing with the existing safer appliances,
the repairs to damaged track, bridges,
tunnels, &c., the entraining and de-
training of all arms of the service in
the shortest possible time. Mr.
: impson took senior command in
this corps, and with it the accom-
panying duties. Owing, however, to
want of intelligent comprehension of
the authorities the movement, after
two years’ drill, subsided, and to-day
the Defence Department are depend-
ent on civil transport. Mr. Simpson
is a member of the railway ambu-
lance corps committee and member
of council for the railway branch oi
the Public Service Association.
Mr. JOHN MURRAY,Estateand
Property Agent for the New South
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. J. MURRAY.
Wales Government Railways, was
born at Sydney in the year 1862,
and was educated at the Fort
Street Model and Sydney Grammar
Schools. Upon finishing his edu-
cation he entered the Surveyor-
General’s office, Lands Department,
as cadet draughtsman. He gradu-
ated in the year 18C3 at the age of
twenty-one years to the profession
of licensed surveyor, after which he
established himself as a surveyor and
land agent in the Moree district,
where he remained for about five
years. He was then appointed to a
position in the Water Conservation
Branch, Mines Department, Sydney,
and in 1890 was transferred to the
Estate Branch of the Railway De-
partment as draughtsman. In the
year 1897 h e was promoted to the
position of estate and property agent
under the railway commissioners.
Altogether he has served fourteen
years in the Railway Department,
while his connection with the public
service of New South Wales exceeds
twenty-five years.
Mr. HENRY BRYANT HOWE,
M. I. Mech. E. London, General
Works Manager of the Railway
Workshops, Eveleigh, was born in
London, and came to Australia with
his parents while a child. He was
educated at a private school, and
after leaving school entered the
service of the Amalgamated Engin-
eering Company of Sydney, where
he remained for three years, and on
the dissolution of the company he
entered the service of Mr. Francis
Napier, with whom lie completed
his apprenticeship in practical engin-
eering (millwrighting and marine
work). After the completion of his
apprenticeship he was employed in
several firms, and was appointed as
engineer of Messrs. Wilkinson Bros.’
Liverpool Street saw-mills. Sub-
sequently he was connected with Mr.
E. D. Niccolle, principally in the
manufacture of ice-making machin-
ery, which was then in its infancy.
In October, 1864, he was appointed
to the railway service in the loco-
motive workshops at Redfern, and
in 1872 was appointed foreman of
the machine shop, later on being
promoted to the position of general
foreman of the whole shops. In
1883 he was appointed Assistant
Locomotive Engineer at the Tram-
way Shops, Randwick, in which
position he remained until 1889,
when he was removed to Eveleigh
as General Works Manager, which
position he now holds. In 1893
Mr. Howe was sent with two
other officers to America by the
railway commissioners, and ob-
tained a vast amount of information
in regard to railway construction,
electrical tramways, machinery and
rolling stock, and the most up-to-
date methods of conducting and
controlling repair work, which he em-
1 odied in a voluminous repcrt on his
leturn to Sydney. Mr. Howe is a
member of the Institute of Mechanical
Engineers, London, also of the Cen-
tral Railway Club of New York, and
the Engineering Association of New
South Wales, of the latter institution
he has been president on two occa-
sions. He has also been a prominent
Freemason for a number of years,
taking an active part in matters
connected with the craft, and at
present he holds the position of
Grand Master of Mark Masonry,
and first Grand Principal of the
Royal Arch Masonry, both of which
positions he has held for some time.
He is also an active worker in con-
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. H. B. HOME.
nection with the Railway Institute
and the Railway Ambulance Corps.
Mr. CHARLES ALFRED
NEALE, Chief Clerk of the Loco-
motive Department, New South
Wales Government Railways, was
born at Parramatta, New South
Wales, in September, 1851, and
in December, 1867, joined the head
office staff of the Railway Depart-
ment, as a junior clerk. In Sep-
tember, 1869, he was promoted to
the Railway Stores Department,
where lie continued until 1873, when
he was appointed clerk in the Audit
Office. In October, 1878, when the
Locomotive Department was first
made a separate branch, and the
Government brought out a locomo-
tive engineer from England to take


charge, Mr. Neale was appointed
First Clerk, which position he held
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. C. A. NEALE.
until June, 1887, when he was
appointed Chief Clerk.
Mr. GEORGE ROBERT COW-
DERY, A.M. Inst. C.E., Engineer
of Permanent Way Branch, Govern-
ment Tramways of New South
Wales, is a son of Mr. George Cow-
dery, who for ten years filled the
position of Engineer-in-Chief for
Existing Lines. He was born near
Campbelltown, in iB6O, and was
educated at several public schools,
and afterwards at the Sydney Gram-
mar School. In 1876 he entered the
locomotive shops at Redfern as a
cadet, and served at the mechanical
work two years. In 1879 he entered
the drawing office, under Mr. Mason,
Engineer for Existing Lines, where
he remained four years. He was
then sent to Bathurst to assist the
engineer in charge of that division,
continuing there three years. Dur-
ing the last twelve months of this
term of service Mr. Cowdery filled
the position of Acting-Divisional
Engineer in consequence of the pro-
motion of the officer in charge. In
1885 he was removed to Blacktown
and placed in charge, as Resident
engineer, of the duplication of the
railway line between Parramatta and
Penrith. Upon the completion of
this work he was appointed Acting-
Divisional Engineer, and was en-
trusted with the charge of several
divisions in succession, until he was
called to the head office in order to
prepare plans and estimates for the
quadrupling of the railway line be-
tween Redfern and Homebush. Up-
on the appointment of three com-
missioners to take control of the
railways of New South Wales the
late Mr. Eddy, in 1899, selected Mr.
Cowdery for his present position.
He has sole charge of the permanent
way and buildings, Tramway Depart-
ment. Mr. Cowdery is an associate
member of the Institute of Civil
J . Hubert Newman . Sydney.
MR. G. R. COWDERY.
Engineers, London. He is also a
member of the Royal Society of New
South Wales.
Mr. WILLIAM ELSTON,
Superintendent of the Carriage and
Waggon Construction Shops of the
New South Wales Government
Railways, is a native of Bristol,
England, and was educated at one
of the primary schools of his native
city. When fourteen years of age
he was apprenticed for seven years
to the trade of carriage-building at
one of the leading firms of coach-
builders in Bristol. Upon comple-
tion of apprenticeship he proceeded
to London, and was employed as
carriage-builder. Leaving London,
he journeyed to America, where he
was employed in one of the American
railways (Long Island railway). He
returned to Bristol and commenced
business as coach-builder with a
partner; afterwards obtained an
appointment in service of the Bristol
Waggon Company, then holding
heavy contracts for the supply of
coaches for railways in Spain and
in China. Obtaining a better offer,
he transferred his service to a large
firm at Gloucester, who were then
constructing a large number of up-
to-date railway carriages for several
British railways. After two years
of service here, he entered the shops
of the Great Northern Railway
Company at Doncaster, where he
remained until he was induced to
accept an appointment in the Ash-
bury Railway Car and Waggon
Works at Manchester. He subse-
quently obtained a good appoint-
ment with the Midland Railway
Company, and was with that cor-
poration at the opening of their new
workshops at Derby. Here he
remained over eleven years, the last
four-and-a-half of which he occupied
the position of foreman of the
carriage shop. In 1888 Mr. Elston
was induced to proceed to Victoria,
where he obtained an appointment
with the Metropolitan Tramway
Company, Melbourne. For a few
months subsequently he was em-
ployed at carriage-building at Ben-
digo, leaving there in 1889 to take
J. Hubert Newman . Sydney .
MR. W. ELSTON.
up his present position. Mr Elston
altogether has had over thirty years’
experience in the work of railway
carriage and waggon construction,
consequently he is eminently fitted
for the position he holds. He has
passed through some of the largest
and best appointed shops in the old
land, and is familiar with the work
done and methods observed in
similar establishments in other Aus-
tralian States. The New South


Wales railway carriage accommo-
dation is universally acknowledged
to be superior to that of any other
State of the Commonwealth. It is
due to the management to say that
this result has been achieved be :ause
of the fact that the departmental
shops are capable of turning out
carriages and cars equal to any that
may be produced in Europe or
America.
Mr. JAMES FRASER, Minsk
C.E , Engineer-in-Chief of Existing
Lines, New South Wales Govern-
ment Railways, was born at Braid-
wood, New South Wales, in 1861.
He received the main portion of his
education at the Sydney Grammar
School, subsequently studying pri-
vately surveying and engineering.
In 1878 he joined the railway service
as a junior draughtsman, under the
jurisdiction of the late Mr. John
Whitton, engineer-in-chief. In 1880
he went out on surveying work,
at which he remained for the en-
suing eighteen months. In ISB2
he was promoted to the position of
assistant engineer in railway con-
struction, in which position he con-
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. J. FRASER.
tinued until 1888. Early in the
following year he was temporarily
transferred to the service of the
railway commissioners as engineer
in charge of the duplication works
then in progress between Granville
and Picton. He was engaged in
this work until the following year,
when he accepted a permanent posi-
tion under the commissioners as
divisional engineer in charge of the
southern division, which comprised
eight hundred miles of permanent
way. This necessitated his removal
from Sydney and his location at
Goulburn. Early in 1892 he re-
ceived the appointment of assistant
engineer-in-chief for existing lines,
which position he held until 1903.
During his occupancy of the fore-
going office he twice acted tem-
porarily for periods of six months
as engineer-in-chief, and when in
that year the position became
vacant Mr. Fraser was permanently
appointed to the office.
Hunter Street, from George Street, in 1853.


Law and the Law Courts.
r IHERE are some who look upon the administration
of justice as quite an ordinary affair, and have
little hesitation in entering upon it lightly, failing
to recognise that, in the well-being of the community, it
is a matter of the highest importance. It is not a mere
abstract inquiry whether this person or that person
be guilty of this or that offence and has incurred a
certain penalty ; nor is the administration of laws
simply for the purpose of ascertaining the rights and
wrongs of our neighbours. Jurisprudence is of a much
higher character and finds its origin in a much higher
source. Human institutions have little authority if
they are not founded on divine laws ; and our juris-
prudence would fail of its influence and office if it were
based on human law. Accordingly, it may be affirmed
that in the criminal law of our country there is
nothing that is not based on divine law. The
same rule applies in civil matters. If a man does
wrong to his neighbour, if he prevents the due course
of justice, if he molests the widow, or oppresses the
fatherless he offends against the law both of God and
of man. And the law overtakes him sooner or later,
and metes out punishment to him according to his
deserts. Unfortunately, in the early days of the
colony these principles were not always kept in view ;
and much was done by those responsible for the due
government of New South Wales which neither har-
monised with the laws of God nor was in concord with
the spirit of the fair body of English jurisprudence.
f< The law, sir ! ” exclaimed irascible Governor Bligh
—when Judge Advocate Atkins pointed out to him
that his intention to punish D’Arcy Wentworth twice
for the one offence was contrary to the law—' ‘ D
the law ; my will is the law, and woe unto the man
that dares disobey it.”
The first Act of Parliament relating to the colony
of New South Wales was one of the earliest statutes
—27 George 111., cap 2—passed in 1787, and it con-
tained in three clauses the scheme for the new order
of transportation empowered under 24 George 111.,
ca p 20 —‘‘ to appoint places within or out of his
Majesty’s dominions to which felons could be con-
veyed or transported,” and the constitution provided
for the colony selected as a penal settlement. After
reciting the provisions of 24 George 111., cap 56, it
enacted that “ Whereas his Majesty by two several
orders bearing date respectively on December 6th,
1786, hath judged fit, by and with the advice of his
Privy Council, to declare and appoint the place to
which certain offenders named in two lists to the said
several Orders-in-Council annexed should be trans-
ported for the term or terms in their said several sen-
tences, mentioned to be the eastern coast of New South
Wales, or some one or other of the islands adjacent,
and whereas Sir James Eyre, Knight, and Sir Beaumont
Hotham, Knight, two of the barons of his Majesty’s
Court of Exchequer, of the Degree of the Coiffe, did,
December 30th, 1786, order that the said several
offenders in the said two lists of the said several Orders-
in-Council annexed should be transported to the place
and for the term and terms aforesaid with authority
to proceed in a more summary way than is used within
this realm according to the known and established laws
thereof. Be it therefore enacted that it shall be lawful
for his Majesty by his commission under the great
seal to authorise the Governor, or in his absence the
Lieutenant-Governor, to convene from time to time,
as occasion may require, a court of criminal jurisdiction
for the trial and punishment of all such outrages and
misbehaviours as, if committed within this realm,
would be deemed and taken according to the laws of
this realm, to be treason or misprison thereof, felony
or misdemeanour.” The Court was to be a Court of
Record, and to consist of the Judge Advocate and
such six officers of the sea and land service as the
Governor, by precept issued under his hand and seal,
required to assemble. Clause 2 enacted ‘' That the
Provost Marshal 'or other officer to be appointed for
that purpose by such Governor shall cause the execu-
tion of such judgment (‘ of death if the offence be capi-
tal or of such corporal punishment not extending to
capital punishment, as to the said Court shall seem
meet ’) according to the warrant under hand or seal,
and not otherwise ; provided always that execution
shall not be had or done upon any capital convict or
convicts unless five persons present in such Court
shall concur, until the proceedings shall have been
transmitted to his Majesty and by him approved.”
Captain Phillip’s first commission as Governor
was dated October 12th, 1786, about two months
prior to the naming of New South Wales by an order
as a place to which convicts might be sent, and it
made him ‘ ‘ Captain-General and Governor-in-Chief in
and over our territory called New South Wales, extend-
ing from the northern cape or extremity of the coast,
called Cape York, to the southern extremity or South
Cape (intended lor the southern extremity of Van
Diemen’s Land, which, until the discovery of Bass
Straits, was supposed by Captain Cook and other
navigators to form part of New Holland), and of all
the country inland, westward as far as the 135th degree
of east longitude, including all the islands in the Pacific
Ocean ; and of all towns, garrisons, castles, forts, and
all other fortifications or other military works which
may be hereafter erected upon the said territory or
any of the said islands.” Another commission,
giving him wider power was issued April 2nd, 1787.
Under this he was empowered to pardon malefactors
sentenced to death by the criminal court —a pre-
rogative not extended to any other colony at this time ;
to execute martial law in time of invasion, or at other
times when by law it was justified ; to punish mutiny
on ships-of-war ; to grant land ; to raise money by
warrant ; to choose his Court of Judicature and to


vary its constitution so long as its members were se-
lected from the sea or land forces. In short, as author-
ity was given the Governor of New South Wales ‘ ‘ to
proceed in a more summary manner than is used within
this realm, according to the knowtr and established
laws thereof,” it may be said that neither limitation
nor parallel there was to Captain Phillip’s powers.
He was the legislature with magistrates appointed by
himself to administer his orders.
The letters patent, dated April 2, 1787. empowered
the Court of Criminal Jurisdiction ‘‘to inquire of,
hear, determine and punish all treason, misprisons,
murders, felonies, forgeries, perjuries, trespasses and
other crimes or offences whatsoever that might be
committed in the colony.” The mode of proceeding
was this : —The charge against an offender was reduced
was closed the Court was cleared, and the members
considered their verdict, which was delivered in public.
Mr. Judge Advocate Wylde used to retire with the
members of the Court, after the evidence in each case
was concluded, to deliberate upon the verdict in an
adjoining room. This practice was continued until
1820, when the Judge Advocate, on the suggestion of
Mr. Commissioner Bigge, charged the members of the
Court in the presence of the prisoner and the public.
If a prisoner was found guilty, and the offence was
capital, the Court pronounced judgment of death in
like manner as if the prisoner had been convicted by
a jury in England, or awarded such corporal punish-
ment as the major part of the Court deemed meet ;
and in cases not capital the Court adjudged such cor-
poral punishment as the majority of the members
Crown Law Offices.
to writing and exhibited by the Judge. It was simply
a plain statement of the offence, without any technical
phrasing, there being no lawyers in the colony. Each
of the members of the Court wore full military dress
and was sworn in by the Judge Advocate who presided,
to ‘‘ make true deliverance between his Majesty the
King and the prisoner brought before them, and to
give true judgment according to the evidence.” The
Judge Advocate regulated the proceedings, and was
at the same time a judge and a juryman, having a vote
in the verdict. The prosecution was left to the person
making the charge, and the prisoner similarly con-
ducted his own defence. Witnesses were examined
upon oath, and, according to the opinion of the ma-
jority of the Court, the prisoner or defendant was
adjudged to be guilty or not guilty. When the case
determined upon. There was no authority given to
either imprison or inflict any fine—for obvious reasons.
The Court of Criminal Jurisdiction was practically
a court-martial, and, although it was supposed to ad-
minister justice ” according to laws of England,” it
did so after a strictly military fashion.
No power was given under 27 George 111., c. 2, or
any supplementary statute at the outset to establish
any form of civil jurisdiction in New South Wales,
although a declaration was made in the first commis-
sion that was granted under the Privy Seal in April 2,
1787, of the necessity of establishing a colony and
civil government ; and the form of civil jurisdiction
that was traced and established in that commission
was as great a departure from the law and usages of
the realm of England as that of the criminal judica


tion. “ Wee, taking the same into our Royal con-
sideration, and being desirous that justice should be
administered to all our subjects, have of our especial
grace, certain knowledge and meer motion thought fit
to grant, ordain, direct and appoint, and by these
presents do for us, our heirs and successors, will, grant,
ordain, direct and appoint that there shall be within
the place aforesaid a Court to be called the Court of
Civil Jurisdiction. And that such Court shall consist
of the Judge Advocate for the time being, together
with two fit and proper persons inhabiting the said
place, to be appointed from time to time by our Gover-
nor, or, in case of death or absence, by our Lieutenant-
Governor for the time being, or any two of them
(whereof the Judge Advocate to be one), to which
Court Wee do hereby give full power and authority
to hold plea of and to hear and determine in a sum-
mary way all pleas concerning lands, houses, tenements
and hereditaments, and all manner of interests therein,
and all pleas of debt, account or other contracts, tres-
passes, and all manner of other personal pleas whatso-
ever.” Thus the letters patent in the legal phrasology
and orthography of the times. The authority, therefore,
under which the civil jurisdiction of New South Wales
and the dependencies at first carried on was derived
solely from the commissions that were issued under
the King’s letters patent. The Judge Advocate fol-
lowed the following process Upon receiving the
plaintiff’s complaint in writing he issued his warrant,
under hand and seal, to the Provost Marshal, furnish-
ing particulars of the complaint, and ordering him to
summon the defendant to the Court. When the claim
was more than £lO the officer was instructed to bring
defendant into Court or obtain bail for his appearance ;
security from the latter being further required to
meet any judgment awarded against him. The mem-
bers of the Court being sworn in “to well and truly
try the several issues brought before them and give
true judgment according to the evidence,” the evi-
dence of the witnesses on both sides was taken down
and signed, and the Court then delivered judgment,
“ according to justice and right.” When the amount
was not obtained by distress defendant could be
imprisoned until the debt and costs were satisfied ;
but on his declaring on oath that he was unable to
support himself in gaol, plaintiff had to pay for his
maintenance, or the debtor would be discharged after
a week in gaol, purged of his liability. From the
decisions of the Civil Court anyone feeling aggrieved
had the power to appeal to the Governor or to the
King-in-Council when the amount exceeded £3OO.
This Court had likewise power to grant probates of
wills and administration of personal estates acquired
in the country.
The Governor, Lieutenant-Governor and Judge
Advocate were constituted Justices of the Peace, and
the Governor was empowered to make such and other
persons Justices of the Peace as he might think proper.
Augustus Alt, Surveyor-General, was the first sworn
into the office to sit with the Judge Advocate and
determine on and punish such cases as were of too
little importance to bring before a Criminal Court.
On May 5, 1787, letters patent were issued con-
stituting the Vice-Admiralty Court for the trial of
offences committed upon the high seas. The following
were appointed Commissioners of the Court : The
Governor, the Lieutenant-Governor the Commissary of
Stores (Andrew Miller), the Surveyor-General of Lands
(Augustus Alt) for the time being; Captain John
Hunter, of the “ Sirius,” First Lieutenant William
Bradley, Second Lieutenant P. G. King, Third Lieu-
tenant G. W. Maxwell ; H. L. Ball, Lieutenant and
Commander of the ” Supply,” and “ all other captains
and commanders of his Majesty’s ships who are and
shall be within the Admiralty jurisdiction of New
South Wales.” Each of the Commissioners was em-
powered to form a Court and assemble “ any other
persons on shipboard or upon land to make up the
number of seven, provided that no merchants but such
as are known merchants, factors or planters, or such as
are captains, lieutenants or warrant officers in any of
our ships-of-war, or captains, masters or mates of some
English ship shall be capable of being so called, sitting
and acting on the said Court.” The Vice-Admiralty
Court was presided over by the Judge Advocate, with
Commissary A. Miller as registrar. Upon his death in
1792 Governor Phillip appointed Richard Atkins to
perform his duties. This Court had authority to take
cognisance of piracy, robbery or felony of captains’
salvages, and other matters of dispute respecting pro-
perty as arose on the high seas But the criminal side
of the Court was removed by Governor Phillip to the
Court of Criminal Jurisdiction on the latter being
instituted. The presiding Judge’s pay was set down
on the first year’s estimates as £lB2 10s., the same as
that of the chaplain and surgeon, and, in addition, he
received a moiety of the fees of his office.
These were the Courts for the administration of
justice over which the Governor of the colony for the
time being had unlimited control —powers which no
servant of the Crown had been invested with before.
If the legal maxim that a man who is his own lawyer
has a fool for his client be sound, then it was surely
the very height of foolishness to send Governor Phillip
to administer the laws of England without professional
aid in an infant settlement, under circumstances that
tainted the very atmosphere with the worst descrip-
tion of crimes. Not a single individual learned in the
law ’ ’ accompanied the first fleet. David Collins, who
sailed with Governor Phillip as Judge x\dvocate was
a half-pay captain of marines, who had seen some
service with his regiment at Bunker’s Hill, and on
board the ” Courageous,” under Lord Howe, at the
relief of Gibraltar. Judicial experience to assist him
in his new career he had none ; never having acted as
Judge Advocate on English military tribunals, al-
though it may safely be assumed he had attended
many court martials aboard ships of war during his
active service in the navy. The office being a civil
one, to select such a man to discharge it can only be
ascribed to the fact that the prevailing idea in the
mind of Lord Sydney, Secretary of State administering
the affairs of the colonies, was to have the law adminis-
tered in accordance with military rules and practices.
This is emphasised by the appointment under Act of
Parliament of a Provost-Marshal to execute the judg-
ments of the Criminal Court and to act as Sheriff of
Cumberland County. The title was distinctly a


military one, hitherto unknown in civil courts, and the
duties of the office in the army were practically those
of the head of a police department ; although under
the Articles of War, prior to the passing of the Army
Act, Provost Marshals had authority to punish, in
accordance with the orders of the Commander-in-chief,
all whom they actually detected in crime. The person
originally appointed Provost-Marshal evidently made
up his mind to remain in England, as he dropped out
of official view some considerable time before the
first fleet sailed. Henry Brewer, a midshipman of
the “ Sirius,” was selected by Governor Phillip on the
voyage out to fill the vacancy, which notwithstanding
youth and inexperience, it is recorded he did very
successfully. Scarcely a fortnight elapsed from the
landing of the convicts at Sydney Cove when the reign
of the lash and the halter began. A criminal court was
assembled as early as February nth, 1788, for the
trial of prisoners. One, for an assault, was sentenced
to receive 150 lashes ; the next, for robbing another
convict of a small quantity of biscuit, was ordered to
be confined for a week on bread and water upon a
small island just outside the entrance of the cove.
The island was immediately christened “ Pinchgut,”
a name which it has since retained, although its origin
was long ago forgotten. A third prisoner, for stealing
a plank, was sentenced to receive fifty lashes, but he
obtained the Governor’s pardon. Before the end of
the month the Court had to sit again to investigate a
still greater offence —that of plotting to rob the pro-
vision store. A wanton offence, too, seeing at this
time officer, soldier and convict were provisioned from
the stores alike. The Governor, in reporting the pro-
ceedings, indicated that as a deterrent to crime he had
a stronger belief in exile—perhaps marooning would
be a more correct term—than either hanging or flog-
ging. “ Your lordship,” he wrote, ‘‘will not be
surprised that I have been under the necessity of
assembling a criminal court. Six men were condemned
to death ; one, who was the head of the gang, was
executed the same day ; the others I reprieved. They
are to be exiled from the settlement ; and when the
season permits I intend they shall be landed near the
South Cape, where, by their forming connections with
the natives, some benefit may accrue to the public.
These men had frequently robbed the stores and the
other convicts. The one who suffered and two others
were condemned for robbing the store of provisions
the very day they received a week’s provisions, and at
which time their allowance, as settled by the Navy
Board, was the same as the soldiers, spirits excepted ;
the others for robbing a tent and for stealing pro-
visions from other convicts.” On the following day
the Governor pardoned another criminal, charged with
the same offence, on condition of his becoming public
executioner. Naturally for some time there was
little occasion to call into existence the Civil Court ;
and when sittings commenced to be regularly held the
causes at the outset were petty. The first action of
any note in the colony was heard in 1795. A hog
belonging to a Mr. Bolton having been shot by some
soldiers, an altercation took place and one of the mili-
tary assaulted Bolton with his loaded musket, as
alleged by two officers of the corps. Damages were
laid at and the hearing occupied seven days, a
verdict being given for twenty shillings. An appeal
was made to Governor Hunter, but he upheld the
verdict. The fees of the Court during the earlier
years of its existence were determined by the Judge
Advocate.
The evils arising from this martial form of govern-
ment established soon became manifest. Lieutenant-
Governor Ross, commanding the regiment of marines
was not on amicable terms with the majority of his
officers, and their quarrelling threatened a social col-
lapse. In March, 1788, a court-martial tried one
soldier for striking another and the Commandant put
Captain Tench, the president, and other officers form-
ing the Court under arrest for passing what he con-
sidered a sentence subversive of all military discipline.
The Governor, recognising the impracticability of
holding a general court-martial, with five officers under
arrest, and one remaining ‘‘ for duty,” ordered the
officers to return to their duty. The following October
Ross again applied for a general court-martial to sit
on another officer for “ neglect of duty, contempt and
disrespect ’ ’ to his commandant, when a still greater
difficulty presented itself. The “ thirteen senior of-
ficers, when assembled, declared that they could not
sit as members of a general court-martial under that
warrant, being as a part of his Majesty’s marine forces
answerable only to the authority of the Commissioners
for executing the office of Lord High Admiral of Great
Britain.” They declined to recognise the authority
of an Act of Parliament made for the army. The
Judge Advocate supported his brother officers, and for
the time being it seemed as if no court-martial could
be held in the colony. There remained nothing but
the Judge Advocate to hold a court of inquiry and
take evidence from both sides for transmission to
England, when the difficulty was solved by Ross with-
drawing his application for the court-martial. Six
months afterwards (April, 1789) the trouble arose again
in a still more aggravated form. The corps of marines
furnished the majority of members of the criminal court,
a duty unpopular with most of the officers ; and the
dependence of the Governor on them was availed of
to coerce him. Captain Campbell, a friend of the
Commandant’s, refused to sit, and Ross hinted to him
that other officers could refuse to perform “ this op-
pressive duty,” as he was aware of no Articles of War
to compel them. The Governor appointed a court of
inquiry, but the officers constituting it ‘ ‘ did not think
themselves competent to give an opinion on a private
dispute, which appeared to them to involve in itself
a point of law.” Then he referred the matter to the
Secretary of State, a majority of the officers agreeing
meanwhile to continue their judicial functions ; and,
after a protracted delay, the Secretary of State wrote
“ that the law officers are of opinion that military
officers refusing to perform the duties of members of
the criminal court when duly summoned for that will
be guilty of misdemeanour in refusing to do so.’ ’ This
decision proved effectual. No further trouble arose
with the officers of marines in respect to their judicial
duties.
But with the departure of Governor Phillip the
evils engendered by military government were aggra


vated through the arbitrary action of Major Grose,
Commandant of the New South Wales Corps, upon
whom, under his commission as Lieutenant-Governor,
the government of the colony devolved. Within a
month of his assuming control he appointed resident
military magistrates in the outlying settlements of
Parramatta and Toongabbie ; and shortly after fol-
lowed this policy up by ordering that “ all inquiries
are in future to be dispensed with until the Lieutenant
Governor has given directions on the subject.” The
effects of this incorporation of
“ Power into will, will into appetite ”
manifested itself in the degeneration of all shades of
the community, and morality proved the exception
rather than the rule Fifteen months later a mutiny
amongst the soldiers occurred at the penal settlement
of Norfolk Island, where the worst criminal offenders
were stationed, under the control of Lieutenant-Gover-
nor P. G. King, who had taken over charge from Major
Ross. A convict under provocation in the theatre
had struck a soldier, and on the arrest of both parties
the other soldiers refused to obey their commanding
officer. The magistrates found the convict guilty,
but their sentence was not confirmed by King, as the
evidence for the prosecution showed that the turbulent
behaviour of the soldiers had caused the affray. This
gave Acting Governor Grose the opportunity he de-
sired, and upon February 28, 1794. he despatched
Lieutenant Townson to assume control over the island,
at the same time issuing an order that ” officers, non-
commissioned officers and soldiers are of their own
authority to confine any convicts who misbehave ;
resistance will be severely punished ; soldiers mis-
behaving will be brought to a court-martial ; . . . there
is no necessity for the taking a soldier before a justice
of the peace.” This reign of military despotism
endured until January, 1795, when the Duke of Port-
land, who for a short while acted as Secretary of State,
in an order reviewing the whole of Grose’s unconsti-
tutional actions, compelled a return to the principle
of English legislation, that civil magistrates in times
of peace should alone be entrusted with the punish-
ment of crime—a principle endorsed by Captain Hunter
immediately after his arrival as Governor of New
South Wales, in September, 1795. Before, however,
civil law had been revived at Norfolk Island, Act 45,
George 111., c. 34, was passed, establishing by letters
patent a Court of Criminal Jurisdiction as a Court of
Record, and doing away with the practice hitherto
prevailing on the island of sending all person? charged
with serious offences for trial before the Criminal
Court in Sydney. There were as yet neither barristers
nor attorneys in the dependency, and King, writing
lo the home authorities on his mode of distributing
justice, told them that he and the magistrates ordered
“ such pains and penalties as are equitable, guided by
Burns’ ‘ Justice ’ and Blackstone’s ‘ Commentaries,
the only law books we have to guide us.”
Judge Advocate Collins held his appointment until
1796, pronouncing every sentence of death or flogging
imposed by the Criminal Court during the first eight
years of its existence. He then returned to England,
and the registrar of his Court, Richard Atkins, pre-
viously a military officer, was delegated to fill his place,
pending his Majesty’s pleasure But the character he
bore was not conducive to an impartial discharge of
judicial functions. Governor Bligh, by no means an
unfriendly critic, at a later stage described him to the
Secretary of State as ” accustomed to inebriety, the
ridicule of the community, pronouncing sentence of
death in moments of intoxication, of weak determina-
tion, and floating and infirm opinions, his knowledge
of the law insignificant, subject to private inclinations,
and so constituted that confidential causes of the
Crown, where due secrecy was required, were not to be
entrusted to him.” So his Majesty’s advisers, still
wedded to their policy of military administration, sent
out another officer to administer the law in the Judge
Advocate’s Courts ; —Mr. Richard Dore, who arrived in
the colony in May, 1798. Besides officiating in the
courts of civil and criminal jurisdiction, he also sat
in the Court of Petty Sessions, and his decisions there
are to be found in a book of records preserved in the
Supreme Court library. Some of these would, no
doubt, have been considered erratic, even in times
when there existed a gross distortion of views respect-
ing the moral nature of offences ; when the perpe-
trator of a criminal assault on a child of eight years
was recommended to the Governor’s mercy, after
sentence of death had been pronounced, and pardoned
“on condition of his residing the term of his natural
life at Norfolk Island,” while the heaviest penalties
were unsparingly inflicted on offenders who helped
themselves to their neighbour’s vegetables or ran off
with the contents of the public store. In the early
days compulsory residence at Norfolk Island was rather
beneficial than otherwise owing to the fact that there
was a better supply of provisions there than could be
obtained by the convicts in Sydney. How the scales
of Justice were balanced in those troublous times can
be gleaned from the following cases : —On October 24,
1798, a convict was charged before Dore and another
magistrate " on a violent suspicion of feloniously and
privately stealing from his Majesty’s stores in Sydney
a cake of soap, and secreting it about his person in
order to take the same away.” The soap was produced,
and proved to be the same quality as that belonging
to the stores ; but as the act and fact of stealing
was not sufficiently established in law, the said
was “ sentenced to receive fifty lashes and
to be discharged, ‘ ’ in order to return to his duty
as a servant of the Government. Two women
appeared before the same Court; the one, charged
with cruelly beating the other with a glass bottle
and -cutting her head, pleading a provocation in
mitigation, the magistrates recommended the parties
to withdraw and accommodate the matter between
themselves. Dore, sitting on the bench with Mr.
William Balmain, the principal surgeon, on Sep-
tember 15th, 1798, had a prisoner brought up without
any specific charge. The gaoler was peremptorily
ordered “not on any account whatever in future to
receive or detain any prisoner in custody without some
particular charge or by virtue of a magistrate’s war-
rant.” Another man was prosecuted for embezzling
some stone, the property of the Government ; but, “ as
there seems something of rancour and malice in the
accusation,” the prisoner was ordered to work out an


equal quantity of stone as that carried away- In
dealing with civil litigants Dore displayed a practical
side one would hardly have suspected. From the
outset he incessantly urged parties appearing before
him to set down in concise terms all contracts and
agreements they entered into, getting them properly
attested and signed ; but, needless to say, this sound
advice was far more frequently neglected than attended
to. Perhaps the most extraordinary view Dore took
of his functions as Judge Advocate was when (1798)
he issued a pamphlet designated ‘ ‘ General Privy
Search,’' in which he stated that he deemed it com-
patible with his official situation ” to issue a general
warrant to empower the constables to make search in
all public-houses and in all suspected haunts for people
who may be tippling therein during the hours appro-
for a guide to the Governors, and to prevent frequency
of appeals that a jurist be appointed, either as Judge
Advocate or Chief Justice who can give the Governor
(who cannot suppose to be a lawyer) that conclusive
legal information which is so requisite, and who is able
to counteract the chicane and litigious conduct of a
few transported practisers, who have practised suffi-
cient of the laws of England to know the chicanery and
evil purposes a bad man can turn them to.’’ The
convict-attorneys, referred to here, were George
Crossley, a notorious scoundrel, twice condemned to
the pillory for perjury and upon his third offence trans-
ported to New South Wales, and Michael Robinson,
equally steeped in nefarious habits ; neither of whom,
conditionally emancipated, was allowed to appear in
the courts for clients. There was still neither Roll of
Supreme Court.
priated for Divine service, or in any other respect
breaking the Sabbath.” To check the immorality in
which the community was steeped owing to general
trafficking in spirits, Governor Hunter had issued an
order compelling attendance at Divine service, and it
was with the view of supporting this that the
“ General Privy Search ‘ ’ was published.
Dore died in 1800, and Atkins again applied to be
restored to the duties of the vacant position. He was
temporarily appointed, “ having heretofore acted,”
but at the same time Governor King urgently repre-
sented to the Secretary of State it was essential that
the Judge Advocate should be a lawyer. “ I feel it
indispensable,” he wrote to Lord Hobart in 1804,
the settlements in Van Diemen’s Land being estab-
lished, “ as well for the benefit of the inhabitants as
Attorneys nor Bar in the colony, although Atkins had
obtained the appointment of Robinson as his clerk.
Robinson remained in that capacity until he was
convicted before King in the Appeal Court of “wilful and
corrupt perjury, the perjury evidently intended to
mislead the Governor’s decision,” and sentenced to
seven years’ transportation to Norfolk Island with
hard labour. At the urgent request of Atkins this
sentence was deferred on the grounds that he could
not do without professional assistance.
In August, 1803, King forwarded to Lord Hobart
what he termed a “ Separate Judge’s Letter,” forcibly
reiterating his demand for a remodelling of the Court
of Judicature. The Civil Court was supposed to be
composed of the Judge Advocate and two persons
chosen by lot from the officers and respectable free


men. In practice it consisted of the Judge Advocate,
a military officer, and the naval officer, or a civilian.
King pointed out that ‘ ‘ however a sense of equity may
be implanted in every man’s breast, there is verjr little
probability of a soldier, sailor or surgeon having ever
made the law so much their study as to be equal to
judge entirely for themselves in giving a verdict without
the advice of the Judge Advocate. This would be
attended with no great evil if the Judge Advocate had
a knowledge of the law, and it had made a part of his
education, which would give greater confidence to the
parties, the members and the Government in cases of
appeal. . . . Either as a soldier or sailor (I speak for
myself) the Governor cannot be supposed to have
made the law his study, and must consequently need
that information and advice which can only be given
by a person who has made that profession some part
of his study, and has no occasion to tumble over
volume after volume (and perhaps in doubt at last)
for what ought to require but little examination.’ ’
It was also urged that the Criminal Court needed
revision. King held with tenacity to the opinion
‘ ‘ that to propose a promiscuous, or, indeed, a re-
stricted selection of jurymen from among the present
inhabitants, exclusive of officers, does not appear at
all advisable, although I have no doubt that in
twenty or thirty years that extension of English
jurisprudence must be necessarily carried out this far.
At present the Criminal Court consists of the Judge
Advocate and six officers of his Majesty’s sea or land
forces, who act both as judge and jury, most certainly
the wisest mode for administering justice in the very
infant state of the colony. But as it has increased
in numbers, and jarring interests have (as in every
other part of the world) shown the necessity of these
trials being composed of different orders. I humbly
presume it would be advisable, instead of the Judge
Advocate and six officers of his Majesty’s land and
sea forces, to introduce into the patent the Judge
Advocate and six members, to be composed from
among the officers of his Majesty’s sea and land
forces, officers of the civil department, or respectable
merchants, or other inhabitants who came to the
colony free. As our Criminal Courts that are to
decide on the life of his Majesty’s subjects are at
present composed entirely of one description of
persons, it certainly will be more satisfactory to the
inhabitants, and the colony at large, to see every
advance towards trial by jury. The arrangement
I have the honour to propose would be gratefully
received, and I humbly conceive that the knowledge
and abilities of a professional man will be thought as
necessary for the president of the Criminal Court,
which has to decide on the life of the subject, as for
the same person who in the Civil Court has to decide
on his property-” By way of illustrating the neces-
sity for reform the Governor mentioned a case, recenf ly
heard, in which an assistant surgeon applied for a
court-martial on Principal Surgeon Jamieson for
assault. The application was refused, King deciding
that the action must be brought in the ordinary
Court as an offence against the law. Complainant
then proceeded in the Criminal Court, where his own
witnesses proved that defendant had acted in self-
defence and that the prosecutor was the aggressor.
On this the Court acquitted defendant, but, without
assigning any reason, compelled him to find securities
to keep the peace for three years, or go to gaol. ‘ ‘ So
extraordinary a sentence,” King pointed out, ” being
attached to a committal where the accused ought to
have been the prosecutor, would have been sufficient
grounds for me to extend the powers delegated to me
by exonerating Mr. Jamieson, which I did not choose
to do. But it has operated with me as a very suffi-
cient reason for thus respectfully suggesting the neces-
sity of a professional man being placed here as Judge
Advocate, and the members of the Court being com-
posed of other descriptions than the military officers,
I most humbly submit the whole matter to your
Lordship’s consideration as being much connected
with the prosperity of his Majesty’s subjects in this
territory, which they as well as myself are well con-
vinced your Majesty has much at heart.” The ap-
peal fell upon deaf ears, and neither Lord Hobart
nor Lords Camden a;nd Castlereagh, who in turn
succeeded him as Secretary of State, could see that
legal reform was a pressing necessity which could not
be much longer delayed. And so it proved. Early
events brought the Secretary of State to action.
Bligh, the Governor of New South Wales
appointed after King, brought himself, through his
uncontrollable temper, into incessant conflict with the
military, the magistracy, leading merchants, and, in
fact, everyone who ventured to offer the slightest
opposition to his will. Amongst those to incur his
special enmity was Captain Macarthur, an ex-officer
of the New South Wales Corps, engaged in sheep-
breeding and mercantile pursuits, for no other reason
than that in several minor disputes Macarthur had
successfully held his ground. At the instigation of the
felon-attorney Crossley, Bligh ordered Macarthur to be
prosecuted for a breach of the port regulations in
‘ ‘ having deprived the seamen of the ‘ Parramatta
—of which Macarthur was part owner —“ of their
usual allowance of provisions, and then compelled them
to leave their ship.” On December 17, 1807, Macarthur
was committed by Judge Advocate Atkins —now a
mere tool of Bligh and Crossley’s —and a bench of
magistrates, to the Criminal Court, to be tried for
“high misdemeanours.” A month later (January
25, 1808) the Criminal Court assembled, composed of
Macarthur’s brother officers, with Atkins as Judge
Advocate. Macarthur objected to Atkins being sworn,
declaring he had thrice applied for a copy of the
indictment, and for the Governor ” to appoint some
disinterested person to preside at the trial.'' The
reply received from Bligh was “ that the law must
take its course, as he does not feel justified to use any
interference with the executive power.” “ By
which,” added Macarthur to the Court, “ I suppose
is meant the judicial authority, and I humbly con-
ceive his Excellency’s power must be the executive.”
Macarthur therefore appealed to the members of the
Court, “ under an entire confidence that what I can
prove to be my right, you, as men of honour, will
grant me.” He then read his protest against Atkins
sitting as judge, on several grounds ; —because “ there
was a suit between them to be submitted to his


Majesty’s ministers ; because Atkins cherished a
rancorous inveteracy against him, displayed in the
propagation of malignant falsehoods ; because Crossly
and Atkins had conspired to deprive him of liberty,
property, honour and life, of which conspiracy he
produced proof in the writing of Crossley ; —“ here it is,
gentlemen, it was dropped from the pocket of Crossley
and brought to me ’ ’ ; because by convicting Mac-
arthur Atkins would escape an action for false im-
prisonment ; and because in declaring the bench of
magistrates had the power to punish Macarthur by fine
and imprisonment, Atkins had arrived at a foreign
conclusion.’’ He further cited several authorities on
his right to challenge any of the jurors, and contended
the Judge Advocate, as president of the Court, was
both juror and judge. Atkins, having vainly en-
deavoured to prevent Macarthur reading the petition,
threatened to commit him ; and called out that he
adjourned the Court, on Kemp—one of the officers of
the bench—threatening to commit him to gaol.
Atkins then left the Court-room, and the officers, de-
claring themselves a court without him, applied to
Bligh for another Judge Advocate. The Governor’s
answer was ‘ r there could be no cause of challenge
against the Judge Advocate, without whose presence
there could be no court, and that Atkins had a right to
commit anyone who insulted him in court.” He
further demanded the immediate surrender to the
Provost Marshal and Bligh’s secretary of the papers
left by Atkins on the table and those produced by
Macarthur—including the incriminating letter of
Crossley’s. The officers offered attested copies of the
documents or to deliver the originals to anyone ap-
pointed Judge Advocate for the trial of Macarthur ;
otherwise they would keep the originals for their justi-
fication, adding ” the Court, constituted by your
Excellency’s precept and sworn to by the Judge Advo-
cate, beg leave to acquaint you that they have ad-
journed, to wait your Excellency’s pleasure.” Bligh
sent for the Commandant of the New South Wales
Corps, and on receipt of a memorial drawn up by
Crossley, and signed by Atkins, submitting that ‘ ‘ con-
tumacy of the officers ’ ’ amounted “to an usurpation
of his Majesty’s Government, and tended to create
rebellion or other outrageous treason,” summoned
each member of the Court in the following form ;
“ The Judge Advocate having presented a memorial
to me, in which you are charged with certain crimes,
you are hereby required to appear before me at Govern-
ment House at nine o’clock to-morrow morning to
answer in the premises. Given under my hand and
seal at Government House, Sydney, this 26th day of
January, 1808.” But before the morrow Bligh had
been deposed, and Macarthur set at liberty to answer
for his action in England. When the news of these
high-handed proceedings reached the Secretary of
State there was no longer hesitation or delay.
The professional adviser so long urged by
Governor King accompanied Governor Macquarie in
the person of Mr. Ellis Bent, a new Judge Advocate,
who was appointed Judge Advocate and Commissary
of the Vice-Admiralty Court of the Territory.
Arriving in Sydney in 1811, he soon saw that it was
necessary to entirely remodel the system under which
the law had hitherto been administered, and to
establish an independent Court in which no Governor
could imitate Bligh’s arbitrary proceedings. Mean-
while the deposition of the late Governor and the
many complaints received in England concerning the
hardships occasioned through the monopoly of the
military class, led to a Select Committee of the House
of Commons being appointed, in 1812 to, inquire into
the condition of New South Wales. Bent’s report,
urging that civil litigation be distinct altogether from
the administration of justice in the higher Court of
Criminal Judicature, and that the Judge Advocate no
longer preside over the civil and criminal judicatures
was laid before the Committee ; and, as a result of
its investigations, a new commission and letters
patent, dated February 4th, 1814. was conferred on
the colony. The letters patent recited the part of
the former patent of April 2nd, 1787, relating to the
institution and appointment of the Criminal Court,
and made no change in its mode of procedure, its
powers, or in the extent of its jurisdiction. The
alterations that were effected consisted of the sepa-
ration of the civil and criminal jurisdictions, and the
appointment of three new civil courts, two of which,
viz., the Governor’s Court in New South Wales and the
Lieutenant-Governor’s Court were instituted for the
trial of small causes.
The Governor’s Court was to have cognisance of
all pleas of land and of all personal pleas whatsoever
where the value of the lands or of the subject matter
of the action did not exceed fifty pounds sterling,
excepting such pleas as might arise between party
and party in Van Diemen’s Land, where these came
under the jurisdiction of the Lieutenant-Governor’s
Court, and from its decisions there was no appeal.
The Commission provided that “ upon complaint in
writing being first made to the Court by any person
against any other person residing in the territory a
warrant is to issue under the hand and seal of the
Judge Advocate and directed to the Provost Marshal,
or other person appointed by the Governor, contain-
ing shortly the substance of the complaint and com-
manding him to summon the defendant to appear
before the Court to answer such complaint ; but where
the value of the demand is ten pounds and upwards,
and arises from the detention of goods and chattels
(oath whereof has to be first made) the warrant may
command the Provost Marshal to arrest the defen-
dant or to take bail for his appearance before the
Court at a given day to answer the complaint and
stand security for performing the judgment of the
Court. On the appearance or arrest of the defendant
the Court is empowered to examine into the complaint
by the oaths of witnesses to be produced by each party,
or the voluntary confession of The defendant, and to
give judgment according to Justice and Right. If
the defendant does not appear, the Court, after ex-
amining the matter of the complaint, will pronounce
judgment on the Provost Marshal returning for answer
to the warrant that defendant could not be found,
and upon it being verified upon oath that defendant
at the time of the complaint instituted is abiding some-
where within the territory of New South Wales.
The Court is empowered to give costs, and to enable


their recovery may issue warrants of execution against
the goods and chattels of the defaulter, or for want
of sufficient distress may imprison him until payment
of the same. ’ ’
But the principal alterations in the new order of
legal affairs was the establishment of a Supreme Court,
constituted according to Governor Macquarie’s official
notification, as follows : “ This Court is to consist of
a Judge, to be appointed by commission under his
Majesty’s Royal Sign Manual, with any such two
magistrates of the Territory as the Governor (or in
case of his death or absence, the Lieutenant-Governor)
shall, by precept under his hand, appoint, or any two
of them, whereof the Judge is to be one. Ihis Court
is a Court of Record, and has all powers incident thereto,
and is specially empowered to form rules of practice,
nominate the necessary clerks and officers, and settle
a table of fees to be taken by them, subject to the
approval of the Governor, which table of fees is to be
fixed up in a conspicuous part of the Court-room,
and may be altered by the Court with the like consent
and approbation whensoever it may be thought fit.
The jurisdiction of the Supreme Court is threefold :
ist, its Ordinary Jurisdiction ; 2nd, its Equity Juris-
diction ; 3rd, a limited Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.”
With characteristic energy Macquarie began to
arrange for the increased accommodation necessitated
by the new Courts of Law, prior to the arrival of the
Letters Patent authorising their establishment. He
was essentially a builder. As early as June, 1813, he
set about erecting a substantial building to be devoted
exclusively to the administration of justice, and of
dimensions sufficiently capacious to meet all require-
ments for some years to come. An appeal to the
public was made through the medium of the Sydney
Gazette : “ It must be evident to all, ’ ’ he wrote, 1 ‘ that
the apartment now appropriated to the purposes of
the law, not exceeding the ordinary dimensions of a
private office (for which alone it was intended), not
fitted up with a view to the usual conveniences of a
Court of Justice, and from the smallness of its size
not capable of being so fitted up, barely affords space
for the assembling of the members and officers of the
several Courts. . . His Excellency now publicly recom-
mends to the consideration of the inhabitants of the
territory the necessity of erecting a building, better
adapted to the commodious and decorous meeting of
the several courts of judicature established in the
colony. • • • But though the Governor is most an-
xious that accommodation should be provided more
suitable to the solemnity and importance of the occa-
sion yet he feels it to be inconsistent with the due
discharge of his duty to his Majesty to permit the
expense to fall altogether upon his Majesty’s Govern-
ment. The Governor would, therefore, emphatically
suggest the propriety and honour of their principally
owning so proud an ornament and noble memorial of
the liberal spirit of the inhabitants to theii honourable
and unanimous exertions and voluntary contributions.
And in intimating that he was prepared to sanction an
official grant of £SOO, he called upon the magistracy to
consider the means of giving effect to his wishes. A
meeting of magistrates was held, under the presidency
of Judge Advocate Bent, on July ist, 1813, when it
was decided that each magistrate should immediately
open a subscription list in his own district. Ihe
Governor gave another £SO from his private purse ;
Lieutenant-Governor Maurice O’Connell subscribed a
similar sum ; the Judge Advocate sanctioned £IOO
from the Police Fund and also contributed £SO pri-
vately ; Alex. Riley and J. T. Campbell, £SO each ;
Wm. Broughton, £42 ; D. Wentworth, Wm. Cox,
S. Lord and T. Moore, £4O each and the Rev. S.
Marsden, £3O. Within six weeks the subscriptions
exceeded £2,000, and at a meeting held on August nth,
1813, it was decided “ that the site given by the
Governor and the building be secured to certain trus-
tees by regular deeds of conveyance for the benefit
of the territory, and that the Governor be requested to
appropriate all fines and forfeitures imposed by law
for misdemeanours to the pmrposes of the undertaking
These matters being satisfactorily arranged, D. D.
Mathews was appointed architect, and tenders were
called for the work. But building was slow in those
days, and ere the Court House, on the western side of
St. James’ Church, at the top of King Street, could be
completed the Governor’s Court and the Supreme
Court had been opened in temporary premises on the
ground floor of the “ Rum ” Hospital, as the adjoin-
ing general hospital in Macquarie Street was termed.
The Governor’s Court assembled and held its first
sittings on May 8, ißis> when, the oaths being taken
by the initial members, Judge Advocate Ellis Bent
addressed the auditory in a short speech, and after-
wards adjourned. Thie first term did not commence
until July 1 following, and had hardly closed when
the Judge contracted a severe and protracted illness,
from which he never recovered. Upon his death, at
the early age of 32, in November, 1815, F. Garling,
who with W. H. Moore had been sent out by the
Government to practise in the new court as stipendiary
solicitors on a salary of £3OO per annum, was appointed
to act temporarily as Bent’s successor “ until his
Majesty’s pleasure is known thereon. Mr. Garling is
to receive a salary of £BOO per annum, to be paid him
half-yearly from the Police Fund.’’ The rules of
practice and the scale of fees that had been drawn up
and fixed by Ellis Bent were adhered to by his suc-
cessors. But the mode of procedure was more complex
than benefited the limited jurisdiction or the nature of
the functions of the Governor’s Court; and soon after
his arrival in the month of October, 1816, Judge
Advocate Wylde made certain alterations both in the
proceedings, as well as in the fees, that had the effect
of simplifying the practice and adopting it more nearly
to the purpose for which the Court was origifially
intended, i.e. ,the easy recovery of small debts. By
the first schedule of fees it was proposed by Mr. Judge
Advocate Wylde, and approved by the members of his
Court, the charge made in his office for the summons
and examination only of a complaint for the recovery
of a sum not exceeding £1 was 7 s. 6d. ; and at W indsor
? nd Parramatta it was Bs. qd. The local charge was re-
duced, upon the suggestion of Governor Macquarie, in
1819, to the sum of 55.; and for causes above £1 and not
exceeding £3 it was fixed at 10s., with an additional
2S. 6d. upon sums between £3 and £5. Some idea of
the amount of business transacted in the Governor’s


( ourt may be gathered from the following figures
Between October, 1816, and 24th June, 1820, the fees
amounted to £3.896 17s. rod. For the three years
ending October, 1819, the causes exceeding £5 num-
bered 697, in which sums amounting to £13,827 15s. 3d.
were recovered. Ihe number of cases below £5 tried
within the same period amounted to 524, the greatest
number in any one year being 220. Upon complaints
of the higher amount issued between October, 1816,
and the end of the Easter sittings of 1820,1,137 sum-
monses were issued, and 725 cases tried ; and in those
of the smaller amount 591 summonses were issued,
and 382 causes tried. Business to some extent
diminished after Governor Macquarie’s proclamation
in November, 1815, extending to magistrates of the
territory the power to decide questions arising upon
wages and contracts for labour in husbandry.
by one permitting suitors to plead or defend a suit,
but ordering legal assistance in the examination of their
witnesses. The persons who were appointed by
Governor Macquarie to act as members of the Gover-
nor’s Court consisted of the principal merchants of
Sydney ; and when the Court was held at Parramatta
or Windsor the magistrates of those places, or of the
neighbourhood, performed the duty
The first Judge of the Supreme Court of Civil
Judicature was Jeffrey Hart Bent, a brother of the
Judge Advocate. He arrived in the colony in July,
1814, and opened his Court on Monday, May Ist, 1815,
when, having administered the oaths to his assessors,
he adjourned till the following Thursday to consider
a communication received the previous day from
Governor Macquarie. This letter transmitted petitions
from three emancipists—Ed. Eager, Geo. Crossley
Darlinghurst Court.
Sittings originally were fixed to take place on the
first days of the months of January, April, July and
October in each year, but with a view to facilitate as
much as possible the recovery of small debts, the
Governor had these terms, which were declared to
extend to twenty-four days after each day of opening,
supplemented by a sitting of the Governor’s Court
upon one day in each month for the trial of causes
under £5. At the commencement of March, 1817, it
was ordered that in all cases exceeding £lO both parties
“ should ’’—not might—be assisted by solicitors, who
were entitled to receive for that assistance the sum of
one guinea, which was to be increased in case they
had been retained for the suit, but not to exceed two
guineas. This order was subsequently varied in 1818
and 1. ( baiters praying lor permission to practise
as solicitors and barristers of the Supreme Court.
Although the Governor recommended the prayer of
the petition, and his assessors strongly supported it.
Bent, after several adjournments, not only refused to
admit the petitioners as attorneys of the Court, but
superadded an extra-judicial opinion upon an excit-
able topic, altogether beyond the necessity of the case.
He said he would never administer the oaths to persons
who had been transported as felons, as, in his opinion,
it would be contrary to the laws of England ; and that
no circumstances and no necessity could exist so strong
as to induce him to do so. A serious disagreement
thus broke out between the Judge and the Governor,
who extended especial protection to the emancipist


class. Bent would not sit to hear any causes, and he
questioned the legality of Macquarie’s action in respect
to a road toll, the surplus of which, after repairs, was
paid to the Police Fund. Enraged at this, the Governor
forwarded a strong representation of the judge’s
conduct to Earl Bathurst, and told the Secretary of
State that a letter from Bent contained “ false asser-
tions and malignant insinuations.” “ He holds no
Court,” Macquarie wrote, “ nor is it his intention to
hold one until the point in regard to the readmission
of attorneys sent here as prisoners shall be determined
agreeably to his own wishes in the negative.” Earl
Bathurst recognised the necessity of upholding the
authority of the Governor, and the Judge was at once
recalled by a despatch in which the Secretary of State,
on behalf of the Government, used the following words :
“ His Majesty’s advisers consider the removal of the
said Jeffrey Hart Bent, Esq., from the colony as neces-
sary to mark the sense of disapprobation which they
entertain of the measure, which so indiscreetly for the
colony and for himself, the said Jeffrey Hart Bent
thought it necessary to adopt, and which for so long
a period has occasioned all the serious evils of a total
suspension of justice, to a manifest injury of the best
interests and public credit of the colony.” At the
same time, in addressing Bent, Earl Bathurst gave
expression to “the high displeasure of His Royal
Highness, and his positive recall by his Majesty’s
Government, on account of conduct which, in their
opinion, could admit of no justification” But before
these despatches arrived Macquarie had vigorously
acted on the spot. In a General Order, issued De-
cember nth, 1816, he notified Bent’s ” removal and
recall from his official situation,” and declared “ his
disqualification and incapacity to act from thenceforth
as Judge of the Supreme Court or a magistrate of this
colony.” “ It was a severe measure,” the Governor
pleaded, in his despatch to Earl Bathurst, "and I
did it with extreme reluctance. ... In one letter
particularly Mr. Bent declares, in speaking of himself
and me, that ‘ our local rank places but a shadow of
distinction between us ; and. with a view of drawing
a malignant contrast of his own. he adds ‘ that his
irritability of temper had never led him into acts of
illegality or oppression.” The removal of the Judge
was sanctioned by Earl Bathurst.
G'arling was not confirmed in his appointment of
Acting Judge Advocate, and in October, 1816, John
Wylde, who was subsequently awarded a baronetship
and made Chief Justice at the Cape, came out to suc-
ceed Ellis Bent. Originally a solicitor, the new Judge
Advocate had been in partnership in London with his
brother, afterwards raised to the woolsack and to the
peerage as Lord Truro. Wylde held office in the
territory until March, 1824, when he was translated
to the Supreme Court bench, where he sat until his
retirement in February, 1825. Though he never dis-
played very high qualities, his legal attainments were
considered such as to justify his position, and it was
generally admitted that he discharged the functions
of his offices with considerable credit.
The departure of Mr. Justice Bent before the
arrival of his successor prevented any sittings of the
Supreme Court, in its civil jurisdiction, for well nigh on
fifteen months. No little injury was sustained by
individuals through this want of any tribunal in which
causes of a larger amount than CSO could be heard,
and it did not cease to operate until the arrival of
Mr. Justice Field in February, 1817. Upon the re-
opening of the Court, the Judge’s clerk, Mr. J. Gurner,
was appointed to act as registrar and Judge’s marshal.
The two stipendiary solicitors, Messrs. Garling and
Moore, sent out by Earl Bathurst in 1814, with Mr.
Thomas Wylde, the father of the Judge Advocate, Mr.
fames Norton, who had arrived from the English Courts
in 1818, and a Mr. Amos, were the only solicitors prac-
tising at the beginning of 1818. Lpon the suspension
of Mr. Amos, in August, 1819, an order of Court was
made by which George Crossley, the emancipist Mr.
Justice Bent had refused to enrol as an attorney of
his Court, was permitted to proceed as the attorney
of all such clients of Mr. Amos as had suits depending
before the Supreme Court. At a later period, May,
1820, under the regulations permitting parties to
prosecute or defend suits in person, Eager, who as an
ex-convict had also been refused permission to prac-
tise, was allowed to appear in the Supreme Court on
his own behalf and to conduct suits. W ylde pre-
sided over the Criminal Court, whilst the business
of the Civil Court was conducted by Judge Field.
Of the two Judges, Macquarie wrote, “ I have
every reason to believe they will in their re-
spective situations prove a great blessing and ac-
quisition to this colony.” He soon found reason to
change his views. Instead of healing the wounds in
the body politic, for which purpose he had been sent,
Field was in dispute with the emancipists almost from
the first sitting in his Court. Indignant at Macquarie
appointing an ex-convict as one of the magistrates
who with the Judge were to constitute the Supreme
Court, Field refused a special application of the
Governor’s to permit Michael Crossley a freed lawyer,
to practise as an attorney, on the ground that it was
contrary to the law of England. To the entreaties of
his assessors he replied that ‘ ‘ he regretted any gentle-
man had been found who differed from him on a point
of pure professional feeling and practice, and to say
that these persons, whom they confess it is a disgrace to
admit to their tables or to suffer any part of their
families to associate with, are fit and proper persons
to be admitted to the situation of attorneys. I do
now solemnly declare that I will not admit as attorney
of this Court, nor administer the oath to persons who
have been transported here as felons.” Another
action of the Judge’s which had more far-reaching
effect was his giving a decision allowing a defendant
to plead a plaintiff’s conviction for felony as a bar to
civil action. This alarmed the emancipists, who at
this time formed a large majority of the trading and
agricultural sections of the community ; and, recog
nising the helpless position in which the Judge’s ruling
placed them, they resolved upon united action to
obtain redress. At a public meeting on January 27th,
1819, of land-holders, merchants and others representing
the inhabitants of the colony, a committee was ap-
pointed to petition the Prince Regent to obtain relief
from the Throne for the emancipist class, freeing them
of their legal disabilities. The committee consisted


of : Sir John Jamieson (chairman), W. Browne, J.
Harm, S. Lord, G. Blaxland, W. Cox, R. Brooks, R.
Jenkins, F. Garling, E. S. Hall, W. B. Redfern, R.
Towns, and Ed. Eager (secretary). Through the
influence of the Governor this prayer was granted.
But the petitioners went further. They asked for the
introduction of trial by jury in the Supreme Court,
and objected to the constitution of the Criminal Court,
their principal grounds being—(l) the combination in
the person of the Judge Advocate of the duties of a
magistrate, who commits the prisoner upon investiga-
tions conducted by himself, of prosecutor, of jurymen,
and of judge ; (2) the military character of the Court,
to the members of which there was no right of chal-
lenge, and from whose decisions they had no right of
appeal ; (3) the military title of the presiding member
and the occurrence of cases wherein the accuser of a
prisoner and the party complaining of the offence was
a member of the Court ; (4) the general unfitness and
incapacity of the Criminal Court to administer impar-
tial justice or to command respect ; the repugnance of
its form and proceedings to the petitioners as English-
men, or to the proceedings and institutions of their
native country. Lastly, the petitioners stated that,
while under the protection of such a Court, their lives
could not so well be secured as they ought to be.
Prior to this representations regarding the eleva-
tion of certain emancipists to the magistracy by
Governor Macquarie, and the favour with which he
regarded that class generally, had been made by several
influential colonists to the Home Government. They
accordingly despatched a Commissioner (Mr. John
Thomas Bigge) to ‘ ‘ examine into all laws, regulations
and usages of the territory and its dependencies, and
into every other matter or thing in any way connected
with the administration of civil government ; the state
of the judicial, civil, and ecclesiastical establishments ;
revenue, trade and resources.” Mr. Bigge’s inquiries
extended over two years, and his report was printed
in 1822 by order of the House of Commons. In this
review, he advised the home authorities that, generally
speaking, the petitioners had justification for their
complaints against the Criminal Court, and, with the
view of meeting their principal objections to the com-
bination of so many different functions in the office
and person of the Judge Advocate, he recommended
the appointment of an English barrister to the office
of Attorney-General, to receive all depositions from
the magistrates, to prepare indictments and conduct
prosecutions. He further supported the suggestion of
Mr. Judge Advocate Wylde that the judicial establish-
ment of New South Wales should consist of three
judges, one of whom should always preside in the
Criminal Court ; that all questions of law should be
decided by the Court, and that questions of fact should
be decided by certain respectable inhabitants of the
colony, not less than eight in number, to be appointed
from time to time by the Governor. Upon the momen-
tous question of trial by jury the Commissioner wrote
in his report : “ Upon the whole I am of opinion that
the period is not yet arrived at which the system of
trial by jury can be advantageously introduced into
the civil and criminal proceedings of the colony.”
With the administration of justice in Judge Field’s
Court Mr. Bigge expressed himself as satisfied, pointing
out that of 165 actions tried therein between April,
1817, and January, 1821, only nine appeals were
entered, and of these but one decision reversed. But
other reports of a more unfavourable nature found
their way to Downing Street. That pernicious practice
of payment by fees was still in existence during Field’s
judgeship, and it was alleged, many declared unjustly,
that he encouraged litigation to augment his income.
Be this the case or otherwise, Lord Bathurst considered
there were sufficient grounds to justify Field’s removal
from office, and he was recalled, after presiding for
nearly seven years in his Court, at the end of 1823.
Baron Field, as the Judge was generally known, dis-
played considerable professional talent in the discharge
of his duties ; but, although the author of two legal
text-books of repute in his day, it has been said that
his judgments did not acquire the weight of authority
afterwards.
In 1820 the offices of the Supreme Court were
removed to the King Street Court House, constructed
by the Colonial Architect, Mr. Greenway. For those
early days the building was of handsome proportions,
affording ample accommodation for the Supreme
Court Judges and all the administrative departments
of their jurisdictions. Unfortunately bad construction
soon made itself manifest, and induced a periodical
policy of patching, which has exhausted in the inter-
vening years many thousands of pounds sterling,
without leading to any beneficial results. Before the
Court House had been erected twenty years Mr. Lewis,
the Colonial Architect of the day, pronounced it to be
“ hardly in a state to admit of repairs,” and Governor
Gipps decided, in 1839, °U the immediate erection of
another Court House at Darlmghurst, contiguous to
the “ new gaol at Woolloomooloo,” where the criminal
sessions would be held for the future.
It was not long ere Commissioner Bigge’s report
on the judicial system of New South Wales bore fruit.
The New South Wales Judicature Act, 4 Geo. IV.,
chapter 96, passed July ig, 1823, brought about a new
condition of affairs, remodelling the machinery of the
Government, as well as the administration of justice.
Governors were no longer to exercise arbitrary control ;
their caprice had to give way to law. The new Act,
followed by a Charter of Justice in October, 1823, in
pursuance of its provisions effected as great a change
in the mode of administering the civil as it did that of
the criminal law of the colony. A subsequent Act,
9 Geo. IV., c. 83, extending Act 4 Geo. IV., c. 96,
made various changes, but not such as to render a new
charter necessary. The Act 4 Geo. IV., c. 96, em-
powered his Majesty by Letters Patent to appoint the
Supreme Court, and accordingly Letters Patent were
issued under the Great Seal, bearing date October 13,
1823, by the authority of which the Supreme Court
still maintains its jurisdiction. In the proper sense of
the word, Act 9 Geo. IV., c. 83, passed in 1828, is our
first constitution Act, for Act 4, Geo. IV., c. 96, more
generally known as the ‘‘New South Wales Act,”
though it authorised the creation of civil judicature, es-
tablished trial by jury, and constituted a legislative body
in the form of a Council of not more than seven or less
than five members, and conferred powers of local taxa


tion, was only a temporary enactment. On its ex-
piration the Act 9, Geo. IV., of 1828, which is mainly
a reproduction of the prior Act, was substituted as a
permanent constitutional foundation for the new
Settlement, and as an authoritative declaration of the
extent to which the Common and Statute Law of
England had become the inheritance of that Settlement.
The declaration is contained in the 24th section, and
is in these words; “All laws and statutes in force
within the realm of England at the time of the passing
of this Act, not being inconsistent herewith, or
any charter or letters patent or Orders in Council
which may be issued in pursuance hereof shall be
applied in the administration of justice in the Courts
of New South Wales and Van Dieman’s Land respec-
tively, so far as the same can be applied within the
said colonies ; and as often as any doubt shall arise as
to the application of any such laws or statutes in the
said colonies respectively, it shall be lawful for the
Governor of the said colonies respectively, by and with
the advice of the Legislative Councils of the said colo-
nies respectively, by ordinances to be by them for
that purpose made, to declare whether such law or
statutes shall be deemed to extend to such colonies,
and to be in force within the same, or to make and
establish such limitations and modifications of any
such laws and statutes within the said colonies re-
spectively as may be deemed expedient in that behalf.
Provided always that in the meantime, and before any
such ordinances shall be actually made, it shall be the
duty of the said Supreme Courts, as often as any such
doubts arise upon the trial of any information or action,
or upon any other proceeding before them, to adjudge
and decide as to the application of any such laws or
statutes in the said colonies respectively.’’ Trial by
jury was now rendered possible, the eighth clause of
the Act enabling the Crown to cause trial by jury to
be “further introduced and applied.’’ Clause 4.
providing for a jury of “ seven commissioned officers
of his Majesty’s land or sea forces ’’ was carried after
a protracted discussion in the English Parliament
Sir J Mackintosh and others endeavouring to introduce
an amendment establishing juries of twelve qualified
citizens. But civil litigants could elect to have their
differences determined by twelve of their fellow-
civilians, instead of by the Chief Justice aided by two
assessors, the jury qualification being a freehold of not
less than 50 acres,, or a householder in a dwelling of
not less than £3OO value. Clause 24 gave authority
for the appointment of a Legislative Council, not
exceeding seven nor less than five in number. Mem-
bers could dissent from any proposed legislation, but
if one or more agreed, the Governor could put the law
into force pending the sanction of the Crown. In
time of rebellion the orders were para-
mount. By clause 29 the Chief Justice had to certify
that any proposed legislation was not repugnant to
general law ere the Governor could lay it before the
Council.
“The Supreme Court under Act 4, Geo. IV.,
c. 96,’’ wrote a legal critic of the day, “ is a Court of
Record, and has cognisance of all pleas, civil, criminal
or mixed, and jurisdiction in all cases whatsoever, as
fully and amply to all intents and purposes in New
South Wales and all and every of the islands and
territories which now are or hereafter may be subject
to or dependent upon the Government thereof, as his
Majesty’s Court of King’s Bench, Common Pleas and
Exchequer, at Westminster, or either of them, lawfully
have or hath in England. On the trial of every issue
of fact joined between the parties in any action of
law cognisable in the Supreme Court, where the sum
or matter in dispute exceeds £SOO sterling, and where
the trial shall not be by jury, the judges cause the
evidence to be taken down by a clerk or officer, and
to be repeated in open court to the witnesses giving
the same, and the evidence so taken is entered upon
the proceedings of the Court as matter of record ;
and in every case of appeal to his Majesty-in-Council
copies of all the documents and papers that are pro-
duced and given in evidence, or rejected, are required
to be duly authenticated by the clerk and annexed to
the record as part thereof. The power that the judges
have who are appointed to preside in the Court are
as extensive as those of Judges of the Courts of King’s
Bench, Common Pleas and Exchequer, in England.
The Supreme Court is a Court of (3yer and Terminer
and Gaol Delivery ; it is also empowered to inquire of,
hear and determine all treasons, piracies, felonies,
robberies, murders, conspiracies, and other offences,
of what nature or kind soever committed, or that
shall be committed upon the sea, or in any haven,
river, creek or place where the Admiral hath power,
authority or jurisdiction, or committed, or that shall
be committed in the islands of New Zealand, Ota-
heite, or any other island country or place situated
in the Indian or Pacific Oceans, and not subject to
his Majesty or to any European State or Power, by
the master or crew of any British vessel, or any of
them, or by any British subject, sailing in or belonging
to, or that shall have sailed in or belonged to, and
have quitted any British ship or vessel to live in any
part of the said islands, countries or places, or that
shall be there living ; and that all persons convicted
of any of the offences so to be inquired of, heard or
determined in the said Court' shall be subject and
liable to, and shall suffer all such and the same pains,
penalties and forfeitures as by any law or laws now in
force persons convicted of the same would be subject
and liable to in case the same had been committed
and were respectively inquired of, tried, heard and
determined and adjudged in England, any law
statute or usage to the contrary notwithstanding.
The Supreme Court is also a Court of Equity, and has
power and authority to administer justice, and to do,
exercise and perform all such acts, matters and things
necessary for the due execution of such equitable
jurisdiction as the Lord High Chancellor can, or
lawfully may, within the realm of England. The
Charter of Justice expressly authorises the Supreme
Court to appoint guardians and keepers of infants
and their estates, and also of the persons and estates
of natural fools, and of such as are or shall be de-
prived of their understanding by reason of the act
of God, so as to be unable to govern themselves and
estates, which the Court may inquire of, hear and
determine by inspection of the person, or such other
ways by which the truth may be best discovered.’ ’


“ The 9 Geo. IV., c. 83, enacts that the Supreme
Court shall have ecclesiastical jurisdiction and full
power to administer and execute such jurisdiction as
hath been or shall be committed to the Court by his
Majesty’s charter or letters patent : provided that in
all cases where the executor or executors of any will
upon being duly cited, shall refuse or neglect to take
out probate, or where the next of kin shall be absent
and the effects of the deceased shall appear to the
Courts to be exposed and liable to waste, it shall be
lawful for the said Courts to authorise the Registrar
or other ministerial officer of the said Supreme Court
to collect such effects, and hold, or deposit, or invest
the same in such manner and place, or upon such
security and subject to such orders as shall be made.
The Charter of Justice gives the Court full power to
however, is required, where letters of administration
shall be committed with the will annexed, for want
of an executor appearing in due time to sue for the
probate, to reserve the authority to revoke the same
and to grant probate of the will to such executor
whenever he shall duly appear and sue for the same.
The Court may grant letters of administration with
the will annexed to any one or more of the lawful
next of kin of such person so dying and being then
resident in the colony and of the age of 21 years ;
and in case no such person shall be resident, or being
cited shall not appear, then to the Registrar or to
any other person the Court may think fit. The
probates are not to extend to money, goods or effects
not within the colony. The Court before granting
letters of administration is bound to require a bond
Central Police Court, 1906.
grant probates under the seal of the Court of all or
any of the inhabitants of that part of the said colony
and its dependencies situated in the island of New
Holland, and of all other persons who shall die and
leave personal effects within that part of the said
colony ; and where the executor refuses to act, or
the testator dies intestate, or does not name an exe-
cutor resident within the colony, to commit letters of
administration with the will annexed, and to sequester
the goods and chattels and credits and other effects
whatsover of such persons so dying, in cases allowed
by the law, as the same is and may be now used in
the diocese of London, and to demand, take, hear,
examine and allow, and if reason require to disallow,
the amounts of them in such manner and form as is
now used in the said diocese of London. The Court,
of every person to whom they shall be committed,
and also securities for the due administration of the
effects. The Court has the power to allow an executor
or administrator such commission as may be reason-
able if he shall have passed his accounts and obeyed
the orders of the Court.’ ’
‘ ‘ The Supreme Court is empowered by an Act of
the Legislative Council to appoint trustees to collect
the estates of insolvents and to make orders for the
distribution of the produce of such effects equally
and ratably among the creditors. It may be ob-
served that the laws in force within the colony upon
the subject of insolvent effects are based upon the
Insolvent Debtors Act in England, and that the
powers of the Court in this respect are precisely the
same as the Insolvent Debtors Court in England,


excepting that the Judges of the Supreme Court have
authority to grant certificates discharging the insol-
vent from future liability, with the consent in writing
of the major part in number and value of the credi-
tors, with a restriction, however, that such certificate
shall not be allowed a second time to the same per-
son unless his or her estate, when collected and re-
alised, shall be sufficient to pay at least 15s. in the
pound ; and that no person or persons who shall be
declared insolvent a third time or oftener shall be
entitled to any such certificate.”
From the decisions of the Supreme Court an
appeal lay, in all actions where the sum or matter at
issue exceeded the value of £SOO, to the Governor or
Acting-Governor for the time being, one or the other
of whom was directed from time to time to hold a
Court, to be called “ The Court of Appeals of the
Colony of New South Wales,” and by a subsequent
section of the Act 4, Geo. IV., c. 96, it was further
provided “ that it shall and may be lawful for his
Majesty to allow any person or persons, feeling ag-
grieved by any judgment, decree, order or sentence
of the said Court of Appeals, to appeal therefrom to
his Majesty in Council in such manner, within such
time and under and subject to such rules, regulations
and limitations as his Majesty, by his charter and
letters patent shall appoint and prescribe.” It was
provided also that ‘ ‘ in case it shall be made to ap-
pear to the satisfaction of the Judge of the Supreme
Court that the judgment, &c., may be of peculiar
importance, or may affect directly or indirectly any
claim, demand or question to or respecting property
or any civil right amounting to or of the value of £SOO
‘terling,” an appeal shall be permitted to the said
Court of Appeal, although the sum or matter at issue
in respect of which judgment shall have been given
shall not amount to £SOO sterling. And to promote
and encourage the introduction and use of trial by
jury in civil cases among the colonists, it was fur-
ther provided that “ upon any appeal to be brought
to the said Court of Appeals from any judgment of
the said Supreme Court, founded upon the verdict of
a jury of twelve men. the said Court of Appeals shall
not reverse, alter or inquire into the said judgment,
except only for error of law apparent upon the record.”
In any judgment pronounced by the Court of
Appeal in respect of any sum above the value of
£ 2,000, or where such judgment would affect pro-
perty or any civil right to the value of £ 2,000, or in
cases where the Court of Appeals reversed any de-
cision of the Supreme Court, the party feeling ag-
grieved had the right of appeal, within fourteen days
from the date of judgment, to the King in Council,
upon finding securities for the due performance of
the decision of the higher Court, and execution would
in the meanwhile be suspended. But should the
Court not think fit to stay execution, the party in
whose favour judgment had been given had to enter
into securities for the due performance of the de-
cision of the King on appeal. The Court of Appeals
was also required to take security for costs from the
appellant, and if such security were not given within
three months from the date of the petition for leave
to appeal, the Court of Appeals was not to allow the
appeals. On the other hand, if the party feeling
aggrieved by decision of the Court of Appeals was
not able to comply with this regulation or any regu-
lation imposed by that Court, he was not precluded
from appealing, as the power was reserved to the
King, on application by humble petition to his
Majesty in Council, to allow such appeal ; and in
case the appeal should be entertained by the King
in Council, the Supreme Court was to conform to
and execute “ such judgments and orders as shall be
made in the premises, in such manner as any original
judgment, decree or decretal order, or other order or
rule by the said Supreme Court of New South Wales
would be executed.”
The Courts of General and Quarter Sessions
took cognisance in a summary way of all crimes,
misdemeanours and other offences, or misconducts
not punishable by death, committed by convicts
whose sentences had not expired, or had not been
remitted ; but persons not being convicts were tried
according to the forms adopted in the Supreme Court.
It was intended that these tribunals should take
cognisance of all matters and things that were in-
quired into in Court of General and Quarter Sessions
in England, so far as the circumstances and condi-
tions of the colony would permit. And they did so.
When seven officers of the forces could not be ob-
tained to sit on the jury the number was made up
from the magistracy.
In the Civil Court issues of fact were tried by
a Judge and two assessors, being magistrates and
liable to be challenged ; but either plaintiff or de-
fendant could apply for a trial by jury to the Court,
which had the power to grant or refuse the motion.
The assessors were appointed by the Governor. It
had been usual for the Judge to require the assessors
to receive the law upon the matter in dispute from
him, and only to decide upon contested matters of
fact ; but in cases where the assessors differed the
Judge also decided the matter of fact, that is to say,
his ruling upon the matter of fact created a majority
in the Court. The privilege of trial by jury was not
readily availed of at the outset, owing no doubt to
the limited number of respectable persons eligible
for the panel. It was not until November, 1824, ?ix
months after the new Charter of Justice had been
promulgated, that a civil jury was applied for in the
action of the King v. R. Cooper, where a verdict was
given for the defendant.
When Governor Bourke met his Council for the
first time, in January, 1832, he urged them to pass
a Bill regulating the constitution of juries. The Bill
disqualified ‘ ‘ twice-convicted persons and every man
who hath been or shall be attainted of any treason
or felony, or convicted of any crime that is infamous
(unless he shall have received for such a crime a par-
don, or the full period shall have expired for which
he shall have been sentenced to be transported), and
every man of bad fame or of dishonest life or con-
duct, or of immoral character or repute.” The
property qualification was £3O annual value of real or
£3OO in full personal estate. Special jurors were
confined to “ esquires or merchants (not keeping a
retail shop) or bank directors.” Criminal issues were


left to the old military juries, created by the Consti-
tution Act 9, Geo. IV., of 1828. In 1833 the Gover-
nor introduced another Bill, which proposed to effect
a still greater change. Persons arraigned were given
the option of selecting trial by jury of twelve civilians
or by military jurors. The disqualification of persons
attainted or convicted was limited to those who had
not received a free pardon, or “ were not within the
benefit and protection of some Act of Parliament
having the force and effect of a pardon under the
Great Seal,” and those “ who after expiration or
remission of sentence have been convicted of any
treason, felony, or other infamous offence.” The
Bill met with great opposition in the Council, and
was only carried by Governor Bourke exercising a
casting vote in addition to his own vote. An inter-
esting commentary on this Act is supplied by the
large number of cases in which suitors in civil actions
and persons criminally charged preferred military to
civil juries. In respect to the latter prosecutions, in
the Supreme Court during 1835 and a portion of 1836
there were tried by military juries 346 persons.
Before civil juries in the same period there were tried
217. But in the Quarter Sessions Courts the demand
for military juries was even greater: In 1833 and
1834 they tried 604 persons, whilst civil juries were
only asked for by 273. Yet the percentage of con-
victions bv military juries was greater than by civil.
After this Act had operated for three years the Gover-
nor sought the opinion of the Judges and the Crowu
Law officers regarding its working. Chief Justice
Forbes expressed the view that trial by jury had been
deferred too long and Judge Dowling gave the measure
a qualified support. Messrs. Kinchela and Plunkett
(Attorney-General and Solicitor-General) commended
the working of the Act, but urged more circumspec-
tion in empanelling juries. Judge Barton, however, in
a carefully-prepared paper, pointed out that the fram-
ing of the Act implied distrust of civil juries, by leav-
ing a military jury to the option of the accused. That
distrust was shared in by the community, and arose,
he thought, “ from the circumstance that very low
and disreputable persons are qualified and liable to
serve on juries, according to colonial law, and that
the juries empanelled are frequently chiefly formed of
such persons.” The Judge did not advocate aboli-
tion of civil juries, but greater care in the mode of
forming them, pointing out that in one instance out of
a panel of twenty-six, no less than ten jurors had
been convicts. The provisions of the Act of 1833
were periodically reviewd by Sir R. Bourke, who,
when asking the Council to re-enact them in 1836,
said “ he hoped, ere long, to see the institution estab-
lished on its ancient English foundation.” But
definite instructions from England were still required.
In 1839 Parliament received favourably a provision
in a Bill to continue the New South Wales Consti-
tution, by which the colonial Legislatures were em-
powered to deal with Courts and juries. Before the
new statute arrived in the colony, however, Governor
Gipps swept away the last relics of military juries,
which had constituted the Criminal Courts wholly
until 1833 and partially afterwards; The preamble
of Act 3, Vic., No. 11 (1839) cited an Order-in-Council
of June, 1830, authorising Governors “to extend
and apply the form and manner of proceeding by
grand and petit juries,’’ and enacted that whereas
the population had greatly increased and there was
“ a sufficient number of respectable persons qualified
to act as jurors to be found in all parts of the colony
where juries were required,” it was deemed expedient
that the trial of offences by a jury of seven commis-
sioned officers should in future be dispensed with,
and ‘ ‘ that all crimes, misdemeanours and offences
cognisable in the Supreme Court and prosecuted by
information in the name of his Majesty’s Attorney-
General or other person duly appointed for such pur-
pose by the Governor, and all issues of fact joined
on every such information shall be tried by a jury
of the inhabitants of the said colony only.” In the
Supreme Court and in the Quarter Sessions after
October 31, 1839, military juries were to “ cease and
determine.” But the colonists did not then obtain
the “ ancient English foundation ” of trial by jury,
and it is somewhat remarkable that at no time since
have they made any effort to acquire it. Their de-
mand had been for petty juries, and it was thus ap-
peased. Those primordial bodies, grand juries, which
in England have so often prevented tyranny, strangely
enough were not revived, and at no time since have
been called for by the public.
By his Majesty’s Order-in-Council, which Act 9
Geo. IV., c. 83, s. 13, permitted to be issued, Circuit
Courts were instituted. These Courts were Courts of
Record, standing in the same relation to the Supreme
Court as Courts of Oyer and Terminer and of Assize
and Nisi Prius in England in relation to the King’s
Superior Courts of Record at Westminster. The
Chief Justice was the Judge of the Vice-Admiralty
Court, and the commission investing him with the
office gave him the power to hear and determine
questions of salvage, disputes about seamen’s wages,
&c., but did not authorise him to interfere in criminal
cases, as the Supreme Court was empowered to take
cognisance of offences committed in places where
the Admiral had jurisdiction.
Courts of Request were also established under
the authority of 9 Geo. IV., c. 83, authorised to hear
and determine in a summary way all actions for the
recovery of debts under £lO, excepting where the
matter related to a title to any lands, or the taking
of any duty payable to the King, or to any fee of
office, annual rent, or other such matter where rights
in future would be bound, or to any general rights,
and to award costs. The decision of the courts was
final, and was carried into execution by attachment
and sale of goods and effects, or by corporal arrest.
One commissioner presided in all the Courts, receiv-
ing his appointment under the Sign Manual, with such
salary as his Majesty directed.
Sir Francis (then Mr.), Forbes the first Chief
Justice, who previously had held with distinction a
similar office in Newfoundland, landed in the colony
under salute, March 8, 1824, and, on May 17 follow-
ing, the Charter of Justice was formally promulgated
in Sydney at Government House —where his Excel-
lency administered the State oaths as well as the oath


of his judicial office to the Chief Justice,—at the
t ourt House and in the market place. Judge Forbes
took his seat on the Bench the same afternoon, ac-
companied by Messrs. S. S. Wemyss and Ed. Riley,
the assessors of his Court. Upon the conclusion of
the reading of the Charter of Justice by Joshua J.
Moore, the commission of the Attorney-General
(Saxe Bannister) was then read, and the oath" of office
administered to him. J. J. Moore was sworn in as
Prothonotary of the Court and John Gurner as the
Registrar of the Court. An Order-in-Council, dated
October 19, 1824, authorised the Chief Justice of the
Supreme Court to make rules and orders touching and
concerning the time and place of holding the sittings
of the Supreme Court, the forms and manner of pro-
ceeding, and the practice and pleadings upon all
indictments, informations, actions, suits, &c., and
all other matters to be brought therein. Accord-
ingly, on June 22, 1825, the Chief Justice issued several
orders regulating the practices of the Court. These,
it was generally admitted, were well adapted for con-
ducting the business of the Supreme Court, and in
many of them the future Knight, by simplifying
pleadings and dispensing with costly procedure,
anticipated the legislature of modern times.
Act 9, Geo. IV., c. 83, allowed his Majesty to
appoint not more than three Judges of the Supreme
Court, the requhite qualification being that they
were barristers in England or Ireland of not less than
five years’ standing. They held office only during
pleasure. In case, however, of the absence, resig-
nation or death or incapacity from disease or infirm-
ity of a Judge the Governor could appoint some
person to act in his stead until the Judge returned
to his duties or another appointment was made by
the King. Until about the middle of the fifties the
Judges were liable to suspension at the pleasure of
the Governor and dismission by the Secretary of
State ; yet it can safely be said that during their long
tenure of office they escaped even a suspicion of lean-
ing to the Executive. This fact stands out clearly,
that both in the general government and in our
Courts of Law from the earliest days the servants
of the State were influenced far more by pervading
British principles and tastes than by any particular
status of the colony or its transitory institutions.
For illustration, Sir Francis Forbes, when administer-
ing the law under conditions scarcely known to
Englishmen in other countries, hastened the estab-
lishment of a more desirable system, while he held in
check the tendency of that which existed to despotism
and oppression. With the Constitution the tenure
of the judicial office became dependent on Legislature,
and has since remained so. A Judge may be removed
by an address from both Houses —a formidable
responsibility. Should the division of the Legis-
lature into separate chambers ever become merely
nominal, and should the Judges be liable to the sud-
den attacks of a passionate majority, it is safe to
aver they would still have public opinion to rely on.
The Attorney-General was invested with the
peculiar power of instituting proceedings of a criminal
nature in the Supreme Court or at the Court of
Quarter Sessions; as not only were all offences prose-
cuted by information in his name, but he had the
power of finding or refusing the information, there
being no grand jury. He was, therefore, the public
prosecutor, and as such has exercised the powers of
a grand jury until the present time. The Supreme
Court could allow any individual to exhibit a cri-
minal information against anyone for crimes and
misdemeanours not punishable with death; but,
then, the proceedings were conducted in the name of
the Attorney-General.
The Judges of the Supreme Court were authorised
by the charter to enrol such persons having been
admitted barristers-at-law or advocates in Great
Britain or Ireland, or having been admitted writers,
attorneys or solicitors in one of the Courts of West-
minster, Dublin or Edinburgh, or having been ad-
mitted as proctors in any Ecclesiastical Court in
England, to act as well in the character of barristers
and advocates as of proctors, attorneys and solicitors
in the Courts of the colony. This condition of affairs
continued until 1829, when the status of the legal
profession was considered by Chief Justice Forbes
and his brother Judges, the result being that it was
formally divided by a Supreme Court rule, subject to
the sanction of the Crown. All existing practitioners
were allowed to elect whichever branch of the profes-
sion they might prefer to follow in the future ; and
admission to the Bar could only be obtained by
those who had been admitted in the Courts of the
United Kingdom. Attorneys were only to be en-
rolled on producing proofs of the same admission, or
of having served five years in an attorney’s office in
Sydney or in the Supreme Court. This rule, which
had been issued upon a petition from the Bar, was op-
posed by the solicitors, and remained a dead letter until
the advent on the Bench of Judge Burton, in 1834. With
his force of character he insisted on the rule being en-
forced, and it continued to have vitality until March,
1892, when the Legal Practitioners Act, 55 Vic.,
No. 31, was passed, enacting “ that every attorney
shall have the right of admission in all the Courts
of New South Wales ; that every barrister of five
years’ standing shall be entitled, without examina-
tion, to be admitted to practise as an attorney, and
that every attorney, on being struck off the roll of
attorneys, shall (on his own application) be entitled
to practise as a barrister.”
In September, 1906, the Statute Book of New
South Wales completed its eighty-second year, the
first authoritative legislative effort —excluding the
ordinances of the earlier Governors, manv of which
were illegal—being passed in the fifth year of
George IV. (September 28, 1824). Us object was to
make promissory notes and bills of exchange payable
in Spanish dollars as valid and negotiable securities
as if they had been made payable in sterling money.
Besides this piece of legislation, the results of the
labours of the first Legislature in Australia are con-
tained in forty-eight other Acts, all but seven of which
had either expired or been repealed prior to 1890.
And of that number five may be mentioned—the
Dividing Fences Act, the Legal Tender Act, the News-
paper and Blasphemous and Seditious Libels Act,
the Printed Paper Act, and the first Apprentices Act—


which still subsisted on the Statute Book in that year,
antique proofs of a long-past generation. During
the second legislative period, ranging from 1829 to
1842, some 240 Acts were passed ; during the third
period, from 1842 to 1855, 466 Acts were passed ;
during the fourth, existing, period down, to 1890, 739
Acts received the royal sanction ; —in all nearly 1,500,
of which rather less than half had a place on the
Statute Book when the work of consolidation was
instituted in 1893.
Towards the end of 1903 the attention of the Hon.
R. E. O’Connor, then Minister of Justice, was drawn
to the condition of the Statute Books. The first New
South Wales Act had been passed sixty-nine years
before, and during that long interval, except as to
two or three subjects, no consolidation work was ever
attempted. Amendments, partial repeals, re-enact-
ments, implied repeals, repeals of Acts in the formula
“ So much of the said Act as is inconsistent with
the present Act is hereby repealed,” adoptions of
Acts with provisions quite inapplicable to the colony,
and various other methods of legislation had been
the consolidation and for the amendment of the
Statute Law ; but as to the amendment only so far
as such amendment might be deemed necessary for
effective and useful consolidation. Ihe committee,
of great weight and authority, consisted of the Chief
Justice, Sir F. M. Darley (president), the Hons. Sir
W. C. Windeyer, Sir J. G. L. Lines, M. H. Stephen,
William Owen, W. J. Foster and C. J. Manning,
Judges of the Supreme Court ; their Honors Judge
Forbes, Judge Murray, Judge Docker, Judge Back-
house, judge Fitzhardinge, Judge Gibson and Judge
Coffee ; the Hons. C. G. Heydon, T. M. Slattery, Sir
J. P. Abbott, Sir J. E. Salomon, G. B. Simpson,
C. E. Pilcher, R. E. O’Connor, W. H. Pigott ; Messrs.
A. Oliver, F. E. Rogers, J. H. Want, E. Barton, B. R.
Wise, W. P. Cullen, A. J. Gould, H. F. Barton, P.
Cobbett, P. J. Healey, A. H. Simpson, C. B. Stephen,
A. Gordon, A. G. Ralston, D. Ferguson, J. L. Wat-
kins, J. H. P. Murray, E. A. Smith, W. Roberts, G.
Colquhoun, P. W. Creagh, R. Smith, Wm. Cope, D.
Fisher, A. R. Minter, A. C. Stephen, H. A. Russell,
G. W. F. Addison, R. 1). Pring and G. C. K. Waldron.
Old Central Police Court.
piled one upon the other, and had brought the Statute
Law into a condition of confusion and entangle-
ment, which gave endless trouble to the Courts and
was a daily source of irritation and expense to all
classes of the community. Some mitigation had
been afforded from time to time by the publication
of collections of the statutes. In 1859 Mr - H. Cury,
a District Court Judge, published A Collection of
Statutes affecting New South Wales, containing all the
Statutes of practical utility at the present time” ; and
in 1879 was published a very useful and excellent
work, “ A Collection of the Statutes of Practical
Utility, Colonial and Imperial, in force in New South
Wales,” by Mr. A. Oliver, then Parliamentary drafts-
man. Notwithstanding these efforts, the essential
features of the trouble remained, and Mr. O’Connor
determined to make an effort to grapple with the
difficulty. On December 29, 1893, a Royal Com-
mission was issued, which authorised its members (1) to
make a diligent and full inquiry into the Statute Law
in force in the colony ; (2) to submit proposals in the
form of bills ready for presentation to Parliament for
Eightjcommittees were formed, and the Statute-Book
parcelled out amongst them. A revision committee,
composed of some sixteen members, was to examine
and pass all the bills prepared by each committee,
and to forward them to the Minister, to be submitted
to Parliament. This continued for two years and a
half, when a report was sent in, signed by Mr. Justice
Owen (the Chief Justice having resigned some time
before), in which the Minister was informed that the
Commission was unanimously of the opinion that
“ it would be undesirable to continue its existence in
the present form,” and the work came to a stop.
The report also stated that ‘ ‘ a good deal of very
important and careful work had been carried out by
the Commissioners, and it would be a serious loss if
it were not utilised for the benefit of the community.’ ’
The opinion was expressed that the work would be
better done if entrusted to a smaller body of com-
missioners. Upon this his Honor Judge Heydon,
K.C., volunteered his services. They were accepted,
and he was appointed a “ Royal Commissioner for the
consolidation of the Statute Law,” to complete the


work. This he did, in the face of many hindrances,
attei six years strenuous labour ; his report being
presented to Parliament in July 1904.
In the limited scope of this article many matters
deserving some attention have had to be omitted,
but a brief reference must be made to the important
reforms which have been secured during the latter
years of his predecessor’s term of office and, since the
appointment of Sir F. M. Barley, P.C., G.C.M.G., the
present Chief Justice, to preside on the Supreme Court
Bench. From the earliest days of the Legislative
Council the ponderous and vexatious system of
Equity procedure was a crying grievance to suitors
and lawyers alike. The voice of Wentworth was
constantly heard crying out to have that ‘ ‘ Augean
stable cleansed,’’ as he contemptuously termed the
Equity Court ; and he did not relax in his efforts until
a modicum of relief was secured. Five- and-twenty
years ago the antiquated rules of practice, then prevail-
ing in this jurisdiction were abolished by the passing
of a bill to amend the process ; and since that time
the hearing of suits has been greatly facilitated by tak-
ing of evidence orally before the Judge, who may make
the order, if he think fit, that the testimony shall be re-
corded by shorthand writers. Another instalment of
reform has been granted by the Supreme Court Pro-
cedure Act ; section ten permitting the rules of court to
be drawn up, specifying in what cases applications
may be made in chambers, and providing for a course
of procedure thereon. Since the Crown Lands Aliena-
tion Act of 1861, several bills have been adopted by
Parliament encouraging agricultural settlement and
removing the friction which so long existed between
pastoral tenants and free selectors. Local land
boards are now constituted in various districts, and
the decisions of these tribunals are subject to appeal
to the Land Appeal Court. The decisions of this
Court have the force of judgments of the Supreme
Court, but the latter may be resorted to where ques-
tions of law are involved. Little has been done
since Sir Alfred Stephen’s amendments were adopted
by the Legislature to alter the criminal law, although
in 1894 the First Offenders Probation Act was placed
upon the Statute Book for the benefit of youthful
offenders bringing themselves under the provisions of
the criminal laws. About thirteen years ago a Bank-
ruptcy Act took the place of the old insolvency law,
and it has worked so efficiently in the protection of
creditors and the punishment of fraudulent traders,
that it has not been considered necessary to amend
it. By the operations of the Land and Income Tax
Assessment Act of 1895 a new jurisdiction, known as
the Court of Review, was appointed for the hearing
of appeals against the assessments of the Commis-
sioners appointed to carry out the provisions of the
Act. In 1899 the [Marine Board was superseded by
a body constituted under the Navigation (Amend-
ment) Act, and a Court of Marine Inquiry has now
become the tribunal for investigating the cause of
collisions and awarding penalties.' The Court con-
sists of a District Court Judge, assisted by two nau-
tical assessors. A Judge of the Supreme Court pre-
sides over the Central Criminal Court, and all prisoners
are tried by a jury of twelve, chosen by lot from the
Sheriff’s panel; the accused in cases of felony and
misdemeanour having the right to challenge eight, or in
capital cases, thirty jurors. The Supreme Court J udges
go on circuit every half-year and hold Courts of Gaol
Delivery for dealing with more serious crimes ; also
hearing actions at the various towns visited. In 1901
the Arbitration Act was passed for the hearing of
industrial disputes, and it was intended to be the
means of avoiding strikes and establishing harmonious
relations between employer and employee ; but the un-
warranted abuse of its provisions has rather pro-
moted friction between the various trade interests
than abated it.


Chief Justices—Past and Present.
Sir FRANCIS FORBES sat on the Bench as Chief
Justice from October, 1823, until July, 1837, when, ow i n S
to threatened attacks of paralysis, he obtained leave
to quit the colony. Four years later this fatal malady
brought his life to a close. He was a man of great
ability, and had his labour been confined to the Bench
his endowments would have secured for him the name
of a great benefactor. Against his own wishes, his ap-
pointment imposed on him the combination of judicial
duties with those of a member of the Executive Council
and the Legislative Council, preparing in a great degree
all public measures brought forward. Incidental to
the office of Chief Justice was attached a power by
which “ no local ordinance should be passed into law
unless he should have transmitted to the Governor a
certificate that such ordinance was not repugnant to
the laws of England, but was consistent with such laws
as far as the circumstances of the colony would admit.”
This virtually invested the Judge with a veto on any
Act of the Legislature, of which he did not approve.
Such an anomalous position frequently proved a source
of trouble to Downing Street, as well as to the Chief
Freeman. T. Shine, Eng.
THW HON. SIR FRANCIS FORBES, KNT.
Justice. Forbes, who was at all times a strong sup-
porter of trial by jury, took up early in his career an
attitude which provoked much local feeling. Act 4,
Geo. IV., constituting Courts of Quarter Sessions,
made no provision for juries, and the Chief Justice
held that the omission must be taken as the intention
of the Legislature for civil juries to be empanelled
thereat. The magistracy appealed to the Governor
against a ruling which in criminal cases would bring
the emancipist class on an equal footing with the free.
After several months’ wrangling Forbes granted a
mandamus, commanding the magistrates to hold
sessions and summons a jury. But the magistrates
proved equal to the occasion, and foiled the Judge by
confining the list of jurymen to persons who had never
been convicted. This system, which worked well, was
continued until 1828, when Act 9, Geo. IV., c. 83,
settled the dispute by providing, in section 13, that
the Circuit Court should proceed in like form and
manner as the Supreme Court ; and in section 17,
“ such and the same manner with regard to the cri-
minal cases tried before Courts of General and Quarter
Sessions respectively.” But, what was a greater blow
to the Chief Justice’s political leanings, sections Nos.
21 and 22 withdrew from him the power to veto pro-
jected legislation that he considered repugnant to Eng-
lish law ; whilst section No. 24 declared English law was
to be applied in the administration of justice subject
to the power of the Governor and the Legislative Coun-
cil—now enlarged to not more than 15 nor less than
10 members —to declare by ordinance what law should
be deemed to extend to the colony. The law imposing
restrictions on the Press led to an estrangement between
the Chief Justice and Governor Darling, and occa-
sioned a long correspondence accusatory on the part
of the latter, that Forbes, of the Executive Council,
and in his legislative capacity, had approved of an
Act of Council relative to the Press which afterwards,
by virtue of his power as Chief Justice, he judicially
defeated. Outside the excitement of politics, Forbes
possessed imperturbable calmness of temper, acute dis-
crimination, and a thorough acquaintance with legal
principles. By the exercise of a discriminative mind
he defined with precision in criminal cases the circum-
stances that distinguished apparent from real guilt,
though in political trials his conduct did not escape
censure. It was during his term of office that the
Legislature removed the penalty of death from forgery,
cattle-stealing, and stealing from a dwelling-house
above the value of £5. Notwithstanding this, in 1833,
1834 and *835 the capital sentences passed were 135
148, 116 respectively ; a deplorable condition of affairs
which drew from Sir W. W. Burton the comment that
‘ ‘ it appeared as if the main business of us all were the
commission of crime and the punishment of it.” The
Judges associated with Chief Justice Forbes were:
Mr. Justice Wylde, Sir James Dowling, Mr. Justice
James Stephen, Sir W. W. Burton, and Mr. Justice
Kinchela.
Sir JAMES DOWLING, who succeeded Chief Jus-
tice Forbes, was favourably known as the compiler of the
legal work entitled “ Dowling and Rylands’ Reports.”
He owed his appointment of Puisne Judge to the
patronage of Lord Brougham, then Secretary of State
for the Colonies, and to his superior claims of qualifi-
cation over the other candidates ; and he did honour to
the recommendation. Perhaps a more painstaking
and conscientious J udge never occupied the seat of
Justice. For some years after his appointment,
through the infirm health of his brother Judges, the
principal duties of the Court devolved upon him. He
was a fluent speaker and wrote shorthand so remark-
ably well that the proceedings of every trial at which
he presided might now be accurately published from
his notes. As a “case-lawyer,” which consists of a
knowledge of precedents in point to the matter under
discussion, Sir J. Dowling was well informed. More


over, he was of a kindly nature and possessed a very
conciliatory address. So great was his regard for the
feelings of others that it was said that during the whole
sixteen years he presided on the Bench not a single
expression escaped him calculated to hurt the most
sensitive mind. As a member of the Legislative Coun-
cil he was sometimes obliged to share in debate, but he
confined himself to topics connected with legal amend-
ments. Of his talents, it can only be said they were
not of a very high standard. His range of reading
beyond the books of his own profession was limited ;
and there was at times apparent in his addresses to
juries and in his judgments a tendency to impart to
circumstances capable of innocent explanation a con-
struction on the side of guilt. At that time in New
South Wales a Judge had no respite from work. During
the whole of Sir James Dowling’s career he was daily
engaged in some one or other of the multifarious duties
of the Supreme Court ; and he died at his post on
Freeman. T. Shine, Eng.
THE HON. SIR JAMES DOWLING, KNT.
August 27, 1844, a victim to scrupulous anxiety and
excessive toil. His associates in the discharge of
judicial functions were : Sir W. W. Burton, Mr. Justice
Kinchela, Mr. Justice Willis, Mr. Justice Wm. a’Beckett
and Mr. (afterwards Sir) Alfred Stephen, the latter
being appointed his successor. In 1838 the Chief
Justice was chairman of a Select Committee to examine
an Insolvency Bill framed by Judge Burton on the
lines of the Cape of Good Hope Act, with a view of
checking the corrupt practices then in vogue. This
very necessary measure, which was known as Burton’s
Act, became law in 1841.
Sir ALFRED STEPHEN, P.C., C. 8., G.C.M.G.,
was the fourth son of Mr. Justice Stephen, who for some
time was a Judge of the Supreme Court of New South
Wales, and who died in 1833. Born in the island of St.
Christopher, West Indies, on August 20,1802, the future
Chief Justice of this colony was sent, at an early age,
to England and placed in the London Charterhouse
School, and at the Grammar School, Honiton, Devon-
shire ; but at thirteen years of age he accompanied his
father, who was then Solicitor-General for the Lee-
ward Islands, back to the West Indies, and two years
afterwards received an appointment as second lieu-
tenant in a militia corps of Fusiliers, formed for the
defence of St. Christopher. His tastes, however, mani-
festing themselves in the direction of the law, he returned
to England and commenced to study for the Bar,
under Sir John Stephen, and subsequently as a
pupil of Sir James Stephen. He was called to the Bar
at Lincoln’s Inn in November, 1823, and commenced
practising immediately as an Equity draughtsman.
Before the following year had expired he embarked
for Tasmania, and, landing in that colony in April,
1825, was appointed by the Governor, Colonel Arthur,
to the office of Crown Solicitor and Solicitor-General.
One of his first efforts at the colonial Bar was directed
against the practice of a counsel receiving fees from
both litigants. The main question at the time was
whether a barrister holding a general retainer could,
without license, advise the opposite party, or whether
he could draw pleas for both. Mr. Stephen considered
the practice to be dishonourable and dangerous, and,
if allowed to continue it ‘ ‘ would compel him to re-
linquish the profession or seek an honourable pittance
elsewhere.” In 1829 he discovered a fatal error in all
the land titles of the colony, the Governor having issued
them in his own name instead of that of his Sovereign.
The Secretary of State issued instructions to amend
the form of grant, and upon Mr. Stephen’s recom-
mendations the error in the titles was removed as far
as it possibly could be.
In 1832 Mr. Stephen left the colony for England
and whilst on his way to the home country was gazetted
Attorney-General of Tasmania. The following year he
returned to the colony and at once entered upon the
duties of his new office, which he retained until the
year 1838, when he resigned his appointment, partly
through a quarrel with Judge Montague, one of the
Judges of the Tasmanian Bench, who had assailed him
with great abuse in open Court. As a law officer of
the Crown Mr. Stephen was said to display great legis-
lative skill, and to exhibit in a considerable degree
qualities which justified his subsequent elevation to
a Judgeship in New South Wales. He was appointed
to a vacant position on the Bench of the Supreme Court
of this colony in 1839, sitting as one of the Puisne
Judges until 1844, when, on the death of Sir James
Dowling, he was appointed Chief Justice of the colony.
The appointment gave general satisfaction, although
claimed, in accordance with English practice, by Mr.
Plunkett, then Attorney-General. But the Executive
Council disallowed Mr. Plunkett’s claim and followed
a course which was afterwards taken by the Parkes
Government in appointing Sir James Martin to the
Chief Justiceship on the retirement of Sir Alfred
Stephen, giving the offer to the man believed to be
the best fitted for it. In 1846 Mr. Brewster, a solicitor
of Port Phillip, and one of the members for that con-
stituency. introduced into the Legislative Council a bill
‘ ‘ to abolish the division of the profession of the law
in New South Wales.” The leading legal members—


Messrs. Windeyer, Wentworth and Darvall —opposed
the measure ; while the erratic Robert Lowe gave it
strong support. The outcome was, a select committee,
appointed in 1847, which found that Sir Alfred Stephen
and the resident Judge at Port Phillip discountenanced
the proposed change on the grounds—that it would
be unwise ; that it would remove the legal responsi-
bility for negligence or ignorance attaching to attor-
neys ; that it would remove the check afforded by the
Bar against speculative actions, and that it would tend
to decrease generally the skill, efficiency and character
of the profession of the law, and consequently, by
degrading the Bench, impair the administration of
justice. The committee reported accordingly, and,
further, adopted the suggestions of the Chief Justice
to admit candidates, after examination, to the Bar,
without having to study abroad, and to introduce in
the Court of Equity a concise, simple and expeditious
mode of proceeding, suited to the wants and means of
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
SIR ALFRED STEPHEN, P.C., C.B, G.C.M.G.
the community, instead of the cumbersome and ex-
pensive system then prevailing. During the Earl of
Belmore’s term of office (1867-73) as Governor of New
South Wales, a commission of gentlemen learned in the
law was appointed to suggest reforms in the civil and
criminal jurisprudence of this country, and Sir Alfred
Stephen, as Chief Justice, being at the head of the
commission, devoted a considerable portion of his
time to the inquiry. A large number of recommen-
dations in the details of administration were made in
the report of the commission, and a bill embodying
many of the recommendations was drafted for the
consideration of Parliament. This did not advocate
any sweeping changes, but it led to some important
practical reforms and the removal of several incon-
venient anomalies.
In 1873 Sir Alfred Stephen resigned his office as
Chief Justice and retired from the Bench. Such an
event could not but call forth an expression of public
opinion upon the services of a Judge who had been
actively engaged in the duties of his office, almost
uninterruptedly, for no less a period than 34 years.
On September 26, the day upon which he delivered his
valedictory address, both floor and gallery of the
court-room were crowded with members of the Bar,
solicitors, and the general public—everyone taking the
greatest interest in the proceedings. Upon the Bench
were their Honors Mr. Justice Hargrave and Mr.
Justice Faucett and Mr. Justice Cheeke ; and at the
head of the gentlemen of the legal profession was Mr.
Attorney-General Butler. In the course of his address
the Chief Justice said :—ln May, 1839, the business
of the Supreme Court was naturally not overwhelming,
but especially in suits and civil proceedings generally,
it has during the last twenty years enormously in-
creased. At the time of my arrival the roll of barristers
in Sydney comprised 20 names only—Mr. Went-
worth’s at its head, Mr. Ross Donnelly’s the last on
the list. On the solicitors’ roll there were the names
of not more than 52. In 1863 the Bar—those in actual
practice, excluding those bearing office —numbered 44,
while the solicitors had increased to 137. In the
present year their numbers are respectively 65 and
243, of whom above 100 reside in Sydney, the others,
greatly to the advantage of the country, being spread
over the vast districts of the interior. It is painful
to remember that of the small band of practitioners
first mentioned four barristers and seven solicitors
alone are now living. Of the Judges with whom I
originally sat and those who next succeeded none now
remain in the colony—the greater number have gone
to their last rest ; and of the,profession whom I now
address the far larger proportion have entered it—
many of its members have been born—since my acces-
sion to office. Truly it is time for me to retire and
leave the field to younger men.” For but a few
months short of thirty years Sir Alfred Stephen filled,
with high distinction, the office of Chief Justice, and
during this long period had with him on the Supreme
Court Bench Judges a’Beckett, J. N. Dickinson (who
for some time acted as Chief Justice), Roger Therry,
W. M. Manning, S. F. Milford, Ed. Wise. J. J. Hargrave,
Alf. Cheeke, P. Faucett, and Sir Win. Manning. A
warm-hearted and cultured English gentleman, dis-
tinguished as a Crown Law officer in Tasmania, as
Judge of the Supreme Court and Chief Justice in New
South Wales, as President and, after resignation of
that office, as a member of the Legislative Council in
this colony, as member of the old Board of National
Education, as senator of the University, as trustee
of the Australian Museum and the National Art Gal-
lery, and as Lieutenant-Governor, Sir Alfred Stephen
will be best remembered by his reputation as a Judge.
A patient, just, upright and fearless administrator of
the law, he possessed all the qualities which would
have won him a high place, even among the great
jurists of England. His accurate knowledge of the
law, his faculty of luminous expression, his dignity,
his charming, old-time courtesy, won him the respect
and love of all who ever associated with him, or who
pleaded before him. His power of disposing of busi-
ness was altogether exceptional. For keen insight
into the nature of men and things, for a ready power


of applying the principles of law to the complicated
facts of a long case, for strict adherence to the rules
of evidence, and the quickest perception of the irrele-
vancy of all extraneous matter, and for all those quali-
ties which may be summed up in one word —power —
it would be difficult for any Judge to excel him. His
woVk a - a law-reformer must not be overlooked, for
while on the Bench he drafted or suggested many of
the Acts which now form the base of the procedure
in our Courts.
Sir JAMES MARTIN, C.J., who succeeded Sir
Alfred Stephen, was born in 1820, in the town of Middle-
ton, County Cork, Ireland, and arrived in New South
Wales, with his parents, during the following year. His
early life was spent at Parramatta. On leaving school
he was articled to G. R. Nichols, one of the ablest of
Australian lawyers and legislators, and he was no
sooner out of his articles than he was admitted as an
attorney, and commenced to practise for himself with
considerable success. He appears to have divided his
attention between law and politics. At this time he
was only 26 years old, and two years later he succeeded
in entering Parliament in the teeth of most bitter
opposition. In 1856 Mr. Martin joined the party led
by Mr. (afterwards Sir Charles) Cowper, and the latter
shortly afterwards was entrusted by his Excellency,
Sir William Denison, to form a new Administration.
In performing this task Mr. Cowper experienced great
difficulty in finding Crown Law officers. Messrs.
Plunkett, Broadhurst and Isaacs having declined the
Attorney-General’s portfolio, the Premier was com-
pelled to take a bold step and fall back upon Mr. Martin.
No sooner did this appointment of an attorney become
known than a great outcry against it was made, both
inside and outside Parliament, the barristers regarding
it as an insult to the Bar. A hostile resolution was
carried in the House, and the Ministry resigned, to be
returned to power the following year, with Mr. Martin,
now a member of the Bar, again as Attorney-General.
In 1868, at the time that H.R.H. Prince Alfred visited
the colony, Mr. Martin received the honour of knight-
hood ; and five years later, on the retirement of Sir
Alfred Stephen from the position of Chief Justice, the
office was offered to Sir James Martin by Sir Henry
Parkes. He accepted it, and was sworn in on Novem-
ber 19, 1873. Sir James Innes, then Solicitor-General,
in expressing the congratulations of the Bar upon his
Honor’s appointment, said : ‘‘ The Bar of New South
Wales has long been proud to acknowledge you as a
leader, and, while making no invidious comparisons,
I feel i am authorised to say that without a single dis-
sentient the members of the Bar gladly admit that by
none could the high honour to which you have now
attained have been more fairly won, and that by none
could that honour be more worthily borne. We have
reason to believe that the satisfaction with which your
filling the great office of chief magistrate of this colony
is felt by the Bar, is shared in no diminished degree by
the people at large.” The duties appertaining to the
office of Chief Justice his Honor discharged for close
on thirteen years with ceaseless assiduity and caie,
and it was only when the work became so excessive as
to induce serious ill-health that he reluctantly sought
rest by obtaining several months’ leave of absence.
But the rest had been delayed too long, and he suc-
cumbed to the effects of overwork on November 4th,
1886. Sir James Martin held a position in New South
Wales which may well be considered unique. In the
office of Chief Justice he acquired a reputation for
insight and ability, for a quick grasp of complicated
fact, and a power of terse and clear expression seldom
equalled on the Bench anywhere. Endowed with
talents and capacity of the very highest order, and
with a mind highly cultured and richly stored with
varied and extensive information, which could only be
acquired by long and constant application, he became
in his early years a bold and brilliant leader in the
parliamentary life of the colony. As a Judge his
power of dealing with abstruse and difficult questions
of law, in collating, contrasting and distinguishing
cases, no matter how numerous, that bore on any
Freeman. T. Shine, Eng.
SIR JAMES MARTIN, KNT.
particular question, was singularly remarkable. At
intervals during his term of office there sat on the Bench
with Sir James Martin the following Judges : Then-
Honors Mr. Justice Hargrave, Mr. Justice Cheeke,
Mr. lustice Faucett, Sir William Manning, Sir William
Windeyer, and Sir J. G. Long Innes.
By virtue of his position as Attorney-General the
Hon. j. H. Want was entitled to the preference, if the
Government saw fit to appoint him, to the vacancy, but
he waived his claim, and the Government of the
day accordingly offered the Chief Justiceship to Sir
F. M. (then Mr.) Darley, 0.C., who declined it on private
grounds. Sir Julian (at that time Mr.) Salomon, Q.C.,
was then approached and he signified his willingness
to take the office ; but, upon discerning that the three
senior Puisne Judges were unfavourable to his appoint-
ment, he resigned before being sworn in, and, upon
second representations, Mr. Darley was induced to
accept the position.


Sir FREDERICK M. DARLEY,
P.C..G.C.M.G., K.C.,LL.D. (Dub.),
Chief Justice of the Supreme
Court of New South Wales,
was born in Dublin, September 18th,
1830, and was educated at Dun-
gannon College, in the County of
Tyrone, his uncle the Rev. John
Darley, afterwards Bishop of Kil-
more, being the headmaster. His
father was a member of the Irish
Bar, and subsequently one of the
six Clerks in Chancery in Ireland.
From Dungannon Mr. Darley pro-
ceeded to Trinity College, Dublin,
entering on the Ist of July, 1847.
He graduated Bachelor of Arts,
July Ist, 1851. The honorary degree
of EL. D. was conferred on him at the
same time as on Lord Roberts, who
stood beside him. He was called to
the Bar in Dublin on January 18th,
SIR F. M. DARLEY, G.C.M.G.
1853, and became a member of the
King’s Inn, Dublin, and of the Inner
Temple, London. Previous to this
he had been for two years in the
chambers of Richard Holmes Coote,
the editor of “ Coote on Mortgages.”
After nine years at the Irish Bar, in
the Munster circuit, he left for
Australia, landing in Melbourne
early in 1862, where he remained
only about ten days. At the end of
that period he came to Sydney, and
with the exception of a few trips to
England, has remained in Sydney
ever since. He was admitted to
the New South Wales Bar in June,
1862. On the 28th September he
was summoned to a seat in
the Legislative Council. Among
the measures which he was instru-
mental in introducing and passing in-
to law were the present Equity Act,
and the Divorce Act—which gives
to the wife rights equal to those
enjoyed by her husband and
the Act which authorises marriage
with a deceased wife’s sister. In
1884 he was appointed one of
the members of the Royal Com-
mission to inquire into the Military
Defences of the Colony, and in
that capacity his services were
of considerable value. Of this
Commission it will be remembered
the late Sir James Martin was
President, and the late Sir Peter
Scratchley (a relative of Mr. Darley),
Vice-President. Mr. Darley was
made a Queen’s Counsel in 1880.
After the death of Sir James Martin,
Mr. Darley was appointed Chief
Justice, November 27th, 1886. The
Premier, Sir Patrick Jennings, in
making the offer urged Mr. Darley
in the following terms: “ You must
be aware that your consent to
occupy the position would give,
probably, almost universal satisfac-
tion, and would be in a large degree
beneficial to the public service in
its highest and most responsible
position.” No occupant of the
position could ascend the Bench
under happier auspices. Mr. Darley
enjoyed the confidence of both
branches of the legal profession, and
held the esteem and respect of the
public. The ceremony of swearing
in took place at the Banco
Court, 18th December, 1886. In
1897 was appointed K.C.M.G.,
and in igoi G.C.M.G. While
holding the office and discharging
the responsible duties devolving upon
him as Chief Justice, he has been
called upon to discharge also the
duties and responsibilities of Lieu-
tenant-Governor, to which he was
appointed on 23rd of November, 1891.
In 1892, when on a visit to England,
he was asked by the Prime Minister
of England, Mr. Balfour, to sit upon
the Royal Commission to inquire
into the South African War, and he
consented to do so, under the
Presidency of Lord Elgin.
Sir Frederick was married at
Hansdon, Hertfordshire, England, on
December 13th, iB6O, to Miss Lucy
Forest Browne, and has two sons
and four daughters.
The Hon. Sir WILLIAM OWEN,
Knt., Senior Puisne Judge of the
Supreme Court of New South
Wales, was born in November, 1834,
and is the son of the late Colonei
Owen, of that famous regiment, the
72nd Highlanders. Educated at
Cheltenham College, England, and
graduating, a prize medallist, at
Trinity College, Dublin, Mr. Owen
was called to the bar in 1859,
and enrolled as a barrister of the
Supreme Court of this colony the
following year. He selected the
Equity jurisdiction as the field of
his forensic labours and soon won
his way to a leading position at
the Equity Bar, taking silk in 1882.
In October, 1887, he was appointed
Chief Judge in Equity, and dis-
charged , judicial Junctions in this
court until November, 1896, when
he was transferred to the Common
Law Bench. His Honor has also
Crown Studios.
SIR WILLIAM OWEN, KNT.
acted for some years past as De-
puty Judge Commissary of the
Vice-Admiralty Court, a jurisdic-
tion quite distinct from the Su-
preme Court. In addition, Mr.
Justice Owen has presided over
several Royal Commissions, not-
ably those where certain grave
charges were unjustifiably brought
against the Chief Commissioner of
Railways, the late Mr. Eddy, and
the recent inquiry into the grave
scandals in connection with the
past administration of the Lands
Department. Sir William Owen
is one of the latest among our
prominent public men to be favoured
by his Majesty the King with the
honour of knighthood.


In recording the careers of those
members of the Windeyer family
who have been before the public of
New South Wales for nearly a cen-
tury, it may be interesting to state
something of their antecedents. The
first Windeyer who made England
his home was John William, a
Swiss soldier, who went thither in
Queen Charlotte’s bodyguard in
1761, when she was married to
George HI. He left the Royal
Household to take charge of the
naval stores at Purfleet on his mar-
riage to Hannah Cameron. He
had children —Walter, Archibald
Charles, Ann (afterwards Mrs.
Weaver). Archibald Charles was
head of the commissariat in Ro-
chester, three times mayor of that
city, and Grandmaster of the Free-
masons. Descendants of his are now
in Canada. Walter had four sons
and one daughter—Charles, John,
Walter, Archibald, Mary (Mrs. Pud-
difoote). Of Walter’s sons Charles
was the first to come to New
South Wales, with a promise that
he should have the first appoint-
ment for which his legal edu-
cation fitted him. He was law
reporter for the Times, and the first
recognised reporter in the House of
Lords for the same journal. In
Wade’s ‘‘British History,” writ-
ten 1840, he tells us that ‘ ‘ the
first person who ventured to rest his
book on their Lordship’s bar is said
to have been Mr. Windeyer, who
now r is or lately was a justice of the
peace in Sydney, New South
Wales.” Charles Windeyer was an
honorary member of the London
Vaccine Institution. His diploma,
granted for his “ liberal co-opera-
tion in the philanthropic cause
of vaccination,” dated March 25,
1824, and signed by the Rt.
Hon. the Lord Mayor of Lon-
don, Robert Waithman, President,
is a remarkable specimen of en-
graving. He came to Sydney in
1825 with an introduction to Sir
Thomas Brisbane. He was able
to be of service in carrying out
Sir George Gipps’ plan to found
a municipality in Sydney. A
mayor and the requisite number
of aldermen were in the first
instance appointed in 1842, Mr.
Windeyer being mayor. Before
the time when an election could
be held among the existing mem-
bers he was appointed clerk of
the bench, and subsequently po-
lice magistrate, He died in 1855.
John Windeyer died on board
H.M.S. “ Warspite ” when that
ship was in Sydney harbour. Cap-
tain Walter Windeyer sailed with
the Duke of Clarence, afterwards
King William IV., to whom he was
naval aide-de-camp. He was some
time commander of Nelson’s ship,
the “ Victory,” when she was a
training ship in Portsmouth. Archi-
bald Windeyer came to this country
in 1845. He acquired the estate
called Kinross, as well as much
valuable station property. Richard
Windeyer, born in London, August
10th, 1806, was the eldest son of
Charles Windeyer. He was edu-
SIR WM. WINDEYER.
cated in London chiefly, but for a
considerable time was at a school
in France, to which he owed his
perfect command of the language of
that country. He was admitted a
Barrister of the Middle Temple in
1834, was a writer and Parlia-
mentary reporter for the Times and
other papers, being also the origi-
nator of Todd’s Parliamentary Com-
panion, was a friend of Richard
Cobden and took part in the first
agitation against the Corn Laws.
Colonel Peronet Thompson, Cob-
den’s secretary, was godfather to
Richard Windeyer, son of William.
On the death of Dr. Warded and
the retirement of Mr. Wentworth
from the Sydney bar, in accord-
ance with the strong representa
tions of his father, Richard
Windeyer came to Sydney, and at
once became a leading barrister.
He had married, in 1832, Maria,
daughter of William Camfield, of
Burswood, Kent. Mr. and Mrs. R.
Windeyer arrived in Sydney with
their only child on the 28th Novem-
ber, 1835. Some years of successful
practice at the bar enabled him to
purchase a large area of land on the
Lower Hunter, called by the natives
Tomago, the meaning being “sweet
water.” In 1843 he was elected to
represent the constituency of Dur-
ham in the first Legislative Council,
and during his political career intro-
duced a bill dealing with libel, be-
sides many other measures. He
was ever among those who strug-
gled for freedom, Wentworth, Bland,
Lowe and Dr. Lang being his inti-
mate associates ; he was also a great
friend and advocate of the rights
of the natives. Toocooya, the chief
of Tomago, always spoke of Mr.
Windeyer as his “ brudder.” Busi-
ness worries, engendered by the
“ hard times ” of the early forties,
had much to do with the break-
down of his health. He went with
his wife to Launceston, where he
died on the 2nd December, 1847.
He was remembered by the oldest
inhabitants as ‘ ‘ one of the kindest
of men that ever walked, always
wanting to help the poor.” In the
days of his prosperity he built a
pretty school-house and teacher’s
residence at Tomago, and to the
time of his death paid a school-
mistress to teach the children on
the estate in the day-time, and
in the evening the boys and
young men who worked on. the
place.
William Charles Windeyer was
born at 8 College Street, West-
minster, September 29, 1834. On
the 19th July, 1835, his parents,
Mr. and Mrs. R. Windeyer, sailed
with their infant son for Australia,
arriving in Sydney on the 28th
November. When twelve years
old he had to deplore the loss
of his father. The widow and
orphan were left badly off. An
offer from Dr. Nicholson was
deemed to be an offer to edu-
cate the boy, but when Mr. Cape’s
quarterly account was unexpectedly
received by Mrs. R. Windeyer she
found that the house and care for


him whilst going to the day-school
was the extent of Dr. Nicholson’s
undertaking. On her consulting
Mr. Robert Lowe he generously
relieved her anxiety by paying the
account. In Patchett - Martin’s
‘ ‘ Life of Lord Sherbrooke ’ ’ a
letter from Sir William Windeyer
is quoted, which would make
it appear from his own words
that his education had been pro-
vided by this faithful friend. It
is only just to Mrs. Richard Win-
deyer to state that, with the
exception of the quarterly account
in question, she entirely educated
her son at the King’s School,
Parramatta, and at the University,
from the narrow income she de-
rived from the farm and garden
at Tomago, which was all that
remained of the property possessed
by her husband. On his death
she lost no time in handing
everything over to the official as-
signee, Mr. George King, who ex-
pressed in earnest terms his
admiration of her “ straightforward
conduct and business-like capa-
city.” With her father’s assist-
ance she was able to buy in
the section whereon stands the
house and grounds. The Sydney
University was opened in 1852.
Having gained a general and a
classical scholarship, Windeyer was
admitted and entered amongst the
first few candidates who presented
themselves. In 1856 he graduated
with distinction in classics and
took a first-class in mental philo-
sophy. At the Commemoration as
Esquire Bedel, his duty was to
carry the mace before the Governor.
On returning from attending his
Excellency to his carriage, and
entering the common room, he
found that his fellow-graduates had
signed the roll, leaving the first line
vacant for his name, a kindly con-
sideration, which deeply touched
him. He never ceased to speak
gratefully of the “ best influence of
his life ” —Dr. Woolley,—whose
friendship was, he said, a blessing,
of which he was unworthy. Whilst
at the University he won every year
the English essay prize, first given
by Dr. Woolley, and afterwards
founded by Mr. Wentworth as a
medal. After graduating, the study
of law was at once begun in Mr.
Broadhurst’s chambers. He was
admitted to the bar in March, 1857,
and on the last day of that year
married Mary Elizabeth, second
daughter of the Rev. R. T. Bolton.
Until his appointment as Crown
Prosecutor for the whole of the
country districts of New South
Wales he was a contributor and law
reporter to the Empire newspaper.
In January, 1859, a t fh e a
public meeting, he resigned his
official position and contested the
electorate of Paddington with Sir
Daniel Cooper, who headed the poll
by 47 votes. At the same general
election he was returned for the
Lower Hunter, defeating Captain
Williamson, the former member, by
a large majority. Thus he gained
a seat in Parliament before he was
25 years of age. In iB6O a new
organisation of volunteers was
formed. A large public meeting
assembled in the Victoria Theatre,
which had been taken by Windeyer
at his own risk, the result being the
enrolment of the Sydney Companies
of Rifles, called the Sydney Rifles.
The captains were : —No. 1, Captain
Peel Raymond ; No. 2, Captain
W. C. Windeyer ; No. 3, Captain
J. R. Fairfax ; No. 4, Captain W. C.
Still ; No. 5, Captain A. G. McLean ;
No. 6, Captain W. Harbottle. Cap-
tain Windeyer became an enthuias-
tic rifle shot. In 1862 a match
between Sydney and Melbourne re-
sulted in the triumph of Sydney.
On the return voyage of the victors
the ‘ ‘ City of Sydney ’ ’ was wrecked
off Green Cape. The shock told
on him to a considerable ex-
tent, and he determined to resign
his seat in the House. His princi-
pal interest now was in the
School of Arts. He never failed to
give an evening in the week to such
students as availed themselves of
his tuition in Latin and Greek. In
1866, without his knowledge, and
during his absence from town, he
was elected for West Sydney, de-
feating Mr. John Robertson, on
the latter seeking re-election on
taking office as Secretary for
Lands. Mr. Windeyer supported
the Martin-Parkes Administra-
tion. In 1870 he accepted
office as Solicitor-General under
Sir James Martin, after it had
been offered him seven times.
Two years later this Govern-
ment was defeated and Parlia-
ment dissolved. Mr. Windeyer
unsuccessfully contested West
Sydney, and remained out of
politics till 1876, when he was
elected first member for the
University. He held office as Attor-
ney-General twice before his poli-
tical career was terminated by his
acceptance of a Puisne Judge-
ship in 1879. His judicial
utterances are now daily quoted.
Apart from political and judicial
work there was much of
his life given to the cause of edu-
cation and to philanthropic move-
ments. His services as president of
the Public Charities Commission,
his organisation of the first Pri-
soners’ Aid Society, his work
on the Senate and as Chancellor
of the University were valuable.
In addition he was president
of the School of Arts for
some years, and chairman of
the trustees of the Sydney
Grammar School. His one great
indulgence was to get away to
his country home and to work
in his garden. Throughout his
life an intense longing to
see the old world was ever
present with him. It was
in the first jubilee year that the
the long-looked-for visit was made.
Mr. Justice and Mrs. Windeyer
sailed to Great Britain in the
“ Rome,” and while Mrs. Windeyer
continued her voyage to England
the Judge landed at Suez and had
a most interesting tour through
Egypt, Greece and Italy. At Mara-
thon he made the acquaintance of
one whose friendship was a delight
in his later years. An author, an
Oxford scholar, a politician, with a
friend also an Oxonian, had to ask
for a share in the conve3 7 ance en-
gaged to take him to Marathon.
They soon discovered kindred sen-
timents in their fellow-traveller.
The following lines, written by
the author’s friend, show some-
thing of the regard in which these
young men held their elderly
companion :
The goal of many a hope was won :
At length I stood, and by my side
A well-loved comrade old and tried,
Upon the Mount of Marathon.
And one was with us ; though his race
Had on a far-off shore been run,
And struggles over fortune won ;
True English he in heart and face.


He spoke of Greece, her storied past,
Her glorious future; and the trust
So wrought on us that neither durst
On his belief a doubt to cast
Of Greater Britain. And his soul,
Seemed to go forth with lofty words—
Words that might whet her children’s
swords.
And stay their hearts to keep her whole.
We parted and may meet no more,
But in my heart this thought survives
The lessons taught by noble lives
Are worthiest of all human lore.
On arriving, in England much
pleasure was in store from the
number of eminent persons,
whose acquaintance was gained,
in some instances, by his edu-
cational work, and in others
by his philanthropic efforts.
The degree of LL.D. was conferred
by the University of Cambridge.
He returned to Sydney cheered and
strengthened, and, as he said,
better able to enjoy the beau-
ties of his own beautiful country,”
In 1891 the honour of knight-
hood was conferred upon him, when
the number of congratulations he re-
ceived surprised and touched him.
He carried out his resolve to “ do
some more work.” In 1892 a dead-
lock arose in the Supreme Court at
Brisbane over the appeal in the case
of the Queensland Investment Com-
pany. The Queensland Government
appealed to the Government of New
South Wales, and Sir William was
appointed to preside on the bench at
Brisbane. He sat and delivered
a notable judgment. At the end
of 1895, after the persecution
which the upholders of Dean sub-
jected him to, a breakdown in health
caused him again to apply for
leave of absence, and he went to
England by way of America. His
family remained at Tomago for a
year, and then j oined him in London.
In his journey through America he
visited many of the law courts, and
he constantly felt that the bond
between American and Australian
children of our British mother
could not be broken. An en-
jovable season in London with ail
the jubilee gaities and sights was
spent. Sir William was appointed
by Mr. Chamberlain, Secretary of
State for the Colonies, to go to
Newfoundland *to sit in the de-
ferred cases of the bank directors,
and before proceeding upon this
Commission a continental tour was
begun. Two daughters accom-
panied him from England to
France, and thence to Italy. At
Venice the fatal illness came. After
some days of suffering he was well
enough to go to Bologna where,
on September 12, 1897, paralysis
of the heart ended all.
Mr. Justice GEORGE BOWEN
SIMPSON was elevated to the
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. JUSTICE G. B. SIMPSON.
Supreme Court Bench in December,
1894, and sits now almost exclu-
sively in the Divorce jurisdiction,
although occasionally he sits as a
member of the Supreme Court.
His Honor was born at Oaklands,
near Parramatta, November 22,
1838, his father being Captain Percy
Simpson, a naval and senior mili-
tary officer, formerly Governor
of Paxi, in the Mediterranean,
commander at Wellington Valley,
and Police Magistrate of Singleton,
New South Wales. After completing
his educational course at the King’s
School, Parramatta, and entering
Sydney University Mr. Simpson was
called to the Bar in 1858, and made
a Queen’s Counsel in 1886. About
the middle of the intervening years
he was Crown Prosecutor, and for
some time District Court Judge, but
he resigned the latter appointment
in June, 1874, to resume practice
at the Bar. In December, 1885, he
was nominated to the Legislative
Council, acting as Attorney-General,
and the representative of the
Robertson Ministry in that Chamber
during 1885-6. He held the same
ofhce in the fourth Parkes Govern-
ment from February, 1888. to
January, 1889, w h en he retired with
his colleagues, but was reappointed
in March, 1889, upon Sir Henry
Parkes returning to power. Re-
signing with the Ministry in
October, 1891, he was appointed
Attorney-General for the third time
in the Government formed by Mr.
George Reid in 1894.
Mr. Justice HENRY EMANUEL
COHEN, a member of the Supreme
Court Bench and for some time a
Colonial Treasurer, is the second son
of Abraham and Sophia Cohen, of
Sydney. He was educated at
private schools in the metropolis
and elsewhere, and was after-
wards engaged for a while in
commercial pursuits. Then he
proceeded to London, and entered
at the Middle Temple in October,
1868. In June, 1871, he was called
to the Bar, and upon returning to
Australia, shortly afterwards, was
admitted to the Bar of New South
Wales. Putting up for Parliament
in 1875 he was returned for West
Maitland, and represented that
constituency during the sessions of
1875-80 and 1883-5. He was
Colonial Treasurer in the Farnell
Ministry from December, 1877, to
December, 1878. In May. 1881, he
Freeman.
MR. JUSTICE H. E. COHEN.
was appointed Judge of the District
Court, but retired early in 1882
and subsequently re-entered politics,
being Minister for Justice in the


Stuart Cabinet from January, 1883,
to October, 1885. He then finally
retired from Parliament and after-
wards declined nomination to the
Legislative Council. In the latter
end of 1895 he was appointed an
Acting Judge of the Supreme Court
of New South Wales, being
permanently appointed in Septem-
ber, 1896. Mr. Justice Cohen was
the first President of the Arbi-
tration Court, sitting in that
jurisdiction during the years
1902-5. From 1884 to 1886 he
officiated as President of the
Great Synagogue, Sydney, and has
been chairman of the Board of
Management of Hospital Saturday
Fund since its inauguration.
Mr. ARCHIBALD HENRY
SIMPSON, before accepting the
position of Judge in Bankruptcy,
was a well-known Equity bar-
rister. He received his early
education at Tunbridge School, in
Kent, England, and subsequently
entered Christ College, Cambridge,
where he had a distinguished
career, taking the following honours ;
Bachelor of Arts, first-class Classical
Tripos, eighth Classic, and Fellow,
iB6O. He also received the degree
of Master of Arts in the year 1868.
Entering at Lincoln’s Inn, he read
under Sir Charles Hall and Mr.
J. H. Dart, and in 1868 was called
to the Bar by the Society of
Lincoln’s Inn, immediately com-
mencing the practice of his pro-
fession in London as conveyancer
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. A. H SIMPSON.
and equity draughtsman. He re-
mained in London until 1881, when
he came to New South Wales. In
the same year he was admitted to
the Bar of this colony, on the
motion of Sir Julian Salomons, K.C.
From the outset of his professional
career here, until his elevation to
the Supreme Court Equity Bench,
on November 21, 1896, Mr. Justice
Simpson confined his attention
entirely to Equity, Probate, and
Bankruptcy. He is an M.A. of the
Sydney University ad Eundem, and
also a Fellow of the Council of St.
Paul’s.
Mr. J ustice WILLIAM GREGORA 7
WALKER, the son of Mr. Giles
Walker, of North Lyons, Nor-
folk, England, was born in that
ancient township in 1848. He
Falk
MR. JUSRICE W. G. WALKER.
received his early education at
Tunbridge School, in Kent, his
Honor Mr. Justice A. H. Simpson
being head boy when Mr. Walker
joined that educational establish-
ment. Leaving school in 1867, he
entered Exeter College, Oxford,
where, in 1871, he took his degree
of B.A. On June 17, 1873, he was
called to the Bar at Lincoln’s Inn,
and practised at the Chancery Bar
in London for some years, coming
out to New South Wales in June,
1882. In December, 1896, he was
appointed a Queen’s Counsel, and
upon the promotion of Mr. A. H.
Simpson to the Bench Mr. Walkei
became the acknowledged leader of
the Equity Bar. From that time
and until his elevation to the
Supreme Court Bench he was en-
gaged in all the great cases heard
in the Equity jurisdiction, winning
the reputation of a sound lawyer,
a close reasoner, and an eloquent
speaker. With the exception of a
short interval, Mr. Justice Walker
ha? acted since 1887 as Chancellor
of the diocese of Sydney.
Mr. Justice ROBERT BARLOW
PRING, Puisne Judge of the Su-
preme Court of New South Wales,
was born at Mangoplah station, in
the Wagga district, on January 27,
1853, so that he was only 49 years
of age when elevated to the Bench
in July, 1902. His earlier educa-
tion was acquired, first at Macquarie
Fields, and afterwards at the King’s
School, Parramatta, under the Rev.
G. F. Macarthur. Subsequently
he entered the Sydney University,
where he received the degree of
Bachelor of Arts, and, later on, that
of Master of Arts ; and having
chosen the law as a profession, he
read with Mr. M. H. Stephen (after-
wards Acting Chief Justice). He
was called to the Bar of New
South Wales on De :ember 15, 1874,
and remained in active practice
until February 10, 1902, when his
Honor accepted the position of
Acting Puisne Judge for a period
of six months. Before this time
had expired Mr. Justice Pring was
confirmed in his appointment.
Falk.
MR. JUSTICE R. R. PRING.


Commenting on his elevation to
the Bench, the Sydney Morniny
Her<ild wrote: “Mr. Justice Pring
possesses a calm, judicial mind,
together with sound legal know-
ledge ; and his success at the
Bar has been due mainly to his
clear and close reasoning when
complicated legal problems had
to be decided. He has a thorough
grasp of the land laws, and was
generally retained in the big land
disputes that have engaged the
attention of the Supreme Court
for years past.’
Mr. Justice PHILIP WHISTLER
STREET is the second son of
the late Mr. John Rendell Street,
who was the managing director of
the Perpetual Trustee Company
from its incorporation, and for some
time member of the Legislative
Assembly for East Sydney. His
J •> •>
mother was a grand-daughter of
the explorer Lieutenant Lawson,
who, in company with Wentworth
and Blaxland, was the first to
cross the Blue Mountains- He
was born at Darlinghurst, Syd-
ney, on the 9th August, 1863, edu-
cated at the Svdnev Grammar
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. JUSTICE P. W. STREET.
School, and from that institution
passed on to the University, where
he graduated B.A. in 1883, there-
after reading law with Mr. Cecil B.
Stephen, K.C. He was called to the
Bar of New South Wales on the
25th August, 1886. While in prac-
tice he acted on one occasion as
examiner for barristers, and has
also acted on several occasions as
examiner for solicitors. To over-
take the work accumulated in the
Equity Court, owing to the absence,
on leave, of Mr. Justice A. H.
Simpson he was appointed, on the
22nd July, 1906, Acting-Judge, and
when Mr. Justice Gregory Walker
was compelled to retire on account
of failing health, Mr. Justice Street
was permanently appointed Judge
in Bankruptcy and Probate on
February Ist, 1907.
His Honor CHARLES EDWARD
ROBERTSON MURRAY, District
Court Judge (Metropolitan district)
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
HIS HONOR C. E. R. MURRAY.
is a son of the late Charles Knight
Murray, barrister-at-law, and was
born at Netting Hill, London, on
the Ist August, 1842. Arriving in
Australia with his parents about
September, 1852, he received his
early education at St. Mark’s
School. He matriculated in 1860 ;
in that year he held the Levy
scholarship ; in 1861 a University
scholarship ; in 1862 a L niversity
and the Deas Thomson (chemistry
and experimental physics) scholar-
ships. At the yearly examinations
he took first in classics and mathe-
matics ; he was placed as “ proxime
accessit ” after Sir Samuel Griffith
for the classical medal, and was
bracketed with Sir Samuel for the
mathematical medal, in the honours
examination for the B-A. degree,
which he took in 1863 ; he received
the medal for mathematics with his
M.A. degree in 1865. In 1863 he
was articled to Messrs. Spain and
Roxburgh, solicitors, and ap-
pointed Associate to Mr. Justice
Wise in August, 1864, afterwards
to his successor, Mr. Justice
Faucett. He was called to the Bar
of New South 4\ ales in June, 1867 ;
permanently appointed Crown Pro-
secutor in June, 1875, and District
Court Judge in August, 1878, in
the then newly-created North-west-
ern and Eastern districts, being
transferred to the Northern district
at the beginning of 1881, to the
Southern in 1890, and to the Me-
tropolitan district in 1893. In 1877
Judge Murray married Arabella
Marcella, only daughter of the late
Nicholas O’Connor, M.D., and has
two sons and two daughters.
His Honor ALFRED PAXTON
BACKHOUSE, District Court Judge
for the Metropolitan district of New
South Wales, is a son of the late
Hon. Benjamin Backhouse, M.L.C.,
and was born in Ipswich, Suffolk,
England, on the 28th May, 1851.
He came to Australia with his
parents as a boy, and received his
early education at the Grammar
School, Ipswich, Queensland. Pro-
ceeding afterwards to the Svdnev
• • •
University, he gained the Levy
scholarship in 1870, the Lithgow
scholarship in 1871, was “ proxime
accessit ” for the Cooper scholar-
ship in 1872, in which year he
graduated 8.A., with honours, in
classics and mathematics and took
Freeman & Co.
HIS HONOR A. P. BACKHOUSE.
his M.A. degree in 1873. He was
called to the Bar of New South
Wales in December. 1876, and was
appointed Crown Prosecutor in 1878,
which position he held until ap-
pointed a District Court Judge.
His Honor has been a Fellow of
Svdnev Universitv since 1887, was


Vice-Chancellor from 1892-5 and
from 1896 1900. In February,
1879, he married Kate Marion,
daughter of the late Robert Hills,
of “ Allington,” Elizabeth Bay,
New South Wales. *SI
His Honor FRANCIS EDWARD
ROGERS, M.A., LL.B., Judge for
the South-western district of New
South Wales, was born in Sydney
on the 24th February, 1841. His
father, the late Edward Rogers,
J. Hubert Newman Ltd
HID HONOR F. E. ROGERS, K.C.
held the position of Clerk of the
Peace for many years. The son
was educated at private schools,
and passed from them to the Syd-
ney University, and succeeded in
obtaining his B.A. degree in 1860.
He took his M.A. and LL.B. degrees
in 1862, and was gold medallist in
chemistry and physics. Having
chosen law as his profession, he was
called to the Bar of New South
Wales in 1864, and in the same
year to the Bar of Queensland.
Five years later he was appointed
Crown Prosecutor for the Northern
district, a position which he held
from 1870 to 1875 ; a similar posi-
tion was held by him in the Hunter
district from 1875 to 1877 ; he was
then appointed to Sydney where he
acted from 1877 to 1882. In De-
cember, 1887, he received his ap-
pointment as Q.C. He was Presi-
dent of the Land Court, 1890 to
1893, and was appointed Judge in
1897. His Honor has on many
occasions been appointed Acting-
Judge of the Supreme Court. He
is a Fellow of the Senate of the
University, his fellowship dating
from 1889. He married Rebecca,
eldest daughter of the late Rev.
Dr. King, formerly rector of St.
Andrew’s, Sydney.
His Honor ERNEST BOUGHAM
DOCKER, Judge of the District
Court, New South Wales, is a son
of the late Hon. Joseph Docker,
M.L.C., and was born on the Ist
April, 1842, at Thornthwaite, near
Scone. Judge Docker received his
education at the Collegiate School,
Cook’s River, passing from there to
the Sydney University, where he
had a distinguished career, winning
the St. Paul’s College Denison
scholarship in 1860 ; University
medal for verse, 1861 ; Wentworth
medal for English essay, 1862 ;
taking his B.A. degree, 1863, and
M.A., 1865. He was called to the
Bar of New South Wales in June,
1867, and was appointed Crown
Prosecutor 1875. In 1880 he was
appointed a District Court Judge
for the North-western district and
in 1884 transferred to the Western,
and in 1894 was appointed a Judge
to hold a Court in Norfolk Island.
In ecclesiastical matters Judge
Docker has always taken a very
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
HIS HONOR E. B. DOCKER.
active part in the Church of Eng-
land. He is a member of the Coun-
cil of King’s School, of the synods
of the dioceses of Sydney and
Bathurst, and is the author of
“ Hymns of the Kingdom” (sacred
verse). He has also been president
of the Photographic Society of New
South Wales since 1894. On the
25th June, 1873, he married Clarissa
Mary, eldest daughter of the late
Venerable Archdeacon J. K. Tucker.
His Honor GRANTLEY HYDE
FITZHARDINGE, M.A. (District
Court Judge for the Southern and
Hunter districts of New South
Wales), son of the late William
George Augustus Fitzhardinge was
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
HIS HONOR G. H. FITZHARDINGE.
born at Waverley, Sydney, on the
6th November, 1845. He received
his early education at the Sydney
Grammar School, where many of the
prominent men of the State have
laid the foundation of their future
career ; proceeding afterwards to
the Sydney University, where he ob-
tained his M.A. degree. Was called
to the Bar of New South Wales in
1868. Prior to his appointment as
Judge Mr. Fitzhardinge had secured
a good position at the bar, and was
for some years Crown Prosecutor.
In the course of carrying out his
duties has officiated in most of the
districts of the State. In 1876 he
married Julia, daughter of John
Yeomans ; issue, one daughter and
two sons.
His Honor CHARLES GILBERT
HEYDON, District Court Judge of
New South Wales and second Presi-
dent of the Industrial Arbitration
Court of that State, is a Sydney


native, having been born in King
Street on the 25th August, 1845.
He is the second son of the late
Jabez King Heydon, who emigrated
to New South Wales in 1838 and
became a well-known Roman
Catholic convert and editor of the
Freeman's Journal, Sydney. He
received his early education at St.
Mary’s School, Sydney, and also at
the school of the Rev- Thomas
Ait ken, at Ryde, New South Wales.
In 1860 Mr. Heydon entered the
service of the Commercial Bank-
ing Company of Sydney, but relin-
quished commercial life for the legal
profession, being called to the Bar
of New South Wales on the 25th
September, 1875. Prior to his per-
manent appointment as District
Court Judge, in March, 1900, Judge
Heydon had several times been
appointed Acting Puisne Judge of
the Supreme Court. In December,
1893, he became Attorney-General
in the Dibbs Administration with
a seat in the Legislative Council.
In August, 1896, he was created
sole commissioner for consolidating
the statute law of New South Wales,
and in November of the same year
took silk as Queen’s Counsel. In
June, 1905, he was appointed Pre-
sident of the Industrial Arbitration
Court in succession to Mr. Justice
Falk
HIS HONOR C. G. HEYDON, K.C.
Cohen. His commercial experience,
combined with his reputation as a
sound lawyer, eminently qualified
him for this position. He is a Fel-
low of St. John’s College.
The late Sir WILLIAM MON-
TAGU MANNING, K.C.M.G.,
LL.D., a Puisne Judge of the
Supreme Court of New South
Wales, son of John C. Manning,
of Clifton, Bristol, was born at
Alphington, Devon, England, in
June, 1811. He was educated at
Tavistock, also Southampton, and at
University College, London ; and,
having decided to adopt the legal
profession, was called to the Ear at
Lincoln’s Inn in 1832. For some
time Mr. Manning practised in the
Western Circuit, but in 1837 came
out to Sydney. Shortly after his
arrival he was made chairman of
Quarter Sessions, which position he
held until 1844, when he was ap-
pointed Solicitor-General. In 1848
Mr. Manning was appointed Acting-
Judge of the Supreme Court during
the absence of Mr. Justice Therry,
resuming his duties as Solicitor-
General in 1849. He was appointed
a nominee member of the Legislative
Council in 1851, resigning in 1856 in
order to contest the election as
member for the Legislative Assembly
for South Cumberland, for which
constituency he was duly elected. In
the same year (1856) he became
Attorney-General, but in May, 1857,
continued ill health compelled his
retirement from political life. In
recognition of his services to the
State he was presented publicly
with his portrait, (painted by Sir
Watson Gordon, R.A.), a piece of
plate, and a purse of £\,ooo. Acting
on medical advice Mr. Manning re-
visited the Old Country at the end
of 1857, and in March, 1858, received
the honour of knighthood. After an
absence of over twelve months Sir
William returned to Sydney, and in
iB6O was made Attorney-General
and a member of the Legislative
Council the following year, holding
the office of Attorney-General again
from 1868 to 1871. On the 27th
April, 1876, Sir William was elevated
to a judgeship in the Supreme Court,
later becoming Primary Judge in
Equity, which position he held until
16th October, 1887, when he re-
signed. He was a member of the
Senate of the Sydney University from
1861-95 and in the year 1877,J ust
shortly after his appointment as
Judge, was elected Chancellor. He
was created K C.M.G. in 1892, and
died on the 27th February, 1895.
Sir William was twice married, first,
in 1836, to the eldest daughter of
Edward Wise, of Bembridge, Isle of
Wight, and, secondly, in 1849, to
the second daughter of the Very Rev.
Creelman
THE LATE SIR W. M. MANNING.
Dean William Sowerby, of Goul-
burn.
The late Hon. Sir JOSEPH
GEORGE LONG INNES, Knt.,
Senior Puisne Judge of the Supreme
Court of New South Wales, the
eldest son of the late Captain Joseph
Long Innes, 39th Regiment, and for
some time Chief Commissioner of
Police for New South Wales, was
born in Sydney on the 16th October,
1834. He was educated at Mr.
George Cape’s school, and then at
the King’s School, Parramatta.
Leaving the King’s School in 1851
he accepted a clerkship in the Sur-
vey Office for a few months; then in
December, 1831, he became Clerk of
Petty Sessions, and clerk to Gold
Commissioner Zouch, at Sofala, then
a township comprising 10.000 in-
habitants. From 1854 to 1856 he
was Associate to Sir Alfred Stephen,
Chief Justice of the Supreme Court
of New South Wales. In 1856 he
left this colony for England, entering
as a student at Lincoln’s Inn in
November. He was called to the
English Bar in 1859, having in May
of that year won the first Certificate
of Honour, his proxime accessit being
the gentleman who was subsequently
Sir Lewis William Cave, one of the
Jugdes of the Queen’s Bench Divi-
sion of the English High Court of
Judicature. Mr. Innes practised at


he English Bar until 1862, when he
eturned to this colony and was ad-
mitted to the Bar of New South
Wales on the 28th February, 1863,
and practised until 1865, when he
was appointed a District Court
Judge in Queensland. Prior to
that appointment he refused the
position of chief Under-Secretary
offered to him by the Premier, Sir
Charles Cooper, which was then
offered to and accepted by Mr. Wil-
liam Owen, afterwards himself a
distinguished member of the Su-
preme Court Bench. In 1859 Mr.
Innes resigned the position of Dis-
trict Court Judge and returned to New
South Wales and resumed practice
at the Bar. In 1870 he was appointed
president of the Goldfields commis-
sion. Turning his attention to poli-
tics Mr. Innes was elected to the
Boy
THE LATE SIR J. G. L. INNES.
Legislative Assembly as member
for Mudgee in 1872, and was appoint-
ed Solicitor-General in Sir Henry
Parkes’ first administration. In
October of that year he was nomi-
nated to the Legislative Council
where he represented the Govern-
ment. In November, 1873, he be-
came Attorney-General in the same
Government, and held office until
the defeat of the Government in
February, 1875. In 1874 he ac-
companied Sir Hercules Robinson,
Governor of New South Wales, on
his special mission to Fiji in con-
nection with the annexation of those
islands to the British Crown, and in
recognition of his legal services on
that occasion he was knighted in
January, 1875. Sir Hercules Robin-
son offered Sir George the Chief
Justiceship of Fiji, and he was in-
formed by the Imperial authorities
that if he accepted the position he
would, after inaugurating the law
courts of that colony, have the
choice of the Chief Justiceships
of Ceylou and Gibraltar. Sir
George, however, declined the offer.
From 1875 to 1880 Sir George
limes filled the position of Chairman
of Committees in the Legislative
Council, but resigned that position
to accept the portfolio of Minister
for Justice in Sir Henry Parkes’
third administration. In 1878 he
was president of the Royal Com-
mission to inquire into the working
of the gaols. On the 14th October,
xSBi, he resigned the office of Minis-
ter for Justice on his acceptance of
the office of a Puisne Judge of the
Supreme Court of New South Wales,
in succession to Mr. Justice Har-
grave, resigned. Sir George limes
continued in his high office until his
death in England on the 28th Oc-
tober, 1896. Always keenly in-
terested in sport of all kinds, Sir
George was until his death es-
pecially interested in cricket, of
which in his youth and early man-
hood he was a performer of some note.
In addition he was for many years a
trustee of the National Art Gallery
of New South Wales, and at his
death he left a private collection of
pictures of considerable value. In
1865 Sir George married Emily
Janet, the eldest daughter of the Hon.
John Smith, of Llanarth, Bathurst,
and Gamboola, Molong. He left,
surviving, five sons and one daughter.
The Hon. WILLIAM JOHN
FOSTER, Puisne Judge of the
Supreme Court, New South Wales,
is a son of the late Rev. W. H.
Foster, of Lough Gilly, County
Armagh, Ireland, and was born on
the 13th January, 1831, at Rathescar,
County Louth, the residence of his
uncle, John Leslie Foster, Baron of
the Irish Court of Exchequer. He
was educated at Cheltenham College,
England, and at Trinity College,
Dublin, where he took the Vice-
Chancellor’s prize for Greek in 1850,
also the composition prize in the
same year, as well as honours in
classics and mathematics. He left
the University in 1851, and arrived
in Sydney in 1834; and for the first
three years devoted himself to
agricultural pursuits. He then
studied law, and was called to the
Bar in 1858. In 1859 he published
a work on the District Courts Act,
which was the standard work on the
subject until 1870, when a revised
edition was issued. In 1877 he
published a supplement to the
same work. He acted as Crown
Prosecutor from 1859 to 1862 ; and
from 1864 to 1870, when he was
appointed Crown Prosecutor for
Sydney, in succession to Mr. Butler,
who accepted the Attorney General-
ship. In December, 1877, he
resigned this post and became
Attorney-General in the Farnell
Administration, with a seat in the
Legislative Council. Retiring with
his colleagues in December, 1878,
he again took office in October, 1881,
being Minister for Justice in the
Parkes Administration from that
date until January, 1883, when he
THE HON. W. J. FOSTER.
resigned. He retired from the
Legislative Council in 1880, and
was returned to the Legislative
Assembly as member for Newtown.
In 1882 he was defeated for that
constituency, but re-elected in 1883,
and sat in the Assembly until 1888,
when he retired from political life.
He was made Queen’s Counsel in
1886, and on the 14th February of
that year he was raised to the
Supreme Court Bench, retiring on
the 18th December, 1894, ' n conse-
quence of continued ill health. Mr.
Justice Foster married in February,
1854, Matilda Sophia, daughter of


Mr. John Williams, of LI andigige,
Pembrokeshire, and one of his sons,
Mr. T. C. J. Foster, is now
practising at the Bar.
The late Mr. Justice CHARLES
JAMES MANNING, who for a
short period before his death, occu-
pied the position of Chief Judge in
Equity, was born at Balmain in
1841, and in due course was sent
THE LATE MR. JUSTICE C. J.
MANNING.
to England for his education, finally
taking honours at Winchester, and
Corpus Christi College, Oxford. At
the age of 21 he was called to the
Bar at Lincoln’s Inn, London. Re-
turning to Sydney, he was admitted
to the Bar of New South Wales,
about the year 1864, and appointed
Judge of the Supreme Court in 1889.
Seven years later he was made Chief
Judge in Equity, which position he
held till his death in 1898.
The Hon. CHARLES GREGORY
WADE, K.C., Attorney-General and
Minister for Justice in the Car-
rnthers Government of New South
Wales, is a son of Mr. W. Binton
Wade, M.1.C.E., and was born at
Singleton, in this State, on the 26th
January, 1863. He received his
early education at All Saints’ Col
lege, Bathurst, from 1874, and
during that period he held the
Broughton scholarship, and at the
latter part of 1877 he w r ent to the
well-known King’s School, Parra-
matta, w T here he remained until
1880, finishing his career there by
carrying off the Broughton and
Forrest exhibitions in 1880. Mr.
Wade then went to the old country
and entered Merton College, Oxford
where he added to his successes by
taking honours in classics with his
B.A. degree. He was called to the
Bar at the Inner Temple in 1886,
and the same year returned to
Australia and was admitted to the
Bar of New South Wales on the
19th May, 1886. Mr. Wade was not
long making his mark at the bar,
and within five years was acting as
Crown Prosecutor (1891). In 1894
he was appointed Crown Prosecutor
at the Central Criminal Court, and
also for the Western Circuit, which
position he held until 1902, when
the pressure of his other legal work
compelled him to resign. On seve-
ral occasions he has been appointed
an Acting District Court Judge, and
Tesla.
HON. C. G. WADE, K.C.
also acted as chairman at Quarter
Sessions. In 1902 he w r as appointed
Royal Commissioner to inquire into
the accidents at the Broken Hill
mines, and has received several
other commissions to hold inquiries
under the Coal Mines Regulation
Act. Mr. Wade has always taken
an active part in the political world
and is a keen debater. He was
elected to the New South Wales
Legislative Assembly as member
for Willoughby in September, 1903,
and at the general election in
August, 1904, was returned for
Gordon, and the same year ap-
pointed Attorney-General and Min-
ister for Justice. It is as Attorney-
General in the present Carruthers
Government that Mr. Wade has
been most prominently before the
public, having had charge of the
Liquor Amendment Act and the
Anti-Gambling Act, both of which
were drawn by him and carried in
the Parliament after long argu-
ment, in the course of which Mr.
Wade upheld his reputation as a
strong advocate and admirable de-
bater. He has also been much in
evidence as the adviser of the Go-
vernment in the recent Land Com-
mission and proceedings arising
therefrom. Mr. Wade w T as also the
author of the Married Woman’s
Property Act, the Employers’ Lia-
bility Act, and other enactments.
In 1905 he was admitted to the
Sydney University as B.A. {ad
eundem gradum). He married Ella,
daughter of Francis Bell, M.I.C.E.
The Hon. CHARLES EDWARD
PILCHER, 8.A.. K.C., M.L.C, is
an Australian native, who has raised
himself to the front rank in his pro-
fession. He was born at West
Maitland on April 20th, 1844. In
that old but aristocratic town he
received his early education, attend-
ing the High School, one of his
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
THE HON. C. E. PILCHER. K.C.,
M.L.C.
fellow-pupils being the present Chief
Justice of the High Court, Sir
Samuel Griffith. From that edu-
cational establishment he passed on


to the King’s School, Macquarie
Fields, and from there to the Syd-
ney University, where he again had
as a fellow - graduate, Sir Samuel
Griffith. He took his B.A. degree
in 1865, and on leaving his alma
mater, he was articled to the late
Sir Joseph Abbott, afterwards to
Mr. G. D. V. Pilcher, finally becom-
ing law pupil to Sir Frederick
Darley, the present Chief Justice.
Called to the Bar of New South
Wales in 1867, he was in the course
of time made Queen’s Counsel,
afterwards King’s Counsel on the
death of the late Queen. In 1875
he was elected to the Legislative
Assembly as member for West Mac-
quarie, which seat he retained for
eight years, in three parliaments,
then retired. He was appointed by
the late Sir Henry Parkes’ Govern-
ment a member of the Legislative
Council in 1891. and took a promi-
nent part in the debates in Council
on the Land and Income Tax Bill.
Mr. Pilcher was. with the late
Mr. J. W ant an uncompromising
opponent of federation.
The Rt. Hon. GEORGE HOUS-
TON REID, P.C., D.C.L., K.C,
M-H R-, is a son of the late Rev.
John Reid, Presbyterian Minister,
Tesla.
RT. HON. G. H. REID, K.C.
and was born on the 25th July,
1845, at Johnstone, Renfrewshire,
Scotland- He arrived in Australia
with his parents in 1852, and came
to New South Wales in 1858. He
was in the Treasury Department of
New South Wales, 186-1-78 and
secretary to the Attorney-General
1878-9. He was called to the Bar
of New South Wales in 1879, and
took silk as Queen’s Counsel, 1898.
Elected M.L.A. for East Sydney,
November, 1880, and continued to
represent that electorate (after-
wards changed to King division),
with a break in 1884-5, until 1901,
when he resigned to enter Federal
Parliament; Minister Public Instruc-
tion, Stuart Government, 1883-4.
Succeeding Sir Henry Parkes in
leadership of Freetrade party, he
led the Opposition from 1891-4, and
upon the overthrow of the Uibbs
Ministry, in 1894, became Premier
and Treasurer ; his Ministry re-
mained in office until September,
1899, and carried changes in the
customs tariff making the New
South Wales tariff the freest in the
world, and also passed measures of
land and income taxation. Mr.
Reid, in 1895, brought a conference
of Premiers together and advanced
the federal movement. He was a
member of the National Conven-
tion which framed the Common-
wealth Constitution in 1897-8. and
was elected to the House of Repre-
sentatives in hist Federal Parlia-
ment, for East Sydney, in 1901,
and re-elected at the elections in
1903 and 1906 ; was leader of the
Opposition in Federal Parliament
until defeat of the Labour Cabinet
under Mr. Watson, in 1904, when he
became Prime Minister ; his party
remained in power until July, 1905,
when he resigned, and since then
Mr. Reid has continued to lead the
Opposition. Visited England for
late Queen’s diamond jubilee cele-
brations in 1897, and was created
P.C. and D.C.L. of Oxford ; author
of five freetrade essays and New
South Wales, the Mother Colony of
Australia ” ; is a Cobden Club gold
medallist, and has contributed to
various English reviews.- Married
1891, Flora, daughter of John
Bromlv, of Thornton, Cressy.
j 7 7 j
Dr. RICHARD MEARES SLY,
K.C., M.A., LL.D., is a son of the
late Joseph Sly, of Sydney, and
was born in that city on the 17th
December, 1849. He received his
early education at Sydney Grammar
School, and then went to the Uni-
versity, where he greatly distin-
guished himself, becoming first
scholar in the first and second years
and gaining two scholarships in his
third year —a double first in classics
and mathematics at the
examination —with his B.A- degree
and in April, 1872, he won the
Tesla.
DR. R. M. SLY, K.C.
Gilchrist travelling scholarship of
£IOO a year for three years. Ur. Sly
then went to England, where at the
London University he took his
LL.B. degree. In June, 1875, he
was called to the Bar at Middle
Temple, and at the examinations
obtained a studentship in juris-
prudence and Roman law of £IOO
a year for two years. Returning to
Sydney, he took his M.A. degree at
the University in 18”6, and later his
LL.D. degree. At the New South
Wales bar he has long held a pro-
minent position, and in June, 1898,
was appointed an Acting Justice of
the Supreme Court, and thrice sub-
sequently has held a similar posi-
tion. In 1904. he took silk as
King’s Counsel. Dr. Sly married
Constance Adelaide, second daugh-
ter of Josiah Mullens, of Sydney.
Mr. ALEXANDER GORDON,
K.C., is the only son of the late
Mr. Alexander Gordon Q.C , and
was born at Redfern, Sydney, in
1858. He first attended a private
school in Sydney, and completed his
education at Repton School,, Derby-
shire, England. On returning to
Australia with his parents in 1878,
Mr. Gordon commenced reading for
the Bar with the late Mr. Gateward


Coleridge Davis. He was for some
time Associate to the late Mr. Jus-
tice Hargrave, then Primary Judge
in Equity, and completed his studies
for the Bar in the chambers of
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. A. GORDON, K.C.
Mi. C. B. Stephen (now a K.C.)
On the 31st July, 1882, Mr. Gordon
was called to the Bar of New South
Wales, and for many years attended
the Northern circuit. In March,
1801, he became one of his Majesty’s
Counsel.
Dr. WILLIAM PORTUS CULLEN,
LL.D., K.C., M.L.C , is a son of
the late Mr. John Cullen, of Mount
Johnston, Jamberoo, at which place
the subject of this sketch was born
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
DR W. P. CULLEN, K.C.
He received his early education at
schools in the Kiama district, pro-
ceeding afterwards to the Univer-
sity. Sydney, where he had a dis-
tinguished career, taking the de-
grees of M.A. in 1882 and LL.D.
in 1887. Having decided to prac-
tise at the Bar, Dr. Cullen read in
the chambers of the late Mr George
Knox, was called to the Bar of
New South Wales on the 20th April,
1883, and, after twenty-two years’
practice, took silk as K.C. in 1905.
Dr. Cullen is well known in the
political world, having been elected
in June, 1891, member of the Legis-
lative Assembly of New South Wales
for Camden, which constituency he
represented for three years. In
August, 1896, he was appointed a
member of the Legislative Council.
He has been a Fellow of the Senate
of the Sydney University since 1896.
Mr. ALEXANDER GERARD
RALSTON, K.C., M.A. (Sydney) is
one of the leading members of the
bar of New South Wales. Like
Tesla
MR. A. G. RALSTON, K.C.
many of his legal brethren, he is a
native of Sydney (and the eldest
son of the late A. J. Ralston, for
many years secretary of the Aus-
tralian Mutual Provident Society).
He was born on the 10th November,
1860, and after the usual prepara-
tory schooling, he proceeded to the
Sydney University, where he gave
evidence of that ability which has
since earned for him an enviable
position in Irs profession, taking his
B A. degree in 1881 (in which year
he was Belmore medallist), and his
M.A. degree in 1883. The following
year Mr. Ralston was admitted to
the bar of New South Wales, and
rapidly made a name for himself as
an able advocate and fluent speaker.
His work is principally in connection
with cases tried before juries, and
in the Vice-Admiralty and Divorce
Courts. In 1894, and again in
1906. he was appointed an Acting
District Court Judge, the latter year
bringing further honours, as he then
took silk as King’s Counsel. Mr.
Ralston has also taken an active
part in municipal affairs, having
been an alderman of the Ashfield
Council for foui years, and the Bur-
wood Council for six years : in the
latter council he held the position
of mayor for 1900-1. This term
served to introduce him to a yet
wider sphere, he being returned to
the Municipal Council of Sydney as
alderman for Bourke Ward in 1900.
Mr. Ralston, however, receiving the
appointment of Acting District
Court Judge, found himself com-
pelled to resign his post. He was
also a member of the Royal Com-
mission appointed to consolidate
the statute law. The Sydney
School of Arts has in him a warm
patron, he having occupied the
position of vice-president for some
time. Mr. Ralston married the
second eldest daughter of the late
Sir W. Wind ever.
Mr. ADRIAN KNOX, K.C., is
a son of the late Sir Edwar d Knox,
so well known throughout Australia
Tesla
MR. A. KNOX, K.C.
307
the Cyclopedia op new south wales.


is the managing director of the
Colonial Sugar Co. He was born in
Sydney on November 30, 1863,
receiving his early education in his
native city, and on its completion
proceeded to England and entered
Cambridge University, where he
took his LL-B. degree in 1885.
Returning to New South Wales, he
was called to the bar in May, 1886,
where he has firmly established him-
self in the front rank. Mr. Knox’s
practice is now chiefly confined to
the Equityt Court, and in 1906 he
took silk as King’s Council. For a
short time he took part in political
work, having represented Woollahra
in the Legislative Assembly of New
South Wales from 1894 to 1898. In
the lighter vein, Mr. Knox is a
patron of sport of all description,,
and (with the exception of one yeer)
he has been a member of the Com-
mittee of the Australian Jockey
Club since 1896-
Mr. ALEXANDER B. SHAND,
K.C., is a son of Mr. John Shand, of
Rooty Hill, and was born at Ulla-
dulla, New South Wales, on Bth
January, 1865. He received his
earlv education at Burwood Public
School and Newington College, pro-
ceeding in 1881 to the Sydney
University, where he graduated B. A.
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. A. B. SHAND, K.C.
in 1884. Mr. Shand read foi the
Bar in the chambers of Mr.
Charles J. Manning, and was
called to the Bar of New South
Wales on the 27th August, 1887.
After nearly twenty years’ success-
ful practice at the Junior Bar,
Mr, Shand became a King’s Counsel
in February, 1906. Mr. Shand was
j j
Crown Prosecutor for the Western
circuit for 1895-6.
Mr. DANGER OWEN, K.C., is
a son of Sir William Owen, Senior
Puisne Judge of the Supreme Court,
and was born in Sydney on the
27th August 1862 He received his
early education at the New School,
Sydney, and also at the Charter-
hous° School, England, proceeding
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. L. OWEN, K.C.
afterwards to the New College,
Oxford. Mr. Owen entered as a
student at Lincoln’s Inn, where he
read in the chambers of Mr. Ingle
Joyce (now Mr. Justice Joyce), and
was called to the Bar on the 13th
June, 1888. On arrival in New
South Wales he was admitted to the
Bar of this State in March, 1889,
and took silk in February, 1906.
Mr. JOHN TAYLOR LINGEN,
Barrister-at-Law, is the senior
member of the Junior Bar now
practising at the Supreme Court of
New South Wales, and has con-
sistently declined all offers of acting
appointments or to take silk. He is
a son of Dr. C. Lingen. and was
born at Hereford, England, in 1848.
Having gained a scholarship at
Pembroke College, he graduated in
1870, taking a double honours de-
gree, twentieth wrangler, ana first
in theTsecond class of the natural
J. Hubert Newman Ltd
MR. J. T LINGEN.
science tripos. Entering as a stu
dent at the Middle Temple, he was
called to the Bar on the 7th June,
1872, and on his arrival in Sydney,
in 1880, was admitted to the Bar of
New South Wales. Mr. Lingen con-
fines his practice almost entirely to
the Equity branch of the pro-
session.
Mr. HUGH MONTGOMERIE
HAMILTON, LL.B., Barrister-at-
Law, was born at Parramatta on the
26th June. 1854, and is a son of
Hugh Hamilton, late of Tomabil
Station, on the Lachlan, his mother
being a niece of Major Innes, of
Lake Innes, Port Macquarie, one
of the early pioneers of the
State. He received his early edu-
cation on the Continent and at
Marlborough College, England,
where he was head of the modern
side and gained two scholar-
ships (but is probably better re-
membered by all old Marburians as
captain of the school football team).
Proceeding afterwards to the Uni-
versity of London, he was placed
in the honours division for the LL.B.
degree. Having entered as a stu-
d nt at the Inner Temple, he was
called to the Bar on the 15th May,
1878, and joined the Northern Cir-
• i J
cult, subsequently being appointed
counsel to the Treasury on that


circuit. Returning to Australia in
1889, Mr. Hamilton was admitted
to the Bar of New South Wales the
same year. In 1901 he was ap-
pointed Acting District Court Judge,
and has since repeatedly acted
as such. He was Parliamentary
draftsman during the absence of
Mr. Watkins, and a member of the
Statute Law Consolidation Commis-
sion, and is the author (with Mr G.
Addison) of a work on “ The Crimes
J Hubert Newman Ltd
MR H. M. HAMILTON.
Act of New South Wales.” Mr.
Hamilton in his younger days was
a great athlete and well-known foot-
baller. After leaving Marlborough
College, he was for two years a
member of the International football
team for Scotland. He was one of
the founders of the Royal Sydney
Golf Club, and has been for some
vears a member of the Council of
the Royal Agricultural Society-
Mr. Hamilton is also hon. treasurer
of the Sydney School of Arts, a
position he has held for many years.
Mr. ROBERT J A RHINE
BROWNING, M.A., Barrister-at-
Law, was born in London. He receiv-
ed his early education at Christ’s
Hospital, London, where he won an
exhibition tenable at either of the
Universities, Oxford or Cambridge.
Proceeding to Lincoln College, Ox-
ford, he graduated B.A. in 1878,
and took his M.A. degree in 1880.
Having entered as a student at the
Inner Temple, Mr. Browning was
called to the Bar in November,
1879, and travelled the Midland
circuit for a year. Mr. Browning
left the old country in October,
J '
1880, and went first to New Zealand,
coming on to New South Wales
later and being admitted to the Bar
in February, 1882. At first he com-
bined with the practice of his pro-
fession law reporting for the Daily
Telegraph, then for the Sydney
Morning Herald , and for the au-
thorised Supreme Court’s reports.
The well-known cc Weekly Notes ”
were first started by him. In 1884
he edited “ The Municipalities Act of
1867.” In 1888 Mr. Browning was
appointed Crown Prosecutor for the
Northern district, in which he has
preferred to remain though offered
other circuits. On several occasions
he has acted as District Court Judge
and Chairman of Quarter Sessions.
In 1895 he published “ A Digest of
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR R. J. BROWNING.
Municipal Cases,” and is- now edit-
ing (jointly with Messrs. Young,
8.A., LL.B., and Tebbutt) “ The
Local Government Manual.” Mr.
Browning is a cousin of Robert
Browning, the poet.
Mr. HANBURY DAVIES, 8.A.,
Barrister-at-Law, was born at Car-
marthenshire, South Wales, and le-
ceived his early education at Shrews-
bury School, proceeding afterwards
to Lincoln College. Oxford, where he
gained an exhibition and second-
class honours in classics. He gradu-
ated 8.A., and entering as a student
at the Innei Temple, was called to
the Bar on the 11th May, 1881.
J 7
Mr. Davies commenced the practice
of his’profession in Sydney in 1884
and in 1888 (in conjunction with
the Hon. B. R. Wise) brought out
an edition of “ The Bankruptcy
Act (N.S.W.) of 1887.” In 1897
he accepted the retainer for the
Minister for Lands, and has since
then represented the Crown in cases
in the Land Appeal and Supremo
Courts. He also appeared to assist
the Royal Commissioner (Sir Wil-
liam Owen (in the inquiry into the
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. H. DAVIES.
administration of the Lands Depart-
ment, 1905-6. He has been stand-
ing counsel for the Incorporated
Law Institute of New South Wales
for several years, and has been an
examiner for both the barristers’
and solicitors’ entrance examina-
tions. Mr. Davies is de-puty-chair-
man of the executive committee
of St. John’s Ambulance, Svdnev
' J
centre, and was made honorary
associate of the Order of St. John
in 1903.
Mr. FREDERIC HAMILTON
SALUSBURY, LL.B., M.A., Bar-
rister-at-Law, is a son of the
late Rev. G. A. Salusbury, of West-
bury, Salop, England, and was
born in 1856. He was educated
at Haileybury School, proceeding
afterwards to Trinity College, Cam-
bridge, where he took second-class
honours in the law tripos, with LL.B.
degree in 1879, and later his M.A.
degree. Entering as a student at
Lincoln's Inn, he was called to the
Bar on the 11th May, 1881. Dur-
ing the period of reading for the


Bar in England he read with the
present Lord Chancellor. Mr. Salus-
bury joined the Oxford circuit but
left for Australia in 1887, coming to
Sydney, and being admitted to the
Bar of New South Wales in Feb-
ruary, 1887. For a time he r 2 ad in
the chambers of Mr. R. E. 0 Connor,
now a Justice of the High Court*
He was secretary to the Vice-Presi-
dent of the Executive Council from
1891-5 ; Master in Equity during
absence of Mr. Barton ; Acting Re-
gistrar in Bankruptcy on several
occasions during tin absence of
Mr. Registrar Henry ; Deputy Mas-
ter in Equity, 1905 ; secretary and
one of the draftsmen of the
Statute Law Consolidation Commis-
sion, and is honorary secretary to
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. F. H. SALUSBURY.
the Bar Council. Mr. Salusbui v is
author of The Law and Practice
of Bankruptcy,” and joint author
with Mr. Newbery of “ The Land
and Income Tax Acts, 1905.”
Mr, THOMAS CHICHESTER
JAMES FOSTER, Barrister-at-Law,
is third son of Mr. Justice Foster,
and was educated at Camden Col-
lege, Newtown, and the Sydney
University. He was called to the
Bar on the 25th June, 1881 Mr.
Foster is the author of an “ Index
to the Criminal Law Amendment
Act (1888)”; a “ Supplement to the
Criminal Law Manual.” in 1893 ;
and. in conjunction with Mr, J M.A.
Bonthorne. the Registrar of the
Metropolitan District Court, the
third edition of the “ District
Court’s Practice (1902),” which met
with general approval and is re-
garded as the standard work on
Tesla
MR. T. C. J. FOSTER.
rhe practice of District Courts In
1906, in conjunction with the same
gentleman, he wrote a “ Supplement
to the District Courts Act,” also
highly successful. Mr. Foster has
taken considerable interest in
church matters, and has been for
many years a member of the
Diocesan Synod of Sydney, ox the
Provincial Synod and General
Synod, and of the standing com-
mittee of the Sydney diocese.
Mr. WILLIAM JOHN GEORGE
MANN, M. A.,Barrister-at-Law,is the
son of John Mann, who in the early
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. W J. G. MANN
part of last century came from Broad
Hempston, in Devonshire, England,
to settle in New South Wales, and,
after trying sheep-farming for a
time, settled down to wheat-grow-
ing on a property he purchased in
1834, known as Down Park., on the
Lower Hunter. The subject of this
sketch was born on the 2nd Sep-
tember, 1859, and, after the usual
preparatory schooling, entered a
country solicitor’s office at the age
of fourteen years, but, having served
three years, he went to the Sydney
University in order to complete his
education and qualify himself for
the higher branch of the legal pro-
fession. Mr. Mann matriculated in
1877, graduated B.A. in 1880, took
his M.A degree in 1882, and, having
in 1881 and 1882 also passed the
law examinations, was called to the
Bar of New South Wales on the
31st July, 1882, on the motion of
Mr. Char] es J. Manning (afterwards
Chief Judge in Equity), in whose
chambers he had read.
Mr. HAROLD MURRAY
COCKSHOTT, LL.B., Barrister-at-
Law, was born at Melbourne, Victoria
Freeman.
MR. H. M. COCKSHOTT.
in the early sixties, and was taken
to England while still a child by his
parents. He received his early
education at the old historic ‘' Char-
terhouse,” Godaiming ; then return-
ing to Victoria, he proceeded to the
Melbourne University where ho took
the degree of LL.B. in 1883. He
was called to the Bar of New South
Wales on the Ist December, 1884,


afid for two years acted as Associate
to the late Mr Justice Windeyer. Mr.
Cockshott has been for some years
one of the reporters for the “ New
South Wales Law Reports and
the Weekly Notes,” and is joint
author with Mr. E. Lamb of “ The
New South Wales Statutes,” “ The
Rules, Regulations and By-laws,”
“ The Liquor Acts of New South
Wales,” “ The Consolidated Digest
of New South Wales Cases,” and
other works. For the last five
years Mr. Cockshott has been aider-
man for Belle Vue ward of the
borough of Woollahra.
Mr. EDWARD SCHOLES, Bar-
rister-at-Law, was educated at the
Armidale Grammar School. Having
decided to: adopt the legal profes-
sion, he*served under articles of
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. E. SCHOLES.
clerkship in the offices of Messrs.
Want, Johnson & Want, solicitors,
and was admitted an attorney,
solicitor and proctor of the Su-
preme Court of New South Wales
in the year 1880. In 1882 he had
his name removed from the roll
of solicitors and proceeded to
London, where he entered as a
student at the Inner Temple, and
was duly called to the Bar on the
26th January, 1886. Mr. Scholes
returned to Sydney in that year
(1886), and was admitted to the
Bar of New South Wales. He has
presided as Acting Judge of the
Metropolitan District Court for two
periods, of the District Court at
Young for one period, as Chairman
of Quarter Sessions and District
Judge for the Western Circuit, and
as Judge of the Court of Marine
Inquiry for one period, also hold-
ing commissions as Crown Prose-
cutor in the Assize Courts on
several occasions. Mr. Scholes has
held five commissions issued by the
Chief Justice to hold inquisitions of
office to try questions of escheat to
the Crown. He is junior counsel to
the Railway Commissioners of New
South Wales, counsel to the Water
and Sewerage Board, and to the
Crown in cases against the Govern-
ment to try the value of, and com-
pensation for lands reserved for
public purposes under the Public
Works Acts, &c. He has on two
different occasions been elected a
member of the Barristers’ Admis-
sion Board. Mr. Scholes has also
borne his part in municipal work,
having served as alderman of the
municipality of Burwood for nine
years, elected Mayor one year, and
was a member of the committee of
the Municipal Association of New
South Wales for six years. He has
been president of the Western Sub-
urbs Cottage Hospital for the last
five years. Mr. Scholes took part
in the formation of the New South
Wales Federal Association in 1888,
and was a member of the council of
that body from its formation until
the passing of the constitution.
Mr. ERNEST LAMB, LL.B.,
Barrister-at-Law, is a son of Mr.
John De Villiers Lamb, so well
known in connection with pastoral
matters, and a grandson of the late
Commander John Lamb, R.N. He
was born on the 26th January, 1866,
and received his early education at
Winchester College, England, and at
the Sydney Grammar School. In
1882 Mr Lamb returned to England
and entered at Trinity Hall, Cam-
bridge, where he graduated and
took the degree of LL B Becom-
ing a student at the Inner Temple,
he was called to the Bar by that
society oh the 7th July, 1886, and,
returning to Sydney, he was ad-
mitted to the Bar of New South
Wales, being shortly afterwards ap-
pointed Associate to the Chief Jus-
tice, Sir Frederick Darley, which
position he held for about two
years Mr. Lamb was for many
y r ears reporter for the “ New South
Wales Law Reports and W eekly
Notes” ; he edited the “ Statutes of
Practical Utility ” in conjunction
with Mr. Cockshott. He is joint
author of the New South Wales
“ Digest ” and other law books
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. E. LAMB.
Mr, Lamb’s practice is chiefly con-
fined to the Common Law side of
the Court
Mr. JAMES LANG CAMPBELL,
Barrister-at-Law, was born in 1859
and educated privately. Adopting
the legal profession, he read with
Mr. K. E O’Connor (now a Justice
of the High Court of Australia), and
T . Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR J. L CAMPBELL.
was called to the Bar on the 17th
August 1886. Mr, Campbell was
secretary of the Attorney General’s


Department between the years 1887-
1888, resigning the position in order
to resume practice. He represents
the Taxation Commissioners in the
Court of Review and is Examiner in
Law to the Public Service Board.
Mr THOMAS ROLIN, M.A.,
Barrister -at - Law, is a son of
Thomas Bateley Rolin, solicitor,
and was born at Sydney in
1862. He received his early
education at Cleveland Street
Public School and at the Sydney
•/ •/
Grammar School, proceeding after-
wards. as so many other members of
the legal profession have done, to
the Sydney University in 1880,
where he gained distinction. He
graduated in March, 1883, taking
first-class honours in mathematics.
Tesla
MR. T. ROLIN
the mathematical medal, and second-
class honours in classics. Mr. Rolin
took his M.A. degree in 1885, and
was called to the Bar on the 17th
August, 1886. He acted as District
Court Judge and Chairman of Quar-
ter Sessions in 1903, and appointed
Acting District Court Judge 1907
for Wagga and Hay. Mr. Rolin
is one of the examiners at the
examinations for admission of soli-
citors, and is author of several legal
works and publications, having
edited (in conjunction with Mr.
George E Rich) “ The Companies
Acts,” in 1890, and the “No
Liability Companies Acts,” in 1897,
and (with Mr. G. M. L Innes) pub-
lished “ The Supreme Court Prac-
tice ” (1902).
Mr. GEORGEJE. RICH, M.A., Bar-
rister-at-Law, is the younger son of
the late Rev Canon Rich, and was
born in 1863. He received his early
J Huber t Newman Ltd.
MR. G. E. RICH.
education at the Sydney Grammar
School, and matriculated in 1880 at
the University, Sydney, where he
graduated in 1883, gaining first-
class honours in classics with his
B.A. degree. He took his M.A.
degree in 1885, and was called to
the Bar on' the 10th March, 1887.
Since 1890 Mr. .Rich has been
Challis lecturer at the University
on equity, probate, bankruptcy and
company law. He is a member of
the Bar Council and of the Council
of the Women’s College within the
University. Mr. Rich is author
(with Mr. Tom Rolin) of “The
Companies Act,” 1890, and the
“ No Liability Companies Act ” ;
with Mr. Gregory Walker (after-
wards Mr. Justice Gregory Walker)
he edited “The Practice in Equity,”
and brought out a later edition of
this work in 1902 in association
with Messrs. Newham and Harvey.
He also established and edited with
Mr. R. K. Manning “ The Bank-
ruptcy and Company Cases of New
South Wales.” Mr. Rich practises
chiefly in the Equity, Probate and
Bankruptcy Courts.
Mr. JAMES C. GANNON, M.L-C-,
Barrister-at-Law, was born at
Tempe, New South Wales, on nth
October, iB6O. He is the son of the
late Mr. Robert Gannon, and was
educated principally at the public
schools, which he left quite early,
accepting a junior position in the
Library. He was subsequently
transferred to the office of the State
Colonial Secretary, under the late
Mr. Critchett Walker. Whilst
studying privately, he gave his
attention to law. In the year 1885
he left the public service and
entered the office of the late Mr.
George Knox, Equity barrister, and
was called to the bar of New South
Wales in March, 1887, and has
devoted his whole time to criminal
and common law practice. Up to
this he had not taken any part in
politics, and twice declined to
contest si, ats in the legislative
Assembly under the Reid Adminis-
tration ; but in 1904 he accepted
office of Attorney General in the
MR. J. C. GANNON.
Waddell Ministry. Mr. Gannon is
a good sportsman- His favourite
pastime is fishing, and he is an.
enthusiastic angler and yachtsman.
Mr. FRANCIS JOHN BETHUNE,
B. Barrister-at-Law, is a son of
the late Admiral C. R. D. Bethune,
C. of Balfour, N. 8., and was
born on the 23rd December, 1860,
in London. He received his early
education at Harrow, where he
remained for five years, proceeding
afterwards (in 1879) to Trinity Col-
lege, Cambridge, graduating B.A.
in 1882. He entered as a student
at Inner Temple, and was called to
the Bar on the 4th May, 1887
Mr Bethune read in the chainbeis


of the present Solicitor-General, Sir
William S. Robson (then Mr. William
S. Robson). He came out to Aus-
tralia in 1892, and was admitted to
the Bar of New South Wales in
that year. He was Associate to
the late Mr. Justice Charles J.
Manning from February, 1892, to
July, 1894, resigning the position
in order to practise his profession.
Mr. Bethune’s practice is chiefly in
the Probate, Equity and Bankruptcy
Courts. He was one of the draughts-
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. F. J. BETHUNE.
men on the Statute Law Consoli-
dation Commission, and is a reporter
for the New South Wales Law
Reports.
Mr WILFRID BRACKET, Bar-
rister-at-Law, was born at Redfern
in September, 1859, and received
his education at a school at Keira
Vale, Wollongong, kept by his
father, the late Russell Blacket.
At the age of fifteen he entered the
service of the English, Scottish and
Australian Bank, and remained in
their employ until 1883. Then, after
spending some time in mining, he
became sub-editor of the Sydney
Bulletin, and held that position
until December, 1886. Thereafter,
and until he passed the final ex-
amination for the Bar in August,
1887, he was leader-writer to that
and other papers. After being
called he travelled the Newcastle-
Maitland circuit for some time, and
also attended the Courts at Cobar
and Bourke. Mr Blacket was sec-
retary of the Statute Law Consoli-
dation Commission, and in 1903 he
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. W. RLACKET.
presided over the Tramway Inquiry
Board.
Mr ARTHUR NEWHAM, M.A.,
Barrister-at-Law, is the third son of
the Rev. W. L. Newham, of Bar-
row-on-Soar, Leicestershire-, Eng-
land, and was born in 1860. He
received his early education at
Clifton College, near Bristol, and in
1879 proceeded to St. John’s College,
Cambridge, where he gained a
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. A. NEWHAM
scholarship in mathematics and was
sixteenth wrangler in the mathe-
matical tripos. On arrival in New
South Wales he was called to the
Bar of this State on the 9th March,
1888. In 1906 he revisited the old
country, and during his stay took
the degree of M.A., returning to
Sydney in the following year. He
was appointed evening lecturer in
mathematics at the Sydney Univer-
sity in 1886, and is joint author
with Messrs. G. E Rich and J. M.
Harvey of “The Practice in
Equity.’ ’
Mr. LEWIS WHITFELD, 8.A.,
Barrister-at-Law, was born on the
12th October, 1857, in Sydney, and
is a son of Edwin Whitfeld, M.A.,
formerly Fellow and Classical Tutor
at Trinity Hall, Cambridge, and one
of the original foundation masters
of the Sydney Grammar School,
where the subject of this sketch
received his early education, and
gained the Senior Knox prize- In
1875 he went to the Sydney
University, where he gained a Uni-
versity Scholarship in that year,
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. L WHITFELD.
and also in 1876, graduating B.A.
in December, 1877, with first-class
honours in classics, and second-
class in mathematics and natural
philosophy. In 1878 he was ap-
pointed a teacher at the Sydney
Grammar School ; this position he
resigned in order to follow the legal
profession. He was appointed asso-
ciate to the late Mr. Justice
Windeyer in July, 1886, retiring,
on being called to the Bar of New
South Wales in September, 1888, in
313
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES,


order to commence practice. He is
a member of the Bar Council, of
which he is the honorary treasurer.
Though Mr. Whitfeld is well known
in connection with cases arising out
of the land laws, his practice is
largely identified with the Divorce
Court- He is author of “ The
Practice in Divorce ” (1893).
Mr. FRANK LEVERRIER, 8.A.,
B.Sc., Barrister-at-Law, was born
on the Bth February, 1863, in
Sydney, to which place he returned
after spending over thirteen years
of his earlv vouth in France. In
Tesla
MR. F. LEVERRIER.
1878 he went to the Sydney
Grammar School, proceeding after-
wards to the University, where his
career was exceptionally brilliant.
In 1880 he obtained the John West
gold medal and University prize
at the senior examination In
1881 he matriculated, and gained
a Universitv scholarship and the
O’Connell scholarship at St. John’s
College ; in 1882 the Levey
scholarship. In 1883 he added
three more scholarships to his
record —the Deas Thomson, the
R, G. Want for theoretical and
practical chemistry, and the Ren-
wick. In 1884 he graduated, gain-
ing the B A. gold medal (natural
science) and the Belmore gold medal
(agricultural chemistry). In 1885
he graduated B.Sc., gaining the
B.Sc. gold medal. Mr. Leverrier
was called to the Bar on the 21st
September. 1888, and since 1890 has
been Challis lecturer at the Uni*
versity on the law of status, civil
obligations and crimes. He con-
fines his practice chiefly to the
Equity branch of his profession.
He was elected a member of the
University Senate in 1907-
Mr. JOHN GARLAND, M.A ,
Barrister-at-Law, is a son of Robert
Garland and was born at Cowhythe,
Eanffshire, Scotland, on the 17th
September, 1863. He received his
early education at Fordyce Academy
He is a graduate of Aberdeen and
Edinburgh Universities, of the
former he is an M.A., and of the
latter an LL.B. with first-class
honours. Mr Garland came out to
Australia in 1887, and was called to
the Bar of New South Wales on th°
30th November, 1888. In 1898
Mr. Garland was elected a member
of the Legislative Assembly of New
South Wales for Woollahra, which
constituency he represented until
1901. He was returned for Tam-
worth in 1903. He has been Pro-
curator of the Presbyterian Church
in New South Wales since 1894, and
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. J. GARLAND
of the Presbyterian Church of Aus-
tralia since 1901. He is also Coun-
cillor of St. Andrew’s College,
Sydney.
Mr. REGINALD KERR
MANNING, 8.A., Barrister-at-Law,
was born at Woollahra, Sydney, on
the Ist August, 1866. He’ received
his early education at the Sydney
Grammar School, Newington Col-
lege, and the Launceston Grammar
School. Tasmania ; at the last-men-
tioned school gaining the A.A. de
gree in 1883. Returning to New
South Wales, he matriculated at the
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. R. K. MANNING.
Sydney University in 1884, gradu-
ating B A. in 1887, and called to the
Bar on the 16th August, 1889. He
was associate to the iate Mr. Justice
Charles J. Manning during 1890 and
1891, and since then has devoted
his time entirely to the practice of
his profession, which is almost en-
tirely in the Equity, Bankruptcy
and Probate Courts.
Mr. REGINA L D C 0 B D E N
BROOMFIELD, B-A., Barrister-at-
Law,is a Sydney native, and was born
Tesla
MR. H. C. BROOMFIELD.


on the 15th June, 1861. He received
his early education at the Sydney
Grammar School, where he was
“ captain of the school” for the
years 1881-2, a position which ranks
in the opinion of most school-boys
as superior to any degree that can
be conferred by the authorities.
Mr. Broomfield has, however, other
honours, as he proceeded from the
Grammar School to England and
entered at Trinity College, Oxford,
where he graduated in 1887, taking
an honour degree in law. On re-
turning to Sydney he was admitted
to the Bar of New South Wales on
the 7th March, 1890. Mr. Broom-
field is a member of the Council of
the Bar of New South Wales
Mr. DAVID GILBERT FER-
GUSON, B.A , Barrister-at-Law, is
the son of John and Elizabeth Fer-
guson, and was born at Muswell-
brook, New South Wales, on the
7th October, 1861. After the usual
preparatory schooling he proceeded
to the Sydney University, where he
gained the Levey science scholar-
ship and graduated B.A. in 1886.
From 1883 to 1890 Mr. Ferguson
devoted his time to journalism, and
wa« on the staffs of the Sydney
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. D. G. FERGUSON.
Morning Herald and f-aily Telegraph
and also the Brisbane and Sydney
Hansards. Having passed the ex-
aminations, Mr. Ferguson was called
to the Bar of New South Wales on
the Bth March, 1890. He read
with Mr. Cecil B Stephen, now a
K.C-, and was one of the draughts-
men on the Statute Law Consoli-
dation Commission. He is a mem-
ber of the Bar Council, and is Challis
lecturer at the University on the
law of procedure, pleading and
evidence.
Mr. HUGH POLLOCK, 8.A.,
LL.B., Barrister-at-Law, Crown
Prosecutor at the Central Criminal
Court, is the eldest son of the late
James Pollock, J.P., of Mount
Grange, Douglas, Co. Cork, Ireland,
where the subject of this sketch was
born. After the usual preparatory
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. H. POLLOCK.
education, he matriculated at Tri-
nity College, Dublin, where he gra-
duated B.A. and also gained the
degree of LL.B. Mr. Pollock came
to Sydney in 1886, was admitted to
the Bar of New South Wales on
the Bth May; 1890, and later ap-
pointed secretary and permanent
head of the Attorney-General’s De-
partment on the reorganisation of
the service by the Public Service
Board under the provisions of the
then New Public Service Act. He
filled the position until appointed
Solicitor-General on the 31st July,
1891, and on retiring from that office
in October, 189-1, returned to pri-
vate practice at the Bar. Mr. Pol-
lock is now Crown Prosecutor at
the Central Criminal Court, to which
position he was appointed in Oc-
tober, 1891.
Mr. ALBERT BATHURST PID-
DINGTON, 8.A., Barrister-at-Law,
is a son of the late Archdeacon Pid-
dington of Tamworth, and was born
at Bathurst in 1862. He received
his early education at the Sydney
Grammar School, proceeding after-
wards to the University, where he
matriculated in 1880, obtaining a
Scholarship for General Proficiency
and the Aspinall Scholarship at
St. Paul’s College. In 1881 he ob-
tained the Lithgow Scholarship for
Classics and a Scholarship at St.
Paul’s College, and in 1882 the
Cooper Scholarship for Classics. He
graduated in 1883, gaining the gold
medal in classics. He was vice-
warden o f St. Paul’s College, 1884 ;
in 1888, after a visit to Enrope, he
was appointed lecturer in English
at the University, 1889-94, during
part of which time he acted as
locum tenens for the evening lec-
turers in Greek and in German,
and he has been examiner in Eng-
lish and European History and in
French at the Public Examina-
tions. In 1889- 90, he was
Associate, to the late Mr. Justice
Windeyer, and was called to the
Bar of New South Wales on the
17th September, 1890. Mr. Pid-
dington edited “ Sir Roger de
Coverley,” 1892, with Essay on
Addison and Steele, Selections from
J Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR A. B. PODDINOTON.
“ Paradise Lost,” 1893, with Essay
on Milton. Mr. Piddington is by no
means unknown in the political
world, as he was elected a membe.
of the Legislative Assembly for
Tamworth in 1895, his opponent
being the late Sir George Dibbs,


and took an active part in the
federal campaigns of 1898 (being
one of the draftsmen of the Mani-
festo of the Anti-Convention Hill
League) and 1899, but since that
time he has devoted all his time
tc the practice of his profession.
Mr. JOHN NORBERT MASON,
Barrister-at-Law, was born in 1863
in the suburbs of Sydney, and edu
cated at private schools. His grand-
father was one of the originators of
the whaling industry in Australia.
O J
The subject of this sketch was ad-
mitted to the Bar of New South
Wales on the 17th September, 1890.
For a number of years Mr. Mason
has taken a great interest in the
progress of the local government
movement, and has been very pro-
minently connected with the or-
ganisations that have advocated the
creation of a “ Greater Sydney.’
He has been an alderman of the
Borough of Willoughby for a num-
ber of years, and Mayor of that
borough during the year 1905-6.
During his mayoralty a number of
O J %/
important changes were made in
MR. J. N. MASON.
the methods of administration, and
this borough is now one of the most
progressive and sound of the local
government areas in the State.
Mr. M ason has been a lecturer on
many occasions on the various sub-
jects connected with commercial
law, and for many months con-
ducted a series of lectures originated
by the Chamber of Commerce.
Mr. AUGUSTUS GEORGE F.
JAMES, 8.A., Barrister-at-Law,was
born at Sydney on the 30th October,
1866. He is a son of the Rev.
George James, one of the earliest
Methodist ministers of this State,
and a brother of the Rev. A. S. C.
James, a well known Presbyterian
clergyman. The subject of this
Tesla
MR. A. G. F. JAMES, B.A.
sketch received his early education
at the Fort Street School, .Sydney,
and at Hurstville College, Goulburn,
proceeding afterwards to the Sydney
University, where he matriculated
in 1885 and graduated B.A. in :888.
Mr. James was called to the Bar of
New South Wales on the 7th March,
1891, and received a brief on the
first day he was admitted. He is
registered for the Southern Circuit,
and has been appointed Crown Pro-
secutor on four occasions. Mr.
James was a prominent footballer
and cricketer in the Goulburn and
Maitland districts, and played in
the first series of lawn tennis trophy
matches with the Wahgunyah Club.
Mr LAURENS F. M. ARM-
STRONG, M.A , LL.B., Barrister-
at-Law, was born in 1862 in New
Zealand. He was educated at the
Sydney Grammar School, proceed-
ing afterwards to the Sydney Uni-
versity, where he gained a Univer-
sity scholarship in 1881, the Nichol-
son medal in 1882, and again in
1883 ; graduated B A. in 1881, gain-
ing first-class honours in classics and
second-class in mathematics and
natural philosophy. He was lec-
turer in classics in 1885, and gained
the degree of LL.B. in 1890, and
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. L F. M. ARMSTRONG.
later took his M.A. degree. Mr.
Armstrong was called to the Bar of
New South Wales on the 31st
October. 1890.
Mr. GEORGE HERBERT PIKE,
M.A., Barrister-at-Law, was born at
Hobart, Tasmania, on the 25th May,
1866, his father being the head-
master of the City School in that
city. He came to New South
Males in 1883, and, entering the
Sydney University graduated B A.,
1889, took his M.A. degree in 1892,
U /
Tesla
MR G H PIKE.
and was called Withe Bar on the sth
March of that year. He has de-
316
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


voted himself to cases arising out of
the complicated land laws, and now
holds a leading position in that
branch of the law. He was engaged
in the “ Mercadopl ” and “ Billa-
bong Dam” cases, and was also
entrusted with the work of con-
solidating the Land Acts and Mining
Acts under the Royal Commission.
Mr. JOHN MUSGRAVE HARVEY,
B-A-, Barrister-at-Law, is a son of
the Rev. Prebendary Harvey, Vicar
of Hillingdon, Middlesex, and was
born at Hampstead on the 22nd De-
cember, 1865. He received his early
education at Marlborough College,
proceeding afterwards, in 1884, to
Kebel College, Oxford, where he
gained a classical scholarship and
graduated in 1888. He came to
Sydney in 1889, and the following
year was appointed Associate to Sir
William Owen, Senior Puisne Judge,
which position he held until 1893.
He was called to the Bar of New
South Wales on the 21st March,
1892, and practises chiefly in the
Equity Courts. From 1893 to 1900
Mr. Harvey was reporter for the
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR J. M. HARVEY.
“New South Wales Law Reports
and Weekly Notes.” He is author
(with Messrs. G E. Rich and Arthur
Newham) of “ The Practice in
Equity.” He was one of the exami-
ners in law and equity at tin' Bar
examinations for the year 1906.
Mr. ARTHUR JAMES KELY-
NACK, Barrister-at-Law, 8.A,,
LL.B. (Syd.), is a son of the late
Rev. William Kelynack, President
of Newington College, Stanmore,
Sydney, and some-time President
of the General Conference of the
Australasian Wesleyan Methodist
Church. He received his early edu-
cation at the Public School at
Bathurst, New South Wales, and
afterwards at the Sydney Grammar
School. On leaving school at an
early age he was for seven years in
business. Mr. Kelynack entered the
Tesla
MR. A. J. KELYNACK.
University of Sydney in 1885, and
at the same time entered as a
theological student at Newington
College. He resigned his theologi-
cal studentship in 1887, but con-
tinued his course at the University
of Sydney, and graduated in arts in
1889. He then became a resident
master at the Church of England
Grammar School, North Sydney,
which position he occupied for one
year. He re-entered the University
of Sydney in 1890 and graduated in
law in March, 1892. Mr. Kelynack
then joined the civil service as
assistant to the Parliamentary
Draftsmen, and was admitted to
the Bar of New South Wales on the
26th August, 1892, but continued in
the chambers of the Parliamentary
draftsmen till about August. 1894,
when he was appointed to be one of
the draftsmen in connection with
the commission for the Consolida-
tion of the Statute Law of New
South Wales, which position he
continued to fill till the work of the
commission was completed. In
1894 he commenced his practice at
the Bar of New South Wales, on the
Common Law side of the Bar, and
also in the Industrial Arbitration
Court. He was for some years one
of the examiners for the interme-
diate examination for the degree of
Bachelor of Laws at the University
of Sydney, and is at present a mem-
ber of the Council of the Bar of
New South Wales.
Mr. EDWARD JAMES LOXTON,
M.A., Barrister-at-Law, was born at
Neutral Bay, near Sydney, on the
11th October, 1864. He received his
early education at the Sydney
Grammar School, proceeding after-
wards to the Sydney University,
where' he matriculated 1883, gradu-
ated B.A. degree, with honours in
classics, 1886, and took his M.A
degree in 1888. Mr. Loxton com-
menced his legal career by being
articled to Mr. Arthur Wigram
Allen, of Allen & Allen, solicitors,
m the year 1886, and passed the
final examination for solicitors in
1889, but never applied for admis-
sion, having decided to go to the
Bar. Entered as a student at law
MR. E. J. LOXTON.
in 1889, passed the final examina-
tion for the Bar 1892, and called
22nd November, 1892. Mr. Loxton
practises chiefly in the Equity
Court.
Mr REGINALD HEATH LONG
INNES, B.A, 8.C.L., Barrister-at-
Law, third son of the late Sir George


L. limes, was born in Sydney on 17th
November, 1869, and was educated
(1882 to 1888) at Malvern College,
one of the great public schools of
England, In 1888 Mr. Innes procee-
ded to New College. Oxford, where he
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR R. H. L. INNES.
in 1891, took his B.A. degree with
honours in the Final School of Juris-
prudence- While an undergraduate
Mr. Innes, on the 6th November,
1889, became a student of Lincoln’s
Inn, and in December, 1891, gained
a studentship (Jurisprudence and
Roman Law) of one hundred guineas
in an examination open to all stu-
dents of the four Inns of Court, and
in March, 1892, another studentship
(Equity) of a similar amount, open
to students of Lincoln’s Inn. Leav-
ing Oxford in 1892, Mr. Innes read
law for a vear in the chambers at
Lincoln’s Inn of Mr. W. M. Cann,
an Equity pleader of note. In June,
1893, Mr. Innes was first in order
of merit in the examination for the
degree of Bachelor of Civil Law
(8.C.L.) Oxford. On his return to
this State in September, 1883, Mr.
Innes was admitted to the Bar of
New South Wales on the motion of
the then Attorney-General (now
Sir Edmund Barton), and acted as
associate to Mr Justice Innes until
the latter’s death in October, 1896.
when he was appointed to a similar
position by that judge’s successor,
Mr. Justice A. H. Simpson, tlm pre-
sent Chief Judge in Equity. Mr.
Innes is said to be one of the very
few juniors of this Bar who have
had the privilege of appearing in a
professional capacity before the
Judicial Committee of the Privy
Council.
Mr. HERB E R T RAI N E
CURLEWIS, BA, LL.B.,
Barrister -at - Law, is a son of
Frederick Charles Curlewis, and
was born in Sydney on the 22nd
August, 1869. He received his early
education at Newington College,
proceeding afterwards to the Uni-
versity, where he graduated B A.
with first-class honours in 1890,
and in 1892 gained the degree of
LL.B. He was called to the Bar
of New South Wales on the 17th
March, 1893, and practises chiefly
on the Common Law side. Mr.
Curlewis is author of “ Comparative
Tables of the Statutes of England
and New South Wales,” ” The Mir-
ror of Justice,” and (in conjunction
with Messrs. Cockshott, Lamb and
Tesla
MR. H. R. CURLEWIS.
Weigall) of “ The New South Wales
Digest ” He is 'also the editor of
“ The Australasian Annual Digest.”
In 1896 Mr. Curlewis was married
to Miss Ethel Turner, the well-
known writer
Mr.ALEC. THOMSON, 8.A., LL.B.,
Barrister-at-Law, was born on the
6th September, 1868, at Dawes’
Point, Sydney, and is the youngest
son of the late Alexander Thomson,
who was for many years manager
of the Sydney Insurance Company,
and afterwards a member of the
firm of A. Hinchcliff. Son & Co.
He received his education at the
Sydney Grammar School and the
Sydney University, during which
time lie took a prominent part in
the sport of rowing. In 1891 he
took his BA. degree, and three
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. A THOMSON.
years latex his LL.B. degree, and
then read for twelve months in the
chambers of Mr. C. B. Stephen (now
K.C.). He was'called toTtheJlßar on
4th May 189-4, and began the prac-
tice of his profession in the Courts
of the North-western circuit, and
subsequently in those of the Nor-
thern circuit, more particularly at
Tamworth. The experience thus
gained in the Circuit and District
Courts has led him to acquire a very
general practice in all the common
law Courts. In 1898 he joined with
Mr. G. Campbell Addison (now
Registrar of the Arbitration Court)
in editing a book on the Small Debts
and Bills of Sale Acts, of which a
second edition and supplement have
since been published
Mr. JOHN JACOB COHEN,
M.A., ML. A., Barrister-at-Law, is
tbe second son of Samuel Cohen,
one of the pioneers of the Clarence
River district, and was born at
Grafton on the 20th December,
1859. He received his early edu-
cation at the Public School.
Ulmarra, and Grafton Grammar
School, and Calder House, Redfern,
proceeding to the University,
where he matriculated in June,
1876, graduated with first-class
honours in mathematics in June,
1879, when he was only nineteen,


and took his M.A. degree in June,
1881. In 1879 he was articled to
Mr. Norman Selfe, M.I.C.E. In
1882 he went to Mackay, Queens-
land, and commenced business as
an architect and engineer, remain-
ing there for two years, when he
removed to Brisbane. He remained
in that city until 1892 practising his
profession, and then decided to
■come to Sydney to read for the
Bar. Before he left he was made
an honorary life member of the
Queensland Institute of Architects
of which he was one of the founders,
and he is also an honorary member
of the New South Wales Institute.
Mr. Cohen was called to the Bar on
the 31st May, 1894, and in 1898
elected member of the Legislative
Assembly for Petersham, which con-
stituency he has continuously repre-
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. J. J. COHEN.
Rented from that year. He was one
of the most active workers in the
promotion of the movement for
federation. Mr Cohen was elected
to the board of management of the
Great Synagogue in 1900, and hon.
treasurer in 1903.
Mr. RICHARD WINDEYER, 8.A.,
Barrister-at-Law, was born Sep-
tember 9, 1868, and is the eldest
son of the late Sir William C. Win-
deyer, Puisne Judge. He'was edu-
cated at the Sydney Grammar
School and the University of Syd-
ney, where he went into residence
as a member of St. Paul’s College,
to which he was admitted on
the 10th August, 1894. Before
commencing practice he was asso-
ciate to his father for some
years, and this intimate legal re-
lationship assisted him greatly in
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. R. WINDEYER.
preparing for his profession. Ori-
ginally he built up his practice by
assiduous attention to the work of
the courts in the Hunter River and
Northern districts. This experience
marked him out as a general com
mon law practitioner Hie term as
associate also brought him Divorce
Court work.
Mr. ANDREW ROBERT JAMES
WATT, LL.B.. Barrister-at-Law, is
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. A. R. J. WATT.
a son of Alexander Watt, a well-
known resident of Newcastle, New
South Wales, in which city the sub-
ject of this sketch was born on the
18th March, 1872. He received his
early education at St. Joseph’s Col-
lege, Hunter’s Hill, proceeding after-
wards to the Sydney University,
where he matriculated with honours
in 1889, graduated B.A. with
honours in 1893, and gained the
degree of LL.B. with honours in
1894. Mr. Watt read in the cham-
bers of the present Mr. Justice Pring
(then Mr. Pring), and on his motion
was called to the Bar of New South
Wales on the 31st October, 1894.
He is Vice-President of the Old
Boys’ Union of St. Joseph’s Col-
lege.
Mr. DAVID MAUGHAN, 8.A.,
Bc-L, Barrister-at-Law, is a son
of Mr. John Maughan, of Syd-
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. D. MAUGHAN.
ney, and is a native of the
State, having been born in Syd-
ney on the sth February, 1873.
j J *
He received his early education at
the King’s School, Parramatta, and
there gained the Broughton and
Forrest scholarships which entitled
him to proceed to Oxford Univer-
sity, England. Ob arrival in the
old country, in 1891, Mr. Maughan
entered Balliol College, Oxford, and
followed up his previous success by
taking second - class honours in
mathematical moderations in 1893,
and first - class honours in the
Honour School of Jurisprudence,
and also his B.A. degree in 1895.
In 1896 he was appointed l law tutor
at Balliol College, in succession


to Mr. Thomas Raleigh, oir the
latter’s appointment to the position
of Registrar of the Privy Council,
and in the same year gained first-
class honours in the examination for
the degree of Bc.L. Mr Maughan
had entered as a student-at-law at
Lincoln’s Inn in 1893, and having
passed his final examinations, he
A\ r as called to the English Bar on the
17th June, 1896. He immediately
returned to Australia, Avas admitted
to the Bar of New South Wales in
November, 1896, and during 1897
read in the chambers of Mr Langer
Owen (noAA r K.C.). Since 1897 he has
practised his profession in Sydney,
his A\mrk lying almost entirely in the
Equity Court. He has been a mem-
ber of the Barristers’ Admission
Board, and has delivered lectures in
Irav for the Chamber of Commerce
and for the University Extension
Board.
Mr. EDMUND HASLEWOOD
SHEPPARD, 8.A., Barrister-at-
Law, is a son of the late Mr. Justice
Sheppard, Judge of the Supreme-
Court, Queensland, and a nephew of
Judge Murray, of the District Court
of New South W r ales. He was born
on the Bth April, 1862, in Sydney,
and received his earlv education at
Freeman & Co,
MR. E. H. SHEPPARD
the Ipswich (Queensland) Grammar
School, the King’s School, Parra-
matta, and prepared by the late
John Kinloch for the Sydney Uni-
versity, where he graduated B.A.
in 1882. Mr. Sheppard was first
articled to Mr. A. Consett Stephen,
of Stephen, Jaques & Stephen,
solicitors ; admitted solicitor in the
year 1886, and commenced practice
on his own account in 1887, con-
tinuing in active practice as a soli-
citor until the 19th February, 1897,
when he was called to the Bar.
Mr. Sheppard practises chiefly in
the Equity and Bankruptcy Courts
and on conveyancing matters in the
Common Law Courts. He has a
large chamber practice in trustee,
conveyancing and company law.
Mr FRANCIS STEWART
BOYCE, 8.A., LL.B., Barrister-at
Law, is a son of the Rev. Canon
Boyce, of St. Paul’s, Sydney, and
was born at Rockley, Ncav South
Wales, on the 26th June, 1872. He
J. Hubert Newman Ltd
MR. F. S. BOYCE.
received his early education at the
King’s School, Parramatta, the Syd-
ney Grammar School, and then went
to Rugby School, England, from
1885-9. Returning to Sydney, he
matriculated at the University, gra-
duated B.A. with first-class honours
in history in 1893, and gained the
degree of LL.B. with second-class
honours in 1896. Having decided
to follow the legal profession, he
was called to the Bar of New South
Wales on the 19th February. 1897,
J *
and selected the Western circuit,
to which he has been attached from
that time- He was president for a
term of the University Union, and
is honorary secretary of the
Prisoners’ Aid Association.
Mr. JOHN BEVERLEY PEDEN,
8.A., LL.B., Barrister-at-Law, is
a son of the late Magnus J. Peden,
of Sydney and Bega, and was born
at Randwick on the 25th April,
1871. He received the main part
Tesla.
MR. J. B. PEDEN.
of his early education at the Sydney
Grammar School, where he gained
the Senior Knox Prize, and also on
two occasions the Windeyer Essay
•/ %/
Prize- On leaving school he was
awarded the Boyd - Morehead
Scholarship, and at matriculation
in 1889 he obtained first - class
honours in Latin and Greek, and
was bracketed for a University
scholarship. Throughout his Arts
course he gained first-class honours
in Classics, and during his Ist and
2nd years won Professor Anderson’s
prize for a philosophical essay. At
the B.A. examination in 1892 he
gained first-class honours in Classics
and Logic and Mental Philosophy,
and first-class honours and the
University medal at the LL.B.
examination in 1898. In 1891 he
went into residence at St. Paul’s
College, being bracketed for the
Fellows Scholarship, and won the
College essay prize the same year.
In 1892 he was appointed Vice-War-
den of the College, and retained the
position till 1899. Mr. Peden was
for several years an examiner in the
University public examinations in
modern history, and in 1896 was
lecturer in Latin at the Univer-
sity. He Avas also joint secretary
of the Australasian Association for


the Advancement of Science in
1898. During his course at the
University he held the offices of
president of the Undergraduates’
Association, president of the Uni-
versity’ Union, chief editor of Hermes.
He was elect ed a Fellow of St. Paul’s
College in 1901 and has been
Challis lecturer in the University on
the Law of Property since 1903.
Mr. Peden was called to the Bar of
New South Wales on the 4th August,
1898. He read in the chambers of
Dr. R. M. Sly. K.C. and is regis-
tered on the Northern Circuit.
Mr. RICHARD CLIVE TEECE,
LL.B., Barrister-at-Law, is the son
of Mr. Richard Teece, general
manager of the A.M.P. Society, and
was born in Sydney on the 24th
September, 1877. He received his
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. R. C. TEECE.
early education at the Sydney Gram-
mar School, proceeding afterwards to
the University. In 1896 he gained
the Boyd-Morehead, Freemasons’,
and the Bowman-Cameron scholar-
ships ; then for two years in suc-
cession—1897 ar *d 1898 —the Cooper
scholarship, and in 1899 the Frazer.
During these three years he was in
residence at St. Andrew’s College,
where he held the Coutts and
Gordon scholarships. In the latter
part of 1899 he graduated B.A. with
first-class honours in classics and
history, also gaining first-class
honours in classics and political
economy at the M.A. examination.
In igor he added the Wigram Allen
scholarship (law) to his laurels, and
obtained first-class honours with his
LL.B. degree in 1902. The previous
year he gained the first Beauchamp
prize, Ins subject being “A Com-
parison between the Federal Consti-
tutions of Canada and Australia.”
Mr. Teece was called to the Bar of
New South Wales on the 29th
October, 1903, on the motion of
Dr. Sly, and read in the chambers
of Dr. Sly, K C., and Mr. Adrian
Knox (now K.C.). In 1904, as
University extension lecturer, he
gave a series of lectures on the
“ History of Commerce ” at the
Royal Exchange, and in 1905 he
went to Tasmania and for six months
was Acting-Professor of Law at the
University of Tasmania, Hobart.
Air. Teece was examiner in law at
the Sydney University. 1906-7, and
to the Public Service Board in 1903
and 1906 ; also lecturer in convey-
ancing and law of property to the
Articled Clerks in 1906 (the lectures
being arranged by the prothonotary).
Mr. HENRY EDW A R D
MANNING, LL.B., Barrister-at-
Law, is the second son of Sir
William Patrick Manning, and was
born in Sydney in 1877. He was
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. H. E. MANNING.
educated at St. Ignatius College,
and the University of Sydney, where
he took the degrees of Bachelor of
Arts, 1900, and Bachelor of Laws,
1902. On the 28th July, 1902, on
the motion of the Hon.C. E. Pilcher,
K.C., he was called to the Bar of
New South Wales, In 1904 he was
appointed to the position of clerk
associate to the Hon. Mr. Justice
O’Connor and Law Reporter to the
High Court of Australia in Queens-
land, South Australia, West Aus-
tralia and Tasmania. After about
eighteenmonths he resumed practice
at the Bar. He is a registered mem-
ber of the Western Circuit of New
South Wales.
J. Hubert Newman Ltd
MR. J. L. WATKINS.
Mr. JOHN LEO WATKINS,
Barrister-at-Law, chief Parliamentary
Draftsman of New South Wales, was
horn at Hobart, Tasmania, in 1849.
His chief schooling was at the Sydney
Grammar School, under the late head-
master, Mr. W. J. Stephens. He left
that school in 1806, and in 1867 en-
tered Christ’s College, Cambridge,
from which he proceeded to the degree
of 15. A., Cantab, in 1871, being brack-
eted 34th Wrangler in the mathemati-
cal tripos of that year. In 1869, he
entered as a student of the society of
the Inner Temple, and was called to
the Bar on the 30th April, 1872. Re-
turning to Sydney in 1873, he pro-
ceeded to the degree of M.A. Cantab,
and M.A., Sydney, and was admitted
to the New South Wales Bar, and
practised there until his appointment,
in 1892, to the position of Parliamen-
tary Draftsman, succeeding the late
Mr. Alexander Oliver in that position.
While practising at the bar he re-
ported for the authorised law reports,
from 1881 to 1886. He also edited
the Lands Acts and the Real Estate
Acts of New South Wales, and com-
piled, jointly with others, a “ Digest of
Criminal and Magistrates’ Cases,” and
a “ Digest of Cases in the Supreme
Court, from 1860 to 1884.”


THE EQUITY COURT.
Mr. HENRY PERCY OWEN,
8.A., Oxford, Master in Equity,
New South Wales, is a native of the
State, having been born at Mait-
land in iB6O. He was educated
first at the Sydney Grammer School
and afterwards at the Sydney Uni-
versity. From thence he proceeded
to Oxford, England, and entered
Christ Church. Having obtained
his degree and passing the neces-
sary law examinations, he was
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. H. P. OWEN.
made a member of Inner Temple,
and called to the English Bar in
1855. Returning to Sydney, he
began the practice of his profession
in 1877. Subsequently he applied
himself exclusively to the Equity
side of the Supreme Court, and
practised continuously in that juris-
diction until 1902, when he was
appointed, upon the death of late
Master in Equity, Barton, to the
vacant office. Mr. Owen is the
youngest son of the late Mr. Robert
Owen, for some years a District
Court Judge of New South Wales,
a colonist of old standing, and a
member of the Legislative Council.
Mr. WILLIAM HENRY HAR-
GRAVES, J.P., Deputy-Registrar
in Equity, Chancery Square, Sydney,
was born at Dapto (at that time
called the Five Islands), New
South Wales, in 1839. He is the
second son of the late Mr. Edward
Hammond Hargraves, whose name
will long be remembered as the dis-
coverer of gold in Australia on 12th
February, 1851. The subject of
this sketch received his education at
the Collegiate School, Darling Point,
at that time presided over by the
late Rev. Henry Carey, M.A. He
subsequently attended St. James’
Grammar School, and later again
another scholastic institution at
Darling Point, then conducted by the
late Rev. George Macarthur. In
1857 he entered the Equity Office
as a cadet under his old tutor, Mr.
Carey who had just previously been
appointed Master in Equity. During
his lengthened career in this office Mr.
Hargraves has seen many changes,
having served under the following
Masters in Equity : Messrs. Carey,
Deffell, Holroyd, Barton, Salisbury,
and the present occupant of the high
office, Henry P. Owen, Esq. In
1879, Mr. Hargraves was appointed
Chief Clerk in Lunacy, remaining in
that position until 1885 when, upon
the demise of Mr. P. C. Curtis, he
was appointed Chief Clerk in Equity.
On 1 st January, 1890, he was appoint-
ed to his present position, Deputy-
Registrar in Equity. Mr. Hargraves
is an ardent conchologist, and has
devoted the whole of his leisure
moments to its study and investi-
gation. From 1865 t 0 1 879, he was
occupied in putting together and
classifying a very large collection of
shells numbering many thousands
of species. His collection is now in
the Australian Museum, at Sydney,
of which institution he is a trustee.
He was reluctantly forced to relin-
quish shell-collecting in 1879 in con-
sequence of the precarious state of
his health, and was ordered by his
medical adviser to reside on the
mountains, In 1880 he established
a home at Blackheath, as a country
residence, where he remained four-
teen years, when he removed to
Med low. This estate he disposed of
to Mark Foy in 1903, who added
to the property a magnificent struc-
ture and established a hydropathic
sanatorium, the most extensive of
its kind in the southern hemisphere.
Upon this estate Mr. Hargraves
spent over £j,ooo, and Mr. Foy
£ 60,000 more. Mr. Hargraves has
J. Hubert Newman . Sydney .
MR. W. H. HARGRAVES.
long been recognised as the father
of Blackheath.
Mr. WILLIAM ALEXANDER
BALCOMBE. Chief Clerk in Equity,
was born at Sydney in 1855, and
was educated at Paddington House
School, under the proprietorship of
the late Dr. Stanley, LL.D. In
1882 he entered upon his clerical
career, as a junior clerk in the Equity
Office. During the eight ensuing
years his abilities were brought into
prominence ; each grade being suc-
cessfully reached, until in 1890 he
was appointed, upon promotion, to
the position lie now holds. He is 3,
3 22
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


grandson of the late William Bal-
combe, who, previous to accepting,
in 1824, the position of the first
Colonial Treasurer to this State, held
J. Hubert Newman Sydney
MR. W. A. BALCOMBE.
the post of Naval Agent, at St.
Helena, during the first part of the
stay of Napoleon Buonaparte.
The MASTER IN LUNACY’S
OFFICE came into existence on
the 16th May, 1879, consequent upon
the passing of the Lunacy Act of
1878. Sincethis Act,several amend-
ing and supplementary statutes have
been enacted, and the whole are now
consolidated under the title of “The
Lunacy Act of 1898.” This Act is
founded to a large extent on the
English law as regards practice,
and special powers are conferred
upon the Master in Lunacy. The
powers and duties of the Master in
Lunacy may be shortly stated as
under : —The general management of
the estates of insane and incapable
persons and insane patients, and the
protection of their interests. The
protection of the revenue by in-
vestigating the ability of relatives
liable to contribute maintenance,
and the enforcing of payment there-
of. Since the passing of the Lunacy
Act of 1898, the following Judges of
the Supreme Court have presided
over the Court in Lunacy:—Mr.
Justice John Fletcher Hargrave,
Sir William Montague Manning
(Knt.), Mr. Justice William Owen
(now Senior Puisne Judge), Mr.
Justice Charles James Manning, Mr.
Justice Archibald Henry Simpson
(still in office). The first holder of
the office of Master in Lunacy was
the late Mr. Arthur Todd Holroyd,
M.D. (Edin.), L.R.C.P. (Loud.),
F.Z.S., F.L.S , F.R.G.S. (Master in
Equity since 1866), who was ap-
pointed Master in Lunacy on the
16th May, 1879, and resigned on
19th January, 1885. Mr. Henry
Francis Barton, M.A., was appointed
Master in Lunacy on the 30th Janu-
ary, 1885, and held office until his
death on the 26th October, 1902, his
successor being the present Master,
Mr. Henry Percy Owen, appointee!
on the 4th November, 1902. With
Mr. Holroyd was associated as chief
clerk, Mr. W. H. Hargraves, now
the Deputy-Registrar in Equity, who
was succeeded on the Ist March,
1885, by Mr. Henry Edwards, the
present Chief Clerk in Lunacy. The
statistics appended illustrate the
growth of this office since its incep-
tion, the extent of the management
of estates of the insane, the revenue
collected, and the cost of the office
in salaries .
The estimated value of the real
estate held by the Master in Lunacy
is
Revenue collections (chiefly main-
tenance of insane patients) —lBBO,
l7s 7 s - 4 d -; l2s.
tod. ; 1898, s s -i 1903,
ns. 2d.
Number of patients in hospitals—
-1880, 2,099; 1888,2,960; 1898,4,067;
x 993> 4> B 4°-
Number of patients in hospitals
for whom maintenance was paid—
-1898, 895 ; 1903, 1,271.
Correspondence —lnward: 1888,
4,289; 1898, 14,207; 1903,20,895.
Outward; 1880,837; 1888, 2,256;
1898, 11,773; 1903, 16,117.
Salaries—lBBB, 1898,
Mr. H. P. Owen, 8.A., Master in Lunacy (see
Equity Court, previous page).
Mr. HENRY EDWARDS,
Chief Clerk in Lunacy. New South
Wales, was born in Suffolk, England,
in 1848, and received the elements
of his education at the Alderburgh
Grammar School, in his native city,
under the late Right Rev. William
Tate, Suffragan Bishop of Norwich.
He came to Australia in the year
1875, and entered the public service
of the State in 1877 as an officer in
the Department of Lands. Later on
he was transferred to the Supreme
Court, and in 1879 was appointed
J. Hubert Newman Sydney.
MR. H. EDWARDS.
second clerk in the office of the
Master of Lunacy. He was pro-
moted to his present position in
1885.
Mr. CHARLES HENRY
BENNETT, First Clerk in
Lunacy, is a native of Redfern,
Sydney, where he was born in 1863,
and was educated at the late Mr.
Sheridan Moore’s Academy and
at the Burwood Public School, the
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. C. H. BENNETT.
headmaster of which was Mr. James
McCredie, late Deputy-Chief In-
spector of Schools. At the con


elusion of his early training, and
having passed the Junior University
Examination, he, in the year 1879,
entered the public service of the
State, being appointed a junior in
the Occupation of Lands, which at
that time, was subject to the admin-
istration of the Department of
Mines. At that period, his chief
(Mr. William Francis Piper) then
had charge of the conservancy of
forests, from which time this de-
partment took its initiative. Mr.
Bennett, having gained a very wide
experience in this department during
his nine years’ stay there, was in
1888 promoted and appointed to the
position of second clerk in Lunacy.
Five years later he was further
promoted to perform the duties of
the dual positions of first clerk and
accountant in Lunacy. Upon the
formation of a separate office of an
accountant in the year igoo, conse-
quent on the growth of the office,
the subject of this sketch retained
the duties of the position which he
now holds. While employed in the
Forestry Department, he was a
contemporary of the late poet,
Henry Kendall, the first Inspector
of Forests for New South Wales.
Mr. JOHN MACV IC A R
ANDERSON BONTHORNE,
J.P., Registrar of the District Court,
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. J. M. A. BONTHORNE.
in conjunction with which he per-
forms the duties of Registrar of the
Court of Marine Inquiry, Court of
Review, and Secretary to the Dis-
trict Court Judges, is a native ol
London, England, where he was
horn in the year 1864. He arrived
in New South Wales when but a
lad with his parents, and was
educated at Dr. Boyd’s School,
Maitland. He entered the public
service in 1882 as Assistant Clerk
of Petty Sessions and Assistant
Crown Lands Agent at Maitland.
Three years later he was appointed
to the Water Police Court, Sydney,
as clerk, and eventually he worked
his way through the various grades
leading up to the chief clerkship,
which position he obtained in the
year 1894. In 1897 l' e was, upon
promotion, appointed Registrar of
the District Court, a position he still
occupies in conjunction with those
already enumerated. Some idea of
his multifarious duties may be
formed when we view the area of
actions the different courts involve.
The District Court, as a court of
common law, has a jurisdiction in
all actions where claims do not
exceed The Court of Marine
Inquiry has a jurisdiction to inquire
into all shipping casualties, and the
Court of Review deals with all
appeals under the Land and Income
Tax Assessment Acts. When the
subject of this sketch left school at
the age of seventeen years, it was
his intention to have followed a legal
profession ; but, owing to the un-
timely death of his father, the late
Rev. James Bonthorne, M.A., he
was in a degree prevented from pur-
suing his studies for the law. In the
year 1903 he availed himself of his
statutory right to a long leave of
absence, and had the pleasure of
making an extended tour through
Great Britain and the Continent.
It is needless to say he returned to
his duties greatly refreshed in every
sense. While in England he visited
many of the law courts there. He
is a justice of the Peace ; has acted
as secretary to several Royal Com-
missions, and in that capacity he
visited New Zealand in 1901 in
connection with the Royal Commis-
sion appointed to inquire into the
working of the arbitration laws ;
and he is joint editor of the “ District
Courts Practice,” a book that has
met with remarkable success, and
is the standard authority on the
practice of the District Courts in
New South Wales,
Mr. THOMAS WILLIAM
GARRETT, Registrar of Probates,
is a native of New South Wales,
having been born in that State in
1858. He is a son of the late
Hon. Thomas Garrett, who for a
quarter of a century or more was
lecognisecl as one of the foremost
public men of New South Wales,
and who filled with distinction the
office of Minister for Lands in the
first and second Robertson Adminis-
trations, also the same portfolio in
the third Parkes Administration. The
Hubert Newman Sydney
MR T W GARRETT
subject of this sketch received his
education at various public schools
of the State and afterwards at New-
ington College. In 1874 lie entered
the government service as a cadet in
the Lands Department. He was sub-
sequently translated to the Supreme
Court as a clerk, where he made
rapid promotion. He was admitted
a solicitor of the Supreme Court of
New South Wales in 1882, and
received his appointment as Registrar
of Probates in 1884. In June, 1896,
the office of Curator of Intestate
Estates was added to his responsi-
bilities. Outside of his official duties,
Mr. Garrett has taken an active
interest in cricket, and for many
years occupied a place among the
leading cricketers in Australia. He
visited England with the pioneer
Australian team in 1878, and also
with the 1882 and 1886 teams. He
was also captain of the New South
\\ ales team for a lengthened period.


Talma.
MR. C. E. PARKINSON.
Crown Solicitor’s Office,
CHIEF CLERK.
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. H. P. CURT IS,
Crown Solicitor’s Office,
CLERK IN CHARGE, COMMON LAW.
Charlemont & Co.
MR. J. V. TILLETT,
CROWN SOLICITOR.
F alK.
MR. W. H. MANT,
Crown Solicitor’s Office,
PROSECUTING OFFICER.
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. W. H. PALMER,
OFFICIAL ASSIGNEE.


COUNCIL OF THE INCORPORATED LAW INSTITUTE
NEW SOUTH WALES, 1903.
Messrs. Hemsley & Dowling have been elected in lieu of Messrs. a’Beckett & Osborne, who resigned,
and Mr. Rich is Hon. Treasurer.
324


Messrs. ALLEN, ALLEN and
HEMSLEY is one of the oldest
firms of Solicitors in Sydney,
being closely associated with the
early history of the State. It was
Falk
MR. R. C. ALLEN.
founded by the late Mr. George
Allen, M.L.C., who was born in
London in 1800, arrived in this
State in 1816, and was admitted an
attorney and solicitor of the Su-
preme Court on the 26th of July,
1822. He was an alderman of the
first corporation of Sydney, mayor
MR. H. ALLEN.
in 1844, and was a member of Lthe
senate of the University of Sydney
from 1859 until his death, in 1877.
In 1846 he admitted into partner-
ship his son, the late Sir George
Wigram Allen, K.C.M.G., who was
born in Sydney on the 16th of
May, 1824, educated at the Sydney
College, and articled to his father
in 1841. From 1846 the business
was carried on under the name of
Allen & Son until Mr. Thomas
Kendal Bowden was taken into
partnership, when the style was
changed to Allen and Bowden. Sir
George Wigram Allen was the first
president of the Law Institute, and
was also a member of the senate
of the University of Sydney, being
elected to fill the vacancy caused
by the death of his father. In
1869 Sir George entered Parlia-
ment. In 1873 he was appointed
the first Minister for Justice and
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. A. M. HEMSLEY.
Public Instruction. In 1875 he was*
elected Speaker of the Legislative
Assembly, and held office until 1883
In the meantime the firm experi-
enced several changes of partners :
two of the other sons of the late
Mr. George Allen joined the firm,
namely, Walter Bourne Allen and
Arthur Mansfield Allen. Mr. Walter
Allen died in 1867, and Mr. T. K.
Bowden in 1879. In 1883 Mr. Reoi-
nald Charles Allen,the presentsenior
member, was admitted as a part-
ner, and the firm’s name, which
had been Allen & Allen since the
death of Mr. T. K. Bowden, was
continued as such. In 1885 both
Sir George and Mr. A. M. Allen died.
In 1886 Mr. George Colquhoun
and Mr. Arthur Wigram Allen,
another son of Sir George’s, be-
came partners, with Mr. A. G. M.
Friend, who had been some years
in the office. In the early part
of 1895, Mr. G. C. Colquhoun and
Freeman.
MR. A. W. ALLEN.
Mr. A. G. M. Friend both retired
from the firm, the former on his
appointment as Crown Solicitor
and the latter to start business on
his own account. The office was
then carried on by R. C. Allen and
A. W. Allen until November, 1894,
when Mr. Alfred Macartney Hems
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. C. S. DE G. COWPER.
ley was admitted into portnership
and the name of the firm changed to
Allen, Allen and Hemsley. Since
1895 the only changes have been the


admission as partners of Mr. Her-
bert Allen and Mr. Cecil Spencer de
Grey Cowper. With regard to the
present members of the firm Mr.
Reginald Charles Allen was born
on the 2nd July, 1858, educated at
Sydney Grammar School, went to
Sydney University in 1876, gradu-
ated in 1879, articled same year,
admitted on 2nd September, 1882.
Mr. Arthur Wigram Allen was born
on 4th February, 1862, educated
at Sydney Grammar School, and
graduated at the Melbourne Uni-
versity in 1882, was articled to his
father on 12th February, 1883, and
admitted in 1886. Mr. Alfred Mac-
artney Hemsley was born on 22nd
July, 1860, educated at West-
minster School, graduated at St.
John’s College, Oxford, admitted
a solicitor of the Supreme Court of
Judicature, England, 1886, and of
N.S.W. in 1889. Mr. Herbert Allen
was born on 21st May, 1863, edu-
cated at the Sydney Grammar
School, graduated at Trinity" Hall,
Cambridge, taking the degrees of
B. and LL.B. Admitted a soli-
citor of the Supreme Court of Judi-
cature, England, 1890, and of New
South Wales, 1894. Mr. Cecil
Spencer de Grey Cowper w r as ad-
mitted in 1887, and joined the firm
1902.
The old and well-known firm of
STEPHEN, JAQUES & STEPHEN,
Solicitors, has been in existence for
very many years. The late Mr,
Montague Consett Stephen com-
menced practising as a solicitor as far
back as 1819. In 1864 his brother,
the Hon. S. A. Stephen, joined him,
and later on Mr, C. A. Laurence
became a member of the firm, which
was then known as Stephen and
Laurence. In 1878 Mr. A. E. Jaques
joined the firm, when the name was
changed to that of Stephen, Laurence
and Jaques. Under this designation
it remained until Mr. Laurence re-
tired, when Mr. Alfred Consett
Stephen, a son of the founder, was
admitted as a partner, and the
name was changed to that of
Stephen, Jaques & Stephen. Later
the Hon. Septimus Alfred Stephen’s
son, Mr, Colin Stephen, became a
member of the firm. In 1901 Mr.
C. A. Jaques, a son of Mr. A. E.
Jaques, and in 1907 Mr. L. A. Milner
Stephen were taken into the partner-
ship — the firm continuing under the
title of Stephen, Jaques and Stephen.
With regard to tlie present mem-
bers of the firm, Mr. ALFRED
EDMUND JAQUES, the senior
partner, was born in February, 1848,
educated at the Sydney Grammar
School, articled in 1865, serving bis
articles with the late G. F. Benbow,
the late Sir Joseph P. Abbott and
the late Thomas Iceton ; admitted a
solicitor of the Supreme Court of
New South Wales in 1870, commenc-
ing practice on his own account
O i. if*.
Swiss Studios.
MR. A. E. JAQUES.
immediately after bis admission. In
1875 he was joined by his uncle, the
late Theodore J. Jaques, formerly
Registrar-General of the colony. In
1878 that partnership was dissolved
and Mr. A. E. Jaques joined Messrs.
Stephen and Laurence.
Mr. ALFRED CONSETT
STEPHEN is a native of Sydney,
and received his early education at
Mr. Pendrill's school, at Glebe, and
at Tunbridge Grammar School, Kent,
England, proceeding afterwards to
New College, Oxford, where he took
his degree in the Honor School of
Jurisprudence in 1879. On his re-
turn to New South Wales he was
articled to the late Hon. S. A.
Stephen, admitted a solicitor of the
Supreme Court in 1882, and sub-
sequently made a partner in the
firm,
Falk
MR. A. C. STEPHEN.
Mr. COLIN STEPHEN was born
in May, 1872, educated at All Saints’
College, Bathurst, New South W 7 ales,
and in Engand, articled to Mr. C. S.
de Grey Cowper (then a member of
Freeman.
MR. C. STEPHEN.
the firm), and admitted a solicitor of
the Supreme Court in 1896.
Mr. CHARLES ALFRED
JAQUES was born in 1878, and
received bis early education at the
King’s School, Parramatta, and in
England. He matriculated in 1896,
articled toMr. Alfred Consett Stephen,
admitted a solicitor of the Supreme
Court in 1901, and about a year later
became a partner in the firm.
324
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


Falk.
MR. C. A. JAWUES.
Mr. LEONARD 'AUBREY
MILNER STEPHEN was born at
Sydney, March, 1875, and is a son of
Mr. Edward Milner Stephen, formerly
Official Assignee. lie was educated
at Sydney Grammar School, and
Tesla
MR. L. A. M. STEPHEN.
afterwards articled to Mr. Alfred
Consett Stephen. lie was admitted
as a solicitor of the Supreme Court ou
11 th March, 1905, and was taken
into partnership in 1907.
Mr. DONNELLY FISHER. M.A.,
senior partner in the firm of Fisher
and Macansh, Solicitors, is a
native of New South Wales and
was born in 1850. He is the
youngest son of the late Thomas
John Fisher, barrister; on his
mother’s side a grandson of the
late W. C. Wentworth, and on
his father’s side a grand-nephew of
the late Dr. Wardill, LL.D. He
was educated in England, partly
at a private school and then at
Tunbridge School, Kent, England.
Returning to Australia in 1866,
he attended the following year
at the Sydney University where
he graduated B.A. in 1871 and
took his M.A. degree- in 1875.
Mr. Fisher served his articles
with the firm of McCarthy, Son
Tesla
MR. D. FISHER.
and Donovan, and was admit-
ted ?. Solicitor of tfm Supreme
Court of New South Wales in
October, 1875. After admission he
became a member of the firm, which
changed its style to McCarthy.
Robertson & Fisher, and later, on
Mr. Macansh joining Mr. Fisher, the
firm adopted the style of Fisher and
Macansh. Though it has seen
changes in partners, the record of
the firm is most interesting, asso-
ciated as it has been with the early
pioneers of the State, and Mr. Fisher
has in his possession several letters
from well-known men of that time
to the firm of Chambers & Holden.
which was established in the late
“ twenties,” and which firm sub-
sequently became Holden, Cham-
bers & McCarthy.
Mr. ANDREW WALTER IRBY
MACANSH, 8.A., of the firm of
Fisher & Macansh, Solicitors, was
born at Yass, New South Wales,
and is the youngest son of the late
John Donald Macansh, M.L.C., of
Queensland, owner of the well-
known station, ‘ ‘ Canning Downs, ”
O'
near Warwick, Queensland, and
Freeman
MR. A. W. I. MACANSH.
previously owner or largely inter-
ested in “ Cunningham Plains ”
and ‘ ‘ Gurley,” both in this State.
He was educated at the King’s
School, Parramatta, afterwards
proceeding to the Sydney Univer-
sity, where he graduated B.A.
Air. Macansh served his articles in
the office of the firm in which he is
now a partner, and was admitted
a solicitor of the Supreme Court of
New South A\ ales in December,
1888. He is part owner in several
station properties situated in
Queensland, “Albilbah,” “ Mur-
weh, ! and others, the clip from
the first-named being famous for
commanding exceptionally high
prices at the wool sales. Air.
Macansh is known in banking
circles, and is one of the examiners
of the Bankers’ Institute,


Mr. RICHARD WATSON WAL-
KER McCOY (son of the late
Richard McCoy) was born at Syd-
ney on the 7th November, 1863.
He was educated at Fort Street
Public School and the Sydney
Grammar School. After leaving
school, he accepted a position in
the Oriental Bank Corporation, and
after remaining in that service for
about three years, decided to follow
the law as his profession. After
matriculating he was articled to the
well-known solicitors, Pigott and
Trickett, both of whom are now
members of the Legislative Council
of the State. In due course he was
admitted a solicitor of the Supreme
Court of New South Wales, and at
once commenced the practice of his
profession, which he now carries on
in conjunction with his brother,
Mr. Rupert S. McCoy. In 1894 he
was elected to the municipal coun-
cil of Marrickville, and two years
later occupied the position of
mayor. At the end of his term of
of office he retired from municipal
life. In July, 1901, he was elected
MR. R. W. W. McCOY.
a Liberal member of the State Par-
liament of New South Wales for
the electorate of Marrickville, and
three years later was again returned
for the same constituency by a
majority of 1,775 votes, and at the
State elections, 1907, was again
returned by his old constituency
by an even greater majority- He
has identified himself for a number
of years with ah amateur sports,
and was a prominent cricketer and
has been identified with different
bodies of control for the advance-
ment of the game, and holds many
honorary positions in connection
with cricket, football and baseball
clubs.
Mr. RICHARD McCOY, for
many years a resident of Marrick-
ville, was born in County Ferman-
agh, Ireland, and while in infancy
arrived with his parents in Sydney,
remaining in this State until the
London Palace of Art
MR. R. McCOY.
date of his death in 1904, For half a
century few men were more closely
identified with the commercial and
political life of the State. In the
latter he enjoyed p the confidence of
men like the late Sir Henry Parkes,
and his advice and opinion was
sought by more than one of the
statesmen who have helped to
make the history of Australia. Of
the 25 years spent in Marrickville,
he was for great part of the time an
alderman of that borough, aud
interested himself in the municipal
welfare of that district. He had
the honour of being the first repre-
sentative of municipalities on the
Metropolitan Fire Brigades board.
The New South Wales Govern-
ment appointed him a director
of the Sydney Hospital, and for a
great number of years was a mem-
ber of the Board and took the
greatest interest in that institution.
He was also identified with public
charities in the State, and was
a director of the Rand wick
Asylum for Destitute Children.
At various times he was largely
interested in mining in the State,
more particularly in Hill End,
Sofala, Wattle Flat and Cow Flat,
when those districts were great
mining centres. In the city of Syd-
ney he built extensively, many of
the valuable and substantial pro-
perties in George Street and other
parts having been erected under his
supervision and at his expense. On
the occasion of the great Inter-
national Exhibition, in 1879, he
acted as honorary judge of the
boot section. He was a promi-
nent Methodist, and up to the
time of his death was a trustee
of old York Street Methodist
Chapel —now the Centenary Hall.
Surviving him are six sons and two
daughters, his eldest son being
Mr. R. W. W. McCoy, M.L.A. for
Marrickville.
Mr. RUPERT STANLEY
McCOY, fourth son of the late
Richard McCoy, is a typical Austra-
Ashby & Co.
MR. RUPERT S. McCOY.
ban, born in George Street, Sydney,
in 1875, and educated in the public
schools of the State, and the Syd-
ney Grammar School, from whence
so many of the rising young men of
the State have passed to the Syd-
ney University and have gained
honours for themselves and brought
satisfaction to their tutors. After
passing the matriculation exami-
nation at the early age of 15 years,


he entered the office of his brother,
Mr. R. W. W. McCoy, to whom he
was articled. Admitted a solicitor
of the Supreme Court of New South
Wales on the 3rd March, 1900, he
at once went into partnership with
his brother, under the name of
McCoy & McCoy, the firm con-
tinuing to practise under that title..
Mr. McCoy is an enthusiastic sup-
porter of all amateur sport and has
taken a prominent part in most
games, including football, cricket,
tennis and golf.
Mr. ALFRED JOHN CAPE, M.A.,
the founder of the firm of Cape, Kent
and Gaden, solicitors, was born
in Sydney, educated at the Sydney
Grammar School ; proceeding after-
wards to the Sydney University, where
he graduated P.A. in 1865, taking the
Talma
MR. A. J. CAPE.
M.A. degree in 1867. He was articled
to the late Randolph John Want; ad-
mitted a solicitor of the Supreme
Court of New South Wales on the
26th September, 1868, commencing
practice on his own account imme-
diately after admission. In July,
1884, he entered into partnership with
Mr. F, D. Kent, under the style of
Cape & Kent, and in 1887, on the
admission into the firm of Mr. T. B.
Gaden, it was changed to its present
designation of Cape, Kent & Gaden.
In 1903 Mr. C. S. Cape, a nephew of
Mr. A. J. Cape, was admitted as a
partner in the firm.
Mr. FREDERICK DEACON
KENT, M.A., is a son of the Rev.
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. F. D. KENT.
S. C. Kent, Incumbent of St. Silas’,
Albert Park, Melbourne. lie was
educated at Camden College, gradu-
ated 13. A. at the Sydney University in
1872, taking the M.A. degree in 1871.
He was articled to the late Randolph
Charles Want, of the firm of Want,
Johnson & Want, and admitted a
solicitor of the Supreme Court of New
South Wales in 1881.
Me. THOMAS BURTON
GADEN is a son of Thomas Brockle-
bank Gaden, assistant manager of the
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. T. B. GADEN.
Commercial Banking Company of
Sydney Ltd. Articled to Mr. Alfred
John Cape, and admitted a solicitor
of the Supreme Court of New South
Wales on the 27th February, 1886.
Mr. CHARLES SCARVELL
CAPE is a nephew of Mr. A. J. Cape,
to whom he was articled. He was
admitted a solicitor of the Supreme
Court of New South Wales on the Bth
March, 1890. Mr. C. S. Cape served
with the Citizens’ Bushmen Con-
tingent during the South African war,
being mentioned in despatches, and
awarded the D.S.O.
Mr EDWARD PERCY SIMPSON,
partner of Minter. Simpson & Co.,
Solicitors, is a son of Robert Percy
Simpson, a well-known squatter, a
nephew of the Hon. G. B. Simp-
son, a Puisne Judge of the Supreme
Falk.
MR. E. P. SIMPSON.
Court, also a nephew on his
mother’s side of the late J. H. Want,
and was born in 1858. He was
educated at Professor Stephens,
formerly headmaster of the Sydney
Grammar School, articled to his
uncle the late Randolph Charles
Want in 1876, and admitted a
solicitor of the Supreme Court of
New South Wales, in 1881. In
1883 Mr. Simpson entered as a part-
ner the firm of Want, Johnson and
Scarvell, which afterwards became
A ant, Johnson & Co., then Johnson,
Minter, Simpson & Co., and sub-
sequently Minter, Simpson A Co.


Mr. WILLIAM EDWARD
HAWKINS, Solicitor, is a native
of Tasmania, and was educated at
the City School and Christ’s Col-
lege, Hobart. Having served ar-
ticles with Messrs. Einlay and
Watchorn, Barristers and Solicitors
of that city, he was admitted as a
Barrister, Solicitor and Proctor of
the Supreme Court of Tasmania in
1886. Instead of practising in his
native place, he proceeded to Syd-
ney, joining the staff of Mr. J. H.
Carruthers, with whom he after-
wards carried on businessGn part-
nership from 1888 to 1891. 0n 4 the
dissolution of that 'partnership Mr.
Hawkins continued to practise on
his own account. He is an alder-
the v suburban municipality
SWISS STUDIOS.
MR. W. E. HAWKINS.
of Burwood, and filled the Mayoral
chair for the year 1901-5. Taking
a lively interest in politics, he is a
member of the council of the
People’s Reform League. Pos-
sessed of a large and choice private
library, he is, in literary circles,
J ' J '
known as a keen student of English
literature, and, as the hon. secre-
tary of the Shakespeare Society of
New South Wales, does his best to
further the study of England’s
greatest poet.
Mr. J. S. CAIUHLL, 8.A., Soli-
citor for Railways, is the elder son
of the late Captain William Cargill,
and was born in Sydney on the 11th
April, 1869. He was educated at
All Saints’ College, Bathurst, and
the Sydney Grammar School, pro-
ceeding afterwards to the Univer-
sity, where he graduated B.A. in
1889. He served his articles in
the office of Messrs. Norton, Smith
and Co., and was admitted a soli-
citor of the Supreme Court of New
South Wales in 1892. Until No-
vember, 1896, Mr. Cargill remained
MR. J. S. CARGILL.
with Messrs. Norton, Smith & Co.
as managing common law clerk,
when he was successful at the first
competitive examination under the
Public Service Act for appoint-
ment to. the professional division,
entered the office of the Crown
Solicitor the same month, and re-
mained until the 15th June, 1903,
when he was appointed to his pre-
sent position. During the last two
years of his service in the Crown
Solicitor’s office Mi. Cargill held
the position of prosecuting officer,
and also represented the Depart-
ment of Navigation in proceedings
in the Courts of Marine Inquiry.
Mr. john McLaughlin,
Solicitor, is a son of Daniel and
Anne McLaughlin, and was born sth
June, 1850, in Westmeath, Ireland.
In his infancy he came with his
parents to New South Wales, where
they settled in the Hunter River
district. He was educated at Lynd-
hurst College, Sydney, and in 1869
entered into articles with the late
W. C. Curtis, formerly Billyard and
Curtis, afterwards Curtis & Gannon.
On completion of his articles he
became managing clerk for Allen,
Bowden & Allen (of which firm the
late Sir Wigrarn Allen was then the
head), and was admitted as a solici-
tor on 19th December, 1871. On the
death of his former master, W. C.
Curtis, in 1876, he entered into
partnership with Frederick Gannon
under the style of Gannon and
McLaughlin. In the year 1880 he
entered the Legislative Assembly
of New South Wales as a represen-
tative for the Upper Hunter in the
tenth Parliament, over which his
former chief, Sir Wigram Allen,
presided as Speaker. Mr. McLaugh-
lin took a very active part in the
political life of New South \\ ales,
particularly in reference to land
legislation and law reform, intro-
ducing legislation protecting native
and imported birds, simplifying and
facilitating appeals from decisions
of District Court Judges to the
Supreme Court, and was also the
author of the Act passed to pre-
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. J. McLAUGHLIN.
vent Supreme Court Judges from
sitting to hear appeals from their
own decisions. He was re-elected
for his old constituency in the
eleventh Parliament. In 1881 Mr.
McLaughlin retired from the firm
of Gannon and McLaughlin, and
continued the practice of his pro-
fession in his own name. He was
elected honorary treasurer of the
Incorporated Law Institute of New
South Wales in the year 1886,
which office he held until 1893. In
1895 he re-entered Parliament as
the representative of the Raleigh
electorate during the seventeenth
and eighteenth Parliaments, up to
1901. On the 16th July, 1907, he
admitted his eldest son, John
Harley Mel jaughlin, into partner-
ship, and the business is now carried
on as John McLaughlin & Son.


Mk. \\ ILLIAM DEANE, Solicitor
and Notary Public, was the founder in
the early fifties of the well-known
firm of Deane & Deane. (The firm
originally consisted of Mr. William
Deane and his brother Henry.)
He is the oldest solicitor in New
South Wales, having been admitted
on the Ist May, 1852. Mr. Deane’s
parents originally came from England,
and at first settled in Hobart, Tas-
mania (where the subject of this
sketch was born), and where his
father, Mr. John P. Deane, intended,
with a cousin, to commence business
as wholesale merchants, and for this
Falk.
MR. W. DEANE.
purpose had put all their resources
into the purchase of two ships and
cargoes. Mr. John P. Deane first left
for Tasmania, his cousin following
with the ships. These in due course
reached Hobart; but his cousin,
in returning to the ship after landing,
was drowned, and difficulties arose as
to determining the partnership, which
caused Mr. Deane, sen., to abandon
all idea of entering into the business
of a merchant. He had then to rely
for a living on his musical talents,
which he had fostered. There was
no scope in this respect at the time in
Hobart, so he came with his family to
Sydney. Here he met all the leading
musical people of the day, including,
of course, the late Vincent Wallace,
the composer of the opera, “ Mari-
tana”; and although romance is not
generally associated with lawyers, it is
a tradition in the Deane family that
this particular opera was composed
in Sydney, and on the very spot
in Rowe Street where the offices of
the firm of Deane & Deane now
stand. Mr. William Deane (like his
brother Henry) was, with the rest of
his family, well known in musical
circles, and a strong supporter of the
old Philharmonic Society (of which
his brother John was for some time
conductor), and of other societies. He
also, in the early part of his legal
career, with his brother Henry, took
great interest and a prominent part in
the old Law Institute, of which Mr.
11. Deane was for many years sec-
retary. Mr. Deane also took very
great interest in volunteering, and
was for many years Captain of No. 2
Battery, Volunteer Artillery. Among
the many incidents in connection with
the early history of the colony with
which Mr. Deane was associated, was
that of the attempted assassination of
the late Duke of Edinburgh at Clon-
tarf on that memorable day in March,
1868. On this occasion a number of
volunteers who were also at Clontarf
were formed into a guard and placed
under his command, and he was thus
able to render much assistance, par-
ticularly in allaying panic and restor-
ing order, and in preventing the
would-be assassin from being lynched.
In charge of this guard Mr. Deane
came up to Sydney in the “ Morpeth,”
the steamship in which the Prince
was taken back to Sydney. Mr.
Deane was afterwards thanked by Mr.
Fosbery, then acting as Deputy Chief
Superintendent of Police, for the
assistance he had rendered. Many of
Mr. Deane’s relatives are in the law,
and his cousins, Messrs. Burton,
Yeates & Hart, to-day represent one
of the oldest legal establishments in
London. Mr. Deane retired from
active practice about four yerrs ago,
when both he and his brother Henry
retired from the firm, which was then
carried on by Messrs. W. S. and
H. W. Y. Deane, so that it is one of
the few old-established firms which
has not changed its name,
Mr. WILLIAM SMITH DEANE,
M.A., senior partner of the firm of
Deane & Deane, Solicitors, Rowe Street,
is the son of Mr. William Deane (the
founder in the early fifties of the firm),
and was horn at Sydney, in 1862. He
received his early education privately,
proceeding afterwards to the Sydney
University, where he graduated B.A.
in 1882 and took his M.A. degree in
1881. Mr. Deane served his articles
with the firm, and remained in their
employ after his admission —as a
Solicitor of the Supreme Court of
New Sodth Wales —until on the retire-
ment of the founder-partners he and
his cousin, Mr. 11. W. Y. Deane,
carried on the business in partnership
under the old original style of Deane
and Deane. The firm are well-known
in legal and commercial circles as
having the control and management of
many old family and trust estates.
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. W. S. DEANE.
Mr. henry WILLIAM YOUNGER
DEANE, junior partner in the firm
of Deane & Deane, Solicitors, Rowe
Street, Sydney, is the son of Mr.
Henry Deane (a member of the origin-
al firm), and was born at Sydney in
1870. He received his education at
the Sydney Grammar School ; served
articles with the firm, and remained
in their employ after his admission in
1898, and on the retirement of the
principal, became one of the present
partners.
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. H. W. Y. DEANE.


Mr. PERCY SYDNEY DAWSON,
Solicitor, and senior partner of the
firm of Dawson, Waldron, & Glover,
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. P. S. DAWSON.
was born on the 12th July, 1861,
at Cooma, New South Wales,
and is the eighth son of the late
Mr. Robert Dawson of that town,
who arrived in this State in the
year 1838, and who was for a period
exceeding forty years Police Magis-
trate at Cooma. The subject of this
sketch was educated at Newington
College, Stanmore. He passed the
Junior University Public Examination
high in all subjects, and he was the
only candidate of his year who achieved
that distinction. He also obtained the
proxime accessit at the same examina-
tion for the Latin medal awarded by
the University authorities and won the
College medal as the most successful
candidate. He passed his matricula-
tion examination with honours in
mathematics in 1883, and entered upon
the University course with the inten-
tion of becoming a member of the
medical profession. This intention
was frustrated in 1884, when he was
very seriously injured in a coach
accident near Queanbeyan, while
travelling to Sydney for his first year
examination at the University. In
this accident he sustained a severe
fracture of the skull, and was in-
capacitated for a period of two years.
Upon the advice of the late Dr. Norton
Manning, Mr, Dawson abandoned his
intention of proceeding with the
medical course and decided to adopt
the legal profession. In the year
1886 he was articled to his late
partner, Mr. G. C. K. Waldron, and
was admitted as a solicitor in 1891.
In the same year he joined Mr.
Waldron in the practice of his pro-
fession as a solicitor, the firm being
known by the name of Waldron and
Dawson. Mr. Waldron was appointed
to the office of City Solicitor in the
year 1898, and continued to hold the
office until 1898, when he met his
death through an untimely accident.
Upon the death of Mr. Waldron in
November, 1898, Mr. Dawson was
appointed acting City Solicitor, and
applications were invited for the
position. In February, 1899, from
about thirty applicants, he was chosen,
and has held the office ever since.
Mr. THOMAS WALTER KING
WALDRON, 8.A., LLB., Solicitor
(Dawson, Waldron & Glover), is a
son of the late Mr. George King
MR. T. W. K. WALDRON.
Waldron of Kiama, and was born on
the 29th October, 1870. He received
his early education at the Sydney
Grammar School, proceeding after-
wards to the University, where he
matriculated with honours, graduated
B.A. in 1893 and gained the LL.B,
degree in 1895. He was articled to
his brother Mr. G. C. K. Waldron, the
late City Solicitor, admitted a Solicitor
of the Supreme Court of New South
Wales in 1898, and on the death of
his brother joined Mr. P. S. Dawson,
and Mr. A. C. Glover as above. In
1898 Mr. Wald ron obtained a com-
mission in the 3rd Infantry Regiment
as Captain, and was appointed to the
command of K Company, Penrith, and
in 1900 was selected as one of the
officers for the Imperial Bushmen’s
Contingent, then proceeding to South
Africa. During his service there
Captain Waldron was for the greater
part of the time in command of Lord
Methuen’s personal escort. On the
close of hostilities he received the
South African medal and four clasps
for his services, and on his return to
Australia he was placed on the reserve
of officers, and rejoined the firm of
Dawson, Waldron & Glover. The
subject of this sketch resides at Pen-
rith, and takes an active interest in
all local matters. He is a vice-presi-
dent of the Penrith Cottage Hospital,
vice-president of the Nepean Agri-
cultural Society, founder and presi-
dent of the Penrith Golf Club and
patron, president or a member of the
committee of numerous athletic, sport-
ing, rifle and other local associations.
In 1892 he won the country cup at
the international tennis tournament.
Mr. ARTHUR CHARLES
GLOVER, Solicitor (Dawson, Wal-
dron & Glover), son of William
Glover, civil engineer, was born on
the 2nd June, 1869, and was educated
at Hurlstone College, Newington
College, and finally at Hurstville
College, Goulburn. He served his
articles with Mr. P, V. McCulloch, and
was admitted a Solicitor of the
Supreme Court of New South Wales,
on the 28th November, 1891. After
his admission Mr. Glover was in the
employ of Messrs. Waldron and
Dawson, and on the decease of Mr.
G. C. King Waldron, he joined Messrs.
Dawson and T. W. King Waldron in
the firm which then became Dawson,
Waldron & Glover.
Tesla.
MR. A. C. GLOVER.
326
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


Mr. RICHARD STANLEY
LAMBTON, Solicitor (Lambton, Mil-
ford & Abbott), the only surviving son
of Mr. S. H. Lambton, formerly
Deputy Postmaster-General of New
South Wales, was born at Glebe,
Sydney, December 2, 1864, and edu-
cated at Burvvood Public School, Syd-
ney Grammar School, and afterwards
at Sydney University. He was articled
to Mr. W. H. Pigott, and admitted a
Solicitor of the Supreme Court of New
South Wales on November 28, 1891.
Mr. Lambton commenced practice on
his own account in 1898, and some
years later admitted Messrs. E. A.
Milford and A. E. Abbott into partner-
ship with him. Mr. Lambton joined the
MR R. S. LAMBTON.
New South Wales Naval Brigade as a
naval cadet in 1885, and is now a
lieutenant in that corps. He served
with the Naval Contingent in China in
1900-1 as a special-service officer, and
holds the China medal. In the first
team of cyclists that visited Queens-
land Mr. Lambton was one of three
who represented this State in 1884.
He was many years captain of the
Burwood Bicycle Club, and is now
president of the Neutral Bay Lawn
Tennis Club.
Mr. ERNEST ALEXANDER
MILFORD, son of the late Mr. Henry
Milford, solicitor, and grandson of the
late Mr. Justice Milford, who was for
many years Chief Judge in Equity,
New South Wales, was born at Edge-
cliffe Road, Sydney, on December 19,
1858. Receiving his education in
Sydney was articled in Queensland to
the late the Hon C. S. D. Melbourne,
M.L.C., and was admitted as a
Solicitor of the Supreme Court of
Queensland on the 2nd day of August,
1881. He practised his profession
Freeman & Co.
MR . E. A. MILFORD.
in the north of Queensland for many
years, when, deciding to return to
Sydney, was admitted as a Solicitor of
the Supreme Court of New South
Wales in April, 1899, during which
year he was appointed a notary public,
and joined Mr. Richard Stanley
Lambton as the firm of Lambton and
Milford, which firm, after admitting
Mr. Arthur E. Abbott, is at present
Lambton, Milford & Abbott.
Mr. ARTHUR EDGAR ABBOTT,
Solicitor, of the firm of Lambton,
Milford & Abbott, is the third son of
Freeman & Co.
MR. A. E ABBOTT.
the late Mr. Joseph Abbott (for some
time a partner of the firm of Mort and
Co., and afterwards connected with
Goldsbrough, Mort & Co.). He was
educated at Newington College, and
served his articles with Mr. R. S.
Lambton, one of his present partners.
In March, 1900, Mr. Abbott was
admitted a Solicitor of the Supreme
Court of New South Wales, and taken
into partnership by Messrs. Lambton
and Milford a few months later,
Mr. WILLIAM ARCHIBALD
WINDEYER is the second son of the
late Hon. Sir William Charles Win-
deyer, Puisne Judge of the Supreme
Court of New South Wales, and was
Tesla.
MR. W. A. WINDEYER.
born in Sydney on the 9th April, 1871.
He received his early education at the
Sydney Grammar School, proceeding
afterwards to the University, where he
graduated B.A. in 1891. He served
his articles with Mr. Robert Smith,
of Norton, Smith & Co., and was
admitted a Solicitor of the Supreme
Court of New South Wales in 1896,
commencing the practice of his pro-
fession on his own account the same
year. Mr. Windeyer is a Commissioner
for taking affidavits in the Supreme
Court, the High Courtof Australia,and
in the Vice-Admiralty Court. He has
been an alderman of the Hunter’s Hill
Municipal Council for some years, is a
director of and honorary solicitor to
the Sydney Homoeopathic Hospital, a
member of the Council of the New
South Wales Kindergarten Union, a
director of Bains’ White Ant Extermi-
nator Co. Ltd., solicitor for the Stand-
ard Life Association,Ltd., and secretary
of the New South Wales Golf Club,
327
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


Mr. LLEWELLYN CHARLES
R USSELL-JONES, Solicitor and
Notary Public, is a son of John
Russell-Jones, of Sydney, solicitor,
and was born 2nd November, 1855.
Educated at the Sydney Grammar
School, under headmasters Ste-
phens and A. B. Weigall : served
his articles with the old-established
firm of Daintrey & Chapman, and,
having passed his final examination
with distinction, was admitted as a
solicitor of the Supreme Court of
New South Wales in December,
1878 ; and, on the acceptance by
Mr. Chapman of the position of
Prothonotary of the Supreme Court,
was admitted as a partner, and car-
ried on for some years as Daintrey
and Jones, and subsequently as
Russell-Jones and Barker; he holds
the appointments of commissioner
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. L. C. RUSSELL-JONES.
for all the Australian States and
New Zealand, India, and the United
States of America, and Notary Pub-
lic and Justice of the Peace. In
1883 took a trip round the world,
visiting India, Egypt, Malta, Sicily,
Italy, France, Great Britain, and
the United States of America,
where he had the opportunity of
studying the various modes of local
government and systems of sani-
tation ; and in 1888 he again visited
Great Britain and the Continent,
and inspected many municipal in-
stitutions in the north of England.
In 1888 was elected an alderman
for Petersham, and has held the
position continuously ever since,
and was mayor for the years 1891-
2-3-4, and had special finance
committees held, when new and
more efficient arrangements were
adopted in the management of the
Council. In 1894 was elected to a
seat in Parliament, at the first elec-
tion under the Electoral Reform
Act, as member foi Petersham, and
sat in two Parliaments, and during
his political career introduced seve-
ral bills into the Assembly. In
1897 received a special invitation
from the British Government to
attend the Record Reign Jubilee
celebrations of the late Queen Vic-
toria, and visited England as a
guest of the nation. Was elected
first president of the Cambrian
and Cymrodorion Societies of New
South Wales, which position he has
held for years. Interested himself
in city and metropolitan charitable
institutions, having been director
and on the house committee of the
Sydney Hospital since 1895, and a
director of the Deaf, Dumb and
Blind Institution. Is a member of
the Petersham Public School board.
Chairman of the board of the New
South Wales Mont de Piete Com-
pany Ltd. and other financial insti-
tutions. Was married in 1884, to
Edith A. Russell, second daughter
of the late John Russell, of the
noted engineering firm of P. N.
Russell & Co.
Mr. HERBERT DE YONGH
SCROGGIE, Solicitor, is a son of
James Scroggie, merchant, and was
born at Morpeth, N.S.W., on the
20th October, 1865. He was edu-
cated at the Sydney Grammar
* ■
School, proceeding afterwards to
the university where he matricu-
lated in 1882. Mr. Scroggie was
articled to Mr. Consett Stephen
(then - Stephen, Lawrence and
Jaques), and was admitted a soli-
citor of the Supreme Court of New
South Wales on the 30th June,
1883. Prior to commencing prac-
tice on his own account he remained
with the firm of Stephen, Lawrence
and Jaques as managing clerk. He
was appointed a Notary Public on
the 11th October, 1897, and is also
a commissioner for affidavits for
New South Wales, South and West
Australia. Mr. Scroggie is a direc-
tor of the Newcastle-Wallsend Coal
Company, and is also well known in
ecclesiastical circles as a member of
F reeman & Co.
MR. H. De Y. SCROGGIE.
the Parochial Council for St.
John’s, Darlinghurst. For some
years he held a commission in the
Naval Brigade.
Mr. FRANK A. DAVENPORT,
Solicitor, is a son of the late Venerable
Arthur Davenport, 8.A., formerly
Archdeacon of Hobart, where the
subject of this sketch was horn. He
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR F. A. DAVENPORT.
was educated at the High School,
Hobart, under the rectorship of the
late Rev. R. P. Poulett-Harris, and
obtained the A.A. degree (Associate
328
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


of Arts) in Tasmania, in December,
1880. Mr. Davenport was articled to
Mr. John Mclntyre, of the firm of
Butler & Mclntyre, now Mr. Justice
Mclntyre (Tasmania), and admitted
as a Barrister and Solicitor of
the Supreme Court of Tasmania on
the 16th July 1885. In March, 1886,
he came to Sydney, and for two years,
acted as managing conveyancing
Clerk to Messrs Holdsworth and
Evans. In January 1889, he com-
menced practice on his own account,
having previously, viz in August 1886,
been admitted a Solicitor of the
Supreme Court of New South Wales.
Mr. Davenport is a Commissioner for
Affidavits and was for some time a
member of the board of management
of the Royal Alexandra Hospital for
children.
Mr. JOHN ALFRED IRONSIDE
PERRY, Solicitor, is a native of New
South Wales, and was bom on the
’2lst February, 1864. He was edu-
cated at the King’s School, Parra-
matta, where lie gained the Broughton
Scholarship and also the gold medal
presented by the late Hon. Charles
Campbell for English prose. He also
obtained a cap of honour in the footbal 1
team, and subsequently was selected
to represent New South Wales in the
intercolonial football matches against
Tesla.
Mr. J. A. I. PERRY.
New Zealand, but was unable to
play. Mr. Perry served bis articles
with the late Honorable R. Burdett
Smith, 0.M.G., and was admitted a
Solicitor of the Supreme Court of
New South Wales, on the 12th March,
1887, and commenced the practice of
bis profession the same month at
Kempsey, Macleay River. He there
inaugurated football, and was the
president of the first Macleay Football
Club ; was also Vice-president and
chairman of the House Committee,
Macleay District Hospital, and so-
licitor to the Macleay Municipality. He
was one of those who joined in the
movement for establishing the dairying
industry on the Macleay River. In 1898
he left Kempsey and commenced in
Sydney in the same year. Recognising
that the legal profession did not suf-
ficiently look after its poorer brethren,
he succeeded in carrying a resolution
at the annual meeting of the Law
Institute held in 1906, to the effect
“ That a sub-committee should look
into the question of considering the
advisability orotherwise of establishing
an association for the relief of poor and
necessitous solicitors, their wives,
widows, and families.” The com-
mittee so appointed consisted of
Messrs. A. E. Jaques, Dr. G. J. Sly,
the Hon. T. Hughes (Lord Mayor of
Sydney), Mr. W. H. Palmer, official
assignee, and J. A. I. Perry. For
some years he has taken an active
part in municipal matters and served
for two years as Mayor of Randwick,
and is an executive member of the
Municipal Association of New South
Wales. Mr. Perry is a representative
on the Synod for Randwick, and
member of the Standing Committee,
also a member of the Provincial Synod.
He succeeded in getting a synod (for
the first time) to give permission to
the clergy to celebrate marriage with
a deceased wife’s sister. In addition,
through his action, a basis of co-
operation has been adopted by several
of the churches. He was one of the
two founders of the King’s School Old
Boys’ Union, and held the position of
secretary for the first two years. In
1906 he was appointed a governor of
the King’s School. He was also one
of the founders of the St, George’s
Rifles, in which he held a commission,
but subsequently resigned.
Mr. CECIL -SPENCER de GREY
COWPER was born on 4-th June,
1864, at Wivenhoe, near Cam-
den, the picturesque estate which
was presented by public subscrip-
tion of the people of New South
Wales to his grandfather, the late
Sir Charles Cowper, K.C.M.G., who
was for many years Premier of New
South Wales, in recognition of his
political services, and is the fourth
son of Mr. Charles Cowper, for-
merly Sheriff of New South Wales.
His mother was the eldest daughter
of the late Mr. Robert Copland
Lethbridge, an English solicitor,
and a granddaughter of the late
Captain Philip Gidley King, Go-
vernor of New South Wales. Mr.
Cowper was educated at the Sydney
Grammar School, where, in addition
to gaining several prizes he held the
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. C.-S de G. COWPER.
position of Quarter Master Sergeant
in the Cadet Corps, then the
crack Cadet Corps of the colony,
and founded a Fencing and
Boxing club. After matriculating
with honours at the Sydney Univer-
sity in the
was articled to his godfather, the
late Hon. S. A. Stephen, M.L.C.
He was admitted as a solicitor in
the year 1887, and two years after-
wards became a partner in the firm
of Stephen, Jaques and Stephen.
In the year 1902 he left that firm
to join the firm of Allen, Allen and
Hemsley, of Australasia Chambers,
of which firm he is still a member.
Mr. Cowper was appointed to the
Commission of the Peace in the
year 1888.
Mr. JOHN T H 0 M P S 0 N
RALSTON, second son of Mr. A. J.
Ralston, for many years secretary
of the Australian Mutual Provident
Society, and brother of Mr. A. G.
Ralston, K.C., was born at Pad-
dington, N.S.W., on June 30, 1863.
After serving articles to the Hon.
J. Malbon Thompson, his uncle, he
was admitted to practise as a
solicitor on June 30, 1888; and a
few months later joined in partner-
ship with Mr. 4. R. Marrack, under


the firm name of Ralston and
Marrack. In 1893 the partnership
was dissolved, and Mr. Ralston ear-
ned on his profession alone. He is
a commissioner for affidavits of the
Supreme Court of New South Wales
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. J. T. RALSTON.
and of the High Court of Australia?,
receiving the latter appointment
shortly after the creation ot that
court. Mr. Ralston has always
taken a keen interest in politics and
municipal affairs, and for many
years was an alderman of the North
Sydney Council, also one of the
promoters and a vice-president of
the Warringah Liberal Association,
as well as a member of the Council
of the Liberal and Reform Associ-
ation. Mr. Ralston claims that he
is one of the most thorough of
Australians, as one of his great-
grandfathers lived in Australia, his
grandparents on both sides were
married in Australia, his parents
were born and married in Australia
and he himself was born at Pad-
dington, a suburb of Sydney. Mr.
Rah ton is a student of history, and
after being severely injured in the
Redfern railway accident in 189 J,
paid a visit to Egypt and Europe,
making special research among the
records and monuments of an-
tiquity.
Mr. FREDERIC ROBISON
COWPER claims an ancestry that
reaches back to the very early
days of the State, his father, Mr.
Charles Cowper, formerly Sheriff of
New South Wales, being a sou of
the late Sir Charles Cowper, second
Premier of New South M ales ;
while he is a great-grandson of the
lata Governor, Capt iin John Philip
Gidley King, R.N., and a grand-
nephew of Admiral Philip Parker
King. He was born in 1865 at
Werenhoc, Camden, the country
seat of his grandfather. After be-
ing educated at the Svdney Gram-
O V V
mar School, he entered the service
of the Mutual Life Association of
Australia in 1881. But in 1884 he
withdrew and entered the legal pro-
fession as an articled clerk. In
1890 he was admitted as a solicitor
of the Supreme Court, and began
practice in Sydney on his own
account. About a year later he
took Mr. Ernest King Cox, a son of
the late Edward King Cox, M.L.C.,
into partnership, and for three
years the firm was known as
Cowper & Cox, when the latter
retired from the business, which
has been carried on by Mr. Cowper
ever since. He was one of the
originators and the first secretary
Freeman & Co.
MR. F. R. COWPER.
of the Articled Clerks’ Association-
For some time he has been a com-
missioner for affidavits of the High
Court of Australia and the States of
New South Wales, Western Aus-
tralia, and South Australia.
M R. EDWARD PRITCHARD
BASSETT was born at Bathurst on
the 17th day of July, 1808. He is the
third son of Dr. Bassett, of Bathurst,
who has been well known in New
South Wales and Queensland for the
last fifty years. He is a nephew of Mr.
W. Tarn Pritchard, the author of
Pritchard’s “ Admiralty Digest,” and
other legal works. Mr. Bassett was
educated at All Saints’ College,
Bathurst, of which college his father
was one of the then three trustees,
acting in conjunction with Dr.Marsden,
Bishop of Bathurst, and Mr. Thomas
Sloman. He matriculated at the
University of Sydney early in 1885,
and on the 21th of July of the same
year was articled to Mr. Alfred Gordon
Thompson, of Bathurst, solicitor. His
articles were in 1889 assigned to Mr.
J. 0. McLachlan, of Laurence and
McLachlan, of Sydney. On the 30th
day of August, 1890, Mr. Bassett was
admitted to practise as a Solicitor of
the Supreme Court of New South
Wales, and shortly afterwards was
appointed managing clerk for the
firm of Laurence & McLachlan, which
firm at about that time admitted
into partnership Mr. G. W. Hayes-
Williams (the present Registrar-
General). In November T 892, Mr.
Bassett relinquished the position of
managing clerk for the firm men-
tioned in order to commence practice
on his own account at Carcoar, where
he remained until February, 1898,
during which time he occupied the
position of alderman of the munici-
pality, and he was one of the delegates
appointed to the now celebrated
Bathurst Federal Convention. Previous
Charlemont Studios.
MR. E. P. BASSETT.
to leaving Carcoar he entered into
partnership with the firm of Lee and
Colquhoun, of Orange, solicitors. In
February, 1898, the firm of Lee,
Colquhoun & Bassett disposed of their
Carcoar business and Mr. Bassett joined
Mr. Colquhoun at the Sydney office,
where he continued as a member of


the firm until January, 1905, when
that partnership was dissolved by
effluxion of time ; after which Mr. Lee
continued practice in his own name at
Orange, and Mr. Colquhoun and Mr.
Bassett continued in partnership in
Sydney under the present style of their
firm, Colqohuun & Bassett. In July,
1903, arrangements having been made
by the committee appointed by the
Senate of the University of Sydney
and the Incorporated Law Institute
for the delivery of lectures on the
subjects of the final examination for
solicitors at the University Law
schoolrooms, Mr. Bassett was ap-
pointed one of the lecturers, which
position be continued to occupy until
bis resignation in July, 1906. His
brothers are Dr. Prichard Bassett, of
Bathurst, and J. T. Prichard Bassett,
of Wellington (N.S.W.), solicitor.
Mr. ARTHUR BOWMAN. 8.A.,
senior partner in the firm of Bow-
man and Mackenzie, Solicitors, was
born at “ Archerfield,” Singleton,
N.S.W., and is the third son of the
late G. P. Bowman, of the same
place, and grandson of the late
George Bowman, of Richmond,
N.S.W. He was educated at Cam-
den College and at the Svdnev
(a x,
Falk Studio.
NR. A. BOWMAN.
Grammar School, afterwards enter-
ing as a student of St. Andrew’s
College, and graduated B.A. with
honours in natural science, having
previously, in the year 1879,
gained the Deas Thomson scholar-
ship. After leaving the University
he went in for pastoral pursuits,
and managed the Archerfield estate
for three years, when he decided to
become a solicitor. He served his
articles in the office o! Messrs. Allen
and Allen (now Allen and Allen and
Hemsley), and was admitted a soli-
citor of the Supreme Court of New
South Wales in 1890. Shortly after
taking Mr. Harley M. Mackenzie in
as a partner, Mr. Bowman took a
trip to England, returning in 1903,
and in the same year Mr. G. A. F.
Belissario became a member of the
firm. Mr. Bowman is a member of
the firm of Messrs. A. K. and F.
Bowman, the owners of the Archer-
field and Grampian Hills estates, in
the Hunter River district, and has
been their general manager since
1889. He takes great interest in
all pastoral matters, and is a keen
judge of stock, and the reputation
attained by these estates for high-
class stock is largely due to Mr.
Arthur Bowman’s management and
excellent judgment. He has been a
member of the council of the Royal
Agricultural Society for over 20
years, having been one of the little
*/ o
band of workers who, after several
years of hard and anxious work,
yj
successfully extricated the society
from its financial difficulties. He
is also one of the committee of the
Milking Shorthorn Dairy Associa-
O J
tion, a director of the Commercial
Building and Investment Company,
and an auditor of the A.J.S. Bank,
Sydney. Mr. Bowman, like all old
University men, continues his inter-
est in the college where he was a
student, and donates a prize an-
nually to the literary and debating-
society of St. Andrew’s College, of
which body he is a councillor. He
has lately been elected a member
of the council of the Coerwell
Academy.
Mr. CHARGES ALEXANDER
WALKER, J.P., Solicitor, of Stock
Exchange Buildings, Pitt Street,
.Sydney, is a member of a well-known
and highly respected family, holding
an unblemished record dating from
the year 1837. His grandfather,
the Rev. George Walker, having
been introduced to the colony
through the agency of the late Dr.
Lang, shortly after his arrival settled
in Windsor, where he opened a school.
Mr. Walker’s father, the Hon. Wil-
liam Walker, M.L.C., is one of the
oldest solicitors in the .Slate, having
practised in Windsor since 1852. and
has the honour of being the only sit-
ting member of the Legislative Coun-
cil who held a seat in the first Parlia-
ment under responsible government.
He was born in the old historic town
of Windsor on March sth, 1865, and
J Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. C. A. WALKER.
educated at the public and grammar
schools respectively in his native city,
subsequently attending the Queen's
School, Darlinghurst, Sydney, then
presided over by Mr. J. Neild Dalton,
brother of the Rev. Mr. Dalton, well
known as the private tutor of the
Prince of Wales. Mr. Walker began
his commercial career by entering
as a clerk the Pay Branch of the
Colonial Treasury, but was shortly
afterwards articled to the late
Mr. John Shepherd, solicitor, under
whom he made marked progress,
passing his final examination twelve
months prior to the expiration of
his articles. His admission as an at-
torney was gained in November, 1891,
and for a short term he performed
the duties of managing clerk to Mr.
Robert Booth, of Dubbo, a position
which brought him particularly in
touch with clients from among the
squatters and others interested in
the land laws, an experience which
has gained for him considerable repute
in this branch of the legal business.
Leaving Dubbo, he took up his resi-
dence and for some time practised
at Moss Vale, eventually practising
at Goulburn. In November, 1898,
he came to Sydney, where he has
succeeded in establishing an excel-
lent practice. He is a member of the


local bowling club and holds the
positions of vice-president of the
North Sydney Swimming Club and
of the lacrosse club. In 1903 he
was elected unopposed for the Vic-
toria Ward of North Sydney Council,
He was a strong supporter of the
Federal Bill as before the country in
1898, and, as secretary of the league
iuGoulburn, worked hard, travelling
to different parts advocating its ac-
ceptance. Besides being an advocate,
our subject has bad extensive ex-
perience in the mining laws, and in
addition to common law, conveyance
and equity work, and holds com-
missions from the Chief Justices of
Queensland, Western Australia and
South Australia to take affidavits in
this State. He has recently been
appointed a solicitor of the High
Court. In August, 1900, Mr. Walker
married Florence Alice, daughter of
Mr, Ninian Baton, of ‘ ‘ Dane Bank,”
Neutral Bay.
Mr. WILLIAM ARNOLD RAND,
Solicitor (Rand & Drew), is a sou
of William Rand, one of the early
pioneers of the Riverina District, and
was born at Oura, near Wagga Wagga,
in 1868. He was educated at the
Public School, and from 1888 to 1885
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. W. A. RAND.
at the King’s School, Parramatta.
Mr. Rand was articled to Mr. L. C.
Russell Jones, and admitted a Solicitor
of the Supreme Court of New South
Wales in February, 1892. For twelve
months after Ids admission be was
witii Mr. Oxley, solicitor, at Bowral,
and then removed to Sydney, where
he practised on bis own account until
May, 1894, when he entered into the
partnership with Mr. 0. Mathews-
Drew, which has ever since that time
been carried on under the style of
Rand & Drew.
Mr. C. MATHEWS- DREW, Soli-
citor (Rand & Drew), is a son of
Mr. C. H. Drew, formerly of Devon,
England, and was born in 1868, in
the district of Lallarat, Victoria.
He was educated at the Sydney
Grammar School and Sydney High
School. After a course of study
abroad, he returned to Sydney and
matriculated at the University in
1887. He was articled to Mr.
J. Murray White, and admitted a
solicitor of the Supreme Court of
New South Wales on the 29th
November, 1892. Mr. Drew prac-
tised on his own account until May,
Tesla
MR. C. MATHEWS-DREW.
1894, when he joined Mr. W. A.
Rand in partnership. He was ap-
pointed a Notary Public in 1902.
For eight years Mr. Drew was
honorary secretary of the Metro-
politan Rugby Union, and for some
time in the Scottish Rifles. Mr.
Drew has been identified with
amateur sport and military matters,
having held the position of lion,
secretary to the Metropolitan
Rugby Union for eight years, as
well as holding the position of
vice-president and councillor on
the N.S.W. Rugby Union. He was
for some years identified with the
Sydney Scottish Rifles, and on the
committee of the Civil Ambulance
and Transport brigade of New
South Wales.
Mr. HENRY DAVIS, L.A.,
Solicitor (Henry Davis and Wolsten,
holme), graduated L.A., with honours,
at the Sydney University, March,
1890, and gained the Anderson gold
medal in mental and political
philosophy in 1891 and in 1892.
He served his articles with Messrs.
Carruthers and Hawkins, and was
admitted a Solicitor of the Supreme
Court of New South Wales in 1893,
and after practising on his own account
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. H. DACIS.
for some years, entered into partner-
ship with Mr. H. Wolstenholine. Mr.
Davis has been an alderman of the
Petersham Municipal Council for the
past ten years, and during that time
has twice filled the mayoral chair,
and is a member of the committee of
the Municipal Association of New
South Wales. He is a vice-president
of the New South Wales Literary and
Debating Societies’ Union.
Mr. FREDERICK WYNNE ROLIN,
Solicitor, is a son of the late Thomas
Lately Rolin, and a brother of Tom
Robin, barrister-at-law, and was born
at Sydney in 1870. He received his
education at the Sydney Grammar
School, was articled to the late
Thomas Lately Rolin, and admitted as
a Solicitor of the Supreme Court of


New South Wales in 1898. After
wards Mr. Holin entered into partner
Freeman & Co.
MR. F. W. ROLIN.
ship with his father, and since the
year 1901 has been in practice on his
own account.
Mr. PERCY EDWARD TIGHE,
Solicitor, Beresford Chambers, 30
Castlereagh Street, Sydney. Air.
Tighe’s father, the late Mr. Edward
John Tighe, came to Australia in
1857, and was actively engaged in
commercial and other pursuits until
his death in 1890. Mr. Percy
Edward Tighe was born in Sydney
in 1870. He received his education
mainly at Newington College, Stan-
more, In 1887 he matriculated at
Sydney University and soon after
was articled to a solicitor. In 1893,
shortly after being admitted by the
Supreme Court to practise as a
solicitor, Mr. Tighe, who has made a
study of -several modern European
languages, was offered by Lord
Rosebery, then Secretary of State
for Foreign Affairs, a nomination as
candidate for the position of attache
in the British diplomatic service.
His private affairs, however, then
precluded him from accepting the
offer. In the beginning of 1902, he
accepted a temporary appointment
with the Nickel Corporation, Nou-
mea, New Caledonia, the control of
which company had just passed into
the hands of the great American
nickel trust. Returning to Sydney
after an absence of nearly twelve
months. Mr. Tighe resumed the
practice of his profession, At the
election of 1901 he was a candidate
for the Parliamentary representation
of Balmain South, polling well, but
came too late into the field to have
a chance of success. He has been
lor many years a member of the
Incorporated Law Institute. In 1896
Mr. I'ighe married a daughter of the
late Mr. Henry Lettsom Gronow,
M.A., of St. Leonards, who was a
son of the Rev. Thomas Gronow,
M.A., J.P., of Ash Hall, Glamorgan-
shire, Wales, and a nephew of Cap-
tain R. H. H. Gronow, formerly of
the Grenadier Guards and M.P. for
Stafford, England, author of several
interesting volumes of reminiscences
often quoted. Mrs. Tighe, it may
also be mentioned, is a great-great-
grand-daughtcr of Dr. John Coakley
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. P. E. TIGHE.
Lettsom, M.D., F.R.S,, the cele-
brated Quaker physician and philan-
thropist, who was one of the original
founders of the Medical Society, and
first president of the Philosophical
Society, both of London.
Mr. ROBERT ALEXANDER
MONRO KING is a native of
Goulburn, New South Wales, where
he was born on the Bth day of Feb-
ruary, 1869. After completing his
education at the Sydney Public
High School, with a view, before
entering upon the practice of the law,
of obtaining commercial experience.
Mr. King in 1886 entered the count-
ing house of Beale & Co. Ltd ,
and in 1893 entered into ar-
tides. He was admitted to prac-
tise as a solicitor of tlx; Supreme
Tesla
MR. R. A. M. KING.
Court of New South Wales in 1899,
and shortly after entered into part-
nership, with Mr. \\ . D. Schrader.
At the expiration of the partnership,
Mr. King commenced to practise
on his own account Mr. King in
1890 was elected a fellow of the
London Incorporated Institute of
Phonographers.
Mr. ARTHUR VAUGHAN
HILLIARD, 8.A., Solicitor, was born
at Gladstone, Queenslnnd, on the 17tli
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. A. V. HILLIARD.
November, 1860, and is a son of the
late William Edward Hilliard, one of
the old colonists, formerly Police


Magistrate of Gladstone, Queensland,
afterwards of Sydney, merchant. He
was educated at the Sydney Grammar
School ; matriculated and entered
Sydney University, in March, 1887 ;
graduated B.A, in classics, mathe-
matics and science, April, 1890, entered
the office of Messrs. Cape, Kent and
Gaden, solicitors, July, 1890 ; and was
admitted Solicitor of the Supreme
Court of New South Wales, March,
1891, passing second in the final
examination of the fourteen successful
candidates, oat of thirty-two who
entered. After admission Mr. Hilliard
served as managing clerk with the
above firm till the end of 1897, and
then entered into private practice. He
is one of the trustees of the Balgowlah-
Manly Cemetery, and secretary to the
Church Council of St. Matthew’s
Church of England, Manly.
Mr. AUBREY HALLORAN, 8.A.,
LL.B., Solicitor, is a native of the
Mudgee District, and received his early
education from his father Mr. T. J.
Halloran, one of the mostdistinguished
of our State school teachers, four of
his children being members of the
Sydney University. The subject of
Talma.
NR. A. HALLORAN.
this sketch graduated B.A. in the year
1892, LL.B. 1894, served his articles
with Mr. John Stinson (Pigott and
Stinson), and was admitted a Solicitor
of the Supreme Court of New South
Wales in 1895. He is a J.P. and
notary public. Mr. Halloran has been
an active member of political com-
mittees for several years past. He
takes an active part in the public life
of this city, and is interested in many
of our educational and scientific
institutions, being a member of the
Royal Society, and one of the council
of the Zoological Society, also vice-
president of the Y.M.C.A. Debating
Club. In musical and art circles he is
prominent, showing an active interest
in artistic matters. He is the lion,
secretary of the Pickwick Club.
Mr. ROBERT B. PARRY, J.P.,
Solicitor, is a son of Mr. Robert B.
Parry, Sen., of Ryde, New South
Wales, and was born on 16th November,
1872. He received his education at
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. R. B. PARRY.
Armidale and in Sydney, and was
articled to tbe late Mr. W. G. Procter,
of the firm of Procter & Schraeder,
and for some time the representative
of the New England electorate in the
Legislative Assembly of New South
Wales. Mr. Parry was admitted a
Solicitor of the Supreme Court of New
South Wales in 1895, and since his
admission, has carried on the practice
of his profession on his own account.
In musical circles, Mr. Parry is well
known as the Honorary Secretary of
the Liedertafel Society, a position he
has held for the past eleven years.
Mr. ARTHUR BERNARD
DAVIES, 8.A., LL.B., Solicitor, son
of the late Wyndham Davies, was
horn in Sydney, and was educated first
at the Sydney High School, and after-
wards at the University, where in
1891 he obtained the Barker Scholar-
ship and Horner Exhibition, in 1892
the George Allen Scholarship, in 1898
the Barker Scholarship No. 2, and
Norbert Quirk Prize. In 1894, he
graduated 8.A., and gained the gold
medal for mathematics. In 1897 he
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. A. B. DACIES.
took his LL B. degree, and in the
same year was admitted a Solicitor ol
the Supreme Court of New South
Wales. Mr. Davies is qualified both
as solicitor and barrister.
Mr. LESLIE MANSFIELD, So-
licitor, a son of Mr. G. A. Mansfield,
the well-known architect, was born
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. L. MANSFIELD.
in Sydney, in 1870. He was educated
at the King’s School, Parramatta, and


the Sydney Grammar School, from
whence he matriculated. He served the
first portion of his articles with Messrs.
Norton, Smith, Westgarth & Co.,
and then was transferred to Mr. G. C.
Westgarth, when that gentleman left
the firm. Mr. Mansfield was admitted
a Solicitor of the Supreme Court of
New South Wales in August, 1898,
and was associated in partnership with
Mr. A. V. Hilliard, from that time
until early in the year 1907, when he
retired and commenced business on
his own account. He is an active sup-
porter of all kinds of sport, and on
several occasions represented this State
in intercolonial tennis tournaments.
Mr. WILLIAM ARNOTT,
Solicitor, was born in London, and
arrived in Sydney in 1885. For
some time he was engaged in mer-
cantile which he relin-
quished to enter the office of the
Talma.
MR. W. ARNOTT.
old and well-known firm of solici-
tors, Messrs. Want, Johnson & Co.
He was afterwards articled to Mr.
Minter, a partner of the said firm,
and in November, 1892, was ad-
mitted as a solicitor of the Supreme
Court of New South Wales. In
May, 1893, Mr. Arnott commenced
the practice of his profession in
Elizabeth Street, where he re-
mained for some years, afterwards
removing to No. 94 Pitt Street,
where he is now located. Mr.
Arnott is a commissioner for affi-
davits for New South Wd oa a nd a
Justice of the Peace,
Mr. WILLOUGHBY DOUGLAS
SCHRADER, Solicitor, is a son of
the late Dr. C. U. I). Schrader, of
Newcastle and Walcha, N.S.W.,
and was born in the former town in
1870. He was educated at the
Fort Street Public School and High
School, Sydney. On leaving the
latter, Mr. Schrader entered the
employ of the A.J.S. Bank, gradu-
ally rising in the service until he
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
NR. W. D. SCHRADER.
was appointed manager of the
branch at Hinton, Hunter River
district, in 1891. Having decided
to enter the legal profession, on
completion of his articles, he was
admitted a solicitor of the Supreme
Court of New South Wales in 1899,
and shortly after joined Mr. R. A.
Monro King in partnership. On its
termination Mr. Schrader decided
to carry on the practice of his pro-
fession on his own account.
Mr. WILLIAM ADDISON
FREEMAN, Solicitor, is a native
of New South Wales, and was born
on the 6th October, 1871. He is
a grandson of the late Henry
Freeman, who came out as a colo-
nist in 1832, a son of William
Freeman, and nephew of Stephen
Freeman, both for many years
identified with the lands adminis-
tration in New South Wales, the
former as Chairman of Land Boards
(Tamworth, Bourke and Grafton
districts) and tfip latter as
Commissioner of the Land Ap-
peal Court. He was educated
at Newington College and Sydnev
%J •
High School, articled to the late
Mr, C. .1. Ross, at Tamworth, and
subsequently by assignment to Mr.
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. W. A. FREEMAN.
D. W. Roxburgh, of Messrs. Nor-
ton, Smith & Co., Sydney, with
which firm he remained some years
before starting practice on his own
account in 1903. Prior to his ad-
mission as a solicitor of the Su-
preme Court of New South Wales,
in 1900, Mr. Freeman spent some
months on the goldfields in West
Australia as a working miner, and
gained experience which has been
of advantage to him in his profes-
sion. He is an auditor of the In-
corporated Law Institute of New
South Wales.
Mr. CHARLES ALFRED
JAQUES, J.P, one of the members
of the well-known firm of Stephen,
Jaques & Stephen, solicitors, is
a son of Mr. A. E. Jaques, the
senior partner, and was born in
Sydney in 1878. In common with
many members of the legal profes-
sion, he received his early educa-
tion at the King’s School, Parra-
matta, but at the age of 11 years
he had the advantage of one year
at the Abbey School, Beckenham,
in Kent. Mr. Jaques matriculated
in 1896, was articled to Mr. Consett
Stephen (a member of the firm;,


and admitted a solicitor of the
Supreme Court of New South Wales
in 1901, and about a year later he
became a partner in the firm. In
1902 he was appointed a J.P. for
Falk Studio.
MR. C. A. JAQUES.
New South Wales, and was prob-
ably the youngest in the State.
For over seven years Mr. Jaques
was a member of the committee of
the Kina’s School Old Boys’ I nion.
Mr. GEORGE ALFRED RAVES,
8.A., Solicitor, is a native of Bal-
larat, Victoria, but has resided in
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. G. A. RAVES.
Sydnev since he was ten years of
age. He received his early educa-
tion at Paddington Superior Public
School, and afterwards at Camden
College. In 1894 he matriculated
at the Sydney University, and
graduated B.A. in 1897. Mr. Raves
was articled to Mr. W. E. Hawkins,
and immediately after his admis-
sion on the 24th May, 1902, as a
solicitor of the Supreme Court of
New South Wales, commenced
practice on his own account. He
is solicitor for the International
Harvester Co. of America, other
corporations and trust estates.
Mr. ERNEST AMBROSE
ROBERTS, Solicitor, was educated
at All Saints’ College, Bathurst,
and the King’s School, Parra-
matta ; at the latter school under
Dr. Harris. He was articled in
1890 to Mr. W. G. Hayes-Williams
(the present Registrar-General),
who was then a member of the
firm of Laurence, McLachlan and
Williams. Mr. Williams subse-
sequently joined Mr. E. W. Perkins,
MR. E. A. ROBERTS.
solicitor, and Mr. Roberts con-
tinued with him, and was admitted
a solicitor of the Supreme Court of
New South Wales in November,
1905. He started practice, in
January, 1906, with the late Mr.
P. M. Lane, a fellow schoolmate
and articled clerk, under the style
of Lane and Roberts. In Novem-
ber, 1906, Mr. Lane died, and since
then Mr. Roberts has been prac-
tising on his own account. He was
one of the founders of the King’s
School Old Bovs’ Union, and acted
as secretary for some years. He
has also been a member of the
King’s School council for about
ten years, being first elected as a
representative of the Old Boys’
Union, and for the last two years
has acted as treasurer to the coun-
cil.
GODDARD WILLIAM ASH,
Solicitor, is a son of William Ash,
formerly of Singleton, and after-
wards of Royston Park, Ourimbah,
and was born in Singleton in 1869.
He was educated at the Singleton
Grammar School, and subsequently
at the King’s School, Parramatta.
Mr. Ash was articled to Mr. E. P.
Simpson, of the firm of Want,
Johnson & Co. (now Minter,
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. G. W. ASH.
Simpson & Co.), with whom he
remained after he was admitted a
solicitor of the Supreme Court of
New South Wales, in 1891, until
he joined Mr. Richard Windeyer
Thompson, of West Maitland, in
his Sydney business, under the
name of R- W. Thompson and
Ash. This partnership terminated
in 1906 through the death of the
senior partner, Mr. Ash continuing
the practice of his profession on his
own account. He has been a
member of the committee of the
King’s School Old Boys’ Union
ever since its foundation.
Mr. HERBERT EDGAR
MCINTOSH, Solicitor, of 492
George St., Sydney, is the son of
the Rev. George Mclntosh. His
mother was the eldest daughter of
Mr. W. H. McKeown, who about
336
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


half a century ago made his home in
that locality. Hewas born at Gordon,
and began his education in the
Crown Street Public. School, Sydney,
under the late Mr. F. Bridges. While
yet young, he was placed in the
North Sydney High School, and sub-
sequently attended the Church of
England Grammar School, where
for two years he held Bishop Barry’s
scholarship ; and in the school con-
tests won several prizes for elocu-
tion. Upon the termination of his
school career he was articled to
Mr. Donnelly lusher, solicitor, even-
tually passing the necessary exami-
nations, whereupon he commenced
to practise as a solicitor. For
many years, while living in Gordon
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. H. E. McINTOSH.
and Carlingford, Mr. Mclntosh was
selected president of the Central
Cumberland Pastoral and Horti-
cultural Association, and, for a con-
siderable time, president of the old
Pastoral and Agricultural Union and
member of the Chamber of Agri-
culture. Mr. Mclntosh has identi-
fied himself with rowing, cricket,
football and other manly pas-
times. When the Federal Consti-
tution Bill was before the country
he unsuccessfully contested the
Willoughby electorate. In 1903
Mr. Mclntosh was nominated a
candidate for municipal honours at
North Sydney, and was returned
after a sharp contest. His term
having expired, in February, 1905,
he was re-elected. Mr. Mclntosh
was elected representative to the
Church of England Diocesan Synod
for Pennant Hills and Ermington.
Mr. T. MAUGHAN KEMMIS,
Solicitor, the third son of the Rev.
Canon Kemmis, has not followed in
his father’s footsteps, but in those
of an ancestor, Thomas Kemmis,
Crown Solicitor for Ireland from
1783-1823. Mr. Kemmis’ paternal
grandmother was a daughter of
James Raymond, the first Post-
master of Sydnev, and his maternal
grandfather the late Archdeacon
Gunther of Mudgee. He was edu-
cated at the Sydney Grammar
School, and matriculated at the
Sydney University in 1886. In
1887 he was articled to Mr. J.
Booth Jones, of Jones & Jones, and
admitted a solicitor of the Supreme
Court of New South Wales in 1892.
He remained for some years with
J. Hubert Newman Ltd
MR. T. M. KEMMIS.
Messrs. .Jones & Jones as managing
o o
clerk before commencing practice
on his own account. Mr. Kemmis
is a commissioner for affidavits for
New South Wales, Queensland and
New Zealand.
Mr. WILLIAM H. DREW, Soli-
citor, is a son of William Drew,
well known in the commercial life
of this State, and was born in
Sydney. In the year 1896 he re-
linquished his studies at the Sydney
University and was articled ito the
Hon. L. F. Heydon, solicitor. In
February, 1901, he was admitted a
solicitor of the Supreme Court of
New South Wales, and immediately
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. W. H. DREW.
Thereafter commenced the practice
of his profession on his own ac-
count.
Mr. ROLLO CECIL CAPE,
Solicitor, eldest son of the late Rollo A.
Cape, J.P., of Bona Vista, Petersham,
was born in Sydney on the 24th Sep-
tember, 1870. He was educated at the
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. R. C. CAPE.
Sydney Grammar School and the
Sydney University; and articled to
Mr. A. Consett Stephen, of the firm of
Messrs. Stephen, Jaques & Stephen, of
O’Connell Street, Sydney, solicitors.


On the 18th November, 1899, he was
admitted a solicitor of the Supreme
Court of New South Wales, and en-
tered upon the practice of his pro-
fession in Sydney on his own account.
He was subsequently appointed a Com-
missioner for Affidavits of New South
Wales, and also admitted a solicitor
of the High Court of Australia.
Mr. RUSSELL CHARLES
ROXBURGH. Solicitor, youngest
son of the late John Peri Roxburgh
and grandson of the late William
Spain, of the old firm of Spain and
Roxburgh, was born at “ Eynes-
burv,” on the Edgecliff Road,
Double Bay, on the 20th February,
1871. He was educated at the
Svdnev Grammar School, and ma-
triculated at the University of
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. R. C. ROXBURGH.
Sydney; articled to Mr. Donnelly
Fisher and afterwards transferred
to Dr. George James Sly ; admitted
a solicitor of the Supreme Court of
New South Wales on sth June,
1896. After ten years with Norton,
Smith & Co., during the latter por-
tion as managing common law
clerk, he commenced practice on
his own account. He is a commis-
sioner for the High Court of Aus-
tralia and warden and parochial
nominator for St. Paul’s Church of
England, Burwood ; also a mem-
ber of the general committee of the
Sydney Mission to Seamen.
Mr. HENRY SALWEY, Soli-
citor, is a son of the late Mr.
Herbert Salwey, solicitor, who was
a well-known practitioner in the
New England district in the early
days, and owner of Branga Park
station, Walcha, where the subject
of this sketch was born. He was
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. H. SALWEY.
educated at the Sydney Grammar
School, and served his articles with
M'. James W. Johnson, of the firm
of Want. Johnson & Scarvell. now
M inter, Simpson & Co. He was
admitted a solicitor of the Supreme
Court of New South Wales on the
2Jth March, 1888, and after seven
years with the firm of Fisher, Ralfe
and Co. as managing clerk, com-
menced business on his own ac-
count.
Mr. W. ARCHIBALD A. MAZE,
8.A., Solicitor, is a son of the late
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. W. A. A. MAZE.
Robert Maze, one of the early pioneers
of this city, for many years alderman
and mayor of Darlington and aider-
man of the City Council ; and was
born in Darlington, Sydney on the
23rd October, 1868. He received his
early education at the Boys’ High
School, Glebe Point, and later at
Newington College; matriculated in
1889, and graduated B.A. at the Syd-
ney University in 1892. Mr. Maze
was articled to Mr. Frank A. Daven-
port ; and prior to his admission as
solicitor of the Supreme Court of New
South Wales, on the 10th March, 1906,
was managing clerk to Mr. Robert B.
Parry for four years. Immediately
after his admission, he commenced
practice on his own account.
Mr. JOSEPH JOSHUA JAGEL-
MAN, Solicitor, eldest son of Joseph
Jagelman, was born in Sydney in
Tesla
MR. J. J. JAGELMAN.
December, 1869. His father, and also
his grandfather, were well-known
merchants in Sydney in the middle
of the early seventies. The son was
sent to relations in Tasmania at an
early age, and passed the whole of his
early life amid the surroundings of
the charming island ; receiving his
education in Hobart, where he was a
fellow-student with many of the
prominent business men of the present
day. Returning to Sydney in 1891,
be matriculated at the Sydney Uni-
versity, eight months after arriving
there. On the expiration of his
articles he was admitted to practice,
in August, 1897. Mr. Jagelman takes
an active interest in local matters, and
is a member and vice-president of the
Waverley Debating Society. To the
Tasmanian Mail and other papers Mr.
Jagelman is a constant contributor.
346
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


The City and Port of Sydney,
Once the capital of the Australian Continent and
of New South A\ ales when it included Victoria and
Queensland, Sydney remains the metropolis of New
South V ales, and, in justice to her importance and
magnitude, is entitled to be the Federal capital of the
Commonwealth. Gifted by nature with all the phy-
sical requirements of a great city, the emporium of a
country profusely endowed with mineral wealth, and
rich in pastoral and agricultural resources, our City,
the Queen of the Pacific, has increased in importance
with the neighbouring States, Sydney now enjoys a
regular intercourse with all countries laying between
the eastern coastline of Africa and the western shores
of North and South America. She has a rapidly-grow-
ing trade with the New Hebrides, New Caledonia, the
Fiji Islands, all other centres of commerce in the Poly-
nesian groups, with the numerous islands of Malaysia,
as well as with Southern India. Her ships have estab-
lished traffic with China and Japan and the Mauritius ;
her immense trade in coal extends far north and west-
so largely that at the present time she is entitled to
take rank among the principal cities of the world.
Among the chief ports of the eastern and western
hemispheres in relative importance she occupies the
proud position of ninth, the aggregate of her exports
and imports alone being exceeded by those of London,
Liverpool, New York, Hamburg, Antwerp, Marseilles,
Calcutta, and Bombay ; whilst, in turn, Sydney com-
mands a greater volume of trade than Shanghai, Alex-
andria, Melbourne, Montreal, and Capetown. Within
easy sail of, and in constant steam communication
ward, to Vladivostock on the one hand and Vancouver
on the other ; and her European mail service is carried
on by some of the finest lines of steamers afloat that
jointly make a circuit of the earth. Her maritime
enterprise is aided by the vast advantages of a noble
harbour, on the southern shore of which Sydney is
built.
Port Jackson, if equalled, is certainly not sur-
passed by another natural harbour in the world, and
not even by the magnificent haven of Rio Janeiro.
The bold coast fronting the Pacific is suddenly broken


-a gap is seen, about 74 chains, or nearly one mile,
in width —and the giant sandstone bluffs, on the north
side over 200 feet in height, form a portal to an
estuarv, with a perimeter capacious enough to shelter
the navies of the world. A vessel making the port
sails in a few moments out of a long swell of ocean
into calm deep water, protected on every side by high
lands. On entering a splendid vista is presented to
the vovager, the blue waters of the harbour spreading
out into several lake-like expanses, from which rise
many picturesque islands, and the elevated shore
being broken into innumerable small bays and inlets.
Above Svdney, into these waters the united streams
of the Lane Cove and Parramatta Rivers enter from
the west. Picturesquely-wooded slopes, rising here
and there to heights exceeding 200 feet, offer charming
landscape effects in their approaches to the water’s
edu’e. disclosing ?t intervals in the distance curving
stretches of silver or golden sands which a Stanfield or
Coplev Fielding would love to paint. The well-wooden
hills —alas, being robbed of their arboreal beauties year
by vear under the vigorous strokes of the builder’s
axe, —clothed in the bright garb of spring, or in the
russet of summer, and bathed in the glorious light of
an Australian atmosphere, form a charming margin
to the bright blue waters they enclose. As the city is
approached pretty villas and imposing mansions, sur-
rounded with gardens end orchards, crown the heights
or extend along the shore.
The harbour of Port Jackson proper has an area of
nine square miles-- -Middle Harbour, one of its arms,
three square miles ; and the coastline of the whole is
54 miles. From the heads to the city the distance is
seven miles, beyond which the waters extend eight
miles into what is called the Parramatta River, giving-
-15 miles as the length of navigation. The average
breadth of the navigable waters is three-quarters of
a mile, though at some points thev widen to two miles
or more. The shallowest part is between Middle
Head and George’s Head, where the soundings show
23 feet at low water. Beyond this the depth ranges
between five and eighteen fathoms. There are miles
of wharf frontage in use, and about 25 miles of deep-
water frontage in sheltered places, that may be made
available for a like purpose. The chief lighthouse is
nigh upon a hundred feet in height, erected on cliffs
268 feet above the sea-level. It is electric, and of
12,000 candles, increased by the optical panel to nearly
a million candles in each ray, making it visible 25
miles to seaward. On a rocky point, 60 feet high,
situated immediately within the South Head, stands a
second lighthouse (the Hornby), 30 feet high from the
base, which has a light visible at 15 miles. Within
the entrance there is a light-ship, with two fixed white
lights ; and at Fort Denison, nearer the city, there is
a red harbour light, beyond which ships are forbidden
to proceed until they are boarded by the Health Officer
and other authorities.
Opposite the harbour entrance the first object to
arrest the gaze of the stranger stands the bold, rugged
promontory, called Middle Head, and its position,
yiewed from the distance at which Captain Qook sailed
hy 9 doubtless led the great navigator to imagine that
tiie port was of small dimensions. To the right, at the
head of North Harbour, and distant about six miles
from Circular Quay, lies Manly Cove, the charming
marine suburb of Manly being situated on a narrow
tongue of land between the harbour and the ocean,
with hills rising on either side, and their verdant slopes
covered by numerous picturesquely-situated homes.
The southern shore of the harbour, from the entrance
right up to Svdney Cove, consists of a succession oi
beautiful bays. Watson’s Bay is the nearest to the
entrance, followed by Rose Bay, with its crescent-
shaped shore and vegetable gardens lying to the rear.
Next there is Double Bay, with Point Piper on its east-
ern and Darling Point on its western side, followed by
Rushcutter and Elizabeth Bays, around these two last
some of the finest residences and gardens in Sydney
being situated. Woolloomooloo Bay is next passed,
followed by Farm Cove, and the vessel then berths in
Sydney Cove.
The Middle Harbour branch of Port Jackson con-
tains an area of about three square miles. Many have
described it as a Port Jackson in miniature, and it
well deserves the title, but with this addition, that the
natural beauty of its surroundings has been little
interfered with by the progress of settlement. Steamers
enter this arm of the harbour round the north of
Middle Head, the channel being very narrow, owing
to the presence of a long sand-bar called 4 4 The Spit.’
The picturesque Lane Cove and Parramatta Rivers,
which come in from the west, are in reality prolonga-
tions of the harbour itself, the fresh water portions of
both being comparatively insignificant. Fast and
commodious steamers touch at the chief points of
interest in each at regular intervals daily. The Cir-
cular Quay, at the head of Sydney Cove, has a length
of more than four thousand feet available for the largest
vessels, and similar facilities —detailed more minutely
elsewhere —are afforded in Woolloomooloo Bay and on
the shores of Darling Harbour, from Dawes Point
almost to the wharf below Harris Street, Ultimo.
The growth of the city and its suburbs has been
marvellous, and Sydney now stands as the second city
of the British Empire, estimated by the annual value
of its ratable property. The annual value of property
in Sydney and suburbs, covering an area of 91,220
acres, was in February, 1906, £5,866,860 ; while the
annual value of Greater Melbourne, with an area of
163,480 acres, was £4,551,823. In the city of Sydney
there were, in the year 1903-4,20,651 inhabited houses,
and 748 other buildings, including vacant dwellings,
giving a total of 21,399 dwellings. The inhabited
dwellings were occupied by a population of 1 12,630.
In the suburbs of Svdney there were 79,898 houses, in
%/ ./
which 399,870 persons dwelt. The city proper is
situated about seven miles from the entrance to the
port, at a point where the southern shore presents
several prominent headlands leading to capacious
land-locked basins. Built on a stratum chiefly sand-
stone, it occupies an area of something more than
2,000 acres, bounded on the north and west by water,
and as it enjoys a considerable elevation it is remark


ably healthy and dry. Its greatest length is 3| miles
north and south, and its greatest breadth 2$ miles,
east and west. The principal thoroughfares run north
and south, parallel to Darling Harbour, and are crossed
at right angles by shorter streets.
The original settlement was fixed at the head of
the bay called Sydney Cove, and in the neighbourhood
there are still traces of the primitive architecture.
In a right line, extending from this point to the south,
and more decidedly on each side —to the east by easy
acclivities —to the west more abruptly, the highest in
that direction being occupied by the Observatory and
Signal Station. Towards the south the variations of
level are less strongly marked ; but eastward the
gradual ascent reaches to the heights of Darlinghurst,
wonderful progress within the last thirty years, and
its line banking: houses, mercantile establishments,
and handsome public edifices and clubs give it an
aspect bespeaking undeniable wealth, advancing culti-
vation and enterprise. The portion convenient, though
not close, to the quays, which, as usual in other great-
sea ports, is the most frequented, contains many of
the best buildings for commercial purposes, the banks
and most of the warehouses being constructed of free-
stone, in the modern style of Italian composite, and
displaying in their faQades much rich ornamentation.
The private residences in the neighbourhood of
Sydney are of a superior character, and are generally
in the vicinity of the water, the parks, or some other
recreation ground. The fashionable quarter far ex-
A Section of Bligh’s Plan of Sydney, 1807.
and still more elevated suburbs of Paddington, Wool-
fahra, and Waverley. The city is flanked on the west
by a large arm of the estuary called Darling Harbour.
The streets of the main part of the city have been
laid out to the cardinal points of the compass, and
therefore intersect each other at right angles A
breadth consistent with modern ideas of dimensions
for city streets, recommended by the authorities
during the administration of Sir Richard Bourke, was
not adopted in Sydney, though it was in laying out the
then provincial town of Melbourne, so that the sixty-six
feet of width of Sydney streets must appear somewhat-
contracted to those who have been accustomed to
recently-built towns in Europe or America, Archi-
tecturally Sydney is on the up grade. It has made
cellence is the east end of the city, and the suburban
localities stretching thence along the shore. Here are
most of those splendid mansions of which glimpses are
caught from the harbour, which they overlook. Many
of them have been erected at great cost, and for extent,
tastefulness of internal decorations, and beauty of
their grounds and gardens, are perhaps unequalled by
any private residences on this side of the equator.
There are upwards of 150 churches and other places
of worship in the city and suburbs. Government-
House, the official residence for many years of the
State Governor, and now of his Majesty’s representa-
tive, the Governor-General of the Commonwealth of
Australia, is a splendid building in the Tudor style, on
a slight eminence near to and overlooking the harbour,
and surrounded by gardens and ornamental grounds.


The public traffic ol the city and suburbs is carried
on by an excellent tram service, second to none any-
where, and omnibuses and hackney-carriages, and the
water communication between the city and its trans-
marine suburbs by steam ferry boats, with a service
almost as good as that of the trams. The streets ol
the city and in some of the suburbs are lighted by
electricity ; in the remaining suburbs gas is employed.
The service of electricity in private residences has been
established in recent years, and increases annually.
Sydney has spacious markets on the water’s edge and
in its main thoroughfares, and these bazaars are usually
well stocked with table requirements of every kind.
There is no lack of trade bazaars, theatres, music halls,
and other places of amusement, all of which are well
supplied with up-to-date attractions.
Although the “ Queen City of tlm South ” has
few reserves analogous to the reserves of London, it
has excellent parks and gardens within its boundaries,
easilv accessible to the citizens. The Centennial Park
has not yet been fully laid out. When its adornment
is completed, there will be nothing for beauty and
extent with which it can compare in Australasia.
Hyde Park is a charming plateau of 10 acres, nearly
in the centre of the city proper. It has a fine avenue
of shade trees about half a mile long, and is almost
entirely surrounded by plantations and clumps of
trees, affording a grateful protection from fiery Sol,
and forming an agreeable resort. At the northern end
of the avenue is a fine bronze statue, by Theed, erected
in memorv of Prince Albert, and on the south-eastern
side a monument of Captain Cook has been erected, in
a position which commands a splendid view down the
harbour. The Domain, a charming expanse of park
land of 130 acres, planted for landscape effect, is on
the north-eastern side of Sydney, surrounding the
pretty inlet called Farm Cove. The grounds possess
every variety requisite to produce picturesque views,
and the astistic disposition of the groups and avenues
of trees greatly enhances the beauties of this popular
resort for sporting and promenading purposes. Near
the main entrance is an excellent bronze statute of
Sir Richard Bourke, by Bayley, in a situation from
which is obtained one of the most beautiful views
imaginable. Moore Park, a tract of 500 acres, includ-
ing the portion now known as the Centennial Park,
lies on the south-east, and adjoining the latter ground
is the Randwick Racecourse, where some of the classic
races of the antipodes are fought out. Within twenty
miles of Sydney seventy-eight public parks have been
proclaimed, these including an area of nearly 75,000
acres. Of this extent the National Park of New South
Wales —in the neighbourhood of Port Hacking —ex-
ceed 36,300 acres in area, and the Kuring-gai Chase-
abutting on the shores of Broken Bay and the entrance
to the Hawkesbury —36,500 acres. These are the
national pleasure grounds of the State, and besides
forming, in their natural beauties, charming recreation
resorts, are utilised as breeding areas for birds, &c.
The Botanic Gardens embrace about 36 acres in
extent, and are the finest in the Australian colonies ;
tor, in addition to the immense collection of exotics
from every clime, the lovely position they occupy
strikes every beholder with admiration. They are
laid out at the head of Farm Cove, adjoining Govern-
ment House reserve, and include the site of what
was in Governor Phillip s days the first farm estab-
lished in Australia. The gardens are in point ol
beauty perhaps only excelled by those in Bourbon.
They have always commanded the greatest horti-
cultural attention, and the lawns, shrubs and trees
have been brought to the highest state of perfection.
In wealth of species the Botanic Gardens need not fear
comparison, for their age is but a decade short of 100
years, and the locality is favoured with an exceptional
mildness of climate. There are seven hot-houses, in-
cluding an orchid-house containing many rare speci-
mens ; and the classification of plants has engaged
the minds of master botanists. A museum and a her-
barium, containing many thousands of specimens, are
housed in a capacious building specially erected for the
purpose, and are the constant resort of visitors daily.
The Zoological Gardens were inaugurated in 1879 on
12* acres of Moore Park, known as Billygoat
Swamp, and, besides being artistically laid out,
house I, very fair collection of mammals, birds, reptilia,
&c , &c. Thus far generalisations only have been
dealt with. An effort will now be made to roughly
outline the growth of Sydney from its earliest begin-
nings to those days when the foundations of its present
stately dimensions were hopefully and wisely laid.
The 20th January, 1788, ushered in a bright
summer morn and brought Governor Phillip with his
miniature fleet to Botany Bay. Two days afterwards
he had wended his way along the coastline to Port
Jackson, explored its noble waters, and on January
26 saw his fleet riding at anchor at the head of Syd-
ney Cove, opposite a stream of pure running water,
subsequently designated as Tank Stream. The mili-
tary and convicts landed, to the number of 1,030 ;
Governor Phillip pitched a bell tent on the eastern side
of the creek ; with him was a small bodyguard of sol-
diers ; the detachment of marines bivouacked at the
extreme head of the cove near the stream, and on the
west side were placed the convicts. Sydney had com-
menced. As soon as the ground was sufficiently
cleared England’s national emblem was hoisted on the
spot where the obelisk in Macquarie Place now stands ;
the Roval proclamation was read, and the infant en-
campments were further subdivided and extended. In
a setting of hill and valley at the head of a magnificent
stretch of water there lay embryonic Sydney, endowed
I/ V %/ '
by nature with all the requirements of a great city and
a greater port. When Governor Phillip called the
harbour “the finest in the world” his praise was
rather that of a sailor enraptured with the waters of a
great haven than a discoverer commending the site of
O O
a future leading city of the old and new worlds. In
extending inland, with a distance of some twelve or
thirteen miles from the heads that guard the entrance,
there lay around its 900 miles of shores fully a hundred
and twenty bays’ and coves, intersected by slender
well-wooded promontories affording shelter from
every wind to the waters on which the fleets of all
nations could ride in perfect safety. The shallowest
depths of water at the entrance to this magnificent


harbour at low water in the eastern channel he found
about twenty-six feet, and in the western channel
about twenty-two feet.
No sooner were the above formalities completed
than Governor Phillip commenced in earnest to build
his city; a rough plan was prepared by Mr. Surveyor
Alt, whilst the neighbourhood and adjacent cove were
baptised Sydney, in honour of Thomas Townsend Vis-
count Sydney. The woodman’s axe was broughti into
V V C
requisition, and used with such good will that in a short-
time sufficient clearing was made to permit of the
stockading of cattle, the bedding of plants, and the
erection of houses. His Excellency pitched a portable
Canvas house, which had been brought out from home
with the framework all ready to be fixed, as the govern-
mental residence. This was situated on the east side
of the rivulet already noticed, about the spot where
Pitt and Spring Streets intersect, and near at hand he
planted a garden containing fruit trees procured at
Ceylon and the Cape. Thirty years ago some of those
trees were still standing, but the garden site has long
since been covered over with noble edifices.
A village of huts —wattle saplings and mud —was
erected on the western shore of Sydney Cove, to accom-
modate the soldiers and those over whom they kept
guard. Later on something in the shape of a town
commenced on the banks of the Tank Stream —huts
chiefly formed of rough boards nailed to a few upright
posts, shabbily covered with bark, these spreading
over the space in the valley between two ridges lying
to the east and west. From Queen’s Wharf to Jamie-
son Street and Bridge Street were the first areas built
upon ; although for some years scarcely anything was
to be seen on these sites at all resembling a hut.
The cottages were but thinly scattered over the hill
lyino' to the north-west of the cove, the stumps thereof
remaining visible for fully fifty years afterwards. At
first the houses were rudely designed, but the narrow
streets were kept in good order and kept fairly clean.
No regularity, however, was observed in their align-
ment, and consequently that part of the city first
occupied has still an irregular appearance. The chief
street was twenty feet in breadth, and was named
George Street, after King George 111. ; another w i s
called Pitt, after Mr. Pitt. George Street extended
from t he harbour edge along the hollow between the
two ridges, and gradually was made rather more than
a mile long, the other streets either intersecting it at
right angles extending up the hills, or else running
parallel to it so that rain water drained into the Tank
Stream.
Whilst these miniature residences and thorough-
fares were being fashioned, the Governor at the same
time was pushing on with his rude public buildings.
From their huts the soldiers were removed to more
commodious barracks and stores, built near Charlotte
Place. A gaol, of course, was necessary for punish-
ment of the incorrigible, and this was commenced.
The ‘‘ old gaol ” extended from Essex Street to within
a few yards of Little Essex Street, or Brown Bear Lane,
as then called, and was bounded east and west by
George and Cambridge. Streets. It was 85 feet long,
built of wood— with a clay floor, and never lacked pa-
tronage, executions occurring with such frequency that
the spot was nicknamed “ Gallows Hill.” The build-
ing was burned down not long after its erection by
prisoners, who had the pleasure of erecting a new one
for their pains. Some time after a hospital also was
arranged in a number of primitive gunyahs on ground
where our Custom House now stands. It required all
the energies of Phillip and his officers to accomplish
even this much, so numerous were the obstacles they
had to contend with. To secure a permanent supply
of water ‘ ‘ tanks ’ ’ were excavated in the rocky bottom
of the stream, which divided, even in the earliest days,
the aristocratic from the plebeian quarter, and the
water course was formed into an open tunnel. tor a
considerable distance the bush was cleared on all sides.
A bridge was thrown over the tanks to permit of com-
munication between the Governor’s palace and the
main town. Subsequently Governor Phillip removed
to a cottage built on ground situated near the old
Illustrated Sydney News office, and this he used as a
temporary gubernatorial residence. The first stone ol
Government house to be, in Pitt Street on the site of
Vickery’s chambers, he laid with the customary obser-
vances, on March 15, 1788, a piece of copper placed
beneath it recording the date of his landing.
Building continued, but the progress was slow,
there being a dearth of skilled mechanics, whilst lime
could only be obtained by burning shells. Six months
after landing, when the future city was properly laid
out, onlv four of the officers had wooden tenements,
whilst the remainder had to make shift as best they
could. The portion of the town built upon the eastern
ridge near the water’s edge contained most of the
principal buildings and residences. The live stock had
been removed to the head of the adjoining cove, called
Farm Cove, which had been cleared for farming pur-
poses. The last ridge, or plebian quarter, was chris-
tened “The Rocks,” and here chiefly the prisonerslived.
Where the colonists first landed was known as “ The
Camp.” When the winter rains set in, the difficulties
and the hardships of the prisoners were increased a
thousandfold ; but eventually this impelled them to
labour for the amelioration of their discomforts. In
spite of all obstacles bricks were made, stones cut,
timber gathered, and houses of a superior character
gradually appeared on the more valuable portions of
the ground close to the harbour, which were eagerly
sought after and soon built upon. Towards the end of
September, on a census being made by the police, the
population was found to consist of 933 persons, of
whom a verv large proportion were males. During
this month the first large brick store in the vicinity of
Queen’s Wharf was completed, and an observatory
erected by Lieutenant Win. Dawes, of the Marines,
on the point now bearing his name. This he called
Point Maskelyne, after the Astronomer-Royal of that
period in England, the native name of the place being
Tarra. But the building was soon found insufficient
for its immediate objects, and being also too small for
the accommodation ol the family of Lieutenant Dawes,
the stonemasons set abou. building another obser-
vatory forthwith, nearly on the same spot. Here
were set up the astronomical instruments, which had


been sent out by the Board of Longitude for the pur-
pose of observing the comet that was to be seen at the
end of this year.
Very gradually the little settlement grew, the
colonists being too distressed for food to turn their
attention to any other matters. Nevertheless, suffi-
cient progress was made to justify, at the commence-
ment of 1790, a semi-official naming of the thorough-
fares where the populace did principally congregate,
and these were known as Government Row, George
Street, Pitt Row, High Street, Spring Row, Chapel
Row, Lower Chapel Row, Green Hills, South Row, and
M indmill Row, or the Rocks. The portable hospital
brought out from home was put up in July on the site
of the gunyahs, and nearly five hundred patients w T ere
immediately placed under medical treatment, many of
whom, owing to the insufficient supplies of food, died.
have to be begun in the course of a few months some
regular plan for the town will be necessary, and in the
laying out of which I have endeavoured to place all
public buildings in situations that will be eligible here-
after, and to give a sufficient share of ground for stores,
hospital, &c., to be enlarged as may be necessary in
the future. The principal streets are placed so as to
admit a free circulation of air, and are 200 feet wide.
The ground marked for Government House is intended
to include the main guard, civil and criminal courts ;
and as the ground that runs to the south is nearly
level, and a very good situation for building, streets
will be laid out in such manner as to afford a free air ;
and when the houses are built, if it meets with your
lordship’s approbation, the land will be granted with
a clause that will ever prevent more than one house
being built on the allotments, which will be 60 feet in
Argyle Cut in 1853.
A fresh si ore house was finished and a landing-place
formed near the site of the present Custom House.
Some months before this a signal station was set up at
South Head, from which the approach of vessels could
be telegraphed to Sydney. Notwithstanding a high
rate of mortality and the despatch of 280 souls to
Norfolk Island, the population during the two years
from the taking of the first census increased to 1,455 ;
a number which, owing to sickness, was reduced before
the end of 1790 by 159 souls.
In the natural order of things the growth of the
social organisms with which Governor Phillip was
charged had by this time so advanced that the for-
mation of a properly laid out town had begun to press
upon his attention. With the assistance of his Sur-
veyor-General, Mr. Alt, an ex-Baron of Hesse-Cassel,
lie had already designed a noble plan for the purpose,
in the colony’s earliest days he had written to Lord
Svdnev saving : “ As stores and other buildings will
front and 150 feet in depth ; tbit will preserve uniform-
ity in buildings, prevent narrow streets and the many
inconveniences which the increase of inhabitants wdll
otherwise occasion hereafter.” This representation of
the swaddling city showed how strongly the conviction
had possessed Phillip that the city was to have a pros-
perous and permanent destiny ; that the shores of
Sydney Cove would in time be peopled with a pushing
population of free citizens, attracted by the hopes of
acquiring wealth in a free and beautiful country. As
Darwin later on expressed in verse, he felt he could
say —
There shall broad streets their stately walls extend,
The circus widen and the crescent bend.
But circumstances in the end destroyed all Governor
Phillip’s plans and dashed his hopes to the ground,
almost within three years of the colony’s existence.
Writing in 1791, Captain Tench savs : “ This place
Sydney, has long been considered onlv a>' a depot for


stores. It exhibited nothing but a few sterile huts and
scattered gardens. Cultivation of the ground was
abandoned and all our strength transferred to Ro. e
Hill ” For a brief time, in fact, Parramatta eclipsed
the sea-port settlement and enjoyed the privilege of
being the principal town of the colony Most of the
officials and better off of the citizens had settled up the
river, leaving the soldiers in their and the seamy
portion of the community clustered around the Rocks.
This locality, where population was the thickest, al-
ready bore an evil reputation. 44 Brown Bear Lane ’ 5
and 4 4 Maori Lane 5 ’ were two of the most noted scenes
of riot in the whole settlement. Here crime was of
daily occurrence ; constables were beaten nightly,
and no one could pass the Rocks after dark without
hazard of being stripped and plundered. Where detec-
tion was feared the robbers did not hesitate at murder.
Some notion of what the value of city land was con-
sidered may be gathered from the following circum-
stances. Schoffer, the Dutch expert, sent out for the
cultivation of tobacco, and who has been termed the
father of sundowners, was given a grant of 50 acres of
land in what is now the very heart of the city. He
promptly 44 swapped ” it in a lump for 20 gallons of
rum. And a soldier who was awarded for his exem-
plary behaviour a grant of land near Wynyard Square,
made it over to the Crown again without even asking
for compensation. Before the end of this year the
first brick house in Australia, built as a residence for
Lieutenant-Governor Collins, was completed, Governor
Phillip still occupying his little stone cottage at the
corner of Bridge and Phillip Streets. With regard to
the main street leading from Dawes Point, and known
in the early days as High Street, it was just a track
leading to the brickfields, and remained as such until
its proclamation as a street in a Government and
general order dated October 6. 1810. This ran as
follows : — 44 George Street, the principal street in the
town, and leading through the middle of it, from Dawes
Point to the place near the brickfields, where it is
intended to erect the first toll-bar, being upwards of
one mile in length, and hitherto known alternately by
the names of High Street, Spring Row, and Sergeant-
Major’s Row, is now named George Street in honour
of our revered and gracious sovereign.” Near the
landing-place and in the vicinity of the site of the
commissariat stores subsequently erected in George
Street, were the first stone hospital, markets, marine
barracks, and prison of 1792. This last did away with
the old log gaol of 1789, and occupied the south-west
corner of Essex and George Streets which as early as
1837 had reverted to almost its pristine condition and
remained only a rubbish heap. On the sits of the
present Mariners’ Church was reared the residence of
Captain Piper, the second time naval officer in Sydney.
One of the first leases granted in the immediate
vicinity of the city, and yet not over it. was that on
the south side of the track which led out —beyond the
bridge that crossed Blackwattle Swamp —to Petersham
and Cook’s River. This consisted of thirty acres,
granted by Governor Phillip for a period of fourteen
years to Major Francis Grose, of the New South Wales
Corps, on September 29, 1792. This became known
as Grose’s farm. Other leases adjacent to the land
were granted to Lieutenant Thomas Laycock, N.S.W.
Corps, of 28 acres, and Major Foveaux, 30 acres. The
suburbs of Sydney had commenced to develop. Be-
fore these leases were granted the land had been part
of a Crown reserve of 400 acres. When the leases
lapsed 500 acres were granted to the Orphan Institu-
tion, in 1803, by Governor King, 220 acres of which
were surrendered to the Government on August 19,
1806, for a grant in the Cabramatta district. It was
on this land adjacent to Grose’s farm that the 73rd
Regiment, on landing in Sydney to displace the trouble-
some N.S.W. Corps, whose officers were nearly running
the colony, were marched to camp until the departure
of the N.S.W. Corps for England in 1810, there not
being sufficient barrack accommodation for two regi-
ments in Sydney at that period. Beyond Grose Farm,
along this Petersham track and on the same side, but
divided by a running stream, known as Johnston
Creek, which meandered through the site of the later
village of Kingston, came a grant of land acquired by
anothei officer of the N.S.W. Corps, Lieutenant-
Colonel Johnston for his intrepidity in following the
Castle Hill mutineers and bringing them to book.
Here his son, Mr. Robert Johnston, built his Annan-
dale residence, demolished only to give room to the
ruthless speculative builder only as late as 1906.
There was an avenue of Norfolk pines leading from the
gateway to the house, alongside of the famous oak,
which for long years afterwards was in use as a hanging
tree, and the property under its enterprising owner was
in 1832 considered one of the most complete farms in
the neighbourhood of Sydney.
Major Grose, who took the reins of government
in hand on the departure of Governor Phillip, lost no
time in commencing agricultural operations. In Oc-
tober, 1793, a number of convicts were set to work at
Petersham, where sixty acres of Government ground
were cleared of timber, twenty of which were sown
with Indian corn, Grose’s idea being to establish a
chain of farms between Sydney and Parramatta.
Whilst this work was proceeding, the infant city,
notwithstanding the temporary attractions of the rival
settlement of Parramatta, continued to grow. In
1793 it was to own a temporary church —erected, at
the expense of the Rev. Mr. Johnston, —of strong posts,
wattles, and plaster, on the east side of the cove, near
to what is now the corner of Hunter and Castlereagh
Streets. Not long after the completion of this rude
resort for worship it was replaced by a brick and stone
structure, erected by convict labour. Perhaps the
improved edifice came before civilisation was quite
prepared to greet it, as after a few years —about five-
it was ruthlessly set ablaze, and its woodwork all de-
stroyed. The more durable material was utilised to
fit up a store and residence a little behind the site of
the Bank of Australia, between Charlotte Place and
Jamieson Street, and this building appears to have
been the first brick house put up in Australia.
Woolloomooloo was the next direction in which
settlement gravitated—Walla-bah-mullah, a s the
aboriginals of the day termed, it which means in the
native language a young male kangaroo, or more pro-
perly speaking, a black male kangaroo. I he aborigi-
nals pointed out to the early officials that the land


lying between what we now call Rushcutters’ Bay,
Sydney Domain, Hyde Park, and the South Head
Road was the special haunts of this kind of marsupial.
The aboriginals held the black kangaroo in gieat es-
teem, and rarely killed any for food ; but the white
strangers made battues and killed them for food,
as the colonists were in a starving state. Complaints
were made to the British Government that the Port
Jackson aboriginals were driven from their happy
hunting-grounds, and then the Imperial Government
set apart Wullu-bah-mullah for the sole use and benefit
of the aboriginals. The native name has been cor-
rupted to Wullah-mullah, Walloomooloo, and to its
present name. About 1810 the cove nearest Garden
Island, after being called Garden Island Cove and
Palmer’s Cove assumed the name of Woolloomooloo
Bay, a name which can never be obliterated, as it is on
all the nautical charts. In 1793 Mr. John Palmer,
the commissary, was granted 170 acres surrounding
the bay. This land he called Woolamoola Farm, and
that name appears on his papers. Upon the waters of
a creek which ran past the present watch-house (at the
corner of \\ oolloomooloo and Riley Streets) Mr. Palmer
erected a ship-building yard. In the Colonial Secre-
tary’s register the name of the suburb is spelt
Woolamoola,” but in the plans of 1806 (in Bligh’s
time) the name is spelt 44 Walloomooloo.”
Palmer’s grant then deprived the poor aboriginals
of their Imperial grants of land, which comprised half
of Woolloomooloo and all of Potts-Point and Darling-
hurst. When Governor Macquarie assumed the Go-
vernment of New South Wales, in 1810, he called
upon an official to give up a large slice of land which
had been originally granted to a pensioner, as it was
an aboriginal reserve. In lieu of the land the official
was given a very valuable grant elsewhere. Mac-
quarie then proclaimed to the poor aboriginals that
the land was their territory for ever. In order to per-
petuate his wife’s name the Governor called the place
Henrietta Town, and to the bay facing its east side he
gave his wife’s second name, Elizabeth, the name it
bears at the present time. According to some Admi-
ralty charts, Henrietta Town takes in part of Woolloo-
mooloo and the best part of Darlinghurst. Governor
Macquarie, in or about 1810, built a township for the
inhabitants at Elizabeth Bay. He then erected huts,
boatsheds, and found boats for the aboriginals. In
1821 Macquarie left the aboriginals in happy posses-
sion of their reserve. W hen Sir Thomas Brisbane
arrived, in the same year, the aboriginals had been
neglected, and nearly all had disappeared. Some of
the officials told the new Governor the place would
make a splendid site for a madhouse or hospital for
insane. Brisbane fell in with this view, and set apart
the place facing Elizabeth Bay for the use of insane
persons only under Government keepers. When
Lieutenant-General Darling arrived, in 1825, he com-
pleted Governor Brisbane’s work, and heedless, or,
perhaps oblivious, of Hie fact that the aboriginals held
their reserve in perpetuity, he dispossessed them of
their homes, .and they were driven away.
Even in the mid-nineties of the eighteenth century
old Woolloomooloo was looked upon as a pleasant
place enough for residence. Palmer Street of to-dav
carries in its name a recollection of the time when a
too liberal Governor gave of the superfluity of Crown
lands at his disposal many acres here to Com-
missary Palmer, who laid it out as a farm, de-
limited by ditches and stone walls, and overlooked by
a somewhat barren hill crowned with windmills, and
reaching from old South Head Road (now Oxford
Street) to the bay. In a letter written by Lieutenant-
Governor Grose to Dundas in 1793, he says : “ I have
allotted to such officers as have asked 100 acres of
land. Commissary John Palmer asked, and again
asked, receiving in the following year an additional
70 acres.” A word or two about this early settler
may not be amiss. Arriving with the hist fleet as
purser of the “ Sirius,” he was appointed by Phillip
to be Commissary, in which position he prospered.
From ? return dated December 31, 1801, he was pos-
sessed of 1,070 acres, 900 acres of these being pur-
chased from settlers. He had on this land at Woola-
moola Farm 35 horses, 19 horned cattle, 25 goats,
360 hogs, 650 sheep, and 22 assigned servants. Among
the latter was the celebrated Margaret Catchpole who
arrived in the ship “ Nile,” December, 1801. and in
January following writes to her former mistress (Mrs.
Cobbold) in these words : “ Captain Sumpter gave me
a good character to the Governor, so that I was not
two days upon the stores, but was taken off them by
Mr. John Palmer, a gentleman of the highest respecta-
bility in the country.” Whatever the subsequent
career of this remarkable woman, all agree that her
first situation was under the roof of Commissary
Palmer’s house —the first erected in Woolloomooloo —
near the intersection of Palmer and William Streets.
But the bay was not then or for many years after so
strictly confined within its limits as now. Just as the
Tank Stream flowed up to the present site of the Post-
office, crossed by a bridge where is now the Exchange,
so did the tidal waters of Woolloomooloo Bay run up
a quarter of a mile further than they do now; while
somewhere near Sir John Young’s Crescent one arm
ran up to the neighbourhood of Woolloomooloo Street.
In Barry’s “ City of Sydney ’’ it is mentioned that
V «/«/«/
people used to fish from the windows of the houses
along the shore line.
The valley, however, between the old racecourse
and the windmill heights was too near the city to be
given up to cultivation. Population soon began to
find its way there in ever-increasing numbers, especially
when the aboriginals were dispossessed of their natural
haunts. The narrow little lanes —nestling beneath the
cliffs, and hiding away behind the piincipal streets as
the surveyors aligned them and the people built along
them —became in process of time a sort of Alsatia
for the criminal, and the very unfortunate.
These were the prehistoric times of the 64 domain
dosser,” who we have perpetuated even till to-day,
and who, it seems, will be ever of us. What “ the
Rocks ’’ district was in the old days for the western
and northern ends of Sydney, Woolloomooloo became
for the eastern, and the new and evil fame it acquired
in the short and simple annals of the police eclipsed
the respectable associations which had begun to grow
up there, and now cling after the evils have been ex-
terminated. It was too early for the gent whose roof


has to be the canopy of heaven and his bedding the
back number of the Sydney Morning Herald. Not-
withstanding the vicissitudes of life engendered by the
uncertainty of the times, everyone at least was housed.
Kettle, writing of the end of 1793, tells us that the
town at this time was of no fewer than 160 huts and
five barracks for the soldiers.
Beyond the first burial ground, where the Town
Hall now stands, there was little more than a narrow
track down a steep incline —steeper in those days —to
the brickfields, which in 1793 were supplying bricks
for the building of the barracks in George Street, the
bricks being conveyed in carts, containing either 700
tiles or 300 bricks, drawn by 12 men, waggons of
timber drawn by 24 men. The military barracks
extended from Charlotte Place on the west side, to
With a constant traffic between Sydney and
Parramatta it was only to be expected that settlement
should form at suitable sites within easy distance of
the route. Long before the formation of the new road
to Liverpool, 1814, little centres of population had
sprung up on either side, extending even beyond that
township, which even to the coming of Governor Mac-
quarie was nothing more than a struggling hamlet
awaiting his energy to develop into a town, then of
some importance. A grant of land of 48 acres given
to Nicholas Bayley, of the New South Wales Corps,
created Ashfield, so called on account of a massacre bv
•/
the aborigines of six white men, who, too venturesome,
had been burnt on their own camp fires, westward of
the parish of Petersham. Bayley’s estate, known as
Dobroyde, passed into the possession of Simeon Lord,
King Street, 1850, looking West from Castlereagh Street.
Barrack Street, and were long known as Foveaux’s
Barracks. For many years after settlement had
reached the spot, this portion of the town was known
as the village of Brickfield. In 1829, even later, at
the foot of the hill near Hay Street, the ground was
swampy, caused by the creeks which ran through
Belmore Park (now merged into the grounds of the
new railway station) and its close proximity into the
head of Darling Harbour. Cribb’s paddock, which
extended from Hay Street to the toll-gates were sold
back to the Government for nine heifers. The burial
ground area was fenced in about the year 1804, and
afterwards a brick wall with stone coping was placed
around. The place had then gone to decay, but until
the foundations of the Town Hall were laid in 1868
there remained a number of graves in partial preser-
vation.
and adjoined that of 800 acres belonging to W. H.
Moore, which extended to the eighth milestone out of
Sydney. Canterbury Farm, granted to Robert Camp-
bell in 1793, was just outside the suburb of Canterbury
and not far from the present racecourse. It consisted
of 177 acres, on which wheat was grown as early as
1795. The Rev. Richard Johnston also had a farm in
the vicinity, where a crop of wheat had been harvested
in 1793. To the east lay Summer Hill, originally
called Sunning Hill Estate, and thus marked in many
old documents of the period. It lay between the
Parramatta and Liverpool Roads, and adjoined Dob-
royde.
Several tracks led to farms lying between George's
River and Cook’s River, in Salt Pan Creek and the
upper part of George’s River, in a perfectly wild coun-
try, where later on a large tract of land was granted


to the Church and School Estate. On the north lay
the Gflebe Estate, originally donated to the Church,
and subsequently repurchased. Through this estate
ran another track, which did not join the one leading
to Parramatta till between the ninth and tenth mile-
stones, at a little beyond what later on was known as
Powell’s bridge. Banks Town, named after Sir Joseph
Banks, dated from 1793. On the north was Dog
Trap track, now called Woodville Road, 44 miles from
Becket’s bridge Lieutenant Shortland, the discoverer
of the Hunter River, had two grants of land were Dog
Trap and Liverpool tracks joined and crossed Pros-
pect Creek. A mile beyond here in after years Bow-
ler’s bridge was to cross this creek, a branch of the
George’s River, the wooden structure originally built
being replaced in Sir Richard Bourke’s time by the
first stone bridge erected in the colony. Three-quarters
of a mile from Liverpool lie the Cowpastures, one of
the oldest settlements in Australia, the first explorers
of which appear to have been two bulls and five cows
that were lost from the first fleet. With the discovery
seven years afterwards of their progeny, the Cow-
pastures settlement, the farthest then in regular com-
munication with Sydney, was initiated.
The year 1796 witnessed the first attempt to
introduce some sort of order into the settlements.
The authorities had all the houses in Sydney and Parra-
matta numbered. Both towns, too, were divided into
four districts, the inhabitants of which, under a gene-
ral order, were to meet and from their members elect
thirty of the most respectable citizens, who were to be
approved by the Governor, and to serve in the ensuing-
year as watchmen for the purpose of enforcing proper
regulations in their respective divisions. Not until
the following year were these custodians replaced by
an officially organised body of police. Then the watch-
men were replaced by watches of three persons —one
principal and two subordinates, —selected from con-
victs whose conduct had been unexceptionable since
their landing. The first windmill was erected in New
South Wales in August, 1796, and it was as late as
October, 1878, when the last of the Sydney windmills
-situate on the South Head Road, near the Waverley
toll-bar —was levelled to the ground.
The following year saw the first steps towards the
establishment of markets introduced. Before this in
the settlement of the colony the settlers had no mar-
kets, and their trading was carried on direct with the
Government ; but on June 10, 1797, Governor Hunter
recommended that a store should be established for
the retail sale of merchandise, for which payment in
wheat might be taken. When Governor Bligh
assumed office this was replaced by the first public
market established in Sydney on a space near the
Queer;’s wharf —a site afterwards monopolised as a
stand for licensed drays.
Despatches were sent to the Governor (Hunter) in
1779 to cause a register of all ships entering and clear-
jno- the harbour to be instituted. This was the first
step taken towards the establishment of Custom
House duties and port regulations. The first imposi-
tion of import duties commenced in August, 1800,
being designed to raise a fund for the purpose of
furnishing a gaol in Sydney. This work had been
carried on at first by voluntary assessment levied
on the inhabitants of Sydney and the settlers gener-
ally ; but this was found inadequate for the purpose.
The gaol was erected on Gallows Hill, in Sussex Street,
being bounded by Essex, Harrington and George Streets.
In it was the gallows, this instrument of death being
visible from almost any part of the vicinity, and morbid
curiosity almost daily prompted numbers of men,
women and children to gaze on the terrible tragedy
of unfortunate men, and women too, suddenly
launched into eternity, unlit.
Before the year 1800 the popularity of Parra-
matta as the leading settlement of the infant colony
had waned, and the wealthier members of the com-
munity weie beginning to live in such state as the
times permitted in their harbour home. One of the
oldest of these properties was Yaucluse, acquired by
Captain Piper, and later on by the great Australian
statesman, William Charles Wentworth, who was
buried from there in 1873. Yaucluse, however, had
earlier historic associations The property marked the
site of the house of a well-known Irishman —famous in
his day—associated with the unhappy troubles of ’9B,
Sir Henry Hayes, who came out as a political prisoner,
and was shortly after his arrival emancipated by the
Crown. Yaucluse was then a hotbed of snakes, and to
get rid of them the genial baronet resorted to the
strange reined)" of importing 500 tons of genuine Irish
soil. He then dug a trench around his residence, and
the ceremony of filling in the soil was witnessed by a
large party of ladies and gentlemen from Sydney on
March 17, 1800.
When Governor Macquarie landed some twenty
years after the founding of New South Wales he found
the wide streets of Phillip’s creation had dwindled
down to narrow and crooked lanes. An idea of the
width and appearance of these can be gleaned from an
order issued by Governor King in 1813 regulating the
width of footpaths. Regulation: “That each in-
habitant compleat the pathway as far as his premises
extend not less than five feet in width, making a drain
to receive the water from the road, and to bring the
road to a level where it is hollow, raising it by a gradual
ascent to the center.” In 1814 King had a return
made, which gives a good idea of the extent of the
young township and the distribution of population —
the inhabitants within the limits of Svdnev including
« • c
the Brickfields. Cockle Bay and Farm Cove, outlying
districts. The houses in Sydney, inclusive of the
military district, numbered 420, and those in the
military district were 160 ; around the Brickfields
fhere were 72 ; at Cockle Bay, 15 ; and at Farm Cove,
8 ; making a gross total of 678. The number of in-
habitants, excepting the military residing in the bar-
racks, amount to 2,100. This return was dated March
61, 1804. King made several efforts to improve the
appearance of the straggling settlement intimating in
another general order that if persons with garden plots
did not cultivate them the ground would be taken from
them and given to more industrious occupants ; and to
check what tie viewed as a prevailing disposition of
laziness, he ordered that all discovered lounging about
the street must be compelled to fill in the approaches
to the bridge which was then in course of construction


over the Tank Stream. But in the end he had to give
this policy up, as he found it easier to expel the drone
from the hive than to reclaim him. There was, after
all, some excuse for laziness when even the private
traders knocked off business at 3 p.m.
The price of commodities gives a very fair idea
of what living in Sydney meant in those days of 1806.
%/ »• %/
A notice in the Gazette of that year states : —“ The
assize of bread for the week ended March 14, 1806. is
as follows : Wheaten. lOd. ; household bread, 7d. per
loaf, to weigh 2 lbs. 1 oz. new, and 2 lbs. when one
day old. Current rates for tea, 16s. to 30s. per lb. ;
sugar, Is. 6d. per lb. ; rice, 6d. per lb. ; fresh butter,
6s. per lb. ; fresh beef and pork, 25., and mutton,
Is. lid. per lb. ; salt beef, 14d. to IBd., and salt pork,
2s. per lb. ; English soap, 2s. to 2s. 6d. per lb. ; colo-
nial soap, Is. to Is. 6d. per lb., white thread, 14d.,
coloured thread, Bd. to lOd. per skein ; spirits, £3 to
£3 10s. per gallon ; porter, 16s. per gallon ; port wine,
16s. per bottle ; tobacco, 20s. to 245. per lb ; coarse
white calicoes, ss. per yard ; English prints, ss. 6d. to
10s. per yard ; striped muslins, 4s. 6d. per yard.”
Markets were established August 23, 1801, by
Government and general order, stated to be in the
vicinity of Hospital wharf, afterwards known as King’s
wharf, then Queen’s wharf, close to the landing-place,
and the market was to be open at 7 o’clock in the
morning, when everything had been landed. This
market extended from the “end paling of Daniel
McKay’s garden, in the middle of High Street”
(George Street towards the Parade). On February 4,
1809, another order was issued by Governor Bligh
abolishing these markets, as being inconvenient,
and Lieutenant-Governor Patterson directed that the
old Parade Ground, which was situated at the foot of
Church Hill, where Charlotte Place now joins George
Street, should be from March 1, 1809, appropriated
for that purpose, the use of the old market ground
being forbidden after that date. This market not
only became obnoxious to the military quarter, but
also too confined for the sale of produce and stock,
and when Governor Macquaiie arrived, one of his first
acts was to cause the removal of it to the site now
occupied by the Queen Victoria Markets.
With the arrival of Governor Macquarie, who
assumed office on January 1, 1810, the building of
Sydney may be said to have commenced. Nothing
had been done in the way of laying out the town pre-
viously. In almost all instances the roads were
merely bush tracks, winding in and out, with huts and
dwellings erected at the will of the owner, in utter
disregard to street alignment. On October 6, 1810,
Macquarie issued a Government and general order with
regard to the laying out of the town and naming the
streets of Sydney. George Street was named in honour
of the reigning sovereign ; Pitt Street after the great
statesman ; Castlereagh Street after Lord Castlereagh ;
York, Clarence, Kent and Sussex Streets in honour of
the dukes bearing these names ; Phillip Street, Mac-
quarie, Bligh, Hunter and King Streets after the first
governors ; Goulburn Street, after the first Colonial
Secretary, and Elizabeth Street in honour of Lady
Macquarie. The Governor then divided Sydney into
five districts. The first district extended from Dawes
Point, on the north, to Surrey Lane, on the south, and
from Sydney Cove, on the east, to Cockle Bay, on the
west. The second division extended from Surrey Lane,
on the north, to the military barracks, on the south,
and from Sydney Cove, on the east, to Cockle Bay, on
the west. The third division, from Macquarie Place
on the north, to the north side of King Street, on the
south, and from Hyde Park, on the east, to George
Street, on the west. The fourth division, from the
south side of King Street, on the.north, to Park Street,
on the south, and from Hyde Park, on the east, to
Cockle Bay, on the west ; and the fifth division, from
Park Street and the burying-ground, on the north, to
the southern extremity of the Brickfields, on the
south : and from Hyde Park and Surry Hills farm, on
the east, to Cockle Bay, on the west.
Up to this point York Street had been the main
street leading into the country, but it ceased to be
upon Macquarie’s regular formation of George Street,
which then became the main artery of the city. Pre-
vious to this period the whole of that portion of the
city bounded by a line now formed by George Street
on the east, Druit Street on the south, and a line ex-
Clyde Court, Millers’ Point.
tending from Hunter Street to the waters of Darling
Harbour on the north, comprised what was called the
military district, and no civilians were allowed within
its limits —a regulation which continued in force until
Macquarie abolished it. Sussex Street appears to have
been the main artery for produce trading. It is one of
the oldest quarters of the town, and from its earliest
beginnings always indulged in variegated architecture
for its warehouses and produce stores. The street was
formed and proclaimed at three different periods, the
first part from Erskine Street to Goulburn Street, the
second part from Goulburn Street to Hay Street, and
lastly from Margaret Place to Erskine Street.
Macquarie was essentially an advocate of progress,
and, although he may have displayed a partiality to
self-glorification in the monuments of his energy that
he raised upon pediments of bricks and mortar, there
is this stands to his credit, that when he came he found
the town of Sydney composed of mean homes or huts,
scattered about or huddled together on no particular
plan, and when he left, under his hand there was a fair
city, with well-ordered streets and handsome public
buildings. One of his earlier ordinances sets forth that


no person whatsoever was to erect any houses in Syd-
ney, whether on leasehold ground or otherwise, with-
out the Governor’s permission, obtained through an
application to the Crown Surveyor; “ a non-compli-
ance with this order will subject the proprietor to have
his house or houses pulled down and to forthwith
incur the Governor’s displeasure.” The frown of this
colonial Jove may appear laughable to-day, but it was
highly salutary in those roaring days of rough and
readiness ; and had the regulation never lost its force
Sydney would not be the city of misassorted archi-
tecture that it now is. Wharf accommodation for the
expansion of the shipping, good roads ensuring en-
hanced facilities with the interior, and public offices in
accord with the growing importance of the colony
alike stand to his credit, and as a builder he accom-
plished more substantial good than all his predecessors
combined. The work was solid, and there are no. lack
of evidences of this enduring to to-day. The stone-
work of such of his structures as remain is as good as
the day it was built, and would put to shame much of
our modern work. For instance, there is one of the
circular bastions at Dawes Point, then one of the lungs
of the city, where an old-time gun was mounted, which
could be so worked as to command the town or the
harbour. Then, again, the oldest building in the
neighbourhood of Circular Quay—if not in Sydney —
that gloomy mass known as the Ordnance Stores,
four storeys high and constructed under Macquarie’s
personal supervision by convict labour. Each storey
has to-day quite visible the mark, in paint or cut, the
former chieflv, of each convict worker, though he
cannot be identified. There are two distinct buildings,
the one fronting George Street being the first put up.
On the front the inscription is still legible : “ Erected
in the year 1812. Lachlan Macquarie, Esq., Governor.
G.R.” This site had been originally granted to the
historic Mrs. Reibey, but the Governor, wishing to
build this store close to the King’s wharf, induced that
masterful ladv to exchange another site near the Fire
%J
Brigade station, if not the actual one.
It will be recollected that in the spot indicated,
some twenty years ago were two elaborate houses.
Over the door of one were the letters “ M.R. 1810,’
and on the other “ I.N. 1812,” the former being Mrs.
Reibey, and the latter Isaac Nichols, wherein the latter
carried on the postal business of the country, Mr.
Nichols being the first Postmaster-General of Australia.
From these stores was a low, dwarf stone wall, which
now faces the entrance to Circular Quay, and a rocky
drop of about 30 feet. Isaac Nichols’ store, which
stood on the site of the building erected in 1812, caught
fire in February, 1801, and when he was ascending to
the roof with a bucket of water to quench the flames
he lost his balance and fell into the yard, “ without
sustaining much personal injury. Isaac thanks the
Lieutenant-Governor, through the medium of the
Sydnev Gazette, for the assistance rendered to him by
a party of guards during the fire.” A line may b“
added anent the postal charges when the Post-office in
Australia was first established as a public institution :
For every letter delivered from the office, English or
foreign, the fee was Bd. ; for every parcel not exceeding
20 lbs., Is. fid. ; those exceeding 20 lbs. in weight, 3s. ;
for every colonial letter from or to any part of the
territory, 4d. ; soldiers’ letters or those addressed to
their wives, Id.”
In May, 1811, the eastern and western portions
of Sydney were connected by the bridge thrown over
the Tank Stream at Bridge Street, a piece of work
which engaged many street “ loafers ” as well as the
Government workmen, and took a very considerable
time to complete. Fort Macquarie, which under the
edict of Mr. O’Sullivan had to make way for the prosaic
tram-sheds, on Circular Quay, was completed in 1812.
Next to Pinchgut, before Fort Denison was erected, it
was the landmark of the harbour. A square redoubt,
it was sexagon in shape, having a raised sort of cir-
cular bastion at each angle for the purpose of support-
ing a gun working on a traversing carriage. The fort
was built on an isolated ridge, separated from the
mainland by a channel, through which boats passed,
the place being known in the early days as Benelong
Point. Later on the channel was filled in and a per-
manent road formed. With Fort Macquarie were
something over three acres reserved by the Imperial
Government, with other properties of a similar char-
acter, amongst them being Dawes Battery, \ ictoria
Barracks, Newcastle Barracks and Lady Macquarie’s
Chair. When political freedom came the Government
agreed to give up Garden Island and put up work'
shops, buildings, &c., thereon in return for these reser-
vations.
The road to South Head was completed in 1813,
and a public notice, dated March 13, 1813, announced
that as this highway was being cut up by waggons, &c.,
using it to avoid toll-fees, all traffic for the future would
have to pass through the turnpike erected on the boun-
dary of Mr. Palmer’s land, at the south-eastern ex-
tremity of Hyde Park —the same toll-dues being ex-
acted as those on the road to Parramatta. Two years
previous to the erection of the toll-bar —on October
5, 1811 the public were ordered to take notice
that 1,000 acres for common pasturage of all cattle
belonging to the inhabitants of Sydney had been set
apart by Governor Macquarie bounded on the west-
side by 28 chains to Surry Hill farm, and the south
line of 97 chains, the north side by the road leading
from the Sydney to South Head. Moore Park now
covers a portion of the site of that common. On
February 27, 1813, Governor Macquarie threatened to
levy an annual tax on the inhabitants of the town if
they did not take necessary measures to preserve the
roads in order and repair the bridges, at the same time
recommending to the inhabitants William Roberts,
“who had rendered much satisfaction in repairing
George Street.” This recommendation admits of a
little amplifying. Roberts, the father of the old racing
Roberts family, took a contract from the Government
for the formation of George Street from Charlotte
Place to the bottom of Brickfield Hill ; this being the
farthest point that could be reached along the existing
route at that time, as there was an arm of the harbour
running up what is now Campbell Street from the old
“ Beehive.” The consideration agreed upon being so
many convicts to do the labour and so many gallons ot
rum.


The road to the South Heads in those days ex-
tended from the south-east corner of Hyde Park, via
Oxford Street—so called about 1874—through what
was known as the Surry Hill Estate of 100 acres,
granted to John Palmer, whose house has been already
referred to, and some of whose family were buried in
a vault he erected at the corner of Forbes and Wool-
loomooloo Streets. On this property, which after-
wards passed to Edward Riley—of the firm of Rilev
and Walker, —thence to the Venerable Archdeacon
Scott, was a large stone quarry, the stone of which
was utilised for building Darlinghurst Gaol. For
many years on the south side stood the solitary resi-
dence of Mr. Cavenagh, some distance from the main
road. This was in the vicinity of the gaol, on the
south side of the road, and not far from a track (Botany
Road), 2f miles along which was a flat used for training
horses, now the site of Randwick Racecourse. Passing
Darlinghurst Gaol, northern side of the route.
Juniper Hall, afterwards Ormond House, the home for
awhile of Attorney-General Dr Kinchela, and now the
abode of the State children. King George’s Mount
was close to it, and on the south was a long declining
mass known in those days as Mount Tom ah, at the
highest part of which G. M. C. Bowen reserved a grant
for planting a vineyard. Beyond Juniper Hall, and
situated at the foot of what is now Cascade Street so
called from falls in the vicinity in those days was
Underwood’s distillery, a portion of which is now
employed as a rubber factory. Turning in a north-
easterly direction, the road to Point Piper was passed,
beyond which, at a distance oi 3| miles from the city,
afterwards were Levey’s gardens, and on an adjacent
rise, now the site of the Waverley Tea Gardens, was an
octagonal obelisk, known as “ Levey’s Tower,” which
commanded a view of the surrounding country. The
track to this structure followed on the Great and Little
Coogee, and was much frequented by the wood-cutters.
Government House from the Botanical Gardens.
which was first used by prisoners January, 1841, there
was a road afterward, known as Woolloomooloo Road,
and now Victoria Street. It was constructed at the
expense of the owners of several properties, and is
found in some of the old plans marked as “ private
road.” Allotments had been given to civil officers
and others along this road in consideration that they
erected residences on approved plans within three
years. Beyond, and on the same side of the gaol, were
the Government brick kilns in 1830. At the corner of
Hopewell Street as late as 1869 there stood a toll-bar.
Proceeding along Oxford Street to the site of Victoria
Barracks, then unoccupied, a stream which ran into
Rushcutters’ Bay was crossed, almost at its source, by
a bridge, not far from which a few years later rose
West’s mill, the stream running through his land.
This property was known as Barcom Glen, beside
which lav the vallev of Lacroza. At the corner of
what is now Begg Street Mr. Robert Cooper built
T
Near the rise Mr. Barnett Levey built Waverley House,
and on the site of the present Paul Street, Waverley
Crescent, which consisted of three cottages, built in
the style of such tenements in England at that time.
Bellevue Hill was adjacent, and beyond, on the right,
the track lay to Bondi Bay, where in those times fine
specimens of ferns and palms —known as the Zamia,
and called by the natives “ Burwan ” —were to be
found. Cabbage tree or fan palms abounded, besides
many and varied hues of native flowers. At the 44
miles distance, and on the south side of the road, was a
racecourse, abandoned owing to the swampy nature of
the ground before 1830, when posts only remained to
mark the spot. Up hill and down dale went the track,
now through virgin country until, driving along what
is now the site of the Bondi Golf Links, the Macquarie
lighthouse was reached. This route endured until
1831, when the Government permitted Cooper and
Levey to construct a new road through Point Piper


Estate, meeting another fresh line of communication
from Park Street, and connecting with the South Head
Road near the sixth mile.
The following year (1814) saw the first section -
Sydney to Liverpool —of the “Great South Road’’
completed by the same William Roberts afore referred
to. It was opened on February 22 by Governor Mac-
quarie and Lieutenant-Governor G. Mode, Lieutenant-
Colonel of the 46th Regiment, then stationed in Syd-
ney, and the Governor’s suite. The barriers at the
bridges, which had remained until then, were imme-
diately removed to make way for his Excellency’s
carriage, and it is on record that the Governor ex-
pressed much satisfaction with “ the general line and
performance of that important work, being particularly
struck with the appearance of Moore’s bridge, which
is at once bold, strong, and workmanlike,’’ extending
across “a wide, steep and beautiful reach, named
At Moore’s bridge a toll was erected in February,
1814. Strangelv enough, the first victim of a “ bail-
up ’’ along this new road was one of Roberts (the
contractor) servants, who, robbed of his property, was
treated with much cruelty and driven into the bush.
In September of the same year complaints were made
by the settlers along the Great South Road of being
“ bailed up and robbed, mostly by a single footpad,
armed with a musket, and his face covered with a silk
handkerchief.’ ’
In 1817 the south-west corner of George Street
was a cowyard, which fronted George Street, and
next but one to which was a three-roomed public-
house. There was yet no Pitt Street, properly formed,
at the back of the eastern side of George Street. Six
blocks from the Australia Inn, then the fashionable
hotel, and almost opposite Essex Street, were the
premises of the old Sydney Gazette, now flourishing
Sydney from Old Point Piper Road.
Cook’s River,” miles from Sydney. There were
other bridges of inferior workmanship —notably Bow-
ler’s bridge, at the 17 mile post, across Prospect Creek.
The road from where it branches off on the Parramatta
Road, 5| miles from Sydney, to its termination at
Liverpool, is 19-| miles, the whole distance of which the
Governor drove in his carriage. The road “ leading
thus,” states the Sydney Gazette, “ to the fertile settle-
ment on George’s River, will render incalculable bene-
fits to the settlers, thereby enabling them to send their
various produce to markets by a safe and expeditious
line of conveyance, instead of, as heretofore, harassing
their cattle and breaking their carts through the rug-
ged and intricate passes of the bush.” The road was
spoken of as likewise to be of great advantage to the
settlers of Airds, Appin and Bringelly, on the river
Nepean, by rendering their distances from Sydney
several hours shorter and in many degrees better than
the “ present ” road through Parramatta,
under the enjoyment of a Government monopoly,
but soon to stand or fall upon the merits of its compe-
tition with other more advanced journals. The site
is now occupied by the present Bulletin offices, and
formerly was one of the sites of the Sydney Morning
Herald offices. From the Post Office to King Street
was an historic corner, and on the site of Messrs.
Waters’ present premises was the old residence of
Captain A. F. Kemp, who combined the duties of
military officer and trader very greatly to his own
advantage. The star of the White Horse tavern has
long since set in a wave of infamy, its last proprietor
being no less than a South Coast member of Parlia-
ment, but the site of the Strand Arcade of to-day
about marks its position.
The foundation of St. Andrew’s, the Anglican
Cathedral was laid in 1818 by Governor Macquarie,
but the original plans for a building twice as large as
the present splendid structure encroached upon


George Street, and the original foundation stone had
to lie removed in 1887. The same year 1818) the
obelisk in Macquarie Place —the site ol which some
historians believe to be the precise spot whereon Cap-
tain Phillip read his commission as Governor, and
good advice to his very much mixed community —was
erected, and inscribed as follows : —“ This obelisk was
erected in Macquarie Place in 1818 to record that all
public roads leading to the interior of the colony are
measured from it. Lachlan Macquarie, Esq.,
Governor.” On the opposite side of the stone
“ Principal roads : Distance from Sydney to Bathurst,
137 miles ; from Sydney to Windsor, 35| miles ; to
Parramatta, 15J miles ; to Liverpool, 20 miles ; to
Macquarie Tower at South Head, 7 miles ; to the
North Head of Botany Bay, 14 miles.” Not a long
list of principal roads truly, but yet, with the excep-
tion of the Parramatta highway, all the work of this
energetic vice-regal builder. Henceforth from this
landmark all distances in the colony were measured-
and still are : the first mile within the city of Sydney
being marked at the corner of George and Liverpool
Streets, and the second at Newtown Road. The
ancient obelisk was very shaky for many years, until
in Jubilee year the Government put in a new foun-
dation, which has given at least the appearance of
stability to the overgrown milestone.
The year 1819 saw the second large Anglican
Church in New South Wales—St. James’, King Street —
erected of brick upon stone foundations The design
is altogether of that character which distinguishes all
the public buildings commenced under Governor
Macquarie’s rule. lonic pillars, carrying heavy pedi-
ments, mark it from more modern ecclesiastical styles
and give the church a rather ponderous appearance.
A very lofty steeple, surmounted after the fashion of
St. Paul’s. London, by a ball and cross, points out the
location of St. James’ from every part of the city and
harbour. On June 4. 1819, were completed the
Hyde Park barracks, situated at the eastern end of
King Street, and intended by the Governor to become
the principal convict depot in the colony. Subse-
quently they came into use as the female immigration
depot, and later on again passed into the hands of the
military. The Benevolent Asylum, facing George
Street, and opposite the old Redfern railway station,
is another reminder of Macquarie’s paternal rule, it
being established for the relief of indigent persons and
the care of destitute children of tender years. The
most reliable record concerning this establishment
states that in the year 1819, “ by advice of his Excel-
lency Governor Macquarie, first patron of the society,’ ’
a suitable plain building near the new turnpike house,
with other conveniences for the accommodation of
fifty or sixty persons, was erected for relieving the
poor, aged, and distressed. In 1861 Government took
possession of the building, and then it was that the
female inmates were removed to Hyde Park. At the
angle of George and Pitt Streets, a whilom boundary of
the city, the pikeman levied toll at the gate just re-
ferred to, and earned his wages from peripatetic kine,
chariots, and beasts of burden.
Back once more to “ the Rocks ” in the years
when grass grew in George Street and lights, mostly
oil lamps, were few and far between. This locality
now contained all the heterogeneous constituents of
Australian society. At the lowest rung of the ladder
were the convicts, who, existing by mendacity or rob-
bery, made the Rocks to Sydney what St. Giles ever
has been to London. Still in the midst of this bed ol
infamy one crime which is so common to-day was very
rare. A gentleman who had been lor many years a
magistrate in Sydney, giving evidence before a com-
mittee of the House of Commons in 1819, said that he
recollected only one instance of child murder, and that-
created horror and surprise throughout the territory.
Cunningham, in his history of “ the Rocks,” written
about the year 1820 and published some years later,
speaks of the inhabitants of that locality in anything
but complimentary terms. “ Rows upon rows of neat
cottages present themselves, overlooked by the com-
manding position of Fort Phillip with the signal and
telegraph appendages. The position of the town to
the right is best known by the name of the Rocks,
from the ridue whereon it is built, being nothing more
0 . . .
than masses of white sandstone, often rising in suc-
cessive layers like steps and stairs from the bottom to
the top of the ridge. This is considered St. Giles, and
the division of the town to the left the St. James, por-
tion of Sydney. Most of the superior citizens inhabit
the latter, the lower classes chiefly inhabit the former,
though the Rocks may boast of many handsome
houses, with highly respectable inmates.” In Mackle-
hose’s work, known as ” Picture of Sydney and Stran-
gers’ Guide to New South Wales,” published ten years
later, the same opinion of the Rocks and the inhabit-
ants thereof seems to prevail. Windmill Street is so
called from its being the first line of communication
between the Rocks and windmills on Millers’ Point, in
the vicinity of Darling Harbour. ‘‘ Several streets be-
tween George and Princes Streets are not only so pre-
cipitously steep, but are also so completely over-run
with filth, discharged from the upper streets, to which
they act as a kind of common sewer, that they are
seldom passed through —persons generally travelling a
good distance round rather than encounter the abomin-
able stench which pervades the lanes and alleys here
referred to.’ ’
But the Rocks was not the only spot where the
undesirable element of the community congregated.
Woolloomooloo had already acquired a dubious noto-
riety, and the reputation of the purlieus around Bar-
rack and York Streets, on the harbour side, were cer-
tainly not savoury. At Barrack Street corner, imme-
diately facing the military guard-house, was a tavern
of doubtful repute, bearing the sign of the ‘ ‘ Crown
and Kettle.” Further along York Street, at Market-
Street corner, where Saber & Sons’ warehouse was
built later on, was situated one of the queerest as well
as most notorious taverns of olden days, kept in busi-
ness by the dregs of society. Here the ‘ ‘ Johnny
Ward ” element had its headquarters, and it was no
infrequent thing for a couple of hundred of the aged,
blind, lame, and other unfortunates of both sexes to be
congregated in and around the building at one time.
The notorious “ rum hospital,” already fully de-
scribed elsewhere, and the court-house, still in use
have also to be put down to the credit of Governor


Macquarie’s energy, and it was during flu' last com-
plete year of his office that the first St. Mary’s Roman
Catholic Cathedral, in College Street, was commenced
by the Rev. Father J. J. Therry upon a site superior to
that enjoyed by any other religious edifice in Sydney.
It did duty until 1865, when it was destroyed by fire ;
a temporary structure, hastily erected, was demolished
in a similar manner in 1869, and to day St. Mary’s
Cathedral yet awaits completion.
Building and road-making were bv no means the
O o v
only matters engrossing Macquarie’s attention ; his
active mind took in everything connected with the public
and private life of the colony, and nothing escaped his
attention. A scale of fees for the maritime trade and
duties on imports were established. For entry to or
clearance from the Hawkesbury was 4s. ; to and from
Norfolk Island and Newcastle, 10s. ; to the fisheries
in Port Jackson harbour shall be limited to four,
licensed by the police superintendent at 10s. each, to
ply between the hours of daylight and 9 p.m. Water-
men were not to exact more than their prescribed fare
and to take fares in rotation in a fair manner. No shore
boat after 9 p.m. to remain alongside any vessel in the
L O
harbour, and all passengeis to be landed at the Hospital
wharf under a penalty of 21s. Two years on another
general order enacted that no boats were to land on
Garden Island without the Governor’s permission ; nor
to land in Farm Cove, except at Benelong Point ; nor
to be in Cockle Bay nor Farm Cove after sunset, under
penalty of forfeiture. That these regulations and
rates did not prove inimical to the expansion of the
port is in a measure shown in the fact that between
1810 and 1822—Macquarie’s term of office—the total
annual port dues increased from £B,OOO to £30.000, or
A View of King Street in 1853, East from Pitt Street.
or to the settlements at the South Sea Islands, 10s. ;
and for the naval officer’s clerk there was an additional
fee of 2s. in the case of each arrival and departure.
Duties were imposed on ships importing cargoes from
any portion of the world —the manufactures of Great
Britain alone excepted —of 5 per cent, ad valorem on
the amount of their respective invoices. On every
gallon of spirits landed 3s. was charged : on every
gallon of wine, 9d. ; and the wharfage on each bale
was 6d. Of these fees the naval officer received as his
emolument a minimum of 5 per centum. The
wharfinger’s fee on each bale, package, or cask landed
or shipped was 3d. ; the metage on coals per ton, 2s. 6d.;
and for every thousand feet of timber, 2s. Boats
plying within the heads or about the coast without a
license were forfeited under a regulation dated October
10. 1810 ; and it was further ordered that ferry-boats
thereabouts, per annum. These import rates endured
until 1833. when the port of Sydney was declared a
free port by the Lords of the Admiralty, and foreign
nations were allowed to land goods and warehouse
goods for exportation without any charge.
One of the first acts on the arrival of Lieutenant-
General Darling, in 1825, was to dispossess the abori-
ginals of their reserve at Elizabeth Bay, and the claims
set up in favour of the site being reserved for a lunatic
asylum were pushed aside. According to the official
plans the land was parcelled out amongst the Gover-
nor’s staff and high judicial functionaries. It was the
commencement of Potts Point in the making. Those
who participated were : Sir John Wylde, Dr. H. G.
Douglass (Clerk of the Council and Commissioner of the
Courts of Request), Mr. Jas. Busby (Government
Mineral Surveyor), Mr, A, B, Sparke, Judge (John)


Stephen (father of Sir Alfred Stephen), the Attorney-
General (A. M. Baxter), the Colonial Treasurer (Win-
Balcombe), Judge James Dowling, and Mr. Alex.
Macleay (the Colonial Secretary) who secured to him-
self a grant of 58 acres, all the land in Elizabeth Bay.
The grants were signed by Governor Darling, and it is
very doubtful whether he knew that he was granting
to private individuals Crown lands set apart in per-
petuity for the unfortunate aboriginals. The grants
absorbed half of Woolloomooloo and all of Darlinghurst,
and even five acres in the latter place was awarded
Deputy Commissary-General James Laidley. In 1831
the grant given to Sir James Dowling was subdivided
into streets and building allotments. The streets
named by the Judge were Victoria, Brougham, Dow-
ling, Judge, Forbes, and Bourke Streets, Woolloo-
mooloo. Cockle Bay henceforth was to be known by
the more euphemistic name of Darling Harbour.
Sydney w T as now approaching the completion of
the thirty-eighth year of its existence, but the progress
of growth was still very slow. King Street was yet
the centre of the residential and business portions of
the town, and George Street awaited the advent of the
paving slab. A set of lamps for its illumination, placed
diagonally at 50 yards distance, caused a writer of the
period to remark that “ by reason of the whiteness of
our houses and the clearness of our sky, they effect
illumination equalling some of our best lighted London
streets.” The large garden and timber-yard in Lower
George Street, belonging to the Commissariat Depart-
ment, which stood at this time, was sold in lots in
1830 for the purpose of widening George Street. The
deficiency of the earlier records of the alienations of
the land by the Crown in the town of Sydney had
caused utter disregard for strict alignments, and en-
croachments had been made on the space allotted for
the public streets. As a consequence thereof proper-
ties deteriorated by the projection of houses beyond
an established line. This called forth an Act (22),
which was passed by Sir Richard Bourke on October
28, 1834, “ for the better regulating the alignment of
the streets of the town of Svdney and altering and
J o
improving the roads throughout the colony of New
South Wale?, and for opening and improving the
streets of the town thereof at the public expense, by
means of toll-gates erected at different stations. From
the passing of this Act no person was permitted there-
after to erect a building of any kind within 12 feet of
the outer kerb or exterior edge of such footway, and
no house or building raised without specifying to the
town surveyor the position and the kind of building
contemplated.
Even till as late as 1828 George Street, from Lyons’
auction mart (at the corner of Charlotte Place) to
Jamieson Street, formed the general boundary line of
a large garden extending back to the summit of Church
O o o
Hill, and on the opposite side as far as Tank Stream
was a lumber-yard of the authorities above referred
to. Charlotte Place still did duty as the parade
ground, and the guard-house occupied a site subse-
quently covered by Mr. Cleeves’ handsome* dwelling-
house —twenty years later on one of the sights of the
town. The market at the market square, erected in
1811, for nineteen years served its purpose for all
kinds of merchandise, but on June 19, 1829, Governor
Darling proclaimed the establishment of a cattle
market at the ‘‘Brickfields, south side of Campbell
Street, and east side of George Street.” The cattle
pens were situated on the south side of Campbell
Street from Elizabeth Street ; and in March, 1833,
tenders were accepted for the erection of the hay
market house. In an old plan of the cattle markets,
as they stood in 1852, the market for the cattle ex-
tended from Castlereagh Street to Pitt Street, now
the site of the old Belmore Market sheds ; that portion
of the ground from Pitt Street to George Street, now
the site of the new market, was the hay market ; while
that portion occupied by the Roman Catholic school
and church was a pound. Gradually, as the numerous
wharfs were erected on the shores of Darling; Harbour,
and the supplies of produce landed there from the
coastal towns, north and south, became larger, so
Sussex Street began to assume the aspect of one long
produce market. The old Royal Hotel, in George
Street, erected by Barnett Levey in 1829, was a curious
structure, combining hotel, granary, and theatre. In
December, 1830, it was sold ; in February, 1831, the
windmill was removed from the top ; and on March 8,
1840, the whole building was destroyed by fire, to be
replaced eight years afterwards by the present edifice.
The Central Police Court and Bridewell, as it was
then called, adjoined so closely as to be at first taken
for a portion of the market. In reality it was built for
that purpose, and used as such until 1830, when it
passed into the hands of the magistracy. Adjoining,
in Druitt Street was the watch-house, garnished with
an enticing set of stocks, to which many of the old
Johnny Warders from the adjacent tavern, afore
referred to, frequently found their way. In the same
year (1830) an agitation was commenced to connect
the Sydney Cove with Darling Harbour, of which the
Argyle Cut was the outcome. Public meetings were
held for and against the proposition, with the result
that those agitating for the proposed highway were
successful. The next matter which agitated the pub-
lic mind in connection with the undertaking was
whether this highway should take the form of a tunnel
or an open cut. As the latter was found to be cheaper
it was adopted, and the Cut was made, at a cost of £875.
The work, completed in October, 1832, less than two
years from the day it was commenced, was to a large
extent done by convicts, who worked in chain gangs
under the supervision of a brutal taskmaster, Tim.
Lane, who has left an unenvied record. His favourite
phrase to a delinquent chain man was, 44 Well, with
the help of God and the flogger’s strong arm, you’ll
get fifty before breakfast to-morrow,” and it is said
that he always kept his word. To this day may be
X t- v
seen evidences of the convict system on the face of
“ The Quarries” —the name given to the immense
cuttings made through the hill. The Cut was not then
bridged over, as we know it at the present day. At
first a rude wooden bridge was thrown across, which
did duty for a considerable time ; then a more preten-
tious bridge took its place, and in comparatively recent
years the massive stone arches supplanted the less
aspiring bridges of the past. The bridge over Glou


cester Street was erected in 1862, when James Oatley
was mayor ; another, in Cumberland Street, was put up
in 1864, when James Speir was our civil ruler, and the
Princes Street bridge when Charles Moore sat in the
seat of Sydney’s chief magistrate.
A very interesting document has recently been
exhumed in connection with the 44 Argyle Cut.” It is
the copy of the Bill introduced into the Legislative
Council in the year 1832 in connection with this high-
way. According to the pieamble, this piece of legis-
lation was 44 to enable the proprietors or shareholders
to sue and be sued in the name of their chairman for
the time being, and to authorise and empower them
to levy a toll on all persons, horses, cattle, and car-
riages passing through the Cut or opening about to be
formed in the ridge of rock intersecting the said street
and for other purposes mentioned therein. A glance
at the provisions of the Bill shows that out of a revenue
received from the tolls the shareholders were to be
paid two half-yearly dividends of £5 per cent., and
any balance left was to accumulate in the bank until
it equalled the amount of money expended in con-
structing the Cut. "W hen that time arrived the mone}
was to be paid to the shareholders, and henceforth the
tolls would cease. In a schedule to the Bill the tolls
were set forth as follows : — C 4 Every horse, mare,
gelding, mule, ass, ox, bull, cow, or other animal, Id. ;
every cart, dray, carriage, or vehicle drawn hy one
horse or other animal, 2d. ; every cart, dray, carriage
or vehicle of any description, drawn by two or more
horses or animals, 3d.” This interesting document
was found among the papers of the late Alexander
Berry, who sixty years ago had his office in Lower
George Street, and was presented to Mr. B. W. 0 Sul-
livan, when Minister for Works, by Dr. John Hay,
who inherited most of Mr. Berry s property under the
will of Mr. David Berry, of Coolangatta and North
Shore.
In 1838, when fifty years had passed over since the
Philliperian day of first beginnings, Sydney proper
possessed eleven principal longitudinal thoroughfares
running from the western side of the township, as
follows : —l, Sussex Street ;2, Kent Street ;3, Clarence
Street, crossing Church Street and continuing in a
northerly direction under the name of Fort and Princes
Streets fl, York Street, with its direction to the north-
ward continued by the three lines of road known by
the names of Cumberland, Gloucester and Harrington
Streets, these three, with Princes Street, constituting
that part of the town locally called the Rocks ; 5,
George Street ; 6, Pitt Street ; 7, Castlereagh Street ;
8 Elizabeth Street ; 9, Phillip Street ; 10, Macquarie
Street; and 11, King William Street, which passed
immediately in a line with the Sydney College. Ihe
cross or traverse main streets in the township, com-
mencing in the north, were as follows 1, Windmill
Street ; 2, Argyle Street ; 3, Essex Street ; 4, Charlotte
Place, prolonged eastward by Bridge Street ; 5, Jamie-
son Street ; 6, Hunter Street ; 7, King Street ; 8, Mar-
ket Street ; 9, Druitt Street, continued eastward by
Park Street, and extended still further eastward by
William Street; 10, Bathurst Street; 11, Liverpool
Street ; 12, Goulburn Street ; and 13, Campbell Street.
Of these the salient features may be briefly re-
ferred to here. Any further detailed account of the
growth of the town between the year 1838 and the
present year would be impossible in the limited space
to which this article must be confined. Sussex Street
was upwards of 5,000 feet in length, as then formed
passing between the head of Darling Harbour bay and
the cove, or boat harbour, which shot into the land
from Darling Harbour, on the north side of the projec-
tion of the land known as Soldier’s Point a site
where the military bathing-house was erected. This
street contained not less than eight mills on its western
side, and, besides the patent slip and several boat and
shipbuilding yards, had upwards of a dozen large
wharfs connected with it. For its length it contained
more valuable merchandise than any other thorough
fare in Sydney. The author of ‘‘ A Picture of Syd-
ney,” published in 1839, 'writes of Sussex Street thus .
“ For many years the shores of Darling Harbour, on
the western side of Sussex Street, were regarded as
land of little or no value ; but no sooner had Sydney
begun to rise in importance as a commercial town
than the land in this vicinity had its value discovered,
and almost the whole of the water frontage w as secured
by men of capital, who have of late years further en-
hanced its value by the erection of substantial and
extensive warehouses, stores, and other buildings,
many ... of which will bear comparison with most
of the stone houses and commercial depositories of
respectable firms in either North or South Britain.
Kent Street, more than a mile and a-half in length,
was formed, as it is to-day, to Liverpool Street. At
the north end a considerable population had gathered
before 1836, and here, notwithstanding its height,
there were several wharfs-, another patent slip, and an
extensive shipbuilding yard established prior to 1838.
At the southern there were several residences with
gardens attached, the site being popular on account
of the “ beautifully diversified landscape view of the
waters and shores of Darling Harbour, extending to
the westward over an extensive range of thickly-
wooded undulating country, between which, in a
north-west direction the waters of Port Jackson are
so broken by the coast, that it only requires to be
seen in order to be appreciated as one of the most
romantic prospects that the eye can behold, or the
most fastidious critic of natural scenic beauty desire. ’
In the olden days, now being written of, Kent Street
beyond Church Hill descended so precipitously down
the rugged sandstone rocks as to be inaccessible to
any wheeled carriage. Clarence Street, 3,000 feet in
length, from the south-west brow of Church Hill to
the north-west corner of the ‘ ‘ old Burying Ground,
had also to undergo an extensive series of levelling
operations before it became, as in 1838, one of the
best thoroughfares within the township. At the
north end, on its eastern side, for more than 1,000
feet, was the lofty freestone wall forming the western
confine of the military barracks, and opposite was a
scries of irregular, ill-built wooden cabins, which after-
wards gave way to a number of handsome freestone
buildings. It was intended to prolong Clarence Street
till it reached the intersection of George and Liverpool
Streets on Brickfield Hill, but before this was carried


out the intervening land became too costly to carry
out the idea. York Street —3,000 feet— was only
formed from the military barracks to the old Burying
Ground, Barrack “ Lane ” connecting it with George
and Clarence Streets.
George Street, from its extreme length of upwards
of 10.000 feet, lying bet ween Dawes Point, on the
north, to the Old Toll-house, 5 5 on the west of the
ground occupied by the Benevolent Asylum, was
decidedly the first street in Sydney. From the Com-
missariat Stores, on the north side of the King 5 s wharf
(Circular Quay), to the bottom of Brickfield Hill it
was one continuous range of generally well-built edi-
fices, many of them presenting an external appear-
ance which London might well be proud of. The
intersection of corners, where the cross-streets cut it,
are in general particularly well designed, as instanced
at Bridge Street, King Street, Market Street 55 Pri-
vate residences between Bridge Street and Park Street,
i,/ /
many of them deserving the term handsome ;
tion.” To the south-west of King Street private resi-
dences predominated until the western confine at
Park Street, where the old Burying Ground formed an
unoccupied space —the cemetery not having fc ‘ for some
years been used as such, there having been an ample
piece of ground set aside as a cemetery on the south-
east border of the town, at the north ascent of the
elevated ground named the Surry Hills.” From
Bathurst Street division, George Street or Brickfield
Hill, so called from the numerous brick kilns in that
quarter, descended rapidly to the hollow where the
corn and cattle markets were situated —the ascent up
Brickfield Hill “ being not only steep and difficult, but
actually dangerous ” until as late as 1839. Between
the bottom of Brickfield Hill and the old Sydney turn-
pike, or what was then called the plane of Surry Hills
range, George Street was occupied only in the south
by houses, the whole of the opposite side being still
retained by the Government. From the old toll-bar
westward along Parramatta Street there was not a
George Street in 1850, looking South from King Street.
but at the latter, southerly, point they stopped. Near
the north end were the Government warehouses, con-
nected with the commissariat and naval yard, the
former of which formed the north confine of the King’s
wharf. The southern limit was private property, and
consisted of commercial and marine store-rooms, the
front of the buildings being occupied by the Australia
Hotel, at one time the principal tavern in town.
Southward from the King’s wharf, on the west side
of the street was the gaol, and opposite another range
of private dwellings, with the lower flats occupied as
stores. Between King and Bridge Streets there was
only one intersecting thoroughfare, and all the build-
ings in this section —the pick of the street in 1838—
had only just been erected. The carriage way —for
the first time now being entitled to bo spoken of as a
good thoroughfare —was covered with an extensive
coating of granite, termed “ Australian M’Adamisa-
house of any description until 1835, when a number
of brick buildings were erected.
Pitt Street extended from Hunter Street to Camp-
bell Street, which bounded the northern side of the
cattle market, and was upwards of 5,000 feet in length.
As a street it was one of the best formed and most
handsome in Sydney, and in 1838 the people were
agitating for its extension to the head of Sydney
Cove. Between King and Park Streets were situated
all the shops and warehouses, the lower orders finding
residences for themselves towards the north and south
extremities. A few months later on, between King
and Market Streets, Pitt Street presented the most
continuous line of fine buildings that could be found
in Sydney, offering fewer objects to remind the new-
comer that he was in a new town. Castlereagh Street,
of the same length as Pitt Street, was occupied by a
great number of wooden huts and temporary cottages,


but according to the design prepared in 1838 it was
intended to also extend the street towards the north
to the head of the cove, cutting it almost at the centre,
at a spot to be reserved lor the berthing of coastal
vessels of small draught. Elizabeth Street was
bounded by Hunter Street, on the north, and the
Protestant burying ground (Devonshire Street) on the
south, the distance between these points being 6,500
feet. The principal buildings —chambers for the
lawyers —were at the north end, in the vicinity of the
Supreme Court, the remainder of the houses in the
street being irregular private dwellings. Phillip Street
commenced on the north side of King Street, having its
south view terminated by St. James’ Church, and
continued north till it terminated in Bent Street.
Although occupying the second ridge, which cut off
the extensive tableland of Hyde Park there was no
street in town where the mason and house carpenter
appeared to have found less employment. The Emi-
gration barracks, a weatherboard structure, was at the
Princes, Cumberland, Gloucester, and Harrington
Streets —which wound along the eastern aclivity
of the lofty rock on which Fort Phillip stood.
The houses in this quarter were mostly occupied by
mariners, many of the wooden skillings and huts of
Macquarie’s tune being still standing, and the roads
as footpaths so filthy that no one would pass through
them unless compelled to.
Windmill Street, lying between the Rocks and
“ the windmills at the Millers’ Point,” was the nor-
thernmost of the transverse streets of Sydney, its
length being 1,000 feet. Notwithstanding its advan-
tageous position, there was little to say in praise of its
architecture. At the western extremity, particularly
in the neighbourhood of Clyde Street, there was a
considerable population--the last-named street
being so termed from its having been at one time
principally the property of a number of Glasgow
artizans, brought out by Dr. Lang. Argyle consisted
of two portions, the eastern and western, separated
George Street North, from Margaret Street, 1853.
Bent Street end. The charmed spot which Bent
Street bounded was sacred to Government House —the
building now occupied by the Public Instruction De-
partment. Other public offices were scattered here,
the idea of the officials being to get as near to the
water’s edge as possible. The principal gate of Go-
vernment House was almost in the exact spot where
the statue of T. S. Mort now stands. As soon as the
Government House of this period (1838) had been
abandoned for the new one (Vickery’s Buildings),
then about to be erected, about 1,000 feet southward
of Fort Macquarie, Phillip Street was to be prolonged
the eastern side of the head of Sydney Cove, near the
jettv where the Tank Stream disembogued, its whole
length then making about 2,800 feet. Macquarie
Street had nearly the whole of its eastern side occupied
by public offices, whilst on the western side were seve-
ral well-built premises. The only remaining longi-
tudinal section of streets worth notice were four—
from each other by ‘‘a precipice of considerable
height.” Essex Street, 800 feet in length, led up
from George Street along the south side wall of the
gaol, till the line of direction was terminated by the
military hospital, situated at the south end of South
Fort Street. The steep ascent was almost impassable
for wheeled carriages, and hence there were onlv a few
substantial houses, although the intention of Governor
Macquarie was that Essex Street should become the
principal line of communication between Svdney
Cove and the whole of Darling Harbour lying between
the north-west corner of Church Hill and the west
end of King Street. The main or south-west arm of
Charlotte Street was originally formed, as now, 700
feet in length, and at the north-east corner stood the
old guard-house, removed in 1837. At the south-east
corner stood “ the most splendid and capacious build-
ing in Sydney.” Bridge Street —so named from its
being crossed a bridge over the Tank Stream, about


120 feet to the eastward of the lower end of Queen’s
Place —continued the line of Charlotte Place eastward,
for a distance of 500 feet, as far as the south end of
Macquarie Place. When Pitt and other longitudinal
streets had been continued to the cove, Bridge Street
was to be continued, until it intersected Macquarie
Street, to a distance of 1,500 feet ; and, writes Made-
hose, “ if the buildings then erected on each side be
so executed as to correspond with those already reared,
Bridge Street will undoubtedly be the finest street in
Sydney ; it is also the principal entrance to the present
Government House.” The buildings in Jamieson
Street were of the very best description, and several
of the residences of Hunter Street were occupied as
town residences of “ gentlemen of the first respecta-
bility.’’ King Street, 2,600 feet in length, in a line
from the prisoners’ barracks, Hyde Park, to Darling-
Harbour, taken as a whole, was decidedlv the best
transverse street in Sydney, some of the finest build-
ings in town being on the north side, which, from the
name of the person who received the original grant of
land was commonly called Moore’s Corner. Along
streets of presentable appearance were four, occupying
the north end of the eastern ridge on which Sydney is
built, viz., Bent. Spring, O’Connell and Bligh Streets,
all residential localities, carrying with their tastefully
laid-out gardens, a superior sort of air.
Sydney had come to be recognised now as the
chief British city in the southern hemisphere. Two
years later, when a census was taken, the total num-
ber of persons within the boundaries —embracing
about 2,000 acres —of Sydney represented 29,973, of
whom 17,332 had arrived free, and 7.000 were born
in the colonv. Those who had served a sentence of
transportation numbered 3,356 ; 207 held tickets of
leave ; 1,018 were convicts in Government employ,
and 1,016 (537 males and 523 females) were convicts
privately assigned. The district of Sydney outside
the boundaries contained about 4,500 persons, mak-
ing a total in town proper and suburbs of 35.507 —
of whom 20,733 were males and 14,774 females. The
religious denominations were thus divided —Church
of England, 19,905 ; Presbyterian, 3,565 ; Wesleyan ,
937 ; other Protestant denominations, 973 ; total
View of Mosman. Musgrave Street from Cremorne.
Market Street there was a dense population,
ral of the most influential firms in the colony had
their premises in this neighbourhood. In Park Street
there were a few substantial buildings, but mostly
dilapidated tenements in the continuation across
George Street, termed after Major Druitt. On the
south-east side of Druitt Street was the north wall
of the old burying ground, while on the opposite side
was terminated the watch-house attached to the
police office. Bathurst Street principally was occu-
pied by neat little cottages, and the only houses in
Liverpool Street were those of the working classes.
Goulburn Street, about the same length (1,700 feet)
as Liverpool Street, was very irregularly built, and
inferior in appearance to the other transverse tho-
roughfares. Campbell Street, named after the old
merchant from India, whose wharf occupied the nor-
thern extremity of George Street, w T as the southern-
most cross-street of the township. The whole of the
south side was retained by the Government, and the
north side, which commanded a prospect terminated
in a southerly direction by the Surry Hills, there were
several excellent freestone buildings. The remaining
Protestants, \ 2l,97B ; Roman Catholics, 9,502 ; Jews,
476 ; Mohammedan and Pagan, 101. There were
5,392 houses, of which 3,714 were stone or brick and
1,678 wood. Of this number of buildings, 125, includ-
ing places of worship, Government offices, &c., were
uninhabited. In the parish of St. Phillip were 9,836
persons and 1,414 houses ; in the parish of St. James,
6,081 persons and 802 houses ; in St. Andrews, 6,925
persons and 1,232 houses ; and in St. Lawrence, 4,844
persons and 767 houses. The occupations followed
were —landed proprietors, merchants, bankers and
professional men, 717 ; storekeepers and retail dealers,
798 ; mechanics and artificers, 4,178 ; gardeners,
stockmen, and agriculturists, 1,206 ; domestic ser-
vants, 3,135 ; other persons not included in above,
25,483. The outside or suburban districts of Sydney
were —to the east, Woolloomooloo ; to the south-east
Paddington and Surry Hills ; to the south, Redfern
and Chippendale ; to the south-west, Newtown, Glebe,
Camperdown ; to the west, across Darling Harbour,
was Balmain ; and to the north the township of St.
Leonards. Contrast these figures with later returns
and one realises in a measure our metropolitan growth.


Twenty years (1861) after the above-mentioned census
was taken the population of Sydney and suburbs
stood at 95,789 ; in 1871 it was 137,586 ; in 1881,
224,939; in 1891, 383,283; and in 1901, 488,382,
being now considerably over half a million.
Back once more to port matters —already partially
dealt with, and dealing more especially with wharves
at first. After Hospital Wharf (afterwards known as
the King’s Wharf, and later on again as the Queen’s
Wharf) had been erected at the head of Sydney Cove,
and the jetty at the mouth of the Tank Stream,
nothing further was done in the shape of permanent
landing facilities until 1810, when the Market Wharf
in Cockle Bay was constructed and made available
for the public use. Till 1824 all the wharves built
were the property of the Government, managed under
the strictest regulations with a view of preventing the
escape of would-be runaways ; but in that year per-
mission was given Robert Campbell to construct at
the bottom of George Street, what was the first private
wharf in Australia. After this all along the shores of
Cockle Bay, adjacent to Sussex Street and round to the
cove, wharves sprang up rapidly. Where Campbell
built his residence in George Street at the beginning of
the nineteenth century now stands some brick ware-
houses, on the front of which may still be read 44 A.S.N.
Company,” whose steamers supplied the intercolonial
trade with water carriage. The Australian Steam
Navigation Company was established in 1832, and
had its wharf in Cockle Bay, at the foot of Margaret
Street. The company then bought Campbell’s wharf
and improved the locality, but the change did not
improve prospects, and the company went into liqui-
dation. In the vicinity of Windmill Street, in 1838,
were Giles, Ritchie & Co’s., Parbury, Lamb & Co’s.,
and Walker’s wharves, and these with and
the A.S.N. Company’s, were able to give berthing ac-
commodation to the largest ships visiting the port.
To enumerate the miles of wharves which have sprung
up on all sides of Circular Quay, Darling Harbour, and
the lower end of the Parramatta River would neither be
interesting not within the scope of this article ; suffice
it to say that they were all taken over upon the crea-
tion of the Harbour Board, and have been so improved
ip point of equipment by that body as to make Sydney
recognised now as one of the most advanced ports in
the world.
In 1833 the first slip was constructed in the har-
bour not far from Erskine Street, an event which
called forth the following interesting paragraph from
the Sydney Gazette of the day 44 Captain Fothering-
ham has applied for nine perches of ground on the
shores of Darling Harbour, the minimum price of
which is £I,OOO. Well may the mouths of the old
one hundred and water when they read this.
Twenty years ago a score of them, by clubbing their
pay for twelve months, might have purchased all the
sea-coast from the battery to the steam-mills. They
might have monopolised that part of the town which
will probably become the most valuable part of Syd-
ney. But those happy days are past. Land worth
at that time 1 lb. of snuff per perch, 1 lb. of tobacco
or a gallon of rum per acre, with palings, pig-house and
skillion given in to seal the bargain, is at this time esti-
mated at the lowest price of £I.OOO. Captain Bother-
ingham merits a free gift of these nine perches for his
efforts in establishing the patent slip, the first of its
kind south of the line.” From the speculative spirit
have sprung three of the largest graving docks —Mort’s
and at Cockatoo —in the world, as well as three other
slips, with a plant of machinery valued af £125,000
or thereabouts, and a capacity necessitating the con-
stant employment of 2,516 hands.
Further data concerning the port and harbour are
detailed in the articles dealing with the Customs and
Harbour Trust, but naturally any notice of Sydney
would be wanting without some topographical refer-
ence to its harbour, which
“ Like some dark beautious bird whose plumes
Are sparkling with unencumbered eyes.”
Thus wrote Moore, as he looked up aloft at the sky by
night, and found companionship in the soul of beauty
there. To most lovers of the Irish bard will this
image occur when entering on a summer’s night the
harbour gates to beautiful Sydney ; or looking down
upon the stillness of the sleeping coves from any of the
surrounding hills. Lights are spread upon the black-
ness of the hills —straight lines, crescents, squares and
marvellous configurations —lights rise up from the
harbour depths, straight shafts and twisted column®,
pillars and spires and trios of lights, wherever from
ship’s mast, or yard, or port, rays of white or blue or
red strike the waters, and straightway seem to grow as
planets of fire. Along the shores may be seen innumer-
able blue gleams of electric fire, the duller green and
rod of the oil-lamps of the ships, still and bright in the
quiet water ; alternating, mingling, shifting, blending
as the surface is only slightly stirred. Every calm
night brings such illumination.
A traveller entering Sydney harbour upon any
still night sees this panorama opening to him ; and if
he have the good fortune to be detained in quarantine
till morning, he may see a far more beautiful picture
by rising with the rising sun. The city and the har-
bour lay spread out before him, the spires and towers
standing out in the distance, clear and shining in the
morning sunlight. The long land arms run out on
either hand, while the blue sea, unruffled and smooth,
forms a fine contrast to rock and foliage and sky.
To see Sydney well in the clear broad daylight, it
is needful to travel by a tram to the heights of
North Shore, and walk thence by the Military Road to
the head of Mosman’s Bay. A splendid view-point is
thus obtained, above and opposite to the length and
breadth of the city. You see the light over the South
Head, and following the coastline south, you look
along all the heights of Woollahra, Waverley, and
Paddington to Randwick. Between the ocean coast
and the inner line of the harbour are the homes of
more than a million of people. You may see thence
the spires of St. Phillip’s, and St. James’, and St.
David’s, and St. Patrick’s, the towers of St. Andrew's
Cathedral, and, through the heavy foliaged trees of
the Domain, the high walls of St. Mary’s. In the
distance, and partly obscured by the smoke, are the
University buildings—the various colleges grouped,
almost joined in this faraway view. Flanking them
are the Prince Alfred Hospital and the Deaf and Dumb
and Blind Institution.


In the dense centre of city buildings rises the
graceful tower of the General Post Office. It over-
looks everything, and waves its flag of practical utility
in the sight of the whole city. Very near to it appears
the Town Hall, small by comparison, though more
elaborate, and between them and the water the heavy
masses of commercial buildings, fringed by the un-
broken line of masts. The city to be seen on the Noith
Shore looks, and is, very compact and you are sur-
surprised that no suspension bridge—the sport of poli-
ticians at election times for sixty years —overhangs the
water. You must look into the future for that.
Complete your picture of the present by a glance
up the long estuaries of the Parramatta and Lane Cove
Elvers, and a look across the rolling woodlands west-
ocean stir is felt, the glories of opal and amber,
where fierce sun-rays burn upon rocky shores.
Take in all the greatness and beauty of the
present, and then try to realise the picture in the
square miles of buildings already raised. You can
see how they are growing, how far away to the
south to north, to east and to west, and through
the forest and beside the waters of the north
coast, art is replacing nature’s pristine charms,
houses and buildings of various kinds are rising like
avant-couriers of the compact masses, whose advance
is by no means slow. Look from them to a point of
the city where roofs and chimneys are most closely
packed, where the smoke of the labour of human life
seems ascending perpetually, and you may see a suc-
A View of the Palace Gardens and Sydney Harbour
ward, to the great barrier of the Blue Mountains.
Look across the harbour, where right below you the
round tower of Fort Denison stands in mid-channel,
and a little lower down the picturesque Elizabeth Bay
and the perfect half-moon of Rose Bay, blue as the sky
above. Look down to the Heads, where a dozen craft
are entering upon the long huge rollers, which break
upon bluff Dobroyd opposite or die down the ripples
upon the innumerable beaches of Middle Harbour.
Watch the many lights and colours of the water, the
ultramarine of the mid-channel, the indigo in the sha-
dow of the hills, the emerald of a strip close beneath the
cliff, where no wind moves nor any pulse of tide oi
cession of white puffs, and hear a louder, sharper pulse
of toil pierce the low murmur of distant and multitu-
dinous sounds, and you know that you look upon the
present centre of the railway system of the colony ;
vou have fixed your eye on the new railway station-
ft/ %/ K *
orieinallv intended to astonish the world—the focus-
O v
sing point of four thousand miles of railways. These
are the feeders of the city ; these reaching out divide
and grip and drain the colony. They gather its pro-
duce, the results of its labour, and bring them down to
this city, which stands without rival or competitor
along two thousand miles of coast.


The Customs Department and its Work.
It will be interesting to glance at the tariff
changes which have taken place during the historv of
the State before dealing with the figures relating to
its progress and development. Prior to the year 1830
an ad valorem duty of 5 per cent, was levied upon all
merchandise for purposes of revenue. From that year
a duty of 2s. 6d. per proof gallon was imposed upon
spirits the produce of the colony, together with a duty
of 6s. 6d. per gallon on all spirits of British or West
Indian origin imported directly from the United King-
dom. All other spirits were charged Bs. 6d. per proof
gallon. Unmanufactured tobacco paid Is. 6d., and
manufactured tobacco 2s. per lb. The ad valorem of
5 per cent, was, as before, charged upon all other im-
ported goods. This was the first tariff, and it will be
observed that at this early period in our history Britain
received preferential treatment.
There were no alterations until Ist April, 1840,
when distillation from any article except grain was
prohibited, and until the Ist April, 1844, 3s. per proof
gallon was charged on spirits distilled from grain—
after that date ss. From the 15th September, 1840,
the duty upon British and colonial spirits imported
direct from the United Kingdom was increased to 9s.
per gallon. Other spirits were increased to 12s. Wine
was charged at 15 per cent, ad valorem. Tea, sugar,
flour, meal, wheat, rice, and other grain and pulse,
5 per cent. All other merchandise not being the
produce of the United Kingdom, 10 per cent. How-
ever, from the 16th June, 1840, breadstuffs were
exempt from duty and wharfage for a certain period,
probably owing to prevailing drought. From 29th
September, 1840, the excise on colonial spirit distilled
from grain was raised to 6s. 6d. per gallon. After the
12th December, 1843, the duties on spirits distilled in
the colony were reduced one-half and without distinc-
tion of country of origin ; in lieu of the ad valorem
rates already mentioned, a small specific rate was
levied on breadstuffs, sugar, wine, tea, and coffee.
Here will be noticed the abandonment of the principle
of preference.
From the Bth November, 1845, to the Ist January,
1850, the duty on imported spirits was reduced to 65.,
and on colonial distilled spirit to 3s. 6d. per gallon.
There were no further tariff alterations until the sth
August, 1852, when the Deas Thomson tariff was im-
posed, consisting of a few light specific duties, prin-
cipally upon spirits, tobacco, ale, sugar, &c. A con-
siderable number of slight increases in the existing
duties were effected up to the year 1865, when an
ad valorem rate of 5 per cent, was charged upon all
goods not then subject to duty. In the interim the
only innovations were the imposition of a duty on
bonded warehouses, and an opium duty of 10s. per lb.
in 1857, an export duty on gold of 2s. 6d. per oz. in
-1861 (which was afterwards reduced to Is. 6d. per oz.
in 1862), and in 1865 a package duty ot one shilling —
excepting live stock, flour, wheat, tea and goods in
transit. Ad valorem duties were abolished from Ist
January, 1874, and the number of articles previously
subject to duty greatly reduced. However, from the
10th December, 1879, until the 12th December, 1895,
there were frequent increases, including the Dibbs
tariff of 2nd March, 1892. An excise duty on beer of
3d. per gallon was first imposed on 3rd June, 1887.
In December, 1895, the Dibbs ad valorem rates were
abolished, and the number of articles previously
charged with duties war considerably reduced. There
were no further alterations in the tariff of New South
Wales until the imposition of the moderately protec-
tive tariff of the Commonwealth of Australia.
Although the progress of the trade and develop-
ment of New South Wales has not perhaps been suffi-
ciently xapid to fully justify the sanguine predictions
of many of the early writers, yet it has been on the
whole steady, and build upon solid and enduring lines.
In order to arrive at an estimate of this progress it will
be necessary to study the statistical records from the
first year in which New South Wales ranked as a sepa-
rate colony after responsible government had been
granted to Victoria and Queensland, 1860. During
the latter period of our history a policy of railway
construction has brightened the hopes and possibilities
of the interior and laid the foundation of a large inter-
nal trade, which will be dwelt upon in due course.
In 1860 the population of New South Wales numbered
336,572. In 1880 it had grown, by natural causes and
by immigration, to 747,950. Twenty years later it
stood at 1,364,590. At the present day it exceeds
1,500.000. It will be noticed that each period of
twenty years has seen the population doubled. The
present rate of increase is about 2*3 par cent, per
annum.
In 1860 the total imports into the State amounted
to £7,755,859, in 1880 to £14,176,063, in 1900 to
£27,561,071, and in 1905 to £29,350,034. The exports
steadily increased from £6,311,351 in 1860, until they
reached £26,738,111 in 1903. In the following year
a remarkable increase took place, due to an excep-
tional season, the total being £33,007,835, wool being
responsible for £9,246,931 of this amount. Again, in
1905 there was a still further increase to £36,756,366,
the highest point ever reached in the history of the
State’s production. From a commercial point of view
the year 1905 was even better in comparison with
1904 than the figures would indicate, for in 1905 the
exports of gold were considerably less
The principal articles imported are apparel and
piece goods, machinery and manufactures of metal,
stimulants, timber, &c. In many instances the inci


deuce of the tariff has curtailed importation and stimu-
lated local industry. Boots and hats may be instanced,
but, generally speaking, the buoyancy of trade and
the consequent stimulus to consumption has preserved
the general volume of imports. The imports in 1905
were equal to £l9 1 Is. per head of the population.
The exports of New South Wales comprise prin-
cipally the products of our primary industries —wool,
minerals, butter, wheat, meat, skins, &c. Needless
to state, wool takes pride of place and the growth of
that industry is worthy of note. In 1860 the exports
of this commodity amounted to £1,454,289. The
amount reached £8,040,625 in 1880, whilst for last
year (1905) the figures stood at £11,141,335, the
largest amount ever received in a single year, a con-
tributing factor to this excellent result being the ex-
ceptionally high price obtained for the product. The
increase of the rabbit pest, whilst threatening to seri-
ously interfere with the wool industry, has not been
without its compensations. The value of frozen rab-
bits exported in 1905 was £143,768, as against £54,286
in 1904 ; skins £160,180 against £97,381. This trade
is also growing, and it is difficult to predict the volume
it may ultimately assume. Quite recently as many as
2,000,000 rabbits were marketed in a single week.
The figures relating to the exports of coal, copper,
meats, ores, skins, tallow, timber and tin show a very
satisfactory increase in 1905 over 1904, and the pre-
sent high prices ruling for the majority of our raw
products gives reason for congratulation. The total
exports in 1905 were equal to £24 10s. per head of the
population, being an increase on any previous year,
and proving that the productive capacity of New
South Wales in proportion to its populationn will com-
pare favourably with any country in the world. Gold
was first exported in 1851 —£468,000 worth. The
next year it had increased to £2,661 000, and in 1905
the value was £2,578,000. In 1876 silver was first
exported —£17,000 worth, and in 1904 these figures
had grown to £2,322,146.
In 1860 the value of meats exported was £22,000.
There was no appreciable increase until 1871, when
it stood at £134,000. Since then it has grown steadily,
of course fluctuating with the seasons, until in 1905
the value was £616,000 exclusive of rabbits and hares.
During the same period the exports of coal increased
from 1184,000 to £1,565,602. As distinct from our
actual exports, it is interesting to note the great in-
crease in the production of wool, wheat, and minerals
of all kinds. Practically all our wool is exported, and
has been already dealt with. Wheat has steadily
increased from 3,000,000 bushels in 1882 to 2/,000,000
in 1904 (a phenomenal year), and 16,000,000 in 1905.
Only one or two lean years broke the continuity of
progress. Minerals of all kinds steadily increased from
£2,100,000 in 1881 to £6,220,051 in 1904. Again,
high prices stimulate production. Tin may be in-
stanced, for the price is now the highest in history-
the world’s demand having exceeded the supply.
In passing, a brief space may be devoted to the
figures for the first five months of 1906. In regard to
the population, the enlarged rate of increase recorded
in 1905 is being maintained. There is an increase in
the total value of imports of £1,720,585 over the cor-
responding period of the previous year, whilst the
increase in the exports amounted to £3,806,641, made
up from all the principal items, particularly butter,
wool, and gold. As a corollary to this state of affairs,
there is an increasing demand for fertile land where
good rainfalls prevail, and in many cases where sub-
division for closer settlement has been effected \illages
have sprung up. There has been a corresponding
increase in land values, and settlers are undoubtedly
prosperous. In these districts the primary industry
is dairying, which is advancing by leaps and bounds.
The figures speak for themselves. The Co-operative
factory at Byron Bay may be instanced. For many
years it has distributed amongst the neighbouring
dairy farmers between £25,000 and £3O 000 per month.
In the last decade the number of dairy cattle increased
from 358,411 to 644,148,. whilst the production of
butter during the same period steadily advanced from
23,295,512 to 53,591,243 lbs. ; cheese from 2,938.785
to 4,223.621 ; bacon and ham from 5,250,717 to
10,680,532. As has already been stated, the figures
for 1906 disclose a continuous upward tendency.
The accomplishment of federation, besides giving
an impetus to Australian industry, has undoubtedly
stimulated the interchange of merchandise between
the States. It is perhaps desirable to show, as distinct
from our total trade, the amount which we receive
from and transfer to the other States. To be approxi-
mate, the transfers inwards are slightly less than the
imports from oversea —but the value of our exports
oversea is about double that which we transfer to the
other States. A comparison of the figures for 1895
and 1905 will suffice to show how greatly the inter-
state trade has increased. In 1895 we received from
the other Australian States goods valued at £6,758,140.
In 1905 the total was £14,864,911. Likewise, the
outward transfers increased from £7,104,812 in 1895
to £12,262,836 in 1905. A great proportion of the
inter state trade is made up of the transfers of live
stock, butter, coal, wheat, flour, wool, &c.
It may be, at this juncture, opportune to deal
with the figures relating to live stock with which to a
great extent the prosperity of the State is identified.
In 1861 there were 5,615,054 sheep in the State, which
number grew to 36,591,946 in 1881. There was a
steady, but not quite such a rapid increase until 1891,
when the figures reached 61,831,416 —high water mark.
Then came several years of disastrous drought, and the
number steadily diminished to 26,649,424 in 1902, a
loss of 35,000,000 in about a decade. So great, how-
ever, is the recuperative power of the land that, with
the advent of good seasons, there was a remarkable
recovery. The number again advanced, and now
stands at over 40,000,000. Under favourable circum-
stances, in less than five years it should exceed that of
any previous year, notwithstanding that the carrying
capacity of the country is in a degree impaired by the
advent of the rabbit. All other live stock wassimilarly
affected by the drought. The number of cattle was
practically the same in 1905 as it was in 1860 —
2,271,923. Horses increased from 233,220 to 506,835
during that period, and pigs, taking the first available
figures, from 223,597 in 1895 to 310,662 in 1905.


Having dealt with our primary industries, a brief
space may be devoted to the progress of manufactur-
ing. We will take the period from 1895 to 1905.
The number of establishments increased in that time
from 2,723 to 3,641 ; the number of hands employed,
from 48,030 to 71,317 ; and the value of plant and
machinery, from £5,255,129 to about £8,000,000.
There are no figures available to show the increase in
wages paid or output, but in 1905 the former amounted
to £5,012,758, and the latter £27,159,230. A com-
parison of these figures with value of our pastoral and
agricultural products, as previously given, shows how
largely the latter enter into the progress and pros-
perity of the State. The possibilities of the manu-
facturing industries are immense, nor are they limited
by the capture of our home market.
As illustrating the extent and importance of our
trade, the shipping figures of the State will prove
instructive. During the year 1860 1,424 vessels
entered our ports, with an aggregate tonnage of
427,835. Twenty years later the vessels numbered
2,108, and the tonnage amounted to 1,242,458. Tn
1900 there were 2,784 vessels entered, with a tonnage
of 4,014,755. In that year there was rather an excep-
tional increase over the previous year, accounted for
by the heavy imports of merchandise in anticipation
of the federal tariff. The figures relating to the im-
ports in 1900 will bear out this statement, for in the
two following years there was a slight falling off. In
1905 there was a slight decrease in the number of
vessels entered (2,725), but the tonnage increased to
4,697,511, the highest upon record. The shipping
clearances outward are approximately the same as the
inward figures. The buoyancy of our trade and the
stability of our industries, as indicated by the fore-
going statistics, must give occasion for congratulation.
It must not, however, be assumed that the pros-
perity of the State may be gauged by the magnitude
of our commercial transactions or by the actual accu-
mulation of wealth. Rather must we be guided by
prosperity, comfort, and contentment of the masses.
There is no better indication to be obtained of this
than by the study of the figures relating to the deposits
in our Government Savings Bank, which most cer-
tainly represent the thrift of the people. The maxi-
mum amount allowed to stand to the credit of any
individual is £2OO. The amount of d( posits has steadily
ily grown, and in this respect the State has never retro-
gressed. In 1860 there were 12,027 depositors, with
a total amount to their credit of £557.197. In 1880
there were 61,531 depositors, with £2.075,856, From
that year the amount increased at a proportionately
greater rate, until in 1905 there were 355,714 deposi-
tors, representing an amount of £13,498,252. The
significance of this total may be realised when it is
considered that it is equal to £9 for every inhabitant
of the State. Similarly the deposits held by the banks
of issue grew from £5,164,011 in 1860 to £37,071,055
in 1905.
It cannot be denied that the foregoing figures dis-
close a condition of things eminently satisfactory, and
in view of the high prices ruling for our products, and
the practically unlimited market, there is no reason
whv our industries should not flourish and the future
*/
be marked by still more rapid progress.
The History of the Harbour Trust.
The year 1900 was a memorable one in the his-
torical annals of Sydney, for in that year the Govern-
ment of the day (at the head of which stood the Honour-
able Sir William Lyne) made a determined effort to
stamp out the bubonic plague which had settled in our
midst. Tn this connection people were unanimous in
calling upon the Government to assume responsibility.
An agitation sprang up in Parliament and in the press,
which resulted in the resumption by the Government
of the day of a strip of land along the foreshores of
Darling Harbour, extending roughly from the head of
Darling Harbour to Dawes’ Point, and bounded land-
ward by part of the western side of Sussex, part of
Kent and Windmill Streets, and a lane at the back
of Lower Fort Street. (Gazette notice dated 3rd May,
1900.) Subsequently other portions of the wharfage
area were resumed, and finally the whole of the fore-
shores and the control of the waters of Port Jackson
were placed under a commission, the scope of whose
duties were defined by an Act of Parliament entitled
“ The Sydney Harbour Trust Act, 1900,” which re-
ceived the Koval assent on the 11th February, 1901.
In the interval which occurred between the re-
sumption of the property and the passage of the above-
mentioned Act, vesting the wharves and premises
adjacent in a body of commissioners, to be known as
the “Sydney Harbour Trust Commissioners,” a
board was appointed to take over and administer
temporarily the resumed properties. The board con-
sisted of the following gentlemen : —Messrs. R. R. P.
Hickson, T. F. Waller and C. E. Parkinson, and these
7 /
gentlemen faithfully carried out the duties entrusted
to them until the passing of the Harbour Trust Act.
Three commissioners were appointed to administer the
Act, namely, Messrs. R. R. P. Hickson, M.I.C.E. (for-
merly Under Secretary and Commissioner for Roads in
the Public Works Department) and a member of the
Darling Harbour Resumption Advisory Board, who
was appointed president ; T. F, Waller, a well-known
city estate agent and Government land valuator, also
a member of the Darling Harbour Resumption Ad-
visory Board and other boards, and L. Beaton, formerly
Sydney manager for Howard Smith and Sons.
y y O


Mr. J. R. Martin, an officer employed in the Trea-
sury Department, was appointed secretary, and on his
resignation, in November, 1903, he was succeeded by
Mr. Harold F. Norrie, the officer-in-charge of bonds
and contracts in the Public Works Department ;
Captain C, E. Bird, connected for a number of ytars
with the Anglo-Australian line of steamers and the
Canadian Mail line, and latterly the Sydney manager
for Flood and Company,was appointed harbour master?
and on his resignation in April, 1905, he was succeeded
by his deputy, Captain Pritchard, R.N.R. Mr. James
Johnston, an accountant in the Public Works Depart-
ment, received the appointment of treasurer and was
afterwards succeeded in the same office by Mr. J. B.
Watson, a well-known city accountant. Mr. E. W.
Austin, secretary to the Darling Harbour Resumption
Advisory Board, was appointed chief clerk ; and later
an engineer-in-chief and chief surveyor were appointed
in the persons of Messrs. H. D. Walsh, 8.A., M.1.C.E.,
and S. E. Perdriau, both occupying important positions
in their respective branches of the public service. Sub-
sequent to these appointments several changes were
made in the personnel of the office staff, as follows :
Mr. E. W. Austin was appointed assistant secretary ;
Mr. D. B. G. Sheridan, chief clerk ; Mr. W. E. Adams,
assistant engineer ; Mr. P. N. Christie, assistant engi-
neer ; Captain J. R. Ferrier, assistant harbour master.
Shortly after the appointment of the commis-
sioners a vigorous onslaught was made upon the in-
sanitary conditions then prevalent at the various
wharves, and one of their first acts was to pass a by-law
compelling ship-masters to affix a metal disc to the
hawsers or mooring-lines of vessels berthing at the
various wharves, in order to prevent the passage of
rats to and from such vessels. As soon as suitable
offices could be procured officers were appointed and
the staff organised, which occupied several months,
and it was not long before the commissioners were able
to put into effect a series of reforms in the area under
their charge, the wide-reaching effects of which are
only now beginning to be apparent to the business and
general community of Sydney. The visitation of the
plague, which had played such a terrible part in the
history of the year 1900, was stayed, and the panic
which its presence had created was at once allayed.
This was accomplished by the simple expedient of
joining hands with the Public Health Department and
the City Council in the systematic destruction of rats
and in thoroughly scavenging the waters of Port Jack-
son from all putrid and offensive matter. In this way
tons of dead rats and other animals and garbage were
removed from the harbour every week and destroyed,
and the outlets of all sewers discharging into Darling
Harbour and wharves were systematically steamed
with a powerful steam jet. All these measures, carried
on with unvarying regularity from week to week and
from month to month, at last resulted in the procla-
mation of Sydney as a clean port in the following y«ar.
Financial. —Early in their official career the com-
missioners were confronted with the duty of collecting
a revenue sufficient to pay for the up-keep of the port
and the administration of the Trust, and at the same
time of providing a surplus to meet the interest charge-
able on the capital debt, which has been fixed at
£4,817,306, and when it is considered that the total
amount of revenue derivable from port dues only
previous to the inception of the Trust amounted
roughly to the sum of about £70,000 annually, it will
be at once apparent that the commissioners were con-
fronted with a task of no small magnitude, seeing the
increased amount which would be necessary to enable
them to meet their statutory obligations. The expen-
diture of the Trust (excluding capital expenditure) from
the 11th February, 1901, to the 30th June, 1904, was
£260,304 ; the total amount of revenue for the same
period was £799,186, leaving a surplus of £538,881
available in order to meet interest and sinking fund.
The Trust is debited with a number of unproductive
properties, such as the Naval Stores (£20,000), Goat
Island (£38,000), Fort Denison (£3,000), Schnapper
Island (£1,500), Bennelong Point (£7,600), Darling
Harbour railway wharf (£80,000), valued at £150,100
in all, on which interest has to be paid.
At the time of the creation of the Sydney Harbour
Trust (11th February, 1901) a considerable number
of works were either in course of execution or pro-
jected by the Public Works Department, which, as the
Act constituting the Trust vested all the foreshores of
Port Jackson in the Trust, had to be handed over to
the latter authority. The most important of these
works were : —The construction of a concrete wharf
and other works at Darling Island ; the construction
of wharves and sheds for the A.U.S.N. Company ; for
Huddart, Parker and Company Proprietary Limited :
for the Howard Smith Company ; at the Market wharf ;
and the reconstruction of Druitt Street and Wharf
Street, which had become necessary consequent upon
the alteration in the original designs of the approaches
to the new Pyrmont Bridge. Of all the works taken
over by the Trust only two were not proceeded with,
namely, the improvements at the head of the Parra-
matta River, which were stopped for want of funds,
and the completion of the Rodd Island improvements,
which dropped out of the province of the Trust when
Rodd Island was once more vested in its former trus-
tees, but on which in the meantime the Trust had
spent over £IOO.
It will be of interest here to give a condensed list
of works carried out by the Trust in the short period
of less than three-and-a-half years from the time of its
inception to 30th June, 1904 : —First in order of mag-
nitude come the wharves, stores and sheds, &c., con-
structed at Millers’ Point for Dalgety and Company.
With the exception of a wool store, for the completion
of which arrangements have been made, these works
are now finished, and the wharf and shed accommo-
dation provided is no doubt the finest in the southern
hemisphere. Next comes the Trust’s new offices at
the Circular Quay, a work which was absolutely neces-
sarv, as the offices previously rented by the Trust
were out of the way and in other respects most incon-
venient The originally projected improvements at
Darling Island were completed, and, in addition thereto
a double-decked cargo shed was built, and a new wharf
constructed at the north end of the island. At Circular
Quay the various ferry jetties were re-built, and on
the western side of the Quay the wharves were re-
arranged and new sheds built for the Norddeutscher


Lloyd, for Gibbs, Bright and Company, and for the
China Navigation Company. The old naval stores
were renovated and made available for business pur-
poses. On the eastern side a new shod was built for
the M essageries Maritimes Company, the Orient wharf
was re-decked, and, in addition to this, the whole of
the roadway, which is vested in the commissioners,
was wood-blocked, and is now kept in first-class order.
At Fort Macquarie new jetties were built for the
accommodation of the picnic traffic, which, in the in-
terests of the safety of the ever-increasing traffic, it
was necessary to divert from the Quay. At Woolloo-
mooloo a new commodious shed was built for the
German-Australian S.S. Company; McArthur’s shed
and wharf were repaired, and a new wharf was built
for the accommodation of the blue metal trade. In
the Darling Harbour area, apart from the buildings at
Millers’ Point which have been already men-
tioned, many other works were carried out. Altera-
tions were made at the Central and Moore’s wharves,
and Moore’s Road is now being widened so as to give
better access to these properties. Smaller works were
carried out at the Grafton and North Coast Company s
wharves ; a new shed and jetty were built for Huddart
Parker and Company, and a jetty of considerable pro-
portion for the Howard Smith Company is in course
of construction. A new shed was constructed on the
Market wharf, which is now occupied by the Illawarra
Steam Navigation Company, and on the site of the old
Pyrmont Bridge an entirely new wharf was built, and
is now tenanted by the Melbourne S.S. Company.
Above the new bridge, improvements were carried out
at Nicoll’s, the Federal, and Byrnes’ wharves.
Hentsch’s bond was rebuilt and enlarged since the
fire ; an up-to-date oofiee palace was built in Sussex
Street, and a number of new cottages for waterside
workers in Napoleon Street and Day Street. On the
other hand, a large number of old and insanitary dwel-
lings were demolished. More, no doubt, remains to
be done in the way of demolition and reconstruction of
some of the small streets under the jurisdiction of the
commissioners, but this is simply a question of funds.
The three electric light stations controlled by the
Trust were greatly improved. Not very much has
been so far done in the remoter parts of the harbour,
where, of course, the necessity for the construction of
new works is much less pressing. Still, the wharves at
Manly and Watson’s Bay were much improved,
and vast improvements were carried out at Goat Is-
land, where wharfage accommodation was provided for
the tugs and launches belonging to the Trust ; a resi-
dence built for the harbour master, and cottages and
barra’cks for the crew of the fire-boat Pluvius.”
This boat, fitted up with the most modern fire-fighting
machinery, has already rendered valuable services on
the occasion of several fires amongst the shipping of
the port. Goat Island has been connected with the
metropolitan water supply, and a large portion of the
shipping which depends for its water upon licensed
water-boats is now supplied from the island. The
harbour lighting and signalling was greatly improved,
and new lights erected at Dawes Point, Millers’ Point,
and Goat Island, while a powerful light has been in-
stalled at Bradley’s Head. The dredging of the
harbour costs the Trust over £20.000 a year, and it is
interesting to note that during a period of three (3)
years and two (2) months a total quantity of 2,051,386
tons of silt, stone, ashes, garbage, &c., &c., was re-
moved from the bed of the harbour and towed out to
sea.
At the time of the inception of the Trust there
were only 167 leases of parts of the foreshores of Port
Jackson in existence, which had been granted by the
Lands Department. The officers of the Trust, how-
ever, up to the 30th June last, brought to light 132
cases of unauthorised occupations, of which 21 con-
sisted of a reclamation only, 81 of a wharf or jetty on
piles or some similar construction, and 30 comprised
both reclamation and a jetty, &c. Probably more of
these occupations may yet be discovered, and the
public revenue benefited by the rent charged to the
trespassers. In most of the cases so far dealt with
leases were subsequently granted by the commissioners,
and it may here be stated that the total number of
leases granted from February, 1901, to June, 1904,
was no less than 520. A few of these were for very
short terms only, and have expired, but the greater
majority are still in existence. Of leases gr c .nted by
the Lands Department before the inception of the
Trust there were 59 still current on the 30th June last.
Permission was also granted in 32 cases to lay down
moorings.
The commissioners have been strongly opposed to
the alienation of any further part of the foreshores of
the harbour. There were, however, a certain number
of cases in which matters had, at the inception of the
Trust, progressed so far in the Lands Department that
the commissioners decided to complete the cases of
alienation of land subject to the payment of wharfage
rates on goods landed thereon, but nothing further can
be done as regards the alienation of these lands until
the Reclamation Grants Bill, which is in course of
preparation, shall have become law. The number of
cases of this nature was, however, only 22, and the area
thus approved to be alienated amounted to a total of
only 4 acres 2 roods 72 perches. Practically, therefore,
the alienation of the foreshores has now ceased,
A low-level pumping system for the disposal of
sewage having been established in connection with the
Metropolitan Board of Water Supply and Sewerage, in
order to serve those portions of the harbour frontage
which were situated beneath the level of the ordinary
city and suburban sewerage system, a determined
effort is being made by the commissioners to put a stop
to the pollution of the waters of the harbour by the
discharge into it of crude sewage. There are a very
large number of private residences in and around
Sydney from which crude sewage is discharged into
the harbour, and, of course, it need hardly be said that
this creates a nuisance, which the commissioners have
decided shall be abated by every means in their power
and with as little delay as possible. In this endeavour
the commissioners have met with great encourage-
ment from the public, and they have received numer-
ous letters from people living in the localities affected
who have had the value of such improvements as thev
have already been able to effect brought home to them
by experience, particularly in such confined waters as


Mosman Bay, Neutral Bay, and Middle Harbour. The
evil effects of the accumulation of'filth in these waters
have been for many years recognised by the Govern-
ment, and a large number of very extensive reclama-
tions have been carried out at the heads of bays,
which have tended to increase considerably the amen-
ity of Sydney and the waterside suburbs ; but yet
more remains to be done, as evidenced by the fact that
there are probably some 1,800 houses yet in Sydney, a
certain number of which are connected with sewers
discharging into the harbour, the plans of whose drain-
age system have been lost.
For the first time in the history of Sydney a float-
ing fire-fighting plant was established by the Trust
early in 1903 for the protection of the shipping of the
harbour. The headquarters of this plant are at Goat
Island. The necessity for such a means of dealing
with fires on ships has been demonstrated more than
once lately, and Sydney can now point to the “ Plu-
vius ”as supplying a long-felt want. The boat pos-
sesses the finest and most powerful of floating fire en-
gines. It was built and used as a tug, the additional
cost of adding the fire-fighting appliances being only
£1,200. The dimensions are 100 feet bv 20 feet,
with a depth of 20 feet in the hold and a draught of
10 feet. The engines are compound, 24-inch and 29-
inch cylinders, 20-inch stroke ; boiler pressure, 120 lbs.
per square inch; speed, J3£ knots. The fire pumps
are designed by Merewether & Sons, of London, to lift
2,500 gallons of water per minute. A sufficient num
ber of men have been provided with residences at
Goat Island to man the vessel in case of an emergency,
and the station is connected by telephone with the
Exchange. The superintendent of the fire brigades
and the harbour master have lately come to an amic-
able agreement, according to which the former will
take complete control and responsibility in case of
fire on any vessel moored at any wharf vested in the
Trust and the harbour master will act under him for
the time being, the harbour master to advise whether
or not it be necessary to take any such vessel out into
the stream and when so separated from the wharf she
shall be in the sole charge of the harbour master. This
arrangement puts an ejul to the “ divided control
which formerly prevailed, and gives shipowners greater
security that their property will be adequately pro-
tected in case of fires on board ship within the precincts
of the port of Sydney.
If arrangements are made to transfer to the com-
missioners the whole of the revenue to which they are
legitimately entitled, the Trust will soon be in a posi-
tion to pay a higher rate of interest, and so to justify
its expense as an integral part of the administration of
the State.
Navigation, Harbours and Lighthouses.
Prior to the advent in Australian waters of steam,
and for some some years afterwards, the control of
lighthouses, the regulation of harbours, and the super-
intendence of pilots was vested in the office of the
Master Attendant. But as steam communication
caused such a rapid expansion in our coastal trade, it
was found necessary in the early fifties of the past cen-
tury to appoint an administrative body, with wider
powers than those wielded by a single official, and the
Marine Board came into existence. One of the first
acts of this authority was to get an Act passed by the
Legislature for the efficient management of steam ves-
sels, which remained in force for many years —a striking
testimony to the practical qualifications of the mem-
bers, who were principally selected from commercial
circles and the mercantile marine. The Navigation
Amendment Act of 1899 abolished the Marine Board,
and constituted a Department of Navigation and
Courts of Marine Inquiry. The powers and duties of
the department were defined by this measure, and the
Navigation Acts of 1871-96 were amended to accord
with the new jurisdiction.
The Department of Navigation is administered by
a superintendent, who is under the control of the Colo-
nial Treasurer. A deputy superintendent is appointed
for the port of Newcastle. The District Court sits as
a Court of Marine Inquiry to hear and determine in-
quiries, appeals, and references under the Act. One or
more of the District Court Judges holds the Court, and
is assisted by two assessors, who have power to advise,
but not to adjudicate. The Court, sitting as an open
Court, makes inquiries as to shipwrecks and other
casualties affecting ships, or as to charges of incompe-
tency or misconduct on the part of masters, mates, or
engineers of ships. The assessors who assist the Court
are of nautical, engineering, or other special skill.
Masters, mates, or engineers have their certificates
dealt with by the Court, and must deliver them to the
Court or to the superintendent as directed. The
superintendent has power vested in him to generally
superintend the framing of harbour regulations, ex-
cepting Port Jackson ; the preservation of harbour
havens and navigable creeks ; the licensing, appoint-
ment and removal of pilots ; the regulation of light-
houses ; the fixing of light and other sea, harbour, or
river marks ; the placing or removing of moorings ; the
licensing of watermen, ferries, lighters, and boats
plying for hire outside of Port Jackson.
Harbours and Ports.
New South Wales possesses many harbours and
bays affording outlets for the produce of the country,
harbours of commercial importance, and others of re-
fuge only in time of danger. Inside Cape Byron, in the
north the bay offers shelter in all but north-easterly
weather. A large pier enables the produce of Bruns


wick and the Tweed Rivers to be shipped when an
entrance to those rivers is impossible. At Shoal Bay,
the entrance to the Clarence, there is safe anchorage,
and it only Jacks the improvement of the river entrance
to make this one of the best ports on the coast. Trial
Bay, at the mouth of the Macleay, affords ample shel-
ter and safe anchorage. But the abandonment of the
construction of the breakwater prevents this from
developing into a shipping port. Port Macquarie,
at the mouth of the Hastings, and the harbour at
Forster, near Cape Hawke, afford good anchorage.
Port Stephens, as a natural port hardly inferior to
Port Jackson, offers at all times the safest and most
commodious harbour desirable. It is, however, little
Macquarie Lighthouse, South Head.
used, owing to its proximity to Newcastle. Twenty
miles south of Port Stephens is Port Hunter, at the
mouth of the river of that name, now rendered safe
and convenient by the construction of breakwaters
and training walls. Newcastle harbour, made by the
skill of man safe and roomy, possesses shipping facili-
ties equal, if not superior, to those found in any other
Australian port. Magnificent wharves line its shores,
provided with shipping facilities of the most modern
tvne. Still further south is Lake Macquarie, which,
lying in the centre of the coalfield system, when fur-
ther improved, will become an important shipping
place. Broken Bay, with its bold entrance, 15 miles
north of Port Jackson, forms the mouth of the river
Hawkesbury. The bay has three branches— Brisbane
Water, the Hawkesbury, and Pittwater. Port Jack-
son has been fully described elsewhere. Botany Bay,
the first port entered by Captain Cook, is used for
little more than a shelter in stress of weather. Wol-
longong, Kiama, and Ulladulla are small harbours
which have been snatched as it were from the sea,
and now are important shipping places. Jervis Bay,
80 miles from Sydney, has an entrance two miles wide,
and safe anchorage may be found on its bosom in any
part. Bateman’s Bay, at the entrance to the Clyde,
is an inlet of some importance ; and Twofold Bay, a
magnificent sheet of water, near the southern limit
of the State, is well sheltered and affords ample ship-
ping facilities.
Lighthouses.
The coast of New South Wales is guarded by
twenty-five lighthouses, including a small light at
Richmond River, and there is, in addition, a lighthouse
at Shoalhaven River beyond repair.
Beginning at the Victorian border, the lights are
at Green Cape, Twofold Bay, Montagu Island, Warden
Head, Point Perpendicular, Crookhaven, Kiama, Wol-
longong, Macquarie (South Head), Hornby (Inner
South Head), Barrenjoey, Norah Head (near Tuggerah
Lakes), Nobby’s (Newcastle), Point Stephens, Nelson’s
Head, Seal Rocks, Crowdy Head (Manning River),
Tacking Point (Hastings), Smoky Cape (Trial Bay).
South Solitary Island (off North Coast), Clarence
Heads, Richmond Heads, Cape Byron, and Fingal
Head, at the Tweed River.
The whole of the buildings and apparatus were
valued for Commonwealth purposes at a total of
£238,787 ss. 3d.
The two oldest lighthouses are the Hornby (built
directly after the “ Dunbar ” wreck) and Nobby’s at
Newcastle, the voungest being that at Crookhaven
Heads, only four years old. The new Macquarie light
replaced the old one 25 years ago. Exposure in some
places is very great, the height of the lighthouses above
sea-level ranging from 120 feet at Smoky Cape to 125
feet at Twofold Bay. Various descriptions of appa-
ratus are employed, such as the dioptric, catoptric
and catadioptric, each being kept up to date and
renewed when the periodical inspection demands it.
The lights are also various, some “ flashing,” some
with fixed colours —red, green or white ; others show
white and red alternately, and two are feu eclair. The
actual candle power cannot be given in most cases ;
the lamps (kerosene) vary in actual power from 50 in
the smaller lights to from 400 to 700 in the first-class
ones, the optical apparatus still further increasing the
power of the emergent beams. The Macquarie (South
Head) is electric, and of 12,000 candles, increased by
the optical panels to near 1,000,000 candles in
each ray.
The visible range of the rays in perfectly clear
weather is limited (for every light) by the earth’s
curvature only ; the first-class lights reach this range
in ordinarily clear weather, but the lower-class lights
do not show to the same distance. The observed dis-
tances range from 7 miles at Twofold Bay to 27 miles


at the Macquarie light, with a possible or geographical
range of 17 miles to 27 in these cases. Macquarie is
the only one lit by electricity ; Hornby, Kiama and
Wollongong use gas. All the others use mineral oil,
except Twofold Bay, where it might be dangerous in
the small old wooden tower, so vegetable oil is the
luminant there. All the latest improvements, vapor-
ising, Welsbach mantles, and everything that increases
the lighting replaces the existing conditions without
delay. 44 Flashing,” or revolving lights, are worked
by clockwork, driven by chains and falling weights,
which break up the light. The 44 flashing ” was dis-
continued at the Macquarie lighthouse owing to the
danger accruing to shipping in the harbour.
44 Group flashing” means three short flashes
every 20 or 30 seconds, and the feu eclair is a lightning
flash lasting one-fifth of a second. A magnificent
erection of crystal holds the optical apparatus at Mac-
quarie light. It has sixteen sides, and, being very
heavy, requires considerable power to work it. The
light which used to show landward is now intercepted
by a fixed prismatic mirror, and reflected out to sea,
so that nothing is wasted. The same conservation of
light is observed at all coast stations, but on islands
the gleam shows in all directions.
The total upkeep of the lighthouses of New South
Wales costs between £13,000 and £14,000 a yeai.
Against this there is some revenue derived from har-
bour and light dues, the remaining cost being defrayed
from the general revenue, so that it is not a revenue-
producing department, but a real national benefit.
The Fisheries of New South Wales.
New South Wales possesses over 700 miles of a
shore line, off which arc splendid, but undeveloped,
fisheries. Her numberless inlets, superb harbours,
and extensive rivers teem with fish life. Some of the
edible marine fishes are of great value and enormous
size. Huge black rock cod, the lordly and much es-
teemed schnapper, jewfish, whiting, black bream, tre-
vally, mullet, blackfish, teraglin, garfish, herring, the
pilchard, the anchovy, and other varieties maybe cap-
tured on the coast and in the estuaries. Delicious
oysters abound in many of the rivers and far-extending
shallow bays, and, in addition, crayfish, prawns, Ac.,
are plentiful in their season. The great inland rivers
—the Murray, the Darling and the Murrumbidgee-
are rich in piscine life, and the far-famed Murray cod,
which not infrequently attains a weight of from 40 lbs.
to 80 lbs. (specimens exceeding 100 lbs. in weight have
been taken), can be caught in quantity.
Despite the fact that there is an abundance of the
various species within easy reach, the fish supply of
the State is totally insufficient to meet the demands
of the population, and exceedingly dear. Fish is a
positive rarity in the suburbs of Sydney, and in all the
inland towns.
It seems incredible that with a population of
more than 1,500,000 souls, and the great possibilities
staring us in the face, that an association has not been
formed long ago to develop the enormously prolific
fisheries of New South Wales by the establishment,
on large and substantial bases, of the important indus-
tries of fish-capture, oyster-culture, fish-distribution,
fish-curing in all its branches, whaling, and, indeed,
the pursuit of every industry which has its origin in
the products of the sea, including the manufacture of
fertilisers from fish refuse and the non-edible section,
and the extraction and refinement of fish oil.
Salting, drying, tinning, and smoking the excellent
edible fishes which abound in New South Wales waters
should form special departments in any association’s
operations, and should prove profitable in the extreme.
When it is considered that for the five years ending
December, 1904, frozen and preserved fish to the
value of £782,000 were imported into New South
Wales, the neglect to utilise the raw material of a
better class waiting unheeded at the verv doors of the
colonists is simply amazing.
Port Stephens, Lake Macquarie, Lake Illawarra,
Tuggerah Lakes, Hawkesbury River, Jervis Bay,
Port Macquarie, and the Clarence River are, amongst
others, pre-eminently adapted for fish-curing estab-
lishments on an extensive scale, and there is no ques-
tioning the fact that fish of the finest species and in
almost inexhaustible quantities are at all seasons of
the year obtainable in the vicinity of these places.
There is an abundance of the very choicest fish within
the waters of New South Wales. The potentiality of
natural wealth in the depth of our waters may possibly
be found to be astounding, but as vet those waters are
C? 7 %/
unexplored. Our deep-sea fishing-grounds should be
one of the chief sources of supply, and the lakes,
lagoons, &c., should be looked upon and cared for as
natural nurseries for stocking the ocean. A trawling
expedition was undertaken in the Government steamer
“Thetis,” the result proving beyond doubt that
trawling could be carried on in connection with our
offing fisheries, and with success. Over ninety dif-
ferent specimens were captured, including John Dory,
schnapper, sole, flounder, skate and flathead.
There are about 525 “ good ” species of New
South Wales fishes (Elaswiohranchs and Teleosteans) ,
and of this number about half may be regarded as
“ edible fishes ” properly so called. These include the


ox-eye (ox-eyed herring), grant herring, salmon herring,
bony bream (Pibrie), pilchard, herring, freshwater her-
ring, sandy sprat, anchovy, freshwater catfish, estuary
catfish, long-finned eel, silver eel, Australian grayling,
Sergeant Baker, slender long-tom, stout long-tom, sea
garfish, river garfish, short-beaked garfish, sea mullet
(hardgut mullet), flat-tail mullet (fan-tail mullet),
Richmond mullet, tallegalane (sand mullet), yellow-eye
mullet, short-finned pike, ling (Beardie), nannygai,
blackfish, bluefish, estuary perch, golden perch, Mac-
quarie perch, Murray cod, black rock-cod, Queensland
groper, pearl perch (epaulette-fish), old-wife, long-
finned pike, Australian salmon (salmon trout), sand
whiting, trumpeter whiting, spotted whiting, jewfish,
teraglin, bastard trumpeter, cockatoo fish, morwong,
jackass-fish, silver perch (grunter), giant boar-fish,
schnapper (red bream, squire, &c.), bream (black
bream), tarwhine, blue-striped red mullet, sweep,
butter-fish, spotted pig-fish, striped pig-fish, blue-
spotted groper, blue groper, maori (rainbow-fish), rock
whiting, herring kale, kingfish, yellowtail, trevally,
tailer, mackerel, horse mackerel, banded Spanish
mackerel, spotted Spanish mackerel, barracouta, large-
toothed flounder, small-toothed flounder, long-snouted
flounder, black sole, red gurnet perch, red rock-cod,
bull-rout, common flathead, red gurnard (kumu gur-
nard), sharp-beaked gurnard, river blackfish (slippery)
variable leather)acket, common leather)acket (“ China
man ’ ’ v -
Observatory, Meteorological and Statistical.
One of the first buildings erected in Sydney after
Governor Phillip commenced to lay out the town was
the observatorv. With the fleet had come out Lieu-
tenant Dawes and a number of instruments from the
Board of Longitude for the purpose of observing the
comet that was to be seen at the end of the year 1788.
The observatory was erected at Dawes Point, then
known as Point Maskelyne, after the Astronomer
Royal in England. In the native language the site was
termed “ Tarra.” The building, however, proved too
small for its purposes, and a second one was built on
an adjacent site, which accommodated not only the
astronomical accessories, but Lieutenant Dawes and his
family. Our first astronomer, artillery and engineer
officer left Sydney early in 1792, and died at his estate,
Grenada Hall, Grenada, in the West Indies, on Apiil
14, 1819, having administered the Government of
Sierra Leone for six years at broken intervals between
1792 and 1803. After Astronomer Dawes’ departure
the science ceased to be further prosecuted until the
arrival of General Sir ihomas Brisbane. 1 hence the
astronomical history of New South Wales commenced.
At his own expense he built an observatory at Parra-
matta, obtaining valuable instruments lor it, and the
skilled services of Messrs. Carl Riimker (afterwards
the distinguished director of the Hamburg Obser-
vatorv) and James Dunlop. The principal instru-
ments employed were a transit instrument of 64 inches
focal length and 3-J inches aperture, a 2-feet mural
circle (both by Troughton), a 16-inch repeating circle
by Reichenbach, and a small equatorial of 42 inches
focal length. Here Sir Thomas Brisbane turned for
relaxation from his governmental duties, and Parra-
matta soon began to be called in Europe the Greenwich
of the southern hemisphere. Here, too, in the small
Sydnev observatorv, given into his charge by his cousin,
M. Flinders, the young midshipman. John Franklin,
worked out those difficult problems of navigation
which afterwards helped him during his arctic voyage.
The first fruits of the labours of the Parramatta obser-
vatory consisted of observations of the summer sol-
stice of 1821, the results of which were made known
to the astronomical world through the Astronomiche
Nachrichten of Sthumacher. One of the most interest-
ing circumstances in connection with this observatory
is that we owe to it the verification of one of the most
remarkable investigations in physical astronomy.
This was the elaborate investigation by the late Pro-
fessor Encke into the movements of the comet dis-
covered by Pons in 1818, but which now universally
bears the name of the distinguished professor. On
the evening of the 2nd June, 1822, the wanderer was
detected by Mr. Riimker. A series of observations,
extending to June 29, was made, which enabled Encke
to correct his elements and predict the next apparition
with increased accuracy. Besides the useful cata-
logue of 7,385 stars, published as the result of the
labours of the Parramatta observatory, and Mr. Dun-
lop’s catalogue of upwards of 600 nebulae and clusters
of stars, together with a valuable collection of double
stars, the observatory was not behind in cometary
discovery, no less than five comets being discovered
and observed during the years 1822 and 1833.
The Parramatta observatory was dismantled in
1847, and its roofless brick walls were still to be seen
in the park a few years ago, but nothing remained to
testify to the character of the ruins except the stone
part which once formed the support of the meridian
instrument. From the time that operations ceased
to the arrival of Sir William Denison the colony had
not contributed anything worth recording towards the
•J v
promotion of astronomy. Sir William drew attention
to the importance of establishing a Government insti-
tution ; the Council, concurring in his views, voted, in
March, 1855, a sum of money for the erection of a
national observatory, and the Rev. William Scott,
M.A., of the Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, was
appointed to the important office of first astronomer


to the establishment, erected on the summit of Flag-
staff Hill, a little to the north of the 1 ort Street Model
School. The institution —a handsome stone structure,
comprising the astronomer’s residence, the library and
the computer’s room, with a square tower, 58 feet
high, arising from the entre, and carrying the time
ball, a transit room with two meridian openings, and
an octagonal domed building for the reception of the
equatorial—was opened in 1858, when meridian obser-
vations were commenced. Mr. Scott resigned in 18(52
and Mr. G. R. Smalley, 8.A., was appointed as his
successor. Upon Mr. Smalley’s death, in July, 1870,
Mr. H. C. Russel], who had joined the Observatory
staff in 1859, was appointed Government Astronomer,
a position held by him for upwards of 35 years. After
his retirement, in 1905, it was considered desirable to
separate to some extent the astronomical and meteoro-
but six ; now it approximates 2,000. Weather charts
and forecasts are issued twice daily. This work is
expanding, and much interest is being shown in it by
the general public.
Last year the Observatory was visited by 1,405
persons during the afternoons on which it was open
to the public. The staff numbers 15 persons, in addi-
tion to the Government Astronomer.
Meteorological.
Going back to the earlier days ot meteorological
studies in New South Wales, unfortunately fifty-two
years were allowed to pass over before any regular
observations were taken. Except for the labours of
the Rev. W. B. Clarke—who studied the climate for
upwards of thirty years and published some papers
on electrical storms in the Sydney Morning Herald of
Lighthouse at Wollongong.
logical work of the institution, Mr. H. E. Lenehan
being appointed Acting Government Astronomer, and
Mr. H. A. Hunt, Acting Meteorologist. So far as
astronomical work is concerned, the observations taken
during 1905 comprised nearly 2,000 stars and up-
wards of 300 determinations of collimation and azi-
muths. At the branch observatory, which has been
established at Red Hill, a number of photographic
chart and test plates have been prepared. The mea-
surement of star plates, jointly undertaken by this
State and Victoria, has been carried on vigorously. A
daily time ball service is maintained at Sydney and
Newcastle.
Meteorological observations have received special
attention, as is very desirable in a country whose
prospeiity is so largely affected by climatic conditions.
In 1870 the number of meteorological stations was
1842 —some papers by Mr. Tebbutt—whose collection
of astronomical and meteorological instruments is one
of the finest owned by any private individual anywhere,
and by a long way the best in Australasia, —by Mr.
Jevens, Count Strzelecki, and some others, the only
information was obtained from books and newspapers
of the time, and so meagre as to be unsafe to make
deductions from. Sir Thomas Brisbane caused
meteorological as well as astronomical observations
to be taken ; but, unfortunately, excepting part of
1822, all of 1823, part of 1824, and one year, probably
1827, without date, all these records were lost long ago.
In the year 1840 the Government first caused meteoro-
logical observations to be taken, but at only two places
in New South Wales —Port Macquarie and the South
Head, Port Jackson. These were carried on at Port
Macquarie until 1849, and at South Head till 1855 ;


the Observer then left the colony, and the instruments
were lost, so that it was not possible to ascertain their
quality when regular records were taken.
In 1856 Mr. Jevens commenced and carried on, at
his own expense, a most valuable series of observations
until the arrival of Rev. W. Scott. Twelve stations
were established by the latter in 1856 —Rockhampton,
Brisbane, Casino, Armidale, Maitland, Bathurst, Parra-
matta, Sydney, Goulburn, Deniliquin, Albury and
Cooma —and, with the exception of the first two, which
were handed over to the Queensland Government,
these have been retained ever since. In J 863 Mr.
Tebbutt, of Windsor, added to his other instruments
a complete set of meteorological ones, and has since
maintained a most valuable series of observations,
adding to those usually taken those of maximum wet
and minimum wet, which for many years were not
recorded elsewhere. When Mr. H. C. Russell became
Government astronomer meteorological observations
February ; they are always attended with strong elec-
j7 • ,
trical excitement, a stream ol sparks being sometimes
produced for an hour at the electrometer. In autumn
the wind begins to change to westerly, and brings
unsettled weather, the character of which varies in
different years. In some the east is below and the
west above ; then much rain falls on the coast. In
others the east is above and the west below, with much
cloudy weather and little rain. In winter the wind is
steady from the west, with storms of wind and rain
from eastward in June, July or August, and sometimes
southerly wind with rain ; but the prevalent wind is
west-north-west for all the winter months. The eas-
terly gales, which come on without warning, instru-
mental or otherwise, are by far the most dangerous on
the coast, bringing with them, in nearly all cases,
thick weather, torrents of rain, and a very high sea on
a lee-shore, from which none but the best-found vessels
can get away, and others, if unable to make a port,
Lighthouse on Seal Rocks.
were conducted at the ten stations above referred
to. Gradually, with infinite labour and patience, he
built up the present system, until there are now
observing stations to a number in excess of 2,000,
all of which send in regular returns, to be care-
fully analysed in the Observatory. From the year
1877 down to the present these were published through
Mr. Russell's weather predictions and daily weather
charts.
Of our winds, in this State in summer the preva-
lent winds on the coast are south-east and north-east
during the day, and light westerly at night. In winter
westerly winds prevail, with occasional gales from east
and south. Inland the winds are from north and west,
with heavy rains and storms of wind from eastward
and occasionally southward. Southerly busters are
generally to be expected from November to the end of
must be wrecked. In one of the worst of these —that
known as the “ Cawarra gale no less than fourteen
vessels were lost on the coast. Generally the baro-
meter is low for northerly, high for southerly wind ;
lowest for north-west, the true tropical ; highest with
south-east, the true polar wind. A low barometer is
an indication of a westerly wind, either in winter or
summer. High barometer in winter indicates southerly
wind. January and February are our hottest months,
and nearly equal. March and December, May and
September, June and August are nearly equal in each
case, and the temperature of April is the same as the
mean of October and November. The evaporation in
October, November, December and January is greater
than that in the other eight months of the year. De-
cember has the greatest, June the least, evaporation.


Mr. G. H. KNIBBS, F.R.A.S.,
&c-, Federal Statistician, was born
in 1858, and educated in this State.
He entered the public service in
1877. immediately after receiv-
ing his diploma as a surveyor.
He was on the Trigono-
metrical and General Survey
staff. Mr. Knibbs has contribute 1
several papers to the Royal Society,
on original researches in the pro-
vinces of astronomy, mathematics,
physics, meteorology, geodesy, physi-
cal geology, hydraulics, artesian
theory, &c. He was in 1891 the
successful competitor for a £SO prize,
open to all, for an essay on “ The
Nature and Public Utility of Trigo-
nometrical, General, and Cadastral
Survey.” The judges were the Sur-
veyors-General of the Australian
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. G. H. KNIBBS.
vStates. For many years he was a
member of the examining board for
surveyor’s diplomas, and examined
on several occasions for the Technical
College, Hawkesbury Agricultural
College, Public Service Board, &c.
He is a fellow of the Royal Astrono-
mical vSociety of Great Britain, a
member of the Internationaler
Verband fur die Materialpriifungen-
der Technik, was president of the
vSydney branch of the British
Astronomical Association, the
Astronomy, Mathematics and Physics
section of the Australasian As-
sociation for the Advancement of
.Science, the .Sydney University
Engineering Society, the Institution
of Surveyors of New South Wales,
and Society for Child Study. Mr.
Knibbs has had charge of the De-
partment of Engineering at the
University, and has also been Acting-
Professor of Physics. He was honor-
ary editor of the Royal Society’s
journal and also of the Surveyor.
Mr. Knibbs’ greatest work has un-
doubtedly been that discharged in
connection with his commission,
under the seal of the Stale, on edu-
cation. Air. Knibbs was Director of
Technical Education prior to his
appointment as Federal Statistician.
Mr. H. A. LENEHAN, Govern-
ment Astronomer, was born in
Sydney on August 29th, 1843.
His education was received at Lynd-
hurst College, Glebe, which he en-
tered in 1853. In 1865 he became
a clerk in the service of the Bank,
Ipswich, Queensland, but later was
transferred to the Rockhampton
branch. While at Rockhampton
he was offered a situation in the
Roads Department, Bowen ; event-
ually he was appointed drafts-
man in the railway service. On
completion of the first section of the
railways to Westwood, the staff
was removed to Toowoomba. In
1869 this °ffi ce was closed, and,
refusing an offer to go to the
Gilbert Ranges, Mr. Lenehan severed
his connection with the Queensland
Public Service. Twelve months
later he received an appointment as
computer in the Sydney Obser-
vatory, and since then he has had
charge of the time signals, clocks,.
Transit Circle, &c.. in the institution.
The staff of the Observatory consis-
ted then of only three officers, there
are now 16. On two previous oc-
casions, viz., in 1875 and 1877,
Mr. Lenehan filled the position of
acting astronomer during the absence
of Mr. Russell in England.
Towards the end of 1903 Mr. Russell
was granted twelve months’ leave of
absence prior to retiring from the ser-
vice, and Mr. Lenehan was again ap-
pointed acting astronomer. He was
congratulated by Professor Otto
Klotz, F.R.A.vS.. the Government
Astronomer of Canada, and Air. W.
J. Hussey, of the Lick Observatory,
California, wrote expressing appre-
ciation of tin; helpfulness of the
Sydney Observatory in facilitating
his work. Mr. John Tebbutt, of
Windsor, who has a world-wide
reputation in scientific circles for
the work he has performed, particu-
larly in connection with comets, has
on several occasions during the past
sixteen years thanked Mr. Lenehan
for the valuable assistance rendered
him. What Mr. Russell thought of
him may be gathered from the fol-
lowing letter, which he gave to
Mr. Lenehan in 1886 ; “It would
give me very great pleasure if I can
in any way assist you to gain a
MR. H. A. LENNEHAN.
position in which the emolument is
more in keeping with your ability
than that which the Observatory
provides. My daily contact with you
in official work for sixteen }*ears en-
ables me to say that you have great
tact and ability in getting on with
your work and a most obliging
method of sharing the responsibilities
of office life. Than Mr. Lenehan no
official could be more obliging. He
regards himself as a public servant
in the fullest acceptance of the
term. His work is not alone con-
fined to office hours, in that many
evenings are occupied in showing
to visitors the wonders of the
heavens.” In 1892 Mr. Lenehan had
a serious illness and obtained six
months' leave of absence, spending
the vacation on a visit to England.
At the annual general meeting of the
Royal Society of New South Wales,
held on May 3, 1905, for the election
of officers, Mr. Lenehan was elected
President; he is also Treasurer of the
“ Banks” Memorial Fund.


Mr . ROB E R T ROW A N
PURDON HICKSON, President
of the Sydney Harbour Trust, was
born in the County Kerry, Ireland,
in September, 1842, his father being
a Church of England clergyman and
his grandfather a Justice of the
Peace and Deputy Lieutenant of
the County. In iB6O he was articled
to Mr. James Barton, M.I.C E.,
Engineer-in-Chief of the principal
works in the north of Ireland, in-
cluding the Dundalk, Inniskilling
and Londonderry railway, Carling-
ford Plarbour works and minor
operations. 'ln 1864 he was ap-
pointed by Mr. Barton as his princi-
pal assistant, and placed in charge
of the Carlingford Harbour works
which were under the Carlingford
Harbour Commissioners. Later
Mr. Hickson was appointed by the
J. Hubert Newman , Sydney,
MR. ROBT. R. P. HICKSON.
late Mr. Baker, Engineer-in-Chief
for the London and North-western
Railway, to take charge of the ex-
tensive marine railway station at
Glenore. The company deciding
upon making more up-to-date pro-
vision for passenger traffic, and also
for the ever-increasing business in
cattle and general goods, entrusted
the matter to Mr. Hickson. On
the death of the Harbour Master,
Captain Graham, R.N., Mr. Hickson
was appointed by the commissioners
to the vacant position and as such
had charge of all pilots, lighthouses,
&c. These responsibilities were in
addition to his duties as engineer.
In 1871 he was appointed by the
late Sir James Ramsden, Managing
Director of the Barrow-in-Furness
Railway Co,, as Harbour Engineer.
In 1876 Mr. Hickson was nominated
by the late Sir John Coode for the
position of engineer-in-chief for the
harbours and jetties in South Aus-
tralia. The first work lie was called
upon to perform after his arrival was
the complete reorganisation of the
dredging appliances and the con-
struction of a dockyard at Port
Adelaide. He built the Victor
Harbour breakwater, and made
navigable the Port Creek thus en-
abling vessels to reach Port Adelaide
at any time. In 1886 he was ap-
pointed by the late Mr. Moriarty,
Engineer-in-Chief for Harbours and
Rivers, to take charge of the New-
castle Harbour works, and all the
harbour works from Newcastle to
the Queensland border. He also
carried out the water supply for
Newcastle and suburbs, including
the construction of the large pump-
ing station at Maitland. In 1888,
upon the retirement of Mr. Moriarty,
and as Mr. Darley, the principal
Assistant Engineer, was absent in
England, Mr. Hickson was appointed
Acting - Engineer -in - Chief, which
position he held for a period of ten
months, until Mr. Darley returned.
In 1889, in succession to Mr. Bennett
who had retired, he was appointed
Engineer-in-Chief and Commis-
sioner for Roads and Bridges. The
sewerage works of the western and
northern suburbs, involving an ex-
penditure of over were
then placed under Mr. Hickson’s
control. He held this position until
the reorganisation of the department
in 1895, when he was appointed
Engineer-in-Chief for Public Works,
and had the control of the whole of
the engineering works of the State,
with the exception of the railways
and tramways. On the passing of
the Public Service Act he was ap-
pointed by the board to the position
of Under Secretary and Commis-
sioner for Roads and subsequently
President of the Harbour Trust.
On the formation of the Public
Service Tender Board by the Public
Service Board he was appointed
chairman, which position, twelve
months later, owing to the pressure
of departmental works, he was re-
luctantly compelled to resign. He
has also acted as Vice-President of
the Public Works Tender Board,
Chairman of the Departmental
Board of Reference, and a member
of the Sydney Water and Sewerage
Board. In 1874 Mr. Hickson was
elected associate member of the In-
stitution of Civil Engineers, and in
1876 was transferred to the full
membership. He is a member of
the local committee of the above
institution, a member of the Royal
Society and a Justice of the Peace
for New South Wales and South
Australia. He has taken consider-
able interest in the volunteer move-
ment, is major commanding the
recently formed Civil Service Volun-
teer Corps. In 1866 Mr. Hickson
married Sophia, daughter of the late
Rev. Hamilton Haire, by whom he
has had seven children, two
daughters and five sons.
Mr. THOMAS FRANCIS
WALLER, Commissioner of the
Sydney Harbour Trust, is the second
J, Hubert Newman. Sydney .
MR. T. F. WALLER.
son of the late John Francis Waller,
Esq., of Finoe House, Tipperary,
LL.D. and J.P., Barrister-at-Law,
the distinguished poet and author
vice-president of the Royal Irish
Academy, and was born in Dublin,
Ireland, in 1844. He was educated,
first at St. Columba’s College, Dub-
lin, then at Bray College, England,
and subsequently matriculating at
Trinity College, Dublin. In 1863
the subject of this brief sketch came
to Melbourne, and being desirous to
gain experience in pastoral pursuits,
he journeyed inland and there ac-
quired a knowledge and experience
which eventually proved of great
service to him in undertaking the
business of a stock and station agent,


to which his attention was ultimately
directed. The firm of Messrs. T. F.
Waller & Co., of Albury, which was
subsequently sold to Messrs. C. L.
Griffiths & Co , owed its origin to
his skill and untiring efforts. Mr.
T. F. Waller, after the sale of the
business, went back to Melbourne
and there pursued the same avo-
cation, joining the service of Messrs.
R. Goldsbrough & Co. In the year
1865 he arrived in Sydney to take
the management ot that firm’s
interest in New South Wales. Sub-
sequently he started the business of
a land and estate agent, during
which period he did considerable
business with the Government as an
expert and valuator. Mr. Waller
was chairman of the commission
appointed to inquire into the working
of the Public Service, and was
appointed a member of the Royal
Casual Labour Commission. He
was a member of the Advisory
Board to the Government upon the
occasion of the resumption of the
foreshores of the harbour in 1900,
In February of the ensuing year,
upon the formation of the Sydney
Harbour Trust, Mr. Waller was
appointed to his present position
with Mr. Hickson (president). He
is a vice-president of the Industrial
Blind Institution, with which he has
been associated for many years.
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. HAROLD FRANCIS NORRIE.
Mr. HAROLD FRANCIS
NORRIE, Secretary to the Sydney
Harbour Trust, is a member of the
legal protession, a Commissioner for
Affidavits, and a Justice of the
Peace. Mr. Norrie joined the Slate
service in 1872, and has since filled
many positions therein. He served
upwards of eleven years in the
office of the Crown Solicitor, and
was for thirteen years in charge of
the legal work in the Department of
Public Works. Mr. Norrie came
prominently before the public a few
years ago in connection with the
conduct of the defence of the Public
Works Department before the Royal
Commission appointed at the in-
stance of the Member for Canterbury
(Mr. Varney Parkes) to investigate
certain grave charges against the
department, and which resulted in
the complete vindication of its ad-
ministration. He gained considerable
prominence later on in connection
with the demolition of the old
Devonshire Street cemeteries and
the settlement of the heavy claims
arising out of the transference of the
remains to other burial grounds.
He also held many important de-
partmental inquiries whilst in the
Department of Public Works, and
was elected on two consecutive
occasions to represent the officers of
that department on the Council of
the Public Service Association. Mr.
Norrie has been a resident of Vau-
cluse for many years, and took an
active part in its incorporation as a
borough. He was elected as an
alderman of its first council, and sat
continuously for upwards of eight
years, resigning only on acceptance
of his present appointment. He is
Chairman of the Public School
Board, Chairman of the South Head
Cemetery Trust, and is also one of
the Commissioners of the South
Head Trust, and Chairman of the
La Perouse Cemetery Trust—a trust
specially appointed by the State
Government to look after the un-
claimed remains removed from
Devonshire Street.
Mr. HENRY DEANE WALSH,
M. Inst. C.E., 8.A.1. (Dublin),
Engineer-in-Chief of the Sydney
Harbour Trust, is the son of the late
Right Eton. John Edward Walsh,
a prominent member of the Irish bar,
who held office during 1866 as Attor-
ney-General for Ireland and Con-
servative member for Dublin Uni-
versity ; at the time of his death he
was Master of the Rolls for Ireland.
Mr. H. D. Walsh was born in Dublin
in 1853, and was educated at Portora
Royal School, Enniskillen and sub-
sequently at Dublin University where
he took his B.A. degree in 1873 : he
also passed through the University
Engineering School and attained the
degree of 8.A.1. in the following year.
He served his time at the Great
Southern and Western Railway in
Ireland under the late Mr. Valentine
Brown, M. Inst. C.E., and having
practised his profession for a few
years in Ireland came to New South
Wales in 1877. He shortly after-
wards obtained an appointment in
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. HENRY DEANE WALSH,
the Harbours and Rivers Branch ot
the Public Works Department, the
first work entrusted U. him being a
contour survey of the present Prospect
Reservoir. In the following year
Mr. Walsh was appointed Resident
Engineer in the Newcastle district,
and in that capacity had charge of
the construction of the \\ alka Reser-
voir, the Walka Pumping Station,
and other important works in connec-
tion with the Hunter District water
supply, Maitland River bank pro-
tection works, &c., &c. In 1888,
during the absence of the district
engineer, Mr. Walsh was called upon
to fill the position of acting district
engineer to the northern district,
which at that time included all har-
bour works, &c., from Lake Mac-
quarie north to the Queensland
border. Early in the following year
he received the permanent appoint-
ment of district engineer for New-
castle, embracing the various harbour
works at Lake Macquarie, Port
Stephens, Cape Hawke, the Manning
(River Heads, Camden Haven, and


Port Macquarie, in addition to the
extensive works for the improvement
of the port of Newcastle. In 1892
Mr. Walsh was appointed an official
member of the Hunter District Water
Supply and Sewerage Board, of which
body he held the position of president
from 1896 to 1901. On the inception
of the Sydney Harbour Trust in Feb-
ruary, Igo 1, Mr. Walsh was appointed
engineer-in-chief, and in that capacity
has carried out many important im-
provements in connection with the
berthing accommodation and shipping
facilities of the port, Mr. Walsh was
elected an associate member of the
Institution of Civil Engineers on 6th
February, 1883, and a full member
on sth November, 1889.
Captain CHARLES E. BIRD,
Harbour Master of Port of Sydney,
J. Hubert Newman, Sydney .
CAPTAIN CHAS. E. BIRD.
was born at Swansea, Glamorgan-
shire, on the 30th July, 1862, and is a
son of the late G. E. Bird, Esq., J.P.,
of Swansea, merchant, and Vice-
Consul for Germany, Denmark,
Norway and Sweden. He was edu-
cated at Singleton House School,
Newcastle-on-Tyne. He started sea
life in 1878 as an apprentice to
Messrs. Charles Hill & Sons, of
Bristol, now managing directors of
the Bristol City Line, and served in
their full-rigged ships “ H.M. Royal
Highness” and “ Eagle,” trading to
the west coast, South America.
Here he remained four years as
apprentice and seven months as third
mate. He passed his first nautical
examination at the aye of twenty and
his final at twenty-three. Two years
later he attained to the rank of a
chief officer. In 1884 he entered the
service of the Anglo-Australasian
S.S. Co., sailing with their steamers
“ Fenstanton,” “ Port Adelaide, and
“ Hankow,” which traded between
the old land and Australian, Indian,
Japanese and Chinese waters. He
acted as an officer in the s.s.
“ Hankow ” while an Imperial trans-
port in the Egyptian campaign of
1885-6. He was appointed in 1887
to the command of the s.s. “ Port
Victor” at Yokohama, that vessel
being chartered for the C.P.R. mail
service, Vancouver, 8.C., and Hong-
kong at its inception on the com-
pletion of the Canadian railway.
Captain Bird was appointed sub-
lieutenant of the Royal Naval Reserve
in December, 1889; lieutenant, Oc-
tober, 1890, resigning from the service
in 1897, when he relinquished active
sea life. He remained in the Anglo-
Australasian Co.’s service in con-
tinuous command of the s.s. “ Port
Victor ” and the s.s. “ Port Albert”
until 1894, when he was offered
command at Sydney of the R.M.S.
“ Warrimoo,” of the Canadian-Aus-
tralian mail line, James Huddart
managing director. In this position
he assisted in the opening of the
“All Red ” route. In 1897 he was
offered and accepted the position of
manager and secretary o+ Messrs.
Flood & Co. Ltd., Sydney. His
service with this company extended
over a period of four years, during
which time he also practised as a
marine surveyor. Captain Bird holds
a pilotage certificate for Sydney and
Newcastle. He has had the honour
to be included upon the first panel of
nautical assessors appointed to advise
the District Court Judge at Courts
of Marine Inquiry. On the formation
of the Sydney Harbour Trust he was
appointed by the commissioner to the
position of harbour master and chief
wharfinger, with the supervision of
the collection of wharfage. This
position he still occupies. During
1899 he was a member of the
sectional committee of the Sydney
Chamber of Commerce.
Mr. STEPHEN EDWARD
P E R D R I A U, Chief Surveyor,
Sydney Harbour Trust, New South
Wales, was born in Balmain, Sydney,
in 1858, and was educated at the
Fort Street Public School and after-
wardsat the Sydney (Grammar School.
Having passed a competitive exam-
ination in 1875,11 c entered the public
service as a cadet in the Survey
Department. In 1877 he passed the
Field Assistants’ examination, and
in 1879 that which qualified him as a
licensed surveyor. Pie was then
appointed assistant to the late Mr.
W. J. Condon, Superintendent of the
Trigonometrical Survey then being
carried out in the Base Line Camp,
Richmond. In 1881 he returned to
Sydney, and spent a year as assistant
surveyor under Mr. Bullock, who was
then in charge of the North Sydney
district. In 1883 Mr. Bullock resigned
his position and was succeeded by
Mr. Perdriau. During his control of
this district Mr. Perdriau made a
comprehensive survey of practically
the whole of the Crown grants of that
area. Upon the passing of the Crown
Lands Act of 1884 he was recalled
to head office to fill the position of
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. STEPHEN EDWARD PERDRIAU.
supervising surveyor under Mr. W. J.
Deering, Metropolitan District Sur-
veyor. He remained in this office
until its amalgamation with that of
the Chief Surveyor of the Lands
Department. He was then engaged
in the current work of the depart-
ment. In addition to his duties while
filling this position, he was called
upon to conduct examinations of the
work of licensed surveyors. From
1882 to 1904 he has been closely
connected with the surveys and val-
uations of the foreshores ot the
harbour, and since igoo in the still
more important work necessitated by
the Darling Harbour resumptions.
While in the Lands Department Mr.
Perdriau represented the Government


as appraiser at the regular sittings ol
the Local Land Boards of the metro-
politan district. Mr. Berdriau sur-
veyed the resumptions which included
the old A.S.N. Co.’s wharves and
offices at Circular Quay, the total
cost of resuming which reached
also the Martin Place
resumptions opposite the main facade
of the General Post Office, which
cost and the Darling Island
property, £ 150,000. He has also done
much special work for the Govern-
ment, some of it of a most important
character. In 1890 he was appointed
one of three commissioners to inquire
into and report upon the causes of
the Bourke flood, his colleagues on
that commission being Mr. Whitting-
dale Johnston, S.M.,and Mr. Edmund
Fosbery. He was the first officer in
1888 to commence the great work
of converting the Lachlan Swamp
(which for years formed the source
of the metropolitan water supply)
into what is now known as the
Centennial Park. Mr. Perdriau made
the design for the sale of the building
allotments surrounding the park,
estimated to return £200,000. Mr.
Perdriau was attached as special officer
to the Parliamentary Standing Com-
J O
mittee on Public Works during the
inquiry into the proposal to extend the
railway into the city.' The various
schemes put forward by experts were
referred to him for investigation and
report, and for valuation of the lands
that would be required therefor.
Upon the passing into law of the Land
and Income Tax Acts, Mr. Perdriau
was selected and entrusted with the
duty of making the assessments of the
water frontages of the city of Sydney,
and was the expert and referee for
disputed assessments of all the water
frontage lands of Port Jackson. In
190: -Mr. Perdriau was transferred
to the Sydney Harbour Trust, and
was appointed its chief surveyor.
Upon the resumption of the foreshores
of the city of Sydney, it was necessary
that someone possessing an intimate
knowledge of the properties and their
values should be appointed in order
that an accurate estimate might be
placed before Parliament. In choos-
ing Mr. Perdriau for this work the
Government showed wisdom. The
resumed area included all the wharves
and business portion of the city near
the water, extending from Dawes’
Point 10 the railway yards at the head
of Darling Harbour. The actual
cost of resuming this aggregation of
property reached the enormous total
of a sum which only
exceeded Mr. Perdriau’s original
estimate by a quarter of a million.
Mr. JOHN BURNET WATSON,
1 reasurer and Accountant, Sydney
Harbour Trust, was born in Sydney,
and educated at various public
and private schools in the city.
Upon the termination of his school
life he entered a merchant’s office as
junior clerk, where he remained for
several years and worked his way up
to the position of accountant, having
entire control of the counting-house,
and was then, at the instigation of
the financial house interested (Dal-
gety A Co. Ltd.), appointed as
manager of the business, and re-
mained in that position for about
three years, until it was eventually
liquidated. He then entered into part-
nership with his brother as general
merchants and importers, and carried
on operations under the name ol
Messrs. ( . A f. B. Whitson, York
MR. J. B. WATSON.
Street, Sydney, for several years,
when the partnership was dissolved
by mutual consent. He was subse-
quently appointed accountant to
M essrs. IT. W. Peabody & Co., one
of the largest American merchants in
Australia, and relinquished that posi-
tion to take up the management
and control of the Sydney office
of Messrs. Cameron A Cameron,
tobacco manufacturers, of Virginia,
U.S.A., which position he held for
about two years until he resigned.
He then was engaged by Mr. F. N.
Yarwood, F. 5.1., one of the leading
public accountants in Sydney,
conducting special audits and investi-
gations, and early in 1902 became
acting treasurer to the Sydney Har
hour Trust, and on the 30th Septem-
ber of the same year was appointed
permanently to the position of
treasurer and accountant to that body
Mr. JAMES ORR, M.T.N.A.
(member of the Institute of Naval
Architects, London), is the Chief
Shipwright, Surveyor and Naval Ar-
chitect to the Department of Naviga-
tion, New South Whiles Government.
Mr. Orr is a native of Scotland, born
at Ruthven, Perthshire, in the year
1858. He was educated, first at the
school of the Established Church of
Scotland, and at the school of the
Ere: Church of Scotland, and subse-
quently underwent private tuition
until he arrived at the age of fifteen
years, when he was apprenticed for
five years with the well-known firm
of shipbuilders and engineers, Messrs.
Todd & McGregor, finally completing
his time with the now eminent firm
of Messrs. I). & W. Henderson and
Company Ltd., of Meadowside, Pat-
rick, Glasgow. Having completed
his indentures and an additional
year with this firm, and being an-
xious to acquire an insight into the
practical working of vessels at sea
in connection with his profession, he
therefore made the necessary arrange-
ments and sailed for and arrived
at Melbourne in the year 1878
with Captain Horne in the full-
rigged 1,200-tons ship “ Loch ,Sloy ”
(wrecked some few years ago on
the Australian coast). Mr. Orr
obtained his discharge from this
vessel with the view of at first
only stajfing in Australia a few
months and ultimately returning to
MR. J. ORR.
the old firm, according to a mutual
understanding. However, as yea s
went on the subject of this sketch
directed his attention to and gained
extensive knowledge and experience


in steamers trading to the other
colonies of Australia, now the States
of the Commonwealth. He was
employed in designing steamers for
the old Australasian Steam Naviga-
tion Company and other firms, and
was for a long period naval architect
to the Public Works Department,
New South Wales Government,
designing and constructing tugs,
dredges and other craft necessarv
for th carrying out of breakwaters
to harbours, rivers and other general
improvements. During this per od
under his designs and p< rsonal super-
vision, the well-known ship-“So-
braon ” was converted into the nau-
tical school-ship ot the same name.
In consummation of the rearrange-
ment of the Marine Board, he was,
on May-day. igoi, appointed chief
shipwright, surveyor and naval ar-
chitect to the Department of Navi-
gation, which position he now holds.
In 1902, in the matter of the indus-
trial dispute arising between the
Shipwrights’ Provident Union, Port
Jackson, and the Amalgamated So-
ciety of Carpenters and Joiners and
.Shipbuilders’ and Shipowners’ Asso-
ciation, the Arbitration Court ap-
pointed him as arbitrator to sit
with three experts nominated by
the associations referred to, for the
purpose to hear and to determine
the question of demarcation of
shipwright and shipjoiners’ work.
During his residence here he
was engaged with the inquiry of
the troopship N “ Drayton Grange,"
in assisting the Royal Commission
appointed to inquire into the condi-
tion of the vessel on her arrival here
from South Africa upon the termi •
nation of the late war. Mr. Orr has
also been engaged in the heeling
of the men-o’-war on the Australian
station, and was commissioned by
the Imperial authorities to inquire
into and report upon the stability of
some of those employed hi these
waters. Our subject resides with
his family at “ Monaughty,” Falcon
Street, North Sydney. He married
in 1893, the eldest daughter of the
late Professor William Brown 01
Melbourne, Guelph, Canada, and
Braemar, Scotland, the family con-
sisting of three children, one daugh-
ter and two sons.
Mr. HERBERT ROBINS
WARREN, an official of the Old
Age Pensions Office, Treasury De-
MR. H. R. WARREN.
partment, New South Wales Govern-
ment, is a native of Ennis, County
Clare, Ireland, where he was born
on igth August, 1868. He is the
seventh son of the union of the
Rev. Thomas Warren and Annie
Peach Robins (deceased). His
father, on his retirement from the
Presbyterian Church, in year 1885,
took up his residence, and still
resides, at 29 Gipsy Hill, Norwood,
London, S.E. The subject of this
sketch received his education by
(irst attending Enins College, Ire-
land, and upon his arrival in Sydney
in 1883 he became a scholar of the
Sydney Grammar School, sub-
sequently attending the Sydney
University. In the year 1887 Mr.
Warren first joined the public service
of this State, serving as a field
assistant under Mr. Stephen Ramsay
Beatty, Government surveyor, for
two years; then with Mr. S. A.
Steane for a similar period as a
Government detailer and in sewerage
surveying work. Owing to some
changes in the department in which
he was then serving his services were
dispensed with, and in 1892 Mr.
Warren received an appointment
with the firm of Messrs. Kemmis and
Forster, surveyors and architects, a
position he had to relinquish some
eighteen months later owingto illness.
Upon recovery he took up the
position of book-keeper to the Union
Club, Sydney, where he remained
for three years, and afterwards with
Messrs. Featherstone and McGlew
for two years. During the South
African war of 1899 to the latter part
of 1902, Mr. Warren served in the
Army Medical Corps from this State,
under Surgeon-Major Fiaschi, at
Paardeberg, Driefontein, Johannes-
burg, Wittebergen, Diamond Hill
and Cape Colony ; and in recognition
of this service the Imperial Govern-
ment presented him with bars and
clasp, bearing the name of each of
the several districts in which he had
the honour to serve. Upon his
return from South Africa he w'as
again appointed to the public
service, and has served in various
departments, including the Auditor-
General’s, Statistician’s, and Elec-
toral, receiving his present position
in May, 1905. In June of 1894 Air.
Warren, married Annie, eldest
daughter of Mr. james Neely, late of
Catherine Street, Forest Lodge.


Ecclesiastical
Church of England.
In the scheme for the formation of a convict settlement
at Botany Bay, the Home Government had given but
little thought to religion. This was clearly evidenced
by the fact that in the arrangements, no place was
assigned to any religious teacher, and persistent effort
was necessary to secure the appointment of a chaplain.
When, finally, consent was given, his letter of appoint-
ment made him subject to the control of the Governor
and his officials, “as in the discipline of war.’’
Nothing in the history of the time shows more painfully
the religious indifference in England than such conduct
in 1787. It is said that ‘ ‘ when the case was brought
under the notice of the Minister of the Crown, he laughed
at the idea of the conversion of such desperate charac-
ters, and the amount required was regarded as a useless
expenditure of funds.
Mr. William Wilberforce, who had interested himself
on behalf of the convicts, was entrusted with the task of
finding a chaplain, qualified and willing to accept the
position. With the help of members of the Society for
the Propagation of the Gospel, he finally secured
the Rev. Richard Johnson. His appointment as chap-
lain was conveyed to him in the following letter :
“ First Chaplain’s Commission.
“ George R.
“ George the Third, &c. —To our trusty and well-
beloved Richard Johnson, Greeting —
‘ ‘ We do, by these presents, constitute and appoint
you to be chaplain to the settlement within our terri-
tory, called New .South Wales. You are, therefore,
carefully and diligently to discharge the duty of chaplain
by doing all and all manner of things thereto belonging ;
and you are to observe and follow such orders and direc-
tions from time to time as you shall receive from our
Governor of our said territory for the time being, or any
other your superior officers, according to the rules and
discipline of war.
“ Given at our Court at St. James’, the 24th day of
October, 1786, in the 26th year of our reign.
“• By His Majesty’s command,
“ .Sydney.’’
The records contain meagre information regarding
the chaplain’s work on the voyage. A silence so signifi-
cant suggests that few opportunities were afforded him
of reaching those who were henceforth to be under his
spiritual oversight. Arriving at their destination, no
place was made for him, and his office received scant
recognition in the busy months after landing. At the
first ceremony there was no sound of praise, or prayer,
or thanksgiving for a remarkably prosperous voyage.
Four years after landing no place had been set apart
for worship ; and, in writing to the Governor, he said :
“ We have been here now above four years, and the
first time we had service at Port Jackson I found things
much more comfortable for myself and for the con-
gregation than I did last Sunday.’' His choice of places
was limited to the shade of the giant gum trees, or an 0 d
boat-house, whose sides and ends were quite open, and
which he declared ‘ ‘ was not fit or safe for a stable or a
cow-house.’’ Governor Phillip, however, does not
appear to have been indifferent to the religious exercises
of the convicts, for on November qth, 1791, he published
the official order : ‘ ‘ Every person will regularly attend
public worship, which will begin at 10’oclock on Sunday
morning.’’ The commissary was directed to stop 2 lbs.
meat from every overseer, and 1 1 lbs. from every convict
who did not attend divine service, unless prevented by
illness or some other sufficient cause. The records are
silent as to the manner in which this order was enforced.
After waiting for five years without securing help,
and despairing of gaining any assistance from the Gov-
ernment, Mr. Johnson decided to take the matter ol
church-building into his own hands, which he did in 1793,
The design was modest. However ambitious his desire,
his means were limited, and a church, built of posts,
wattle, and mud-plaster, covered with bark, constituted
the first building for worship. The spot chosen was on
a rise to the eastward of the head of Sydney Cove, and
about 300 worshippers could be accommodated inside
the building. The total cost was set down at £6 7 12s. 6d.
of which £y 14s. was paid in spirits, pork, tobacco, &c.,
the remainder in dollars ; which after some delay was
refunded by the Government.
On the Ist of October, 1798, Mr. Johnson’s church
was destroyed by fire, generally believed to have been
the work of an incendiary. In reporting the matter to
the Home Government, Governor Hunter informed them
that he had laid the foundation stone of a larger church,
on the opposite side of the cove ; while this, and a church,
which had been commenced at Parramatta, were in pro-
cess of completion, a spacious storehouse, with suitable
fittings, was set apart for divine service. A Govern-
ment order, of July 23rd, 1802, directed that the
churches, now building at Sydney and Parramatta, be re-
spectively named “St. Phillip and St. John.
The condition of the children growing up in ignor-
ance, and surrounded by the most debasing influences,
prompted the chaplain to provide some means of in-
struction for them. Weary of waiting for a reply from
the Government he turned to the Society for the Pro-
pagation of the Gospel, and received a grant of £lO
per year for two teachers, his ‘ ‘ wattle and daub ’ ’
church being used as a school-room.
The arrival of the Rev. Samuel Marsden in the
month of March, 1794, greatly relieved the anxiety of
the chaplain. “On the first Sunday after landing, he
preached to the military in tin* barracks in the


morning, and in the afternoon in Mr. Johnson’s new
church. In September of the same year a temporary
church was finished at Parramatta, out of materials of
two old huts, and opened by Mr. Marsden. The begin-
ning was small, but for the first time decent places of
worship were to be found in both settlements.
A band of refugee missionaries arrived from Tahiti
in 1798, and a cordial welcome was given them by the
clergymen and residents. For a few months they settled
down in Parramatta, and exercised a cheering and whole-
some influence upon the society which had received
t p em
After twelve years spent in ministering to the con-
vict settlement the Rev. Mr. Johnson decided to resign
the chaplaincy and return to England. His term of office
was not marked by any great achievement. A man of
quiet, and peaceable temperament, he was unfitted for
the struggle with the depraved and criminal class,
whom he" failed to impress. Left without support from
the authorities, surrounded by a class who had no fear
of God or man, the task before him was one beset on
every hand with difficulties. The worthy man had
pursued his way, gathering whom he could under the
fail to arouse intense hatred, and lead sooner or later to
serious reprisals. The culminating point was reached in
1802 when a conspiracy was set on foot which denounced
Mr. Marsden and threatened his life. As a result an
inquiry was held, and while the finding was that some
of the chaplain’s not altogether consist
with the dignity of the ecclesiastical character, he was
praised for his noble efforts to reform the depot for
convict women, and for his efforts to provide tor tne
neglected orphans of both sexes.”
The church at Parramatta was completed and ready
for occupation in 1803, and, as that town was temporarily
the seat of government, to it was accorded the honour of
having the first stone church. It was built to seat 400
persons. Two western towers were added subsequently
by the wife of Sir Charles Titzroy ; and, at the opening
ceremony, the presence of “ many ladies of the first
respectability ’ ’ was reported. In 1807 Mr. Marsden
left for England, and the Rev. Henry Fulton, who had
been exiled for taking part in the Irish rebellion in 1798,
and had arrived in Sydney in 1800 was allowed to
exercise his religious functions, and on the departure
of Mr. Marsden he remained in charge.
St . John’s Church, Parramatta, erected and opened for worship 1803
shade of the trees ; acknowledging his own want of
success when he said, ‘ ‘ I used to get as many of them
together as I could, and after reading give them an
exhortation.” His misery enlisted no sympathy, his
appeals secured no help ; of a disposition too mild to
contend against the rough men of the age, his health
never robust, yielded at last, and he left "the colony in
1800. having made no enemies and secured few friends ;
” yet none who knew him doubted his piety, nor charged
him with neglect of duty. Among the godless crowd he
feared his God and sought the good of man.”
After his departure the Rev. Samuel Marsden took
up the work single-handed. The two men differed widely
in temperament. Mr. Marsden being described as a sturdy
Yorkshireman. ardent and impetuous, as unbending in
his dealings with evil-doers, as he was manly towards the
peaceably minded. Like his predecessor he had been
appointed a magistrate. In such a community the fear-
less discharge of duty by a clerical magistrate, could not
The number of clergymen was increased by the
arrival of the Rev. William Cowper, who took charge
of St. Phillip’s, Sydney, in 1808. He was followed by the
Rev. R. Cartwright, so that on the return of Air.
Marsden in 1810, the population numbered 10,000 souls
with four clerg\ ministeiing, and with two substantial
churches. The clerical staff was further increased by
the appointment of the Re\. John \ oull, and again in
1818 by the arrival of the Re\s. Richard Hill and John
Cross. The death of Mr. \ oull took place in 1820, and
the vacancy was filled by the Rev. Thomas Reddall, who
was stationed at Campbelltown.
Church organisation from this time was more com-
plete. Under letters patent of George IV., October 2,
1824, the archdeaconry was established within the juns-
diction of the Bishop of Calcutta, and this continued
until 183 b when the bishopric of Austialia was consti-
tuted, and the Rev. W illiam Grant Broughton, D.D.
(formerly archdeacon) was consecrated the first bishop.


Shortly after the first settlement instructions had been
issued to Governor Phillip to set apart 400 acns of land
in each new township, for the maintenance of a minister
of religion, and 200 acres for that of a schoolmaster,
these instructions were afterwards repeated to Gov-
ernor Macquarie, and remained in force till 1824. when
they were superseded by Royal Charter, and this in turn
was finally revoked in 1833 after extended notice ; much
valuable property reverting to the Crown, but was still
to be disposed of for the purposes of the original charter.
In 1834 Archdeacon Broughton paid his second visit
to England to secure help for the many undertakings
which he found to be springing up around him. The
authorities were indifferent, and help was sought and
obtained from other sources. The .Society for the Pro-
motion of Christian Knowledge voted £3,000, and the
Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, £l,OOO, for the
lessening of the spirited destitution under which a great
part of the colony was labouring.
The yeai 1836 marked an important epoch in the his-
tory of the church inasmuah as the office of archdeacon
was revoked to make way for a resident episcopate.
and while there was raised to the dignity of Archbishop,
and on his return assumed the title of Archbishop of
Sydney, conferred on him by the Pope. 'Phis claim
Bishop Broughton met with indignant protest. A meet-
ing was convened in St. James’ Church, and the protest,
which was dated March 25, 1843, was signed by six
presbyters and lodged with the authorities.
The protest was delivered by the Bishop while stand-
ing at the altar, as follows : “ We, William Grant, by
Divine permission, Bishop and ordinary Pastor ol
Australia, do protest, publicly and explicitly, 011 behalf of
ourselves and our successors, Bishops of Australia, and
on behalf of the clergy and all the faithful of the same
church and diocese, and also on behalf of William,
by Divine Providence, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
Primate of all England and Metropolitan, and his succes-
sors. that the Bishop of Rome has not any right or au-
thority according to the laws of God and the canonical
order of the church, to institute any episcopal or archi-
episcopal see, or sees, within the limits of the diocese of
Australia, and province of Canterbury aforesaid. And
we do hereby, publicly and explicitly and deliberately,
St. Phillip’s Church, Sydney, 1800.
The Royal Letters Patent dated June, 1836, fully stated
the necessity for making the change, and intimating the
appointment of the Rev. William Grant Broughton
first bishop, he and his successors to be subject and
subordinate to the Archbishop of Canterbury, as his
Metropolitan, 't he difficulties before him were numer-
ous but he resolutely faced them, and shortly had an im-
portant addition to his staff. Twenty clergymen (a
fourth part for Van Diemen’s Land) having been de-
spatched at the expense of the Society for the Propa-
gation of the Gospel, together with £3,000 collected be-
friends in England who had begun to manifest in a
practical way their concern about the dearth of the
appointed means of grace and salvation among the
increasing population of New South Wales.
A new source of discord was, however, hovering on
lhe horizon, and, though small, it had to be met. The
Roman Catholic Bishop, Dr. Folding, had visited Europe,
protest against, dissent from, and contradict any and
every act of episcopal or metropolitan authority done
or to be done at any time, or by any person whatever,
by virtue of any right or title derived from any assumed
jurisdiction, power, superiority, pre-eminence, or au-
thority of the said Bishop of Rome, enabling him to
institute any episcopal see, or sees, within the diocese
or province hereinbefore named.” Robert Allwood,
8.A., Minister of St. James’, Sydney. H. H. Bobart,
M.A., Minister of St. John’s, Parramatta. Thos.
Steele, LL-D. Minister of St. Peter’s, Cook’s River.
W. B. Clarke, M.A., Minister of St. Simon’s, Castle Hill.
H. T. Stiles, Minister of St. Matthew’s, Windsor. W.
H. Walsh, Minister of St. Lawrence, Sydney.
The education of the rising generation had hitherto
received small attention, the school first formed in the
colony was (as we have seen) that under the care of the
Rev. Richard Johnson, and supported by grants from the


Society for the Propagation of the Gospel; some years
elapsed before a second was formed for the ‘ ‘ Rocks ’ ’
of Sydney. Parramatta could boast an orphan school,
founded in 1809 by Governor Macquarie. The King’s
School was established in 1832, the principal, the Rev.
Robert Forrest, receiving a salary of £IOO per annum.
A sum of £2,300 was voted from the public funds and
expended on buildings to accommodate from sixty to
eighty boarders and day scholars. As with the orphans
of the State, all the children were presumed to be
members of the Church of England. The schools
founded by the Clergy and Schools’ Corporation
numbered 35, attended by 1,250 children. They gave
a plain useful education, were superintended by the
chaplain, and the church catechism was used in all.
In place of these schools Governor Macquarie
suggested that others should be formed on the Irish
system for the general education of the youth of the
colony of all creeds, —the Scriptures to be read but no re-
ligious instruction to be given by the master or mistress,
the schools to be open on one day of the week to the
clergy for special religious instruction. The Bishop
stoutly opposed, as he did at a later date, when in 1839
Sir George Gipps proposed a somewhat similar plan of
combined schools. In 1826 the church had 16 schools
open with 1,000 scholars ; in 1840 there were 40 schools
educating 2,500 children. Aid was given by the Gov-
ernment equal to the receipts from private sources ;
altered in 1841 to a grant to needy schools of half-penny
per day for each child in towns of 2,000 people, and in
other places from a farthing to a half-penny per day.
The annual subsidy to the orphan schools was increased
to £6,000 ; of the church parochial schools to £2,950 ; of
others to £5,370. By the Act of 1837 the actual exist-
ence of a church and school was made essential to the
appointment of a minister receiving aid.
To superintend a diocese ten times larger than the
United Kingdom was, Bishop Broughton discovered,
beyond the power of one individual. His diocese in-
cluded, Tasmania, South Australia, Melbourne, and West
Australia, and constant travel was necessary to overtake
the demands. As time went on some relief was obtained.
In 1842 the island of Tasmania was declared to be the
diocese of the Bishop of Tasmania. Further changes
took place in 1847, when the dioceses of Melbourne, Ade-
laide (including South Australia and West Australia) and
Newcastle (including the north portion of New South
Wales and Queensland) were established, and the Bishop
of Australia styled Bishop of Sydney and Metropolitan
of Australia and Tasmania. In 1857 the diocese of
Perth was formed out of that of Adelaide, and in 1859
the diocese of Brisbane out of that of Newcastle. Before
these latter changes were brought about Australia’s
first bishop had ended a laborious and troubled epis-
copate. The toils and anxieties of office had told upon
him, and after journeying to England he was called to
his rest, and his remains laid in Canterbury Cathedral.
Sunday-schools were few in number and appear to
have claimed little attention. In the census of 1838
the only Sunday-school mentioned is that of St. I,aw-
rence with 95 children. 'I he latest returns give the
number of schools as 229 ; male teachers, 770 ; female,
J>73° ; total 2,500 : with a roll of 32,725, and an average
attendance of 21,915.
A small church, capable of seating 300 people had
been erected in Newcastle, but in 1847 the diocese 0!
Newcastle Church, 1847.
Newcastle was formed and the first bishop, the Rev
William Tyrrell, consecrated in Westminster Abbey.
In company with two chaplains and seven candidates
for holv orders, he proceeded to his now see and began
his work. His diocese nominally embraced an area of
800 by 700 miles. The settled portions were occupied
chiefly by squatters and sheep-owners. To meet the
wants of this scattered population there were 14 clergy-
men. On May 26, 1850, a church was opened at Armi-
dale, the most northerly in the diocese at that time, now
the seat of a diocese, that of Grafton and Armidale. For
upwards of thirty years he laboured zealously, and at his
death, in 1879, his place was filled by the Rev. Joseph
Pearson, vicar of Newark and fellow of St. John’s
College, Cambridge. After but a short time his epis-
copate was clouded by an utter prostration of health.
On his resignation of the see, Bishop Stanton, of North
Queensland was chosen for the vacancy, and was wel-
corned in Newcastle in 1891.
For nearly three years after the death of Bishop
Broughton the diocese of Sydney was administered
by Archdeacon Cowper. At length the newly appointed
Metropolitan, the Right Rev. Frederick Barker, arrived
in Sydney and entered vigorously upon his work. One
of the most pressing wants was a church training college
for teachers. This he succeeded in establishing within
two years. St. Paul’s College was already in progress.
A timely bequest of Mr. Thomas Moore by a house and
landed estate, bringing in an income of nearly £4OO a
year was available, and with an amount of £5.000 col-
lected by the Bishop towards a building, Moore College
was founded at Liverpool. Attached to the college was
a chapel dedicated to the memory of Bishop Broughton.
Always alive to the importance of education, the
Bishop, while visiting the outlying portions of his diocese,
conceived the idea of starting a school for the education
of the daughters of the clergy. A site was secured at
Waverley, near to Bishopscourt, and soon a number of
pupils from all parts of the country were gathered. The
school, known as the “Clergy Daughters' School,’’
was largely endowed in memory of Mrs. Barker. In
1859 the institution was removed to a new building,


St. Catherine’s, Waverity, which stands on three-and-
a-half acres of ground granted by the Government.
The New South Wales Legislature having passed an
Act abolishing all grants in aid of religion beyond those
made to existing incumbents, considerable difficulty was
experienced with regard to the maintenance of the clergy.
The only method that could be devised to provide an
adequate sum was by the voluntary gifts of the people.
Though for a time the new system failed to give an
adequate return, it gradually came into general use with
gratifying results. A church society was ulimately
projected and brought into operation, having for its
objects : —(1) The support of clergymen, missionaries to
the aborigines, and catechists ; (2) the endowment of
churches ; (3) the erection of churches and parsonages ;
(4) the circulation of the Holy Scriptures, the book of
common prayer, and other religious publications. The
total sum collected through the society from its com-
mencement to March 31, 1907, amounted to £747,637 12 10 -
It had been in contemplation to form a separate
diocese for Goulburn, and each year the need of this sub-
division became more apparent, but the necessar}’ funds
or not at all. While it lasted work at the Cathedral
buildings was entirely suspended, and remained so till
wages again came down to the ordinary rates. The
first stone had been laid by the Governor of the colony,
Sir Richard Bourke, but little progress was made till
1864, when a new committee was formed and new plans
adopted, the work was then pushed on more rapidly,
and was not again wholly interrupted. Special efforts
were made in the end to have it ready for consecration
on St. Andrew’s Day, 1868. The western towers were
finished in 1874, and a chapter house, to be used
also as a synod hall was added as a memorial
of Bishop Barker, and occupied for the first
time at the Synod in 1886. At the enthronement of
Bishop Barry in 1888, the offertory, amounting to £450
was expended in providing a reredos from a design by T.
L. Pearson, Esq., R.A., which includes bas-reliefs in ala-
baster of the Transfiguration, Resurrection, and Ascen-
sion of our Lord. A design was prepared and adopted
by the committee whereby the various subjects of the
windows should be classified in regular order to represent
the chief events in the life of otir Lord, with his miracles
St. Andrew’s Cathedral, Sydney,
had not hitherto been available. An endowment fund
fixed at £12,000 had been started, and matters were
now so far advanced that the nomination of a bishop
was possible. The choice fell on the Rev. Mesac Thomas,
M.A., of Trinity College, Cambridge, and at that time
secretary of the Colonial and Continental Church Societ}’.
His consecration took place at Canterbury on March
25, 1863. Bishop Thomas arrived in Sydney on
March 14, 1864, and was duly installed in the Cathedral
of St. Saviour’s, in his own diocese. After a long term
of office he was succeeded by the Rev. William Chalmers,
vicar of St. Andrew’s, Brighton, Victoria, who was con-
secrated on November 1, 1899.
Difficulties of a peculiar nature had from time to
time obstructed the progress of the work of building the
Cathedral church of St. Andrew. The gold discoveries
had disturbed the normal conditions to such an extent
that wages rose to ruinous rates, tradesmen receiving
as much as 265. per day ; for a time builders were in de-
spair and would only tender for work at fabulous prices,
and parables. This scheme was carried through by the
liberal donations of various families. The large east
window was an exception, special contributions having
been raised for a memorial of Bishop Broughton. The
subject represents events in the life of the apostle St.
Andrew.
An important conference of bishops, and clerical and
lay representatives from all the dioceses in New South
Wales was held in 1866, when “ constitutions ” for the
good government of the united churches within the
colony were adopted. Legislative sanction was ob-
tained, and an Act of Parliament passed ‘ ‘ to enable the
members of the churches to manage the property of the
Church.”
The synod remains in existence for three years, sessions
being held every year. At the first meeting two secretaries
are appointed, and a committee of elections and quali-
fications elected, whose business is to consider all ques-
tions relating to the election of representatives. Being
a deliberative body the synod is subject to standing


orders similar to those governing representative and
deliberative assemblies ; and in cases where no provision
has been made in the standing orders “ resort is to be
had to the rules, forms, and practices of the Legis-
lative Council of New South Wales, so far as they can
be applied.” The bishop is ex officio, president of the
synod, and in his absence a commissary appointed by
him takes his place. The first synod met on December 5,
1866, there being 44 clerical and 07 lay representatives
pi esent.
In course of time an Act of Parliament was passed to
repeal the Act of 1866 and to give legal force and effect
to certain amended constitutions approved by the pro-
vincial synod of the province of New South Wales.
It was found necessary to enlarge the powers of the
standing committee of the synod, and an ordinance was
passed to provide for a constitution of a standing com-
mittee, and to define its powers and duties.
This committee consists of ex officio members, viz.,
the bishop, dean, two archdeacons (other than the dean),
and the Iron, secretaries for the time being. The elected
appeals from any diocesan synod against the veto of its
bishop, and the legislating on matters referred to it by all
the diocesan synods.” It was found advisable to widen the
scope of this synod, and by an Act passed in 1902 an
amended constitution came into operation which pro-
vides ‘-that the bishops and clerical and lay represen-
tatives of the church in the several dioceses in the State
of New South Wales,shall meet in provincial synod under
such articles and provisions as may have been, or may
be, from time to time passed by the provincial synod
and assented to by all the synods.”
The year 1872 was distinguished in the history of the
church, inasmuch as that the general synod of Australia
and Tasmania was then brought into existence. Ob-
jection had been taken to the custom of having bishops
intended for a colonial province consecrated in England,
as involving ‘ ‘ the sad unreality of taking an oath of
canonical obedience to the wrong authority.” A general
conference of the bishops and representatives of all
the dioceses in Australia and Tasmania was convened in
Sydney on Octo v 'er 10, when it was determined :
St. Phillip’s Church, Sydney, 1905.
members consist of live clergymen, and 14 la}' members,
who are elected at the first session of each synod. The
duties of the standing committee are important, they
being empowered to make arrangements for all
business to be brought before the synod, and to propose
such business as may appear to the committee to be
necessary, or desirable, in addition to that arising out
of matters referred to them ; to defray all expenses
ordered by the synod, and when required act as a
council of advice to the bishop ; also consider and
report on any matter the synod may refer to them, and
carry out or assist to carry out the resolutions passed
by the synod and entrusted to them, or not otherwise
provided for.
A provincial synod was brought into existence under
the authority of the constitutions passed in 1866, and
is composed of the bishops, clerical and lay representa-
tives of the dioceses of New South Wales. The first session
was held in iß6q. Its functions were, ‘ the receiving of
‘ ‘ That this conference do now resolve itself into the
General Synod of the dioceses of Australia and Tas-
mania in conformity with the constitution adopted.’ ’ A
more representative gathering could not have been
found; with the Metropolitan Ilishop of Sydney were the
bishops from Melbourne, Adelaide, Brisbane, Perth,
Tasmania, Goulburn, Newcastle, Bathurst, and Grafton
and Armidale. The formation of this synod completed
the gradation of the diocesan, provincial, and general
synods. The general synod meets once in five years
under the presidency of the Archbishop of Sydney, as
Primate. The determinations of this synod are not
binding upon any church in the diocese. By a deter-
mination of the synod passed in 189 b “The Metropolitan
of each ecclesiastical province now in existence, or to
be hereinafter formed under the authority of the General
Synod, shall be designated Archbishop of his see, as
well as Metropolitan of his province.” This deter-
mination having been ratified by the conference of


bishops'of the Anglican communion held in Lambeth, in
1897, the Metropolitan of New South Wales is now-
styled Archbishop.
While the session in 1881 was being held, Bishop
Barker was in England and grave fears were entertained
that the illness from which ho was suffering would ter-
minate fatally, and the diocese of Sydney proceed to
elect a new bishop, before satisfactory arrangements
had been made as to the position he would occupy with
relation to the other Australian dioceses. Bishop
Barker’s death proved that these fears were not ground-
less. His episcopate extended over a period of 28
years. In the most difficult circumstances he proved
himself an able administrator, a wise counsellor, a
friend and guide to all who sought his help.
His successor was the Rev. Canon Barry, Principal
of King’s College. London. Owing to the unsatisfactory
method of election, the new Primate was chosen and
sent by the Archbishop of Canterbury. His episcopate
covered the short period of five years. For private
reasons he resigned the position in 1888, to the great
regret of the diocese.
At the session of Synod called to elect a successor
several names were submitted. After an exhaustive
ballot, three were chosen to be sent on to the Provincial
Bishops, and from these again two to be considered by
the Australian bench of Bishops, in accordance with the
terms of the ordinance. By this process of exhaustion
the Rev. William Saumarez Smith, L.D., of Trinity
College, Cambridge, and Principal of St. Aidan’s 'theo-
logical College, Birkenhead, was chosen, and consecrated
in St. Paul’s Cathedral, Canterbury, by Archbishop
Benson of Canterbury, assisted by Bishops Temple,
Goodwin, Jones, Maclagan, Lewis, Bloomfield, Earle,
Billing, Cell, and Bishops Campbell, Marsden (late of
Bathurst) and Barry (late of Sydney). An addition
was made to the constitution of the general synod held
in 1900, providing for the inclusion of British New
Guinea within the territorial limits of the Church of
England, in Australia and Tasmania, and for the repre-
sentation in general synod of the dioceses now or here-
after established therein.” (It is worthy of note that
the Right Rev. Montagu Stone Wigg, D.D., was
consecrated as first bishop of British New Guinea,
on January 25, 1898, arriving at Dozura in May of the
same year, and has now under his control a staff of
thirty-three workers.
The diocese of Grafton and Armidale was formed
in 1867, with Armidale as the centre. The selection of
the first bishop was made by the Archbishop of Canter-
bury, the Rev. W. C. Sawyer being chosen and conse-
crated in Canterbury Cathedral. In 1868 he reached
the scene of his labour, but the new diocese was thrown
into a state of mourning by his sad death by drowning
before he could be installed. This melancholy event
caused some delay before the consecration of the Rc\.
James Francis Turner, which took place in 1869.
The increase of population had in the meantime
been steadily maintained. Expansion had taken place
on all sides' New centres were being formed in the
country districts, and their claims could not be wholly
disregarded. To adequately supply these with efficient
workers, and direct the affairs of a diocese spreading over
an area so vast as that comprised within the limits of
the diocese of Svdnev, rendered it essential that the
bishop of Sydney should be further relieved. Ihc
claims of the metropolitan area were not only urgent,
but absorbing, and to visit the distant parts of the
diocese required much time. The subject of a separate
bishopric for the far west had been under consideration,
but the preliminary steps were not fully accomplished,
and the appointment made till 1869. That the Rev.
Samuel Edward Marsden should be chosen as the first
bishop was auspicious. He was the grandson of the
second chaplain of New South Wales, and with the
difficulties of a colonial bishopric he would be, in some
measure, familiar.
The newly appointed Bishop arriving in Sy r dney
on March 16th, 1870, the ceremony of instal-
lation being conducted by the Metropolitan on May sth
in the Cathedral of All Saints, Bathurst. For sixteen
years he continued to administer the affairs of the
diocese, an area approaching 100,000 square miles in
extent, when he decided to resign the see and return to
England, and as the Bishop of Gloucester and Bristol
had invited him to become his assistant, he was enabled
to carry r out his determination. The Rev. Charles
St. James’ Church, Sydney.
Edward Caiuidge, vicar of Thirsk. was appointed to the
vacant see, and consecrated by the Archbishop of
Canterbury on October 18th, 1887.
The most recent offshoot is the diocese of Riverina,
which attained to the dignity of an episcopal see in
1884. The Right Rev. Sydney Linton was chosen as
the first bishop. For ten years he persevered in his
ceaseless and exhausting work in the trying climate in
the south-western corner of the colony, and over an area
measuring about 100,000 square miles. A serious
illness eventuated, from which he never rallied. The
choice of his successor fell to the Rev. Ernest Augustus
Anderson, vicar of St. Paul’s, West Maitland. Some
difficulty having arisen as to the place of consecration,
the bishop-elect proceeded to England, where he was
consecrated by the Archbishop of Canterbury on 29th
1 une, 1895.
To commemorate the twenty-fifth year of the
episcopate of the late Bishop Barker steps were taken
to raise the sum of .£IO,OOO as a church building loan
fund for the diocese of Sydney. The scheme was


outlined, so that the amounts could be paid by instal-
ments extending over four years. The fund was
started, and so faithfully were the obligations dis-
charged that the fund, including interest received,
now amounts to £10,600.
Aj
In forming the settlement in New .South Wales
the claims of the aborigines received no consideration.
Their existence was scarcely recognised. Their land
was taken for occupation, and they ignored ; absolute
ownership was assumed as if there had been no previous
inhabitants. The same course was largely adopted by
the early settlers. The aboriginal was driven back,
robbed of his birthright, neglected. Uncivilised and
degraded, he became still more debased as he adopted
the vices of the white settlers. Among the thousands
who in the early years made homes in New South Wales
the native had few friends, and as time went on the
tribes were speedily reduced in number. ‘ ‘ The Gov-
ernment, be it said, was always and everywhere
precise in its demand that the natives should be dealt
with justly.” The public conscience was, however,
easily satisfied ; no effort had been made to civilise or
christianise them. It is interesting, therefore, to find
that the first clergymen made some effort to establish
schools for the children, and that in 1832 a mission
station was formed, on the initiation of the Church
Missionary Society, in the Wellington district, some
two hundred miles west of Sydney. Though aided by
funds from the public revenue the mission did not
prosper permanently. The name of the Rev. James
Gunther is worthy of mention. Every effort was made
by him to influence them for good, holding ‘ ‘ that it
was useless to expect any of them, more especially the
children, to be gained except by those whom they had
learned to respect and love.” In later years other
attempts were made, but with indifferent success.
The Yarrabah Aboriginal Mission is now supported
by the Church of England, and has a mission staff of
eleven, including four native lay readers and students
for the diaconate.
The Clergy Widow and Orphans’ Fund was started
in 1867. and has now an accumulated fund of £29,841
2s. 6d.. having paid out to claimants the sum of £10,040
17s. 6d., while the Clergy Superannuation Fund amounts
to £28,000, with an annual income of £2,400.
The first century of the work of the church has
been reached. For the first twelve years little was
accomplished, for while a chaplain accompanied the
first arrivals, his profession received tardy recognition;
no provision was made for carrying out his duties and
no sympathy shown with his work. Nevertheless,
enough remains for congratulation and devout thank-
fulness. The contrast between the conditions of 1788
and 1905 is marvellous. In the former year one
clergyman stood alone, unrecognised, taking no part
while the first act was being performed out of which
a nation was to grow. In the latter year about 1,000
clergymen, under 19 bishops, and with adherents
numbering 623,131, giving a percentage of 46'58 of
the total population, should be gratifying to the members
of the church. Stately cathedrals have been built, and
form the centres of church work and church organisa-
tion, while less pretensious buildings, in town and
country parishes, are on each succeeding sabbath filled
with worshippers. The esoteric history of the church
would contain the record of changes that can find no
place in these pages. The power of the church in the
future may be immeasurably greater and her work of
lasting benefit to those who are gathered within her fold
—if her doctrine and her life is pure.
St. Phillip’s Church, Church Hill, and St. Patrick's.


The Most Rev. WILLIAM
SAUMAREZ SMITH, D.D., who
is the fourth Bishop, and the first
Archbishop, of Sydney, was born in
the year 1836 at St. Heliers, Jersey.
His father, who died in 1903 at the
advanced age of 93, was the Rev.
Richard Snowdon Smith, Preben-
dary of Chichester ; he was the
youngest son of Mr. Joseph Smith,
of Shortgrove, Essex, one of the
private secretaries to William Pitt.
The Archbishop’s mother was Anne,
daughter of John Robin, of Jersey :
she died when the Archbishop was
only fourteen years of age. He
was educated at Marlborough Col-
lege, where he reached the sixth
form at the early age of fourteen,
and was head of the school for some
considerable lime before he went up
to Cambridge. This he did in the
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
THE MOST REV.
WM. SAUMAREZ SMITH, D.D.,
Archbishop of Sydney.
year 1855, entering Trinity College,
where he obtained a scholarship.
He had a distinguished career at the
University, graduating in 1858 with
a “ Double First ” in Classics and
Theology. Amongst the many prizes
he obtained may be mentioned the
Cams Greek Testament Prize, the
Crosse Theological Scholarship,
the Tyrwhitt’s Hebrew Scholar-
ship, the Seatonian Prize (for an
English poem) twice, and the Mait-
land Prize. In iB6O he was elected
to a Fellowship at his College, which
he held for ten years. He was or-
dained Deacon in 1859, and Priest in
the following year, by the then
Bishop of Ely. From 1859 to 1861
he was Curate at St. Paul’s, Cam-
bridge ; in 1861 the Bishop of
Madras invited him to act as his
Chaplain. This invitation he accept-
ed, and spent the following four
years in India. This seems to have
benefited his health considerably,
for as a boy he was weak and often
ailing, but since his sojourn in India
he has always enjoyed the best of
health. He was back in England in
1866 and accepted the curacy of
Holy Trinity Church, Cambridge;
meanwhile he resided as a Fellow
in College. In the following year
he was appointed to the college
living of Trumpington, a village
about two miles outside Cambridge.
This living he held until the year
1869, when he was offered and
accepted the position of Principal of
St. Aidan’s Theological College, at
Birkenhead, Cheshire. In the fol-
lowing year he married Florence,
daughter of the Rev. Lewis Deedes,
Rector of Bramfield, Herts, and by
her he had issue of one son and
seven daughters. In 1871 he took
the degree of Bachelor of Divinity.
As principal of St. Aidan’s he worked
the college up to a flourishing posi-
tion. He was Principal for twenty
years, and was still there when he
was appointed to the See of Sydney.
During the whole of that period he
was also Examining Chaplain to the
Bishop of Norwich. In 1880 he was
appointed Honorary Canon of Ches-
ter, and in 1889 he took the degree
of Doctor of Divinity. The Bishop-
elect suffered a great blow in the
death of his wife in 1890, only ten
days before his consecration in St.
Paul’s Cathedral, London, as Bishop
of Sydney. He arrived in Sydney in
September, 1890, and has thus com-
pleted seventeen years of arduous
labour in this important Diocese. As
Bishop of Sydney Dr. Saumarez
Smith is also Metropolitan of N. S.
Wales and Primate of Australia and
Tasmania. In 1897 h® visited Eng-
land for the purpose of attending the
Pan-Anglican Conference held at
Lambeth, and in that year, with the
approval of the conference, he as-
sumed the title of Archbishop. As
an author the Archbishop has pub-
lished “ Obstacles to Missionary
Success” (Maitland prize essay) ;
“ Christian Faith, a Course of Ser-
mons preached before the University
of Cambridge ” ; “ Lessons on the
Book of Genesis ” ; “ The Blood of
the New Covenant ” ; and has also
contributed articles to the “ Ency-
clopaedia Britannica,”
Vkn. Archdeacon WILLIAM
JAMES GUNTHER, M.A., Rector
of St. John’s Church, Parramatta,
is a son of the late Archdeacon of
Bathurst and Mudgee. He was
educated at the King’s School,
Parramatta, and at Queen’s Col-
lege, Oxford, where he took his
B.A. and M.A. degrees. He was
ordained in the Diocese of Litchfield,
and after gaining experience as an
English clergyman, undertook work
in the Diocese of Sydney. In 1868
he was appointed to St. John’s,
Parramatta. He is the Senior Canon,
Rural Dean, and Archdeacon of the
Diocese. He has twice been offered
a Bishopric, but did not see his way
to accept the offers. Apart from
his diocesan and parchial duties,
he has always taken much interest
VEN. ARCHDEACON W. J. GUNTHER.
in educational work and in our
charitable institutions. Ever since
1868 he has been a member of the
committee of the Parramatta Dis-
trict Hospital, and for many years
was president of that and also the
Benevolent Society. He has pub-
lished some sermons, lectures and
addresses, and his views on subjects
generally are broad and liberal.
The Ven. Archdeacon JOHN
DOUSE EANGLEY, Rector of St.
Phillip’s Church. Church Hill. Syd-
ney, N.S.W. (elected Bishop of
Bendigo, 1907). is a son of Henry
Langley and Isabella Edwardes
Archdall, of Rallyduff, County
Waterford. Ireland, where he was
born on the 17th May, 1836. He
was educated at Trinity College.


Dublin, and at the age of seventeen
years accompanied his parents to
Australia, arriving in the capital of
he mother colony in the year 1853.
His initiative step in life lay in pur-
suing a mercantile profession, in
which he was engageu for some time,
but eventually he joined the service
of the Bank of Australasia, and dur-
ing his connection therewith held
various important positions, being
at the time of his resignation from
their service and immediate call
to holy orders, manager of their
Newcastle branch. In the year
1873, the early’" part of which he
severed his connection with banking,
he was successful in not only' attend-
ing Moore Theological College (then
situate at Liverpool. X.S.W.), but
of receiving his ordination of both
Deacon and Priest ere the y r ear had
drawn to a close. The Archdeacon’ s
first appointment was that of an
incumbency of a very’ large country
area, viz., that of Berrima-cum-
M ittagong, where he laboured for
upwards of two years, being in the
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
RIGHT REVEREND J. D. LANGLEY,
Bishop of Berdigo, 1907.
year 1875 transfei red to the incum-
bency ol one of the metropolitan
churches, viz., St. David’s, Surry
Hills, at which cure he remained
until the year 1882, when he received
the appointment to his present posi-
tion. In addition to attending to
the multifarious duties embodied in
a rectorship, he has held the positions
of organising secretary of the Church
Society for the year 1880-1 and that
of a similar post to the Church of
England Centennial Fund for the
year 1888-9. In 1885 lie was made
Rural Dean of West Sydney ; Chap-
lain to the Archbishop of Sydney in
1893 i Archdeacon of the wide dis-
trict of Cumberland, 1895, and tIW
of Canon of St. Andrew's Cathedral
in 1902. The Archdeacon married
in the year 1866 Louisa Carruthers,
daughter ofMr. John Hudson Keys,
f.P , of Bengalla, Muswellbrook,
N.S.W., and has a grown-up family
of three sons and three daughters.
Rev. WILLOUGHBY FLOWER,
M.A., Th. Soc.,Rector of St. Mark’s,
Darling Point, was born at Matlock
England. January 22nd, 1858, his
family being one of the old York-
shire landowners. After earlier educa-
tion in private schools, he graduated
B.A. at Cambridge in 1880, maturing
his M.A. degree in 1884. He was
elected in 1896 by the Bishops of
Australia as one of the original
Fellows of the Australian College of
Theology, and has continuously held
office since (on three successive elec-
tions) as one of the executive of this,
the Anglican Theological F'aculty of
.Australia. From the year 1878 he
was engaged in volunteer church
work in St. Matthew’s Parish, Cam-
bridge, and, after ordination by
Bishop Woodford, of Ely, in ISBI,
he remained as one of its staff of five
clergy till, as senior curate, he com-
pleted some eight years of continuous
residence and association with its
university and church life. He was
selected in 1883 for the posts, in the
county uf Cambridge, of Secretary
to the Diocesan Church Music So-
ciety and to the Sunday 7 School
Association. Mr. Flower was ap-
pointed, during 1885. by r Archbishop
Temnle. to minister in the mother
I. /
parish of Twickenham, London,
during an interregnum in the in-
cumbenoy. Towards the end of
1886 he accepted the offer of Bishop
Thornton, of Ballarat, to fill the
vacant position of vicar of St. Peter’s,
in the citv of Ballarat. In Ballarat
he was also Canon of the Cathedral,
member of the Diocesan Council,
the elected cleric on the Patronage
Board of the diocese and on the
board of electors to the bishopric,
also prominently representing the
diocese at General Synod in 1891,
and at the Hobart Church Congress
in 1894. Later, when Archdeacon
of Grafton, he also took an active
part in the General Synod of Aus-
tralia in 1896. During his Victorian
career Canon Flower also took a
leading share in general church
organisation, as regards missions.
Sunday schools, church music, dio-
cesan newspaper, &c., and he did
much special preaching and lectur-
ing in the interests of the Church in
various parts of the dioceses of
Ballarat and Melbourne. In defer-
ence to a summons in 1894 from
Bishop Green, and the advice of
Bishop Thornton. Canon Flower
removed to New South Wales and
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
REV. WILLOUGHBY FLOWER. M.A.
THE SOC.
took up residence at Grafton, iu
order to become lieutenant to the
former in the general developing and
organising of the diocese of Grafton
and Armidale, and the active per-
sonal visitation and oversight of the
parishes and clergy on the North
Coast, in addition to the local charge
of Grafton Cathedral. In this dio-
cese Archdeacon Flower also held
the post of examining chaplain to the
Bishop and edited the “ Diocesan
News ’ ’ from its inception. He was
also appointed to the office of
episcopal vicar-general and ad-
ministrator of the see. Shortly after
the demise of the late Canon Kenimis
at St. Mark’s, Darling Point, Arch-
deacon Flower was nominated by
the joint board in Sydney of synod
and parochial nominators for the
vacancy. He took up the position
of rector of St. Mark’s in the October


of 1897. He accepted in 1899, at
the request of the Bishop of New
Guinea, the work of his general
commissary in Australia, relinquish-
ing this at the close of 1904. He
was appointed in 1900 hon. chaplain
to the New South Wales Engineer
Corps. Mr. Flower was elected in
1901 Fellow of St. Paul’s College
within the University of Sydney,
and he still acts as examining chap-
lain to the Bishop of Grafton and
Armidale. In 1885 Mr. Flower mar-
ried Emily Sarah, elder daughter of
Mr.Thos. George, of Bythorn, Hunts,
and grand-daughter of Mr. Henry
Moore, of Rodeen, Ireland, and the
county of Lincoln, and he has two
sons and two daughters.
The Rev. HENRY WALLACE
MORT. M.A., V.D., is the eldest
son of the late Henry Mort, and
rector of All Saints’ Church, Wool-
lahra. Mr. Henry Mort, who was a
native of Bolton, in Lancashire,
arrived in Sydney in 1841, three
years after his elder brother. Air. T. S.
Mort ; and proceeded at'fonce to
REV. H. W. MORT.
Moreton Bay, where he spent the
first thirteen years of his Australian
life. In 1846 he married Maria,
third daughter of Commissary-Gene-
ral Laidley ; and on April sth, 1847,
the subject of this memoir was
horn at Cressbrook, a station about
fifty miles from Brisbane, owned by
Mr. David McConnell, and still in
the possession of his family. The
following year Mr. Mort purchased
Franklyn Vale, and lived thereuntil
1855, when he took his family to
reside in Sydney. In 1857 his eldest
son was sent as a boarder to the Rev.
W. H. Savigny’s school at Cook’s
River. After three years with that
able schoolmaster, he went to Mac-
quarie Fields for two years, under
the Rev. George Macarthur. After
three years at Clifton, the subject
of this sketch matriculated at
Queen’s College, Oxford, where he
spent four years, devoting his chief
attention to the study of mathe-
matics, and taking his B.A. degree
in 1870. At the end of that year
he was ordained by Bishop George
Augustus Selwyn, of Lichfield, to
the curacy of St. Mary’s in that
city, under the Rev. Canon J. G.
Lonsdale, M.A. Here he worked
until the middle of 1873, and then
returned to Sydney. For fifteen
months, till May, 1875, he worked
with the Rev. W. T. Gunther in the
out-lying districts of St. Johns,
Parramatta. Meanwhile the Church
of All Saints, Woollahra, was in
corxrse of erection by Mr. Henry
Mort as a memorial to his wife, who
had died in 1873, and to this his
son was licensed by Bishop Barker
on January Bth, 1876. Several
friends of the family contributed
money and other special gifts to
this beautiful building, and seven
years later it was extended to its
full length by the parishioners, aided
by a further contribution from Mr.
Plenty Mort. The tower and south-
west porch have yet to be built to
complete the design of the architect,
the late Mr. Edmund T. Blacket.
Mr. Mort took his M.A. degree
(ad eundura) at Sydney University
in 1881. He has held a military
chaplain’s commission since 1877.
and has been senior military chap-
lain since 1892. In 1897 he became
entitled to the Colonial Auxiliary
P'orces Officers’ decoration (V.D.),
and, as senior chaplain of the Com-
monwealth forces, he conducted the
special service in connection with
the presentation of colours to eigh-
teen Australian regiments by the
Governor-General, in Melbourne on
November 14th, 1904. He has been
bon. secretary of the N.S.W. auxili-
ary to the Melanesian Mission since
1877, and hon. secretary of the
council of the King’s School since
1890. In 1002 he was appointed
rural dean of East Sydney, and lias
held several other important offices
in the diocese, including that of a
trustee of the Clergy Widows' and
Orphans’ Fund, a member of the
council of the Clergy Daughters’
School, one of the Synod nomi-
nators, and vice-president of the
hay Readers’ Association. Mr.
Mort married, in 1876, Kate, the
third daughter of the late Robert
M. Isaacs, LLT)., barrister-at-law,
and has three sons and two daugh-
ters.
The Rev. Canon ROBERT
TAYLOR, Rector of St. Stephen’s
Church, Newtown, comes from that
portion of England whence so many
distinguished citizens have ema-
nated, and which, in a spirit of
contrariness, has been designated
“ silly .Sussex.'’ Born at the
fashionable and popular watering
place, Brighton, on the South Down,
in April, 1834, l ie received the rudi-
mentary portion of a liberal
education at Christ Church Gram-
mar School in his native town, and
subsequently entered the Metro-
politan Training College, where he
went through a course of studies to
efficiently equip him for the battle
of life. Circumstances directed his
footsteps to Australia, and from the
time of his landing here the story of
his life may be told in two short
words, “the Church.” He has, in
fact, almost through the whole of
the many strenuous years that have
intervened, laboured as a priest
in various parochial charges, in and
around the neighbourhood of Syd-
ney. Entering Moore Theological
Training College, Liverpool, in
1859, he remains to-day one of the
oldest churchmen who have ema-
nated from that justly famous insti-
tution. He received his office of
deacon at the hands of Bishop
Barker, Metropolitan of Sydney,
before the expiry of 1859, and that
of priest in 1860. His first charge
was in the cure of St. Barnabas,
Sydney. Then, through the years
1860-6 he held the incumbentship
of the diocese of Castle Hill, which
at the time included the surround-
ing districts of Pennant Hills
and Dural; and since being
transferred from thence towards
the end of 1866, he has received the
following clerical appointments :
Rector in charge of St. Stephen’s,


Newtown, 1868-70 ; chaplain of
Camperdown Cemetery, 1872; rural
dean of West Sydney, 1884-5;
THE REV. CANON R. TAYLOR.
chaplain to the Prince Alfred Hos-
pital, 1883 ; incumbent of Holy
Trinity, Macdonaldtown, 1884-8,
and canon of St. Andrew’s
Cathedral, 1891.
The Rev. GEORGE MIDDLETON,
rector of the historic church, St.
Peter’s, Cook’s River, Sydney, is
the eldest son of Mr. fames Middle-
ton, of Bellevue Hill, Sydney. Born
on the 20th March, 1844, the reve-
rend gentleman is a native of the
colony. His early education was
received at a private boarding-school
in Norwood, near London, England ;
and in 1861 he entered Moore Theo-
logical College, then situated at
Liverpool, New South Wales, being
ordained by Bishop Barker in 1867.
Two years later Mr. Middleton was
made a priest. He is now in his
fortieth year of ecclesiastical work
during which long period he has
been brought into touch with most
of the many districts of the diocese
of Sydney. His first appointment
was to the curacy of St. Paul’s,
Cobbitty, in 1867-8, and the follow-
ing vear he undertook the duties of
locum tennis at St. Peter’s, Camp-
belltown. During 1869-70 he held
the curacy of St. Thomas’, Wil-
loughby; and before the latter year
had drawn to a close the more
onerous duties of an incumbent felt
upon his shoulders. His first in-
cumbency was at Bowral-cum-
Wingecarribce, where he remained
for three years, at the end of which
lie look over the administration of
the cure of Kurrajong, North Rich-
mond. In 1876 he accepted the
cure of Emu and Castlereagh. a
position held until 1883, when an
opportunity arose of affording his
family the advantages of the best
metropolitan educational institu-
tions. Having this in view, he
accepted for a short term the offer
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
REV. G MIDDLETON.
of a curacy at St. David’s, Surry
Hills, but in the same year was
appointed first incumbent St. Simon
and Jude parish, Sydney. In 1884
he accepted the charge of St. Bar-
tholomew, Pyrmont, remaining there
until the year iS'St), when he was
appointed to Sutton Forest. Two
years later he succeeded to the
rectorship of St. Bartholomew,
Prospect-cum-St. Andrew’s, Seven
Hills, which he held till 1904, when
he accepted the parish with which
he is now associated.
The Rev. PERCY JOHN
SIMPSON, Precentor of St. An-
drew’s Cathedral, Sydney, and Prin-
cipal of the Cathedral Choir School,
was born at London in the year
1864, and had the advantage of a
thorough scholastic training in
Wellington College, Berks, one of the
best known of the great leading
secondary public schools of the
United Kingdom. From there he
completed his educational ca-
reer at Christchurch, Oxford. The
rites of ordination to the office of
deacon were administered to him
by the Bishop of Newcastle, New
South Wales, in 1892, and the fol-
lowing year he was admitted to
holy orders as a priest by the same
church dignitary. His first cure
was that of the parish of Lake
Macquarie, in the diocese of New-
castle. After discharging this minis-
terial office for a short period he
was translated to the parish of St.
Peters’ East Maitland. Here he
laboured with great acceptance to
his parishioners until 1894, when he
was again removed to Merriwa, to
which parish he had been appointed
incumbent. His special gifts as a
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
REV. P. J. SIMPSON.
musical director brought him under
the notice of Bishopscourt, and
in 1895 he was appointed precentor
of St. Andrew’s Cathedral and prin-
cipal of Cathedral choir. As such
he has been enabled to render the
greatest assistance in making the
musical portion of the Cathedral
service attractive, in addition to
training a choir of boys up to the
required standard for his excellent
work. In 1902 Mr. Simpson re-
ceived the appointment of chaplain
to the Archbishop of Sydney, and
in 1903 he was appointed honorary
assistant chaplain to H.M. gaol,
Darlinghurst,
380
HIE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


Roman Catholic.
The history of the Roman Catholic Church may be said
to date from the arrival in the colony of Fathers Conolly
and Therry in 1820. Prior to that date the chaplain
of the Church of England only was recognised. The
motto of the authorities was punishment, not reforma-
tion. Among the early arrivals were a number of
convicts of the Roman Catholic faith, who, in conse-
quence of their crimes, were banished to Botany Bay.
In the arrangements for their deportation the only
omission, was the appointment of chaplains able to
bring the consolations of religion to the exiled convicts.
The Home Government may have conceived the idea
that such men were too hardened to receive impressions,
and that no clergyman would be willing to accompany
them for the purpose of attempting their reformation.
That one priest was prepared to make the sacrifice may
be gathered from a letter written to Ford Viscount
Sydney, at that time Secretary of State for the Colonies ;
My Lord,
You have been apprised of the desire which two clergymen of
the Catholic persuasion have to instruct the convicts, who are of
their faith, and who are destined for Botany Bay. I beg leave to
inform your Lordship of my sentiments concerning this request.
There are not less, probably, than 300, ignorant you may imagine
of every principle of duty to God and man. The number is great,
and consequently constitutes an object of consequence to every
man who has the happiness of his neighbours at heart. That the
Catholics of this country are not only of inoffensive principles, but
that they are zealously attached to the constitution of it, I may
presume is well known to your Lordship. For my part, who am
one of those clergymen who wish to take charge of the convicts of
my persuasion, I beg to acquaint your Lordship that if I be so
happy as to be permitted to go, I trust my endeavours to bring
these unhappy people to a proper sense of their duty as subjects and
citizens, may be attended with some salutary consequence. They
earnestly desire some Catholic clergyman may go with them, and I
trust to the known humanity of the Government that a request
which seems to promise some hope of their reformation will not be
denied. It is well known that these people will not pay the atten-
tion to the other ministers which they will to their own. Perhaps,
also, the presence of the priest may be of great use to make them
readily obey every order of their Governors, and I have no doubt
our conduct will meet the approbation of them,
I sincerely pity these poor people, not so much for the dis-
agreeable situation into which they have brought themselves, as for
the misdemeanours which have made them deserving of it. Yet, I
trust, if their ignorance be removed, and their obligation as men
and Christians be forcibly inculcated to them, that this may be a
means under Providence of their becoming useful to themselves,
and perhaps afterwards to their country. At least this I sincerely
wish. Nor do I think I can ever be as happy elsewhere as in the
place of their destination, employed in using my endeavours to
bring them out of the wretched state of depravity into which they
have fallen. I entreat, therefore, most humbly, that this our request
may be granted. These poor people will bless and thank you. 1
shall take care that they be not forgetful to the Governor and Lord
Sydney.
I have the honour of subscribing myself
Your Lordship’s most humble Servant,
Thomas Walshe, Priest.
p,S.—My Lord, —We are not so presumptuous as to wish sup-
port from the Government; we offer our voluntary services. We
hope, however, not to offend in entreating for our passage.
This letter is undated, but its proposal leaves no
doubt of the earnest desire of the writer to accompany
the unhappy and degraded beings in their exile.
The old records show that in 1792 a petition for
the rights of conscience was presented to Governor
Phillip, at Parramatta, by free Catholics, whose names
are appended, viz., Thomas lynan, sailor, farmer ,
Simon Byrne, Joseph Morley, John Brown, emancipists ,
and Mary Macdonald, wife of a marine settler. There
is nothing in the petition to indicate that their hard-
ships in the matter of religion were shared by others.
The following is a copy of their petition :
May it please Your Excellency,
We, the undersigned, with the most humble respect, take the
liberty of representing to your Excellency, the inconvenience vve
find in not being indulged heretofore with a pastor of our religion.
Notwithstanding the violation of the laws of our country, we would
still wish to inherit the laws of our Creator in the form we have
been instructed in our youth, the principles of which we never
wish to eradicate whether from a reverence or duty to our parents
(who have instructed us in it) or from prejudice imbibed from the
precepts taught us by our priests. We, therefore, humbly implore
your Excellency’s assistance on your return to England to repre-
sent to His Majesty’s Ministers, that it may be taken into con-
sideration, as our present opinion is that nothing else would induce
us to ever depart from His Majesty’s colony here, unless the idea of
going into eternity without the assistance of a Catholic priest.
The reason for this petition was augmented by the
action of Governor King, who established an orphan
school, in which the children of convicts were included
as orphan children, and all were to be trained as Pro-
testants.
The date of the celebration of the first mass is
largely a matter of conjecture. A community so
unmindful of the claims of religion were at no pains to
leave a record of work with which they had no sym-
pathy, and for which they had no inclination. A
Spanish priest, who is said to have made some pungent
reference to the absence of church, or altar, and who had
accompanied an expedition for scientific observation,
would not be unmindful of this duty. A tradition has
been preserved to the effect that a priest accompanying
an expedition said mass privately in the cottage of
Mr. Davis, at the corner of Harrington Street, where he
was assisted by Father Dixon, a convict priest.
The first Catholic clergyman to arrive was an Irish
priest, the Rev. James Harold, who in the rebellion of
1798 fearlessly did his duty. Suspicion that he was
hostile to the Government and taking an active part in
the rebellion fell upon him ; he was arrested, and, after
some months’ imprisonment, was sent on board the
‘ ‘ Minerva ’ ’ convict ship and transported to Botany
Bay. Shortly after his arrival he was suspected of
complicity in a seditious correspondence, alleged to
have been carried on, but his connection with it rests
on somewhat doubtful authority. He was, however,
thrown into prison, and on the first opportunity sent on
to the penal establishment at Norfolk Island. When
that settlement was abandoned in 1807 he, with other
convicts, was removed to Tasmania —again returning
to Sydney in 1808, obtaining his release in 1810.
The second priest to arrive was the Rev. James
Dixon ; like Father Harold, he had been exiled for
some supposed part taken in the disturbances of those
times. The sentence which had been passed upon him
was death ; this was changed to transportation for life
to Botany Bay. Father Dixon arrived in Sydney on
the 16th January, 1800, and his conduct appears to have
been most exemplary, as a proclamation was issued on
the 21st of April, 1803, granting a conditional pardon,
with permission to exercise his clerical functions as a
Roman Catholic priest. This permission was subject
to stringent regulations issued in concert with the
proclamation. The concluding clause of the procla-
mation was as follows ; -“ This permission shall remain


in force and effect so long as he. the Rev. Mr. Dixon
(and no other priest) shall strictly adhere to the rules
and regulations, which he has this day bound himself by
oath to observe, as well as all the other regulations
which may hereafter be made thereon by his Majesty’s
Governor of this territory for the time being, and in case
of any deviation therefrom, by the said Rev. Mr. Dixon,
or any of his congregation, it will remain with the
Governor of this territory to suspend such religious
assemblies and to deal with the offenders according
to law.’ ’
Under these regulations, the celebration of the first
mass took place on Sunday morning, May 15, 1803.
and, as the regulation restricted the work of the priest
to three places, Parramatta was visited on May 22,
and the Hawkesbury on May 29. Father Dixon was
constituted Prefect Apostolic for New Holland, and
continued for a time to exercise his sacred functions.
Reports, however, gaining credence that these meetings
for mass were gatherings covertly used for maturing
plans for rebellion, the permission for attendance at
mass was revoked about the end of 1804. This was
followed by determined action on the part of the
Government to enforce attendance at the services of the
Church of England, dissent or refusal being punished
with the lash. ‘ ‘ The friends of Father Dixon having
obtained a permit for him to return to Ireland, he
availed himself of an opportunity to quit a colony
which had been watered by his bitter tears, and fur-
nished him with the most odious memories.
The third priest to arrive was also a convict, and
described by the Governor in a despatch to the Home
Government “ asa Catholic priest of the most notorious,
seditious, and rebellious principles.” The clergyman
bearing this unenviable reputation was the Rev. Peter
O’Neil, who arrived in Sydney in 1801. For some
alleged insubordination he was speedily transferred to
the convict settlement at Norfolk Island, where in 1803
his release was granted and he was permitted to return
to Ireland.
The Catholic population was now left without a
priest, and the order compelling attendance at the
Protestant services being strictly enforced, officials and
convicts alike had no choice. Thus matters stood for
some time, the Home Government showing apparent
ignorance of the number of Catholics in the colony and
reluctance to sanction the appointment of a religious
instructor for them, nor were there many who would
choose the position. The Rev. J eremiah Francis Flynn
was the exception. He volunteered for the Australian
mission and was appointed by propaganda Prefect
Apostolic of New Holland, with faculty to administer
the sacrament of confirmation ; but his departure was
delayed in consequence of an official intimation to the
effect ‘ ‘ that it was not the intention of the Government
to send any more Roman Catholic clergymen to New
South Wales.” Nothing daunted, he made arrange-
ments to proceed as a private citizen, relying on the
influence of friends to have the order revoked. He
reached Sydney in 1817, and on calling on the Governor
to request permission to engage upon his duties as a
Roman Catholic clergyman, was refused, and as he had
come to Sydney without a permit he was directed to
leave the colony forthwith. For some weeks he con-
cealed himself and secretly administered the sacrament
to those who visited him. A petition was prepared and
presented to the Governor asking for a concession, so
that the ban might be removed and Father Flynn
allowed to minister to the wants of the Catholics for a
time. Sanguine of success, he once more appeared
among the citizens, was apprehended, and kept in prison
till an opportunity was afforded of placing him on board
a ship, when he was sent back to London.
The situation in New South Wales as regards
religion, and the necessity for making provision for the
wants of the Roman Catholic colonists was beginning to
press upon the Home Government, and it was resolved to
appoint two Roman Catholic chaplains, one of whom
would exercise his sacred calling in Van Diemen’s Land
and the other in Botany Bay. The Rev. Philip Conolly
was chosen for this mission. The position was beset
with difficulties, yet opening up remote possibilities,
almost without limit. His appointment w r as under
the direction of the Rev. Dr. Slater, wdio held at
that time the position of Bishop of the Cape of Good
Hope, Mauritius, Madagascar, and New South Wales.
His colleague, the Rev, John Joseph Therry, appears
to have volunteered, and was accepted. Passages for
the two missionaries having been secured on one of the
convict ships, they sailed from Cork, and arrived in
Sydney harbour on 3rd May, 1820. Without delay
they w r aited upon the Governor and received his per-
mission, subject to certain regulations, to exercise the
office of chaplain for the Roman Catholic convicts.
They immediately entered upon their duties. Mass
was celebrated on the 7th May and a meeting of Catho-
lics convened on the 15th June, when it was unanimously
resolved ‘ ‘ that a meeting be held in the Court House at
12 o’clock on the 30th inst.; for the purpose of consider-
ing and determining, the most effectual mode of opening
a subscription to build a Roman Catholic chapel in
Sydney. At this meeting, which was presided over by
the Rev. Father Conolly, resolutions were passed
“ expressing esteem for His Majesty’s Government in
England and confidence in and gratitude to the Governor-
in-Chief,” also, “ that it is the indispensable duty of
Catholics of this colony to unite with their clergy to
build a house of divine worship in Sydney ; ” “ that a
committee of the subscribers be immediately chosen
for the management, conducting and selecting a site
for the building ; ” “ that our clergymen are requested
to be of this number, and they are empowered to name
their president” ; ‘ ‘ all contracts for the completion
of it shall be confided to the committee, wdiose chairman
or president shall ratify the same under his hand, and
all receipts and payments of money or otherwise will
be in like manner notified by him ” ; 1 ‘ that the com-
mittee so named shall have the power of selecting and
appointing in the several districts of the colony, collectors
to apply for contributions, to be handed to the treasurer,
with lists of the persons’ names and their subscriptions’ ’;
“each collector shall have his appointment authorised
by a printed letter’ ’; ‘ ‘ that J ohn Piper, Robert Jenkins
and Francis Williams be requested by this meeting to
collect the subscriptions of the Protestant inhabitants
of Sydney”; “that the Revs. P. Conolly and J. J.
Therry and Messrs. James Meehan, William Davis.
James Dempsey, Edward Redmond, Patrick Moore,


Michael Hayes and Martin Short do form the com-
mittee.”
As there was no building adapted for divine worship
in Parramatta, application was made for the use of one
of the Government stores. In refusing the recpiest, it
was pointed out that no such place was available.
The use of the Court House, in Castlereagh Street, was
permitted for worship in Sydney. Father Theory now
determined to proceed to Van Diemen’s Land to take
up his duties, and embarked for that purpose, but
owing to a violent storm, which lasted for ten days, the
ship returned to port, and Father Conolly, who had
become dissatisfied in Sydney, decided on making the
smaller island the scene of his future labours ; a change
was therefore made, and Father Conolly left New South
Wales.
Having now the sole charge of the mission, Father
Therry speedily selected a site for a church, choosing
that on which the Cathedral of St. Mary’s now stands,
and the foundation stone of the projected building was
laid on Monday, 29th October, 1821, by His Excellency
Governor Macquarie. The amount expended at the
end of 1822 was £1,325 ss. 10.1 d., while the sum. received
amounted to £1,329 10s. rod. Another return in 1824
gives a further expenditure of £1,276 18s. 4d. and
additional receipts of £1,183 3 s - 5d., leaving a debt of
about £9O.
In those remote times, when skilled labour was
scarce, the task before Father Therry was one that
taxed his powers to the fullest extent ; his funds were
exhausted, and the Government subsidy which had
been promised was withheld, and it seemed as if the
work must be abandoned ; but in 1832 a sum of £SOO
was voted by the council, and the work was again
pushed forward to completion. The ceremony of dedi-
cation was performed by Dr. Folding, the first Bishop
of Australia, on 29th June, 1836.
The position of Father Therry after the departure
of his colleague was one of complete isolation, till the
arrival of Father Power, in 1826. The various demands
upon him came from places so widely separated, that a
great amount of time was spent in travelling over roads
that were unformed, and in parts almost impassable.
In 1821 he prepared a petition for presentation to the
Home Government, and forwarded it through Mr.
Commissioner Bigge, praying that the Rev. Dr. Slater
might be permitted to select and send, at least five other
clergymen for New South Wales. Receiving no reply
and being subjected to some petty annoyances at the
hands of the officials, lie seems to have consulted Dr.
Slater as to the expediency of retiring from the colony.
Whether from design, or through misfortune, he was
perpetually in conflict with the Government officials.
Allowing no opening for the advancement of his cause
to escape unchallenged, his want of tact created situa-
tions in which he appeared hostile to those in authority.
Observing the regulations for making the orphan schools
Protestant, he at once petitioned for leave to distribute
copies of the Catholic cathecism among the Roman
Catholic children. The reply was to the effect ‘ ‘ that
they should not be distributed in the orphan schools of
the Crown. ’ ’ Father Therry next appears to have
raised against himself a violent outcry because of a
supposed insult to the whole body of Protestant clergy-
men. In consequence of this his name was removed
from the list of chaplains and his salary suspended.
Father Therry was urged to withdraw from the colony,
the sum of £3OO being tendered to him conditionally
upon his leaving the colony; but he remained
indexible, and continued his ministry ; but so
obnoxious had he become that all avenues of usefulness
were closed against him. To neither the military nor
the convicts could he gain access. Officially the only
recognised chaplain was the Rev. Father Power, who
had arrived in the colony some time before. The strained
relations with the Government continued for a length-
ened period, when Father Therry presented a petition
setting forth that he had been removed from his official
position as chaplain and his salary withdrawn. His
prayer now was, ‘ ‘ That his position as chaplain may be
restored and his future salary fixed at £2OO a year ;
should this not be granted, he requested that the sum
of £3OO offered to him in 1825 to quit the colony may
now be granted to enable him to return to England.”
A considerable time elapsed before his position was
restored to him and a refund of his salary made. On
the arrival of Dr. Ullathorne as Vicar-General Father
Therry was transferred to Campbelltown. Mean-
while the Catholics of Tasmania invited him to come
over and minister to them, and in 1838 he became
Vicar-General for that portion of the Australian diocese,
He returned to New South Wales and settled in Balmain,
remaining there till his death, which took place in 1864.
On the deposition of Father Therry from the position
of chaplain, the Rev. Daniel Power was appointed at a
salary of £l5O per year. His term of office was a short
one, in which he was able to accomplish but little.
” His health seems to have been seriously impaired
before his arrival in the colony,” and he died in Parra-
matta about two years after his appointment. His
successor was the Rev. Vincent Dowling, who had
arrived in the colony in 1831. Newcastle was allotted
as his spiritual charge, and for many years he laboured
there. Mass was said in the upper loft of an old store
till the erection of a commodious church, which had
become necessary owing to the rapid progress of the
district.
Roman Catholics had hitherto laboured under
great disabilities; as official positions under the Crown
had been closed to them. The Act of Emancipation
which received the Royal Assent in 1829, removed this
barrier, and a few appointments were made, and these
prepared the way for asserting the right of the Catholic
body to religious equality ; Mr. Roger Therry being
appointed Commissioner of the Court of Requests, and
John Hubert Plunkett came to the colony as Solicitor-
General. Before leaving he obtained from Government
the appointment of an additional chaplain for New South
Wales, and the Archbishop of Dublin induced the Rev.
Father McEncroe to accept the position. He arrived
in Sydney in 1832, and for thirty-six years took a leading
part in the development of religion, filling responsible
positions in the church, gaining by his strong adminis-
tration the confidence and esteem of the Roman Catholic
population.
Father McEncroe, at the request of his bishop,
spent two years in Norfolk Island ; meanwhile the arrival
of Dr. Ullathorne, and Dr. Folding two years later, each


accompanied by a staff of missionaries, relieved the
burden that had rested on the earlier chaplains, and
Father McEncroe was called upon to undertake his first
mission. He was deputed by the fellows of St. John’s
College to proceed to Ireland to fix upon an able Presi-
dent for that college, and he selected the Rev. John
Forrest, D.D., of Maynooth College. While in Ireland
he took every opportunity of pressing upon the atten-
tion of the clergy the great needs of the mission ii)
Australia, and was the means of inducing the Rev.
William Eanigan, who afterwards became first Bishop
of Goulburn. to volunteer for mission work. On his
return he was placed in charge of St. Patrick s District,
Sydney, and to the close of his life devoted himself to the
work of that district.
The esteem in which he was held was marked in
1854. The Archbishop and the Vicar-General were
both absent in Rome, and during their absence the
Coadjutor Bishop, the Right Rev. Dr. Davis died ; the
clergy chose Father McEncroe to be their Diocesai
Superior pending othe arrangements by the Archbishop.
It was mainly through his representation that
the sacred Congregation of Propaganda resolved on the
formation of new dioceses in Few South W ales and
bishops appointed for Maitland, Goulburn, Armidale
and Bathurst.
As has been already mentioned, Dr. Ullathorne
arrived in 1833 invested with authority as Vicar-General
to administer the spiritual affairs of the colon} . Heie-
tofore chaplains had been appointed, but there was no
head to guide them, and all questions of importance
were remitted to the ecclesiastical superior at Mau-
ritius, resulting in tedious delays, bor the supply ol
books and requirements for the altar the clerg} were
dependent on friends in Ireland, while the sacrament ol
confirmation had been in abeyance since the departure
of Father Flynn. Dr. Ullathorne was able to heal the
divisions which had existed regarding the building ol
St. Mary’s Cathedral, and was indefatigable in perform-
ing all the duties of his sacred ministry. In him the
cFurch had a staunch champion and an acti\ e adminis-
trator. At a meeting of Catholics held shortly after
his arrival he was able to announce that the Go\ eminent
had consented to proceed at once with the roofing and
flooring of St. Mary s, and trustees were chosen foi the
land. The trustees were the Vicar-General, Fathers
Therry and McEncroe, the Attorney-General. Mr,
Plunkett, the Commissioner of Requests, Mr. Therry,
and Mr. Murphy. The choice of trustees was approved
by the Government, and the difficulties about proceeding
with the work were soon overcome. While on a visit
to England Dr. Ullathorne gave evidence before the
COllllll i 11 ee on 1 ransportations, and in a course of
lectures on ‘ ‘ The Church in Australia and the Con-
dition of the Convicts ’ ’ such interest was awakened
that in six weeks funds to the amount of £1,500 were
collected. On his return to Australia he resumed the
duties of Vicar-General, but his stay was short. His
evidence on the system ol transportations had gi\cn
offence to many influential persons, and while Dr.
Folding was desirous that he should be appointed to one
of the sees about to be erected, he declined any prefer-
ment in Australia and returned to England.
The progress hitherto made and the position
attained, though encouraging to the Catholic body, was
still further enhanced by the advent of Bishop Folding
in 1835. Two years prior to this date the Holy vSee had
resolved to appoint a Vicar Apostolic for the diocese oi
Madras, in India, and the Sacred Congregation of
Propaganda had selected him. The climate of India,
for which his constitution was unsuited, led Dr. Folding
to decline the honour, while the urgent appeals of Dr.
Ullathorne for missionaries in Australia, and urging the
appointment of a bishop, led Dr. Folding to seek Aus-
tralia, instead of Madras, and he became first bishop.
The ceremony of consecration took place on 29th June,
1834, i ll the private chapel of the Vicar Apostolic of the
London district. Accompanied by nine missionaries,
he reached Sydney in 1835, the ceremony of installation
taking place on the Sunday after landing.
New interest having been awakened, the lay
members of St. Mary’s presented an address to the
Governor praying that a fitting salary may be assigned
for their pastor. Subsequently a grant of £SOO was
made. A house was rented for him with extensive
grounds in Woolloomooloo ; it was at that time the only
house in Woolloomooloo, and had been built for the
first Protestant archdeacon. Immediately after taking
possession he turned it into a seminary, commencing
with four students, the Bishop acting as professor.
The seminary was some time after transferred to tem-
porary buildings on the Cathedral grounds.
The first official return presented to the Government
by Bishop Folding gives the following authentic statistics
regarding the Australian church in 1836 ; —‘ ‘ln Sydney
there is one chapel at Hyde Park, capable of containing
2,000 persons, generally attended on Sundays by a
congregation of from 1.500 to 1,800 ; there is one chaplain
(Rev. J. McEncroe), with salary of £l5O. In Parra-
matta, Rev. J. Sumner, chaplain, £l5O, one chapel,
capable of holding 500, ordinary congregation from 200
to 300. In Campbelltown, Rev. J. J. Therry, £l5O,
church, capable of holding 450, ordinary congregation
250. In Windsor, Rev. J. V. Corcoran, £l5O, church
being erected to contain 1,000. ordinary congregation
250. In Maitland. Rev. C. V. Dowling, £l5O, church
accommodation 450, ordinary attendance 250. In
Wollongong, no chaplain, church capable of holding 250.
The official census of the same year gave the number of
Catholics as 20,898, scattered over a large area. The
schools from which all support came from the Govern-
ment were primary, seven being schools for boys and
six schools for girls. The total number attending was
572, and the amount for the support of the teachers was
£ 6 3°-
“The first confirmation was administered on heb-
ruary 28, 1836, and on Bth May the first ordination
under a Roman Catholic bishop took place at the
Cathedral, Father Sumner being the first priest or-
dained in the colony, and the Revs. MM. Spencer and
Gregory the first deacons. The Rev. C. Lovatt, who
for a time held the office of president of the Diocesan
Seminary of St. Mary’s, arrived in 1837, and in the fol-
lowing year nine priests, of whom two afterwards rose
to eminence in the church —the Rev. John Brady, who
became first Bishop of Perth, and the Rev. James
Gould, who was appointed first Bishop of Melbourne,
and afterwards its first Archbishop.’'


The end of the year witnessed the return of Dr.
Ullathorne, Vicar-General, with three priests and the
first sisters of charity to arrive in Australia. About
this time considerable activity was shown in church
building. 'lhe foundation stone of a new church for
Parramatta was laid, and in 1840 the first school erected
by private enterprise, the Catholic school in Camp-
belltown, was built. In September the Bishop blessed
the foundation stone of a church at Wollombi, and on
the Bth October a like ceremony was performed for the
church of St. John the Baptist, Campbell’s Hill, West
Maitland, and on the 13th, at Wollongong, the founda-
tion of St. Francis Xavier was laid. The church at
Windsor was completed and dedicated October 21, 1840,
In Liverpool the foundation stone of All Saints was
blessed by the Bishop on Bth November
the Vicar-General was given, a gold snuff-box, full of
sovereigns, and an address expressive of their esteem
and desire for his return. After a short time spent in
Europe, Dr. Folding was summoned to Rome, and one
of the results of his visit was the erection of the heir-
archy in Australia ; Sydney became the metropolitan
and archiepiscopal see, and Bishop Folding received
the pallium in Rome. Adelaide and Hobart were sepa-
rated from the mother church, and became episcopal
sees. The Rev. Francis Murphy was appointed to the
former and the Rev. Robert William Willson to the
latter.
Archbishop Folding returned to Sydney on the 2nd
November, 1842, and for a lengthened period the most
bitter controversy was carried on, owing to a public
protest having been lodged by Archbishop Broughton
Burning of Old St. Mary’s Cathedral.
The erection of St. Patrick’s Church was one of the
principal works attempted, and the scene at the blessing
of the foundation the most memorable. It was esti-
mated that 20,000 persons witnessed the ceremony,
which was preceded by the celebration of high mass in
the Cathedral, followed by a procession from thence to
the site of the new building, and so strenuous were the
efforts put forth that when, in 1844. the church was
sufficiently advanced for the dedicatory ceremony the
full amount of £5,000 expended on the building had
been collected.
Having in view the needs of his diocese, Dr. Folding
left for England in November, being accompanied by
the Vicar-General and the Rev. Mr. Gregory. A purse
containing £4OO was presented to the Bishop, while to
against the right or authority of Rome to institute any
episcopal or archiepiscopal sec or sees within the limits
of the diocese of Australia. Despite the attacks, the
work of the church continued to grow, three hundred
adults and children being received at the sacrament of
confirmation on Sunday, 13th August of the following
year. A peal of bells having arrived for the Cathedral,
the money necessary to provide a tower was quickly
subscribed and the bells placed in position.
An important meeting was held in St. Mary’s on
31st December, 1843, the object being to petition for a
fairer distribution of the funds for public worship.
The census of 1841 gave the number of Catholics as
35,bg0 ; Church of England, 73,727 ; the Presbyterians
and Wesleyans, 16,439. I n the estimates as proposed


only £5,000 was apportioned to the Catholics, while the
Church of England had £14,000, the remaining two
receiving £4,750.” A committee waited on the
Governor, and received a favourable reply.
The provincial synod met on the 10th October and
following days, the Archbishop presiding. At its close
a meeting was held and a vigorous reply formulated
to strictures by the Right Rev. Dr. Broughton in a
sermon preached at the female factory, Parramatta.
The Archbishop sailed for Europe on his second
visit in February, 1846, the Rev. Dr. Gregory acting as
Vicar-General of the diocese during his absence. He
returned a year later, accompanied by a community of
Benedictine nuns and some missionaries. Taking up
again the duties that devolved upon him, his attention
was mainly devoted to the erection of Lyndhurst Col-
lege, and several months were spent in visitations.
A third visit to Europe was made in 1854, and
while in Rome he tendered his resignation of the see,
and on Sunday, August 17th, the breakfast of the Guild,
held in St. Mary’s Hall after a religious ceremony, was
presided over by the Archbishop.
'fhe withdrawal of State aid from the churches of
all denominations by a vote of the Legislature in 1862
occasioned serious loss, and for a time promised to
impede all further progress. Among the supporters of
the measure were some who hoped that this w’ould stop
the growth of the Catholic Church. This error has now
been exposed. By a special appeal made by Dr. Folding
to the faithful of the diocese, in which he solicited their
voluntary contributions, pointing out the work that
had been accomplished, especially in connection with
.St. Mary’s Cathedral, and hopes were entertained that
the interior would soon be completed. These hopes
were not realised. A disastrous fire occurred on the
night of June 29, 1865, and the sacred pile reduced to
ruin. The grandeur of the sight drew thousands ol
people to Hyde Park, intent on helping to extinguish
St. Mary’s Roman Catholic Cathedral, 1907
' ‘ owing to some resolutions taken by Propaganda, and
which appeared to him calculated to bring ruin to the
church as built up by him on Benedictine lines for
twenty years.” The proffered resignation was not
accepted, and a few days later he had an audience with
the Holy Father, when he was encouraged to persevere
in the great missionary work in which he was engaged.
The erection of St. John’s College was now contem-
plated, land having been set aside for the purpose, and
the Government offering a sum equal to the amount
raised. A meeting was held in St. Mary’s Cathedral
and a resolution carried to the effect that steps be taken
to raise the sum of £IO,OOO ; this amount was more than
covered in a short time and the building erected,
£40,000 being spent in its erection.
'file Catholic Guilds of St. Mary’s and St. Joseph’s
commenced in ißb2 with but eighteen members ; as
time went on the number was reckoned by hundreds,
the fire, but their efforts were useless, and in a few hours
the building was in ruins ; the loss was estimated at
£50,000.
The Archbishop was on a visit to Bathurst when
the news reached him of the destruction of the Cathedral,
but the genuine expressions of sorrow and promises of
help from all sections, gave the assurance that another
temple equal in magnificence would again be raised.
While the ruins smouldered meetings were held, at which
the citizens gave practical sympathy, and it was decided
to take steps to give effect to their wishes. The Arch-
bishop presided, and His Excellency the Governor,
Sir John Young, was one of the speakers. The Hon.
T. A. Murray, President of the Legislative Council, and
other prominent citizens took part, and the greatest
enthusiasm was manifested. A temporary building
was quickly erected on an adjacent spot and plans
prepared for a new building. The foundation stone


was solemnly blessed by the Archbishop on the Bth
December, 1868, when the sum of £1,400 was laid upon
the stone. But a singular fatality seemed to hover
above St. Mary’s. The temporary building, occupying
the spot where St. Mary’s Hall now stands, was in the
course of a few months destroyed by fire, and owing to
the inflammable nature of the material nothing was
saved. Such overwhelming disaster evoked the most
genuine sympathy, and in little more than four months
a brick building had been completed on the same site.
The visit of His Royal Highness, Prince Alfred, to
Sydney was made the occasion of great rejoicing.
Preparations had been made to give the visitor a royal
welcome. This event, in which all classes were taking
part, became the occasion of great bitterness, owing to
an attempt made on the life of the Prince by a man
bearing the name of O’Farrell. Immediately the
greatest alarm prevailed. O’Farrell was a Catholic and
the deed was at once characterised as a Fenian plot.
I he Archbishop exerted his personal influence on every
hand to appease the fury of the storm that had been
raised, and which continued for a number of years.
Once more the Archbishop prepared to visß Rome,
having been summoned by the Vatican Council. He em-
barked in October, but at Suez was compelled to rest,
returning to Sydney without visiting Rome. Appli-
cation had been made from time to time to the Holv
See for an auxiliary bishop or coadjutor. “ The Very
Rev. Dr. Sheehy, 0.5.8., had received the briefs of his
appointment as Titular Bishop of Bethsaida and Coad-
jutor in 1866,’’ but had declined the appointment, and
it was not till 1873 that the Most Rev. Roger Bede
Vaughan was appointed as Coadjutor to His Grace of
Sydney. His consecration took place on the 19th
March, and he arrived in Sydney at the end of the year.
1 he Archbishop, though full of years, steadily continued
his work. On the 30th April he dedicated the newly
erected church of St. Joseph’s, Orange. The school ill
Kent Street was erected at a cost of £9OO. St. Francis’
schools were also begun, the total cost being about
£9OO ; and about the same time the school at Mt. Car-
mel, on which £3,000 was expended, had been com-
menced. But the labours of the Archbishop were about
to end, symptoms of serious illness appeared, and
on the morning of Friday, the 16th March, he passed
away. It was estimated that 100,000 persons witnessed
the funeral. Many and important changes took place
during the episcopate of Dr. Folding, space will permit
of but few of the most important. Maitland was
erected into a see in the year 1817. Dr. Davis, 0.5.8.,
being appointed first Bishop of Maitland and Coad-
jutor of His Grace the Archbishop of Sydney. But dur-
ing the six years of his episcopate he never visited Mait-
land. Subject to severe attacks of illness, which com-
pletely prostrated him, his death took place in 1851.
For ten years Maitland remained a titular see, till
definitely erected in 1865, when the Right Rev. James
Mur ’ray became bishop. He arrived in his diocese at a
time when the Education Bill was under discussion in
Parliament ; he soon took prominent part in defending
the religious liberty which the Catholic body had
struggled so long to obtain. The number of Catholics
in his diocese was set down at about 20,000 ; with 16
schools receiving Government aid and 12 supported by
the voluntary efforts of the people. The number of
pupils was about 2,000. There were 44 buildings for
worship, with 14 priests in the ranks of the clergy.
The Sacred Heart College was one of the important-
works to which he devoted attention, and which he
was able to open as a college in 1875. While on a
second visit to Europe he secured for his diocese a
community of Redemptorist missionaries; four mis-
sionary fathers and two lay brothers accompanying
him on his return, and three arriving some short time
after. To meet the wants of this community the mon-
astery of St. Alphonsus was erected at Waratah, near
Newcastle, and in 1887 the blessing and inauguration
of the buildings by the Archbishop took place.
Goulburn was erected into a see by brief dated
10th March, 1864, and the Right Rev. Dr. Geoghegan
was translated as first bishop. Owing to his death the
same year the task of forming the diocese devolved
upon the Rev. William Lanigan, of Berrima, while in
charge of this parish he received his appointment as
Bishop of the See of Goulburn. Archbishop Folding
being on a visit to Europe, the consecration ceremony
was performed by His Lordship the Bishop of Brisbane,
assisted by the Bishops of Maitland and Bathurst.
The Catholic population of the diocese was about
16,000 ; with eight missionary districts, one convent of
nuns, and a staff of five priests. A visit to Europe was
made in 1871, when more perfect arrangements were
made for the spiritual interests of his flock. On his
return the number of priests was increased to 15. A
new Cathedral to accommodate 1,000 persons was
commenced, and St. Patrick’s College completed. The
Catholic population had increased from 16,000 in 1867,
to 24,000 in 1880 ; with 25 priests, three convents of
sisters of mercy with 36 sisters, and one convent of pre-
sentation nuns with ten sisters ; 18 churches had been
built during the preceding ten years. In 1891 the
Catholic population had grown to 30,000, with 57
churches, 20 convents, three monasteries, and 20
schools distinct from the convents.
Bathurst became a separate diocese in 1865, when
the Right Rev. Dr. Quinn was consecrated first bishop.
The church of Sts. Michael and John had been opened
for worship. On arrival he found a Catholic popula-
tion of about 13,000, with six priests. In 1885 the
number of priests had increased to 28 ; with 43 churches
and 56 schools, attended by about 4,000 pupils. In
eight convents there were 86 sisters of mercy, and 106
sisters of St. Joseph in 13 convents. In addition, a
college and seminary had been built at a cost of
£15,000, and in 1884 the brothers of St. Patrick ar-
rived and entered upon their work. The number of
Catholics was estimated to be about 25,000. In 1873
the College of St. Stanislaus was opened with solemn
ceremony. The seminary of St. Charles having been
blessed by Archbishop Vaughan in 1881, when a sum
of £2,000 was collected. Bishop Dunne paid two
visits to Europe during his episcopate, receiving on
each occasion of his return flattering proofs of loyalty
and devotion from the members of his flock. On his
return from his second visit it was evident that his con-
stitution was seriously impaired, and on January 18,
1885, he passed from the scene of his labours, but his
memory is enshrined in the hearts ol his people. He
was succeeded by the Rev. Joseph Patrick Byrne,
D.D., who was consecrated in the Cathedral at Bathurst
on the 9th August, 1885.


The first priest appointed to the district of Anni-
dalc was the Rev. Timothy McCarthy. His parish ex-
tended to the Queensland border on the one side, and
the Pacific Ocean on the other, a tour of his district
lasting three months. Armidale was, however, one of
the first centres marked out for an episcopal see, and in
1869 Timothy O’Mahoney was consecrated in
the Cathedral of Cork as first bishop. For some reason
he was not installed till 1871. There were but three
priests attached to the diocese, and four chapels. The
city of Armidale was served by a wooden chapel, mea-
suring 25 ft. bv 18 ft. The first work to which the
bishop addressed himself was the erection of a Cathe-
dral, and this was so far completed that the Archbishop
was able to bless and open it on the 2nd February,
1872. Bishop O’Mahoney’s episcopate was but a
short one ; grave imputations were urged against him
and he was recalled to Rome, and while there resigned
the see in 1878. His successor was the Right Rev.
Elzear Torreggiani, who was consecrated in 1879, and
arrived in Sydney at the end of the year, accompanied
by six capuchins. In his large and scattered district,
covering more than 46,000 square miles, there were
10,000 Catholics and 17 priests with 23 churches. This
large diocese was divided in 1885, Grafton having been
erected into a see. As we pen these lines the announce-
ment of the death of Dr. Torreggiani has appeared in
the public press.
Wilcannia, including the inland territory hitherto
forming part of the dioceses of Goulburn and Bathurst,
was created a sec in 1887, and the Right Rev. John
Dunne appointed first bishop. In the Cathedral of
Goulburn he was consecrated the same year, the Car-
dinal Archbishop being the consecrating prelate, as-
sisted by the Bishops of Goulburn and Maitland. Un-
avoidable difficulties having been met with the progress
has been slow, although the new bishop with great
vigour set about forming parishes and erecting schools
and convents.
The diocese of Grafton was formed in 1887, the
Rev. Jeremiah Joseph Doyle, the first bishop, was
consecrated in St. Mary’s Cathedral by the Cardinal
Archbishop. Dr. Doyle had been placed in charge of
the Casino district on his arrival in the colony in 1878,
and it was in an especial manner proof of his success as
priest that he should be selected as bishop of this im-
portant and growing district. His first work was to
erect a Cathedral in the town of Lismore. This he
commenced immediately after his return from a visit
to Rome. The stone was laid after a postponement
caused by tropical rain, which prevented any ceremony
on the day first selected. The collection at the cele-
bration of high mass on the occasion amounted to over
£3,000 ; a further sum of £450 being handed in when
the stone was finally laid. A disastrous fire which
occurred on 2nd January, 1905, completely destroyed
the convent and the pro. Cathedral. Very little pro-
perty was saved from the convent, but most of the
vestments, sacred vessels, and seats were saved from
the Cathedral.
The most Rev. Dr. Vaughan who, as already men-
tioned, arrived in Sydney as Coadjutor Archbishop, suc-
ceeded Archbishop Bolding. The select ion of llie Holy
See gave great satisfaction to the clergy and laity of the
Roman Catholic Church, inasmuch as Dr. Vaughan had
the ability to lead and advise on subjects the most
intricate and difficult to deal with. The scene on the
day of his arrival was an unusual one, over 20,000
people lined the quay to express their welcome, while
the addresses presented assured him of loyal support.
That to him they turned as their champion in matters
of education may be gathered from the concluding
words of the address presented by the clergy : 4 4 We
hope to be better able to protect the education of
the rising generation from the blighting influence of
anti-catholic secularism under the leadership of one
whose published writings prove him so deeply conver-
sant with the pure sources of sanctity and learning,
from which the colossal minds of the ages of faith and
scholasticism drew their inspiration.” Nor were they
disappointed. In his reply the prelate sketched the
lines of his future work, from which it may be learned
that the completion of the Cathedral and the work of
securing a Christian education were foremost in the
outline ; and in the controversy that followed every
available opportunity was taken to set forth the teach-
ing of the Catholic Church with regard to education.
Two days later when distributing the prizes at the
Lyndhurst College, in a passing reference to education,
he said : 44 We have all our parts to perform in that
common cause, for we have not only to educate our-
selves, but throughout our lives to do all we can to
extend to others whatever advantages of this nature it
may have been our happiness to receive. I hope to do
all 1 can to help you all in fighting the battle. If we
are only true to God and to ourselves, we must and
shall succeed.’ ’
When in 1879 the Public Instruction Bill was in-
troduced the Catholic bishops met, and a joint pastoral
was issued on the important subject of religious educa-
tion. This pastoral was attacked on all sides and the
Archbishop stigmatised as a firebrand The bishops
were charged with turning the education question into
an Irish grievance. When the end came, and the
Public Instruction Act passed, the Catholic Church
showed unexpected activity in opening up Catholic
schools, and has since proved capable of providing
instruction for her own children.
Dr. Forrest resigned the rectorship of St. John’s
College soon afte v the arriva l of Dr Vaughan, and he at
o o y
once filled the position, and during his residence in
Sydney the college was his home. The great work of
the diocese had been faithfully carried forward during
the intervening years till he set out for Europe in 1883.
His pastorals and speeches have been published
in separate form as a valuable legacy *or all time
Through the busy and exciting years the work o* com-
pleting the Cathedral was carried forward, and in 1882
44 A Fayre o* ye Olden Tyme ” returned the gratifying
sum o +> £6.000. A final meeting having been convemd
n o
to promote the Cathedral f und in 1883, the Archbishop
was able to announce that the sum of £102,763 6s. 7d.
had up to that time been spent on the Cathedral. Of
this sum £60,000 had been spent before the death of
Archbishop Folding. A visit to Europe was now con-
templated. He embarked on April 19th, 1883, bearing
with him the prayers of the whole Catholic Church. He
reached England apparently in health, but the end
came swiftly. He passed away in his sleep. The
voice that had charmed while it evoked the keenes^


enthusiasm was silent. Death was to him a sleep.
Archbishop Vaughan was succeeded by the present
Cardinal Archbishop the Right Rev. Patrick Francis
Moran, at that time Bishop of Ossory in Ireland. His
His Eminence Cardinal Moran.
translation was at the request of the bishops of the
province and by brief of the Holy See. On his arrival
m Sydney the most enthusiastic welcome was accorded
him. But a few months elapsed ere he was summoned
to Rome, where he was raised to the dignity of a Car-
dinal, an honour conferred for the first time on the
Metropolitan of the Australian church. Hastening
back to his diocese the Cardinal Archbishop was able to
preside at the plenary synod of bishops in Australia,
held on the 14th November, 1885. The session lasted
a fortnight. One of the results was the issue of a
pastoral letter addressed by the Plenary Council to the
clergy and faithful entrusted to their charge.
Briefly summarised its recommendations were :
(1) That on the death of an administrator his successor
might be taken from its clergy should the last prelate
have died without making provision for the govern-
ment. The clergy were reminded that three things are
O J o
essential to a successful apostleship : (1) The example of
their own lives ; (2) the census of the parish ; (3) con-
stant and easy access to sacraments. It was further
declared necessary that in the centres of population
large-souled associations should be called into exist-
ence : for the young girls a “ children of Mary 55 asso-
tion ; for the youths, a Catholic young men’s society ;
in every parish a sodality of the holy family ; a St. Vin-
cent de Paul’s society for the succour of the bodily and
spiritually destitute ; the Christian doctrine society for
the gathering of young children to hear the truths of
religion ; the formation of temperance societies in
every parish under the charge of the local pastor ;
Catholic circulating libraries ; and above all the form-
ing of good Christian homes, and, as the corollary of
this, the attendance of the children at good Catholic
schools. Attention was drawn to the danger and un-
happiness arising from mixed marriages; and a strong
protest made against a godless education which the
bishops contended must be the result from the with-
drawal of State aid from all Christian education in the
colonies.
The foundation stone of the ecclesiastical college
of St. Patrick at Manly was blessed by the Cardinal
Archbishop during the session of the plenary synod.
This college, now fully completed, commands an ex-
tensive view of Sydney harbour, and is one of the first
buildings to arrest the attention of the visitor to Syd-
o *
ney. The college, which cost about £65,000, was
opened for students in 1888. The year 1888 being the
centenary of the settlement in Australia, a commemo-
ration worthy of the occasion was determined on, and
the catholic body resolved to complete, as a centenary
memorial, the chancel and central tower of St. Mary’s.
A brilliant speech was delivered by the Hon. W. B.
Dailey at a public meeting held in St. Mary’s, at which
representative men from all parts of Australia were
present, including His Excellency the Governor, Lord
Carrington, with the six Governors of the other colo-
nies. At the close of the meeting Lord Carrington was
able to announce that the sum of £3,000 had been
given towards the object in view.
The Cardinal Archbishop visited England again in
1888, and had the satisfaction of learning that the Holy
See had been pleased to appoint the Right Rev. Dr.
Joseph Higgins, Titular Bishop of Antifelle, as Coad-
jutor Bishop. The Cardinal Archbishop and his as-
sistant are still actively prosecuting the mission in
Australia.
The Rev. Dean O’Haran.
The progress that has been made during the cen-
tury has been truly marvellous. In 1892, besid s the
Cardinal Archbishop and the Right Rev. Auxiliary
Bishop, there were 160 priests, 100 of the secular clergy
and 59 regulars. Of religious teaching brothers there
were 141. The nuns of the various religious sisterhoods
number 676. The children taught in Catholic schools
by the religious teachers number 18,174. The Catholic
population in 1901 was 347,286.
Much might be written of the work of the religious
sisters. The first, as we have seen, being the sisters of
charity, who in 1836, came to minister to the convicts,
and to bring the consolations of religion to the female


Catholics of that population. The sisters were the means
of securing for them occupation more suitable for women'.
They established a Magdalene Asylum, which was after-
wards carried on by the Good. Samaritan community.
As nurses they volunteered for the Soudan. The Hos-
pice of St. Vincent de Paul was commenced by them, and
the work accomplished in this alone merits the highest
praise. St. Joseph’s Sanatorium at Auburn owes its
existence to their untiring and unselfish labours. Ever
ready to face the dangers of disease, calls upon them
were never in vain.
The sisters of mercy came to New South Wales in
1869, first settling in Goulburn, but in 1893 the one
community had grown, and 48 other convents of sisters
of mercy had been founded. Bishop Murray introduced
the first Dominican nuns into’Australia. From Maitland
branch convents have been placed in Tamworth, New-
castle, Waratah, Moss Vale, and Strathfield ; the care
of deaf mutes being a special work at Waratah.
Australia can claim to have two orders which have
been founded to carry on the work of the Australian
church—the religious institute of the Good Samaritan
and the Sisters of St. Joseph of the Sacred Heart. The
former made its beginning in Sydney, having been
founded by Dr. Folding in 1857,
laide, under the episcopate of the Right Rev. Dr. Steel.
Branches of this community have now been formed in
each of the colonies. There still remains one community,
bearing a humble title, whose labours are confined to
the aged poor. The order had its beginning in Mel-
bourne in 1884, where they succeeded in raising a
home for the aged poor. A branch of the order has
been established in Sydney, and their modest work,
accomplished in a quiet sphere without Haunting banner
or the roll of drum, is yet worthy of the highest honour.
The poor are their care, and the blessings of the poor
follow them.
The Congregational Church.
The Congregationalists. or Independents, were among
the first to be represented in New South Wales. As
early as 1798, their missionaries had preached in Sydney
and Parramatta, but as almost everything was done
under Government supervision and direction, the field
was not a promising one for free churches, and their
progress in those primitive times was small. Strenu-
ously opposed to .State aid in any form, their churches
were built, ministers supported, and missionary opera-
tions carried on with money raised from among them-
selves. A church depending on the voluntary gifts of
the adherents for sustenance found a limited scope for
the first thirty years after the settlement of Australia.
Having no central fund from which to draw for the
maintenance of their cause, great hardship was experi-
enced by the pioneers, testing their faithfulness to
principle, as well as their faithfulness to God and their
work. Bike the Apostles, they ministered to their
flock, receiving only the reward of their labours. Owing
to the conditions under which the colony was founded,
it was not till free emigrants began to arrive, that churches
of this order could hope to obtain means to maintain
pastors, and a multiplication of churches was not easily
attainable.
The essential clement in the doctrine of the
Congregational Church is, that any community ol
Christians has a right to the regulation of its own
ecclesiastical discipline and form of worship, hide
pendent of any other community ; each congregation
forming in itself, a “ church.” It is on their interpre-
tation of the word ” church,” as used in Scripture, that
they rest this doctrine, which they hold in common
with the Baptists. Before admission to membership,
they hold that there must be not only an intellectual
assent to the historical narrative of Christianity, but that
there must be satisfactory signs of the presence of its
spiritual essence in the heart. Any man whom a con-
gregation may think qualified to edify them is eligible
for the ministry. Ordination is performed by the
ministers of neighbouring churches. It is not held, that,
office is thereby conferred, gifts bestowed, or authority
conveyed. ‘ ‘ The power of the church they hold to be
purely spiritual, and acknowledge no head but Christ.”
It might at first sight appear likely that this perfect inde-
pendence of each congregation would render their work-
ing harmoniously together a matter of great difficulty;
but experience has shown the contrary. By leaving each
congregation to act independently in its church discipline
many disputes which might have spread widely have
ended where they began. ‘ ‘ They are satisfied to agree
about the essentials of religion, to sink minor differences
which the fallibility of human judgment renders inevit-
able, to leave the determination of the accessories of its
worship to the taste and feeling of each congregation,
and to act in unison for the furtherance of the great
truths of Christianity.” On all important questions,
when the opposing forces have been marshalled, the voice
of Congregationalists has been raised with no uncertain
sound, as they hold that it is the duty as well as the privi-
lege of all Christians to assist in promoting the welfare
of the community.
The development of religious work from 1788 to 1820
was inappreciable. A chaplain of the Church of England
had charge of the settlement, his appointment having
been made in England and his salan* paid from the
public funds, and until the latter date other religious
bodies were scarcely represented. An Independent
minister had preached sermons in the colony in 1798, but
though a number of missionaries from the Friendly
Islands took refuge in Sydney not one of them seems to
have settled down as a permanent pastor of a church.
In May, 1796, the directors of the London Missionary
Society passed the following resolution : ‘ ‘ That a
mission be undertaken to Tahiti, Friendly Islands,
the Marquesas, and Pelew Islands, in a ship to be com-
manded by Captain John Wilson, as far as may be
practical and expedient.” Among the names, of whom
there were thirty in all, were John Eyre, James Flint
Cover, Henry Bucknell, William P. Crook, William
Henry/ Rowland Hassall, Francis Oakes, William
Shelley, &c. These names are of historical interest.
The hostility of the natives compelled them to leave the
islands, and they came to Sydney and cast in their lot
with the convict settlement at Port Jackson. The
Governor of the colony welcomed them, believing that
their advent would ‘ ‘ prove a happy augury for the
development of a religious spirit throughout the settle-
ment.” Finding no opening for their ministrations,
Some of them settled down to other pursuits, embracing


the opportunities that came lo them ol preaching Ihe
gospel. Ihe Rev. William P. Crook conducted services
in a schoolroom in Jamieson Street Sydney, and was
lor a time connected with the church at South Head,
one of the oldest churches in the colony. As time
went on other missionaries arrived and were identified
with movements for the religious welfare of New South
Wales. One of the number, the Rev. E. E. Threlkeld,
undertook a mission to the aborigines at Fake Macquarie
in 1824. The Eondon Missionary Society has indirectly
furnished the churches with good and faithful m’nisters,
and it is interesting to recall the fact that the catholic
basis of the society enabled Episcopalians, Presbyterians
and Congregationalists to unite in the good work.
For a number of years the Rev. S. Marsden, an Episco-
palian minister, acted as agent for the parent societ}',
received missionaries, and directed them in their work.
The foundation stone of the Pitt Street Congre-
gational Church was laid in 1830 by the Rev. J. Hayward,
an old South Sea missionary, and described in the
journals of the time as ‘ ‘ the oldest Independent minister
in the colony.’’ Considerable delay was experienced in
completing the building, and it was not till February
15, 1838) that it was opened for worship and a church
formed. Though somewhat altered the building still stands
and is used as the lecture-room of the School of Arts.
Petersham Congregational Church.
One of the opening sermons was preached by the
Rev. C. Price, who had been invited to take the over-
sight of the infant cause. A request for a minister
had been forwarded to England, but[theie was consider-
able doubt whether one wou’d be sent. Before final
arrangements had been completed, the Rev. W. Tarrett
arived in response to their invitation: to avert any
derangement of their plans, Mr. Price retired in his
favour and proceeded to Tasmania, where lor upwards
of fifty-one years he ministered to the same church.
The initial difficulties having been surmounted, Pitt
Street church began its career, ft was indeed the day
of small things. The total number of members was
twelve, of whom there were eight men and four women,
and included in the list were two of the returned mis-
sionaries and their wives. Testimonials of membership
from churches in England were presented, showing that
they had formerly been connected with churches pre-
sided over by such men as the Rev. Rowland Hill,
E. Mannering, J. Stratton and J. Campbell. This little
band voluntarily associated themselves n church
fellowship, declaring that they acknowledged no eccle-
siastical authority extraneous to themselves.
The church in Pitt Street flourished for a few years,
when troubles arose, and Mr. Jarrett resigned. Another
application had been sent to England, and, pending
the arrival of a minister, the building was let, on certain
conditions, to an Irish Presbyterian minister for £2O
per year. By the advent of the Rev. Dr. Ross in 1840,
this arrangement came to an end; the church was
re-formed, and under his ministrations began, and con-
tinued to make, steady progress. The zeal, ability and
piety of Dr. Ross soon enabled him to place the de-
nomination in its true position in the colony, gathering
round h m men whose names have been honoured in
the annals of Australia, among them George Allen,
Ambrose Foss, Robert Garrett, Joseph Thompson,
David Jones and John Fairfax.
The growth of suburbs around Sydney soon led to
plans being entertained for establishing other Inde-
pendent churches. T he first to be erected, mainly through
the liberality of the members of the Pitt Street Church,
was the building at South Head, the Rev. E. E. Thre’keld
being chosen as first pastor in 1841. After a few years’
work in the district, he left to take up work at the
Mariners’ Church, where he laboured till his death,
which took place in 1859. The next church erected
was that in Redfern; while in course of construction
the Rev. J. Beazley, of Tasmania, was invited as the
first pastor. The invitation was accepted, the church
formed in September, 1847, and in October the building
was opened for worship.
Profoundly impressed with the need that existed for
vigorous effort in the city, the churches in Pitt Street
and Redfern combined in the formation of a city mission,
and work beyond the scope of an ordinary pastorate was
overtaken. In the meantime invitations were being
received from different parts of the country for help to
establish Independent churches, and in 1850 this mission
was merged into the “Home Missionary Society,’’
steps being immediately taken to secure ministers
from England. The first public meeting, presided over
by John Fairfax, Esq., was held in July, 1850, and for
a number of years the records of this society supply the
records of the denomination in the colony. For twenty-
eight years its operations were carried on, when the
name and constitution were slightly altered, and
the work was carried on as the “New South
Wales Congregational Church Extension Society,”


lill 1888. when the Congregational Union took over the
duties. The committee of the Union, constituting a
Church Extension and Home Mission Board, this
continued till 1403. when another change was made,
and the operations of the society are now controlled, by
a special “ Home Mission Board, ’ ’ consisting of six repre-
sentatives from the Union committee, six representatives
from the Ladies’ Auxiliary, and representatives from
each District Association in the proportion of one
lor every £4O, or portion thereof, contributed annually
by the churches of the said District Association to the
Home Mission funds. Any church, not connected with
a District Association, contributing annually £lO, has
the privilege of sending one representative to the board,
which has power to appoint agents, recommend grants,
and originate new mission stations, and is responsible
to the Congregational Union of New South Wales.
Under its direction churches are being founded in new
centres of population. Its funds are raised by sub-
scriptions, donations, bequests, contributions from
churches, or other means deemed desirable by the
board. An average of £I,OOO per year is raised by the
society from these sources.
The old records for 1851 chronicle the arrival of
the Rev. J. T. Warraker from Tooting, Surrey. After
a time he settled in West Maitland, where a church was
formed in 1854 and a building undertaken, which, on
completion, cost the modest sum of £4,800. Mean-
while preparations were being made for the erection of
a building in Newcastle, where land had been secured
in the main street. This was, however, exchanged for
a larger but less desirable site on the side of the hill in
Brown Street. At the time material was dear, labour
scarce, and the approach to the laud difficult, so that
when the building was finally completed no less a sum
than £2.350 had been spent on church and school. The
new church was opened in September, 1857, and was
free of debt. An allotment of land containing a quarter-
acre was subsequently obtained from the directors of
the A. A. Co., on which a minister’s residence has been
built. Several ministers laboured for short periods in
Newcastle, with varying success. Eventually under
the pastorate of the Rev. Thomas Gainford a strong
church was built up which still retains its vigour and
usefulness, and has become the centre of a District Asso-
ciation with which is connected nine branch churches.
The year 1853 was more eventful in the history of
Congregationalism, the South Head church, after being
closed for a time was re-opened,, and the Rev. Mr.
Traveller became their minister. Services were also
commenced at Petersham by the Rev. Mr. Ridley, and
followed up for some months by the Rev. A. W. Murray.
A building was erected and a church formed in 1854.
The growth of this suburb was so rapid that after a few
years, land was secured on another site and a larger
building erected, the members pledging themselves
during the jubilee meetings to raise the sum of £1,500 to
clear off the debt.
The Home Missionary Society was receiving requests
for help from various quarters, and their powers were
fully taxed to meet the demand. The Rev. A. Gordon
was stationed at Balmain, where he succeeded in estab-
lishing a church. A handsome stone building has since
been erected with accommodation for 500 worshippers.
The Rev. \V. Slatyer having arrived from England it
was arranged that lie should proceed to Bathurst, but
not meeting with the support anticipated he returned to
Sydney and commenced services in a large room attach-
ed to the Happy Vale Hotel, near Surry Hills. From
this movement eventually sprang the Bourke .Street
Church. The present site in Bourke Street was pur-
chased at £l2 per foot, and a new building opened in 1854,
a church having been formed in the meantime. In the
followingyear the Rev. E. Griffiths, who had arrived from
England, commenced work in Ipswich. Queensland not
having been separated at that time, he was under the
jurisdiction of the Home Missionary Society.
The frequent applications to the Home Mission Com-
mittee in England, induced them to send a deputation
to the colonies to make inquiries regarding the state of
the churches, and the need there was for financial
assistance. The deputation consisted of the Revs. J.
Fletcher and j. L. Poore. Visits were made to all the
outlying districts, which served to strengthen the hands
of those engaged in the work, and gave a great impetus
to the denomination ; and on their return they were able
to make a satisfactory report on the progress made by
the churches.
Another arrival from the islands in 1854 was the
Rev. G. Charter. For a time he settled in Petersham,
eventually accepting an invitation to the pastorate of the
church at Wollongong, which was formed in 1856, and
there he remained till the close of his ministry.
F'or a time no name was better known, and few men
more honoured for his work among the churches, than
the Rev. S. C. Kent, who came from England in 1855.
Commencing his ministry in Newtown, he remained there
till his removal from the colony. He was succeeded
by the Rev. J. A. Dowie (late of Zion City, America).
The pastorate was subsequently held for a short time
by the late Rev. I). Mossop, and, on his removal, the Rev.
J. W. Davies, M.A., in 1878 commenced a pastorate
that has been continued for upwards of a quarter of a
century. As railway communication improved and
population spread, other churches sprang into existence.
In 1853 a church was formed in Burwood, the Rev. G. G.
Howden being the pastor. The accessions to the church
and district soon enabled the members to make prepara-
tions for a larger building, and a handsome stone church,
with spire now forms one of the prominent features of
the district. In the course of time churches were
established in Homebush, Strathfield, Croydon, Granville
and Rookwood.
For the next decade progress was slow. In 1861
churches were formed in Point Piper Road. Woollahra,
and Gerringong ; the former by the Rev. Dr. Ross, of
Pitt Street, who was assisted by the Rev. Aaron Buzza-
cott, a retired missionary, the first pastor being the
Rev. J. E. \ etch. His successors were the Revs.
T. S. Forsaith, J. G. Frazer, M.A., and the Rev. Dr.
Fordyce, who commenced his ministry there in 1887.
A small band of worshippers withdrew from the congre-
gation in 1805 and formed the church in Ocean Street,
having invited the Rev. Thomas Gainford, of Newcastle’
to become their pastor.
The denomination, and more particularly Pitt
Street Church, sustained a severe loss by the death of
the Rev. Dr. Ross in 1862. His worth to the deuomiqg


lion in its early struggles cannot be over-estimated.
His intluence, combined with his untiring labours,
greatly assisted in raising the position from one church
to a group of churches, and the value of their work no
statistics can unfold. His successor was the Rev. W.
Cuthbertson, 8.A.. who was followed by the Rev.
John Graham, Rev. Dr. Jefferis, W. Scott, E. Tremayne
Dunstan, N. M. Hennessy, and N. J. Cocks, M A.
New life seems to have been infused about the year
1870. As early as 1862 a week evening service was
commenced at North Sydney, in the house of Mr. G. A.
Lloyd, and was conducted by the Rev. John West.
It was soon apparent that a more commodious building
was necessary. Land was given by Mr. Lloyd, and so
energetically was the work carried on, that a new stone
church, built at a cost of £1,400, was opened in October,
1863 ; towards this £SBO had been raised. Through
Graduallv the requirements of other centres were
overtaken. A church was formed in Marrickville in
1871, Hunter’s Hill, and Milton in 1873 ; but the greatest
progress has been made since 1880. Churches have
been planted in almost all the suburbs around Sydney,
and in 1903, at the annual meeting of the Congrega-
tional Union, it was resolved ” to establish District
Associations to cover the whole area of the I nion.”
The need for some central association lor conference
and advice, led to the formation of the Congregational
Union in 1866, on the recognition of the following
principles: —(1) ‘‘The supremacy of the Lord Jesus
Christ as head of the church ; (2) the scriptural
right of every church to maintain perfect independence
in the government and administration of its local affairs;
(3) the spiritual relationship of Christian churches
of the same faith and order, and their right to unite as
one in federal action for denominational purposes.”
Congregational Church, Marrickville.
the agency of the Home Missionary Society of England,
the services of the Rev. A. Brown, M.A., were secured.
On his withdrawal, in 1869, the Rev. R. N. Morris, 8.A.,
became pastor, having also the oversight of the churches
at Manly and Willoughby. After two years he was
succeeded by the Rev. J. E. Cullen. Manly having in
the meantime become a separate charge, action was
taken for changing the site of the church to one nearer
the centre of population ; land was secured on the present
site, at a cost of £275. Some difficulty arose with the
trustees of the church, and it was resolved to build a
school-hall on the new site, and for this purpose £3OO
was subscribed. Branch churches were formed at
Longueville and Mosman’s Bay, and the former united
with Willoughby in forming a separate charge. The
present building in North Sydney was completed during
the pastorate of the Rev. W- C- Robinson, at a cost
of {3,100.
Recognising these principles, the objects sought by
the Union are :—(i) The cultivation and maintenance
of fraternal intercourse with and among the associated
churches ; (2) the acknowledgment of the solidarity of
the churches ; (3) united action for the creation, main-
tenance, and improvement of our educational, religious
and philanthropic agencies ; (4) the preservation of
civil and religious liberty ; (5) intercourse, or action
together, with churches or associations, civil and
religious, outside our own pale ; (6) the creation of a
centre to which denominational obligations of any kind
may be referred, and by which they may be dealt with ;
(7) the creation of a sustentation fund for the purpose
of increasing, where necessary, the stipends of ministers ;
(8) the purchase of sites for church purposes, from funds
given therefor ; (9) the collection of denominational
statistics,”


The Union was incorporated by Act of Parliament
in 1882 and has a legal status, and is empowered to hold
land and other property, and to deal with the
same. Trustees in whom are vested land or buildings
in trust for any Congregational church, may convey
the same to the Union, providing that the consent and
direction of the church is first obtained ; and, subject to
the approval of the church, may mortgage or sell land
or any part ; the funds, however, must be used for the
benefit of the church, with this proviso—should no
church exist, the Union has full power to act on its own
responsibility.
A further advance was made in 1892, when federal
meetings were held and a Congregational Union of
Australasia formed. The first meeting of the body
was held in New Zealand, and it is intended to hold
similar meetings from time to time in the capital cities
of the various States.
The training institution of the Congregational
body is Camden College, which was instituted in 1864.
For about twenty vears it was based on the resident
system and occupied spacious premises in Newtown.
It was, however, thought politic at a later period to
adopt the non-resident system, and the college occu-
pies rooms in Norwich Chambers, Hunter .Street, city.
For many years the Rev. J. G. Frazer, M.A., has filled
the office of warden. The college is open to applicants
resident in any of the colonies. Every candidate must
produce recommendations from his pastor and the
Congregational church of which he is a member, attest-
ing his piety, and general fitness for the work of the
Christian ministry. The course of study extends over
four years, except in special cases, to Ire determined by
the council. The bursaries available for the students
of Camden College are : —(1) Henry Hopkins Bursary ;
(2) Charles John Fairfax .Scholarship (bequest of Hon.
John Fairfax) ; (3) David Livingstone Bursaries Fund
(founder, George Durham, Esq.).
No body of religious workers has been more zealous
in planting Sunday-schools than this body. Wherever
a church has been formed the children have received
the most careful attention, and a Sunday school becomes
one of the important parts of the organisation. The
interest in this work has been greatly increased by
the establishment of a Congregational Sunday-school
Union, in which every school within easy distance of
ll e city has joined. Ihe Union works along the lines of
the larger Union, and aims at : —(1) The improvement of
existing Sunday-schools and assistance in the formation
of new schools ; (2) establishing a regular intercourse
with each school by visitation and conference, and to
aid in furnishing information on all matters connected
with religious education ; (3) the supply of books and
other school requisites ; (4) correspondence with kin-
dred institutions ; (3) to obtain statistical information
from Sunday-schools affiliated with the Union; (6)
the establishment of branch Unions where practicable.
J he affairs of the Union are under the direction of
a committee consisting of a president, three vice-presi-
dents, two secretaries, a treasurer, and five advisory
members, with representative delegates from each school.
The latest returns show that 60 Sunday-schools, with
BbB teachers and 10,000 scholars are affiliated with
the Upion,
The jubilee of Congregationalism was celebrated in
Mav, 1883, when meetings were held, and an amount ol
enthusiasm, evoked which far surpassed the expectations
of its most sanguine promoters. The Congregational
Union of New South Wales invited the Unions of
the Australian colonies to send delegates to an
intercolonial conference. The invitation was cordially
responded to, and over fifty of their representatives
assembled with the members of the New South Whales
Union. The meetings were continued from the 15th
to the 23rd May, in Pitt Street Church, and about 320
representatives from the churches in New South Wales
were present to take part, with about forty ministers,
who were in settled charges. It had been estimated that
the total indebtedness of the churches was about
£23,000. To raise a sum sufficient to clear off this
amount was the most important object of these meet-
ings. The keenest interest was manifested and the
most perfect harmony prevailed. At the close of the
day devoted to finance, the sum of £16,257 had been
promised (including £1,500 to be raised by the members
of the Petersham Church within three years). The
statistics of the denomination at that time show that
48 churches, with 26 separate schoolrooms, and 13
ministers’ residences had been erected, at a total cost
of £130,000. The Sunday-schools numbered 51, with
587 teachers and 6,229 scholars on the books, with an
average attendance of 4,367. There were also 20 sepa-
rate preaching stations and 53 lay preachers. The
membership totalled 2,768, the attendances at services
being 7,551. Total number of adherents, including
children, 12,955. The impetus given to the denomi-
nation by this series of meetings was great, and an
earnest spirit developed, which has given ample com-
pensation for the efforts put forth and the sacrifice made.
To promote, by social intercourse, more intimate and
general acquaintance, and to foster a spirit of brotherhood
between all male adherents of Congregational
churches, a Men’s Fellowship was instituted in 1901.
The objects of the fellowship are : —To further united
action in denominational matters, as well as provide an
institution into which young men connected with the
churches may enter, and thus become permanently
identified with denominational interests ; also to stand
for Christian principles and uprightness in business
and public life, and to take action for the purpose of
advancing moral and religious movements.
The trend of the times being towards union, and
with the example of the Methodist bodies, among whom
it has been successfully accomplished, to stimulate
action, steps were taken in 1903 to enable the Presby-
terian and Congregational bodies to confer as to the
desirability of uniting. The movement has only
reached the preliminary stage, but hopes are enter-
tained that a basis may be found, acceptable to both
bodies, and on which union may be effected. Two
important recommendations were assented to by the
members, viz., “ The recognition of one church
fellowship ; certificates of membership, or of transfer,
to be current in either communion ; and the recognition
of one ministry, ministers to be eligible for service in
either communion.” Should these recommendations
come into practical operation in both churches, the way
to closer union may not be difficult when a few more
years have passed.t


The Presbyterian Church.
Presbyterianism was practically founded in Aus-
tralia by a few free immigrants, who made their way
to New South Wales shortly after its settlement.
About a dozen families of Scotch extraction had
arrived in the time of Governor King. A promise of
a grant of 100 acres of land to each family, with a free
passage, and rations, for a period, from the Govern-
ment stores had been the inducement that tempted
them from the land of their fathers, to make a home
at the convict settlement of Botany Bay. They
made a permanent home on the banks of the
Hawkesbury River, and Governor King personally
visited them, as colonists of this class were few
in number and extremely desirable at that early
date, 1802. In course of time they built a
church, where, according to the faith of their fathers,
they assembled every Sabbath morning for the public
worship of God. The church erected by them in 1809, at
a cost of £lOO, still stands, and was the first erected in
Australia by voluntary subscription. One of their
number, Mr. James Mein, acted as catechist until the
arrival of a minister, secured for them in Scotland by
the Rev. Dr. Lang during his first visit in 1824. The
church is a quaint building of the old style, and at the
annual meetings held there great interest is now taken
by the ministers of the denomination.
The name of the Rev. John Dunmore Lang, how-
ever, must remain inseparably connected with the
introduction of the Presbyterian Church into the
colony of New South Wales Among the names oi
ministers who have been enlisted under the banner
of the church, there will be found none more zealous
or better adapted for the struggle in a young colony
than he. A ripe scholar, a profound theologian, a
man of indomitable energy, of fiery zeal, bordering on
intolerance, coupled with unremitting perseverance,
he found no difficulty too great to be surmounted, no
obstacle sufficient to turn him aside from his purpose.
The convict settlement of New South Wales was
the sphere chosen by himself as the scene of his minis-
terial labours, as it afterwards became the arena in
which many conflicts were engaged in for the pro-
motion of the religious and moral welfae of the in-
habitants. Previous to his arrival no Presbyterian
minister had found his way to the settlement, and as
none of the societies, or church organisations, would
patronise the undertaking, he was left to bear all the
expense connected with the voyage, and settle himself
in the colonv in the best way he could. He arrived in
Sydney in 1823, and at once commenced a ministry
that extended over a period of 55 years, during which
he had done much to lay the foundations of the Presby-
terian Church in Australia. The Presbyterian mem-
bers of the community were gathered and a church
formed ; stimulated by the advent of a minister of
their own persuasion, the proposal to erect a church
was enthusiastically entertained, and within a few
days the sum of £7OO was subscribed towards the
object in view.
From the foundation of the colony to the year
1820 the Church of England had, by the powerful aid
of Government, sustained her mission and resented
any attempt by others to gain a foothold, among
those of their own faith. The Roman Catholics had,
however, been given some slight recognition, in that
year, receiving small grant* in aid of the work. Hither-
to the infant Presbyterian Church had asked and
received no support outside their own community,
and so jealously were the fund-' for religious purposes
guarded, that there seemed little hope that any aid
from the Government would be obtained. Towards the
expenses of the removal to Australia, and the subse-
quent support of a minister for the church at Portland
Head, Hawkesbury River, the Rev. Dr. Lang had
collected £250 in the west of Scotland and on the
settlement of their minister the Presbyterians had
presented a memorial to the Government asking that
a salary of £lOO per annum might be granted for his
maintenance, the same amount to be raised by private
subscriptions. To this request a reply was received
stating that, “ His Excellency could not comply with
the request and expressing his satisfaction that the
Presbyterians were able to do so much for their minis-
ter, and hoping they would soon be able to do what-
ever more w r as required for his maintenance. 5 5 This
decision was eventually reversed by the Right Hon.
Secretary for the Colonies, who ordered that the
amount of £lOO per annum should be paid from the
revenue to the minister of Portland Head. As large
grants were being made annually from the Treasury
for the promotion and maintenance of religion, a
memorial was prepared and presented to the Govern-
ment, setting forth the progress which had been made
by the Presbyterians, and requesting that aid might
be given from the funds towards the Scots Church
and the support of their ministers. The reply was
unworthy the Governor of the day, and was to the
effect “That when the Presbyterians showed they
could conduct themselves as well as the Roman
Catholics of the colony, it would be time for them to
ask assistance. 5 5 This reply was calculated to pro-
voke feelings of bitter resentment on the part of the
memorialists, and was eventually placed before the
Home authorities, when the Governor was instructed
to advance one-third of the estimated cost of Scots
church from the Treasury and a salary of £3OO per
annum to the minister, adding his regrets that such
treatment had been meted out to members of the
Church of Scotland —“ the established church of one
of the most enlightened and virtuous portions of the
Empire. 55 Towards the Rev. Dr. Lang there appears
to have been shown the greatest antipathy by the
clergy and lay members of the Church of England,
every concession asked and every appeal for help
meeting direct opposition, or covert attack ; but these
were repelled, or resisted, with a force that soon re-
coiled upon themselves. Few men were capable of
undertaking such varied duties as he ; during the first
fourteen years he voyaged to England four times,
paying in all about £6OO in passage money, and living
three-and-a-half years on board ship. These lengthy
and perilous voyages were undertaken to advance the
interests of the church and New South Wales in gene-
ral. His first visit was made within two years after
his arrival in the colony. One of the commissions
entrusted to him was the selection of a suitable minis


ter for the church at Portland Head. In this he suc-
ceeded, and the Rev. .). McGarvie, A.M., licentiate of
the Church of Scotland, was ordained, and accom-
panied Dr. Lang on his return to the colony in 1826.
The spiritual destitution of Presbyterians in the
Hunter River and Bathurst districts induced him to
make his second visit to Scotland in 1830 to secure
ministers. Previous to leaving the colony a memorial
to the Governor was made soliciting aid to the amount
of £lOO per annum for each of these places. Owing
to the peculiar inducement held out to the residents,
and the reluctance to appear antagonistic to those in
power, on inquiries being made, the number of Presby-
terians was but small, and the request for assistance
was refused. This memorial was subseqentlv pre-
sented to the Secretary of State for the Colonies bv
Dr. I when the sum of £lOO per annum was
ordered to be paid to a minister of the church of Scot-
land in each of these districts Having secured these
grants, ministers were sought out, and in 1830 the
Rev. K. D. Smythe, A.M., and the Rev. John H.
Garven. M.A., arrived, shortly after proceeding to
these churches, the former to Bathurst and the latter
to Hunter River district. They were accompanied
by a number of Scotch emigrants, procured and sent
out by Dr. Lang under certain specified conditions.
With the subsequent actions of Dr. Lang in his
attempts to found an Australian College by introduc-
ing Scotch mechanics into the colony, and his varied
and litigious life, we cannot deal in this article.
He closed a strenuous career of turmoil, but of great
usefulness, in August, 1878. having been a member of
the Legislative Assembly of New South Wales from
14th June, 1859, to 15th November, 1869. A statue to
his memory was erected some years later in Wynyard
Square, within a short distance of Scots Church, the
scene of his labours for 55 years.
Up to 1854 the Presbyterian Church was repre-
sented solely by congregations, without any properly
constituted authority, and the unhappy divisions of
the home land were transferred to the colonies In
that year the Church of United Presbyterians com-
menced operations, meeting in the Supreme Court,
King Street, and for some vears the evils of disunion
were keenly felt. Efforts to overcome this state were
subsequently made, and in 1865 the union was consum-
mated ; from that time the many organisations of the
church were set up and a greater advance made in form-
ing new parishes to meet the wants of rapidly growing
communities. In 1879 the advent of the Rev. J. M.
Ross gave a great impetus to the Presbyterian Church ;
for twelve years he occupied the position of general
agent, and in that time he was mainly instru-
ct ' *
mental in welding the forces of the church into one
strong centre of life and activity. A wise counsellor,
a trustv friend, strong in organising the many
agencies of the church, his work remains the best
monument to the noble services he rendered to the
building up of the Presbyterian Church in New South
Wales. His death took place in 1893, and Mr. William
Wood, who had been accountant during his
illness, was appointed to the position under the title
of “ The Assembly’s Financial Secretary.” Several
bequests have been of the greatest benefit in providing
funds for various purposes. Among these may be
mentioned the Logan bequest, amounting to £22,500,
and £l,OOO from the late .Mrs. Talbot, of North Sydney.
St. Andrew’s College, for the training of students for
the ministry, was established in 1868. The building,
plain in appearance, is built of stone, with ample ac-
commodation, at a cost of about £15,000. The foun-
dation-stone was laid on May 9th, 1874. and, on being
completed, was opened on July 22nd, 1876. Another
advance was made in the educational equipment of the
church in 1891, when the Ladies’ College at Croydon
was opened.
For the purposes of this Church, the State is
divided into fourteen Presbyteries, each comprising a
number of separate charges, to each of which a minister
is appointed. In July, 1901, a scheme of federal union
was adopted by representatives from the various
States, and the united church is called “ the Presby-
terian Church of Australia.’ ’ In 1906 the total
estimated value of congregational properties was
£462,221. Number of ministers, 180. Number of
charges, 183. Preaching stations, 1,190. Sunday
School buildings, 89. Agents employed other than
ministers, 48. Sunday School scholars, 20,840.
Teachers, 2,142. Members and adherents, 70.700.
Annual revenue, £67.590.
The Methodist Church
Methodism owes a debt to the devout lavmen
who have laboured with self-denial and energy in the
interests of the society—keeping alive and maintain-
ing the work, where, but for their efforts, religious
services would have been impossible. It was due to
a man of this stamp that the first request for a minis-
ter, or missionary, as they were termed, reached the
English Conference. Mr. Thomas Bowden had been
sent from London by the English Government, at the
request of the Rev. Samuel Marsden, to take charge
of the Government school. He had formerly been a
schoolmaster at the Great Queen Street Charity
Schools, where he had gained the respect and confi-
dence of the Wesleyan, London West, Circuit, as a
zealous and useful class leader. Arriving in Sydney
in 1812, he had gathered the nucleus of a class before
the middle of the year, but feeling the need there was
for one of their own faith to minister to them, the
little band resolved to send an appeal to England for
one to be sent. In due time the Rev. Samuel Leigh
arrived, and with the sanction of Governor Macquarie,
and the sympathy of the Rev. S. Marsden, the agent
of the Church of England, he commenced his labours
in a quiet, unostentatious way. The first meeting
was held on the 6th March, 1812, in the district known
as the “ Rocks,” and not far from the spot where
Phillip formed the first settlement. From this date
Methodism dates its foundation in Australia. Soon
a regular circuit was established, leaders appointed,
and a quarterly meeting fixed. The report states
they could also boast a steward, one local preacher,
and an exhorter. At the first quarterly meeting
held the treasurer found himself with a deficiency
£3O; to their honour, be it said, the amount was
made up by the members in attendance. The opening
of the first chapel was an event of no small moment to


the society, and was paid for by Mr. James Scott, who
laid the foundation-stone. He had been a soldier in
the West Indies, and there joined the Wesleyan Church.
On being removed to New South Wales, he soon be-
came a prominent member, and having purchased a
property in Princes Street, sold part to the Missionary
Society for £3OO, afterwards defraying the whole cost
of the building, amounting to about £5OO. It was
opened by the Revs. S. Leigh and Walter Lawry, March
17, 1819. The building was of dressed stone, and did
good service till November, 1836, when it was en-
larged by 20 feet and the roof raised. From this
small beginning Methodism spread. A visit to Castle-
reagh was made by Missionary Leigh, and in course of
time a chapel was built and given to the mission free
of expense by Mr. John Lees, who stipulated that the
building was for the exclusive use of the Wesleyan
missionaries. The dimensions were 28 feet by 14 feet
and the chapel is described as a substantial building of
weatherboard, and stood for many years, until it
gave place to a larger building. Similar generosity
was experienced at Windsor, but from a different
quarter. The senior chaplain, the Rev. S. Marsden,
having given the land on which to build a chapel,
arrangements were at once made, and the foundation-
stone laid on the 13th September, 1818. the opening
services being held early in the year 1819. The report
states 4 the chapel at Windsor is 32 feet by 16 feet, is
built of brick, and well finished.” By this time the
chapel at Princes Street had become too small to
accommodate the increasing congregation, and it was
decided to build a second place in Macquarie Street,
on a site given by the Governor, and Mr. Thomas
Wilde. The foundation-stone was laid on January Ist,
1819, but for some reason the building was not opened
for worship till July, 1821. It was known as the
Macquarie Street chapel, and was 50 feet long by 30
feet wide, built of good stone, and well finished. The
returns for the year 1825 disclose the position as fol-
lows : —3 circuits, 119 members, 11 chapels with 34
Sunday School teachers and 230 scholars, 2 mission
houses —one at Sydney and one at Windsor. Four
years later, though great progress had been made in
some directions, finance caused more than a little
concern. In the Sydney circuit the* expenditure
amounted to £lB3 Is. 6d., while the receipts were but
£169 10s. 6d., the deficiency £l3 11s Windsor ex
penditure, £lB4 145., the income being only £3 9s. 2d.,
deficiency £lBl 4s. lOd. Parramatta expenditure
£3ll 11s. Bd., with an income of £l3 4s. 5d., and a
deficiency of £298 7s. 3d.
The exigencies of the time rendered it necessary
that young men should be set apart for the work of
the ministry, and the interesting ceremony of the
first ordination of a Wesleyan minister in Australia
was performed in the Macquarie Street chapel on
Tuesday evening, April 25th, 1826.
To reach this measure of success numerous diffi-
culties had been encountered. The condition of so-
ciety was different to that of England, and the mis-
sionaries grew restive under the restraints placed upon
all religious bodies, save the Church of England. This
condition of things could only be smoothed out as
time advanced, but trouble arose in a new quarter.
Money was scarce. A debt of £2,000 on the Mac-
quarie Street chapel had been borrowed from one of
their own members, and the balance from the Govern-
ment. The loan from the former was to have been
met by a refund from the Missionary Committee, but
having been arranged without reference to that body,
gave great offence, so much so, that they insisted that
“ until the interest and principal of the sum borrowed
be paid,” the two brethren who drew the bills for
that amount, shall be considered personally trustees of
the chapel, and no part of the proceeds from that
chapel was to be applied to any purpose whatever
until the sum was fully repaid. Eventually the com-
mittee paid tin money, and the situation was relieved.
These unpleasant features tended to retard the pro-
gress, of the cause, and as the time for self-government
had not arrived, missionaries were often in a dilemma.
It was not till 1855 that an Australian Connection was
effected, which obviated many difficulties hitherto ex-
perienced in the carrying out of the Methodist economy
in these colonies. On the 18th January of that year
the first conference met in the York Street chapel,
when forty ministers gathered from the Australian
colonies, Van Diemen’s Land, New Zealand, and
Polynesia, gave consideration to the weighty concerns
of the society.
The history of Methodism from that time on to
the present is replete with incidents telling of earnest
work, rapid growth and expansion in all directions,
the itinerant character of its ministry, and splendid
services rendered by laymen, adapting it to all the
exigencies of a sparsely populated country. From
every centre it spread. Circuits, in some cases having
as many as twenty preaching stations attached, arc
supplied largely by local preachers, who have kept
the flame of Methodism alive as no other system could
have done.
So large an institution must necessarily have
under its control many departments, and Methodism
has kept itself abreast of the times. Newington Col-
lege, founded in 1880, at a cost of about £55,000, is
an educational establishment of which the society
may justly be proud, presided over by men of high
qualification and unblemished reputation, the College
has given unqualified satisfaction ; the Revs. J. H.
Fletcher, W. Kelynack, D.D., and C. J. Prescott,. M.A.,
have successively filled the position of Principal.
A Ladies’ College has been founded, the objects being
to impart higher education and give a religious and
domestic training to the pupils. The formal opening
took place on January 27th, 1886.
On the Ist January, 1902, the divided sections of
the Methodist connection entered into organic union,
with a common name, common funds, and equal rights.
In this union the Wesleyan Methodist, the Primitive
Methodist, and the United Free Churches joined.
The name given to the united church was “The
Australasian Wesleyan Methodist Church.” When
the union has become general throughout Australasia
the church will be known as “ The Methodist Church
of Australasia.” Altogether the Methodist bodv pos-
sesses 572 churches and 548 other preaching buildings
used for public worship, with sitting accommodation
for 95,334 persons.


The Salvation Army.
The Salvation Army, of which the Rev. William
Booth, D.C.L., is its founder and first General, was
commenced in the East end of London in July, 1865,
as the cc East London Mission,” which name wa-
subsequently changed to the tc Christian Mission,” to
suit the rapid expansion of the new work under the
direction of its revivalist Uader.
In 1877 the name was again changed to that of
its present designation, and came about very simply.
The annual report was being prepared, and the ques-
tion was asked, What is the Christian Mission ? ” It
was proposed to answer ” A Volunteer Army,” but a
bright idea struck Mr. Booth, and taking up his pen,
he crossed out the word “ Volunteer,” and wrote
Salvation,” and thus it reads ” Salvation Army.”
By this military name the movement has since been
known in all parts of the world, and is both
appropriate and significant.
The transfer of some of its members to Australia
led to an urgent appeal to the headquarters, London,
for the work to be started in the colonies, and in 1882
the first commissioned officers arrived in Sydney and
opened fire, and the celebration of the first anniversary
took place on 26th of January of the following year,
which was attended by a monster out door demon-
stration in the Sydney Domain.
With remarkable rapidity the operations of this
military movement spread to the suburbs and prin-
cipal country towns of the State, and a revival of great
spiritual dimensions spread far and wide. Almost
simultaneously homes were opened in which to com-
mence women’s rescue work and men’s prison-gate
work ; the former in Wilson Street, Newtown, and the
latter in Cleveland Street. Redfern
On January 1 1907, the statistics of the Army
for New South Wales only were as follows : —373
corps and societies, commanded by 251 officers, who
are entirely engaged in the work without guaranteed
salaries, and 1,800 local or honourary officers, whose
labours are gratuitous, in addition to the thousands
of active members, adherents, and members of con-
gregations.
Its newspapers comprise the War Cry , with a
weekly circulation of 8,000, and the Young Soldier ,
also published weekly, with a circulation of 2,000, and
a Holiness monthly magazine, the Victory , with a cir-
culation of 2,000.
Its social agencies in Sydney comprise two rescue
homes for fallen girls, one prison-gate brigade home
for discharged male prisoners, two maternity homes
for betrayed girls, one slum home, one inebriates’
home, one lost friends’ department, one servants’
registry, one anti-suicide bureau, two cheap shelters,
one industrial farm colony, and one People’s Palace.
The work is unsectarian and supported by public
contributions. It has been tersely described as the
“ Church of the Poor.’’ It’s workers are absolutely
total abstainers and non-smokers It affords home
for the homeless, work for the workless, food for the
starving, shelter for the needy, and salvation to all
through the Lord Jesus Christ.
The Baptist Church.
The Baptist Church in point of numbers holds the
sixth place among the religious bodies in New South
Wales, and a similar position in point of arrival in the
State, a church of this order having been unknown
previous to 1835, almost a half-century after the foun-
dation of the colony. The records show that the first
Baptist church was established in Sydney on Novem-
ber 28th, 1835. The Rev. John Saunders, the first
minister of this persuasion, had arrived in Sydney at
the end of the previous year, and at once gathered a
number of persons and formed a church. Before the
end of the following year he had succeeded in building
the Bathurst Street church. The progress of the
body was for a time very slow. This may in some
measure have been due : (1) to their somewhat belated
arrival, (2) to the peculiar stress laid by this body on
adult baptism, and want of organisation, as it was not
till the year 1868 that a Baptist Association was formed,
and this was of short duration, for in 1870, two vears
later, it was re-formed under the style of the ” Baptist
Union of New South Wales.” Churches had, however,
been formed and buildings erected in Parramatta in
1851, and Newcastle, Maitland, and Hinton, in the
Hunter River district, a few years later with varying
success. The Union in 1870-1 had as chairman the
Rev. James Greenwood, an able administrator, and
thenceforth a greater measure of progress was made.
Of late years the Baptist body has been steadily in-
creasing in number and influence, having in 1906 no
less than 54 churches and other places of worship,
giving seating accommodation for 8,000 persons, with
37 ministers attached to the Union ; a membership ol
4,016, and about 17,000 adherents. The Sunday
Schools number 44, with 497 teachers, and 5,483
scholars on the roll. For several sessions a draft con-
stitution was under the consideration of the Union,
which, among other matters, provides that all pro-
perties which now belong, or may hereafter accrue to
the Union, shall be held under a model trust deed, bv
trustees to be duly appointed, but the matter of incor-
poration remains in abeyance. The recognised insti-
tutions of the Union are : —The Home Missionary
Society, the Foreign Missionary Society, the Sunday
School Union, the Ladies’ Auxiliary of the Home
Missionary Society, the Ladies Zenana Missionary
Society, and the Girls’ Zenana Aid Society. The
affairs of the Union are controlled by a president, a
vice-president, a general secretary, and a general
treasurer and committees.
The Synagogue.
The Jewish community of New South Wales
though now including a native majority, for many
years consisted mainly of Hebrews of English, and
particularly London, origin. There appear to have
been Jews among the first free settlers in Australia, and
by the year 1817 their number in Sydney reached
about twenty souls. This handful formed themselves
into a llebra Kadisha , or ” holy society ” for the
interment ol the dead ; and thev secured permission
to bury their departed in a special Jewish corner of
the general cemetery. But the handful dwindled, and


were unable to maintain their society after 1820. In
1828, however, Mr. P. J. Cohen set apart an oratory
at his private dwelling, and the public services of the
ancient Jewish rite have ever since been regularly
performed in Sydney. In 1830 the Rev. Aaron Levi,
a day an , or ecclesiastical assessor of the Beth Din or
rabbinical court in London, was sent on a colonial
mission by the Rev. Solomon Herschell, then Chief
Rabbi of England. On his arrival in Sydney he con-
solidated and regularised the Jewish organisation ; and
in consequence a congregation was formed in 1831,
under the presidency of Mr. Joseph Barrow Montefiore.
Mr. Montefiore, in association with Mr. Michael
Phillips, obtained next year a grant of public land for
a Jewish burying-place ; and a rented room was se-
cured as a temporary synagogue at Mr. Gordon’s
store, afterwards known as Bath’s wine stores, No. -4
Bridge Street, close to George Street. This building,
which is still standing, was named Beth Tejiliah , “the
house of prayer.” The first Jewish marriage in Aus-
tralia, between Mr. Moses Joseph and Miss Nathan,
was performed by Mr. P. J. Cohen ; and in 1835 there
arrived from England the Rev. Mr. Rose, the first
accredited Jewish officiant in the colony. He was
succeeded by the Rev. Jacob Isaacs. The infant con-
gregation grew, and in 1841 acquired a site in York
Street. A permanent synagogue, a heavy building in
the Egyptian Jstyle, was erected, and consecrated for
worship on April 2, 1844, by the president, Mr. Moses
Joseph, the music being under the direction of Mr.
Isaac Nathan. Later on, a secession occurred on a
point of ecclesiastical procedure, and an influential
section removed to the Friends’ Meeting House, built
by Tawell, in Macquarie Street.
A rapid development of Sydney Jewry ensued on
the arrival in August, 1862, of the Rev. Alexander
Barnard Davis. This able, tactful, and energetic cleric,
born in London in 1828, had been headmaster of the
Westminster Jews’ Free School, the minister of the
synagogues in succession at Portsmouth, Hants, and
Kingston (Jamaica). His ministry of forty-one years
saw the community grow from tens to thousands, and
completely equip itself with all the ecclesiastical, edu-
cational, and phianthropic organisation of a vigorous
Jewish life. During his incumbency the present hand-
some and spacious Great Synagogue, in Elizabeth and
Castlereagh Streets, the finest in Australasia, was
erected at a cost of £30,000, and opened free ot debt.
The plans were designed by Mr. Rowe with his cus-
tomary skill and taste, in the early Burgundian style,
influenced by later Gothic. The foundation-stone
was laid on January 26, 1875, by the Hon. Saul
Samuel, C.M.G., M.L.C., then Postmaster-General
(afterwards Sir Saul Samuel, Bart., K.C.M.G., C. 8.) ;
and the consecration was performed on March 4,
1878, by the Rev. A. B. Davis, assisted by the Rev.
A. A. Levi, of the York Street synagogue, and the
Rev. J. M. Goldreich, of the Macquarie Street syna-
gogue, the two institutions thus coalescing, to the
vast benefit of the community’s interests. 1 he music
was under the direction of Mr. Sydney Moss. Sittings
to the number of 534 were rented the first year by a
community then totalling 3,000 souls. After nineteen
years, there are in 1907 rented just upon 800 sittings
in a Jewish population now approaching 6,000. In
addition, there are two small Bethels maintained by
sections of the community, the Baron de Hirsch So-
ciety, in George Street, and the embyro Hebrew con-
gregation in Newtown ; and special overflow services
for the festivals are also organised by the Hebrew
Benevolent Society at the Masonic Hall. These
minor movements look to the Great Synagogue as the
mother congregation, as do the small provincial
synagogues, such as that at West Maitland (now
decayed) and that at Newcastle. The Jewish ceme-
tery at Rookwood Necropolis is also managed by the
Great Synagogue, having succeeded the smaller
grounds at Devonshire Street (on the site of the rail-
way terminus), at Rookwood, and elsewhere.
The Rev. J. H. Landau, a preacher of great elo-
quence, was assistant minister from 1891 to 1903,
and the Rev. A. 1). Wolinski, the present senior as-
sistant, came into office in 1883. The Rev. P.
Philippstein, a junior communal officer, has been
attached to the congregation since 1880. Advancing
age and infirmity led to the resignation, in 1903, of
Rabbi Cohen
the veteran chief minister, the Rev. A. B. Davis, who
retired from office at the age of 75, amid a universal
expression affection, regard and respect. He was
succeeded by the Rev. Francis Lyon Cohen, an Eng-
lish Rabbi of many interests and activities. Rabbi
Cohen, who was born in 1862, had been minister of the
South Hackney (Dublin) and Borough (Southwark)
synagogues, and a leading cleric of the United Syna-
gogue of London. He had also attained some reputa-
tion as the leading authority on Jewish music, and
had been particularly active as Jewish chaplain to
H.M. forces. He was the first Jewish minister in
New South Wales who had actually been ordained a
Rabbi, or Doctor of Jewish Ecclesiastical Law, invest-
ing him with episcopal functions in Jewish affairs,
and enabling him to open a Beth Din, or ecclesiastical
court, for the State. He was inducted at the Great
Synagogue on June 25, 1905, and the Hebrew com-
munity is making rapid progress under his guidance.
The growth of its activities has necessitated the earlv
doubling of its clerical staff.


The active communal life of Sydney Jews is evi-
denced by the large number of subsidiary institutions.
Besides the synagogue Sabbath School, there is a
Jewish education board, organised in 1882,. on the
abolition of the denominational school previously
existing under the Public Schools Act, N.S.W., of
1866. Classes are held in the synagogue schoolrooms,
and at outlying centres at five larger public schools,
under the direction of Mr. M. A. Cohen, B.A. The
Literary Society was reorganised in 1901. The oldest
charity was the Hebrew Philanthropic Society, founded
in 1833. It was in 1882 1 amalgamated with the
Orphan Home to constitute the Sir Moses Montefiore
Home, located in 1889 in Dowling Street, Moore Park.
Here aged men and women are accommodated and
casuals fed, while pensions are granted, State children
supervised, and the poor of the community generally
considered. The home is also the centre for certain
domestic rites of Judaism. The Hebrew Ladies’
Benevolent and Maternity Society, for women’s
visiting work, was founded in 1840. The Jewish
Aid Society, for the granting of loans without interest,
has been in activity since 1896 ; and the Jewish Girls’
Guild since 1894. There are also active a Jewish
Women’s Needlework Association and a Jewish
Junior League. The Hebrews of the humbler classes
maintain charities of their own for the further assistance
of the distressed. Such include the Help-in-Need
Society (a women’s association), the N.S.W. Hebrew
Benevolent Society, the Hebrew Relief Society.
Among registered friendly societies are two small
f"' “ *
Jewish organisations : the Hebrew Mutual Medical
and Benefit Society and the Hebrew Confined
Mourning Society. There are also Sydney branches
of the Anglo-Jewish Association, the Zionist Federation,
and other British and general Hebrew unions, while
the Great Synagogue is a contributory in London to
the Chief Rabbi’s Fund, the Jews’ College, and the
Board of Deputies of British Jews, on which it is
represented. There is, finally, a weekly organ of the
community published in Sydney, the Hebrew Standard,
under the direction of Mr. A. Harris.
The Sydney Hebrews take up a full participation
in intellectual, professional and commercial activities
of their city. Prominent among their own communal
workers have been such representative Australian
workers as the late Messrs. S. A. Joseph, L. W. Levy,
M.L.C., J. G. Raphael, and C. Collins, M.L.A. Among
present eminent communal workers are the Hon.
Mr. Justice Cohen, Messrs. Louis Phillips, George J.
Cohen, Samuel Cohen, John J. Cohen, M.L.C., Neville
I). Cohen, Moritz Gotthelf, Aaron Blashki, Daniel
Levy, M.L.C. Past and present Parliaments have
included also Morris Asher, A. E. Collins and C. J.
Levien. Jacob Montefiore was an early pioneer of
immigration ; Sigismund Hoffnung and David Cohen
were prominent merchants and philanthropists of a
later date. A majority of the Hebrew population
belong to the industrial class, while the shirt-making,
tailoring, leather, tobacco, and fancy goods trades
claim a large number. A proportion are occupied in
financial operations and the sale ol property. Several
are importing merchants, and the number of medical,
legal and dental practitioners is appreciable. Outside
Sydney there are many who are country storekeepers,
and a few are settled on the land. The greatest dis-
tinction of Sydney Jews has been gained in legal and
political life : Sir Saul Samuel, Bart., was for several
years Agent-General of New South Wales in England ;
Sir Julian Salomons, K.C., was Solicitor-General, and
for a short time Chiei Justice oi the colony, and has
also been Agent-General ; and the Hon. Henry
Emanuel Cohen is one of the Judges of the Supreme
Court.
The number of Jews in New South Wales, which
in 1891 had been 5,484, had risen in 1901 to 6,447.
Of these there were resident in Sydney and the metro-
politan district 5,137, being 2,665 males and 2,472
females. The number of intermarriages, which are
strongly deprecated by the Jewish religion, has always
been far greater in Australia than in England. In the
majority of such unions the offspring drift away from
the Hebrew community ; but it is also constantly
being augmented by a small number of earnest prose-
lytes to Judaism.
Particular Baptist Association of Australasia.
This body has 12 churches and other, places
of worship, giving accommodation for 1,400 worship-
pers, with nine ministers and nine Sunday Schools,
35 teachers, and a total of 600 scholars.
Sydney Bethel.
The Sydney Bethel Union was started at a very
early period in the history of the colony, and was at
first ministered to by one or more of the missionaries
who in the early days found their way to New South
Wales, through the hostility of the Tahitians, who
refused them a landing. Of these the Rev. L. E.
Threlkeld was for some time minister of the Bethel
Union till his death, in 1859. The Rev. John Reid,
father of Mr. G. H. Reid, followed. In 1870 the Rev.
Thomas Gainford took charge, and under his minis-
tration the Bethel became the centre of a great move-
ment. His ministry extended over a period of fourteen
years, his death taking place in 1884. The trustees of
the Bethel Union are Sir James Fairfax, G. S. Little-
john, A. W. S. Meeks, and John Gainford. The Sydney
Bethel or Mariners’ Church is now under lease to the
Sydney Mission to Seamen.
Sydney Mission to Seamen.
This work was initiated in 1881 by Mr. J. S.
Shearston. In 1895 the Most Rev. the Primate re-
organised the mission, and the Rev. T. H. Uistin-
o 7
Morgan was appointed chaplain.
Church of Christ. —This church has 14
evangelists, 23 churches, with 2,800 members,
20 Bible schools, 153 teachers, and 1,700 scholars.
In practice their methods are similar to the Baptists,’
as onlv immersed believers are recognised as members.
%J O
Other Denominations.
The following denominations have each a church
and minister : Independent Church (unconnected),
Australian Church, Presbyterian Church in Scotland,
Protestant Episcopal Church (US.), Unitarian Church ;
and the Welsh Church, two churches and ministers.
The Lutherans, five clergymen and about 7,500 ad-
herents ; Free Church of England, one church ; and
Catholic Apostolic Church, one.


Architecture.
Strangely enough, no retrospective view of the pro-
gress of New South Wales has devoted much, if indeed
any, notice to the architectural development of the
State ; and this is the more to be wondered at, as that
recognised statistical authority, Coghlan, tells us that
at the close of the nineteenth century the privately-
owned “houses and permanent improvements’’ in
New South Wales were valued at about 118 million
pounds. To this we must add the value of building,
owned by governmental and municipal bodies ; also
the cost of buildings which have been erected and
pulled down, either wholly or in part ; and we should
probably find that during the first century of the
architectural life of this State about 300 millions of
money was spent in building. Surely this is strong
It has been stated a history of the architectural
development of a nation is the actual history of the
nation itself, and probably there is no instance where
this is more correct than in the case of New South
Wales. The report furnished by Governor Phillip to
the British Government —that ‘ ‘ all buildings in the
infant settlement at Sydney must of necessity be of
wood, as there is neither stone suitable for masonry,
nor clay suitable for brick-making available, although
good timber grows in abundance on the spot ” —seems
to us strange reading, in the light of modern experi-
ence, and gives a more vivid description of the
primitive state of affairs in the mother city of Aus-
tralia than almost any other words could convey.
The later report from the Governor, to the effect
Private Residence.—D. Esplin, Architect.
evidence of the important part which architecture
should and does play in the historical development of
a country. The same statistician tells us that at the
close of the last century there were 250,000 buildings
in New South Wales, to which must be added the
great number which, having outlived their time, had
been destroyed, making a probable total of about
400,000 buildings erected during the previous
century. If, therefore, the rate of progress had
been equable, eleven buildings, costing £B,OOO, would
have been erected on every day since Governor Phil"
lip’s landing, and this by a population which even
now only just exceeds a million-and-a-half of people.
that clay suitable for brick-making had been dis-
covered some miles in the country, at a spot which in
after years a distinguished French traveller described
in his map of the locality as the ‘ ‘ village of brickfield,’ ’
gives further evidence of the expansion of the settle-
ment ; while a comparison to-day of the electric tram
traversing George Street, between Anthony Hordern’s
fifteen-acre shop, in Goulburn Street, and Marcus
Clark’s seven-storey building, overlooking Christ Church
spire adjoining, still further and more pointedly illus-
trates our progress.
For many years, as might be expected, the infant
settlement paid more attention to procuring the bare
401
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


necessities of life than to anything else, so that archi-
tectural development was slow. Added to this, con-
siderable uncertainty existed as to whether Sydney or
Parramatta should be fixed upon as the seat of
government. All works were carried out by the
Governor —generally an officer in the British navy,—
with the assistance of the military officers resident in
the colony, mostly members of the New South Wales
Corps, afterwards to attain so unenviable a reputation
as to lead to its final extinction- And the streets and
suburbs of modern Sydney bear in many instances the
names of those who assisted in shaping her destiny •
Phillip, Hunter, King, Bligh, Macquarie, Bourke,
Gipps, Fitzroy, and other streets keeping the names
of prominent Governors in remembrance ; whilst
Foveaux Street is called after Lieut.-Colonel Foveaux,
who, during the administrative term of Governoi
Bligh and part of that of Governor Macquarie, as an
official notification in the Sydney Gazette of Sunday,
January 7th, 1810, tells us, was requested “ to con-
Private Residence.-T. M. Smith, Architect.
tinue to superintend and carry on the public works
and buildings of every description now erecting at
Sydney as he had done heretofore.” The influx of an
increasing population meant, in many instances, that
brain power was the possession of that part of the
population which was bound to obey, rather than
that section that was able, by force of circumstances,
to command ; and it was not at all unusual for changes
and decisions to be arrived at on the suggestion and
decision of members of the community whose indi-
viduality never appeared, but in the name of influential
military or other officers, who were notably incapable
of originating such proposals. It thus arises that the
real authors or architects of many early buildings
were unknown in their day, and have remained so.
The troubles of a bad administration —which
culminated on January 26th, 1808, when Colonel
Johnston, of the New South Wales Corps, left his home
at Annandale, and, at the head of his regiment, arrested
and deposed Governor Bligh—had kept back any real
architectural development; and as Lieutenant-Governor
Johnston only considered himself holding office until
Bligh’s successor arrived, Governor Macquarie found
wailing for him the opportunity, of which he took
every advantage, to put many public works in hand.
Probably he did more than any other Governor
before or since, towards beautifying the city and
erecting public and private buildings, and his Building
Act, besides being the first in Australia, is about as
concise a compilation as can be conceived, and un-
doubtedly exercised a far-reaching influence. It was
issued on August 14th, 1810, and ran as follows :
“ His Excellency the Governor, deeming it
expedient and highly necessary for the
improvement and ornament of the town of
Sydney to enlarge the streets and avenues
thereof, for which purpose a party of the
military are now employed at work, and who
are to be paid for their labour out of the
Police Fund, the Governor therefore orders
and directs that, as far as circumstances will
admit, the width of the streets shall be fifty
feet, including a footpath on each side. That
the paling or palisading on each side shall be
of a uniform height of four feet, and put up
in a neat, regular and durable manner, and
he trusts and expects that such persons as
have it in their power will voluntarily assist
by removing back their own palings and en-
closures. Should any houses stand in the way
of the intended improvements, which it may
be necessary to remove, they will be erected
again at the public expense, on a fair pe-
cuniary remuneration allowed to the pro-
prietors in case they should prefer it. His
Excellency the Governor further orders and
directs that no person whatever shall erect
any house or dwelling in the town of Sydney,
whether on leasehold ground or otherwise,
without previously obtaining his permission,
through Mr. Meehan, the Acting-Surveyor,
who has a plan of the town, recently made
out and approved by his Excellency, with
instructions respecting the several parts
thereof, which the Governor deems most
proper to improve and have uniform buildings,
erected thereon. A non-compliance with
these orders will subject the proprietors to
have their houses pulled dowm and further
incur the Governor’s displeasure; but he
trusts the inhabitants, whose interests at first
view appear to be affected by these regula-
tions, will yield a ready and cheerful obedience
to the orders now published, on account of
the great benefit the public at large will derive
from them and the additional convenience
and ornament the town will acquire by their
being carried into complete effect.”
It has been contended by his admirers that a lofty
and prophetic disposition enabled Macquarie to foresee
the great future which lay before New South Wales,


and, therefore, stimulated him to put up buildings so
much in advance of his day that they still do duty in
these times, as, for example, St. J ames’ Church, the
Equity Court, and many other buildings. His detrac-
tors. however, aver that his colossal vanity was at the
bottom of everything ; and they point to the erection
of the old Sydney Hospital, or the Rum Hospital as it
was called, as a proof that, provided he could put up
a building with his own name in front, he cared for
nothing else. Probably the truth lies, as usual, half-
way between these extremes. In any case, however,
he is credited with the erection of 250 separate build-
ings for public use, of which St. Matthew’s Church, at
Windsor, St. James’, Sydney, the present Equity
Court, the Benevolent Asylum (recently demolished),
the old Sydney Hospital, the old Markets, the original
Court House, and many others went to make up the
total.
Macquarie prided himself upon recognising ability
and making use of it, irrespective of the social rank of
altogether. The originally proposed St. Andrew's
Cathedral, the foundations of which were laid by
Governor Macquarie, from a design by Greenway,
found a place amongst the latter. In Greenway’s
plans the building was to be 180 feet longer than the
present shapely edifice, and to extend almost across
George Street as now aligned.
Any antiquarian research into the apparent
motives of the founders of this State brings to light
the vast projects which they contemplated, and in
many instances carried into effect- We, of to-day,
would hesitate before starting to build a cathedral
twice as large as the Anglican St. Andrew’s Cathedral
now in use, and yet Macquarie proposed this a century
ago. He would be a bold man who proposed to-day
the erection of a University in Sydney three times as
large as the present one, yet the original design, pre-
pared by the University architect, Edmund T. Blacket,
half a century ago, shows that such was the original
conception of what was required. Or, again, take
J. T. McCarthy, Architect,
its possessor, as witness his marked attention to George
Crossley, the attorney, who, twice convicted in England
of perjury, exercised, by force of character, so detri-
mental an influence over Governor Bligh. Actuated
by this feeling, Macquarie entrusted most of the archi-
tectural work to Frank Howard Greenway, an architect
of recognised ability, who, hampered as he was by
lack of skilled labour and without much choice of
materials, certainly produced satisfactory results.
That this era was not even more eventful as an archi-
tectural epoch than it was, may be put down to the
intervention of the British authorities, who sent out
Commissioner Bigge to report, amongst other affairs,
upon the disquieting rumours which had reached
London as to the Governor’s extravagance in matters
of public buildings. Bigge reported unfavourably,
and many large projected schemes were nipped in the
bud; some to be revived as soon as Commissioner
Bigge had sailed for England, but some to be dropped
Sydney Government House, now the official residence
of the Governor-General, the foundation-stone of
which was laid by Lieutenant-Governor Colonel Snod-
grass on J anuary 26th, 1838, on the fiftieth anniversary
of the founding of the State. This building, with
comparatively few additions, other than those which
the exigencies of altered social conditions would de-
mand, has done duty ever since, not only for the
Governor of a province but for the Governor-General
of a collection of provinces within the Commonwealth
of all Australia.
The public buildings of New South Wales are, for
the most part, a distinct credit to the State. The long
roll of men who have occupied the post of Colonial, or,
as it is now called, Government Architect, have all left
memorials of their skill, though probably none have
had the numerous opportunities enjoyed by James
Barnet. The now historic New South Wales Parlia-
ment Houses, in Macquarie Street, were built by


Governor Macquarie’s architect Greenway, and, with
extensive renewals, have served their purposes since
his day. Upon two occasions preparatory steps have
been initiated to construct more imposing buildings.
Forty years ago, in response to an advertised in-
vitation to compete, a Gothic design was sent in by
an Irish architect, and accepted. Illustrations of
this design have been published as the Sydney
Parliament House in more than one English and
American architectural text-book. Later on, about
five years ago, a design, prepared by the present
Government Architect, W. L. Vernon, was adopted
and the foundation-stone laid, but nothing further was
done.
St. James’ Hall, Philip Street. —J. B. Clamp, Architect.
The present Supreme Court, since greatly ex-
tended, was also designed by Greenway in Governor
Macquarie’s time; and, as showing the different
methods of public finance then and now, the Governor
offered a subscription on behalf of the Crown, the
balance of £ 2,000 to be made up by private donations,
to which he, in his private capacity, subscribed, and
when this was in hand the work was begun. The
Criminal Court House, at Darlinghurst, was built in
1836, from a Greek Doric design, by the then Colonial
Architect, Mortimer William Lewis. It has since been
almost rebuilt and greatly enlarged from designs by
W. L. Vernon. The original Australian Museum was also
designed by Lewis in 1846, but subsequent additions
have almost obliterated the section he constructed.
Lewis also built the Treasury, in Macquarie Street, a
Florentine Renaissance design, and like the Australian
Museum, since then much altered, dhe Observatory,
at Dawes’ Point, is from an Italian design by the
Colonial Architect, Alexander Dawson, and stands on
the site of the first windmill. It was erected about 1858-
The Registrar-General’s Office, next the Supreme
Court, in Elizabeth Street, is from a Tudor design by
Dawson, but he evidently was not at home in the style.
This building has since been greatly enlarged and
improved from designs by the present Government
Architect. The Public Library, at the corner of Bent
and Macquarie Streets, was designed originally by
Henry Ginn, and, at a cost of £"5,000, was erected in
1844, for the convenience of private subscribers. The
style was Palladian, but the weight of the enormous
cornice was badly distributed. Consequently, after
the property had been acquired by the Government,
the walls were taken down and the whole greatly
enlarged and re-erected.
The Chief Secretary’s Office, in Macquarie Street ;
the Public Works Office and the Lands Office,
in Bridge Street ; and the General Post Office, in
Martin Place, were all designed in Italian Renaissance
by the Colonial Architect, James Barnet, although the
French mansard storey has been added since. In
justice to the architect responsible for this radical
alteration in the design, it is only fair to bear in mind
that the Minister for Public Works, who instructs
the Government Architect, is not always a man of
architectural taste, and sometimes insists upon in-
creased accommodation at a minimum of cost, thus
leaving the architect very little choice in dealing with
the enlargement of a completed design.
The Post Office is without doubt Barnet’s finest
memorial. It was begun in 1866 and finished in 1886 ;
the campanile clock tower, 230 feet high, being com-
pleted at that time. The workmanship in this building
is very superior, and therefore costly ; and it is believed
that the great expense incurred indirectly affected the
after policy of the State in erecting public buildings ;
as considerably less latitude is now allowed in this
respect than formerly. The colonnade facade to
Martin Place is very fine, although the difference in the
street level somewhat detracts from the effect. The
carvings on the Pitt Street front are attempts to adapt
the true spirit of renaissance realism into modern
designs, and attracted much adverse criticism at the
time.
Barnet also designed the Medical School at the
University—which is a perpendicular Gothic design, —
the Central Police Court, in Goulburn Street, and
numerous other public buildings in various parts of
the State, in different styles. But, probably, the most
effective of all is the comparatively simple Italian
Custom House, at the Circular Quay, mainly because
the open space in front allows the whole to be seen,
and also because in subsequent additions the present


Government Architect was allowed a free hand, and
has been able to work out to completion the original
suggestion.
Of noted buildings in Sydney, it is found that, as
before stated, the foundation-stone of Government
House was laid in 1838. The design is a Tudor one,
prepared by an English architect, Edward Blore, who,
twenty-two years previously, had designed Sir Walter
Scott’s world-famous home, Abbotsford. The works in
conjunction with Government House were carried out
under the superintendence of the then Colonial Archi-
tect, Mortimer William Lewis.
The foundation-stone of the original St. Andrew’s
Cathedral, as designed by Greenway, was laid by
Governor Macquarie on September isl 1819, but, as
the work was stopped by the adverse report of
Commissioner Bigge this foundation was pulled up
and the design abandoned, to be recommenced in
Governor Bourke’s time from a design by J ames Hume-
The building was carried up to a certain height, and
then left for many years, until, in 1846, a third design
was prepared by Edmund T. Blacket, who took down
some part of Hume’s work and completed the edifice-
The Chapter House, vestries, &c., were erected after
his death from designs by his son, Cyril Blacket.
St. James’ Church, in King Street, was also
designed by Greenway, and completed in 1820, towards
the close of Governor Macquarie’s regime. Probably
few architects have played so prominent a part, in the
early architectural development of New South Wales
Greenway, and it stands to Macquarie s credit that
he recognised ability and afforded opportunity for its
display, under circumstances which few men situated
like himself would have dared, especially having
Bligh’s fate ever prominently before him.
St. Mary’s Roman Catholic Cathedral was begun
in 1820, the foundation-stone being laid by Macquarie
on October 29th of that year. The architect’s name
is a matter of uncertainty, but, probably, he belonged
to that section of the community. This building was
burnt down, and only a small part of the north
transept remains. Luckily, however, the doorway is
still complete. The workmanship in this, showing, as
it does to Boomerang Street, was the admiration of
the masons of old time, and the boast of a very large
proportion of them, who claimed to have worked at it-
The present building is a noble fourteenth century
English Gothic design, by the late W. W. Warded ;
the more recent additions having been carried out by
Warded and Denning, the son and pupils of the
original designer.
The foundation-stone of the Scots Church on
Church Hid, was laid by Sir Thomas Brisbane, m July,
1824. The design scarcely claims notice, but the long
association which the patriotic, though militant po i-
tical ecclesiastic, Dr. John Dunmoie Lang,
this building, has given it historic interest in the
minds of all Presbyterians.
In 1840 St. Phillip’s Church of England, on Church
Hid, was begun from designs by Edmund T. Blacket,
to take the place of the original church, begun m 1793•
The foundation-stone of the latter was laid by the
Lieutenant-Governor, Major Francis Grose m July ot
that year, or five years after the landing of Governor
Phiilip, in whose memory—and not, as in the case with
the present church in memory of the saint of that
name—the church was erected. The old building had
a circular tower, and was probably designed by Lieu-
tenant Dawes. The present church is a fine example
in stone of later perpendicular work.
St. Benedict’s Roman Catholic Church, at the
corner of Abercrombie Street and George Street West,
is a stone, three-aisled Gothic church of the Early
English period. It was designed by William Munro,
and the beautiful spire, as well as the general substan-
tial nature of the building, will last as a permanent
memorial to him. Munro was a Presbyterian, but his
reputation stood so high that, it is stated, he amassed
a moderate fortune from building churches and other
ecclesiastical edifices for the Roman Catholic com-
munity.
St. George’s Presbyterian Church, in Castlereagh
Street, was the result of a competition won by an
architect named Field ; and it was begun in 1859. Field
took as a partner a young architect named Rowe who,
in later years, did much for the development of the
city.
St. Matthew’s Church of England, at Windsor,


was designed by Greenway, and begun in Governor
Macquarie’s time. As an instance of the troubles
which this designer encountered, it may be stated that
the original design was for a galleried church, but
owing to the inferior workmanship, it was found
necessary to reduce the height to that now erected —
after the walls had been completed.
Greenway also erected St. John’s Church of Eng-
land at Parramatta, and had difficulties of a somewhat
smilar type to overcome there. With regard to the
two west spires of this church, begun during Mac-
quarie’s time, there is a legend that, owing to the
collapse on two occasions of the structural scantling,
it was found necessary to promise a free pardon to the
workmen on its completion.
J. Grant, Architect.
A Wesleyan Church, which in later years gave
place to the present Methodist Centenary Hall, was
erected in York Street in 1839, from designs by Josiah
Atwool.
The old Jewish Synagogue, built in 1828, in York
Street, was in 1875 converted into offices, and the
present successful building, in Elizabeth Street, was
erected from designs by Thomas Rowe, the Byzantine
features being exceedingly well disposed-
The Unitarian Church, in College Street, and All
Saints’ Church of England, at Petersham, are memorials
of the architect Benjamin Backhouse, who retired
from the active practice of his profession, and was
appointed to the Legislative Council some years oeforc
his death.
The present Church of England, Christ Church
Cathedral, in Newcastle was from designs by John
Horbury Hunt, with later modifications by J. H.
Buckeridge.
Armidale Church of England Cathedral is also by
Hunt.
The Roman Catholic Cathedral in Goulburn was
from designs by P. Stombucco.
In 1845 the Pitt Street Congregational Church
was begun from designs by John Bibb.
In iB6O St. Alban’s Church of England at
Muswellbrook was begun, from designs by Mr. (after-
wards Sir) G. Gilbert Scott, an English architect, the
expenses being incurred by the White fami’y.
In 1880 St. Peter’s Church of England at East
Maitland was begun from designs by Cyril Blackct-
The Osborne Memorial Church at Dapto was
built from designs by J. H. Hunt.
One of the most interesting links between the
present and the past is St. Peter’s Church of England
r.t Cook’s River, which, plastered within and without,
is still a landmark.
In ecclesiastical architecture two designers stand
easily first —Edmund T. Blanket and W. W. Warded, —
the former having left memorials in the Church of
England Cathedrals at Sydney and Goulburn, and in
the following churches :—All Saints’, Woollahra ; St.
Thomas’ North Shore ; St. John’s, Glebe ; Si;. Stephen’s,
Newtown ; St. Phillip’s, Church Hill ; St. Mary’s,
West Maitland ; besides upwards of 200 other churches
in various parts of the country. The Mortuary Station
and Chapel at Rookwood, from designs by the Colonial
Architect, James Barnet, is a very successful treatment
of a difficult combination of Venetian thirteenth cen-
tury Gothic and the railway requirements of modern
times.
St. Andrew’s Church of England at Summer Hill
was designed by A. L. Elphinstone, the interior effect
of chancel arch, flanked by large arches on each
side, being unique in this State. The church has been
completed lately, with the addition of a tower and
spire, from designs by J ohn Reid. The Hunter
Baillie Memorial Church at Annandale, which possesses
a very effective spire, was designed by Arthur Blacket.
St. Clement’s Church of England at Marrickville and
another of the same name at Mosman, were the re-
sult of competitions won by Alfred Spain.
St. James’ Roman Catholic Church at Forest
Lodge was the first ecclesiastical production from
designs by John Kirkpatrick, who, as the successful
competitor for the State House projected by Sir Henry
Parkes, and the designer of many public and other
buildings in Sydney, became afterwards an architect
of note.
The Friends’ Meeting House, built in 1833, and
more generally known as the Quakers’ Meeting House,
was, until its demolition when the Devonshire Street
cemetery was resumed in 1900 for railway extension,
the first Sydney ecclesiastical edifice to meet the train
traveller’s eye on his arrival in the metropolis.


Private memorial churches and chapels have
added in some instances to the ecclesiastical possessions
of the State. Probably the most beautiful example of
these is St. John’s Church of England at Wallerawang,
which was built at a cost of about £5 000, by the widow
of Mr. James Barton, the engineer who designed the
zigzag railway over the Blue Mountains, in memory
of her husband. The plan, by E. T. Blacket,
shows a fourteenth century English Gothic stone
building, with a square tower. Mr. John Taylor, of
Glenalvon has lately completed, at Greenwich, in
memory of his daughter, a Presbyterian Chapel, from
designs by A. T. & G. McCredie. The Osborne
Memorial Church of England at Dapto, from designs
by J . H. Hunt, is another instance. The King’s School
Chapel, from designs by Loweish & Moorhouse, in
memory of a former headmaster, the Rev. Geo. F.
Macarthur, is about as beautiful a piece of work as can
be seen, and if the completed scheme is in accord with
the eastern half already finished, it will compare
favourably with anything of its type. The late Dr.
Jenkins built a beautiful private chapel at Nepean
Towers, and Mr. Geo. Jenkins has lately erected one at
Herbert Park. The late Thos. Brown also erected a
Memorial Presbyterian Chapel at Tithgow.
In educational buildings, the Sydney Unversity,
begun in 1854 from designs by Edmund T- Blacket —
who resigned his appointment as Colonial Architect
in order to undertake the work—is deserving of the
most prominence at the hands of the critic. The style
of the building is perpendicular Gothic, and the
material the Pyrmont sandstone, so generally used in
or around Sydney. Blacket’s original design comprised
a complete quadrangle, of which only one front and
part of one end were built. This plan of grouping all
the buildings together was abandoned in later years
in favour of one for plotting isolated structures, of
different materials, and designed by different archi-
tects, apparently at random over the large area
available. Although it may be possible that the
sacrifice of the original extremely bold scheme of
arrangement was necessitated by administrative
motives, yet it must be admitted that, from an archi-
tectural standpoint, the change is greatly to be de-
plored. The Great Hall, 135 feet lon g> wlth an °P en
timber roof of 45 feet span, is a noble apaitment,
which ranks with Westminster Hall as amongst the
finest in the world.
St. Paul’s Church of England College, by the
same architect, begun in 1857, is a stone building in
the English Gothic style ; the long, low straggled
appearance of the buildings lacking the compactness
which the completed quadrangle would supply.
Unfortunately, the Warden’s House, built in 1883
from designs by Blacket, now forms an isolated block,
renders the probable completion of the quadrangle
more remote. St. John’s Roman Catholic College,
also affiliated to the University, is a geometrical, deco-
rated Gothic design still incomplete. It was begun
in 1862, from an effective design, which has suffered in
execution, owing to the variegated colours which the
different blocks of stone have assumed through
exposure to the weather. St. Andrew’s Presbyterian
College is also a stone building, of much simpler outline
than the other two colleges, and was built in 1872
from designs from William Munro. It has lately been
considerably added to from designs by Nixon & Adam
The Women’s College, completing the group of colleges
within the University, is a brick building in a freely
treated Italian style, designed by J. Sulman. The
building was erected in 1890. The Medical School
by Barnet, the Macleay Museum by Mansfield, and
the Fisher Library by Vernon, are the principal of
the isolated buildings.
The original Church of England Moore College,
at Liverpool, was designed by W. E. Kemp ; but when
this was closed the chapel, built as a memorial to
Marcus Clark’s New Store.—J. Nangle, Architect.
Bishop Broughton, was taken down and removed to
Newtown, to form part of the new Moore College,
which had been erected next to St. Paul’s College,
from designs by Coward & Bell. This building is of
brick, and embodies the old rectory of St. Stephen’s,
which was built about forty years before. The Roman
Catholic training college for priests, at Manly, is a
stone building, conspicuously situated near the
Cardinal’s palace, both buildings being from designs
by Sheerin & Hennessey. The training college,
situated on the high land near North Head, is a land-
mark, either from the harbour or the ocean, The cost
was about £65,000.


St. Joseph’s College, utilised by the Marist
Brothers, at Hunter’s Hill, was also designed by Sheerin
and Hennessey. This school is excellently situated
within its large grounds, and is credited with possessing
more floor space than any other school south of the
equator.
The Armidale School, which is the great public
school of the northern districts, is of excellent design
by Sulman & Power. The playsheds, hospital, offices,
&c., are very complete ; and the chapel, a brick build-
ing, with a large circular apse, has lately been enlarged
from designs by Cyril Blacket.
The King’s School at Parramatta, which has sent
out so many prominent public men, ranks high among
educational institutions. Begun in 1834, probably
from designs by Lewis, the then Colonial Architect,
whose Greek inclinations are suggested in places, it
was intended for the education of the sons of ' the
aristocratic section of the community. Owing to
lack of patronage and funds it was closed in 1864, to
be reopened in 1869 by the Rev. G. L. Macarthur,
Interior Construction of Grace Bros.' New Store.
W. Newman, Architect.
who gave up his school at Macquarie Fields and trans-
ferred his pupils to the King’s School, which he
enlarged, from designs of his own, mainly carried out
in wood. The school flourished so vigorously that
after his resignation and death it was decided to
enlarge it. This work was' entrusted to Loweish and
Moorhouse, the chapel they designed as the Macarthur
Memorial being a lovely stone building of unusual
treatment. In 1898 Cyril Blacket was appointed
consulting architect, and since then large additions
and a thorough remodelling of the whole school have
been carried out.
The North Shore Church of England Grammar
School is an extension of the residence of a successful
miner, and the mam architectural feature of the present
institution is still “ Holterman’s Tower ” as for many
years it was called. The school was declared open in
1889 by Lord Carrington.
St. Ignatius College, at Riverview, occupies a
magnificent position on the south bank of Lane Cove,
being probably the most complete seminary of its
kind in the antipodes. The grounds, of i2o acres
are worked as a farm, and the whole building is lighted
with an electric installation in the College. Half only
of the school, a stone building, in simple Renaissance,
has yet been built, from designs by Tappin, Gilbert
and Deniehey, of Melbourne.
The Technical Colleges, at Ultimo, Newcastle,
Bathurst and Goulburn, were designed by W. E. Kemp,
as architect for the Public Instruction Department.
From the point of view of convenience these buildings
may not be all that is desired, largely owing to the
fact that technical instruction was still in its infancy
when these schools were promoted, and the depart-
mental officers were not very well acquainted with what
they really wanted. But in their exterior effect they
are creditable combinations of brick, stone and terra
cotta, in the Romanesque style.
The Sydney Grammar School, in College Street,
was originally built under the Colonial Architect; but
subsequent alterations and additions have been made
at different times by different architects, no apparent
principle being followed in the selection. The school
naturally suffers, being situated as it is in the heart
of the city, from a too confined area, and therefore
does not compare with other schools in this respect.
The Fort Street Public School, which is the oldest
school in Australia, was built by Governor Macquarie
in 1815 for a hospital, from designs by Greenway.
Previous to the creation of a public instruction
department under a Ministerial head, the duties per-
taining to such matters were administered by a Board
of Education, whose architect, G. A. Mansfield, de-
signed upwards of one hundred schools, including
those prominent ones in Cleveland Street, Sussex
Street, Blackfriars’ Estate, &c. Since then, at in-
tervals, private architects have been favoured, but
for the most part the architect to the department
has carried out the work. For example, the Stanmore
School was designed by Blackmann & Parkes, Pad-
dington School by B. Backhouse, and Forest Lodge
School by Charles Mayes.
The Church of England Grammar School for girls
is an extension and remodelling of premises at Darling-
hurst, formerly the residence of Sir E. Deas Thomson.
The Mansions, Middle Harbour.—J. W. Hill, Architect.


once Premier of New South Wales. The design,
unusual, but effective, is by Harold O. Jackson. The
Girls’ College at Armidale was designed by Sulman
and Power.
A study of the works of contemporary architects
shows a strong disposition towards specialism. Natu-
rally this would be expected in the case of the Govern-
ment Architect, W. L. Vernon, who alone has the
designing of post-offices, court-houses, gaols, and public
buildings, some hundreds of which have been erected
from plans by this architect. As a rule, architects in
the Government service can only be judged by evi-
dences as to their ability in this capacity, which, owing
to the overpowering influence of the Minister for Works
for the time being, scarcely afford a fair basis for
criticism. To compare their works, too, with those of
architects in private practice is always a difficult
matter, because in all State work the financial element
is not so directly in evidence. To mention two
instances by way of point: —The Kenmore Asylum, near
Goulburn, built of brick, with a Romanesque facing
and a good example of work suited for a practical
institution, cost £170,000 ; and the Fisher Library,
at the University, when finished, will cost £Bo,ooo—
amounts being much in excess of the sums private
architects usually have at their disposal.
In the case of Vernon, however, opportunities for
comparison have been afforded ; as, previous to accept-
ing the position of Government Architect on the re-
tirement of J ames Barnet in 1890, he practised for many
years in England and Australia, and erected a number
of buildings whereby his individuality may be judged.
Vernon’s early experiences were unusually varied,
and, consequently, it gave satisfaction to the rest of
the members of the architectural profession then
practising in New South Wales when, in 1890, he
succeeded Barnet as Government Architect, under
circumstances which were unusual. Barnet, after a
lengthy service under the long - standing title of
Colonial Architect, resigned; and applications were
publicly invited for the appointment, under amended
conditions, with the new title ef Government Architect.
Many applications were received, but none apparently
Residence.—M. B. Halligan, Architect.
commanded the confidence of the Minister. Veinon,
who had not applied, and who was then earning an
income in excess of what the appointment canied,
was approached, and negotiations resulted ultimately
in his appointment.
Walter L. Vernon is a native ot Buckingham-
shire, England, and was articled to Habershon and
Pite, architects, of London. In their offices he
continued for some years after the expiration of his
apprenticeship, having charge of a branch in South
Wales, where the firm had a large connection amongst
the country gentry, in addition to their London prac-
tice. After leaving this firm and returning to London
he became assistant to C. Moreing, an uncle of the
late Hon. J. H. Want. This architect, besides a good
general practice, had large interests in Sussex, especially
Hastings, where he sent Vernon to take charge of a
branch ; and here he later on started in practice on his
own account, having, strangely enough, amongst his
early clients the Earl of Beaconsfield and Lord Brassey.
In 1885 Vernon was elected a Fellow of the R.1.8.A.,
a position he still holds, and about the same time he
became one of the first Fellows, by examination, of the
Institute of Surveyors. This he resigned on leaving
England. In addition to his architectural practice at
Government Savings Bank. Haymarket. —Nixon & Adam, Architects.
Hastings, Vernon soon opened a branch office in W est-
minster as a quantity surveyor, and carried on the
two in conjunction. Unfortunately, however, bron-
chitic asthma, which in its earlier stages had neces-
sitated a year’s residence in Malta, now became so
troublesome that, on the advice of his medical adviser,
a permanent change to Australia was resolved upon ,
and as, previous to starting, Messrs. David Jones & Co.
had engaged him to design their new premises, at the
corner of Barrack Street, after selling his practices m
London and Hastings, Vernon started in Sydney,
where he erected Sir Julian Salomon’s residence,
Roberts’ Hotel, Queen Anne Chambers in Bond Street,
and numerous other edifices. In 1885, in response to
overtures made by the late W. W. Warded, the turn
of Warded & Vernon came into existence, and such
buildings as the Union Bank, Gibbs, BrghQand Co.’s
premises in Pitt Street, offices for the E. S. & A.
Bank and the Bank of Australasia. Sir Rupert Clarke’s
House in Melbourne, with many more were carried out.
The partnership was dissolved after the expuation of


the five years, for which it was formed, and Vernon
then recommenced practice at Union Bank Chambers,
Pitt Street, where he continued until joining the
Government service.
The position of Government Architect is at all
times an onerous and difficult one. Every item of
expenditure, whether is. 6d or £I,OOO, must be pre-
sented to the Auditor-General, accompanied by a
voucher signed by the Government Architect, which,
considering that since the time of Vernon’s appoint-
ment over four millions sterling has passed under his
control —the expenditure in one year reaching £3S O > OOC
Private Residence.—R. Loualt, Architect.
—is in itself a heavy responsibility. But probably
this is not so much a source of worry to a man of
architectural taste as the necessity, frequently forced
upon him, of having to enlarge already completed
buildings at a complete sacrifice of effect. In some
cases, such, for example, as the Custom House at Cir-
cular Quay. Vernon has doubled the size of the original
building and, at the same time, succeeded in consider-
ably improving it. On the other hand, the General
Post Office is frequently alluded to as having been
spoiled by Vernon’s additions. In conjunction with
this, however, it is only fair to remember that the
George Street front was doubled in width, and has by
no means suffered in appearance thereby, whilst the
Moore Street front was complete in itself, both in
proportion and detail ; sc that any addition in height
alone, such as the necessities of the department
demanded, would necessarily be a complex task. To
convince those holding different views, it might be
suggested that the Institute of Architects should set.
as a competitive test amongst architectural students,
the problem of enlarging the building in any more
satisfactory way than has been done. As this building
was the most criticised of all Barnet’s designs, because
of its carving, so, probably, one of the most keenly
criticised of all the public buildings erected under the
present Government Architect is the Newcastle Post
Office, a very fine stone building in the Renaissance
style, situated on a prominent corner block ; and, as
the Sydney General Post Office, costing about £350,000,
certainly contributed largely towards the change in
public policy, which now favours public buildings at
much less expenditure, so the Newcastle Post Office
was used as an object lesson in reference to the day-
labour policy of the Hon. E. W. O’Sullivan. And, in
conjunction with the attacks made by the Master
Builders’ Association of New South Wales, it certainly
contributed a great deal towards giving the death-blow
to that system. Now, however, that the heat of party
strife over this vexed question has largely abated, it
may be well to remember that, although the Govern-
ment Architect’s estimate of £19,000 on the building
as then proposed was actually exceeded by £12,000,
making the total cost upwards of £31,000, yet the first
estimate referred to the building itself, exclusive of
the colonnades and other decorative features to be
supplied by exterior colonnades, &c., which the com-
pleted design possessed.
The new city railway station has been often quoted
as the “ largest in the world,” and, as such, a great
deal of opposition was aroused on the plea that it was
in advance of the times. But there are four or five
railway stations in London alone all larger than this,
which really will not greatly anticipate the wants of
this rapidly-increasing city. The design is by Vernon,
in collaboration with the Engineer-in-Chief, Mr. H.
Deane, and shows a long fa9ade in stone, with a tall
campanile rising in the centre. The cost now proposed
will be about £BO,OOO, and it will take £70,000 more
to carry out the completed design. The Court House
at Wagga is a public building which stands, from an
architectural point of view, to the credit of the Govern-
ment Architect ; in that here the needs of a hot district
have been unfailingly kept in view, the ambulatories
and other suggestions of a tropical country, embodied
in the structure, being departures from the usual
design.
It may be urged that the architectural taste of the
Government Architect has little, if any, influence on
the country, provided his buildings are substantial
and convenient. But Vernon’s regime has disproved
this. The public buildings constructed in many of
our country towns from his plans have done more to


educate local taste in architectural matters than would
be supposed. Take, for example, the South Coast
township of Nowra. The court-house, post-office, and
police barracks there are in a style such as the traveller
remembers to have seen in many other country towns
but they suggest their purpose, and have certainly
done much by the artistic stability of their effective
brick work, to suggest that even cottage residences
might be built in something more artistic than weather-
board and galvanised iron. Most of Vernon’s public
buildings, of an important type, are Renaissance
designs in stone, whilst the smaller buildings are in
brick, in a free treatment of Romanesque. But,
strangely enough, like his predecessors, Barnet and
Blacket, he prefers Gothic; and the Fisher Library,
now being erected in conjunction with the University,
will be a lasting monument as to his power when deal-
ing with late Perpendicular. Some smaller examples
of this may be seen at Government House in the
beautiful stone fan tracery ceiling, the oriel window,
&c. The Fisher Library will have an open timber
roof, with a span of 50 feet, suggesting the Great Hall
of the University, which is Blacket’s lasting monument.
In all probability the Fisher Library will, in generations
to come, by popular consent, be classified as Vernon’s
masterpiece ; although lovers of Renaissance will claim
this honour in connection with the fronts of the
National Art Gallery, which now surround most of the
original brick building, erected for the trustees by
J. Horbury Hunt.
In municipal buildings, the Sydney Town Flail
attracts notice, not only on account of its central and
commanding position, but as containing one of the
finest concert halls in the world, as well as the largest
organ. The building, in the Renaissance style, was
originally the result of a competition won by an
unknown architect, named Wilson. The foundation
stone was laid in 1868 by the Duke of Edinburgh, and
since Wilson’s death Macßeath, Sapsford, Bond, and
Mcßae have all, whilst holding the position of City
Architect, added to or altered the original design, with
not always harmonious results.
Excluding the town halls at Paddington, Bathurst,
Inverell, and one or two others, few, if any of the others
have risen to the occasion. Possibly the general aspect
of neglect and disrepair into which municipal buildings
are allowed to drift excites a depressing influence on
architectural design. Strangely enough, however, halls
of similar purpose in England or America are usually
of better style and better kept, whilst even in this
State halls, used as parish halls or for similar uses, are
very frequently more effective in design. Can it be
that the aldermanic mind only associates one class of
building as suitable for its purposes ? For, as the decision
usually rests with the municipal fathers in any archi-
tectural competitions, the design of cemented front
with pilasters and other embellishments of a like nature
almost invariably wins, dhe position of municipal
architect for the city of Sydney has never been regarded
as being a bed of roses ; and nearly every occupant has
resigned, largely owing to the more or less undue
interference of the temporary occupants of the alder-
manic chairs. At present there is no such olhce as
that of city architect, the last officer holding the
position, George Mcßae, having resigned to become
Principal Assistant Government Architect, when the
great work with which his name was associated,
namely, the Queen Victoria Markets, had been com-
pleted. Opinions, both architectural and otherwise
have widely differed whether the Queen Victoria
Markets should have been built at all ; and, if so,
whether the class of building erected suits the site.
This, instead of having a narrow frontage and great
depth, such as a building of this design would suggest
Lyceum Hall.
really covers an area of about 600 feet by too feet,
with frontages to main streets on all four sides. Be all
this as it may, as Mr. Mcßae proposed several distinct
designs, of which the one now erected was selected by
the City Council for the time being, it is only fair to
assume that his instructions were to design a certain
class of building for that particular site. The general
effect of these markets is unusual, as a long facade of
600 feet is rarely obtainable; and although the shallow
depth of the ground rendered any broken outline in
the frontage impossible, yet the design, which is a fine
treatment of Romanesque in stone, looks well. The


sky-nne is broken by four small domes at the angles of
the buildings and a central dome of about 60 feet
diameter in the centre. Mcßae also designed the
new portion of Belmore Markets, at the Haymarket,
which is a utilitarian design in brick, with terracotta
dressings. The carriage porch and other additions
to the Town Hall are a tasty attempt which has been
successful in toning down a somewhat florid Re-
naissance building.
The President of the Institute of Architects of
New South Wales, Cyril Blacket, has been more in
evidence in architectural educational circles than most
of his professional brethren, as he has held positions
as lecturer on architecture and building construction
and teacher of architectural drawing at the Sydney
School of Arts, as lecturer on architecture and building
construction at the Sydney University—being the
first to hold that appointment,—and as lecturer in
charge of the Department of Architecture at the
Sydney Technical College. He began his architectural
career as a pupil in the office of his father, the late
Roscoe J. Collins, Architect.
Edmund T. Blacket, of Sydney, whose partner he
became later on. Blacket & Son had a strong leaning
towards Gothic churches, at one time no less than
eighty-one churches and three cathedrals necessitating
the firm’s attention to a greater or less degree. As
diocesan building surveyor for the Church of England
diocese of Sydney all ecclesiastical works for this
denomination come under Cyril Blacket’s scrutiny ;
whilst as architect to St. Andrew’s Cathedral he is
kept in touch with the best of Gothic work. On the
dissolution of the firm of Blacket & Son by the death
of E. T. Blacket, the surviving partner was joined
by his brother, under the name of Blacket Bros.,
during which partnership the firm did a great deal of
work ; but, after its dissolution, Cyril Blacket recom-
menced practice alone, and has continued so ever since.
The Chapter House and vestries adjoining St. Andrew’s
Cathedral Sydney ; cathedrals at Goulburn, Perth
(W.A.), and Townsville (Q.) ; Trinity College, in Mel-
bourne ; the churches of St. Peter’s, East Maitland,
All Souls, at Leichhardt; the Mort Memorial Church
at Bodalla, the Barton Memorial Church at Wallera-
wang ; All Saints at Woollahra ; St. Thomas, North
Sydney ; the Redfern Congregational Church ; the
Burwood Presbyterian Church ; the Nowra School oi
Arts ; Angus & Son’s show-rooms in Castlereagh Street;
the Leichhardt Methodist Hall ; the remodelling oi
Bishopscourt, Randwick, and the remodelling and
additions to the King’s School at Parramatta are
amongst the works with which he has been associated,
either alone or with his partners for the time being.
Probably few professional careers can be cited as more
distinct than that of Cyril Blacket in respect to the
tendency of modern times towards specialism ; as this
architect has been for thirty years closely associated
with church building, mostly for the Church of Eng-
land, and with lecturing on architectural subjects,
neither of which branches have received much
attention from any other local member of the
profession.
The oldest practising architect in New South
Wales is, at the present time, George Allen Mansfield,
head of the firm of Mansfield & Son, and although,
unfortunately, his health has for some time past pre-
vented him from taking an active part in the archi-
tectural world, yet, having been for over fifty years
a prominent figure, he claims special notice. Mansfield
at one time, previous to the inauguration of the govern-
mental Department of Public Instruction, was architect
to the Board of Education, and in this position was
responsible for many of the early public schools.
Probably no other architect in New South Wales
outside the public service, ever controlled so
great an expenditure over buildings, or had in his
service so many men who afterwards, as architects,
made their mark. One of the most notable examples
of the latter is J. S. Wigram, now the departmental
architect in charge of the public school buildings.
One of Mansfield’s first architectural efforts was
the submission, some forty years ago, of a design
for new Parliament Houses, to be built in Macquarie
Street. His design was placed second. The
Australia Hotel is perhaps Mansfield’s largest work.
Prince Alfred Hospital, since enlarged by the Govern-
ment Architect ; the Daily Telegraph office, in King
Street; Frazer’s stores; the Civil Service stores ; the
City Bank ; the Savings Bank ; the A.M.P. offices, in
Pitt Street ; Toxteth Mansion, at Glebe Point ;
McArthur & Co.’s store ; the Mercantile Mutual Insur-
ance Company all tend to show the weighty influence
Mansfield has held in the development of his native
State as architect for the commercial and city
banks of Sydney- Many of our country towns bear
evidence of his ability, which exhibited itself more in
the way of utility and solidity than in decorative
attempts at original effects.
As a rule an architect, if at all, ascends giadually
to fame, which only comes after many years of hard
work and study. But the firm of Robertson & Marks
forms a distinct departure from this custom. George
Birred Robertson and Theodore Marks started in
business under the style of Robertson & Marks, archi


tects. Work came to them at once in plenty and
of a good type, and for years past the firm’s career
has been phenomenal. Unfortunately the success of
one such firm induces a number of youths to study
architecture with the intention of doing likewise, but
with the result that disappointment and failure are
experienced. In York Street this firm erected six
warehouses for J. S. Reid, of Adelaide, on the site of
the old skating rink, at a cost of £30,000, finished with
hydraulic elevators and Grinnell sprinklers. Further
along they erected two warehouses for Briscoe & Co.
Ltd.,on the situation of a brick Gothic building erected
by J. H. Hunt. These buildings are six storeys high,
with elevators, and' cost £II,OOO. Further, again, along
York Street they built an eight-storey warehouse for
the Singer Manufacturing Company, almost opposite
the markets, the height to the parapet being 102 feet.
In Clarence Street they constructed for Gollin & Co.
L d., at a cost of £IO,OOO, a six-storey building, with a
stone front of Romanesque design. The floor span is 34
feet, requiring very large steel girders. In Kent Street
four stores were erected at a cost of £15,000. The
/V w 7
foundations had to be excavated 25 feet deep in order
to get a rock bottom, and after going down some dis-
tance a six-feet post and rail fence was discovered,
showing the extent to which some parts of Sydney
have been filled in. Three more stores were built on
the opposite side of Kent Street, at a cost of £B,OOO,
with hydraulic elevators reaching up the five storeys
in height. A bulk store for Briscoe & Co. Ltd. was
built on made ground at Blackwattle Swamp, at a
cost of £5,000, the foundation in parts going 28 feet
down to the rock, in ord r to enable the enormous
weight, 7 cwt. to the foot, to be carried safely. At the
corner of George and King Streets Waters & Co. Ltd.
carry on a fashionable drapery business, the
building, five storeys high, having a flat asphalt
roof. The contractors who carried out this work lor
Robertson & Marks obtained permission to use the
basement of the Town Hall, and here set out on the
floor full size the whole frontage to both streets, from
which they made a template giving the exact curves
off which the steel girders were built, and the
curved glass bent. The design of this building is in
the Queen Anne style, in harmony with the first section
of the building erected some years previous by
M. B. Halligan. Almost next door to Waters’ is
Sargent’s building, five storeys high, with a flat asphalt
roof. Owing to the great depth of the rock the
building is carried on concrete piers, resting on the
rock, and spanned by concrete arches to carry the
walls over. The land previous to building was bought
at £825 per foot. Payten Chambers, at the corner of
George and Bridge Streets, on the site of an hotel, is
a seven-storey building, in the Queen Anne style.
Gibbs’ Chambers, in Moore Street, is a seven-storey
building, on part of the old Starkey Estate. Moffitt
Chambers, in Elizabeth Street, is a six-storey building,
fitted with hot and cold water and foot taps to eacn
room.
Stores for J. Richardson & Co. Ltd., at Armidale,
are situated on one of the best sites in the town, at the
corner of Beardy and Dangar Streets, to which there is
286 feet frontage. The building is probably one of
the largest stores in the State. It is two storeys high,
with a tower at the street corner and a large lantern
light in the centre, The hydraulic elevator is
unusual in country towns. Premises for J. H.
Mate & Co. Ltd., at Albury, are built from designs by
Robertson & Marks as the result of a public competi-
tion. These stores, which are amongst the largest in
New South Wales, have 300 feet frontage at the corner
of Dean and Kiewa Streets.
In addition to these selected buildings, Robertson
and Marks have erected a great number of private
residences of good class, at Killara, Bellevue Hill,
and other parts ; and, as honorary architects to the
Sydney Hospital, they have carried out many
additions, including the new operating theatre, which
is credited as being one of the most complete in exist-
ence. Probably, however, the most difficult work ever
Cottage Residence.—A. H. Hale, Architect.
undertaken by this firm was the remodelling of the
head office of the Bank of New South Wales, which
has been recently done at a cost of about £20,000.
The floor of the back part of the banking chamber
has been lowered, heavy masonry piers removed and
steel stanchions substituted without interfering with
the ordinary business of the bank, and without accident.
The banking chamber is now about 160 feet by 70 feet,
and as fine an apartment of its class as any in the
world.
Any historical description of the architecture of
New South Wales lends itself to the connection that it
is really a history of the architectural developments of
Sydney. For this cogent reason, that, out of a total
State population of about one-and-a-half million, about
half a million, or one-third of the entire population,
now reside in Sydney, where at one time the entire
population dwelt. Australia has supplied more than


one paradox, but none so unusual as the existence of
two cities, Sydney and Melbourne, which, after one
hundred years of settlement, still contain an urban
population nearly as large as the rural population, on
which these cities are supposed to live. And, stranger
still, without apparent injury to the progress of the
State.
effects. The thirty brickyards in the metropolitan
area turn out, at low prices, bricks which are elsewhere
unsurpassed ; and the facilities for water carriage,
afforded by the harbour, induce importations of timber,
slates, iron, and other materials, in addition to that
excellent supply which is locally produced
The architectural skill of Francis Howard Green-
Grand Central Coffee Palace. — C. A. Harding, Architect.
Compared with cities of its size in older countries
Sydney, viewed architecturally, is above the average.
The magnificent stone, everywhere available, has
begotten a type of masonry which is peculiar to Sydney,
and enabled local architects to accomplish unusual
way, Edmund Thomas Blacket. and W. W. Warded
have left examples and influences which will never die,
and which, if moderately encouraged, will ensure a
stamp of architecture, when a national style is evolved,
that will be a credit to Australia and its people.


Mr. CYRIL BLACKET, Presi-
dent of the Institute of Archi-
tects of New South Wales, is the
third son of the late Edmund
Thomas Blacket, and was born on
October 26, 1857, at Glebe Point,
Sydney, New South Wales; his
father having a few years before his
son’s birth resigned his position as
Colonial Architect in order to design
the Sydney University, with which
his name will always be associated.
The president was educated at
Eglinton House School, at Glebe
Point, under the Rev. John Pen-
drill, M.A. ; and entered his father’s
office as architectural pupil in De-
cember, 1872, in premises situated
on the site of the present Mutual
Life of New York Buildings. Pitt
Street was in those days vastly
different to what it is now, and
Mort’s buildings, as the premises
were called, overlooked Mort’s Pas-
sage, a thoroughfare between Pitt
and George Streets. The sight of
bullock teams in Moore’s yard, at
the back of the Angel Hotel, was
not uncommon ; whilst sewerage,
water supply, and sanitary arrange-
ments of the time were of the most
primitive type. In 1876 the bud-
ding architect received his first
commission for building a cottage
at Northwood, on the Lane Cove
River, which is still occupied by the
original owner, Mrs. Neave. This
was followed by his winning two
competitions, for hospitals at Wal-
gett and Wilcannia, and several
others. In those days five years’
service in the volunteer force en-
titled the soldier to a land order,
which in this case was turned into
cash, enabling the architectural as-
pirant to carry out his desire for a
trip round the world. This was
begun in January, 1879, when he
left for England in the ship ‘ ‘ La
Hogue,” arriving in May following.
After visiting various parts of the
British Isles and Europe, Mr. Blacket
returned to Australia, via Canada
and America, in May, 1880. Whilst
in England he passed the necessary
examination for admission as an
Associate of the Royal Institute of
British Architects; his examiners
being Professor Barry and Mr.
Charles Barry, brothers of the late
Anglican Bishop of Sydney, and
Mr. G. Somers Clarke, now architect
to St. Paul’s Cathedral, London.
On arriving in Sydney he applied in
response to an advertisement, and
was appointed lecturer on archi-
tecture at the Sydney School of
Arts, where he delivered a course
of lectures, which were published in
Melbourne. In 1880 Mr. Blacket
married Miss Christian J. Home,
third daughter of the late J. Sterling
Home, a solicitor in Bathurst. He
has four children, —one daughter and
three sons. The same year he
joined his father as partner in the
firm of Blacket & Son ; which, dur-
ing three years, carried out a great
number of buildings, many being
churches for the Church of England.
The firm was ended by the sudden
death, on February 9, 1883, of the
senior partner. During the cur-
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. CYRIL BRACKET.
rency of this partnership the senate
of the University of Sydney had
publicly advertised for a lecturer on
architecture, and Mr. Cyril Blacket
was appointed out of a great many
applicants. This position he held
for some years, having resigned from
the School of Arts and also his
association with the R.1.8.A. On
the death of his father, Mr. Blacket
being in poor health and finding the
business more than he could man-
age, took in his eldest brother,
Arthur, as junior partner in the
firm of Messrs. Blacket Bros. This
firm was very successful, but it ended
at the close of 1885, owing to the
withdrawal of Mr. Cyril Blacket,
whose health had completely broker
down through the continuous strain
of business. During the currency
of Messrs. Blacket Bros, the position
of diocesan building surveyors was
filled by them, and is still retained
by Mr. Blacket. On relinquishing
his practice in Sydney, Mr. Blacket
joined Captain Bayly in a venture
on the South Coast ; taking up
selections at St. George’s Basin, a
beautiful sheet of water a few
miles from Jervis Bay. They pur-
chased a light-draught steamer, sur-
veyed and marked the entrance to
the lake, bought all the timber
within some miles, and made all
preparations for opening up a large
timber trade in a new locality. In
fact, it may be confidently said that
they made the district ; as before
Messrs. Blacket & Bayly’s advent
it consisted of a handful of fisher-
men. Very soon they had roads
made, a brick-yard was initiated,
houses were built, selections taken
up, and a large accommodation house
opened for the convenience of tour-
ists. Unfortunately, various diffi-
culties beset the vessels employed
in their timber trade, culminating in
a collision occasioning a lawsuit,
which the firm was obliged to con-
test before it was dissolved, on
account of Captain Bayly’s return
to England. About this time Mr.
Blacket opened an office in Nowra,
where for some years, in addition
to a lucrative architect’s practice,
he dabbled largely in mining and
land ; holding the managership of
several goldmines, as also of a
building society and a land com-
pany, all at the same time. But,
owing to bad seasons, he was forced
to begin again at the bottom of the
ladder, and started to practise his
profession, with but poor results for
some time. However, in October,
1894, he was selected for the posi-
tion of lecturer on architecture at
the Sydney Technical College ; his
appointment being brought about
by letters to the Minister for Edu-
cation signed by thirteen principal
architects and a similar number of
leading builders of Sydney. In 1896
he was appointed a valuator under
the Real Property Act. In 1903 he
was elected president of the Institute
of Architects ; and in 1904 wuis
chosen to fill the mayoral chair of
Lane Cove Borough, all of which
positions he still holds. Hard-woik


ing, thoroughly conscientious, one
who honestly tries to do the best
for those he serves, Mr. Blacket is
a man of strong personality, excit-
able temperament and great origi-
nality of thought ; possessing many
friends and few enemies. He is
very musical, fond of boating, and
is a great lover of horses. He has
acted as deputy-organist at many
of the big city churches, amongst
others, St. Andrew’s Cathedral,
where for many months he acted
for his friend and master, the late
Montagu Younger. Were the subject
of our biography not still an active
member in the professional world,
it might be possible to express
opinions as to the use he has made
of so varied a career. But at least
this conclusion is obvious : that Mr.
Blacket has had much training in
the broadest and widest sense of
the word, from an architectural point
of view. Probably few architects
have been brought more into contact
with their fellow-creatures, and few
indeed have filled more positions
open to this profession than Mr.
Cyril Blacket, president of the Insti-
tute of Architects of New South
Wales.
Mr. JOHN KIRKPATRICK is
one of the best-known and most
successful architects in this State.
Pie is a native of New South Wales,
and at the age of 17 was articled
to Mr. Edmund Thomas Blacket,
at one time Government Architect
in this State, who designed St.
Andrew’s Cathedral and the Uni-
versity buildings. During the later
period of Mr. Kirkpatrick’s pupilage
of Mr. Blacket he was successful
in several competitions. Indeed,
he was successful in winning the
three first competitions he ever
sent in designs for. The first was
for a hospital at Clermont, Queens-
land, the second for St. James’
Roman Catholic Church, Forest
Lodge, and the third for the Anglican
Church at Grenfell. Mr. Kirkpatrick
commenced private practice as an
architect >at the early age of 22,
and has been in practice ever since.
During his career, which may fairly
be described as brilliant, he has been
in all the competitions of any magni-
tude, both in Sydney and the State.
He holds the unique record of never
having failed in any first-class com-
petition, and of being awarded first
prize for nearly every design which
he has submitted in competition.
Among the more notable of these
was the design for the State House.
Out of some fifty designs sent in, Mr.
Kirkpatrick’s secured first prize, and
had the work been proceeded with,
he had letters from Sir Henry
Parkes appointing him the architect.
Another competition was the Walker
Hospital. This was advertised all
over the world, and again Mr. Kirk-
patrick was awarded first prize. For
the Australian Club six of the
principal city architects were in-
vited to submit designs, and Mr.
Kirkpati ick’s was accepted. In con-
nection with the Mutual Life of
New York, he competed against
the principal architects of Aus-
tralia, and received first prize,
afterwards carrying out the building
in a manner which received high
Kerry & Co.
MR. J. KIRKPATRICK.
commendation from the proprietors
and the public. The competition
for the Kenmore Asylum building
was judged finally by an English
expert in London, who awarded Mr.
Kirkpatrick first place. The Govern-
ment, to the great disappointment
of the architect, carried that work
out themselves; but as it was after-
wards found that Mr. Kirkpatrick’s
designs had been followed the board
of arbitration appointed to look into
the matter awarded him £*2,000 com-
pensation. The Sydney Hospital
was also designed by him, and
although the building was actually
commenced by the late Mr. Rowe
and portion built by that gentleman,
Mr. Kirkpatrick was engaged some
years later by Sir George Dibbs,
then Premier of New South Wales—
the appointment being endorsed by
Act of Parliament —to remodel and
complete the building. Mr. Kirk-
patrick has also carried out most of
the works at the Sydney Cricket
Ground, in designing and super-
vising four of the principal pavilions,
including the Ladies’ Stand, which
was the first double-decked struc-
ture of its character in Australia.
Apart from public buildings, he
has built some of the finest pri-
vate residences around Sydney,
notably Woollahra House, which
cost £*40,000, and Mr. Walter Hall’s
residence, said to be, as regards its
interior features, one of the finest
houses in Australia. Besides he has
built many business warehouses and
stores in the city. When it was
decided by the Federal Government
to appoint a Royal Commission to
inquire into and report on the several
proposed capital sites, Mr. Kirk-
patrick was selected as the New
South Wales representative, and had
the further honour of being selected
president by the other members of
the Commission—Messrs. Stanley,
Stewart and Howitt —representing
respectively Queensland, South Aus-
tralia and Victoria. The Commis-
sion’s report was recognised to have
evidenced the most thorough re-
search, and was the subject of the
highest encomiums from Sir Edmund
Barton and the other Federal Min-
isters. It was a most comprehensive
and impartial document ; and all the
facts for and against each site were
clearly and concisely arranged, and
in such a manner as to effectually
disarm any hostile criticism from
those interested in the selection of
any particular area, and the public
press, both metropolitan and country,
was unanimous in its praise.
Messrs. ROBERTSON & MARKS,
whose chambers are situated in the
Mutual Life Insurance Company of
New York Buildings, Pitt Street and
Martin Place, Sydney, is a long-
established fi in of Architects, con-
sisting of Messrs. George Birrell
Robertson and Theodore John
Marks, both of high professional
repute, and to whom the colony
generally stands indebted for
many elegant and beautiful build-
ings. The highest beauty has
been defined by an ancient
philosopher as that which com-
mands the greatest amount of
utility, and it is in this sense that


the term “ beautiful ” has beep, em-
ployed. Mr . ROBERTSON was bom
at Dundee, Scotland, in 1850. Most
of his youth was spent in Edinburgh,
where he received his education,
first at Moray House, the Free
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. G. B. ROBERTSON.
Church Normal School, and after-
wards at Dr. Begg’s school. He
then entered as pupil the office of
Mr. J. W. Balmain, civil engineer
and surveyor, afterwards serving
some time with a large contracting
firm. Coming to Sydney in 1880
Falk & Co.
MR. T. J. MARKS.
he became connected with Messrs.
Mansfield Bros., architects, where
he continued twelve years ; four of
these as draughtsman and the re-
maining ones as managing clerk.
In 1892, with Mr. T. J. Marks, he
commenced practice as Robertson
and Marks, architects, of Sydney.
Mr. MARKS, born 1865 near Kiama,
New South Wales, is the son of the
late Hon. John Marks, M.L.C.
Educated at Norton’s school,
Double Bay, and the Sydney Gram-
mar School, he entered the office of
Mansfield Bros, as pupil, and after
five years’ apprenticeship travelled
for two years over Britain, the Con-
tinent and America. Upon his re-
turn to Sydney he commenced the
practice of his profession with Mr.
G. B. Robertson as afore-mentioned.
Architecture in Sydney claims
many students ; but amongst their
number it has claimed none more
devout and constant than Mr.
MARK RIGDEN, son of the late
Mr. Mark Rigden, of Ashfield, Kent,
England. Young Rigden was born
and educated at Ashford. His entry
into business life was made through
the medium of the South-eastern
Railway Company, in the old
country, with which concern many
opportunities were afforded to gain
wide experience. Migrating in the
course of time to the land of the
Southern Cross, Mr. Mark Rigden
commenced to practise as an
architect and civil engineer in
Sydney about sixteen years ago.
By his great energy and close
application to business he soon
began to gather around him a good
connection. One of the many factors
in Mr. Rigden’s success is due to the
early training he received in the
skill and knowledge of applied me-
chanics and engineering in general,
having served in many capaci-
ties in large engineering works and
constructions ; he was also manager
for eight years to one of our largest
Sydney contractors before embark-
ing on his own professional career.
Prominent among the best works
that have passed through Mr. Rig-
den’s hands in Sydney may be
mentioned the large stationery and
printing establishment of Mr. W. E-
Smith, in Bridge Street. This build-
ing he won in public competition
with many of our Sydney architects,
and his work was so appreciated
that its re-erection was also en-
trusted to Mr. Rigden after the
disastrous fire of 1900. The Worker
newspaper office, in Bathurst .Street,
is another structure due to his
skill; also the Crescent Hotel, in
George .Street, Haymarket. This last
building originally was a theatre,
and converted into its present use
after great care and expense. The
tiling in the dining-room and vesti-
bule may be said to be one of the
constructive sights in Sydney ; no-
thing of its kind had ever before
been attempted in the southern
hemisphere. Mr. Rigden quite re-
cently superintended the erection
of Messrs. Barnard & Co.’s premises,
in Castlereagh Street, claimed to be
the largest and most modern and
convenient auctioneer’s rooms in
this city. In domestic architecture
Mr. Rigden’s works stand out pro-
minent in most of our beautiful
MR. M. RIGDER.
suburbs. Outside his profession,
travelling is perhaps his prin-
cipal hobby. He has done the
round journey from Sydney to
England on three occasions, has
toured all over Europe, and
travelled through South Africa,
Egypt and Ceylon. Amongst the
different outdoor pastimes, cricket
is the game which has always taken
up most of his attention.
Mr. JAMES NANGLE, Fellow of
Institute of Architects of New South
Wales, and Lecturer-in-charge of
the Department of Architecture,
Sydney Technical College, to which
position he was appointed in Feb-
ruary, 1905, is a native of Sydney,
and has practised as an architect


since 1890. In the years inter-
vening he has made a reputation
for himself as a specialist in the
profession, and as the author of
various articles which have appeared
in the Building, Engineering and
Mining Journal. For the use of
students his pamphlets on 1 ‘ Aus-
tralian Building Practice” embodies
instruction and information that
cannot fail to furnish budding mem-
bers of the profession with know-
ledge, which otherwise could only
be gained after years of experience,
and without which they can never
become experts in the profession.
It has now been adopted by the
Technical College as a text-book for
students. Mr. Nangle has, more-
over, made a speciality of the study
of the various properties of building
materials, and as the author of
many original papers on ‘ ‘ Building
Materials ’ ’ for different societies
in New South Wales. Under his
supervision, and from his plans
several convents and public build-
ings have been erected ; none of
these, however, has attracted se
much attention as the eight-storey
building at the intersection of Pitt
and George Streets, erected for
Marcus Clark & Co. Ltd. The
effect is unusual and good, a combi-
MR. J. NANGLE.
nation difficult to accomplish. The
building, which takes the place of
the old police station, is so lofty as
to overlook the finial in the spire of
Christ Church adjoining, and which,
since its erection, has been a land-
mark, visible from almost any part
of the city.
Mr. MAURICE BERNARD
HALLIGAN is the offspring of a
happy union in the early fifties
between Gerald Hailigan, a promi-
nent civil servant in his day, and
Miss Mary Harnett. Intended by
his parents to make his mark —
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. M. B. HALLIGAN.
which it is almost superfluous to say
he has done, and that not lightly
either as an architect in this
city, after being given an education
at once sound and practical at
Calder House, Sydney, he became
articled to Mr. G. A. Morell, and
continued with him and with the
firm of Messrs. Morell & Kemp until
the senior partner’s death in 1888.
Then Mr. Halligan put in the foun-
dation of a practice which has
grown like the proverbial mustard
tree, evidences of its expansion
being traceable in every portion
almost of the metropolitan district
and surrounding country. The
Golf Club’s headquarters at
Rose Bay ; the first section of
Waters’ shop, in King Street ;
Tooth’s malting house, at Mitta-
gong ; the 1.0.0. F. Hall in Elizabeth
Street, are shapely structures, en-
hancing the reputation of Sydney as
an attractive city, all of which were
erected from his designs. The Surrey
Hotel and the Swiss Studios, in King
Street ; Bligh , Chambers, in Bligh
Street, “ Cromer ” residential cham-
bers in Phillip Street, and Messrs.
D. Cohen & Co.’s warehouse at New-
castle are other striking examples
of his deftly designed work ; whilst
for some years past a good propor-
tion of the best suburban home-
steads has been turned out by his
hand, Woollahra alone showing quite
a coterie of charming residences
constructed from his plans. In ad-
dition, Mr. Halligan may be said to
have enjoyed during the past few
years quite a monopoly of our local
hotel work; and, taken all through
Australia, where are there to be
found more handsome hostelries
than in Sydney? The remodelling
of Petty’s Hotel —over whicn some
£12,000 was expended—is a good
example of how an old-fashioned,
dilapidated structure can in clever
hands be made pre-eminent in com-
fort, convenience and elegance.
The few opportunities Mr. Halligan
can enjoy under the pressure of his
busy life are devoted to cricket and
golf. In April, 1896, he was mar-
ried, at All Saints’ Church, Wool-
lahra, to Miss Grace Agnes Suttor,
daughter of the late Hon. W. H.
Suttor.
Mr. R. G. HOWARD JOSKRAND
is a native of Worcester, England,
and the eldest son of the late Mr.
Richard Joseland, wine merchant
and brewer of that city. He was
born in the year iB6O, educated in
MR. R. G. H. JOSELAND.
private schools in England, and
articled to the firm of Messrs.
Haddon Bros., architects and sur-
veyors, of Malvern and Hereford.
Having completed his articles, he
went to London in 1881, when he
entered the office of Mr. Preedy, and
spent nine months on church re


storation work. He next served for
five years as chief architectural
assistant to Mr. G. T. Robinson,
F.S.A., architect and art director to
the firm of Messrs. G. Trollope and
Sons, of London. It was whilst in
this position that he gained experi-
ence in design of the accessories of
architecture, such as mosaics, furni-
ture, stained glass and metal work,
&c., which served him in good stead
on his subsequent arrival in Aus-
tralia. At home he spent most of
his spare time sketching old build-
ings and at the South Kensington
Museum. In 1886 his health broke
down through over-work and com-
pelled him to take a trip to New
Zealand. On arrival there he at
once obtained a position on the
Auckland railways, and after six
months visited Sydney and Mel-
bourne, and on the day of his
arrival at the latter place was again
in harness. The Melbourne climate
not suiting him, he spent six months
on a station in the Riverina,
thence returned to Auckland,
a few months later settling
in Sydney. In competition work
he met, among other leading archi-
tects, Mr. W. L. Vernon, F.R.1.8.A.,
with whom he subsequently was
appointed joint architect on certain
works, and eventually took over
Mr. Vernon’s practice on his being
appointed Government Architect in
1890. Among his works with Mr.
Vernon were the designing of the
Kensington and Middle Harbour
estates, of 1,000 acres each, and
City Bank, Sussex .Street. His chief
city works have been the remodel-
ling of Moore’s Wharf buildings,
Great Southern Hotel, Messrs. F.
Lassetter’s additions and George
Street premises, Messrs. J. Inglis’
warehouses, Sargood’s, Gardiner’s,
and many smaller buildings. Ad-
ditions to St. Paul’s and first por-
tion of St. Andrew’s, Wahroonga,
and Presbyterian Church Manse,
Crow’s Nest, North Sydney, were
also carried out from his plan. Mr.
Joseland’s chief practice, however,
has been domestic work, principally
on the north side of the harbour ;
the Berry Estate, Wahroonga, having
many examples of his work. He
now holds the position of architect
to the Daily Telegraph, Royal North
Sydney Hospital, Berry Estate,
Toohey’s Brewery. Two years ago
he took into partnership Mr. H. V.
Vernon, a former pupil, and son of
the Government Architect. Mr.
Joseland was President of the
Sydney Architectural Association,
1894. I' l private life Mr. Jose-
land has given much time to social
matters, having been for some years
Hon. Secretary to the Progress
Association and the Musical Society
of Wahroonga, also a member of the
Sydney Liedertafel and church
choirs. He is a keen angler, acting
as Hon. Secretary to the Rod-fishers’
Society, N.S.W., and was among
the first to introduce fly-fishing on
the trout rivers of the State.
Messrs. NIXON & ADAM have
been associated for many years in
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. W. NIXON.
partnership. They have been suc-
cessful in several public compe-
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. J. S ADAM.
titions, winning the premiums and
carrying out the work for St. Cle-
ment’s Church of England, Mos-
man, the Southern branch of the
Savings Bank of New South Wales,
the Gundagai Hospital, St. An-
drew’s Presbyterian Church, Single-
ton, as well as several smaller mat-
ters. Amongst other important
works of this firm are the recent
additions to St. Andrew’s College,
within the University ; the new resi-
dence for the Principal of St.
Andrew’s College ; St. Philip’s
Presbyterian Church, Newcastle;
remodelling St. George’s Hall,
Newtown; St. Aidan’s Church (C.E.),
Exeter ; extensive remodelling of
head office of Savings Bank of New
South Wales, including large base-
ments and strongrooms, and new
premises for the Savings Bank,
Newcastle ; new wing to Presby-
terian Ladies’ College, Croydon ;
churches at Mill Hill, Waverley,
Yass and Wentworth Falls, and
many fine residences in the suburbs
aid country —mills, stores, &c.
Both are Fellows of the Institute
of Architects, New South Wales.
Mr. CHARLES A. HARDING,
Architect, of Royal Exchange
Building, was educated and trained
professionally in England, arriving
in Sydney in 1876. After spending
twelve months up country studying
the resources of the colony, and two
years as draughtsman in the offices
of leading architects, in 1880 he was
appointed clerk of works over the
erection of the new Macquarie Street
hospital. He had previously pre-
pared the working drawings for that
building in the office of the late
Thomas Rowe, Esq., and held the
position until the completion of the
work in January, 1884. Mr. Hard-
ing then commenced practice as an
architect and building surveyor in
Sydney, being very successful in his
profession. He erected the Grand
Central Coffee Palace, Clarence
Street ; the Victoria Arcade, Eliza-
beth and Castlereagh Streets ; the
aquariums at Manly and Bondi, the
Kiama hospital, the Balmain skat-
ing rink, and numerous other public
and private buildings. In Decem-
ber, 1890, he accepted a govern-
ment appointment as architect to
the Harbours and Rivers branch of
the Public Works Department under


Mr. Cecil W. Darley, the engineer-in-
chief. This position Mr. Harding
held until March, 1904, having
charge of the designing and erection
of numerous important buildings,
among which were four new light-
houses ; workshops, stores, offices,
residences, &c., on Garden Island ;
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney .
MR. C. A. HARDING.
extensive magazine and other build-
ings on Spectacle Island ; workshops,
&c., at Cockatoo Island and New-
castle ; twelve large cargo stores on
the various wharves; new buildings
at the pilot stations, Macleay River,
Clarence River and Manning River ;
new wing for cells, kitchen buildings
and ten cottages for married warders
at Trial Bay Prison ; also the general
repairs to all lighthouses and pilot
stations on the coast. The total esti-
mated value of the buildings under
his charge being £326,000. He fur-
ther had charge of the designing of
the stone approaches to the new
Pyrmont bridge, the pavilion on the
Centennial Park reservoir, and other
structures for the assistance of the
engineering staff. In March, 1904,
Mr. Harding left the Government
service and recommenced private
practice as an architect and building
surveyor.
Mr. J. BUR CHAM CRAMP
(gold medallist, Institute of Archi-
tects, New South Wales) was born
at vSydney, November 30, 1868, and
educated at Christ Church (Church
of England) schools, Pitt Street,
winning the Mort scholarship in
1882. Upon entering professional
life he joined Mr. H. C. Kent,
architect, as articled pupil in 1883,
and served a term of four years in
his office, continuing there a further
period of eleven years ; so that he
had the benefit of a valuable train-
ing of fifteen years before com-
mencing private practice. During
this experience, besides a busy office
life, he attended the Architectural
Association’s University and Tech-
nical College classes in the evenings,
and, in addition, received private
instruction in design and colouring.
In the year 1888-9 he was
awarded gold medal of the Institute
of Architects, New South Wales, for
architectural work done at the
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. J. B. CRAMP.
rooms of the Institute, and was also
a prize-winner at the Sydney Archi-
tectural Association in the class of
construction. During his leng-
thened period with Mr. Kent Mr.
Clamp acquired considerable experi-
ence, both in office and practical
work, being entrusted with the
responsibility of the supervision of
many of the largest and most im-
portant factory buildings, wool
warehouses, &c., in the city. And,
although only six years in private
practice, he now enjoys one of the
leading connections in the State.
Amongst other successful compe-
titions standing to Mr. Clamp’s
credit may be mentioned the St.
James’ Hall, Phillip Street, Sydney,
and the Victoria Hall, Manly ; whilst
during the term he has been pur-
suing his profession privately he
has been entrusted with the design-
ing and superintendence of many
ecclesiastical buildings, warehouses,
shops, &c., the principal buildings
being the new schools, rectory and
vestries, also the restoration of
church in connection with the
parish of Christ Church, St. Lau-
rence, Sydney; St. James’ Hall,
Phillip Street, Sydney; additions
to Winchcombe, Carson & Co.
Ltd.’s warehouse, Pyrmont ; ware-
house, Clarence Street, Sydney, for
James Stedman Ltd. ; hospital and
nurses’ home, “ Lister,” Darling -
hurst; sundry works St. James’
Church, King Street, with number-
less handsome villas, cottage resi-
dences, &c., which strikingly grace
Manly, Mosman, North Sydney and
other marine suburbs.
Born in Aberdeenshire, Scotland,
in the year 1866, educated at a
grammar school in the north of
Scotland, and receiving a profes-
fessional training in the city of
Aberdeen, after having attended
evening classes on architecture,
Mr. GEORGE LESLIE GRANT.
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney
MR. G. L. GRANT.
Architect, 14 Castlereagh Street,
started life by entering Garvey and
Sons’ steam joinery works (the
largest in. the north of Scotland,
with a view of gaining practical
experience in the several branches
connected with the building trades


which are so essential to the calling
of an architect. Having devoted
twelve months in the above estab-
lishment, he was then articled to
Messrs. King & Wilson, architects,
of the same city, during which time
he attended evening classes at Tech-
nical College on the following sub-
jects combined with architecture,
viz., mechanical, civil, electrical,
and flour-mills engineering. Later on
he entered into various large works
with the view of gaining practical
experience in the various branches
before mentioned —a few months
in each branch. In 1890 he came
to Australia, and, after a brief stay
in Sydney, went to live with his
brother in Dubbo, not following the
calling of his profession for a period
of two years. After this time he
opened practice in the Western
district, with Wellington as centre,
commanding a connection ranging
from Orange to Bourke and Bre-
warrina. In 1899 he returned to
Sydney and joined E. R. Weitzel,
Esq., one of Sydney’s well-known
able architects, as a partner, and
carried on business in the name and
style of Grant & Weitzel until 1901,
when Mr. Weitzel was compelled
to retire on account of failing
health, since which time Mr. Grant
has carried on business on his own
account. He has had a wide home
and colonial experience in all
branches of his profession, having
been associated with the carrying
out of many important works at
home and in and around Sydney.
These include the Garrick (now
Tivoli) Theatre, Sydney ; municipal
buildings, Moree ; grandstand and
pavilion, Wellington show grounds
(the latter premiated design in com-
petition) ; Catholic Apostolic Church,
Redfern ; Hall Concordia, Elizabeth
Street ; bank buildings and various
blocks of business premises ; Spit
Junction, Mosman; and many hand-
some residential properties in Mos-
man and on the North Shore line ;
residence of George Crichton Smith,
Esq., solicitor, Wahroonga ; resi-
dence of T. H. Quirk, Esq., C. A.
Pollard, Esq., Henry Fisher, Esq.,
and W. E. Storm, Esq., Mosman;
and residence of S. J. Head, Esq.,
Pymble. Mr. Grant’s principal
ambition in domestic architecture
in Australia has been to cifltivate
originality of design, study of cli-
matic conditions and necessities, to-
gether with domestic comforts. He
has been residing at Mosman for the
last six years, takes a keen interest
in all local matters, is a stanch
liberal, studies politics very closely,
and is a member of the Presbyterian
Church.
Mr. THOMAS MELBOURNE
SMITH, Architect, is the second
surviving son of the late James
Smith, of Schrublands, Marrick-
ville, who was for many years con-
nected with the well-known firm
of Messrs. Goodlet & Smith Ltd.
Born at Newtown, Sydney, in the
year 1873, he received his scholastic
training at Cooerwull Academy.
Bowenfels. After leaving school he
Falk & Co.
MR. T. M. SMITH.
decided to gain Continental experi-
ence by a trip through Europe.
After twelve months spent in this
pleasant manner, he returned to
New South Wales, and entered the
office of Mr. Harry Kent, architect,
of Sydney, as articled pupil. After
serving his articles he remained in
the same office as draughtsman
until 1899, when he, in partnership
with Mr. J. B. Clamp, started to
practise in offices situated in Scott’s
Chambers, Pitt Street, Sydney.
However, in 1901 the partnership
was dissolved, and from that time
Mr. Smith has carried on the prac-
tice of his profession in the same
premises. ' In adopting this pro-
fession Mr. Smith but followed in
the footsteps, not only of his father,
but also that of his grandfather,
Mr. John Purves Smith, of War-
wick, Scotland, who was an architect
practising in Melrose, and who,
apart from carrying out many im-
portant public works, made exten-
sive additions and alterations to
Abbotsford, the historic seat of
Sir Walter Scott. Letters in con-
nection with which in Sir Walter
Scott’s own handwriting are at the
present time in possession of our
subject. Mr. Smith’s father dis-
continued practising in his pro-
fession upon arrival in the colo-
nies. Since starting to practise Mr.
Smith prepared and supervised
numerous works both in Sydney and
suburbs, besides a number in several
important provincial towns. And
among others a very large private
residence on the Boulevard, Strath-
field, for Francis Crago, Esq. ; busi-
ness premises, situated in George
Street, Sydney, erected for the
trustees in the estate of the late
Joseph Wyatt, of North Sydney, and
which are at present occupied by
Messrs. Harrington & Co. Ltd.,
photographic merchants. Mr. Smith
has resided in Marrickville for a
period of twenty-eight years. He is
lion, architect to the Marrickville
Cottage Hospital, and is also an
Associate of the New South Wales
Institute of Architects. Mr. Smith
is a prominent member of the New
South Wales Gun Club, and during
the past four years has supervised
many "works in connection therewith.
Mr. WALTER NEWMAN, Archi-
tect, F.1.A., Norwich Chambers,
Hunter Street, is a native of Sydney,
and was educated at St. James’
School. Subsequently he attended
Fort Street Model School, where he
completed his scholastic training.
His articles were entered into during
1879, and at their termination he
judiciously extended his experience
by a twelve months’ sketching tour
through Great Britain and France ;
returning to Sydney after this and
joining the office of Messrs. Sulman
and Power. Subsequently Mr. New-
man absented himself from the
colonies for about four years. Dur-
ing two of these he devoted his
attention to exhibition building work
and steel skeleton construction in
America, the remainder of the time
being occupied in studying his pro-
fession in the principal centres of


England. In 1896 he settled once
more in Sydney and commenced the
practice of his profession at his
present address. A long list of
architectural achievements, far too
long for mention in this limited
space, stands to Mr. Newman’s
credit ; notable amongst the more
extensive works being the spacious
and well-set business premises of
Messrs. Grace Bros., Broadway,
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. W. NEWMAN.
Glebe, and the wharf extension,
roomy cargo sheds and stores con-
structed for Messrs. W. Howard
.Smith & Sons, at the foot of King
Street, Sydney. He is a Fellow of
Institute of Architects of N.S.VV.
Busy year in year out, Mr. Newman
has little time to afford for recrea-
tion ; but this notwithstanding he
manages to closely identify himself
with sport in all its various sections.
A prominent Architect and Con-
sulting Engineer in the metropolis
of New South Wales, and well
known in the various centres of the
colony, is Mr. FRANCIS ERNEST
STOWE, son of the late Thomas
Stowe, millwright and engineer, of
London. Born on March 17th,
1867, educated, first, in the ‘ ‘ little
village,” and latterly in this colony
young Stowe went through a severe
course of practical training, em-
bracing engineering, building con-
struction, and office work, for a
period of twelve years before he
initiated the practice of his profes-
sion amidst the historic scenes of
Parramatta in the year 1891. Since
that time his profess 1 ’onal career can
be tersely' described as one of sub-
stantial and speedy progress. The
value of the ancient borough as a
commercial centre to the up-to-date
professional man is in inverse ratio
to the interest it attracts on senti-
mental grounds ; and it was not
long before Air. Stowe recognised
the necessity of putting in his pegs
in a more lucrative field, where his
skill would receive wider recognition.
Accordingly, when the suited mo-
ment arrived he came to Sydney,
where he soon gathered around him
in King Street, a sound connection.
For the past sixteen years he has
instructed classes on engineering at
the Sydney Technical College ; and,
latterly, the architectural depart-
ment of this important and bene-
ficial institution has been under his
control. He is the present prin-
cipal of the Sydney Marine Engi-
neers’ College, from which, under his
tuition, since 1902 candidates to
the number of 128 have been suc-
cessful in obtaining Board of Trade
certificates; and the ‘‘counter-
balance scheme,” adopted by the
Government and used at Darling
Street, Balmain, affords a good
instance of his inventive genius.
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. F. E. STOWE.
In Januaiy, 1894. Mr. Stowe was
married to Miss Margaret Lyon.
Outside his profession, he devotes
himself mainly to military matters,
holding a commission as lieutenant
in the Parramatta squadron of the
New South Wales Lancers. Rising
at the outset from the ranks to an
officer in the lancer cadets, he was
eventually promoted so a second
lieutenantship in his present corps
and then to the rank of first lieu-
tenant.
Mr. DONALD THOMAS ESPLIN,
A.1.A., of the Equitable Buildings,
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. D. T. ESPLIN.
George Street, is the youngest son
of George and Jane Esplin, of Hay,
and was born in that town on the
16th May, 1874. The rudiments of
his education were obtained at the
primary school in his birthplace,
and from thence he was sent on to
the High School, Kew, Melbourne.
His first start in life was in the
office of the late Mr. R. A. Lawson,
where he remained for three years,
afterwards going for a two years’
holiday, and finally settling down to
pastoral purstiits on Ulonga Station,
Hay, then in the occupation of his
step-father, Mr. T. F. Patterson.
Such pursuits, however, while they
served to brace up the constitution,
did not offer scope for the energy
of Mr. Esplin, who was attracted to
the city in 1894, where he was ar-
ticled to Messrs. Sulman & Power,
architects. After four years spent
in the office of this firm, he entered
the Department of Public Works,
remaining there but a short time,
when he returned to the office of
Messrs. Sulman & Power, as chief


draughtsman. This position he
afterwards abandoned to enter
into partnership with Mr. R. J.
Collins. The partnership was of
short duration, and Mr. Esplin
decided to launch out, unrestricted
and unfettered, in business for him-
self ; a step that has been attended
with satisfactory results, and given
scope for the development of the
taste and ability which such a pro-
fession demands to ensure success.
While with Messrs. Sulman & Power
Mr. Esplin attended the evening
classes at the University, at which
Mr. Sulman was lecturer, securing
a diploma for a three years’ course
in architecture; and on the Ist
May, 1901, was admitted an Associ-
ate of the Institute of Architects in
New South Wales. On the 6th
August, 1904, Mr. Esplin married
Miss Daisy Reid, the youngest
daughter of Patrick Reid, Esq., of
the National Bank, Melbourne, and
has one son.
Mr. ROSCOE JOSEPH COETJNS,
A.I.A. (N.S.W.) was born in Sydney,
7th May, 1875. Educated at the
Sydney High School, he afterwards
entered the office of Messrs. Sulman
and Power, architects, of this city.
During the time he was here he
attended the University of Sydney
and passed his third year exami-
nation in the faculty of Science,
Department of Engineering. After
serving with Messrs. Sulman and
Power some five years, he joined
Mr. Wardell, and was elected
a member of the Architectural
Association of New South Wales.
Upon leaving this office he obtained
a good deal of experience as clerk of
works on several buildings, notably
on the head office of the Australian
Gaslight Co. He next took a trip
through the principal cities of Aus-
tralia, and started the practice of
his profession in Perth. Remaining
some eighteen months in this city,
besides his architectural work, he
carried out a considerable amount of
work in connection with mining.
Returning to Sydney from West
Australia, he re-entered the office
of Messrs. Sulman & Power, and
was associated with Mr. Power in
the restoration of Messrs. Sargood’s
warehouse in Melbourne after the
great Melbourne fire, this emporium
being the largest of its kind in
Australia. He then went for a trip
to the East during the American-
Philippino war, and contributed
several articles to the Sydney and
Melbourne papers, besides photo-
graphs which he took of the actual
fighting which took place at the
time. Upon coming back to Syd-
ney he started and has up to the
present been practising his profession
as an architect in the Equitable
Buildings, George Street, Sydney.
The work associated with Mr. Col-
lins is representative of what may
be called e rather severe school,
insomuch as it resembles nature as
near as possible in the exterior,
and relies on securing effect by the
actual grouping and outlines of
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. R. J. COLLINS.
buildings, together with colour
effects of materials, leaving out
all finicky details. Mr. Collins is an
Associate of the Institute of Archi-
tects of New South Wales.
Mr. JOHN HINGESTON
BUCKERIDGE, F.1.A., J.P., born
September7,lßs7, at 86 High Street,
Oxford, England, is the grandson
of the late Charles Elliot Buckeridge,
an officer in the service of the Hon.
East India Company, and son of the
late Charles Buckeridge, Ecclesias-
tical Architect of Oxford and Eon-
don. Members of his family have
been distinguished both in the
church and army, and our subject
is a direct descendant of the main
line. He was educated at Magda-
len College School, and was for five
years (1874-79) a pupil in the office
of the late John Eoughborough
Pearson, R.A., the celebrated Eng-
lish ecclesiastical architect. Study-
ing at the Royal Academy of
Arts, Eondon, for a term of seven
years, he was also a student of the
Architectural Association, Eondon ;
during which time he took an ex-
tended tour through France, Ger-
many, Belgium and Holland. He
worked first as a draughtsman in
the architectural department of
the Eondon School Board, and was
afterwards chief assistant for six
years to the late Mr. Ernest Turner,
F.R.1.8.A., Eondon, who had one
of the most important general prac-
tices in England ; succeeding this by
a brief period of private practice in
Eondon. During this time he car-
ried out important works at Eam-
beth Palace (the official residence
of the Archbishop of Canterbury),
tb e Westminster Schools, the Canon ’ s
residence, Westminster, andtheWok-
ing Hospital. In 1886, owing to a
domestic bereavement, he decided
to “ seek fresh fields and pastures
new”; and upon the recommen-
dation of the then Archbishop of
Canterbury (Dr. Benson) and Air.
Pearson, he came out to the late
Bishop of Brisbane (Dr. Webber), to
take charge of the ecclesiastical
work of that diocese—which at that
time also included the present dio-
cese of Rockhampton, and to carry
out the building of an Anglican
cathedral at Brisbane. This latter
work was, unfortunately, however,
abandoned. Mr. Buckeridge was
appointed diocesan architect, the
office being created for him. This
position he held till 1902, and
Southern Queensland is dotted with
wooden churches to the number of
about sixty, designed and carried
out by him, besides numerotis rec-
tories and schools. The Quetta
Memorial Church, Thursday Island,
and St. Euke’s Church, Toowoomba,
and the Collins Memorial Church,
Mundoolun, may also be mentioned
as having been erected under his
experienced superintendence during
this time ; while large churches still
to be built were designed by him
for Bundaberg and Roma ; besides
the cathedral at Samarai, British
New Guinea, where, with one
exception, the whole of the
mission buildings (schools, dwellings,
&c.), are his work. In 1892 Mr.
Buckeridge removed to Sydney—


retaining a branch in Brisbane.
The most important ecclesias-
tical works entrusted to him in
the State of New South Wales are
the remodelling of the interior
of St. James’ Church, King Street,
and the preparation of designs for
Newcastle cathedral. The latter,
when carried out, will probably be
the finest example of brick Gothic
work in the southern hemisphere.
Mr. Buckeridge has not, however,
confined his attention to church
work ; the Gresham Hotel, Bris-
bane, the grandstand at the Queens-
land Turf Club’s race-ground, and
the Lady Bowen Hospital, besides
a large number of important busi-
ness premises and private dwellings,
MR. J. H. BUCKERODGE.
both in Queensland and New South
Wales, bear witness to his varied
abilities. He is a fellow of the
Institute of Architects (New South
Wales), and was one of a small
body of architects who founded the
Queensland Institute. Mr. Bucke-
ridge has twice married, his first
wife dying in London in 1886. In
1890 he married Ada Emily, only
daughter of the late Edwin Stanley,
of Gympie, Queensland, by whom
he has a family of six sons and
three daughters.
Mr JAMES WHITMORE HILL,
born and educated in Melbourne,
comes of an old English family, the
members of which for generations
have been in some form or another
connected with the erection of pub-
lic and private works. His paternal
grandfather, Mr. John Hill, of Tun-
bridge Wells, Staffordshire, was for
years an engineer in the service of
the Turkish Government, while an
uncle at the same time occupied a
like position under the Russian
Government. This position he re-
signed, in spite of tempting induce-
ments to remain, when the Crimean
war broke out, for he refused to
serve a Government at war with his
own people. Mr. John Hill, father
of the subject of this notice, at first
sought fortune in America, but upon
the discovery of gold in Australia
was caught up by the excitement of
the hour, and after a very adven-
turous voyage of eight months from
New York, landed in Victoria in the
early fifties. After a short experi-
ence upon the goldfields of Ballarat,
he found contracting a much more
lucrative occupation than gold-
mining, and between Victoria and
New Zealand rapidly accumulated a
fortune as a contractor. His son,
Mr. J. W. Hill, though offered a
very lucrative engagement upon
leaving school as an accountant, so
pressed for an architectural train-
ing that Inspector-General Findlay
found a place for him in the Public
Works Department of Victoria. A
number of large works being then
in hand, Mr. Hill had splendid
opportunities to acquire his profes-
sional knowledge, and made the
very most of them. Fortunately,
for the celebrated Black Wednesday
came in his fifth year, and, like a
number of others, he then had to
seek fresh fields. In 1881 Mr. Hill
came over to Sydney, and the fol-
lowing year began the practice of
what has since proved to be a
lucrative profession to him. Open-
ing an office in Elizabeth Street,
close to the one he now occupies,
he soon after opened a branch in
Parramatta, which quickly became
as valuable to him as the Sydney
office, and then so outpaced it that
he gave his chief attention thereto.
Although many competitors have
come and gone there, Mr. Hill’s
practice has continued solid through-
out ; indeed, he may be said to
have practically modernised the
ancient borough, both in business
and domestic architecture. His
efforts, though to this end, have not
been confined to his profession, for
there has not been a public move-
ment for the good of the town
during the past twenty years that
he has not been prominent in, and
besides having been an alderman, he
is on the Commission of the Peace.
Though paying special attention to
Parramatta, where he has resided
for twenty years, Mr. Hill has
not neglected his Sydney practice,
which continues a valuable asset to
him. Here, too, his efforts were
not confined to the profession alone,
for in federal matters he attracted
the attention of the late Sir Henry
Parkes, who on two occasions
pressed him to contest an election,
offering his powerful assistance to
secure Mr. Hill’s return. Mr. Hill’s
ambition, however, did not take
this direction, and, though in
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. J. W. HILL.
friendly contact with Sir Henry till
his death, he never sought politi-
cal distinction, much to the regret
of many friends. Two recent ex-
amples of Mr. Hill’s work arc
worthy of special notice, one a
convent for the Sisters of Mercy,
Parramatta, the first wing of which
is now completed, and the other a
mansion at Sugarloaf Bay, Middle
Harbour, which attracts the atten-
tion of all excursionists to that
arm of the bay. Mr. Hill is noted
for the excellence of his domestic
work, which forms the major part
of his practice, although over one
hundred business premises, four
theatres and public halls, and
eleven churches and convents tes-
tify to his varied professional
abilities.


Mr. J. T, MCCARTHY is a native
of Sydney. After finishing his educa-
tion at St. Ignatius’ College, River-
view, he immediately turned his
attention to the law, spending over
two years in the office of the Hon.
J. H. C arruthers, the present Pre-
mier. This profession proving dis-
tasteful, he decided to take up
architecture, and became articled to
Messrs. Backhouse & Laidley, in
whose office he completed his ap-
prenticeship. Then practical ex-
perience was obtained on some large
buildings during construction. He
eventually commenced the practice
of his profession in Walker Street,
North Sydney, in the year 1897.
After seven years spent in this
locality, owing to increase of work,
he left the northern town and
installed himself in the city, at
Gibbs’ Chambers, Moore Street,
where he still practises. A large
number of building; have been
MR. J. T. McCARTHY.
erected under hi.-, supervision in all
branches of architecture, including
churches, hospitals, business pre-
mises, factories, and private resi-
dences, the most notable being
Mount St. Margaret Hospital for
Insane, the Newcastle branch of
the Citizens’ Life Assurance Co.
Ltd., and new building, for the
Waitara Foundling Home.
Mr. J. HAROLD GILCHRIST was
in 1896 articled to Messrs. Sulman
and Power, architects, Mutual Life
Buildings, for four years; and,
passing the Sydney University ex-
amination for architects upon the
completion of his articles, he re-
mained on with the firm as draughts-
man for another nine months. Then
during a similar period he was in
charge of several large works at the
MR J. H. GILCHRIST.
Royal Agricultural Society’s grounds
Moore Park. Upon the completion
of these contracts he started in
practice on his own account at
Eldon Chambers, 92 Pitt Street,
and carried on business for about
eight months, being made during
this term an associate of the Insti-
tute of Architects of New South
Wales. The ensuing two years saw
Mr. Gilchrist in South Africa, at-
tached to the Public Works Depart-
ment, Kimberley, where he had
charge of the architectural branch
for some time. He was next asso-
ciated, as chief draughtsman, with
the firm of Messrs. Stucke & Har-
rison, architects, Bloemfontein,
Orange River Colony, Johannesburg
Capetown and Port Elizabeth for
a year and a-half ; and during this
time was frequently left in charge of
their business, carrying out and
supervising works to the extent of
£150,000. From the land of the
Kaffir Mr. Gilchrist bent his steps,
in December, 1905, towards the
United Kingdom, which he toured,
as well as ‘ ‘ doing ’ ’ the European
continent, and in May last (1906)
he returned to resume the practice
of his profession in Sydney.
Mr. ARTHUR STANTON COOK,
First-class Assistant Architect, Gov-
e:nment Architect’s Branch, Public
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. A. S. COOK.
Works Department, hails from that
“little village,’’ which is charted
on the maps as London. He was
educated at Forest Hill School,
Woodford Wells, and articled in
1872 to that well-known architect,
the late John Tarring, F.R.1.8.A.
During this term he attended lec-
tures on architecture at London
University and the art classes at
South Kensington. At the expiry
of his articles he gained experience
in the offices of the London School
Board, Messrs. T. E. Collcutt, H.
Saxon Snell, E. R. Robson, and
other architects of note. During
the years 1879-89 he was in private
practice in Furnworth’s Lane, Lon-
don, E.C.and then in 1889 he came
out to New South Wales. A year
later he received an appointment in
the Department of Public Works.
Since entering the Government ser-
vice, and up to December, 1905,
Mr. Cook has supervised the carry-
ing out of a number of large and
important works, many of them by
day labour. Amongst others, may
be mentioned the additions to the
Chief Secretary’s, the Lands and
Public Works offices, additions to
the General Post Office, the Custom
House, Government House, Govern-
ment printing office, the Fisher li-
brary, Sydney University, and the
new pavilions of the Royal Prince
Alfred Hospital.


Mr. FREDERICK TRENCHARD
SMITH, Architect, of 7b Pitt Street,
is a native of this State, having
been born in Sydney in 1867. He
received his education at the Syd-
ney Grammar School, and in 1883
entered, as a j upil, the office of
Messrs. Mansfield Bros., architects,
who have been instrumental in
training so many of our leading
professional men. Continuing in
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. F. T. SMITH.
their service after the completion
of his articles, he gained varied
experience, first as draughtsman for
three or four years ; being in touch
with the practical construction of
city buildings and also travelling
into the country in connection with
the erection of commercial banks
in various centres. Later Mr. Smith
was appointed managing clerk of
works to the firm, and in that
capacity supervised the erection of
many important buildings in the
city, notably City Mutual Life In-
surance Company’s buildings in
Bligh Street ; Martin Chambers,
Pitt and Moore Streets, and various
others. During this period he
gained also a valuable experience
in valuating and assessing, as he
was in charge, on behalf of the firm,
of the valuating of the damage done
to various buildings by the big
Moore Street fire of 1892, represent-
ing the insurance companies, and
afterwards supervising the rein-
statement of several of the build-
ings destroyed, including the
Athenaeum Club, Scott Chambers,
&c. \ few years later he com-
menced the practice of his profes-
sion on his own account, and has
since been associated witli the erec-
tion of many city and suburban
buildings. His name is closely
identified with the architectural pro-
gress of Manly, where he has been
responsible for the existence of
many fine business premises and
residences.
The firm of SHEERIN and
HENNESSY is one well known
throughout the State, Mr. JOSEPH
J. SHEERIN, J.P., being a native
of Sydney and the second son of
the late James Sheerin, builder and
contractor. His early years were
spent in and around Sydney, and,
after gaining a good sound educa-
tion, his father, in order to give
him a thorough knowledge of the
J. Hubert NEWMAN Ltd.
MR. J. J. SHEERIN.
various branches of the building
trade, placed him with Mr. William
Bishop, and for three years he was
engaged in mastering the intricacies
of building construction. A further
term was spent in gaining a prac-
tical knowledge of masonry and
brickwork, after which he entered
the office of the late John F. Hilly,
who with Mr. Edmund Blacket
enjoyed the reputation of being the
leading architects of Sydney. Leav-
ing the office of Mr. Hilly in 1871,
he joined the firm of Mansfield Bros.,
and for thirteen years held an im-
portant position with them —until he
joined Mr. Hennessy, who had been
assistant City Architect and had pre-
pared the designs for the Sydney
Town Hall. Mr. HENNESSY is
a silver medallist and Ashpital
prizeman of the Royal Institute
of British Architects, London.
Among their prominent commercial
buildings are Hordern Bros., Pitt
Street ; ten stores for Sir John See ;
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. HENNESSY.
large stores for John Connell & Co. ;
Feldheim, Gotthelf & Co. ; McMur-
trie & Co. ; Farleigh, Nettheim and
Co. ; Standard Brewery for Toohey
Ltd. ; several factories ; banking
premises in Sussex, George, Pitt
and Oxford Streets ; while the head
offices of the London Bank of Aus-
tralia were remodelled by them,
and extensive fireproof safes in
Martin Place were under their super-
vision ; the Hotel Metropole (in
conjunction with Twentyman and
Aiken) was erected by them. Of
convents and colleges a goodly
number have been in their hands,
among them being Sacred Heart
Monastery, Kensington ; St. Pat-
rick’s College, Manly; St. Joseph’s
College, Hunter’s Hill ; Holy Cross
College, Ryde ; St. Vincent’s Con-
vent ; Dominican Convent, Strath-
field ; Loretto Convent,, Norman-
hurst ; and the Ladies’ College,
Monte St. Angelo ; and Tattersall’s
( lub, Pitt Street, admitted by many
to be the finest sporting club in the
world.
426
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


Mr. ROBERT HARGREAVE
BRODRICK, Architect and City
Building Surveyor, Sydney, New
South Wales, hails from Cheshire,
England, having been born at Mac-
clesfield on July 2nd, iB6O. His
father, who wac a silk manufacturer,
spent along lifetime in Macclesfield,
England, and his son was edu-
cated in the Modern and King
Edward VI. Grammar Schools of
his native township and at Spring
Bank Academy, Over Darwen. At
the early age of sixteen the young
scholar commenced studying for his
future profession, serving indentures
with Mr. James Barlow Fraser,
F.R.1.8.A., of Leeds, York; and on
the completion of his term entered
the services of Mr. D. Urwin, Ouan-
tity Surveyor, Sunderland; and
Tesla.
MR. R. H. BRODRICK.
finally Mr. James Freeman,
F.R.1.8.A., of Bolton, Lancashire.
Upon the conclusion of this proba-
tionary period, Mr. Brodrick was
engaged on stations work for the
Hull, Barnley and West Riding
Junction Railway and Dock Com-
pany, at Hull, York. In 1883 he
came out to Sydney, and, with his
diversified old-country experience
it was only a short time before he
entered the office of the late Mr. T.
Sapsford, City Architect, as a
draughtsman. Here he remained
until 1897, when, in recognition of
his long and able services, he was
appointed by the corporation to his
present onerous position. During
this term of office Mr. Brodrick
has designed and supervised the
carrying out of numerous highly
important works ; notable amongst
these being the Pyrmont electric
generating station for the city elec-
tric lighting scheme, and the city
sub-stations in the same connection.
In 1903 Mr. Brodrick was elected
a fellow of the New South Wales
Institute of Architects.
Mr. CLARENCE BACKHOUSE
is one of the few instances in New
.South Wales where the son of an
architect has successfully adopted
the same profession. He began his
career in the office of his father, the
late Hon. Benjamin Backhouse,
M.L.C., with ’ whom he served
seven years’ articleship. He then
left Sydney for London, and
worked in various architects’ offices
in that city- Wishing to see more
of the world and to gain further
experience in his profession, Mr.
Backhouse practically tramped the
large cities of the world, starting
first with those of England, Scot-
land and Ireland, then across to the
Continent, and finally through
Canada and the United States of
America. Mr. Clarence Backhouse’s
specialism has been theatre-build-
ing, in which he has been very suc-
cessful. The Tivoli Theatre, the
Palace Theatre, the Lyceum Theatre
and Criterion Theatre, Sydney, the
Bijou Theatre, Adelaide, and de-
signs for the Melbourne Opera
House. In the skating boom of a
few years back he designed three
of the largest rinks in Sydney, one,
the Darlinghurst Hall, the largest
in Australia, would accommodate
10,000 persons. Some very large
business premises and private resi-
dences have been erected from his
designs. Among the latter may be
mentioned Mr. Harry Rickards’
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. C. BACKHOUSE.
mansion, Darling Point. Residential
buildings, Darlinghurst; residential
block of forty-four dwellings, city,
Business College, Moore Street, city,
and many private houses in all of
the suburbs have been built from
this architect’s designs.
Box, Palace Theatre, —C. Backhouse, Architect.


Messrs. MANSFIELD & SON.
whose offices are situated in Martin
Chambers, Moore Street, is one of
the oldest established firms of archi-
tects in the city, consisting of George
Allen Mansfield and Wilfred Sydney
Mansfield, and to whom the city
owes many of its beautiful build-
ings. Mr. George Allen Mansfield
is a native of New South Wales,
having been born in Sydney. His
father was the late Rev. Ralph
Mansfield, who was identified with
the early missionary enterprise in
the colony, and otherwise connected
with its progress. He it was who
founded the Australian Gaslight
Co., of which he was for many years
the secretary. Mr. G. A. Mansfield
was educated at the well-known
MR. W. MANSFIELD.
school of the late Mr. W. T. Cape,
and at the age of 17 was articled to
the late Mr. John Fred. Hilly, the
well-known architect. Mr. Mans-
held has been connected with many
of the largest building enterprises of
the capital, and his name will go
down to posterity as the architect
of Prince Alfred Hospital, the Aus-
tralia Hotel, the offices of the
Mutual Provident Society, the origi-
nal City Bank (destroyed in the
great hre of 1890), the new City
Bank recently erected in Pitt Street,
and many other large and impor-
tant structures in Sydney. In 1867
Mr. Mansfield was appointed the
architect to the Council of Educa-
tion, which was established in that
year by Act of Parliament, and this
office he held till 1880, when the
new Public Instruction Act came
into operation. He was also one of
the founders of the Mercantile Mu-
tual Insurance Company, of which
he has held the office of chairman
for over ten years. As early as
1871 he, in conjunction with others,
founded the Institute of Architects
of New South Wales, of which he
was unanimously elected the first
president, an office which he con-
tinued to hold for three consecutive
years. In 1873 he was elected a
fellow of the Royal Institute of
British Architects, being the first
gentleman of Australian birth to
attain that honour. Mr. Mansfield
was one of the members of the Royal
commission for the investigation of
the various works connected with
the fortifications of Port Jackson
and Bare Island, while for nine
years he held office as an alderman
of the borough of the Glebe, and
has also occupied a seat on the
Metropolitan Water and Sewerage
Board. Wilfred Sydney Mansfield,
son of G. A. Mansfield, was edu-
cated at the King’s School, Parra-
matta, and afterwards at the Syd-
ney Grammar School. He entered
the office of his father in 1888, and
after the expiration of his articles
became clerk of works, and later on
a partner with his father. Mr. W.
Mansfield was visiting South Africa
when the memorable war broke out,
and he at once enlisted in the Ist
Regiment of the Imperial Light
Horse and saw some twelve
months’ service in the field, he then
returned to Sydney and resumed
the practice of his profession. Dur-
ing the last three years Mr. Wilfred
Mansfield has had complete control
of the business, owing to the ill-
health of Mr. Mansfield, sen., and
during this time has carried out
many important works in the city
and suburbs, including the addi-
tional storeys to the fine stone-front
building of Messrs. David Jones
and Co.’s premises and adjoining
their drapery establishment at the
corner of George and Barrack
Streets, and many picturesque
villas around Sydney.
Mr. JAMES ALEXANDER MEEK,
Architect, of 138 Enmore Road,
Newtown, is the eldest son of the
late William Meek, of that populous
suburb. Born at Newtown, New
South Wales, on October Bth, 1868,
he obtained his education primarily
at the Newtown Superior Public
School, and later at the Sydney
High School. At the age of 17 he
was apprenticed to the late Mr.
Charles Hellmrich, architect, of
King Street, Sydney, with whom in
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. J. A. MEEK.
1892 he became a partner, and upon
the demise of Mr. Hellmrich in 1896
took over the business, which he
carried on for upwards of two years,
when he relinquished practice. In
1901, after spending a three years’
holiday, he again resumed the
practice of his profession, at Enmore
Road. His chief work is of the
domestic nature, but has during his
practice prepared and supervised
the erection of numerous large ware-
houses and other buildings, amongst
them the warehouses at the corner
of King and York Streets, Sydney ;
hre stations at Balmain and North
Sydney, and the large rooms of the
Independent Order of Odd Fellows
at Newtown. In his private life
Mr. Meek takes a deep interest in
social matters, being for years hon.
secretary of the Newtown Social
Club and hon. treasurer of the
Workmen’s Institute established in
that suburb. He is also very fond
of fishing, spending a great deal of
his spare time engaged in deep-sea
fishing along our coast.


Mr. BYERA HADLEY, third
son of E. A. Hadley, merchant of
Cobham, Bristol, England, was born
on the Ist of February, 1872, and
was educated in a private school at
Chiton, England. Coming out to
this State in 1887 he was indentured
as articled pupil to the well-known
firm of Messrs. A. L. & G. McCredie,
architects and consulting engineers
of this city. At the close of his
indentures Mr. Hadley was success-
ful in winning a free scholarship for
work prepared at the Sydney Techni-
cal College and afterwards exhibited
at the South Kensington Museum
This enabled him to continue his
studies during 1893 and 1894 at that
institution, and also to take a trip
through the United States. On his
return to this city he was appointed
teacher of architectural drawing at
MR. B. HANLEY.
the Sydney Technical College. Mr
Hadley commenced to practise his
profession in Sydney soon after
his return, and during the first five
years was very successful in winning
competitions, including the Town
Halls for Botany and Willoughby,
and the Friendly Societies’ premises
at Leichhardt, North Sydney, and
Sydney, all of which were carried out
under his superintendence. Amongst
the city work carried out from the
designs of Mr. Hadley are Messrs.
John Danks & Son’s premises, Pitt
Street; warehouse for Messrs. Geo.
Cull & Son,'Pitt Street; premises
432 and 434 George Street (Crystal
Hotel) ; and Baumann’s new cafe,
Pitt Street. In domestic architecture
Mr. Hadley has erected many villas,
principally at Mosman’s Summer
Hill, and Bellevue Hill. He was
elected Fellow of the Institute of
Architects, New South Wales, on
the 2nd August, 1899, and appointed
a member of the council under Mr.
John Barlow’s presidency. Mr.
Hadley is a member of the Church
of England, and during the term of
his indentures he was a chorister at
St. Andrew’s Cathedral. In his
younger days he was a keen cricketer
and sculler, and as a member of the
Mercantile Rowing Club won ins
maiden junior and senior races.
Two years ago he was elected a
vice-president of that club.
Mr. EDWARD SKELTON
GARTON, Architect, Stock Ex-
change Buildings, 113 Pitt Street,
Sydney, third son of W. Garton,
County Councillor, of Wanganui,
North New Zealand, was born at
Orwui in 1864, and received his
education from private tutors. At
the age of nineteen years he com-
menced the study of architecture in
the city of Auckland. After a time,
finding the opportunities too re-
stricted in that city, he decided to
visit Australia. Arriving there he
accepted an appointment as re-
porter on the staff of the Reformer
and Northern Suburbs Advertiser of
Melbourne. This position he occu-
pied for about a year, until a
favourable opportunity presented
itself of returning to the profession
to which he had determined to de-
vote himself, and for this purpose
he turned his attention to Sydney.
To fully qualify himself and gain a
thorough knowledge of the practical
part of his profession, he undertook
the erection of several tenements
and dwellings, and in this way
gained a practical experience in all
departments of the trade. His
ambition, however, was to practise
solely as an architect as soon as a
favourable time came. This he was
enabled to do in 1898, when he
opened an office in King .Street, re-
moving subsequently to his present
address. Around the foreshores of
the harbour may be found many
designs furnished by Mr. Garton.
Numerous prettily designed villa
residences around Mosman and
Neutral Bay have been erected
under his supervision, from plans
executed by himself; and through-
out the whole of his career, and
while carrying out numerous build.
ings at one time, Mr. Carton has
escaped misunderstandings with his
clients, and no mishap has befallen
any work undertaken and carried
out under his supervision. The
principal feature of his architecture
is that it is Australian in design,
and adapted in every way to the
climate and immediate surround-
J . Hubert Newman . Sydney .
MR. E. S. GARTON.
ings, and to this Mr. Garton attri-
r> J
butes the success which has been
achieved. In 1903 he was nomi-
nated and returned as alderman
of West Ward, in the Municipal
Council of Mosman, which position
he still retains. Mr. Garton mar-
ried Helen Rebecca Buckland, of
Pennant Hills, and has an issue of
three children.
Mr. ARTHUR FREDERICK
PRITCHARD, F.1.A., of Sydney,
is a son of Mr. William Pritchard,
who for many years practised and
held a prominent position in his
profession as an architect, both in
Victoria and New South Wales.
In fact the family has been con-
nected with the building trade in
England and the colonies for gene-
rations back, so that every im-
provement made, in methods and
materials, has been the subject of
discussion and adoption by mem-
bers of the family through a long
series of years. In 1868 Mr. Prit-
chard, sen., arrived in Victoria, and
succeeded in establishing the largest
country practice at Kyneton. It


was in this town that the son first
attended school. Llis primary edu-
cation having been gained at the
Kyneton Collegiate School, and on
the removal of the family to Mel-
bourne, he attended the Carlton
School, where he eventually became
dux, and successfully passed the
examination of the Melbourne Uni-
versity. He entered his father’s
office in 1882. passing through every
grade till he became chief assistant,
and in 1892 was admitted as a part-
ner. The firm prepared plans and
carried through some of the largest
and most substantial buildings
around Sydney, including the ware-
houses of Messrs. Goldsbrough and
Co., at Pyrmont, and those of
Messrs. Mort & Co., at the Cir-
cular Quay. The premiated plans
for the latter buildings being pre-
pared in competition with the
world. They were also appointed
to assess and adjust the damages
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. A. F. FRITCHARD.
caused by the disastrous fire in
Moore Street. While the large
stores of Messrs. Winchcombe, Car-
son & Co., at Pyrmont, where
for the first time wool was received
into the warehouse by gravitation,
were designed and erected by them.
Mr. Pritchard succeeded to the sole
control of the business in 1897, and
has since designed and completed
the alterations to the Royal Ex-
change, Sydney, which includes the
Wool Exchange, pronounced by
buyers from all nations to be the
finest in the world. Against thirty
competitors Mr. Pritchard won the
City Council’s prize for the best
style of city convenience, and was
entrusted with the erection of that
in Moore Street. Stepping out from
the ordinary routine, he invented
the Acme wall ties used in all
Government buildings and lately in
the colossal structure of Anthony
Hordern & Sons, in George and
Goulburn Streets. In 1888 he be-
came an Associate of the Institute
of Architects of New South Wales
and Fellow in 1899. As lion, trea-
surer he was elected in 1902, a
position which he still holds. In
1905 Mr. Pritchard married Sara
Beatrice, daughter of the late Wil-
liam Howell, of Sydney, and on the
occasion was presented with a silver
service by the members of the
Institute of Architects. As a
yachtsman —a pastime in which he
excels—Mr. Pritchard has made
numerous coasting trips, the open
sea having special attractions for
him.
Born and brought up in the
mother colony, Mr. CHARLES
ROSENTHAL went to Geelong,
Victoria, in 1890 to serve five years’
articles as architectural pupil. Three
years of this period were spent in
Geelong, the remainder of the term
being completed in Melbourne He
then went over to Western Aus-
tralia, and was three years in the
Public Works Department there.
After leaving that colony he re-
turned to Melbourne and stayed in
that city for a couple of years, re-
moving in 1900 to Sydney, where he
has since been practising his pro-
fession. In December, 1894, he
qualified as Associate of the Royal
Victorian Institute of Architects,
and in 1903 successfully passed as
Associate of the Royal Institute of
British Architects, having the dis-
tinction of being the first New South
Wales candidate to present himself
for the colonial examinations for
entry to this influential and talented
corporation. Mr. Rosenthal at the
present time is the diocesan architect
for the Grafton and Armidale
bishopric. • He is generally acknow-
ledged as the leading local basso
cantante, and as such has appeared
many times with the Philharmonic
Society and Liedertafel in Sydney,
the Brisbane Liedertafel, and Mel-
bourne Philharmonic, in such
works as the Messiah, Elijah,
Creation, Berlioz’s Faust, Gou-
nod’s Faust, Lohengrin, Rossini’s
Stabat Mater, &e. As a mili-
tary man he holds the rank of
captain in the Australian Garrison
Artillery. Joining in April, 1903,
he passed for lieutenant in Novem-
ber, 1903, for captain in June, 1904
(promoted captain in May, 1905),
and for major in November, 1905,
J. Hubert Newman Lid.
MR. C. ROSENTHAL.
with special mention and distinc-
tion in four subjects. He has also
passed and obtained certificates foi
the following military schools :
Infantry (2), topography, equita-
tion, range-finding and artillery (2).
Mr. EDWIN WILLIAMS, whose
repute as an Architect is limited to
no local boundaries, is the son of
John and Susanah Williams, r.ee
Jones, and, it seems almost un-
necessary to add, is of Welsh de-
scent. His life’s story is brief and
bright —a procession o f success.
Born on May 7th, 1848, at Wrex-
ham—a township in North Wales,
reeking, one may say, with historic
associations, carrying the mind back
to those days when the A]) Williams
were able to harass the thanes of
Mercia at their own sweet will —he
was educated in the leading schools
c>
within the gates of his birthplace.
At fourteen he made his firsts essay
to shoulder the burdens of existence,
when he commenced to work for his
father ; whose avocation was that


of a builder and contractor. Three
years later young Williams deter-
mined to face the world on his own
account. Liverpool and London
were visited in turn ; then, heigho !
for the marvellous East ; the land of
pact clean streams to those who
have never been there. Finding by
the test of experience its repute
MR. E. WILLIAMS.
more fable than otherwise, the young
traveller returned home, striking
the English Cottonopolis in 1868 ;
and for several years did some good
work in the northern counties,
superintending, amongst other build-
ings, the erection of the John
Barnes Convalescent Hospital,
Cheadle Chistine, St. Paul’s Church,
Heaton Moore, and Holy Trinity
Church, Dinting Vale. In 1882
Mr. Williams left for Australia.
Upon arrival in New South Wales
he was engaged by Mr. John Young
to take charge of the erection of the
first portion of the Australian Joint
Stock Bank, King and George
Streets, .Sydney. During the erec-
tion of the second portion of this
building he was clerk of works ; and
for nine years held a similar position
in the office of those eminent archi-
tects —Messrs. Sulman & Power.
During this period, amongst other
buildings supervised were the Mu-
tual Life Association’s building,
Wynyard .Street ; the Presbyterian
churches at Randwick, Woollahra
and Manly ; the Thomas Walker
Convalescent Hospital, Concord,
and St. Ann’s, Church of England.
Strathfield. In 1896 Mr. Williams
commenced practice on his own
account. From that time to De-
cember, 1905, he was architect for
the Australian Joint Stock Bank;
carrying out a large amount of work
in various portions of the country.
He was one of the founders of the
Newtown United Friendly Socie-
ties’ Dispensary (1887), holding the
secretaryship since its inauguration.
He was also the architect for the
new headquarters of this useful
institution ; the foundation of which
was laid by his Excellency Admiral
Sir H. H. Rawson, K.C.8., on Sep-
tember 27, 1902. Whilst residing
at Manchester Mr. Williams, on
October 19th, 1876, married Miss
Sarah Mather, of that city.
Mr. RUTLEDGE LOUAT, J.P.,
Architect, is the son of a highly cul-
tured French engineer, and his
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. R. LOUAT.
mother is a member of the well-
known Rutledge family ; Sir Arthur
Rutledge, the Rev. W. Woolls
Rutledge, and the late Rev. Dr.
I). D. Rutledge being her brothers.
The eldest son of this union first
turned his thoughts to architecture,
about seventeen years ago, when
he was articled to Mr. Thomas
Butement. On leaving that archi-
tect’s office he was engaged on
several large buildings as clerk of
works, and the experience thus
gained has proved of great value
to him. Mr. Louat commenced
practice in the New England dis-
trict and was successful in com-
petitive work, his designs being
placed first on two occasions for
friendly societies’ halls and once
for a cottage hospital. About eight
years ago he commenced practising
his profession in Sydney. His work
is mostly domestic, but he has been
very successful in several buildings
of a more public character. Mr.
Louat’s residence at Mosman,
which we illustrate, shows what can
be done with an unpromising piece
of land. Mr. Louat finds all the
recreation he desires on the waters
of our beautiful harbour. He is an
enthusiastic fisherman, and every
hour that can be spared from busi-
ness or study is spent aboard his
motor launch.
Orange has enriched lire parent
settlement of Australia with many
worthy citizens, who have success-
fully built up enduring reputations;
and not the least amongst these sons
of New South Wales may be men-
tioned the name of Mr. ALFRED
HUBERT HALE, Architect, of
2 Hunter Street, Sydney. The son
of Mr. John Hale, who followed the
profession of architect for many
y ears in the city so famed for its
bracing atmosphere, our subject
went through his educational train-
ing in private and State schools.
Then he entered his father's office, to
perfect himself in the profession he
had decided to adopt, and during his
years of pupilage, some of the most
important buildings in Orange and
surrounding districts were erected,
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. A. H. HALF.


Including the Town Hall, and se-
veral churches, with not a few hand-
some country and town residences
and business premises. During a
period of stagnation in building
operations in the Western district,
he joined a survey party, as draughts-
man, but, owing to ill-health, had to
leave the same after gaining an ex-
perience which covered about three
years. Then, in 1875, he decided to
commence practice on his own ac-
count, in the capital of the colony,
and thereupon opened his office at
No. 2 Hunter Street. His earlier
works told a telling tale, and busi-
ness soon flowed in—slowly, perhaps,
comparatively speaking, but steadily
and ever swelling. In the various
suburbs, at Newcastle, Wollongong,
and other provincial centres, the
number of public and private build-
ings he has put up will not be
inaccurately stated as legion. Pre-
eminently, he is the professional man
for the speculator whose tastes run
to terraces and villa residences. In
1894, Mr. Hale led to the altar as
his bride, Miss Alice Marian t
Hudson, the second daughter of the
late Mr. J. H. Hudson, Christ-
church, New Zealand. When busi-
ness is put behind him, our subject’s
inclinations run mainly to rifle
shooting. As a safe, steady shot of
marksman’s degree, his scores have
been made on most of the important
ranges of Australia, and many are
the trophies that adorn his home,
telling thus one indisputable story of
his prowess with the Martini-Enfield.
Mr. CHARLES WILLIAM
ROBERT ST. JULIEN, is the
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. C. W. R. ST. JULIEN.
only son of Charles Thomas St.
Julien, and grandson of Sir Charles St.
Julien, KC.K, late Consul-General
and Charge de Affaires of Hawaii at
Sydney, and afterwards Chancellor
and Chief Justice to the Kingdom ot
Fiji. Born at Sydney, 6th Septem-
ber, 1869, and receiving his early
education in the public schools, he
commenced his professional training
by entering articles, in 1884, with
the then City Architect, the late
Mr. Thos. H. Sapsford, who de-
signed the Sydney Town Hall and
other large civic undertakings. Dur-
ing this initial training, Mr. St.
Julien also attended lectures at
Sydney University, and a three
years’ course at the Sydney Tech-
nical College, passing his annual
examinations with honours. He
entered the Government engineering
service in 1890, by joining the
Water Supply and Sewerage branch
of the Public Works Department,
and was at one time chief draughts-
man of the engineering drawing
office of that branch, being con-
nected with the designs and detail
work of the Sydney and country
water supply, sewerage and drainage
works. The most prominent of these
were the main northern sewer
(Bondi) and Western Suburbs sew-
erage schemes for low-level sewerage,
Sydney and suburbs storm-water
drainage, schemes for larger country
towns, such as Play, Lismore, &c.,
also water supply for town of
Casino; septic tank installations at
Rookwood (probably the first in
Australia), Chatswood, Balmoral,
Liverpool, Hay, Lismore, &c. Re-
tiring from the Government service
in 1904, he entered into the private
practice of his profession as an
architect and civil engineer, at Vick-
ery’s Chambers, 82 Pitt Street,
Sydney, since which he has carried
out several business premises, private
residences, school and convent build-
ings, septic tank schemes in town
and country, including St. Anne’s
Orphanage at Liverpool, Bethlehem
Convent, Ashfield, School Hall, Pad-
dington, and a septic tank installa-
tion for forty persons for a country
hotel. Just recently, he has com-
pleted an extensive station homestead
at Book Book, near Wagga, which
is rather unique from an architectu-
ral and engineering standpoint, as
the house itself was constructed of
concrete, made from the river gravel,
and was fitted throughout with hot
and cold water, gas (acetylene) and
sewerage services, so that, although
situated in the bush it has all the
comforts to be obtained in a city
residence. The water supply is ob-
tained from a dam constructed in
some hills situate across the creek
about a quarter of a mile from the
house, and a 40-light Aylmer-Lewis
acetylene gas plant and septic and
filter tanks were installed for the
other services. Mr. St. Julien has
entered municipal life as representa-
tive of Waverley Ward of the Wa-
verley Council, virtually taking his
grandfather’s seat after forty years.
Mr. JOHN FRANK WHITE,
Architect, of Belmore Street, Arn-
cliffe, is the son of Mr F. J. White,
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. J. F. WHITE.
builder, one of the oldest residents
of Redfern. Born at Enmore, New
South Wales, Mr. J. Frank White
is a native, and obtained all his edu-
cation from the Roman Catholic
schools, primarily at St. Benedict’s,
and later at the Roman Catholic
college. At the termination of
school days the lad was bound ap-
prentice to his father, and went
through all the various phases of
the building trade, so that, from his
boyhood, he had a practical know-
ledge of building. His ambition,
however, prompted him to aspire to
greater things, and every aid, or
help, that could in any way add to
the experience gained, was brought
into requisition under the able
tuition of his father. He resolved
to study architectural drawing,
and no opportunity was lost which
gave promise of assistance in


qualifying for the position of an
architect. In 1902 he took up his
residence at Arncliffe, and soon found
that, in that rapidly growing suburb,
his services were in great demand.
In the short time intervening, he
has erected quite a large number of
the pretty villas, that give the pic-
turesque appearance to Arncliffe,
and are an evidence of the refined
taste of the designer. Mr White
was entrusted with the work of re-
modelling the Palace Hotel, Hay-
market, shops in Shepherd Street,
and many dwellings in the suburbs,
all of which remain as a monument
of his skill and taste.
Mr. E. J. BOWEN, Architect, of
Balmain, was born in Sydney, 1866.
He received his elementary educa-
tion at the Balmain National Public
School, and completed it at Fort
Street. He entered the profession
at the age of sixteen, under Messrs.
Backhouse & Spencer. The firm
dissolved partnership when Mr.
Bowen had been there twelve
months, and he finished his time
MR. E. J. BOWER.
with Mr. J. B. Spencer, an English
architect, now practising in. Sydney.
Wdth the view of gaining practical ex-
perience, Mr. Bowen then took a po-
sition as clerk of works to a builder,
for a period of two years. In 1889
he started for himself in Balmain
with varied success. Some time later
he went into partnership with Mr.
C. E. Fairfax and carried on busi-
ness in Sydney. In 1893 his firm
built the residence of Mr. G. Hos-
kins, of Burwood, and the first por-
tion of the Working Men’s Institute,
Balmain. After the bank crisis in
this year Mr. Bowen returned to
Balmain, and there married the
eldest daughter of Mr. G. Proudfoot,
railway contractor. All the public
buildings in Balmain, excepting the
Post Office and the Town Hall have
to be accredited to Mr. Bowen’s
professional ability. About 1896 he
completed the Working Men’s Insti-
tute and erected the Balmain Hos-
pital. Two years ago he built
Wood’s mortuary chapel, Brick-
field Hill ; a private institution the
first of its kind to be attempted in
Australia. Municipal matters take
up no little of Mr. Bowen’s time ;
he having represented North Ward
in Balmain municipality for over
eight years, the electors paying him
the honour of returning him to
office on three consecutive occa-
sions. He is also a singer of popular
merit, possessing a deep baritone
voice. He held the sub-conductor-
ship of the Campbell Street Presby-
terian Church choir for seven years
(his father being the conductor), and
was conductor of St. Paul’s Church,
Balmain, for nearly eight years,
Mr. STANLEY N. RICKARD
is the son of the Rev. R chard
Heath Rickard, a clergyman who
laboured for fourteen years amongst
the natives of New Pommern, in
the Bismarck Archipelago, to the
east of New Guinea—a group of
islands better known in the past as
New Britain. Born amidst . the
scenes of his father’s missionary
efforts, young Rickard was edu-
cated principally in the State schools
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. S. N. RICKARD.
at Newcastle and Mudgee, finishing
his course ot studies at Newington
College. While a student there he
was successful in passing a junior
examination At the outset of his
business career he spent four years
with Messis W. Noller and W.
Gawne, of Newtown, mastering the
technicalities of the building trade.
At the same time he was undergoing
a course of studies at the Technical
College, under the superintendence
of Mr. Cyril Blacket, and success-
fully passed through all his exami-
nations. Then Mr. Rickard was
articled to Mr. Sydney Jones,
A.R.1.8 A., with a view of com-
Working Men's Institute, Balmain. —E. J. Bowen, Architect.


pleting his knowledge in every
branch of the profession. In 1904
Mr Rickard began to practise on his
own account in Sydney, and soon
commanded a business necessitating
the supervision of a large number of
city and suburban buildings These
included an estate of thirty first-
class residences at Strathfield, aver-
aging about £l,OOO each a large
shop and dwelling at Bondi, and a
terrace of seven cottages at Ashfield.
In his leisure hours tennis has in him
an enthusiast, as well as an expert,
and to the game all his spare time
is devoted.
Mr. JAMES E. JUSTELIUS,
Architect, was born at Sydney,
November 15, 1859, educated by
his father, who was a linguist and
classical scholar. At the age of
sixteen years he was articled to his
uncle, the late William Boles, archi-
tect, of Pitt Street, Sydney, for a
period of five years. During his
articles Mr. Justelius was very sue
cessful in competitions, having dur-
ing his last year carried off first
prize for pen and ink work, and
special first prize for perspective in
Gothic architecture, against all
comers.. .On the demise of William
Boles Mr. Justelius succeeded to the
practice, conjointly with James
Henry Bolster, and carried on under
the style of Bolster & Justelius,
architects. The country portion of
the practice of this firm rapidly
grew to such proportions that it
became imperative for one of the
Shops, Bondi. —S. N. Rickard, Architect
principals to manage the branch
office at Bathurst. For a period of
two years Mr. Justelius managed
this branch with great success, some
of the works which passed through
his hands being the hospital at
Bathurst (the largest outside Sydney
at the time) at a cost of some
£lO,OOO ; improvements to the Hon.
E. Webb’s mansion, at a cost ©f
£B,ooo ; many large villas, costing
from £l,OOO to £5,000 each, includ-
ing other works ; amounting together
in that district to some £40,000.
When the heavy work was done there
Mr. Justelius returned to Sydney
and turned his attention to the Syd-
ney practice with his partner. For
twelve years this partnership existed
under the best terms of friendship,
during which time no less than
twelve churches and religious build-
ings passed through their hands,
stores : Turkish baths, Oxford Stieet,
including the engineering of same ;
soup kitchens and refuge homes,
Kent Street : hotels, &c. Domestic
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR J. E. JUSTELIUS.
architecture formed the biggest por-
tion of their work. A dissolution of
partnership took place, Mr. Justelius
severing his connection (under doc-
tor’s orders) with the firm owing to
his health having broken down.
For the last seven years Mr. Justelius
has been engaged in the designing
engineer’s department of the Board
of Water Supply and Sewerage,
where he has been quietly stowing
away a considerable knowledge of
sanitary and septic tank work.
Early this year Mr. Justelius de-
cided to get back into practice, and
with that view secured well-lighted
offices in Vaughan’s Chambers, 142
King Street. He has already put


in several septic tanks with great
success. The effluent from his sys-
tem of septic tank is absolutely pure
and unobjectionable in every way.
Prior to entering the Water Board
Mr. Justelius was a fellow of the
Institute of Architects of New South
Wales.
Mr. FRED. J BOARD, A.LA.,
the youngest son of the late William
Wilmett Board, of Devonshire, Eng-
land, and brother of the present Di-
rector of Education, New South
Wales, was born at Peter-
sham, Sydney, in 1877, and was
educated at the Sydney High
School. Shortly after leaving school,
he was articled, in 1893, to the late
William G. Coward, F.R.I 13. A ,of
Emu Studios. Lismoro.
MR. F. J. BOARD.
Sydney, and remained with him un-
til his chief’s death, when his articles
were transferred to George Allen
Mansfield, F.R 1.8. A., one of the
oldest of Sydney architects with
whom he completed his term cf
articles, and remained as draughts-
man until 1901 ; then, an oppor-
tunity offering, he commenced the
practice of his profession in Lis-
more and has steadily worked up
a good district connection, having
carried out the most important
buildings in Lismore, Casino, Cora-
ki, Murwillumbah and other sur-
rounding towns, since his advent
there. Mr, Board was elected an
associate member of the Institute
of Architects of New South V\ ales
in July, 1902.
Bank of New South Wales, Casino. —F. J. Board, Architect.
Villa Residence. —J. H. Gilchrist, Architect.
Villa Residence. —E. S. Carton, Architect.


Newtown Friendly Societies’ Dispensary.—E. Williams, Architect.
Residence.—C. Rosenthal, Architect.
Warehouse, King and York Streets. —James A. Mack,
Architect.
436
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


Mort’s Dock and Engineering Co. Ltd.
The gigantic industry bearing the above name is in itself
a sufficient monument to the memory of its illustrious
founder. In the mid-fifties of the last century Mr. Mort,
foreseeing the conditions which so soon after would create
a great maritime centre of the port and city of Sydney,
laid down the giaving dock which still bears his name, on
the site then known as Waterview Bay, in the hamlet of
Balmain. In 1851 the excavation was in active com-
mission, with repairing shops close by ; the infant
industry, like tlie infant town of Balmain, which soon
began to grow round about it, expanded rapidly, until in
1872, after passing through various tentative activities, it
was formed into the company first bearing the name of
Mori’s Dork & Engineering Co. Ltd., capital £120,000 in
£1 shares. In the course of succeeding years the com-
pany’s capital was increased out of reserves to £150,000.
Debenture funds were raised for the purpose of ex-
panding the works and plant, and the establishment
grew apace. In 1889 the company bought its present
Jubilee Dock branch premises, and in 1899 the
as several well-known vessels trading on the coast of
Australia. The engineering department is provided
with machine and fitting shops, replete with every
requirement in machinery and appliances ; there are
some 50 lathes —the largest being capable of taking
in work up to 27 feet diameter and 36 feet in length.
Of the planing machines, one has a table 18 feet long,
and can work over a breadth of 9 feet and a height
of 8 feet, and there is a multiplicity of other machine?
for shaping, slotting, drilling, keyseating, screw-
cutting, sawing, and other purposes. High speed and
electric and pneumatic appliances and cranes, lifting
gear and powerful overhead travellers are provided
throughout. From these shops were turned out pas-
senger and goods locomotives as far back as 30 years
ago, and high-class marine engines, wool-dumping and
mining plant are constantly under construction. The
boilermaking department is provided with 3 plate and
angle iron furnaces, beside a host of machines for
flanging, punching, shearing, planing, drilling and
handling iron and steel in every possible shape and
position, powerful plate-bending rolls (capable of
Mort’s Dock, Waterview Bay, Balmain, showing two Vessels in Dock
concern was reformed with added capital, making the
share capital £200,000, and the premises now known
as the \\ oolwich Dock branch were acquired. A
new dock was constructed there, and the company as
it now stands became an accomplished fact. The
establishment at headquarters, Mort’s Bay, occupy-
ing an area of over 18 acres, comprises the dock (now
6do feet long, about twice its original size), 3 patent
slipways, with powerful steam and hydraulic plant,
a sheer-legs capable of lifting 70 tons, wharfage
accommodation of about 2,000 feet frontage, and
fully-equipped shops and plant for the following
trades : shipbuilding, engineering, boilermaking, black-
smiths. patternmaking, coppersmiths, iron, brass and
steel foundries, joiners and sawmills, painters and
allied labourers The shipbuilding department has
turned out some 30 or 40 vessels, including several
Government pilot steamers, the “ Governor Blackall,”
for the Queensland Government mail service, and the
fastest and best of the popular Manly steamers of the
Port Jackson Co-operative Co.’s fleet, as well
curving plates 16 feet wide and li inches in thickness)
hydraulic riveters (both fixed and portable) hydraulic
presses, and a full equipment of cranes, overhead
travellers and appliances. The blacksmiths’ depart-
ment is equipped with 40 smiths’ hearths and anvils.
Here the most conspicuous object is the great steam
hammer, capable of striking a blow of 80 tons, and of
forging shafts over 2 feet diameter. There are about
a dozen smaller hammers, ranging down to 5 cwt., as
well as bolt, spike and rivet machines, saws for cutting
hot iron, and a full provision of tools, lifting appli-
ances and furnaces. The patternmakers’ and the
coppersmiths’ shops respectively are equally well
equipped for all requirements. The iron foundry is
a large and lofty building, its length being 150 feet,
with a breadth of 44 feet. It contains 3 cupola fur-
naces, capable of supplving 20 tons of metal at one
cast, loam mills for preparing the material for the
moulds, and a heated chamber for drying them ; 5
foundry cranes for lifting the ponderous castings,
make up the appointments of a very complete foundry.


There are separate brass and steel foundries, in which
castings up to 4 tons and 35 cwt. can be produced in
these metals respectively. The sawmill and joiners’
departments occupy the ground door of a large build-
ing, 167 feet long and 52 feet wide, containing all the
most approved wood-working apparatus for planing,
mortising, dove-tailing, and the like. The upper floor
forms the laying off loft for shipbuilding, in which is
performed the important work of enlarging the work-
ing drawings. The offices are contained in a hand-
some block of buildings fronting the bay, and are
specially designed for the accommodation of the
officers, draughtsmen, and clerks. The works are
fitted throughout with pneumatic-electric power,
electric light, gas, water, and tramway and telephone
services, a first-class ambulance room, and every
appliance for the handling of work with efficiency and
despatch. The Woolwich branch establishment is
situated in a commanding position in the harbour,
opposite the Government docks establishment on
Cockatoo Island, and comprises over 20 acres of land,
with water frontages on two sides, provided with
ment. capable of lifting vessels up to 1.500 tons. The
Jubilee Dock branch, at Johnston’s Bay, comprises
about 2 acres of water-frontage land, containing the
necessary shops and appliances for attending to the
requirements of vessels using the Jubilee Floating
Docks, moored on the foreshores. The large dock
is 317 feet long, 55 feet in breadth, with a draught of
15 feet, and is capable of lifting vessels up to 1,500
tons. Associated with this is the small Jubilee Dock,
having a length of 100 feet, 23 feet in breadth, and a
draught of 7 feet 3 inches, suitable for vessels up to
120 tons. The establishment as a whole, capable as
it is of dealing with nine vessels in docking and slipping
at one time —as many more being berthed alongside
the works —of simultaneously building half a dozen
ships, as well as of manufacturing all classes of ma-
chinery and carrying out repairs to vessels —is now
the largest concern of the kind south of the line, prob-
ably not second to anything of the kind in the world
—has justified the enterprise and foresight of Mr. Mort,
not less conspicuously than any other enterprise of the
many he initiated Brought into existence, as has been
Mort’s Dock and Engineering Works.
wharfage accommodation and facilities for berthing
vessels. Here the new Woolwich Dock is situated.
This dock is already 650 feet long, has an entrance
83 feet wide, and a depth of water on sill of 28 feet 9
inches. Provided with loco, cranes on tramlines, one
each side, a 15-ton steer crane at the entrance, electric
capstans, and all modern appliances, it is one of the
finest docks in existence. The pumping station is
fitted with three sets of powerful centrifugal pumps,
capable of discharging over three millions of gallons
of water per hour and of emptying the dock in from
fi to 24 hours. The workshops are extensive and
fully equipped with steam, electric and pneumatic
plant for all departments, including engineering,
boilermaking, shipbuilding, patternmaking, iron-
foundry, and painting, &c. There also is the motor
department, where the manufacture of the company’s
celebrated “Invincible” land and marine motors
and gas producer plant, &c., is carried on. On the
foreshores, in a convenient position, is moored the
Woolwich pontoon dock, an adjunct to the establish-
said, but half a century ago by him, this gigantic busi-
ness has grown under the fostering hands to which it
was later entrusted, to its present dimensions. Con-
spicuous amongst those who have thus brought it to
fruition on the lines Mr. Mort laid down, were, and are,
his sons, Messrs. Laidley and W. E. Mort. and Mr.
Lesley Herring, as directors, and Mr. J. P. Franki, as
manager, all of whom were associated in the business
with Mr. Mort himself before his decease, and are still
actively engaged in the same capacities. The late
Captain John Broomfield and, now, Mr. Kelso King,
both as directors, have also devoted years of active
service and support to the company. In such hands,
and under such conditions as they arranged, success
was natural —it has been phenomenal. Known in
every part of the world where shipping penetrates, the
name of “ Mort’s Dock ” is a synonym for despatch
and for good work in the double sense of quality and
execution in all the various departments of its ac-
tivities.


Among the men who in the early
lihtory in New South Wales made
their mark, few can compare with
Mr. THOMAS SUTCLIFFE MORT.
Born in Bolton, Lancashire, Eng-
land, on December 23, 1816, he, at
an early age entered the warehouse
of Messrs. A. & S. Henry, of Man-
chester. While in their employ ap-
plication was made to them for a
trustworthy young clerk, to be sent
to Australia. Mr. Mort was se-
lected. and arrived in Sydney in
1838 under engagement to Messrs.
Aspinall, Brown & Co., and re-
mained with them and their suc-
cessors, Gosling, Brown & Co > as
clerk and salesman, until the com-
mercial crisis in 1843, which proved
disastrous to his employers, and he
was left to face the world afresh-
Assured of support he started as
auctioneer, and to this he devoted
all his energies, working for a con-
siderable time at the rate of 15 and
even 18 hours a day. Mr. Mort
soon put his business on a compre-
hensive basis, and to him belongs
the credit of establishing the first
public sales of wool in Australia.
The project of making the first rail-
way from Sydney to Parramatta
was mooted in 1849, and Mr. Mort
became one of the promoters, but
the discovery of gold near Bathurst
in 1851 brought a great change in
Australian affairs ; and his keen
foresight led him to conclude that
eventually the staple industry would
command better markets than ever.
In the excitement that followed
Mr. Mort succeeded, by his advice,
in saving many who would have
sold out at any price, and in starting
others on the road to fortune, who,
but for his advice would have
thrown away the chance. Many
new openings presented themselves,
and Mr. Mort put all his energies
into new enterprises. He formed
the first company for working auri-
ferous lands. It was called The
Great Nugget Vein Mining Com-
pany.” When the shareholders
became dissatisfied, he called them
together and offered to take all their
shares off their hands, but so great
was the confidence reposed in him,
those present refused to transfer
their liability. In 1856 Mr. Mort
commenced to grapple with the
problem of rural settlement. He
purchased from Mr. John Hawdon,
about 13.000 acres in the Moruya
district, distant some 212 miles
south from Sydney- On this estate,
known as “ Bodalla,” Mr. Mort
spent upwards of £100 ; 000, and
found his greatest pleasure in
devising new improvements and in
promoting the welfare of the popu-
lation who lived on the fruits of his
enterprise.
The river flats on this property,
now luxuriant with artificial grasses,
were in 1856 tussocky swamps keeping
only a few head of cattle. The
summer output reaches from seven to
eight tons of cheese per week, com-
manding the highest price in the
Sydney market.
Perhaps ihe greatest of Mr.
Mort’s efforts was in connection
with the cold storage of produce
MR. T. S. MORT.
and the development of the frozen
meat trade, the industry now hold-
ing an important position among the
industries of tlie State. One evi-
dence of this is seen in the expan-
sion of the Fresh Food and Ice
Company, of which lie was the
founder, and which stands to-day
7 »/
as a monument to his enterprise
and foresight. As far back as i 843
Mr. Mort tried to establish an ex-
port trade in beef cured in the ordi-
nary way—but the later project
was far more ambitious. This was,
to land the meat as sound and fresh
and natural in appearance as if it
had been killed at the place of
delivery. His knowledge of the
prospects of pastoral industry en-
abled him to forecast a magnificent
future for a trade of this sort.
Associated with him was Mr.
Nicholle, whose experiments were
many and costly. The first point was
to invent a cheap means of producing
artificial cold, and this difficulty
was, at length, overcome by the
experimentalists in discovering the
possibility of the repeated use of
the same ammonia. In this respect
Messrs. Mort and Nicholle went
ahead of European science. Accord-
ing to the first authority in the old
world, “ meat frozen was meat
spoiled.” Partial freezing, it was
found, would never do ; the meat
became bad too rapidly when ex-
posed Mr. Nicholle at last demon-
strated that in Australia meat could
be thoroughly frozen without injury
to the quality. This was another
advance upon old world science.
Mr. Mort then entered upon the
project with enthusiasm. A large
establishment rose upon the margin
of Darling Harbour. Costly ma-
chinery was erected in duplicate,
and the freezing chamber covered
with miles of iron piping, through
which the freezing medium was
kept in circulation, and a number
of experiments showed that the
freezing power could be successfully
applied to game, fish, and various
sorts of fruit as well as to meat.
The belief that the process injured
their quality was shown to be
unfounded. Mr. Mort then erected
slaughter-houses in the Lithgow
Valley, 96 miles from Sydney. This
site was chosen to save the cattle
the journey over the Blue Mountains,
which much injured their quality.
The buildings and yards were on the
most complete plan conceivable.
When both establishments were
complete, a large party, on the
invitation of Mr. Mort, visited
the Lithgow Valley, after first
inspecting the freezing works at
Darling Harbour, and there sat
down to a luncheon composed of
varieties of fish, game and meat, all
of which had been frozen for con-
siderable periods before being
cooked. The whole repast was a
thorough success, and in replying
to laudatory speeches from the Pre-
mier, Sir John Robertson, and
others, Mr. Mort said, “ There shall
lie no more waste ! Yes, gentlemen,
I now feel that the time has arrived,


or, at all events, is not far distant,
when the various portions of the
earth will give forth their products
for the use of each and all ; that the
over-abundance of one country shall
make up for the deficiency of an-
other, the superabundance of the
year of plenty serving for the scant
harvests of its successor, for cold
arrests all change- (Cheers.) Science
has drawn aside the veil, and the
plan stands revealed. Faraday’s
magic wand gave the keynote, and
invention has done the rest. (Cheers.)
Climate, seasons, plenty, scarcity
distance, will all shake hands, and
out of the commingling will come
enough for all, for ‘ the earth is the
Lord’s and the fulness thereof,’ and
it is certainly within the compass of
man to ensure that all His people
shall be partakers of that fulness.”
The final stage was attempted when
the ” Northam ” was fitted up for
the reception of a cargo of frozen
beef and mutton for the London
market. £20,000 was subscribed by
the squatters towards the experi-
ment, Mr. Mort having previoufly
sunk £BO,OOO in the enterprise. Un-
fortunately, failure for a time fol-
lowed, and the exhaustion of a life
of enormous activity, a previous
severe illness, and this disappoint-
ment left Mr. Mort unable to
grapple again with the undertaking,
on which so much labour and money
had been spent, and a short time
afterwards a serious illness brought
about the end- Mr. Mort died
peacefully on May 9th, 1878, in his
63rd year.
Mr. JAMES PETER FRANKI,
J.P., M.I.M.E, M.N.E.C.I.T.E.
and S., General Manager Mort’s
Dock & Engineering Co. Ltd., is a
native of Switzerland, and came to
Australia in the fifties, and was
educated at St. Phillip’s Grammar
School. He entered the works of
Messrs. P. N. Russell & Co., a large
engineering and shipbuilding firm, as
an apprentice, and graduated in the
drawing office and all the engineer-
ing branches. After completing the
full term of five years’ apprentice-
ship, he was appointed assistant
manager of the Fitzroy Iron Works,
at Mittagong. Upon the closing of
these works he obtained an engage-
ment as engineer-draftsman with Mr,
Mark Faviel, contractor for the
construction of the railways from
Sutton Forest toGoulburn, in which
contract there were many iron
bridges. On the completion of the
contract in 1867, he joined the firm
of Messrs. McArthur & Co as chief
draftsman and assistant manager, up
to the date of the death of Mr.
McArthur, after which the company
was formed into a public company,
named Mort’s Dock & Engineering
Co., and he was appointed manager.
Under his management several
steamers have been designed and
built, particularly the “ Governor
Blackall,” mail steamer, for the
Queensland Government, and the
“ Captain Cook ” (pilot steamer),
“Governor Musgrave,” “ Marra-
beet,” “ Kurringai,” “ Bingarra,”
and many others. The Crown Street
pumping engine for high level reser-
voir waterworks, many large quartz-
crushing plants, smelting furnaces
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR J. P. FRANKI.
for Peak Hill and many others,
various dredges, tugs and hopper
barges, large engines and boilers
have been constructed under his
management. When Mr. Franki
took charge of Mort’s Dock and
Engineering Co.’s works only about
300 men were employed, but that
number was subsequeutly increased
to 1,500 under his management. A
number of important extensions to
the works have also been made.
These include the addition of a
2,000 ton patent slip being built, the
dock being lengthened to double its
original length, now 640 feet, and
new pumping machinery erected.
Jubilee Dock was also acquired by
purchase, and later a new large grav-
ing dock was built by the company
at Woolwich, to take the largest
ships coming to the Commonwealth.
Outside of his office Mr. Franki fills
the position of President of the Iron
Trade Employers’ Union. He has
also taken a practical interest in
municipal matters. For three years
he was an alderman of the Balmain
municipality. Reacted as Machinery
Judge for the New South Wales
International Exhibition in 1879. In
1885 he went for a trip round the
world, during which he visited many
engineering works of America, Eng-
land and Scotland, France and
Germany, &c. He was appointed
Commissioner for New South Wales
for the International Exhibition of
Victoria, 1887. Mr. Franki is a
British subject, having obtained his
naturalisation papers in 1875. He
occupies the following positions :
Trustee of Workmen’s Institute of
Balmain ; Trustee of School of Arts,
Balmain. Fie is also a member of
the New South Wales Chamber
of Manufactures, and a member
of the Masonic Order, Lodge 868,
Balmain. In 1886 he was honoured
with a Commission of the Peace.
Mr. ARTHUR JAMES ARNOT,
A.M. Inst. C.E., M. Inst. E.E.,
Engineer and General Manager for
the Australian interests of Messrs.
Babcock & Wilcox Ltd., London,
was born at Hamilton, Scotland, in
1865. He was educated at the
Hutchinson Grammar School, Glas-
gow, and at the Glasgow College of
Science, where, for two years, he
studied electricity and kindred sub-
jects under Professor Jamieson, taking
first-class honours throughout. In
1883 he proceeded to London and
was admitted a pupil in the work-
shops of the Brush Company, while,
at the same time, he pursued his
studies at the Finsbury College under
Professor S. P. Thompson. In 1883
he was appointed assistant engineer
at the Grosvenor Lighting Station,
and in 1887 was appointed engineer-
in-charge of the engine-room. In
1889 he was selected by Messrs.
Elwell, Parker & Co. Ltd., to
proceed to Melbourne, Victoria, to
superintend the erection of a large
alternating current plant. In March,
1891, Mr. Arnot was appointed to
the position of chief electrical engineer
for the city of Melbourne. His chief
duties were the designing and carrying
out of the present extensive scheme
of electric lighting throughout the


city. In 1892 he proceeded to Europe
and America and inspected all the
great installation stations in opera-
tion. In 1899 he again visited Great
Britain, the Continent of Europe and
America, upon a similar mission, also
to call for tenders in London for a
complete electrical plant, including
underground cables, for the lighting
of the entire city of Melbourne. He
was admitted an associate member of
the Institute of Civil Engineers of
Great Britain in 1891, and a member
of the Institute of Electrical
Engineers in 1899, of which body he
was the honorary secretary for Vic-
toria. He acted as examiner in
electrical technology for the Victorian
Government, and was honorary sec-
retary to the engineering section of
the Australian Association for the
Advancement of Science. He was
Talma. Sydney .
MR. A. J. ARNOT.
elected president of the Victorian
Institute of Engineers for 1899. He
was also a member of the council of
the Working Men’s College in 1897,
which he held until his acceptance,
in 1901, of his present position as
engineer and general manager in
Anstralia for Messrs. Babcock and
Wilcox Ltd., London. He then
proceeded to London and spent some
lime in their head British office, re-
turning to Sydney in June, 1902, to
assume control. I he head office for
Australia is at 83 Pitt Street, Sydney,
with branches at Melbourne and
Adelaide and in \\ estern Australia
and New Zealand. During 1904
Messrs Babcock & V\ ilcox Ltd ,
supplied power plant for the Sydney
tramways, also for the eleclric light
stations for the city of .Sydney, as
well as for that of Melbourne. They
also fitted up the electric tramway
stations of Christchurch and Auck-
land. In the Western Australian
goldfields, where fuel is scarce, elec-
tricity has been used extensively as
the motive and lighting power, and a
considerable portion of the plant has
been erected by Messrs. Babcock and
Wilcox Ltd. ' In 1891 Mr. Arnot
married the eldest daughter of the
Hon. C. J. Ham, M.L.C. of Victoria.
Mr. J A M E S BARNET,
F. R. 1.8. A., “Braeside,” Ross
Street, Forest Lodge, Sydney, is
a native of Arbroath, Scotland,
where he was born in 1827. Upon
completion of his early education at
the High School of his native city,
he, at the age of fifteen years, went to
London, and was there apprenticed
to a builder, with whom he served
five years, and later became a pupil
in drawing and of designs, obtaining
first prize under the able tuition ot
W. Dyce, R.A. For the next
three years he studied architecture
under C. J. Richardson, F.R.1.8.A.,
F.S.A., and prior to emigrating to
Australia, which he did, arriving in
Sydney, in 1834, he was employed as
clerk of works by the Fishmongers
Co. By way of an introduction to
his Australian career, the subject
of this sketch first directed his
attention to building operations, in
which he was engaged for some
time, and eventually was appointed
clerk of works at the Sydney
University. In iB6O, by request,
he joined the Colonial Architect’s
Department as clerk of works,
and two years later was appointed
Acting-Colonial Architect, on the
retirement of his predecessor, the late
Mr. Alexander Dawson; and in
January of 1865 he was gazetted
Colonial Architect, a position he held
until retirement in 1890 upon the
abolition of that office. The growth
of that department during Mr.
Barnet’s term of office has been very
great. In 1865 there were only 324
buildings under the care of the office,
while the number of officers employed
were seventeen. A few months be-
fore his retirement there were 1,351
buildings throughout the colony in
charge of the department, with a
staff of sixty-four officers. Upwards
of £6, 000, 000 sterling weie expended
on 12,000 works during his connec-
tion with that department. Amongst
many works carried out by him, a
few are worthy of note here : 1 he
General Post Office, Colonial Secre-
tary’s, the Public Works, and the
Lands Offices, the Museum, Customs
House, Public Library, Medical
School and Land Schools to the
Sydney University, Gaols at Goul-
burn and Bathurst, Lunatic Asylum
at Callan Park, &c. In 1868 the
arrangements and works for the re-
ception of H.R.H. the Duke of Edin-
burgh was carried out by Mr. Barnet,
and in 1879 he designed and erected
the industrial exhibition building,
known as the Garden Palace, and
in 1883 the buildings on Garden
Island, &c., for naval station were
erected by him. He was appointed,
in 1870, a member of the commission
to consult in regard to matter con-
cerning the defence of the colony,
and, in accordance with the recom-
mendation of the commission, he
Freeman & Co. Ltd, Sydney.
MR. J. BARNET.
had to carry out works required in
constructing numerous batteries with
necessary magazines and shell-rooms,
&c., which were highly recommended
by Sir William Jervois, R.F.,
K.C.M.G., in his report on the de-
fences of the colony. During the
whole of his service he was never
absent one day from duty, either on
account of sickness or any other
causes, but in 1885 obtained leave of
absence for a year to visit Europe,
where, in order to gain information
he inspected numerous public build-
ings in all parts of the Continent.
He was architect for many light-
houses including the Sydney light-
house which he considers, and rightly
so too, a monument to himself. It
has proved a great success having


done its duty for twenty-one years
without a hitch. The light has a
range of twenty-five miles seaward,
and is equal to 6,000,000 candles,
and is the most powerful light in the
world. It was first lighted on the
Ist June, 1883. The machinery
weighs six tons. The subject of this
sketch is constantly receiving corre-
spondence from interested persons on
the Continent in reference to its
workings He was the first to intro-
duce the system of telephone into
Government offices. Outside of his
official capacity as Colonial Archi-
tect hehasgratuitously superintended
the building of the Sydney University
for the past thirty years, having the
consent of the Government. Mr.
Barnet is the oldest resident of the
Glebe, having resided there over
fifty years. He is a councillor ot
the Zoological Society of New South
Wales.
JHHE “HERCULES” ICE-
-1 MAKING AND REFRIG-
ERATING MACHINE, the
headquarters of which for Austral-
asia are to be found at 63 Pitt Street,
Sydney, represents one of the most
useful inventions of the latter half
of the nineteenth century. In the
construction of the “ Hercules ”
Refrigerator Mr. C. A. MacDonald,
the patentee and manufacturer, and
who presides personally over the
Australasian interests of the enter-
prise at Sydney, has demonstrated
the applicability of mechanical re-
frigeration where in many cases it
had previously been considered im-
possible. By the invention of the
“Hercules” system of machinery
he has proved beyond the shadow
of a doubt that in any circumstance
or condition where refrigeration is
desired the highest and most satis-
factory results may be obtained at a
minimum expenditure of time and
money. The business in Australia
was founded in Sydney by Mr.
MacDonald in 1894, and, as we have
already said, he still personally
controls its Australian interests.
The manufacturing centre of the
“ Hercules” Refrigerating Machine
is at Chicago, Illinois, America.
During the first year of operation in
Australia only five machines were
installed. In 1902, or only eight
years later, eighty-three machines
were installed throughout Australia
and New Zealand. These installa-
tions included machines of every
capacity, varying from 1 to 250 tons
refrigeration every twenty-four hours,
The total number of installations
from the Sydney head office during
the first ten years of operations
reached 431 machines. From a
careful investigation and analysis
from authorised shipping and export
statistics and other records, over 80
per cent, of the frozen beef, mutton,
lamb and other commodities sent
from Australia and New Zealand
during that period were treated by
the “ Hercules ” system of refrig-
eration. The New South Wales
Fresh Food and Ice Co. Ltd.
installed one of the largest re-
frigerating machines in Australia.
This was the “ Hercules ’’ system
of 160 tons refrigeration, or with a
capacity of manufacturing eighty
tons of ice every twenty-four hours.
The company were so satisfied with
the results obtained from this
machine that they subsequently
converted two large installations of
other designs to the “Hercules”
system.
The Metropolitan Ice and Cold
Storage Co. Ltd. in 1897 installed
one large “ Plercules ” machine, and
during the first six years of opera-
tions the cost of necessary repairs
did not amount to £lO in all. The
company has generously consented
to confirm this statement, if neces-
sary ; the company’s best certificate
to the merits of the system being the
fact that, owing to the large increase
of business during recent years, it
has not only been compelled to con-
siderably enlarge its premises but
to instal a second “ Hercules ” of
120 tons refrigeration capacity. This
they did without consulting other
manufacturers. All the large meat
works throughout New Zealand have
installed these machines. For in-
stance, the Canterbury Meat Co.
Ltd. have no less than four “ Her-
cules ” machines in operation, with
a total capacity of 450 tons refrig-
eration. The Wellington Meat Export
Co. likewise possess five of these
machines. No less than seventy-
nine machines have been installed
throughout South Africa within five
years ; these include six machines of
a total capacity of 220 tons refrig-
eration for the De Beers Cold
Storage Co., four machines of a total
capacity of 230 tons for the Imperial
Cold Storage Co., and two machines
of 30 tons capacity for the Buffalo
Supply and Cold Storage Co. The
Government of Natal also has been
supplied with two “ Hercules ”
machines, and in East London, Port
Elizabeth, Johannesburg, and many
other centres throughout South
Africa machines of varying capacities
have been installed. In the early part
of 1903 the Sydney office received


a cable from London requesting
an estimate for three “Hercules”
machines, each of a capacity of 130
tons, each twenty-four hours. Within
forty-eight hours a reply was re-
ceived accepting the tender, and this
was done without calling for com-
petitive prices from other firms.
In December, 1903, Mr. McDonald
left Sydney to supervise the instal-
lation of these machines. Whilst
engaged in the work a further order
for three machines of similar capacity
was received from other clients who
had observed the superiority of the
“Hercules” system. So surprised
were these firms that, upon their
determination to instal the “ Her-
cules” machines, they at once
recalled their buying agent, who was
then on the Continent inspecting the
largest systems in vogue in the great
continental centres, and who was
fully empowered to negotiate for
the purchase of the most suitable
machinery of the description required.
In concluding this outline of the
success of this rapidly growing en-
terprise, it is but right to add that in
the installation of the “Hercules”
system the conditions under which
such is to be carried out, its erection
and placing into position is scientifi-
cally taken into account. The various
conditions under which refrigeration
is required are also fully considered.
Eor instance, on steamships rehig-
eration is mainly required for the
preservation of meats, butter and
other perishable products, either as
freight or for consumption on board
during the voyage. For such pur-
poses the “ Hercules ” machine,
because of its compactness, dura-
bility and simplicity of construction
is pre-eminently adapted. In select-
ing the “Hercules” the purchaser
gets a guarantee that it will fully
achieve the purpose for which it is
installed, and that it will perform all
that is claimed for it. The machinery
is so simple that any person, no
matter how uninstructed, can readily
master its details, and will soon be
competent to successfully control it.
Each plant is fitted up by expert
engineers, who give instructions how
to work and control the machinery.
Mr. WILLIAM WARK, J P,
Assoc. M. Inst.C.E , Proprietor of the
Bathurst Gas Works and Australian
director of Messrs. Parkinson and
W. & B. Cowan Ltd., manufac-
turers of gas appliances, &c., was
born in Glasgow, Scotland, in 1852.
He arrived in Auckland, New Zea-
land, and came on to Sydney at the
end of the year 1869. He received
his education in the old land, and
after his arrival in Sydney studied
civil engineering. For many years
he has practised as a consulting
engineer, mainly in connection with
gas works. In addition to his con-
nection with Messrs. Parkinson and
W. & B. Cowan Ltd., of which
company he is director for Australia
and New Zealand, Mr. Wark is the
attorney of the International Light-
ing Association of Edinburgh, a
company formed for financing and
promoting companies or corporations
for the lighting of cities and towns.
This company has been carrying on
J. Hubert Newman, Sydney .
MR. W. WARK.
operations in New South Wales
since 1896. Amongst ether enter-
prises within this State it carries on
the Hay Gas Works. The industry
of manufacturing all classes of gas
appliances carried on by Messrs.
Paikinson and W. & B. Cowan Ltd.
is the only one of its kind in Austral-
asia. The Sydney branch employs
between fifty and sixty men. He is
an associate member of the Institute
of Civil Engineers, London. In 1894
he was appointed a Justice of the
Peace for New South Wales.
I ) ABCOCK & WILCOX LTD.,
rO 427-429 Sussex Street, Sydney.
This well-known firm of steam en-
gineers originally commenced manu-
facturing their patent water tube
boiler in America about forty years
ago. Twenty years ago an English
company was formed to take up and
manufacture the patents in Great
Britain and the colonies, establishing
large works in Scotland, near Glas-
gow, where some 2,000 employees
are at present engaged. The output
of Babcock & Wilcox boilers at the
present time averages nine per day,
which is unequalled by any other
boiler company in the world. In
addition to boilers, this company has
made a specialty of chain grate
mechanical stokers, superheaters, feed
water heaters and steam piping, and
as they use only the very finest steel
in their manufacture, the boilers,
superheaters and steam pipes have
great durability. The competition
which has existed between electric
supply stations and gas companies
has, no doubt, done much to bring
this type of boiler to the front. En-
gineers of the highest standing have
been engaged in designing and erect-
ing the most economical machinery
for electric supply stations, and it is
worthy of note that 75 per cent, of
the power used in the lighting stations
in the old country and Australia
is supplied by Babcock & Wilcox
boilers.
The recent battleships launched in
Great Britain, viz., H.M.S. “ Com-
monwealth,” “Argyll,” “Dominion,”
“ Edward V 11.,” “ Black Prince,”
“ Hindustan,” “ Queen,” “Africa,” &c.,
have all been fitted with Babcock
boilers. The expert committee ap-
pointed by the Admiralty having
unanimously selected this boiler as a
standard; so that, not only for land
work, but also for marine work, have
they been found most suitable.
Amongst the many large installa-
tions of these boilers in Australia
might be mentioned the Sydney
tramways, where forty-eight are in
use; Mount Morgan, twenty in use;
Broken Hill, twenty-six in .use, &c.
It is to be expected that the success
achieved by this company should
have brought into existence recently
several other types of water-tube
boilers, but time alone will tell
whether they are properly designed
or not. It may be of interest to state
that the Babcock boiler consists of
solid drawn steel tubes expanded into
steel headers, which are again ex-
panded into mild steel drums, the
latter being above the tubes, and
removed from the direct action of
the fire. The inclined tubes contain
water, which, as soon as it is heated,
rises quickly into the drum at the
near end, and descends at the back
into the tubes again. Consequently
good circulation is always obtained,
and unequal expansion thereb)


avoided. The boiler is set in brick-
work, although supported independ-
en ly by steel supports, the furnace
being placed some three feet below
the tubes, thus giving ample space
for complete combustion. The chain
grate mechanical stoker manufactured
the Sydney trams power - house,
Ultimo, illustrates what can be done
in labour and fuel saving appliances.
The fine coal, which arrives in trucks
from the coal-mines, is dumped into
a coal bunker, from which it feeds
automatically into a mechanical con-
regulated by the attendants in accord-
ance with the load, and no hand-firing
is adopted. When the coal is consum-
ed, the ashes remaining are carried by
the revolving grate into an ash chute,
whence they are automatically return-
ed to the trucks which bring the coal.
Babcock Boilers and Stokers at Empire E.L. Station, Sydney.
by this company is, undoubtedly, one
of the most perfect pieces of median-
ism that has ever been introduced for
this class of work. Many are in use in
Sydney, and saving their owners large
sums of money annually in fuel costs,
The very complete installation at
Babcock Boiler fitted with Superheater.
veyor operated entirely by an electric
motor. This conveyor takes the coal
up in small quantities at a time to
coal bunkers overhead, from which
the coal gravitates as required into
the hoppers feeding the mechanical
stokers. The quantity of fuel used is
The head Australian office of the
company is at 427 and 420 Sussex
Street, Sydney, where boilers are
kept in stock, and a glass working
model may be inspected which indf
cates the perfect circulation existing
in this type of boiler. &
444
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


Mr. h. g. McKinney, m.e.,
M.lnst.C.E., was born at Cam-
money, near Belfast, Ireland, and
received his preliminary education
at the Belfast Academy and the
Royal Belfast Academical In-
stitution. He subsequently went
through the engineering course at
the Queenbs University and ob-
tained the degree in engineering
with honours. At the conclusion of
his collegiate training he was ar
tided as pupil to the late Mr. S. IT.
Roberts, M.lnst.C.E., and on the
completion of his articles passed
third in the competition for ap-
pointments as assistant engineer in
the Indian Public Works Depart-
ment. Soon after passing his ex-
amination Mr. McKinney went to
India and entered on the duty of
assistant engineer on the Baree
Doab Canal, in the Punjab, where
he had the good fortune to be em-
ployed in turn on every class of
irrigation canal work, from pre-
liminary surveys to the distribution
of the water. Before the mutiny a
beginning had been made with the
excavation of the Upper Kasur, the
Kasur and Sobraon blanches of
that canal, and it was on the align-
ment, designs and construction of
these branches that Mr. McKinney
was emploved. The Upper Kasur
branch, which draws its supply of
over 1,000 cubic feet per second
from the main canal, has its supply
divided between the other two
branches named. The heaviest
works were those on the Upper
Kasur branch, including the regu-
lator at the bifurcation and those
on the first thirty miles of the So-
hraon branch. After completing
these Mr. McKinney was trans-
ferred to administrative duties on
the main canal, for which position
he qualified by passing the exami-
nation required of canal magis-
trates. His charge at this time in-
cluded fifty-six miles of main canal
and about two hundred miles of dis-
tributary. Whilst in this position
Mr. McKinney came down to Aus-
tralia and travelled through the
southern part of New South Wales,
visiting the more important water-
supph 7 works in Victoria, and also
Tasmania. In touring through
Riverina he did not fail to notice
the similarity of the plains to those
with which he was so well 'ac-
quainted in the Punjab, and he
concluded from his inspection and
inquiries that Riverina was yet cer-
tain to be a great field for the irri-
gation engineer. Returning to In-
dia, he was posted to the Upper
Ganges canal, and subsequently
sent on special duty to the Eastern
Jumna canal. On finishing his spe-
cial work there, which was the pre-
paration of large drainage projects,
he was transferred to the Lower
Ganges canal, where, after complet-
ing the construction of several large
works, he was entrusted with the
management of the first irrigation
from that canal. In the latter part
of 1879 Mr. McKinney resigned the
Indian service and came to New
South Wales with testimonials from
all the officers under whom he had
served. These included the then
MR. H. G. McKINNEY.
Inspector-General of Irrigation in
India, an engineer who subse-
quently attained to that position,
and another engineer who was sub-
sequently Inspector-General of Irri-
gation in Egypt. In the beginning
of 1880 Mr. McKinney was ap-
pointed resident engineer on the
first contract for canal work in con-
nection with the Sydney water sup-
ply, and his duties were gradually
extended till he had a length of
thirty-five miles of canal and tun-
nels in his charge. After nearly
five years’ service on these works
he was appointed engineer to the
Royal Commission on the conserva-
tion of water, in which position his
duties required him to visit almost
every part of New South Wales.
At the expiration of the Royal
Commission in 1887 Mr. McKinney
continued to carry out the duties of
engineer for water conservation,
irrigation and drainage throughout
the State. In 1897 Colonel Home,
R.E., who had been specially en-
gaged to report on the whole ques-
tion of irrigation, furnished a report
which was a complete indorsement
of the soundness of Mr. McKinney’s
work, and which approved of the
great schemes for irrigation from
the Murray and the Murrumbidgee
which Mr. McKinney had proposed.
Early in 1901 Mr. McKinney re-
tired from the public service, and
since then has been practising his
profession as consulting engineer.
During that year he prepared
the Murrumbidgee Northern Canal
Scheme with a view to its being
carried out by private enterprise.
The scheme was taken up by Mr.
Robert Gibson, of Hay, who has
had the matter before Parliament
now for several years. Mr. McKin-
ney had the degree of Master in
Engineering conferred on him by
the Queen’s (now Royal) Univer-
sity of Ireland, and he has been a
member of the Institution of Civil
Engineers for more than twenty
years. Several articles from the
pen of Mr. McKinney have been
read to the members of the Royal
Society in N.S.W., and one to the
Australian Association for the
Advancement of Science, each hav-
ing been well received by the mem-
bers and favourably criticised by
the press,
Mr. HENRY LLEWELLYN
JONES, A.M.A.S., C.E., American
Vice-Consul, was born 1870 at
Philadelphia, and is, as his name
indicates, of Welsh extraction, his
forefather in colonial days of the
United States of America, having
7
emigrated with William Penn to
Pennsylvania. His ancestors on
both sides being English or Welsh
Quakers, they were loyal to the
Crown, and, although men of note
of their day, suffered considerably
from the revolutionists. In fact,
his grandfather, John Bartram, of
seven generations ago, was at the
time of the American Revolution
botanist to King George 111. The
old Botanical Garden is to-day in
existence having been converted
into a public park by the city of
Philadelphia. Mr. Jones is an


example of the self-made man,
starting with the Carnegie .Steel
Company, Philadelphia, as office boy
in 1888, ai d with minor advances
to 1891. Developing a taste for
engineering, he was transferred by
the Carnegie Company to the
engineering department at Pitts-
burg. when active work of compil-
ing the “ Carnegie Pocket Com-
panion ” (a text-book on engineer-
ing) was in progress. On its comple-
tion he was retained on general
engineering work until the forma-
o o
lion of the Topographical Depart-
ment, which was established for the
purpose of making detail surveys
and suitable maps of all the proper-
ties of the company. Mr. Jones was
appointed assistant to the chief
J. Hubert Newman . Sydney.
MR. H. L. JONES.
engineer, and in 1893 was appointed
chief engineer of this department,
which position he held until July,
1894, when he left the employ
of the Carnegie Company to
accept the position of chief
draughtsman with the New Jersey
Steel and Iron Company of Tren-
ton, N.J. This latter position he
held for nine months only, as a
request coming from the Boston
Office for a structural engineer he
was transferred to that territory,
and remained there until early in
igoo, when there were indications
of the American Bridge Company
being formed. The formation of
this company naturally could mean
but one thing, namely, the con-
sol id at ion of interest and the closing
of all the bridge company offices in
Boston with the exception of one.
Mr. Jones anticipated matters by
requesting to be transferred to one
of the rolling mills in Trenton, and
arrangements being completed he
started as superintendent and assist-
ant manager in March, igoo, and
continued there until June of the
same year. At this time Mr. Jones
made what he considered one of
the best decisions of his life, which
was the result of meeting an Aus-
tralian merchant in New York, and
becoming so interested in the pros-
pects of this country he arranged
with the American Bridge Company
(now properly formed) to represent
them in Australia, and left Phila-
delphia for Sydney on July 4th,
1900, arriving here on the steamer
“Moana” in August, 1900. The
Australasian office of the American
Bridge Company was managed by
him as resident engineer until April
of 1902, when it became necessary
to return to New York on account
of business conditions. Having
successfully negotiated with the
officials of the United States Steel
Corporation (which company owns
the Carnegie Steel, American
Bridge, American Steel and Wire,
National Tube and other com-
panies) Mr. Jones returned to
Sydney and opened up the present
office of the company in Sydney as
manager and resident engineer for
Australasia. On his establishing
himself here he was offered the
position of American Vice-Consul,
and was officially gazetted by his
Excellency the Governor on May
20th. 1903. Since then he has
acted as Consul in the absence of
the Consul, Mr. Orlando Baker, On
October sth, 1898, he was admitted
to the American Society of Civil
Engineers as an associate member,
having fulfilled the requirements
necessary to gain admittance to
that society.
Mr. DAVID EDWARD
MCDONALD, C.E., of Bridge
Road, Forest Lodge, is a native of
Sydney, where he was born in 1835.
Upon the termination of his educa-
tion at Dr. Lang’s Scotch College he
was articled to a leading architect
of Sydney and served the full
term of his indentures—five years.
Upon receiving his articles he ac-
cepted an appointment in the Colo-
nial Architect’s office where he
remained two years. Resigning at
the end of that period lie estab-
lished himself privately and built
up a lucrative practice. Later on,
however, he was offered and ac-
cepted a position in the office of the
City Engineer. In the year 1864 he
removed to New Zealand and
joined the staff of the Provincial
Engineer of Auckland, but finding
no scope for his talents as an
architect in this position he assidu-
ously applied himself to the study
of civil engineeiing under W.
Weaver, Esq., railway engineer, and
subsequently carried out the con-
struction of numerous bridges and
wharves and several breakwaters,
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. D. E. McDONALD.
also a number of important marine
works in Auckland harbour. Re-
signing the Provincial Govern-
ment service in 1870 he went to
Wanganui to supervise the erection
of an important iron bridge of con-
siderable proportions, built upon
iron cyclinders. This bridge spans
the Wanganui River, and is fully
five hundred feet in length. Upon
the completion of this undertaking
Mr. McDonald returned to Auck-
land, and was invited to fill the
position of engineer to the Auckland
Harbour Board. This position he
held for some fourteen years, during
which period he designed and car-
ried out an extensive scheme for the
improvement of Auckland harbour.
He also designed two graving docks,


the principal one of which, the
Calliope graving dock, is the second
largest in Australasia, carrying
thirty-five feet of water on the sill.
In 1885 he retired from the service
of the Auckland Flat hour Board,
and returned to Sydney, when he
accepted an appointment to close
up certain contracts held by Messrs.
Ostermeyer, Dewez & Co. with the
New South Wales Government,
which had been in dispute for some
time. He was also entiusted with
full control of that firm’s engineer-
ing works Upon severing his con-
nection with Messrs. Ostermeyer,
Dewez & Co., which during its con-
tinuance was most cordial and satis-
factory, he joined Mr. Martin
Danaher as office engineer and as-
sisted him in the construction of
twenty-four miles of railway on the
Lismore-Tweed line. Upon the
successful completion of this con-
tract he was offered and accepted a
position in the Sewerage Construc-
tion Branch, Public Works Depart-
ment of New South Wales, which
he retained for six years. During
this period several of the most im-
portant sewerage works of the
colony, were carried out under his
direct supervision. In 1874 Mr.
McDonald was elected an associate
of the Institute of Civil Engineers,
London, and subsequently an as-
sociate member.
Mr. JOHN W. JAFFRAY, J.P.,
who has devoted himself, in a
practical manner, to study the best
and most economical means of
dealing with our local industries,
and introducing improvements and
up-to-date appliances for the
better and cheaper production
of our various products, left
Dundee, Scotland, about twenty-
three years ago, for the colonies,
bringing with him the experience
of eighteen years’ actual work in
one of the largest engineering
establishments in that busy manu-
facturing town. Born in Kincar-
dineshire, Mr. Jaffray spent his
early srears5 r ears in Sweden, and left
there to be apprenticed to the firm
above mentioned. Mr. Jaffray came
to New South Wales in 1883 and
accepted a position in the machinery
department of Messrs. Briscoe,
Drysdale & Co.’s establishment in
Sydney ; but was only with them
a short time when he took over the
management of a large machinery
and hardware business, and there
gained the experience of colonial
trade, provided with which, in
1887, he decided to make a start
in business on his own account.
Opening out in modest premises in
George Street, these, however, were
soon found to be inadequate to the
phenomenal growth of his business,
and he removed to much larger
and more commodious premises in
Hay .Street. In later years, how-
ever, it was found to be more con-
venient to have a central office,
which has for some years been
located in Equitable Buildings, near
the General Post Office. To
Jaffray’s Machinery Register ”
much of the success of this firm is
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. J. W. JAFFRAY.
due. It is a monthly epitome of
engineering, mining, and com-
mercial news, circulating broadcast
throughout Australasia. Having a
keen and critical mechanical per-
ception, and keeping himself posted
up from the latest patented inven-
tions, not only in this, but in other
countries as well, he is able to turn
this knowledge to the advantage of
those who consult him on such
matters. One branch of his business
is connected with mining, and the
best means of saving the precious
metals in our ores. He is one of
the foundation members of the
Australian Institute of Mining En-
gineers, and has contributed several
valuable papers to that society.
Mr. FRED WALSH, Patent
and Trade Mark Attorney, of 23
Elizabeth Street, is a successful
Australian, and the premier of his
profession in New South Wales.
He was born at Newtown, Sydney,
in 1858, being the son of a master
mariner holding an extra master’s
certificate, who arrived in Mel-
bourne, in 1854 as chief officer of
one of the fine old clipper ships, and
who transferred his services to an
Australasian company, accepting
command of, or traded between
Sydney and other Australasian
ports, and who subsequently receiv-
ed appointment as pilot at Sydney
Heads, which position he held until
his demise at Watson’s Bay in 1868.
The subject of this sketch received
his education at old Fort Street
Model Public School, leaving it
when just over fourteen to enter a
mining and financial broker’s office
as a junior clerk. After serving a
short time in this capacity he signed
articles of apprenticeship to mechan-
ical engineering at Mort’s Dock and
Engineering Co., Balmain. In this
service he remained six years, pass-
ingin succession through the various
shops until he reached the drawing
office. In order to fit himself for a
better position in life he studied in
the evenings the theoretical part ol
his profession both civil and mech-
anical. Upon the conclusion of his
apprenticeship, Mr. Walsh was offer-
ed a professional appointment as
draughtsman in the public service;
but, deeming it advisable in his own
interests to travel beyond the con-
fines of his own colony, he visited
the other principal Australian States.
At Melbourne he accepted an ap-
pointment with Mr. Edward W’aters,
Patent Agent of that city, and start-
ing first as a draughtsman he soon
advanced to the position of mechan-
ical expert, and a few years later, in
.1882, he returned to Sydney to es-
tablish a business. In this he was
pre-eminently successful, and within
a short period the annual volume of
business undertaken by Mr. Walsh
was considerably more than that of
the much older-established offices of
his competitors. Mr. Walsh was one
of the oldest members of the Engin-
eering Association of New South
Wal es, to which body is mainly due
the establishment of the splendid
system of technical education in
New South Wales. It was while
Mr. Walsh was an active member
of this organisation the important
work of securing technical education


for the toilers of the community was
undertaken and carried to a success-
ful issue. In regard to the cost
of obtaining letters patent in New
South Wales, which for so many
years was a notoriously expensive
process, Mr. Walsh for five years
persistently agitated for bringing the
fees down so that it might be brought
within the reach of the poorest
applicant His repeated represen-
tations and suggestions were at last
listened to and the cost of patenting
reduced to about a third of that
formerly involved, an excellent re-
sult of his efforts. Mr. Fred Walsh
for many years was an alderman of
the borough of Leichhardt. In the
larger sphere of national politics for
the past twenty-two years he has
taken a very active part. In the for-
mation'of the’original Freetrade and
Liberal Association, and in the cen-
tral council cf the organisation, he
succeeded in incorporating land
value taxation as a plank of the
platform. In 1898 he acted as joint
honorary secretary to the Freetrade
and Liberal Committee. So emi-
nently successful and valuable were
his services that, upon the disband-
ing of the committee upon the ter-
mination of the campaign, a special
resolution of thanks was accorded
him at the instance of the Right
Hon. G. H. Reid. In 1890 the
government of the day conferred
upon him an appointment to a com-
mission of the peace. In social
matters he has always taken an
active part. He is an original mem-
ber of the Leichhart Rowing Club,
and was elected its first president.
This position he held continuously
for eight years. For a very con-
siderable period he has conducted
with marked success, in Sydney, his
very important business, acting as
the trusted adviser in patent and
trade mark matters of a considerable
number of members of the legal
profession and of most of the big
trading concerns in the country. He
is a member of the Chartered In-
stitute of Patent Agents, London,
1887; a registered patent attorney
of the United States of America,
1898; a member of the Patent Law
Association, Washington, U.S.A.,
1899; member of the Society of
German Patent Agents, 1904; and
a member of other similar institutes
throughout the world. And his
professional brethren honoured him
in 1894 by electing him President of
the Australasian Institute of Patent
Agents. In 1904 Mr. Walsh was
elected to the honour of a seat on the
Council of the Royal Agricultural
Society of New South Wales. For
some years past, as donor of the
“ Fred Walsh special prizes for in-
vention,” offered for the most im-
portant invention of the previous
three years, in each of four classes
exhibited at the show, Mr. Walsh
has genuinely encouraged the in-
ventive genius of the age. Besides
the multifarious engagements, the
subject of this sketch gives consider-
able time to the public in a military
capacity, holding for some years a
captain’s commission in the St.
George’s English Rifle Regiment.
In 1904 Mr. Fred Walsh received
from the Government of the Re-
public of Honduras the appointment
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. F. WALSH.
of Consul-General in Australia and
New Zealand, and has received His
Majesty’s exequatur authorising him
to so act.
Mr. MANFIELD NEWTON, J.P„
F.M.C.I. Pat. Agents, London,
P'.A.I. Pat. Agents, Patent Attorney,
Civil and Mechanical Engineer, 95
Elizabeth Street, Sydney, is a native
of England, having been born in the
city of London in 1844. He was
educated, first at the City of London
.School, and under private tuition
and subsequently at St. Quentin, in
France. In 1864 he entered the
firm of Messrs. Newton & Son, Patent
Agents, of London, with whom he
remained for sixteen years. Two
years of this period were occupied by
our subject in passing through the
various machine shops at Sheffield,
England, and two years were spent
by him in travelling for the firm on
the continent of Europe, just prior
to the Franco-German war. As he
showed special aptitude for the
work, he was subsequently pro-
moted from draughtsman to foreign
correspondent and specification
writer. A lengthened experience as
searching clerk in the London Patent
office library gave him a good in-
sight into the technicalities of many
highly specialised industries, and
the knowledge thus gained has
proved of great service to those
whom he has been called upon to
advise. In 1880, after the death of
his father, Mr. Newton embarked
for Gisborne, New Zealand, and upon
arrival at that port engaged himself
to Captain Winter, of the county of
Cook, as a surveyor and engineer,
and remained there for four years,
chiefly engaged in trigonometrical
surveying, road-making and bridge-
building. He then paid a visit to
his native land, from whence, after
a short stay, he came to Sydney,
and immediately entered the service
of the Sydney Municipal Council as
surveyor and mechanical engineer,
under Mr. Trevor Jones, C.E. Dur-
ing the ensuing three years (at the
termination of which he severed his
connection with the council) he
attended the Sydney University
course of civil engineering—a course
he accomplished with credit and
success. In the early eighties, the
English Patent Statute of 1852 was
superseded by the important series
of laws which were enacted from
1883 to 1888 —Acts under which the
Patent Office of Great Britain is
now administered. The Austral-
asian Governments were not long in
following the lead given by the
Home Government, and during the
next few years each colony brought
its patent legislation well up to date.
Upon the enactment of the 1887
Patent Law of New South Wales,
Mr. Newton early in 1888 started
his profession in Sydney, and was
soon busily engaged by many large
Sydney firms in furthering their
interests in the different States. The
duties involved were manifold, and
have been carried out redounding
great credit as to our subject’s
abilities and resources. Mr. Newton


has the reputation of being, and
is recognised as one of the most
proficient specification writers in
the States forming the Common-
wealth of Australia. He has a tho-
rough grip of all the details of his
profession, in connection with which
his opinion and advice is ever sought.
Mr. Newton has written a pamphlet,
of which several editions have
been submitted to the inventing
public, entitled ‘ ‘ A few condensed
remarks on the laws and practice
relating to patents, and the qualifi-
cations of patent agents,” in the
introduction of which he deemed it
advisable to preface his remarks
relative to patents and inventions
proper by a chapter on patent agents
and the qualifications and experi-
ence that are essentially necessary
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. M. NEWTON.
to one who seeks to secure the con-
fidence of inventors, with a view to
do them full justice. This chapter is
followed by others that discuss the
test of patentability, title, provisional
applications and complete specifica-
tions, all of which subjects are of
vital importance to inventors who
wish adequately to protect the fruit
of their brain labour. Mr. Newton
has had the benefit of a long special
training as a patent agent in one of
the best and oldest English firms,
his experience in the profession dat-
ing from the year 1864; he has,
moreover, had a considerable experi-
ence as a mechanical and civil en-
gineer. In a paper on ‘ ‘ The rise,
progress and development of patents
and patent law,” read at an October
meeting of the Chamber of Mines,
he writes : ‘ ‘ Patent law is a part of
the British constitution, which is
the mother of constitutions, and its
offspring are to be found in all parts
of the world. Patent law is restric-
tive and free : it is restrictive in its
relation to the Crown and free in its
relation to the people. The freedom
of the people is in direct proportion
to the restrictions that are imposed
upon the Crown. By the time the
Act of 1852 was passed letters patent
for inventions had assumed a posi-
tion of very considerable importance
in the industrial life of the commu-
nity, and the claims of inventors to a
liberal consideration at the hands of
the legislature could no longer be
ignored.” The subject’s grandfather
Mr. William Newton, of Chancery
Lane, London, was greatly instru-
mental in calling attention to the
necessity for amendments in the lav-
relating to patents for inventions.
A paper read by the subject’s uncle,
the late Mr. A. V. Newton, in 1891,
before the Chartered Institute of
Patent Agents on the proceedings
necessary to obtain a patent under
the Statute of Monopolies were de-
scribed with a grim humour, which
while it amused us, should make us
grateful that we were not called upon
to practise the profession of patent
agents prior to the year of 1852.
Mr. Manfield Newton goes on to
write : “ The British Patent Acts of
1852 was largely a leap in the dark
and was viewed with great apprehen-
sion by many people, particularly
the old officials who had previously
been associated with patent appli-
cations. The British Patent Acts
of 1883-8 were conceived on in-
telligent lines and are considered
by experts who understand the
incidence and working of patent
law, to be the best in the world.”
The subject of this sketch is a for-
eign member of the Chartered Insti-
tute of Patent Agents in London,
and a fellow of the Australasian
Institute of Patent Agents, of which
institution in 1900 he was elected
president, a post he still retains.
If there is anything in heredity
and atavism, Mr. Newton in his
own person, is a confirmation of
the accepted theories, for he repre-
sents the fourth generation in his
own family, which has been con-
nected with patents for about one
hundred and twenty years, and he
has a son about thirty years of age,
who is the representative of the fifth
generation in the same profession.
As to sport, Mr. Newton has a pre-
dilection for two special branches,
viz., swimming and bowling. He is
an adept swimmer, and is a member
of the Balmain Bowling Club, in
which sport he takes great interest.
In Freemasonry, he is an English
and colonial Past Master, his mother
lodge being No. 296, of Sheffield.
Mr. Newton has been twice married ;
he has a family of seven, and resides
at Bexley.
Messrs. GRIFFITH & ALLEN,
one of the leading firms of Patent
Attorneys in Australia, with offices
MR. A. GRIFFITH.
in both Sydney and Melbourne, con-
sists of Mr. Arthur Griffith and Mr.
T. C. Allen. Mr. Griffith, who
represents Sturt (Broken Hill) in
the Parliament of New South Wales,
is a fellow of the Australasian Insti-
tute of Patent Agents, a foreign
member of the Chartered Institute,
London, also a member of the Patent
Law Association of Washington,
the two latter being the most exclu-
sive bodies of patent experts in the
world. Mr. Griffith is an old Mel-
bourne Scotch Collegian and a uni-
versity man, who intended reading
for the bar, but interrupted his legal
studies to adopt the profession of
patent attorney. Prior to his entering


his present profession, Mr. Griffith
was for some years a master in the
Sydney Grammar School. In 1894
he was elected to the Parliament
of New South Wales, since which he
has contested five State elections,
and has been successful on every
occasion. He is a keen and forceful
debater, with a considerable know-
ledge of finance. In 1903 Mr. Grif-
fith resigned his seat for Waratah
(Newcastle) to run for the Federal
Senate, but, though he was unable
to break the solid phalanx of the
freetrade party and the metropolitan
press, he nevertheless obtained the
magnificent total of 108,000 votes,
one of the biggest votes ever ob-
tained by any public man anywhere
within the British empire. In 1899
Mr. Griffith carried through the New
South Wales Parliament an Act to
bring New South Wales within the
operation of the International Pa-
tents Convention, which secures to
a patentee in any one convention
country twelve months’ protection
in all the other countries of the con-
vention (including Great Britain,
France, Germany and United
States.) Among his other public
duties, Mr. Griffith is a trustee of
the Savings Bank of New South
Wales, an institution handling over
of the people’s savings.
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. T. C. ALLEN.
Mr. T. C. Allen was born in Ire-
land in 1864. He is a mechanical
engineer, a patent attorney, and a
member of the Patent Raw Associa-
tion of Washington, U.S.A. Mr.
Allen started his engineering career
at Queen’s University, Belfast, and
afterwards served his apprenticeship
in the shops of Messrs. Workman,
Clarke & Co. Limited, shipbuilders
and engineers, Belfast. Mr. Allen
was for some years in private prac-
tice prior to taking up the profession
of patent attorney.
Alderman GEORGE ALBERT
NORTON RUSSELL, J.P., having
been born in Sydney in August,
1843, is naturally quite of the soil,
so to speak. His father, a govern-
ment official, who came,to Australia
in the suite of Sir John Franklin,
gave his son what would be con-
sidered a liberal education in those
early days ; and upon the comple-
tion of his scholastic studies he
entered into a course of contracting.
This avocation was pursued for a
considerable portion of his career
with the happy results which usu-
ally crown the well-directed efforts
of a shrewd man of business.
Amongst the many large building
contracts Mr. Norton Russell had
an interest in with his brother-in-
law, Mr. John Young, may be men-
tioned the General Post Office, St.
Mary’s Cathedral, and the Exhibi-
tion Building, Prince Alfred Park.
Of late years, not of a mind to sit
quietly under the shade of his own
fig tree and watch a wdld world
whirling by, Mr. Russell has ac-
cepted many public responsibilities,
besides devoting a portion of his
working day to controlling the man-
agement of several large family es-
tates. He has held the Commis-
sion of the Peace for more than
twenty years. As member of the
Woollahra School Board since Au-
gust, 1890, he has always shown a
keen interest in the Double Bay
and Fort Street public schools. He
was appointed returning officer for
the electorate of Woollahra in 1899,
and in 1904, upon the reduction of
members and enlargement of elec-
torates his duties were transferred
to Waverley. At the inauguration
of the Dental Board he was nomi-
nated the first lay member, which
position he still holds. In June,
1896, he successfully contested the
representation of Piper Ward in the
Woollahra municipality, and from
that time has been re-elected unop-
posed. For eight years he was a
churchwarden of All Saints’, Wool-
lahra. In conjunction with the late
Mrs. W. Carl Fischer, he was hono-
rary secretary to the first orchestral
concerts which were given of an
afternoon at the Town Hall, in
1890, during the mayoralty of Mr.
Sydney Burdekin. As patron, pre-
sident and vice-president, &c., to
athletic clubs, musical and kindred
societies, he has always rendered
yeoman service. The lighter side
of life, Mr. G. Norton Russell has
largely punctuated by periods of
peregrinations, rounding Cape Horn
as well as passing through the Suez
Canal, in his journeys to Great Bri-
tain, Continental Europe, India and
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. G. A. N. RUSSELL.
elsewhere. Extended holidays have
also been enjoyed in China and
Japan, and opportunity afforded
for visiting Portuguese Timor and
British North Borneo, all these
countries providing material for
interesting illustrated lecturesupon
his return to the States. Coming
nearer home, a tour through New
Zealand in 1901 supplied the data
for a racy little book of travel,
which he published and circulated
privately among his friends. But
perhaps beyond the borders of busi-
ness Mr. Norton Russell is best
known as a clever amateur actor
and monologue entertainer. His
natural versatility,his musical abili-
ties, sleight of hand, histrionic and
ventriloquial powers have earned
for him the reputation of an ama-
teur “ Corney Grain ” in Australia,
and although he has long since


given up appearing on the boards in
any cast, his services as a lecturer
and entertainer are always readily
given to the churches and in the
cause of charity.
%/
A surveyor by profession, Mr.
JOHN BELL has won his way
amongst those to whom the theo-
dolite is as a mark of office. The
son of Mr. Francis Bell, and borr on
February 13th, 1853, young Bell was
educated at Shrewsbury School,Eng-
land. Then he served articles with
his brother, Mr. James Bell, at
Cardiff and during this term the
budding surveyor had the good
fortune to be associated with some
of the most important works of
construction in the United King-
dom—a fact which helps to explain
the pre-eminence which, profession-
ally, he has attained. Notable
amongst these was the designing
and completing the Barry docks ot
world-wide repute, in Glamorgan-
shire, South Wales, and in which his
brother acted as engineer-in-chief.
Since coming to Australia Mr. John
Bell has undertaken some big
things, more especially in the River -
ina district. Amongst the larger
properties he has measured off and
surveyed Yanko and Gogeldein need
only be mentioned to give some idea
of the extensive nature of his opera-
tions. Cricket and athletics he has
turned his attention to during hours
of leisure. From the cricket fields
of the old country he brought a
reputation here many of our leading
exponents of the game would envy,
and for years was a prominent
member of the Incognitas in their
early days. He is now a member of
the New South Wales Anlateur
Athletic Club, his son being the
secretary of the Manly Swimming
Club—a family circumstance bear-
ing out the truth of the saying that
the child is the father of the mam
The Opening of the Milson’s Point Tramline, 1886.


Brigadier-General HARRY
FINN, Commandant of the Military
Forces of New South Wales, was
born at Tenterden, Kent, England,
on 6th December, 1852, and entered
the British Army as a private in the
9th (Queen’s Royal) Lancers at
Aldershot, in May, 1871. Passing
through the various non-commis-
sioned grades he was gazetted in
March, 1881, 2nd Lieutenant of the
21st Hussars, and in July of that
year he received promotion to the
rank of lieutenant in the same regi-
ment. His advancement through
the higher ranks of the military
service w'as as follows : Captain,
November, 1887; Major, October,
1894; Lieut.-Colonel, 1898; local
Brigadier-General, 1902. While in
the 21st Hussars Brigadier-General
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney .
BRIGADIER-GENERAL H. FINN.
Finn for two years filled the appoint-
ment of Instructor of Musketry to the
regiment, was adjutant for five years,
and was also paymaster for a con-
siderable period. While at Bangalore,
South India, in 1890, he officiated as
A.A.G. From that year until 1894
he was engaged as a district staff
officer on the Madras command, and
during 1895 and 1896 he filled the
position of A.A.G. of the forces in the
Burmah district. During 1897 he
occupied a similar position in the
Bangalore district. General Finn
has seen considerable active service.
He was with the 9th Lancers in
Afghanistan during 1878, 1879 and
1880, at the termination of which
campaign he was decorated with the
Afghan medal and clasp, as well as
the Distinguished Conduct medal.
lie also received honourable mention
in the despatches. He served with
the 2 ist Lancers in Egypt, and
through the second Soudan campaign,
which terminated with the taking of
Omdurman, in 1898. For services
rendered during the Soudan war he
received the Queen’s medal, also the
Khedive’s medal and clasp, gaining
promotion to the rank of brevet lieu-
tenant-colonel. At the end of 1899
he accompanied his regiment to New-
bridge, Ireland, where he remained
three months. From thence he pro-
ceeded, in the early part of March,
1900, to Queensland to fill the posi-
tion of commandant of the military
forces of that State with the local
rank of colonel. On the ist Janu-
ary, 1902, he was appointed to the
command of the New South W ales
forces with the local rank of briga-
dier-general.
Lieut.-Commander F. H. C.
BROWNLOW, Officer Command-
ing Naval Forces and Naval Com-
mandant of New South Wales, was
born at the Guards’ Barracks, West-
minster, London, in 1859. His
father was an officer in the Coldstream
Guards, who served with distinction
through the Crimean war, being
present at Alma, Inkerman, Balac-
lava and Sebastopol. His mother
accompanied her husband to the
Crimea, and remained at Scutari,
being associated with that noble
woman, Miss Florence Nightingale,
in nursing the wounded soldiers.
Mr. Brownlow was educated at
St. Olave’s Grammar School, South-
wark, London, a school that was
founded by Queen Elizabeth, and
there he acquired a sound commercial
and classical education. Upon the
termination of his school-days he
entered the office of a surveyor with
the intention of qualifying for that
profession, but after a while finding
a sedentary occupation irksome he
determined to go to sea. He was
apprenticed to a firm of Sunderland
shipowners. He made voyages to
Turkey, Russia, Argentine Republic,
Peru, Chili, France, Egypt, India,
Brazils, and West Indies, and his
reminiscences of travel are very
interesting. He was present at the
great fire at Iquique, where he was
landed withcrews from all the British
ships to subdue the conflagration
which lasted three days and burnt
out the town. On his arrival in
Sydney in 1882 Mr. Brownlowstarted
to learn the coach-building trade
with the firm of Messrs. T. Moore
and Son. Upon the despatch of
troops to the Soudan in 1885 he
joined the contingent and went to
Egypt, and was present at the affair
at Tamai, holding the Queen’s medal
and Khedive star. Upon his return
to Sydney he resumed his connection
with the coach-building trade, but
finding it unsuitable, he, in 1888,
obtained an appointment in the
Mines Department as a temporary
clerk. Subsequently he was placed
on the permanent list and appointed
to the Registrar’s branch, of which
he is now chief clerk and in charge
of the Inquiry branch of the depart-
ment. In 1885 Mr. Brownlow joined
the Naval Artillery Volunteers. In
1889 he was promoted to the rank of
sub-lieutenant and to that of lieu-
J. Hubert Newman . Sydney.
LIECT. -COM. F. H C. BROWNLOW.
tenant in 1892. During the latter
years of the corps’ existence he was
in charge of the torpedo boats
“ Acheron ” and “ Avernus.” Upon
the reorganisation of the Naval
Forces under the Federal Govern-
ment in 1902, Lieutenant Brownlow
was appointed Officer Commanding
the Naval Forces of New South
Wales, and carried out the work of
reforming the Naval Brigade success-
fully. ( An 1904 when the enrolment
of Australians to the Royal Navy
under the Naval Agreement Bill took
place, Commander Brownlow was ap-
pointed by His Excellency the Com-
mander in Chief of Australian Station
—Admiral Fanshawe as Royal
Naval Registrar, and all the appli-
cants for the Royal Navy and Royal


Naval Reserve have to pass through
his hands to be deemed fit for service.
He is a man of great organising
ability, of fine physique and splendid
constitution. Mr. Brownlow is also
a member of the executive com-
mittee of the council of the Public
Service Association of New South
Wales.
Colonel H. DOUGLAS
MACKENZIE, Assistant Adjutant-
General and Chief Staff Officer of
the New South Wales Military
Forces, was born on the 26th Sep-
tember, 1849. He is a son of the
late Rev. Charles Mackenzie, Pre-
bendary of St. Paul’s Cathedral,
London, and belongs to a collateral
branch of the Mackenzies of Coul, in
Ross-shire, whereof the present head
is Sir Arthur Geo. Ramsay Mac-
kenzie, Bart. Colonel Mackenzie
commenced his service career at the
age of twelve as a cadet in the South
Middlesex Rifle Volunteers under
Lord Ranelagh, and in 1863 entered
the Royal Navy, in which he served
during the next eleven years. Whilst
in the navy he served under Admirals
Sir Robert Smart, Lord Clarence
Paget and Sir James Hope and Com-
modore Stirling. „ Retiring as lieu-
tenant from the Royal Navy in 1874,
COLONEL H. D. MACKENZIE .
he joined the New South Wales
Artillery as lieutenant in 1877, be-
coming captain the following year
and major in 1885. From 1885 to
1893 he was Assistant Adjutant-
General of the New South Wales
Military Forces, and since the latter
year has been A.A.G. and Chief Staff
Officer. He became lieutenant-
colonel in 1888 and colonel in 1896.
He was brigade major and C.S.O. of
the Australian contingent to the
Soudan in 1885, an d took part in the
advance on Tamai, was specially
mentioned in despatches, and re-
ceived medal and clasp, Khedive
Star. Colonel Mackenzie was one
of the New South Wales officers sent
to India during the drill season of
1894-5, and whilst in that country
was attached to the sth Dragoon
Guards, A Battery R.H.A., Royal
Engineers and Royal West Kent
Regiment, and served on the brigade
and divisional staff of the Meerut
district under General Sandford.
Colonel Mackenzie married a
daughter of the late Hon. J. B.
Suttor, M.L.C.
Lieut.-Colonel WILLIAM
FREDERICK LONGFIELD,
V.D. (Retired List), is a native of
Cork, Ireland, where he was born in
January, 1841. He is a son of the
late Rev. John Longfield, Church of
England clergyman, and his education
was supervised by his father. He
arrived in Sydney with his parents
towards the end of 1841, and for
some years resided in the Windsor
district. He remained with his
father until the latter’s death, and
then accepted charge of the home.
When eighteen years of age he
entered upon a mercantile career, in
which he continued for a considerable
time. Of late years, however, he has
followed the profession of a public
accountant. His connection with the
Volunteer movement dates from iB6O,
in which year he joined a company
that was then being formed at
Balmain. This company formed part
of the old Suburban Battalion. He
was appointed ensign in 1868, lieu-
tenant in 1871, and captain in 1876.
Upon the formation of the partially
paid forces in 1878 he was transferred
to that system, and was appointed to
the position of captain in the 2nd
Regiment of Infantry. He became
major in 1885 and senior major in
1888. Upon the retirement of Colonel
Goodlet he was entitled to the com-
mand, but having sustained, previous
to that time, a fracture of the leg and
other injuries, he was rendered unfit
for active service, and was compelled
to retire in 1893. He was subse-
quently appointed lieutenant-colonel
on the unattached list, and was
retired in 1902 owing to the age limit.
He has taken an active interest in
the National Rifle Association since
1874, of which body he was hon.
treasurer from 1877 to 1893, and
chairman of the council from 1897
to 1902, when he was compelled to
resign on account of ill health.
Lieut.-Col. Longfield is president of
the Marrickville Cottage Hospital,
LIEUT.-COL. W. F. LONGFIELD .
having previously filled the position
of vice-president treasurer in
succession. He is also president of
the Marrickville branch of the Liberal
and Reform Association, and takes an
active part in other local matters in
that borough.
Lieut.-Col. W. L. VERNON
assumed the command of the ist
Regiment of Australian Light Horse
(New South Wales Lancers) on ist
July, 1903. He followed the com-
mand of Lieut.-Col. Burns, which
extended for some years over the
regiment so well-known as the
New South Wales Lancers, but
which, on the reorganisation of the
Commonwealth Forces, was divided
into two, and otherwise broken up.
The command now under Lieut.-
Col. Vernon consists of four squad-
rons stationed at Sydney, Parra-
matta, Richmond-Windsor, and
Robertson-Berry respectively, with
headquarters, as formerly, at Parra-
matta. The regiment retains the
lance, and will be armed with
short magazine rifles; it also retains
its distinctive review order, at the
same time adopting the universal
service order of the Commonwealth
Light Horse. Lieut.-Col. Vernon


came to Sydney in 1883 from Buck-
inghamshire, England, which is also
the native place of Lord Carrington,
Hon. Colonel of the New South
Wales Lancers, and whose crest is
carried with the motto, “ Tenax et
Fidelis,” by the regiment as its
distinguishing badge. He com-
menced his military career in the
4th Battalion Oxfordshire Light In-
fantry, serving then in the ranks.
On 4th June, 1885, he joined the
newly formed Sydney Light Horse,
which became the nucleus of the
New South Wales Lancer Regiment.
His service has been a continuous
one from that date. After serving as
a trooper in the ranks he received
his first commission as lieutenant on
18th March, 1886. On the re-forma-
tion of the regiment in June 1890, he
retained that rank. He was pro-
moted to first lieutenant on the rolh
February, 1891 ; captain, 17th July,
1893 ; major, 26th October, 1899 ;
and lieutenant-colonel, 12th Sep-
tember, 1902. In 1887 he was
attached as lieutenant, for special
instruction during the autumn
manoeuvres, to the sth Royal Irish
Lancers, at Aldershot. In 1897 he
commanded the detachment of New
South Wales Lancers sent to London
for the Queen’s Diamond Jubilee
LIEUT.-COL. W. L. VERNON.
celebrations; and in 1901 he com-
manded the representative Mounted
Brigade from New South Wales
present at the opening of the
Commonwealth Parliament celebra-
tions and Royal visit to Melbourne.
Lieut.-Col. JOHN HUBERT
PLUNKETT MURRAY, Com-
manding Officer of the Irish Rifle
Regiment, New South Wales Forces,
is a native of the State, having been
born in Sydney on 29th December,
1861. He is a son of the late
Sir Terence Aubrey Murray, a for-
mer and distinguished Speaker of the
Legislative Assembly, and later still a
President of the Legislative Council.
The subject of this notice was edu-
cated at the Sydney Grammar School,
proceeding afterwards to Oxford,
where he graduated with first-class
honours in “ Mods ” and “ Greats.”
Upon his return to Australia in 1886
Mr. Murray was admitted to the
New South Wales bar, and soon
afterwards received an appointment
as one of the parliamentary draughts-
men. Subsequently he was appointed
a Crown Prosecutor, a position he
still holds, acting generally in the
Western district of the State. He
took an active part in the formation
of the Irish Rifles in 1896, and was
gazetted captain. In January, 1898,
he was promoted to the rank of
major. In his several military ex-
aminations he achieved the same
success that characterised his uni-
versity career. In the following year
he was appointed a member of the
court of inquiry that sat to investigate
affairs in connection with the 7th
Regiment, his legal training and ex-
perience proving of excellent service.
Upon the outbreak of hostilities in
South Africa, when it was decided
that New South Wales should par-
ticipate, he at once tendered his
services. However, it was not until
the despatch of the second contingent
in January, 1900, that his offer was
accepted, and he proceeded to the
seat of war as special service officer.
He had charge of the troops on board
the “ Moravian.” Upon landing he
was entrusted with the command of
the Tasmanian Infantry on the lines
of communication in the Karroo. He
was subsequently in charge of the
Rustfontein Mounted Infantry camp
near Bloemfontein. Shortly after-
wards he was attached to the New
Zealand Mounted Rifles, and took
part in the advance from Kroonstaad
m May, igoo. He was with them
at the battle of Johannesburg. He
afterwards joined the New South
Wales Mounted Rifles, remaining
with them until they were ordered
home in January, igoi. He was ap-
pointed provost marshal to De Lisle’s
corps, and subsequently to General
Ridley’s brigade. With the New
South Wales Mounted Infantry he
took part in the occupation of Pre-
toria. He also participated in the
battle of Diamond Hill, and for a
length of time took part in active
operations in the Orange River
Colony and Western Transvaal.
Upon his return to New South Wales
he resumed his duties as a Crown
Prosecutor. Lieut. - Col. Murray
has always taken a deep interest in
Crown Studios, Sydney
LIEUT.-COL. J. H. P. MURRAY .
athletics. While at Oxford he repre-
sented his university at the Oxford
and Cambridge sports. He was at
one time the amateur champion
boxer of England, and as such held
the Marquis of Queensberry’s cup.
Lieut.-Col. J. H. P. Murray was on
25th August, 1904, appointed Chief
Judicial Officer for New Guinea.
Lieut.-Col. Murray married a daugh-
ter of the late Dr. Jenkins, of Nepean
Towers, in 1889, an d has three
children.
Lieut.-Colonel WILLIAM
HOLMES, D. 5.0., Ist Australian
Infantry Regiment, was born at
Sydney, New South Wales, 1862,
and is the son of the late Captain
William Holmes, of the New South
Wales General Military Staff. Mar-
ried 1887 to Susan Ellen, daughter
of Lieutenant Henry Green, Reserve
of Officers, New South Wales, late
Royal Horse Artillery. Lieutenant-
Colonel Holmes joined No. 2 Com-
pany Ist Sydney Battalion in De-
cember, 1872. He received his first


commission as 2nd Lieutenant on
22nd February, 1886. Passing his
examination for the rank of lieu-
tenant during the following year, he
received his promotion as xst Lieu-
tenant in 1890. During that year
he passed the examination for the
rank of captain, receiving a special
certificate for knowledge and attain-
ments in standing orders and tactics.
During 1891 he passed a course of
military topography, and in 1894
passed with honours the Infantry
School of Instruction. On March
4, 1891, he was appointed Acting-
Adjutant of his regiment, serving
upon several occasions during the
absence of the permanent adjutant,
and at camp of continuous training
during Easter, 1891. In 1894
assumed command of D Company,
having been promoted to the rank
of captain on ist January of that
year. He acted as Brigade Major
at the camp of continuous training
during Easter, 1894. I* l J B9B he
passed the examination for the rank
of major, obtaining distinction in
regimental duties, and special men-
tion for tactics. He acted as Major
at the camp of continuous training,
Easter, 1898, and as Adjutant during
the Easter encampment, 1899. Upon
Captain Leggat’s retirement in July,
1899, he was transferred to the com-
mand of A Company. Upon the
acceptance of the offer of troops
from the New South Wales Govern-
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney .
LIEUT.-COL. W. HOLMES, D. S. O
ment by the Imperial authorities for
active service in South Africa, Lieu-
tenant-Colonel Holmes was ap-
pointed second in command of the
ist New South Wales Contingent.
Arriving at Port Elizabeth in De-
cember, 1899, he proceeded with the
troops to Capetown, joining the
Australian Infantry Regiment at
Enslin, under the command of
Colonel J. C. Hoad, C.M.G., he was
engaged for a short period in guard-
ing the line of communications. In
January the following year the com-
pany was converted into a squadron
of mounted rifles, leaving Enslin for
Nauerpoort towards the end of that
month, and was attached to Cle-
ment’s column for the relief of
Colesberg in Cape Colony. From
3rd February, 1900, to ist March
he participated in engagements at
Wolvefontein, Vaal Kop, Kuilfon-
tein, Arundel, and Rensburg. On
March 7 the column reached Norval
Pont, Orange River, and advanced
through the Orange River Colony,
via Phillipopolis, Jagersfontein,
Fauresmith, Emmaus and Petrus-
burg, arriving at Bloemfontein on
4th April. On 22nd April in com-
mand of the New South Wales
squadron, then transferred to Colonel
De Lisle’s corps, which was associ-
ated with General lan Hamilton’s
column, he joined in the march to
Thabanchu. He was engaged in
the recapture of the Bloemfontein
water works, Modder River, and in
that of the town of Thabanchu on
April 25 and 26. He participated in
succession at the battles of Hout’s
Nek, Kaffir’s Kraal, Zand River,
and was present at the capture of
Winburg and Ventersburg on sth
and nth May respectively. He was
engaged in the advanced guard
action between Lindley and Heil-
bron on 20th May, and in the rear
guard action on the following day.
In the advance on Johannesburg,
which was consummated on June
1, 1900, he took part in the battles
of Klipriversburg and Doom Kop.
Leaving Johannesburg and advanc-
ing on Pretoria, he took part in the
action which preceded the surrender
of that city, and entered with the
victorious troops upon that occasion.
In the .battle of Diamond Hill,
which took place a week later,
Lieutenant-Colonel Holmes was
wounded, and was invalided home
on 18th July. He was mentioned in
despatches by the Commander-in-
Chief Field-Marshal Earl Roberts,
which were published in the London
Gazelle, 14th April, 1901. He re-
ceived the South African medal with
clasps for Cape Colony, Orange
Free States, Johannesburg, and
Diamond Hill, and was further
honoured with the Companionship
of the Distinguished Service Order.
Shortly after his arrival in New
South Wales he was promoted to
the rank of major, and was awarded
the Colonial Auxiliary Forces De-
coration. Also in recognition of his
services in South Africa he was
promoted to the rank of brevet-
lieutenant - colonel in December,
1902. During the absence in Eng-
land of Lieutenant-Colonel Older-
shaw he assumed command of the
ist Infantry Regiment.
Lieut.-Col. JAMES WILLIAM
MACARTHUR ONSLOW was
born in 1867, at Camden Park, New
South Wales, and was educated at
Sydney Grammar School and Trinity
J. Hubert Newman . Sydney .
LIEUT.-COL. J. W. M. ONSLOW.
College, Cambridge. He is a son of
the late Captain A. A. W. Onslow,
R.N. He was appointed to the com-
mand of the Camden Squadron of
the New South Wales Mounted
Rifles in 1891, and was sent to India
tor drill season 1893-4, being attached
to the nth Hussars, Royal Artillery,
and King’s Royal Rifles. W ith the
latter corps he served through the
Relief of Chitral Expedition, for which
he obtained medal and clasp. He
was appointed major in 1896. He
went tc England with the Jubilee
detachment of the Mounted Rifles,
under the command of Colonel Las-
setter, in 1897, and was attached for
instruction to the 2nd Dragoons and
6th Dragoon Guards, together with


tile detachment. He was appointed
Lieutenant-Colonel of his regiment
in 1898. He served first in South
Africa on the staff ol Lieutenant-
General Tucker, commanding the 7th
Infantry Division, and afterwards on
the stafiof Major-General Sir Edward
Hutton, commanding Mounted In-
fantry. For his services in South
Africa he received medal and four
clasps, and was mentioned in de-
spatches. After returning from
Africa he was appointed to the com-
mand of the sth Battalion Common-
wealth Horse, raised for service in
South Africa, with which he went to
Africa a second time. This corps
arrived after peace was declared.
Lieutenant-Colonel Onslow is an
honorary A.D.C. to the Governor-
General.
Lieut.-Col. CHARLES MARK
RANCLAUD, V.D } commanding
the 4th Australian Infantry Regi-
mentj was born at Gosford, New
South Wales, in 1851, and was
educated at Newcastle and Mait-
land Grammar Schools, After two
years in the Public Instruction
Department of this State, he en-
tered the service of the Australian
Agricultural Company in 1872, con-
tinuing to the present time in the
employ of that Company, in which
he now holds the responsible posi-
tion of chief clerk. The same
steady progress he has made in
commercial life has characterised
the Colonel’s military career, and
the able qualities, which he has
shown in handling the large num-
ber of men in the employ of the
A. A. Company, have been utilised
to the advantage of the 4th Regi-
ment, with which he has been
connected from the date of its
original formation. The subject of
our sketch joined the service in
1871, serving as a private in the
corps then known as the Volunteer
Rifles, under Captain H T. Brown
received his commission as second
lieutenant in 1882, first lieut-
tenant in 1883, promoted to cap-
tain in 1884 and major in 1885.
On the establishme:.t by the State
Government, in 1878, of partially-
paid forces the Volunteer Rifles
became merged into militia and
known as the 4th Regiment, which
was again altered under the Com-
monwealth Defence Act to 4th
Australian Infantry Regiment, with
companies at Newcastle, Maitland
and other northern towns, with
headquarters at Newcastle, Lieut.-
Colonel Ranclaud succeeding to the
command in 1896, on the retirement
from active service of the late
Colonel Stokes Under Colonel
Ranclaud’s command the regiment
has attained a high state of effi-
ciency, and the feelings of pride
which the Colonel entertains for
the Fourth are shared by the
officers, who have so ably assisted
him in his duties, and the men
under his command, Though scat-
tered over the northern line as far
as Tamworth the officers of the
different companies have become
thoroughly imbued with the spirit
of their Colonel in the desire to
keep up the reputation and high
LIEUT.-COL C. M. RANCLAUD.
standing in the service of the
regiment, and it was, therefore,
very gratifying to hear from certain
Imperial officers, who witnessed the
manoeuvres at the last military
encampment, that the physique,
bearing, style and swing of the
4th Regiment was equal to the
Foot Guards in London As fur-
ther evidence of the interest felt by
all ranks in the regiment and their
desire to keep themselves efficient,
at the last encampment the regi-
ment mustered within half a dozen
of its full strength. As senior
officer of the important district
of Newcastle and Northern New
South Wales Lieut.-Col. Ranclaud
exercises a general supervision over
all units of the Defence Force.
Mr. JOHN RANDAL CAREY,
President of the Board of Directors
of the Sydney Daily Telegraph , was
born in the city of Cork, Ireland, in
1836. His forebears were large
landed proprietors in the county of
Cork, his father, Captain John
Westropp Carey, late of the 88th
Connaught Rangers, being one of
seven brothers who all served their
king and country as commissioned
officers, either in the army or navy,
during the Peninsular wars in the
early part of last century. He re-
ceived his education at Hamblin’s
College, an old-time scholastic estab-
lishment of his native city, upon the
termination of which he entered upon
a mercantile career. In 1853, when
the gold fever was at its height, he
turned his attention to Australia,
arriving in Melbourne that year.
In succession he visited the various
leading goldfields of Victoria —then
in full operation —Ballarat, Bendigo,
Mount Alexander, Tarrangower and
Avoca—but met with indifferent suc-
cess at gold-mining. He then settled
in Gastlemaine, and became a mem-
ber of the firm of Messrs. Richards
and Carey, stock and station agents
and auctioneers, which for many
years did an extensive business
throughout the central and northein
counties of Victoria, remaining a
partner in that firm until 1866,
though in 1862 he proceeded to New
Zealand, and also became senior
partner in the firm of Carey & Gilles,
stock and station agents and ship-
ping merchants, with branches at
Auckland, Invercargill, and Hoki-
tiki. During the existence of this
firm they were considerable importers
of stock into New Zealand from New
South Wales and Victoria. In 1873
he came to Sydney and, with his old
partner, he established an auction-
eering business, from which he re-
tired in the following year, when he
became proprietor of several Manly
Beach steamers, also a number of
harbour tug-boats. Working these
successfully for himself for a number
of years, he eventually floated his
shipping interest into the Port Jack-
son Steamship Company Limited, in
which he retainedalarge interest, and
upon the board of directors of which
he has sat since the company’s inau-
guration. He was also a founder and
director of many other limited lia-
bility companies in Sydney, includ-
ing the one-time powerful Sydney
Tramway and Omnibus Company.
He is a trustee ot the Savings Bank


of New South Wales and president
of the Royal North Shore Hospital
of Sydney. In 1881 he became
member of the firm of Messrs. Mann,
Carey & Co., railway contractors,
which undertook the construc-
tion of several important sections of
railway in the colonies, including
the Nyngan-Bourke line, New South
Wales. Mr. Carey, in 1879, took the
initiative in founding the Sydney
Daily Telegraph, now one of the most
powerful organs of public opinion
in the southern hemisphere. From
its foundation Mr. Carey has filled
the position of chairman of the
board of directors, ■ and it is largely
through his capable guidance the
second great daily newspaper of
Sydney has attained its present cir-
culation and undoubted influence.
Mr. Carey has always taken an active
interest in military matters. He
was amongst the first who enrolled
as volunteers in Victoria, and during
his sojourn in New Zealand he com-
manded various corps of volunteer
cavalry. He holds the rank of
major in the Commonwealth reserve
of officers. To him is due the credit
of taking the initiatory step in the
year 1899 in raising the New South
J. Hubert Newman . Sydney.
MAJOR J. R. CAREY.
Wales Citizens’ Fund, for the pur-
pose of organising a force better
adapted to meet the Boers upon
equal terms amongst their kopjes
than any that had previously been
sent to the South African war, which
resulted in the fact that a contingent
of five hundred Australian bushmen
picked as daring riders, practised
shots, and experts in all kinds of
bush craft, fully equipped and
mounted on the best of bush horses,
was raised, offered to and accepted
by the British Government as a free
contribution from the people of New
South Wales in everything but trans-
port. Major Carey, who was chair-
man of the Citizens’ Committee that
collected the fund, took an active
part, with Major-General French,
G.0.C., and other staff officers of the
local forces, in organising, equipping
and despatching this regiment in
1900 to South Africa. In 1873 he
married the eldest daughter of R. J.
Taylor, Esq., and grand-daughter of
the late General W. Taylor of Auck-
land, New Zealand, and has a family
of two sons and two daughters.
Capt. THOMAS LANE
MULLINS, Adjutant of the New
South Wales Brigade of the Aus-
tralian Field Artillery, is a son of
the late James Mullins, Esq , of
Macquarie Street, and is a native
of Sydney. He was educated at
the Sydney Grammar School, River-
view College, and Stonyhurst Col-
lege, Lancashire, England. Before
returning to Australia, Lieut. Lane
Mullins travelled on the Continent,
visiting France, Germany, Switzer-
land, and Italy, making the usual
grand tour. Upon his return to
Sydney he matriculated A at the
Sydney University in 1885, subse-
quently entering upon the study of
tne law as an articled clerk; but
finding, after a couple of years’ ex-
perience, he had no great preference
for that profession, found a higher
attraction in military matters. He
then took a commission in the
Brigade Division Field Artillery.
Upon the outbreak of the war in
South Africa, Lieut. Lane Mullins
volunteered for active service, and
was one of those selected for com-
missions in the Citizens’ Bushmen’s
Contingent under Lieut.-Col. Airey,
D.S.O. The contingent left Sydney
in February, 1900, and after traver-
sing the greater part of South
Africa (Beira to Capetown), in-
cluding the relief of Mafeking, re-
turned home in June, 1901. Whilst
in South Africa he was promoted to
the rank of captain. Upon return-
ing to Sydney he was attached to
A Battery, R.A.A., with which
he remained till November. The
following February he joined the
Ist Battalion Australian Common-
wealth Horse, under Lieut.-Col.
Lyster, and again proceeded to
South Africa, where he remained
till after the conclusion of the war,
returning home in September, 1902.
Upon the establishment of the Com-
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
CAPT, T. L. MULLINS.
monwealth he was offered and
accepted the adjutancy of the New
South Wales Brigade of Australian
Field Artillery. The subject of our
sketch is well known as an athlete,
being an expert swimmer (holding a
certificate from the Life-saving
Society), polo-player, and horse-
man.
Lieut. HERBERT DAKIN, Sec-
retary of the National Rifle Associa-
tion of New South Wales, is a native
of Manchester, England, where he
was educated, and subsequently be-
came employed in the soft goods
trade in that city. He came to the
colonies in 1890, and has followed
that business in Sydney since his
arrival. While residing in England,
he became, in 1887, connected with
the 2nd Volunteer Battalion Man-
chester Regiment, and on coming to
Sydney joined the North Sydney
Rifle Club, and became secretary in
1898, holding that position until
1903, during which the club rose
from a second-rate body to be the
premier rifle club in the Stale. In
1901 he organised an influental
deputation on behalf of all the rifle
clubs of New South Wales, and has
since then persistently agitated for
Hie purpose 4 01 securing a more
adequate supply of the latest pattern
rifles and a reduction in the price of


ammunition for the clubs, in which
he was eminently successful. He
was the originator, and has been the
hon. secretary since its inception, of
the Rifle Clubs’ Union of New South
Wal es, which was formed in 1899
for the purpose of conducting cham-
pionship competitions between the
various metropolitan rifle clubs.
1 his undertaking has been very
successful, and there are now thirty-
one teams, consisting in all of about
three hundred and ten men, who
J Hubert Newman . Sydney.
LIEUT. H. DAKIN.
take part in these competitions each
month. The competition is con-
ducted in three grades, and has, by
general consent, been the means of
bringing forward more young shots
than any other form of ride matches.
Mr. Dakin was elected a member of
the council of the National Rifle
Association of New South Wales in
1898, was appointed assistant-sec-
retary in May, 1903, and secretary
in February, 1904.
Major WILLIAM WALKER
RUSSELL WATSON, Ist Aus-
tralian Infantry Regiment, is the son
of Dr. William George Watson, and
was born at Balmain, Sydney, in
May, 1875. He was educated at the
Sydney High School and at Sydney
University. Deciding upon den-
tistry as his profession, he succeeded
in building up a lucrative practice.
In 1886 he commenced military work
as a bugler in the 6th Regiment
Reserve, and afterwards in the New
South Wales Scottish Rifles. Hav-
ing qualified himself, he received
his commission, and was appointed
lieutenant in the 4th Infantry Regi-
ment in 1896. In 1897 he was
transferred to the Ist Regiment, and
during the same year was promoted
to the rank of captain, at the time
receiving special mention for the
manner in which he discharged his
duties. He attained the rank of
major in 1898. He was appointed
acting-adjutant of the Ist Infantry
Regiment in 1898, which position he
occupied until January, 1900. From
May to December, 1901, he was
adjutant of the New South Wales
Mounted Rifles. Major Watson
served with distinction with the
New South Wales troops during the
most serious and exciting period of
the South African campaign. Upon
his arrival in South Africa in Janu-
ary, igoo, his regiment was de-
spatched at once to the seat of war.
He participated in the advance on
and occupation of Bloemfontein, and
was present at actions of Osfontein
and Driefontein (Abraham’s Kraal).
He was also with the general ad-
vance made by the mounted infantry
division, under the command of
General Hutton, to Pretoria, and
was present at the battles of Karee,
Brandfort, Eet, and the Zand River.
Afterwards, with Colonel de Lisle’s
Mounted Infantry Corps, he was
associated in the advance movement
under General lan Hamilton, and
was present at the engagement and
occupation of Lindleyand Heilbron,
and at the battles ot Doornkop and
the occupation of Johannesburg.
Major Watson took a distinguished
part in the battle before Pretoria,
and was the officer who demanded
the surrender of the Transvaal
capital from the Boer commandant,
General Louis Botha. Major Wat-
son was present at the battle of
Diamond Hill and in the action at
Bronklmrst Spruit. He also look
part in the first advance south and
in the series of actions at Heidel-
berg, Rhenoster River, Vredefort
and Vlakfontein. During this period
he was appointed staff officer to
Colonel de Lisle’s 2nd Corps
Mounted Infantry, and received pro-
motion to the rank of captain. He
was present at the relief of the
Elands River garrison, at the ac-
tions of Boschfontein, Vredefort (3rd
October, 1900), Rensburg Drift,
Bothaville, and at Rhenoster Kop.
In the following December, Major
Watson was engaged in Cape Col-
ony, operating through the country
from Pietberg toPrieska until March,
1901. Twice during the progress of
tile war, Major Watson has been
mentioned for meritorious services.
From an official despatch from Lord
Roberts to the British War Office,
and published in the Gazette, 30th
November, 1900, the following ex-
cerpt is taken; “Johannesburg,
26th November, 1903. De Lisle,
from Kroonstadt, reports Colonel
Fanshawe had rearguard action
with about sixty Boers. One man
New South Wales Mounted Rifles
killed. Fanshawe reports that Cap-
tain Watson performed a gallant
act. Seeing Private Robertson,
N.S.W.M.R., fall, he turned back
Charl emon t & Co. Sydney.
MAJOR RUSSELL WATSON.
and carried Robertson out on his
own horse under a hot fire.” In the
action which resulted in the capture
of Pretoria, Major Watson took a
distinguished part. His name, with
four other New South Wales officers,
was mentioned in the despatch for
meritorious service. The reference
to the surrender of Pretoria in the
official despatch from Colonel de
Lisle to General lan Hamilton is in
the following terms “ I then sent
my orderly officer, Captain Watson,
N.S.W.M.R., with a flag of truce
into the city to demand its surrender.
He returned at 8.30 p.m. with Mr.
Sheelberg, a representative of the
Government, and General Walhav-
sen, coni 111 cinclcint of the town. r X hese
1 conducted personally to the Field
Marshal Commander-in-Chief.” As
a memento Major Watson retains
possession ot the handkerchief used
as a flag of truce upon the occasion


of the surrender of the city. At the
coronation of His Majesty King
Edward VII., Major Watson was
honoured with the command of the
New South Wales troops represent-
ing the State on that historic oc-
casion, from April to October, 1902.
Since his return to the State he has
been promoted to the rank of brevet
major, and has been made the re-
cipient of the South African war
medal and six clasps. He also holds
the medal struck in honour of the
coronation of the King.
Lieut. R. CAMPBELL DAWSON
was born at Ilford, New South Wales,
on the 14th November, 1881, and
educated at the Coomber and Ryl-
stone Public Schools. He obtained
first place in order of merit in the
examination for appointments to
the public service of this State in
June, 1898, and the following Sep-
tember was appointed to the Depart-
ment of Audit. In June, 1900, he
J. Hilbert Newman. Sydney.
LIEUT. R. C. DAWSON.
joined the St. Leonards Civilian
Rifle Club, succeeding during the
next year iu winning the Crown
badge and the National Rifle Asso-
ciation medal. At the interstate
matches held at Adelaide in Sep-
tember, 1902, Mr. Dawson repre-
sented this State, winning the Gor-
don match at moving targets at
unknown ranges. At the National
Rifle Association meeting, held at
Sydney in October, 1902, he won
the Members’ competition with
a “possible’ at 700 yards, the
medal at 1,000 yards, and
Tooth’s trophy for the greatest
number of ‘ ‘ possibles.’ ’ The cham-
pionship for the St. Leonards
Civilian Rifle Club in 1902-3 next
fell to his prowess as a shot. In
May, 1903, he was selected to repre-
sent Australia in the matches held
at Bisley, England, and fired in the
three big team matches, one of
which, the Kolapore Cup, was
won by Australia with a record score.
Mr. Dawson was the only member
of the visiting team to win an indi-
vidual match, viz., the Duke of
Cambridge, with a ‘ ‘ possible ’ ’ at
the 900 yards range, ten shots being
fired, thus establishing a record. In
the years 1903 and 1904 he repre-
sented this State in the interstate
matches held at Sydney and Perth
respectively. A record of shooting
like this places Lieut. Dawson as one
of the best marksmen in the anti-
podes and it was a proud day for
the Australian Rifle Regiment when
in April, 1894 it included his name
on its officers’ roll.
Mr. FRANK MELHUISH,
F.R.C.V.S., is a native of Exeter,
Devonshire, England, where he was
born in the year 1861. His educa-
tion was received at a well-known
academy of high reputation, con-
ducted by the Rev. J. Kelland, M.A.,
atTotnes, the well-known Devonshire
town situated twenty-three miles from
Exeter. Upon the termination of
his college course he studied veteri-
nary science in his native city, and
after an independent and successful
practice of a few years and passing
the necessary examinations he was
appointed veterinary officer to the
North Somerset Yeomanry. This
position he held for a few years when,
his health having failed him, he was
advised to take a lengthened sea trip.
He accordingly took passage in a
sailing ship for New Zealand, arriv-
ing in that colony in 1890. After
spending nine months in the land of
the moa, and finding that the climate
suited his health, also his predilection
for sport, he started the practice of
his profession. Although the success
he achieved exceeded his most san-
guine expectations, he decided to go
to Victoria, believing that that colony
offered larger opportunitiesfor success
than did New Zealand at that time.
Mr. Melhuish arrived in Melbourne
in the year Malvolio won the Cup,
and shortly afterwards commenced
the practice of his profession at
Flemington. A little later he was
offered an appointment by the Sydney
Board of Health which he accepted.
In 1898 Mr. .Melhuish applied for
and received twelve months’ leave of
absence in order to secure a fellow-
ship in the RoyaT College of Veteri-
nary Surgeons. In this he was
J. Hubert Newman Sydney.
MR. F MELHUISH
eminently successful. He was also
admitted a member of the Sanitary
Institute, London. Upon his return
to Sydney at the expiration of his
leave of absence Mr. Melhuish re-
sumed his duties in connection with
the Sydney Board of Health. At the
outbreak of hostilities between the
South African republics and Great
Britain in 1899, Mr. Melhuish pro-
ceeded to the front with the first
contingent of the New South Wales
Lancers, in which corps he held the
appointment of veterinary officer
since 1896. He resigned his position
under the Board of Health in order
that he might be free to remain in
South Africa until the conclusion of
the war for which he received two
medals and five clasps. Mr. Mel-
huish, on his return to Sydney in
1903, was content to confine his at-
tention to his private practice which
he conducts at Fennelly’s Bazaar,
Pitt Street, Sydney, and at Randwick.
Mr. Melhuish is a strong adherent
of sport. He is a member of the New
South Wales Club, also of the Aus-
tralian Jockey Club.


Captain ANDREW PITT
GRIBBEN, M.R.C.V.S., was born
at Sydney in 1861, and is a son of the
late Mr. John Gribben, who practised
for many years as a veterinary
surgeon in Elizabeth Street, Sydney.
He -was educated, first at a private
academy and afterwards at the old
Fort Street School, then under the
headmastership of Mr. Bridges, the
late Under Secretary for Edu-
cation. Upon leaving school in 1876
he entered the business house of
Messrs. Mason Bros., general mer-
chants, and remained with them until
1887. In that year he decided to
associate himself with his late father’s
business, which was becoming in-
creasingly valuable. Having a natural
aptitude for this work, after two
years’ local experience he proceeded
to England and studied his profession
under the distinguished guidance of
Professor Williams, of the Edinburgh
Kerry & Co, Sydney
CAPTAIN A. P. GRIBBEN.
Veterinary College. In 1892 he was
admitted a member of the Royal
College of Veterinary Surgeons,
London. Upon his return to Sydney
he took over his late father’s practice.
In 1896 he obtained his commission
as Veterinary Lieutenant of the New
South Wales forces, and in the
following year, on the departure of
Captain Scott for England, was ap-
pointed Acting-Principal Veterinary
Officer, which office later on was con-
firmed to him permanently. Upon the
outbreak of the South African war in
1899 the offer of Captain Gribben to
proceed to the front with the Ist
New South Wales Mounted Infantry
was accepted. Arriving in South
Africa in the early part of 1900, he
with his company was despatched to
the front without delay. Captain
Gribben saw active service in Lord
Roberts’ forces, and took part in the
march which terminated in the occu-
pation of Pretoria. He holds the
Queen’s medal with three clasps —
Driefontein, Transvaal and Cape
Colony. Captain Gribben is a mem-
ber of the council of the United
Service Institute, a member of com-
mittee of the National Coursing
Association, and of the New South
Wales Kennel Club, of which he is
veterinary surgeon. He is also a
veterinary surgeon to the Royal
Agricultural Society and to the
Kensington Coursing Club.
Mr. WILLIAM CAMPHIN, late
Superintendent of Police, was born
at Manchester, England, in 1836,
and educated in his native city. In
1857 he arrived in Melbourne, but
soon came on to Sydney, and entered
the firm of Ede Bros., importers, in
whose head office, at Manchester, he
had already been employed for seve-
ral years. He remained in this
employ only a few months, and after
spending a short time in the service
of Messrs. Moses & Company, of
Wynyard Lane, Sydney, he, in 1858,
entered the service of the metro-
politan police. Four years later he
became a member of the detective
force, where he was continuously en-
gaged until his retirement in 1902.
As an instance however, of “ what
might have been,” he mentions that
many years ago, when engaged in
working up a case at Tambaroora,
he met a prospector at an hotel
there, who offered him a half-share
in his claim. Mr. Camphin was,
however, wedded to his profession,
and declined. That claim, he re-
marks, was afterwards floated for
20,000, and forms a part of the
workings now known as Hill End.
“ The Sherlock Holmes business is
all very well in fiction,” said the
veteran detective, “ but it does not
often work out so easy in real life,”
though it is surprising how often
just a slight clue will bring a cold-
blooded murderer or a carefully
planned robbery to light. Among
many instances which Mr. Camphin,
took a prominent part in the appre-
hension thereof may be mentioned
the investigation, in company with
Detective Elliott, in connection with
the Parramatta River murders. It
was just a sailor’s knot that even-
tually led to the tieing of the hang-
man’s noose. Upon information
that a man’s body had been seen
floating in Parramatta River, they
were sent to investigate, and as soon
as Elliott saw the body he said, “ A
sailor tied that knot.'’ Then said
Detective Camphin, “ I know who
did it.” Previous history of Lyster
and Nicholls need not here be re-
ferred to, suffice to say they were
caught by our subject and dealt with
according to law. In 1865 an old
man named Sam. Hassen, who was
very eccentric in his habits, was
found with his throat cut on a farm
belonging to a Mr. Rodd, of South
Creek, near Penrith. Verdict at
inquest was suicide, but about eigh-
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney
MR. W. CAMPHIN.
teen months later information was
obtained as a result of a quarrel
between a man named Murphy and
his wife at Maitland, who was over-
heard to mention that she knew
enough to get him hanged for the
murder of old Sam. Many were the
suspicious circumstances investi-
gated by Mr. Camphin, and which
ultimately led to the apprehension
and conviction of Murphy. Mr.
Camphin was also engaged in the
arresting and execution, on May 20,
1865, of Paddy Tombfor the shooting
of Mr. Alexander Mussen at Pyramid
Creek. In 1874 he arrested a man,
Thomas Barry, for an assault and
robbery ; he was convicted and sen-
tenced to five years. Mr. Camphin,
in company with Detective Finnigan,


arrested three men for sticking up
and robbing the northern mail,
Murrurundi and Singleton ; at the
trial two other cases of a similar
nature at Campbelltown and Wol-
longong were brought home to them,
who were each sentenced to eight
years. In September of 1877 the
body of a man was found in the
Murrumbidgee River, which was
identified as Henry Ford. Suspi-
cions led to the belief that it was a
case of murder, and our subject was
sent to investigate the matter, and
travelled by train to Goulburn, thence
by coach to Wagga, and on horse-
back to Mr. Robertson’s, of Barmed-
man Station, where he arrested a
man named Peter, who was brought
back to Wagga, a distance of over
ninety miles. This man, Peter Mur-
dick, was the last seen in company
with Ford, and had paid for a saddle,
&c., with a cheque drawn in favour
of Ford by Mr. Robertson, who, with
his brother, of Mimosa, rendered
valuable assistance in prosecuting
the case. His execution took place
at Wagga Wagga on 4th October,
1877. Mr. Camphin, in company
with Detective Lyons, arrested a
man named Woods, being a per-
petrator of an extraordinary attempt
to blackmail one Captain Stack-
house, for which he was sentenced to
fifteen years. The arresting of this
man was a very smart piece of
identification on the part of our sub-
ject. In connection with the Robert
Hancock will case of 1878 Detectives
Camphin and Lyons arrested three
persons who were sentenced to seven,
lour and three years respectively.
The arresting and conviction of
Thomas McCrea for feloniously steal-
ing property of W. G. Pople was
effected by him. He had special
contact with the light-fingered gentry,
who were perhaps graduates of the
Fagan Academy, as mentioned by
Dickens. He also mentions his ex-
perience with what was known as
the Swan River men with their
watch trick, and with an ingenious
fraud practised by a Chinaman, Kee
Chang, who manufactured nuggets
of gold on the Orepaki gold-fields of
New Zealand. Many other striking
experiences are full of incidents and
worthy of reference. The Nelson
gold robbery, which occurred in
Melbourne in the early fifties. Then
there was the murder of Conroy’s
Gap, perpetrated by a man named
Munday. The record of the num-
ber of criminals our subject has
arrested, been directly or indirectly
connected with, would fill a large
volume; suffice to add the names of
Gibson, the forger; Martin, the
Forest Reef triple murderer; the
convict Barnes; the bushrangers.
Fred. Lowry and Frank Britten.
Mr. ROBERT ANDERSON,
J.P., “ Greenbrae,” Illawarra Road,
Marrickville, late Inspector, Police
Department, from which he retired
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. R. ANDERSON.
in the year 1889, was born at Turriff,
Aberdeenshire, Scotland, in the year
1831, and received his education in
his native city. He came to Sydney
in 1853, ar *d the following year joined
the Sydney Police Force, taking
charge of its officers at the Mint.
After seven years’ service he received
suitable recognition at the hands of
the department, and was appointed
sub-inspector, being given in charge
of their northern division in 1868.
Upon his being transferred to the
supervision of the central division in
1875, his many friends of the northern
district made both he and his wife
the recipients of a handsome gold
watch and chain with an illuminated
address, and a solid silver tea service
and gold watch, respectively, as a
token of the esteem in which they were
held by them. The subject of this
sketch, both as an officer of the
Crown and privately, has from time
to time taken very prominent steps
in the suppression of crime in all its
many features, notably the suppres-
sion of what are known as “ cafes,”
considering they were but recruiting
grounds for our Criminals. For the
prompt action taken in this matter
he received public recognition, the
press also making special reference
thereon. Upon completion of fifteen
years’ service as sub-inspector, he
was in 1880 appointed to tire position
of inspector, still in control of the
central division. On his retirement
after thirty-five years’ service he
received at the hands of his fellow-
citizens at a public demonstration an
illuminated address, signed and pre-
sented by the then mayor, the late S.
Burdekin, on their behalf, in company
with the handsome gift of six hundred
sovereigns. He has held the position
of returning officer for the Marrick-
ville electorate, and was the first
returning officer for the Lang
Division. He is vice-president of
the Benevolent Society of New South
Wales, holding a like office of their
Marrickville branch. He is also a
director of the Randwick Asylum,
and vice-chairman of the Sydney City
Night Refuge, and one of the com-
mittee of the Sydney Female Refuge.
He is a trustee of the Marrickville
Cottage Hospital, and in 1894 he
received the appointment of Com-
missioner of the Peace. In 1852 he
married Margaret, eldest daughter of
Henry Hewson, of his native city,
and has remaining four sons, who
are each holding positions of note in
this State. His eldest was Principal
Librarian and is now Chief of
the Intelligence Department, while
Robert, jun., J.P., follows mercantile
pursuits, Dr. Anderson is at Coota-
mundra, and the Rev. W. A. S.
Anderson at Bowenfels.


Mr. WILLI AM BRO WN,
Consul for Chili at Sydney, New
South Wales, is a native of this State,
having been born at Newcastle some
forty years ago. Lie received a
practical and liberal education in his
native city. Upon its completion he
entered the employ of the firm of
Messrs. James and Alexander Brown,
of which his father was a partner.
This essentially and characteristically
Australian business progressed by
leaps and bounds, and with its
rapid development and expansion of
interests during the last two decades
the subject of this sketch has been
largely identified. Now a member
Kerry & Co. Sydney.
MR. W. BROWN.
of the firm, his influence in the
mercantile community of New South
Wales is considerable. Although the
headquarters of the firm are at
Newcastle, important branches of
the firm have been established at
Sydney, London, San Francisco and
Valparaiso. Messrs. James and Alex-
ander Brown’s well-known branch
establishment in the principal port of
Chili is the centre of gravity of the
extensive trade which the firm main-
tains with the rest of the republic,
as well as with the whole of the
west coast of South America. Mr.
Brown’s consular appointment dates
from 1897. Up to that time his
private career may be described as
that of an enterprising and successful
business man whose time had been
fully absorbed attending to the vast
mining and commercial interests of
the firm. Upon the Consulate of
Chili becoming vacant in the year
named, the Government of that pro-
gressive republic was anxious to
confer the position upon some gentle-
man of proved ability who was
already interested in the promotion
of business relations between New
South Wales and South America.
The Chilian Government found in
Mr. Brown the representative they
wanted, and conferred upon him the
appointment. Mr. Brown has the
advantage of knowing the conditions
and characteristics of the country he
represents, and is personally known
to a wide circle of distinguished
Chilian public men and private
citizens. For these reasons his
appointment may be considered an
appropriate one; indeed it is one
that has been fully justified in the
increase of trade that has taken place
between Australia and Chili since he
undertook the duties.
The Late Mr. THEODOR
AUGUST BOESEN, late Consul-
General for Denmark, was born
at Copenhagen, Denmark, in
1828 and educated at Latin
School, Fredericksborg. He began
his commercial life at Veile, Den-
mark, and in 1848 took engage-
ment in Hamburg. Early in 1854
he sailed from that place for Aus-
tralia in the barque “ Meteor,”
arriving in Sydney in September of
that year. Having considerable
THE LATE MR. T. A. BOESEN.
shipment of goods from Europe he
at once began business in company
with Mr. J. R. Petersen —a fellow-
passenger and supercargo—under
the style of Petersen, Boesen & Co.,
warehousemen, and which to-day is
one of the oldest business houses in
Sydney. The firm consists of Messrs.
J. R. Petersen, T. A, Boesen, A. E.
Hobson, and Arthur Boesen. The
former manages the London busi-
ness, which is now a limited liability
company. Mr. Boesen was appointed
Consul for Denmark in 1889, and
Consul-General in igoo. He re-
ceived the order of Knight of the
Danebroged. Mr. Boesen died on
March 6, 1904.
Mr. EDMUND RESCH, J.P.,
Consul for the Netherlands, was
born in Dortmund, „Westphalia, on
gth June, 1847. Although of German
parentage and birth, Mr. Resell is
essentially Australian, since by far
the major and best portion of his life
has been spent in New South Wales.
Arriving in Australia in 1863, from
the day of his arrival until to-day,
Mr. Resell has followed a life of
unceasing activity. His first efforts
to achieve success were made on
MR. E. RESCH.
the gold-fields in this Slate and in
Victoria. Subsequently lie entered
upon mercantile and manufacturing
pursuits. In 1877 he established a
brewery at Wilcannia, producing a
beverage which became famous
throughout the extensive and vast
far western provinces of New South
Wales. In 1895 ie came to Sydney,
and two years late/ acquired the
well-known Allt’s Brewery, origin-
ally founded by Messrs. Burrows
and Gleeson. In 1900 the business


and manufacturing plant of the New
South Wales Lager Beer Co. were
also purchased by Mr. Resell, and
in order to centralise the com-
bined interests, large and up-to-date
premises were erected in Dowling
Street, Redfern. Notwithstanding
the heavy and constant demands
made upon his time and activities,
Air. Resch evinces an active interest
in various kinds of sport, more
especially aquatics. As a yachts-
man he has achieved no small degree
of success ; and amongst those who
participate in the wholesome and
noble pastime the name of Air. Ed-
mund Resch is held in high esteem.
While in Wilcannia he was honour-
ed by the Government with a com-
mission as an honorary magistrate
for New South Wales. Since taking
up his residence in the metropolis
the Netherlands Government ap-
pointed Mr. Resch as consul for that
nation in Sydney —another recog-
nition of the business merits pos-
sessed by that gentleman. Air.
Resch’s two sons —Alessrs. Edmund
and Arnold Resch are already
actively associated with him in the
management of the business. Both
of these young gentlemen were made
the recipients of a sound business
education, acquired at the Church
of England Grammar School, North
Sydney, and subsequently at the
Scots’ College, Alelbourne.
ESPER NASSOOR, BEY, Con-
sul for the Turkish Empire in Sydney,
was born in Constantinople in iB6O.
He comes of a family distinguished
iu the diplomatic service of his
country. His brother, Khalil Nas-
soor, Bey, who formerly filled with
distinction the position of Consul
in Sydney, is at present acting as
Secretary-in-Chief to the Governor-
General of Bassora in Alesopotamia.
Esper Nassoor, Bey, received a
liberal education, mainly at the
celebrated French University at
Constantinople. Upon the comple-
tion of his education he engaged in
commercial pursuits and quickly
rose to a high position in one of
the great importing and distribut-
ing houses of the Turkish capital.
In 1893 the Imperial Government
selected Esper Nassoor, Bey, as
their representative at the great
World’s Fair held at Chicago in
1892 and 1893. the termination
of the exhibition he visited all the
chief cities of the United States in
the interests of trade and commerce
with Constantinople. Upon his re-
turn he reported upon his visit to
the United States, and received the
thanks of his Government for Lis
services. He then visited Paris,
where, for a while, he engaged in
commercial pursuits, returning to
Constantinople in 1899 in order to
take control of his rapidly extending
business. In 1902 he was offered
the Consulat Imperial de Turquie
ESPER NASSOOR, BEY.
at Sydney, which position he accept-
ed. Esper Nassoor, Bey, is devot-
ing bis best energies in developing
and increasing trade relations be-
tween New South Wales and the
Turkish Empire, Egypt and the
Levant. Upon his appointment to
the present position, Esper Nassoor,
Bey, was decorated with the Medal
of Megidiv, second class.
Mr. LUDOLPH WALDEMAR
AIARCKER, M.P.S., Denmark,
M P.S., Sydney, N S.W., Consul-
General for Denmark, who resides
at “ Bornholm,” Glebe Point, Syd-
ney, was born at Nexo, Bornholm,
a small island in the Baltic, on the
21 st July, 1866, and was educated
at the Copenhagen University, where
he passed preliminary examinations
compatible to the further study of
chemistry, which course he pursued
at Viborg, eventually obtaining his
diploma as a chemist and druggist.
He first practised his profession at
Copenhagen, but soon directed
his steps to the sunny climes of New
South Wales. In 1887 he came to
Sydney and established himself in
Burwood, where he remained for
about six years. Upon relinquishing
his business of a chemist and drug-
gist, he in 1893 undertook the busi-
ness of an ■mporter of Danish goods,
and while "ihus engaged was brought
into close business relations with the
firm of Messrs. E. Gomraesen and
Company, special importers of Dan-
ish dairy preparations, which busi-
ness he eventually took over, and
which he still conducts in conjunction
with his own of 297 George Street,
Sydney. In all Danish matters the
subject of this sketch takes very
great interest, and has been president
of the Danish Society of .Sydney for
the past five years. In the j-ear
1901, upon the occasion of the
establishment of the Commonwealth
of Australia, the Scandinavian sec-
tion of the community held a national
fete at the Sydney Town Hall, having
as their object the establishment and
maintenance of a cot in the Royal
Alexandra Hospital for Children as
a Commonwealth memorial. Air.
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. L. W. MARCKER.
Marcker’s philanthropic views were
very forcibly displayed in this praise-
worthy movement ; in fact he was
its prime mover, and so interested
was he in its welfare that we find
him performing the secretarial duties.
The handsome sum of bi.ooo was
realised at this fete, which in due
course was presented to the insti-
tution for the purpose already men-
tioned. Mr.- Marcher is a member
of the Masonic fraternity and holds
the office of Senior Warden of Lodge
No. 67, New South Wales.
Mr. HISAKICHI EITAKI, late
Acting Consul-General for Japan,
is a native of Japan,*" and received
his education at the English Law


College, Tokio, Japan —a college
where law and jurisprudence are
laught upon English principles by
Japanese professors. He passed the
examination for barristers-at-law in
1889, and also for the higher grades
of the civil service, and was ap-
pointed judge’s associate in the same
year ; appointed Attache for Foreign
Affairs at Tokio in 1890, appointed
Eleve Consul in 1892, and sent to
Pusan, Korea. He was transferred
to Chimulpo, Korea, as Acting-
Consul, in 1893, and was transferred
to the Consulate-General at Shang-
hai. China, in 1894, where f° r six
months (from December, 1894, 1°
May, 1895) he occupied the position
of Acting Consul-General. He was
then appointed Consul at Shasi (on
the Yang-tse-Kiang), where he re-
mained until August, 1898 During
his stay at Shasi he was commis-
sioned by the Japanese Govern-
ment to negotiate the terms of the
Japanese concession at Shasi with
the Chinese authorities, which was
satisfactorily concluded by him.
MR. H. EITAKI.
He was appointed Consul for New
South Wales in November, 1898,
and arrived at Sydney, January 18,
1899. The Consulate was raised to
the rank of a Consulate-General in
December, igoi, when he was in-
structed to assume the duties of
Acting Consul-General for Austral-
asia, which position he held until
1903.
Mr. ODAV EDUARD PAUSS,
Royal Consul for Norway, hails
from Drammen, one of Norway’s
principal seaport towns, famous for
its comparative large shipping busi-
ness and export trade in timber and
wood-pulp, his birth taking place in
theyear 1863. In addition to receiv-
ing a sound commercial education in
his own country, Mr. Pauss spent
some time in. Germany and England,
for educational accomplishments.
His father was a well-known ship-
owner and merchant, and upon his
son’s return, to Norway, after the
completion of his foreign education,
he entered the business. In the
course of his experience as an em-
ployee of Mr. Pauss, senior, he
became thoroughly acquainted with
foreign countries ; and forming a
very favourable impression of Aus-
tralia and its illimitable resources,
he decided upon a visit to Sydney
with a view to establishing his inter-
ests there, should his full anticipa-
tions be realised. After filling va-
rious positions of responsibility in
two important firms of the New
South Wales metropolis he com-
menced business on his own account
as a general shipping agent. From
the outset he commanded an en-
viable success, not only as general
business agent and underwriter for
various lines of over-sea vessels and
steamship companies, but as part
owner of vessels registered in New
South Wales. Among the more im-
portant companies represented by
Mr. Pauss in Australia are the
Nordisk, Skibsrederforening (The
Northern Shipowners’ Association),
an extensive shipping co-operation,
embracing a number of leading
shipping companies of Scandinavia ;
and Det Norske Veritas (The Nor-
wegian Classification Society). Mr
Pauss also controls the Australian
business of a number of insurance
companies and societies of Norway
and Sweden. The control of these
important interests brought Mr.
Pauss into close contact with the
Scandinavian citizens of New South
Wales and tended no little to fit
him for the position of Consul for
the then federated kingdoms of
Norway and Sweden. He was ap-
pointed to this position in 1899.
Both in his official and in his private
capacity he has taken the deepest
interest in the welfare of the country
of [his adoption., and has always used
his best endeavours to promote an
excellent feeling of comradeship
between the members of his nation-
ality and Australian citizens of Brit-
ish origin or descent. In this re-
spect the representative of a foreign
country can render invaluable ser-
vice. It was principally through
his efforts, aided by Mrs. Pauss, that
the Scandinavian fete held at the
Sydney Town Hall in 1901, was
MR. O. E. PAUSS.
successful in its object of raising
£ l,OOO for the funds of the Royal
Alexandra Hospital for Children.
Mr. Pauss, as a member of the
Masonic Order, is the representative
in the United Grand Dodge of New
South Wales for the Grand Dodge
of Sweden, as well as that of Nor-
way.
OTTO BARON Von HOEN-
NEING - O ’ C A RROLL, Consul-
General for Auslria-Hnngary for
Australia and New Zealand, was
born at Vaszka, Hungary, in 1863,
and received a liberal education at
the Oriental Academy, Vienna.
After occupying several important
official positions, he was appointed
Consular Attache at Moscow, where
he remained two years. In 1890 he
was appointed Vice-Consul at Sofia,
Bulgaria, and in 1896, that of Sec-
retary of Legation in the Diplo-
matic Agency at Bulgaria. In rB9B
he was called upon to fill the impor-
tant position of Acting Consul-
General at Warsaw, and in 1902
that of Acting Consul-General for
Australia and New Zealand.


Local Government.
In Australia there are no ancient franchises, no
cities possessing rites made sacred by age and long
custom. New’ South Wales has been slow’ to adopt a
general system of local government, this only having
come into vogue in 1905-6, notwithstanding the urgent
necessity for such a step. But where the system has
been adopted our municipal bodies have displayed a
strong utilitarian spirit and a desire for progress. In
a country of such vast area, good road communication
is a very pressing need. Water supply, lighting and
sanitation not only make for the comfort of life, but
are necessary for its preservation. Hence a few’ of
our country municipalities for many years have en-
gaged in some of all of these w orks. But the public
bodies possessed of this enterprising spirit have been
so exceptional that it must be confessed New’ South
ales, to-day is a long w.*y behind the other colonies
in the matter of local government. In Victoria. South
Australia. Queensland and New Zealand comprehensive
systems have been in existence for many years, and
the benefits derived therefrom are recognised, not
only by the Governments, but by the ratepayers, whose
property is affected. The central government is
relieved of responsibility and expenditure which form
no part of its proper functions, while the propertv-
owner, though compelled to pay rates from which he
was previously free, receives benefits which go a long
way to compensate for his direct payment.
The need of a general system upon some such
lines as those prevailing in the sister colonies has
long been felt. In New South Wales, until only the
other day, no district, however populous, was com-
pelled to become incorporated, and it was onlv on the
presentation of a petition, signed by at least fiftv of
the prospective ratepayers, and containing a larger
number of signatures than those attached to any other
petition, that a municipality could be formed.
Judged by past experience, this voluntary principle
never proved conducive to the adoption of a general
system of local government ; for so long as the central
government continued to construct local works it was
evident that the residents benefited would submit to
the absence of the local management of their affairs.
For many years a Local Government Bill figured
in the programme of successive governments, and until
1905 for as many years the country was without the
promised measure. The central government retained
in its own hands much work that was municipal in its
character. It retains a good deal still under the head-
ing of national works. Country roads and bridges
were built through the country at the cost of the
government : the residents were left with little to do.
In a large and sparsely settled country this w as to some
extent unavoidable, but it checked the desire for local
government, which of course involves the payment of
rates. Another reason that has had a deterrent effect
upon local energy is the promise just referred to of
bringing in a new bill, and there was naturally a desire
on the part of the people to hang back and see if new
legislation would secure better terms.
At the time of the last census, out of an area of
200,000,000 acres, an area of only 1.768.500 acres
was under local government. Roughly that is less
than one-hundredth part of the colony. At the end of
1860 the total area incorporated was 409 square miles :
in ten years they had increased to 649 miles only : in
1880, to 1,482 miles ; in 1890, to 2,387 miles ; in 1899,
to 2.763 miles ; and in 1901 (November), in the eastern
division there were 2,015 square miles incorporated
and 92.441 square miles, unincorporated ; in the
central division, 552 miles incorporated and
86,105 unincorporated ; and in the western division
292 miles incorporated and 124,661 square miles un-
incorporated ; making a total in the colony of 2,859
square miles incorporated and 303,207 unincorpo-
rated. Roughlv these figures are less than a hundredth
part of the colony. However, it must be borne in
mind that the bulk of the population live in the incor-
porated area, and the value of local government applies
not merely to square miles but to people. There was
about the time of the last census approximately a
population of 800,000 people in the municipalities of
the colony. Although this leaves a large number of
people outside the sphere of municipal work, it must
be remembered that they are widely scattered, the
municipalities covering the more or less densely popu-
lated areas.
In the course of 1894 an attempt was made to
redeem the many ministerial promises made to bring
in general local government. A bill was submitted to
the Legislative Assembly providing for the incorpora-
tion of the entire unincorporated area of the colony
into boroughs, municipal districts of a maximum area
of 400 square miles, and shires ; but in consequence
of the insertion of a clause, which they considered
contrary to the vital principle in the bill, the measure
was abandoned by the government. It was proposed
by the bill to alter the municipal year so as to extend
from January Ist to December 31st ; to alter the boun-
daries of existing municipalities by proclamation of
the Governor without petition ; to rate Crown lands
when under lease or license ; to make the assessment
on either the capital or annual value, the rate on the
former to be gd. to |d. per £ : to raise the maximum of
the general rate to Is. 3d. in the £ on annual value ;
to extend the period of endowment in certain instances
to 30 years, the sum granted ranging in amount per
£ of the general rates collected, from 60s. during the
first five to 10s. during the last five years, down to
10s. during the first five and 2s. 6d. during the last
G G
five years ; to submit certain questions, such as the
levying of a special rate, the rating on the capital cr
the annual value, and the raising of loans to a general
vote of the ratepayers ; to levy local rates for works


of local benefit ; to expend in each riding or ward of
a municipality the amount of rates collected from the
residents of that riding or ward ; to give power to erect
rabbit-proof fences, to grant aid to hospitals and to
prevent destruction by fire ; to take material for any
kind of municipal work from any land on payment of
compensation ; and to raise the borrowing powers to
ten times the total of the general rate.
Nothing further was done until 1902, when Sir
John See prepared a measure of local government,
which met with no better fate than Mr. Reid's bill in
1904. Two years afterwards a bill was drafted by
Mr. W ise, but the government of the day evidently
O %/ •/
considered the time was not ripe for any change, as
the measure was never laid on the table of the House.
Then ,came the enactment of 1905, which, with a
later bill known as the Shires Bill, is now on its trial.
The Shii *es Bill dealt only with the unincorporated
area of the Eastern and Central divisions, omitting
tlie Western division, and leaving the municipalities
to be dealt with in a separate measure There was in
the original draft of the bill no limit imposed on the
extent or population of a shire. Each shire was to be
divided into ridings, and governed by a council, at
first to consist of six councillors, four elected and two
appointed by the Governor. After three years all the
councillors might be elected, and the number might be
increased to nine. They would hold office for two
years, and all would retire'on the same day. The
electors were to consist only of the persons who paid
the rates, directly or indirectly. The basis of rating
provided taxation of the unimproved capital value for
general rates, and for special, local or loan rates either
taxation of the improved or unimproved capital value
in both shires and municipalities. The bill provided
that there might be a tax of Id. to Hd. in the £ on
the unimproved capital value. There was a provision,
however, that if the commissioners found that Id. in
the £ was more than was required they could permit
the local body to levy a lower rate. There could also
be an additional general rate, but not exceeding Jd. in
the £ on the improved capital value, but that could
only be raised by the sanction of the people. The
general and additional general rate was not to exceed
six-fifths of a penny on the unimproved capital value
but power was given to raise a special rate to cope
with any outbreak of typhoid, &c., or to meet the
expense of some special work.
For the first three years after the constitution of
the shires it was proposed to pay from the consolidated
revenue a sum of £150,000 for the endowment of
shires, this amount being considered sufficient at the
end of that period, in view of the growth of settlement
and steady rise of unimproved values, to provide for
all requirements without necessitating a higher rate.
All land (excepting unoccupied Crown lands, shire
council lands, cemeteries, parks, reserves, charitable
institutions’ lands, church lands, &c.) were to be rat-
able ; and when a rate of Id. in the £ was struck on
any shire the present land tax would cease to be col-
lected. Every power required totbe performed 1 by a
local authority was provided for, so that & council
could take up any field of public service. There were
the care of roads and bridges, wharfs, the regulation
of traffic, lights at cross roads or at dangerous points,
power to make provision to prevent or mitigate bush
fires and floods; kerbing, guttering, tree planting,
street lighting, and the care and management of public
watering places The measure also contained power
to provide a sanitary service, to deal with garbage,
provide drains and sewers, simple water supplies, to
regulate and license vehicles and hawkers, to care for
and manage the parks, reserves and commons not
under trustees.
The Local Government Extension Bill of £1903
extended the provisions of the Act passed in 1905,
and embraced a scheme of enfranchisement which
provided that “ every occupier who is a tenant ol
ratable land of the value of £5 or over is to be en-
rolled as an elector ; and where the rent is £2O or over,
each tenant, if there be more than one, shall be en-
rolled as an elector. All landowners and joint owners
are also to be enrolled, and the owners and tenants
between them comprise the electoral authority, as
well as the voting authority, on questions whether or
not the council shall be granted any particular power
for which it may have applied.” In all matters of
rating and to the question of borrowing it was pro-
vided that the voting was not to be with the general
electors, but restricted to the ratepayers. The bill
thus created two sets of electors. It also gave wide
powers to the municipalities, but at the same time
these powers were safeguarded. A council could not
at will extend its functions beyond what are known
as the general objects of municipal government ; and
when it decided on the expediency of stepping outside
the ordinary path, it had first to acquire the approval
of the government. A further check was provided by
enacting that <c on petition from one-sixth of the elec-
tors (not ratepayers merely) the Governor may direct
that a poll of electors shall be taken as to whether such
powers shall be conferred on the council, and if the
poll decides against the extension of the council 5 s
powers they cannot be extended. 5 ’
Coming to the municipalities, the general rate
was not to be less than Id. nor more than 2 Jd. in the £
on the unimproved capital value, and an additional
general rate up to but not exceeding Jd. on the im-
proved capital value. The same regulations applied
as in the Shires Act for levying loan and local ,rates,
and in addition to the Id. in the £ land tax, there was
to be a perpetual endowment of in the £ on
the general rates. Councils were empowered to seize
land on which four years’ rates were due, and to lease
it, taking the rent to pay the rates. If during the
next sixteen years the owner claimed possession, he
could regain his land on paying all sums due to the
council ; but when he did not claim possession within
sixteen years the land would become the absolute
property of the municipal authorities.
Apart from these special powers, the provisions
of the two bills made it compulsory for local bodies
to perform certain functions. The Shires Bill required
all councils to administer the Impounding Act and
certain provisions of the Police Offences Act. Then
by the Local Government Extension Bill the


Governor was given power to hand over to municipal
or shire councils the management of reserves, ceme-
teries, or commons, and to abolish any trusts in which
the management might at the time be vested. The
administration of certain sections of the Cattle Slaugh-
tering and Diseased Animals and Meat Act, and of
the Public Health Act, were vested in all councils,
and also the supervision oi all places of public resort
and amusement, such as theatres, halls of entertain-
ment, dancing saloons, &c. The Governor might also
require any council to take over the management of
stock routes, camping reserves and commons, and of
any parks, works, buildings, wharves, &c., provided or
constructed by the central government.
Early Days.
Legislation passed regarding local government in
New South Males differentiates between the Sydney
Municipal Council and the suburban and country
municipalities. The City Council works under an
Act of Parliament, passed exclusively for it. Al-
though Sydney was not incorporated till a compara-
tively late period, Acts were passed during the reign
of William IV. to regulate, market dues, to make a
tunnel to supply the town from Botany swamps with
water, and to regulate the alignment of the streets.
The city of Sydney was first incorporated on July 20,
1842, and the Sydney Municipal Council was estab-
lished during the same year the election of aldermen
taking place on November 9. Mr. John Hosking was
the first mayor, and it is worthy of note that he was
returned to this office on the vote of the people.
Lawrie, in his story of Australia, comments thus on
the appearance of Sydney about the time of its incor-
poration : Sydney had been described to me as a
rough and tumble mound of hovels, filthy yards, and
mouldy cellars ; behold, almost at a wave of the hand,
it is transformed, when I first see it, into a well-formed
town, with partially-paved streets, of habitable houses,
and adorned with public buildings, quays and wharves,
each and all lending an air of dignity as well as homely
comfort to the place.’’ The house used as the Town
Council Chambers was one erected by Mr. Commissary
Broughton about the year 1813, on the site of the
soldiers’ huts, known by the name of “ Rookery,”
being on the right-hand side facing the rear of the
market sheds in York Street. This building was
afterwards the residence of the first Colonial Secretary,
Major Goulburn, and again that of Judge Stephen,
after the departure of whom it was turned into the
Pultenay Hotel, kept by Mr. Levien.
The city was divided into six wards,nviz.. Gipps,
Bourke, Brisbane, Macquarie, Cook and Phillip wards ;
but at a subsequent adjustment the number was in-
creased to eight, viz., Denison and Fitzroy wards;
each of these returning two aldermen to the council.
The Act by which the city of Sydney was incorporated
contained no provision for the extension of the muni-
cipal principle to other localities ; but in 1843 the first
step was taken towards the extension of the system
to the country districts by the incorporation under
letters patent of Campbelltown, Appin, Camden,
Narellan, and Picton as one district council, which
was afterwards, in the course of the same year, under
a special Act, subdivided into two by the formation
of Campbelltown and Appin into a separate council.
In 1844 the number of country district councils had
increased to eight, the new ones being Newcastle,
Albury, Goulburn, Redfern, Shellharbour, Kiama, and
Shoalhaven, and these, in conjunction with the Syd-
ney Council and the Road Trusts of South Head,
Randwick and Coogee, Parramatta, Windsor, Rich-
mond and Campbelltown constituted the w r hole of the
local government system prior to 1858.
After a few years great dissatisfaction arose in the
minds of the citizens in regard to the manner in which
the affairs of the corporation w f ere carried on ; a Select
Committee of the Legislative Council w T as appointed
in 1849 to inquire into the matter, and it reported in
favour of the abolition of the municipal council, with
a recommendation that itspporersw r ers should be invested
in three commissioners. This was ‘not carried into
effect until 1853, when the corporation w T as dissolved,
and its authority was transferred to a commission,
consisting of Messrs. G. Elliott, J. Rae, and T. Darvall,
who administered the affairs of the city from the be-
ginning of 1854 to the end of 1857. But their control
was no more pleasing to the citizens than that of the
corporation they had succeeded, and in turn they
themselves had to give way to a new 7 council elected
by the ratepayers, w ho assumed control of civic affairs
in the metropolis at the commencement of 1858,
Mr George Thornton was first mayor under the
changed order of things, and again there were sixteen
aldermen —tw T o for each ward, —their office, or rather
the temporary town hall, being the building at the
top of King Street, now known as the Oxford Hotel.
The x population of the Queen City of the South then
amounted to about 150,000. It had jumped in twelve
years from 38,358 to these figures, the average annual
increase prior to the gold discoveries being not more
than 3,000 per annum, so that from 1852-3 till 1858
it had nearly trebled itself.
The first general Municipalities Act applicable to
the entire colony was passed by the Cowper ministry
in 1858. w 7 hen thirty-five suburban and country muni-
cipalities w 7 ere constituted. The Act made provision
for dissolving, if necessary, the district councils, and
placing the areas controlled by them under municipal
)3odies. Under its authority these thirty-five districts
were incorporated, which, with the exception of Cook,
joined to Camperdown in 1870, and East St. Leon-
ards, subsequently united to St. Leonards, still exist,
although nearly half of them have been reproclaimed
in the interior on account of additions or curtailments
of area. Many of these did not establish themselves
until 1860. In fact, the only had assessed
their property prior to the end*' of 1859 were :
Grafton (its estimated value of ratable property heinv
£7.760), Waverlev (£20,000), Newcastle (£36,120),
Albury (£23,760), Goulburn (£54,000), Shellharbour
(£12,138), Kiama (£37,943), Central Illawarra
(£25.000), Wollongong (£14.000), and Randwick
£13,984). From these figures one can obtain a fair
idea of how far the suburbs of Sydney and the country
districts Lad progressed up to this stage.
Between the years 1858 and 1866,, the suburban
residents availed themselves largely of the privileges
comprised in the Municipalities Act, and in the inure


diate neighbourhood of that part of Sydney presided
over by the original council fourteen district munici-
palities were-formed, of which on the eve of the intro-
duction of the Amending Act of 1867 twelve were in
capital working order ; these being Balmain, Cook,
Darlington, Glebe, Marrickville, Newtown, Padding-
ton, Randwick, Redfern, Waterloo, Waverley and
Woollahra. The remaining two, St. Leonards and
Camperdown, had not yet taken steps to establish
themselves under the provisions of the Act. Meetings
of the City Council were now held in Town Hall,
Wynyard Square, or what was, more strictly speaking,
a private building rented for the purpose. During
186-1 the city rate raised by assessment amounted to
£34,339 ; while rents, fines and repayments swelled
the revenue to the sum of £51,032. Expenses for
city improvements amounted to £47,309, and loi
lighting (gas) £6,287. The number of ratepayers this
year amounted to 12,445, and the estimated value ol
the ratable property within the municipal boundaries
was £637,600 ; while the extent of roads, streets,
lanes, &c., under the corporation was about 90 miles.
The Act of 1858 remained in force until it was
amended by the Municipalities Act ol 1867, and fur-
ther amended from time to time. Under the Amend-
ing Act of 1867 districts could be incorporated upon
petition from persons liable to pay the rates. Aider-
men held office for three years, one-third retiring every
year. Municipal areas were divided into wards,
according to population. Voting was by ballot, and
the votes of ratepayers was cumulated up to four ,
thus : the occupier, lessee, or owner of property as-
sessed at an annual value not exceeding £25, had one
vote ; over £25 and not exceeding £75, two votes ,
over £75, and not exceeding £l5O, three votes ; and
over £l5O, four votes. All municipalities were en-
dowed in proportion to the rates. For the first five
years after incorporation the Government gave a sum
per annum equal to the whole of the rates, assessments
and subscriptions ; for the second five years, one-half ;
and in the third succeeding five years, one-fourth,
after which the government endowment ceased.
Every year an assessment was made ol the ratable
property within the borough, and a rate that would
meet the estimated requirements was struck. Rates
were levied on nine-tenths the annual value of im-
proved property, and on 5 per cent, of the capital
value of unimproved land, except in the city of Syd-
ney. where the maximum percentage on unimproved
land was 6 per cent. Councils were authorised to
borrow on debentures, mortgage or bond, hypothe-
cating any land, personal estate, or annual revenue,
actual or prospective, belonging to the municipality,
provided that the amount borrowed did not exceed
the estimated revenue lor five years. In 1884 and
1888 Acts were passed empowering councils to con-
tract special loans for the erection of gas works and
town halls, and in 1893 another amending Act, em-
powering councils to raise money to repay loans,
became law. The 1867 Act also gave powers to in-
corporated bodies regarding the making of drains,
the abatement of nuisances, and the construction and
maintenance of roads and footpaths. Contiguous dis-
tricts, with an area of not more than nine square miles,
and a population of not less than 1,000, might be
incorporated as boroughs ; and districts of not more
than 50 square miles, with a population of not less
than 500, might be formed into municipal districts.
It was estimated in the year 1869 Sydney proper
had a population of 71,800, occupying 14,500 houses.
The estimated value of house property within this
area was upwards of £B,OOO. The suburban boroughs’
population represented about 50,000, and contained
upwards of 9,000 houses and other buildings, the
estimated value of which was nearly £3,000,000. In
the unincorporated suburbs there were about 12,000
inhabitants, and 2,500 houses and other buildings,
and the estimated value of this property was nearly
three-quarters of a million sterling. The total popu-
lation of the city and suburbs, incorporated and
unincorporated, within the metropolitan police district
was estimated at 127,000 ; the number of houses and
other buildings at 26,000, and the estimated value of
household property at £11,637,000. In this district
there were nearly 200 miles of streets and 134 miles
of roads. Throughout the colony there were about
forty municipalities varying very greatly in regard to
size and population. The suburban municipalities
were, of course, the most compact and populous.
Balmain contained an area of but fifteen-sixteenths of
a square mile, and had a population of about 4,000.
The Glebe had an area of three-quarters of a square
mile, and a population of 5,000. The municipality
of Cook contained an area of only half a square mile,
and had a population of 1,400. Marrickville, with
over 24 square miles, had a population of but 1,500.
Newtown, two-thirds of a square mile in area, carried
5,000 persons. Redfern, containing an area of Utile
more than half a square mile, had a population ol
between 4,000 and 5,000. Some of the country muni-
cipalities embraced areas of more than 100 square
miles. Central Illawarra, for instance, had 116 miles ;
Kiama, 120 square miles ; and Cudgegong, 191 square
miles. The rates were levied upon nine-tenths of the
fair average annual rental of buildings and cultivated
lands, and upon £5 per cent, of the capital value of the
fee simple of all unimproved lands. In addition to
the general rates, special rates might be levied for
sewerage, water, gas, free infant schools, and free
libraries. But the rates, general and special, were
limited to 2s. in the £ of the assessment, and in very
few instances did they exceed Is. in the £. Several ol
the suburban municipalities were lighted with gas,
the pipes being continued from Sydney, and the Goul-
burn corporation lit their streets with kerosene. Some
of the municipalities had free libraries, but no special
rate was levied for their maintenance. The town halls
for the most part were neat and substantial, and, to
quote a contemporary of the time, “ the Sydney Town
Hall, the foundation of which was laid by H.R.H. the
Duke of Edinburgh on April 4, 1868, would do
credit to any English or Continental city.”
Since the passing of this Act of 1867 the number
of municipalities has steadily increased the total in
1877 having been 76 ; in 1887, 122 ; and at the end
of the municipal year 1899-90, 189. Of these, 79
were boroughs and 110 municipal districts, the city of
Sydney being classed with the former, as are the


469
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES


remainder of the 35 municipalities established under
the previous Act of 1858. In the course of the muni-
cipal year, 1899-1900 five new corporations were
gazetted, viz. : —Bexley, Gladstone, Hillgrove, Wari-
alda, and Wyalong. Later on Brewarrina and Manilla
have been proclaimed. Notwithstanding the relatively
small area incorporated, at the date of the census—
March, 1901 —the population within the boundaries
of these districts numbered 860,750 —equal to an
average density of 301 to the square mile, or 183
times that of the rest of the State. On February 5,
1900 the annual and capital values of ratable property
in the colony were as follows General rate levied —
city of Sydney, £128,871; suburban municipalities,
£129,687 ; country municipalities, £109,092 ; total,
£367,650. Fair average rental value of improved land
with buildings thereon —city of Sydney, £2,026,010 ;
suburban municipalities, £2,592,600 ; country muni-
cipalities, £2,255,710 ; total £6,874,320. All ratable
property —city of Sydney, £2,135,700 ; suburban
municipalities, £2,859,500 ; country municipalities,
£2,416,900; total, £7,412,160. Capital value of-
improved land with buildings thereon in the city of
Sydney, £40,939,500 ; suburban municipalities,
£58,997,600 ; country municipalities, £30,525,900 ;
total, £110,459,000. All ratable property in the city
of Sydney, £43,128,600 ; suburban municipalities,
£44,335.400 ; country municipalities, £33,749,800 ;
total, £121,213,800.
In 1897 all the municipal Acts —sixteen in num-
ber—were consolidated, and this Act remained in
force until repealed by the Acts of 1901, already
referred to. Under the 1897 Act no greater area than
50 square miles could be incorporated as a municipal
district, and it must have a population of not less than
500. For incorporation as a borough a district re-
quired a minimum of 1,000 on an area of not more
than nine square miles. It will thus be seen that con-
siderable latitude was allowed with regard to muni-
cipal areas. The borough of Darlington, with an area
of 38 acres, was the smallest in size, but it had a popu-
lation of 3,550 people, and the amount of the general
rate levied in 1900 was £B7l. The largest borough
was that of Cudgegong, which had an area of 122,880
acres, a population of 2,630, being less than that of
Darlington, and which struck a general rate in 1901
of £1,062. According to the official statistics brought
up to February 5, 1900, as regards country and sub-
urban municipalities, the latter contained a total area
of 16,777,326 acres, on which were 69,738 dwellings,
with an approximate population of 356,700, and
these in 1899-1900 struck general rates amounting
to £109,092. The metropolitan municipalities em-
braced an area of 91,178 acres, contained 92,141
dwellings, had an approximate population of 438,300,
and levied on the last assessment a general rate of
£258,558. This gave a grand total for the colony of
1,768,504 acres under municipal government, includ-
ing 161,879 dwellings, and an approximate population
of 795,000, with a general rate on the last assessment
amounting to £367,650.
A bill was submitted to Parliament in 1900 to
amend the Act dealing with the corporation of Sydney.
That did away with plural voting, gave votes to
lodgers, and divided the city into twelve wards, with
two aldermen for each. The first election under this
Act made a sweeping change in the personnel of the
council, and brought a party of municipal reform in
power. In the latter part of 1901 a bill was intro-
duced to codify and amend the Consolidation Act of
1897, and to make further provision for municipal
government. It was proposed to confer on municipal
councils the right to levy their rates on the unimproved
value of the land, instead of on the annual value of all
property ; but a council, after passing a resolution to
thus change the bads of valuation, was debarred
from confirming it in the event of twenty or more
electors notifying the mayor that they required a
referendum on the matter. Upon a referendum being
taken the result was to be abided by for four years.
In cases of the general rates being imposed on the
basis of the unimproved value of the whole of the
ratable land in the municipality, the rate was not to
exceed 2d. in the £. On the other hand, when the
general rate was to be collected on the alternative
basis, the councils were to be empowered to collect up
to Is. 6d., in place of Is. in the £.
At the census of 1901 there were in the city of
Sydney 18,303 inhabited houses, 666 uninhabited, and
89 in course of construction, giving a total of 19,058
dwellings. There were also 2,079 buildings of other
descriptions. The inhabited buildings were occupied
bv a population of 1 11,800. In the suburbs of Sydney
there were 73,129 houses, in which 370,050 persons
dwelt ; while in the country municipalities there were
73,500 houses, occupied by 372,185 persons. In the
unincorporated portion of the State there were 114,073
houses, inhabited by 499,370 persons. The estimated
value of land, houses, and other permanent improve-
ments in the State at that time, approximately, was
£265,527,000, of which £124,541,800 was the value
of ratable property in the incorporated districts.
The city of Sydney possessed 115 miles of streets,
including 15 miles wood-blocked, covering an area of
73 acres, and laid at a cost of £490,500.
The Sydney Corporation Act gives authority to
maintain the thoroughfares ; to construct lighting,
sewage and water supply works, and to levy the
necessarv rates in connection therewith ; to make and
enforce by-laws for the maintenance of the public
health and the abatement of nuisances to license
vehicles plying for hire, and generally totakemeasures
for the material and sanitary condition of the resi-
dents. It also directs that valuers shall be appointed
from time to time to assess improved property within
the city at the fair average value, with an allowance
for outgoings not exceeding 10 per cent, and the
unimproved property at a maximum of 6 per cent, on
its capital value, and on the value of such assessment
a city rate not exceeding 2s. in the £ may be levied,
exclusive of lighting. The rate stood at 16d. from
1891 to 1899, but was increased to IBd. for 1900, and
24d. for 1901. At the last assessment it was fixed at
21 d. From the latest official returns the following
particulars are taken: —The population of the city
proper on December 31, 1905, was 118,100, and the
number of premises about 23,190. The assessed
annual value of city property (1903) was £2,030,607 ;


and of company’s manes, £31,993. The capital
value of city property was £45,124,600 ; the length of
streets, including Government streets and tramways
was 116 miles 59 chains 48 feet ; the metal and stone
paved streets, 96 miles 31 chains 48 feet ; the wood-
paved streets under control of council 19 miles 59
feet, and the total wood-paved streets, including
tramway areas and Government streets, 21 miles 29
chains ; the voters on' roll, 34,505 ; the revenue of
the city for 1906, all sources, £257,586, and the
expenditure for the same period, £261,401 ; the
total debentures outstanding £1,700,000 ; the total
sinking fund, £145,850 ; the reserves under municipal
control, 444| acres ; the length of sewers in the city,
about 516 miles.
The main streets running north and south from
the eastern boundary are Victoria, Brougham,
Dowling, Forbes, Bourke, Palmer, Crown, Riley,
\ urong, College, Macquarie, Elizabeth, Castlereagh
Pitt, George, A ork, Clarence, Kent, Sussex, Fort, and
Harris Streets. Those that run east and west are :
Cleveland, Devonshire, Albion, Gipps, Hay, Campbell,
Goulburn, Oxford, Liverpool, Burton, Bathurst, Park,
William, W oolloomooloo, Market, King, Hunter,
Bridge, Albert, and Argyle Streets. The city boun-
dary commences at Blackwattle Cove, and thence
bounded by the waters of Port Jackson to Kushcutters’
Bay, thence by Kushcutters’ Creek to a culvert in the
South Head road at Dowling Street, thence by Dowling
Street to Church Street, thence by the southern boun-
dary of Paddington to Park Road, thence by Lang
Road and Martin Hoad to Bunnerong Road, thence bv
Bunnerong Road to the northern boundary of Ken-
sington estate, thence by that boundary of that estate
to Dowling Street, thence by Dowling Street to Cleve-
land Street, thence by Cleveland Street to its junction
with the Newtown road, thence by that road to
George and the west (formerly Parramatta Street,)
thence by Bay Street to the south boundary of Went-
worth Park, thence easterly by that boundary to
W attle Street, thence by west building line of Wattle
Street to the point of commencement. The city in-
cludes Darlinghurst, Elizabeth Bay, Millers’ Point,
Moore Park, Pott’s Point, Pyrmont, Strawberry Hills,
Surry Hills, Ultimo, and Woolloomooloo. It is divided
into twelve wards, viz. ; —Belmore, Bligh, Bourke,
Cook, Denison, Fitzroy, Flinders, Gipps, Lang, Mac-
quarie, Phillip, Pyrmont. About one-half of the
municipalities were divided into wards prior to the
passage of the 1905-6 bills, and the number of these
wards is regulated, generally speaking, by the popu-
lation. Every person, whether male or female, of the
full age of twenty-one years, who on the 7th day of
January in any year might be the occupier, lessee, or
owner of any ratable property within any municipality,
and who had paid his rates prior to the day of election,
was entitled to vote ; and by special enactment both
owner and tenant were entitled to vote in the city of
Sydney, the ratepayer being allowed the cumulative
vote (if any), the other only one vote.
The City Act of 1879 provided for an annual
endowment by the State of £25,000 for a period of
two years. It also enacted that all fees for auc-
tioneers’ licenses within the city should be paid over
by the .treasury to the City Council. The amount so
received in 1895 was £2,137; in 1895, £3,438; in
1897, £2,247 ; in 1898, £1,409; in 1899, £223; and
in 1900, nil . The auctioneers’ fees since 1898 became
nominal when compared with former years owing to
a rearrangement with the Treasury. Although the
Act authorises the raising of loans equal in amount
to five years’ revenue after the discontinuance of the
endowment in 1889, yet it has been found convenient
to obtain special Parliamentary sanction for each new
loan. The debentures outstanding at the end of last
year were : —City Fund, £300,000 ; Town Hall Loan
Fund, £200,000 ; Streets Loan Fund, £200,000 ;
Moore Street Improvement Fund, £250,000 ; Public
Markets Loan Fund, £450,000 ; Electric Light L oans,
£275,000 ; Resumption Loan, £25 000 ; total.
£1,700,000. These debentures fall due as follow; —
£360,000 in 1912, £250,000 in 1913. £300.000 in 1919.
£150,000 in 1922, £240,000 in 1926, £IOO.OOO in
1928, £250,000 in 1929, £50,000 in 1931, the whole
being redeemable at par, and bearing interest as fol-
lows : 4 per cent, on £1,505,000 ; 3J per cent, on
£170.000 ; 3| per cent, on £25,000.
Ihe growth of the city and suburbs has been mar
vellous, and the metropolis now stands as the second
city of the British Empire, estimated at the annual
value of its ratable property, Melbourne ranking fourth.
The annual value of property in Sydney and suburbs,
covering an area of 91,220 acres, was in February,
1905, £5,866,860, while the annual value of Greater
Melbourne, with an area of 163,480 acres, was
£4,551,283. The following are the annual values of
other of the leading cities of Great Britain, from the
statistics available two vears auo : —London (county),
£41,078,113; Glasgow, £5,395,000; Manchester,
£4,046,755 ; Liverpool, £4,416.061 ; Edinburgh,
£2,924,173 ; Birmingham, £2,858,873; Leeds, £1,982,-
232; Bristol, £1,723,119; Sheffield, £1,610,931; and
Bradford, £1,521,140. On February 28th, 1906, there
were 192 municipalities in New South Wales, having an
incorporated area of 1,810.912 acres ; a capital value
of £140,314,600 ; and rates amounting to £595,812.
The total capital value of all ratable property in muni-
cipalities for 1904-5 is shown in the following
details : —Metropolitan : Sydney, £44,889,000. Sub-
urbs : Alexandra, £745,900 ; Annandale, £1,155,900 ;
Ashfield, £2,069,700 ; Balmain, £3,892,400 ; Bexley,
£457,100; Botany, £279,400 ; Botany North, £398,100;
Burwood, £1,640,000 ; Camperdown, £755,200 ; Canter-
bury, £812,000 ; Concord, £505,100 ; Darlington,
£266,900 ; Urummovne, £862,500 ; Enfield, £339,700 ;
Erskineville, £363,800 ; Glebe, £1,912,500 ; Hunter’s
Hill, £773,300 ; Hurstville, £472,300 ; Kogarah,
£567,000 ; Lane Cove, £492,600 ; Leichhardt, £1,536,-
900; Manly, £1,036,900; Marrickville, £2,808,600;
Marsfield, £100,100; Mosman, £1.998,900; Newtown,
£3,310,400 ; North Sydnev, £4,668,200 ; Paddington,
£1,896,000; Petersham, £2,611,800; Randwick,
£2,253,600; Redfern, £2,453,000; Rockdale, £1,014,-
900 ; Ryde, £582,300 ; St. Peters, £613,100; Strath-
field, £944,900 ; Vaucluse, £249,300 ; Waterloo,
£733,100; Waverley, £2,063,300; Willoughby,
£1,270,600; Woollahra, £3.076,100; total suburbs,
£53,968,900. Total metropolitan, £98,557,900.


Country .municipalities : —Aberdeen, £66,900 ; Al-
bury, £763,400 ; Armidale, £409,600 ; Auburn, £363,-
600; Ballina, £200,200; Balranald, £39,100 Bank;-
town, £225,600 ; Bathurst, £965,600; Bega, £265,400;
Berry, £313,600; Bingera, £75,500; Blayney, £157,-
900; Bombala, £71,400 ; Bourke, £167,300; Bswral,
£248,200 : Braidwood, £140,200 ; Brewarrina, £33,900;
Broken Hill, £1,056,500 ; Broughton Yale, £64,800 ;
Burrowa, £415,400; Cabramatta and Canley Vale,
£114,400; Camden, £148,500; Campbelltown, £lBl,-
700 ; Carcoar, £29,900 ; Casino, £208,800 ; Castle-
reagh, £67,600 ; Cobar, £220,000 ; Condobolin,
£93,700; Cooma, £235,100; Coonamble, £185,800:
wai'ra North, £559,701); lugleburn, £59,000 , In-
verell, £555,300; Jamberoj, £293,400 : Jerilderie,
£87,000; Junee, £176,500; Katoomba, £361,000;
Kempsey, £144,900 ; Kiama, £139,400 ; Lismore,
£345,000 ; Lithgow, £591,900 ; Liverpool, £322,400 ;
Maclean, £85,300 ; East Maitland, £314,200 ; West
Maitland, £1,021,200; Manilla, £80,300; Mittagong,
£144,300 ; Moama. £160,600 ; Molong, £102,000 ;
Moree, £211,500;; Morpeth, £105,800; Moruya,
£33,300; Moss Vale, £267,500; Mudgee, £304,000;
Mnlgoa, £82,400; Murrumburrah, £119,000; Mur-
rurundi, £66,200 ; Murwillumbah, £114,800; Muswell-
brook, £184,200 ; Narrabri, £140,700 ; Narrabri West,
QUEEN VICTORIA MARKETS,
SYDNEY. N.S.W.
Cootamundra, £244,800; Coraki, £110,500; Corowa,
£262,200 ; Cowra, £213,300 ; Cudal, £102,700 ; Cudge-
gong, £445,600 ;; Deniliquin, £258,700 ; Dubbo,
£253,500 ; Dundas, £166,900 ; Dungog, £105,500 ;
Ermington and Rydalmere, £69,400 ; Forbes, £395,800 ;
Gerringong, £208,000 ; Glen Innes, £273,300 ; Gosford,
£58,600 ; Goulburn, £956,600 ; Grafton, £497,500 ;
Grafton South, £59,000 ; Granville, £714,500 ; Gren-
fell, £97,100 ; Greta, £42,200; Gulgong, £146,300;
Gundagai, £111,700; Gunnedah, £105,400; Hay,
£203,900 ; Hill End, £30,300 ; Hillgrove, £65,900 ;
Hillston, £89,400 ; Tllawarra Central, £826,400 ; Illa-
£33,900 ; Narrandera, £238,200 ; Narromine, £76,700 ;
Newcastle and suburbs, £6,592,800 ; Nowra, £203,900;
Nyngan, £85,700; Orange, £499,100; Orange East,
£193,000 ; Parkes, £275,700 ; Parramatta, £1,400,600 ;
Peak Hill, £IB,BOO ; Penrith, £269,800 ; Picton,
£117,300; Port Macquarie, £79,800; Prospect and
Sherwood, £379,900; Queanbeyan, £71,700: Qui-
rindi, £170,400; Raymond Terrace, £71.500; Rich-
mond, £132,500 ; Rookwood, £287,700 ; Shellharbour,
£299,000 ; Shoalhavcn South, £138,200 ; Singleton,
£235,900 ; Singleton, South, £102,000 ; Smithfield and
Fairfield, £171,700 ; St. Mary’s, £150,000 ; Tamworth


£508,200 ; Taree, £93,700 ; Temora, £128,300 ; Tenter-
tield, £208,100 ; Tumut, £111,400; Ulladulla £29,200;
I Imarra, £242,000 ; Uralla, £56,600 ; Wagga vVagga,
£464,200 ;W alcha, £102,900 ; Wallendbeen, £120,200 ;
Warialda, £50,400 ; Warren, £103,100 ; Wellington,
£226,600; Wentworth, £49,200; Wilcannia, £81,100;
Windsor, £202,700 ; Wingham, £73,500 ; Wollongong,
£553,100; Wrigthville, £33,700; Wyalong, £77,400 ;
Vass, £217,200 ; Young, £267,000 ; total country,
£38,355,800 ; total metropolitan, £98,857,900 ; grand
t Mai, £137,213,700.
The total revenue collected by all the municipali-
ties of the State during the year 1903-4 amounted to
£834,465, including the State endowments and grants
of £46,827. The general rates amounted to £456,853.
Other rates and charges—-for lighting, water and other
services—represented £197,358. This sum does not
include the proceeds of rates levied by the metro-
politan and Hunter District Water and Sewerage
Boards, and the water supplies of Campbelltown,
Liverpool, and Richmond, Camden and Wollongong,
which, though actually local rates, are not collected by
the municipalities affected by them. The amount
received from the sources specified during 1903-4 was
£414,357, making, with the sum already mentioned,
£611,715, the total charge for those special services.
The whole of the city of Sydney and suburbs is sup-
plied with water by the Metropolitan Board. Deduct-
ing the State endowments and grants, the gross re-
venue of all municipalities was £770,191 ; if to this
be added the revenue of the Metropolitan and Hunter
District Water Supply and Sewerage Boards, the total
will reach £1,184,548. This may be taken as the
whole burden of local taxation, and is equivalent to
about £1 6s. 24d. per head of the population residing
within the limits of incorporated districts, and to
13'87 per cent, or 2s. in the £ of the total annual
value of all ratable property.
The expenditure of the city of Sydney in 1904
reached the sum of £432,778, thus distributed: Sala-
ries and officers’ expenses and other expenditure on
administration, £21,550; general works, services, and
improvements, £126,755; lighting, £181,431; interest
on Joans. &c., £60,020; sinking funds, £38,265; mis-
cellaneous, £4,757 ; total, £432,778. The suburban
boroughs and municipal districts expended £263,205,
which may be subdivided under the following heads :
Cost of administration, £32,316 ; general works, &c.,
£118,187 ; lighting, £39,097 ; water (Manly), £69 ;
sanitary and other expenditure, not defrayed out of
general rate and endowment, £27,625; interest,
£33,145 ; payments to sinking funds, £959 ; additions
to plant, £350; miscellaneous, £11,457 ; total expen-
diture, £263,205. The expenditure of the country
municipalities for the year was £326,530, which,
divided under the same headings m those of the sub-
urban municipalities, appears as follows :—Adminis-
tration, £56,309 ; general works, £103,307 ; lighting,
£38,664 ; water, £34,488 ; sanitary, £48,373 ; interest,
£29,794 ; payments, £2,720 ; plant, £1,563 ; miscel-
laneous, £11,312 ; total, £326,531.
The total amount of loans raised during 1903-4
was £217,468, including £155,000 borrowed by the
city of Sydney for electric lighting, while a sum of
£60,200 was redeemed. Most o[ the new loans in the
country and suburban districts were renewals. The
total amount of loans, apart from liability to the State,
under the Country Towns Water and Sewerage Act
outstanding at the close of the year was £2,941.939 ;
and towards meeting this amount there was at the
credit of the sinking funds a sum of £164,739, leaving
£2,777,200 not provided for. Hates of interest ranged
from 24 pei cent, to 8 pei cent., and the amount paid
as interest on loans and overdrafts during the year
was £122,959. The total debt per head of population
living in municipalities amounted to £3 6s. IGJM., or,
allowing for the sinking funds, £3 3s. 2|d., while the
yearly charge for interest was 2s. Bkl. per head. Of
the total liabilities, £1,590,000 was incurred by Syd-
ney ; £763,169 by the suburban municipalities, and
£588,770 by the country councils. In the suburbs
the heaviest loan (£51,250) was contracted by Waver-
ley, and the smallest (£6,200) by Hyde ; in the country
districts, Parramatta (£56,600) was the largest bor-
rower, and Mudgee and East Maitland (both £5,000)
were the smallest debtors. Of the total indebtedness
£1,079,572 was raised in London, £1,840,870 in Syd-
ney or locally, and £21,497 in Victoria. Against this
debt Sydney possessed assets approximately amount-
ing to £3,640,799 ; and the assets of the suburban and
country municipalities were £5,685,054.
The amalgamation of the forty-one metropolitan
municipalities is a question which has for some time
attracted attention, and under the Local Government
Act of 1905 provision is made for the constitution of
Greater Sydney and Greater Newcastle. It is not
probable that any great reductions in the cost of ad-
ministration would be affected by such a unification,
as the salaries already paid arc not on a lavish scale ;
but there is no doubt that increased efficiency would
be attained, and the expenditure in works and im-
provements reduced. Interest charges on loans would
certainly be lessened, for, notwithstanding the reduc-
tion on rates during the last few years, a further saving
of £3,280 would result if the £763,169 owing by the
suburban municipalities carried the average rate paid
In’ the city of Sydney ; and in view of the increased
J %j *
importance and more economical working of a
Greater Sydney, a further reduction in the rates of
future loans, either renewals or for fresh enterprises,
might reasonably be expected. The first instalment
of the unification of the suburban areas with the city
has been proposed, to be consummated under a special
Act, by the absorption of the borough of Camperdown,
which, owing to the unsatisfactory state of its finances,
it is urged should be taken over by the City Council,
O %j *
and form a separate ward, returning two aldermen.
The Municipal Association of New South Wales
was established in January, 1883, its object being to
watch over and protect the interests of municipal
corporations, to take action in relation to any subject
affecting municipal bodies or municipal legislation,
and promote the efficient carrying out of municipal
government throughout the State. In the first year
there were 63 councils subscribing, while in 1906 the
number was 138. The Mayor of Sydney is ex-officio
president of the association. Advice is given and legal
opinions obtained for subscribing bodies on debatable
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


points arising under the Municipal Acts;,.a general
meeting is hold annually in Sydney, usually in the
O v V %/ ' V
month of September ; the subscription is £2 2s. per
annum ; and the secretary is Mr. T. A. Morgan, J.P.
The Sydney Town Hall is one of the most imposing
civic structures in the world, and contains the largest,
finest toned, and most powerful organ ever built.
The hall proper is of magnificent dimensions, and is
constructed with broad and lofty corridors on three
sides. It is entered in front from a spacious and
stately vestibule, and at the sides from lobbies of line
architectural proportions, paved in osmaics. The
building is surmounted by a clock tower and belfry,
from the top of which* an extensive view of the city,
harbour and surrounding suburbs may be obtained.
Mithin the Centennial Hall, at its western end, is the
“ grand ” organ, built at a cost of £16,300 —including
all incidental expenses —by Messrs. Hill & Sons, of
London. It occupies a recess of 68 feet by 28 feet ;
the pipes are bright spotted metal, uncoloured, and
the organ case is painted white and gold. The com-
ponent parts may be summarised as follows : —Great
organ, 28 stops, 40 ranks, 2,428 pipes ; swell, 24 stops,
31 ranks, 1,891 pipes ; choir, 20 stops, 22 ranks, 1,342
pipes ; solo, 20 stops, i : 0 ranks, 1,220 pipes ; echo, 8
stops, 15 ranks, 915 pipes ; pedal, 26 stops, 32 ranks,
960 pipes. There are also 14 stop handlers regulating
couplers, bringing their total to the enormous number
of 140.
Since Sydney was incorporated the following
Mayors have held office : —1843, John Hosking ; 1844,
J. R. Wilshire ; 1845, George Allen ; 1846, Henry
Macdermott ; 1847, Thos. Broughton ; 1848, J. F.
Josephson ; 1849, Ed. Flood ; 1850, George Hill ;
1851-2, Win. Thurlow ; 1853, Daniel Egan ; 1854-6,
the City Commissioners, Geo. Elliott, F. O. Darvall
and John Rae ; 1857, Geo. Thornton ; 1858, John
Williams ; 1859, Geo. Smith ; 1860, James Murphy ;
1861, John Sutherland ; 1862, Jas. Oatley ; 1863,
Thos. Spence ; 1864, Wm. Speir ; 1865, John Woods ;
1866, John Sutton ; 1867-8-9, Chas. Moore ; 1869-70,
Walter Renny ; 1871-2, Michael Chapman ; 1873, Jas.
Merriman ; 1874, S. S. Goold ; 1875-6, Benjamin
Palmer ; 1877-8, J. Merriman ; 1879, Chas. J. Roberts ;
1880, Robert Fowler; 1881-2-3, John Harris; 1884,
John Hardie ; 1885, Thos. Playfair ; 1886, John
Young ; 1887, A. J. Riley ; 1888-9, John Harris ;
1890-1, Sydney Burdekin ; 1891-2-3-4, Sir W. P.
Manning, Kt. : 1895, S. E. Lees ; 1896-7, Isaac E.
Ives; 1898-9-1900, Sir M. Harris, Kt. ; 1901, Sir J.
Graham, Kt., M.D. ; 1902, Thos. Hughes. Lord
Mayors —1902-3, Thos. Hughes, J.P. ; 1904, S. E.
Lees, J.P. ; 1905-6, Allen Taylor, J.P.
The present council consists of 24 aldermen, one
of whom is Lord Mayor, elected annually by the aider-
men. Nine of the latter constitute a .quorum. Tin-
wards are represented as follows : —Phillip ward
Aldermen T. H. Barlow and R. I). Meagher ; Bel more.
Aldermen G. T. Clarke and John English ; Lang, Aider-
men A. A. C. Cocks and Evan Jones : Gipps, Aldermen
W. P. Fitzgerald and Geo. Mclvor ; Denison, Aldermen
John Harris and Andrew Kelly, M.L.A. ; Pyrraont,
Aldermen W. T. Henson and Allen Taylor ; Bourkc.
Aldermen T. Hughes and T. H. Kelly ; Macquarie,
Aldermen S. E. Lees and C. L. Thomson ; Flinders.
Aldermen J. H. Lawrence and Jas. Ward ; Fitzroy,
Alderman A. McElhone and E. M. Stephens ; Bligh,
Aldermen P. H. Morton and J. L. Mullins ; v Cook,
MR. T. H. NESBITT, TOWN CLERK.
Alderman E. W. O’Sullivan and Geo. Perry ; The
town clerk is Mr. T. H. Nesbitt, F.S.A.A. ; the deputy
town clerk, Mr. W. G. Layton ; the general auditor,
Mr. R. Uougan ; the city organist, Mr. A. Mason ; the
city solicitor, Mr. P. S. Dawson ; the city treasurer,
Mr. F. H. Solomon, F.S.A.A. ; the city surveyor, Mr.
W. M. Gordon ; the architect and city building sur-
veyor, Mr. R. H. Brodrick ; the comptroller of assets
and stores, Mr. J. Neale Breden ; the city electrical
engineer, Mr. Thos. Rooke, A.M.1.C.E., and the health
officer, Dr. W. G. Armstrong.


Alderman SAMUEL EDWARD
LEES, ex-Lord Mayor of the City of
Sydney, is a native of the State, having
been born in Sydney in 1843. He
attended in succession several metro-
politan schools, where he received his
education. ■» Upon the termination of
his school days, he was apprenticed
to the printing trade, and in 1871 he
established himself independently, and
soon built up a successful business.
Taking a keen interest in municipal
matters, he, in 1897, stood as a
candidate for Macquarie Ward for a
seat in the Municipal Council of
Sydney, when he was elected. He
has continuously represented that
ward in the City Council ever since,
it is worthy of mention that Mr. Lees
has been elected successively under
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney .
ALDERMAN S. E. LEES.
three distinct franchises, namely, the
household, the cumulative, and the
lodget Upon every occasion
he has been returned by substantial
majorities. In 1895 he was elected
to the mayoral chair, and his adminis-
tration during his occupancy of office
in that year was characterised by
prudence, economy and sound judg-
ment, and which met with the full
appreciation of the citizens of the
metropolis. The aldermen desired
that he should offer himself for another
year. This, however, he declined, as
he proposed, and carried out, a tour
of the world in 1896. During the
twenty-eight years that Mr. Lees has
sat in the council he has, at one time
or another, acted on every committee
of the council. In 1902 His Majesty
the King raised the city of Sydney to
the dignity of a Lord Mayoralty.
Mr. Lees is the second gentleman
who has filled the position of chief
magistrate since that high honour
has been conferred on the metropolis
of New South Wales. Mr. Lees has
also for many years taken an active
interest in the political affairs of the
State. In 1885 he was elected to
represent Penrith in the Legislative
Assembly, and sat for that electorate
continuously until 1898, when he was
defeated by a narrow majority. His
services as a legislator were then
recognised by the Government of the
day in a call to a seat in the Upper
House. This position he retained
until 1901, when he resigned in order
to comply with a requisition from his
old constituents to contest the seat
for the Assembly once more. He was
re-elected to the Assembly for another
period of three years. And on again
seeking the seat he was defeated by a
narrow majority. Apart from his
political, municipal and commercial
career, Mr. Lees is a member of the
Sydney Hospital Board, also of several
committees of various charitable in-
stitutions. He is the founder and
president of the Nepean Cottage
Hospital. Mr. Lees is a prominent
member of the Methodist Church,
and in all agencies and organisations
that have for their object the advance-
ment of that denomination Mr. Lees
takes something more than a passive
interest.
Alderman THOMAS HUGHES,
first Lord Mayor of Sydney, was
born on the 19th of April, 1863. He
is the second son of the late John
Hughes of “ Kincoppal,” Elizabeth
Bay, Sydney. He was educated at
S'.onyhurst College, Lancashire,
England, where he was from 1875
to 1880. He matriculated at the
University of London in 1880. After
spending upwards of a year in
European travel, he returned to
Australia, and entered on the study
of law in 1882, and was admitted
to practice as a solicitor in 1887.
Thereupon he joined his brother,
the Hon. John Hughes, M.L.C., in
partnership, which continues to the
present day. In politics be has al-
ways belonged to the old Freetrade
party, led for many years by the
Right Hon. G. H. Reid, but took no
personal part in public affairs until
1898, when he made his first incur-
sion into politics by taking an active
part in support of the cause of Aus-
tralian federation. In September,
1898, he was elected to the Sydney
City Council for Bourke Ward, the
premier ward of the city, by a
majority of 646 votes, and im-
mediately interested himself deeply
in the work of the reform of the
then effete council. In December,
1898, he was again returned for
Bourke Ward, and this time un-
opposed, his previous election having
only been for the balance of the term
of a deceased alderman. In January,
1899, he was appointed secretary to
the representative of the Govern-
ment in the Legislative Council, and
in that capacity was closely in touch
with the federal movement, which
culminated in the passage of the
Federal Enabling Act through the
New South Wales Parliament, and
J. Hubert Newman, Sydney .
RIGHT HON. THOMAS HUGHES.
the ultimate acceptance of the draft
constitution of the whole of the
Australian colonies. In February,
1899, he accompanied the Right
Hon. G. H. Reid, Premier of New
South Wales, as his secretary to
the conference of premiers in Mel
bourne, which brought about the
modifications in the original draft of
the federal constitution, which were
required by the people of New South
Wales before they would accept it.
Throughout 1899 and 1900 he took
part in the agitation for the reform
of municipal government in Sydney,
and helped to found the Citizens’
Vigilance Committee which was
brought into existence on the out-
break /)f plague in Sydney in 1900.
On the passing of the Act of 1900,


providing for the reconstitution of
the City Council on a wider fran-
chise, he was re-elected in December
of that year at the head of the poll
for Bourke Ward with the greatest
number of votes polled by any can-
didate. Throughout 1901, during
the mayoralty of Sir James Graham,
Mr. Hughes devoted himself to re-
organising the finances of the city,
and in his capacity as vice-chairman
of the Finance Committee of the City
Council he was able to give effect to
many changes which he had pre-
viously been unable to Accomplish.
At the general election of 1901 he
offered himself as a candidate in the
liberal interest for King Division of
Sydney, but was defeated by the
narrow majority of eighteen votes.
In December, 1901, he was elected
Mayor of Sydney for the ensuing
year, and in November, 1902, when
the King elevated the city of Sydney
to a Lord Mayoralty he became the
first Lord Mayor of Sydney. In
December, 1902, he was again re-
turned to the City Council, and was
subsequently re-elected Lord Mayor
for the year 1903. During his term
of office he has acted on two Royal
Commissions, and he also holds a
seat on the boards of management of
several large commercial companies
in the city.
The Late PATRICK NOLAN,
J.P., ex-Alderman of the City of
Sydney in the Municipal Council,
Kerry & Co. Sydney .
THE LATE MR. P. NOLAN.
in which he sat as representative of
Gipps was born in Kilkenny,
Ireland, in iB6O. At fifteen years
of age he entered the service of a
large grocery firm in his native
town. Arriving in Sydney, per
s.s. “ Liguria,” in 1884, * ie almost
immediately succeeded in obtaining
a position in the business of the late
Robert Miller & Co., with whom he
remained until 1894, in which year
he resigned in order to commence
business on his own account at
Church Hill. This venture proved
successful from the outset. In 1902
he took a further step in advance by
opening up a fine establishment in
Oxford Street, in which he proposed
to carry on a wholesale as well as a
retail trade. In less than a year
business had so far increased that
he resolved to devote the whole of
his attention to the Oxford Street
house, consequently disposing of his
Church Hill interests in 1903.
Mr. Nolan was first elected to the
City Council in igoo as a member
of the Reform Party. In 1902 he
again contested for the honour and
was returned by a large majority,
the council being elected this time
under the new Act, with an extended
franchise. He was appointed to the
Commission of the Peace in 1896.
He died in May, 1904.
Mr. JOHN TAYLOR, ex-Vice-
President of the Mcti opolitan Water
Supply and Sewerage Board, was
born at Huntley, Aberdeenshire,
Scotland, in 1831. He attended a
primary school in the town of Port-
soy, Banffshire, and at the age of
fifteen years was apprenticed to the
general building trade in that town.
After gaining a thorough knowledge
of this business in all its branches,
he went to Elgin, Murrayshire, in
1851, where he became foreman for
Mr. Mcßeth, builder and contractor,
of that town. During 1854 he went
to Edinburgh, where he remained
until 1855, when a strike in the
building trade took place. He then
left for Glasgow, where he remained
until 1856, when he went to Liver-
pool, and came to Australia in 1857.
Immediately on his arrival in Sydney,
he established himself as a builder
and contractor, and took his first
public contract in 1859, building
Berrima bridge, and soon after doing
large additions to Gladesville Asy-
lum, also a very large number of
important railway works, including
buildings, bridges, &c., amongst
which may be mentioned large goods
sheds at Redfern, viaducts on the
Windsor and v tern lines, also the
Goal burn railway station, and large
works at Penrith were erected under
his supervision. During 1865 he
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney
MR. J TAYLOR.
built large additions to the Berrima
gaol. In partnership with the firm
of P. N. Russell & Co., he built a
number of other important govern-
ment works,includingthe road biidge
over the Macquarie at Bathurst, and
the Grafton steam punts. In 1869
he bought out the entire business of
Messrs. -John Booth & Co., of the
Balmain timber yards and mills.
These, however, were destroyed by
fire in 1874, through which he sus-
tained a serious loss. He was
elected a member of the Balmain
municipal council in 1871. He be-
came mayor of this borough in 1874,
and again in 1877. He resigned his
seat in the Balmain council 1879.
He was elected an alderman of the
city of Sydney in 1877, having been
chosen a representative of Brisbane
W ard in that year. He remained
a member of the City Council for
twenty-three years. In November,
1 §93’ City Council appointed him
its representative on the Metropoli-
tan Water Supply and Sewerage
Board in succession to the late
Mr. Benjamin Palmer, and almost
immediately upon taking his seat
he was elected vice-president of
the Board, which position he
held for a period of over ten
years, till 22nd March, 1904.


Mr. JOHN LANE MULLINS,
M.A., J.P., Alderman of the City of
Sydney, is a son of the late James
Mullins, Esq. % J.P., of Macquarie
Street, Sydney. The subject of this
notice was born in Sydney in 1857
and was educated at St. Mary’s
College, Lyndhurst, and St. John’s
College within the University of
Sydney. Entering the Sydney Uni-
versity, he graduated with classical
honours and won his M.A. degree
at twenty-one, and was subsequently
elected to a fellowship of St. John’s
College. He then travelled through
Great Britain and the Continent in
order to improve his education. He
was articled to Mr. Robert Smith,
solicitor, now of the firm of Messrs.
Norton, Smith & Co., and was
admitted a solicitor by the Supreme
Court of New South Wales in 1885,
and immediately undertook the
establishment of .. practice. He
has taken a deep interest in military
matters, and was largely instru-
mental in the formation of the New
South Wales Irish Rifle Corps, in
which he accepted a commission
He still holds the rank of captain in
that regiment. Upon the recon-
struction of the Sydney Municipal
Council upon the broader franchise
conferred by the Sydney Municipal
Act of igoo he was elected in that
J Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. J. L. MULLINS,
year a member of the City Council
as a representative of Bligh V\ ard,
and was returned again for the same
ward in 1902. In the council he
was appointed chairman of the
Finance Committee at the begin-
ning of IQO2, held the same position
in 1903, and was unanimously re-
elected in 1904. Me is also a
member of the Electric. Lighting
Committee. Through his action in
the council municipal loans have
been floated locally, and on his
resolution the gas and hydraulic
companies were first assessed and
rated. Upon the outbreak of the
South African war he volunteered
for active service, and was appointed
adjutant of the third contingent.
He remained in camp for three
months, and the contingent was
disbanded in July, 1900, in the belief
that peace would be restored without
further aid from our local forces.
Having been elected a member of
the City Council he was unable again
to volunteer. Mr. Lane Mullins
takes a deep interest in philanthropic
and charitable matters. For many
years he has acted as honorary
secretary for St. Vincent’s Hospital.
He is married to a daughter of the
late John Hughes, Esq., J.P,, ol
“Kincoppal,” Elizabeth Bay, and a
sister of the first Lord Mayor of
Sydney.
Mr. MICHAEL JOSEPH
C ONL O N was born at Wollon-
gong, New South Wales,on the 27th
September, 1841. His father, the
late Mr. Patrick Conlon, was a
native of Kinvara, county of Gal-
way, Ireland, and arrived in Sydney
in the year 1834 as a private of
the 50th Regiment, which embarked
in the ship “ Fairlee.” The subject
of this sketch was educated at St.
Benedict’s School, of George Street
West, Sydney. Upon the termina-
tion of his schooling, he selected the
business of a potter as his profes-
sion, and has had experience in and
at the various potteries in and around
the metropolis. He spent some
years as an employee, and, having
gained the necessary and essential
experience of every department in
this business, he eventually decided
to become an employer, and on the
9th October, 1875, he started his
own business at Broughton Street,
Glebe, where he has remained ever
since. All the necessary require-
ments of the trade are manufactured
by Mr. Conlon, and his goods are
to be found in all parts of the Com-
monwealth, which must in itself be
an assurance of general satisfaction
and consequent return of business.
When he began his pottery he only
employed two lads; but the magni-
tude of his output may be gathered
when we learn that at the present
time his business warrants the con-
stant employment of twenty-eight
hands. The works themselves oc-
cupy the large space of an acre and
a half. As a young man, Mr.
Conlon was of a theatrical turn of
mind, and was a comic singer of no
mean order, and on many occasions
rendered gratuitous service. Mr.
Conlon has taken a very great interest
in cricket, and might reasonably be
termed an enthusiast of the game.
He was one of the promoters of the
first borough match ever played in
this State, in which the boroughs of
the Glebe and Darlington were the
contesting parties for the trophy, a
silver cup, which was won by
Darlington. Subsequently a match
was played between the borough of
Glebe and Balmain for another cup,
which now adorns the Glebe
Council Chambers. Mr. Conlon’s
capacity as a selector and umpire
could always be relied upon, and it
was his pleasure to serve the local
club in this and with his ready
counsel. He was also president of
the local football club at the time
when Rugby rules were first intro
duced into New South Wales, a
position he held for many yeai s Mr.
Conlon prides'himself on the success
he has attained at the game of bowls,
in which sport he takes an active
part.- He was one of the founders
and president for many years of the
first local club. He thrice won the
champion medal, and was runner-
up on five other occasions and, in
addition, has added to his laurels
many valuable trophies. In the year
1884 Mr. Conlon, at the instance of
his many friends, allowed of his
nomination as an alderman for the
borough, and was duly elected un-
opposed for the Outer Ward —a seat
he retained until in 1896 he retired,
owing to ill health It is needless to
add that he was reluctantly com-
pelled to take this step, and as a
mark of esteem from his brother
councillors, he was made the recipi-
ent of a suitable recognition for the
twelve years’ service rendered to the
council and residents of the Glebe,
and which was signed by the then
mayor and under the seal of its
council. The employees of the
council can look upon him as their
friend, for it is on record that Mr.
Conlon was the first to frame and
carry the resolution that eight hours
should constitute the working day
of the council’s employees. The
thoroughfares of the borough have
received more than an ordinary at


tention at the instance of our subject.
When he entered the council it is
said that they were in a deplorable
state ; but, on his retirement, they
bore testimony to the untiring efforts
MR. M. J. CONLON.
of Mr. Conlon. In parliamentary
matters he takes a great interest, in
1887 contesting the Glebe electorate
in the interest of Protection, which
he has twice done, but has been de-
feated on each occasion ; on one
occasion, only by fourteen votes. He is
very philanthropical and charitable:
his benefactions are both numerous
and far-reaching, and, where it is
possible, he avoids publicity in these
matters. Mr. Conlon has been a
resident of the Glebe for twenty-nine
years. In the year 1865 he married
the daughter of the late Samuel Hyde
Alleyn, and has had four sons and
nine daughters, of whom three
daughters only are alive.
Mr. CORNELIUS GORTON is
a name well known and highly re-
spected in the borough of Redfern,
where for a number of years the
owner of it has been one of the most
prominent citizens. Born at Wol-
verhampton, Staffordshire, England,
in 1850, at the age of thirty he
arrived in Sydney, and in the inter-
vening years has quietly but suc-
cessfully pushed Ill's way to the front
rank. His father, John Gorton, a
japanner of Wolverhampton, placed
his son,after giving him such educa-
tion as was in his power, with Mr.
John Collins, a chandelier manufac-
turer in that city, and while in that
employ he gained an experience
that was in later years to be useful.
Shortly after his arrival in Sydney
and from that time onward has
made steady but substantial pro
gress, having erected over 400
houses and shops in the city and
suburbs. Twelve years of constant
work had established his reputation
and the ratepayers then made mani-
fest their confidence by electing
him to a seat at the municipal
council, the members of which have
chosen him on two occasions to
occupy the mayoral chair. A further
mark of honour was placed upon
him in 1902 when he was appointed
a Justice of the Peace. All the
movements in the cause of charity
and social functions connected witn
the borough Mr. Gorton has not
only been closely identified with, but
a prime mover. The Bowling Club
has had in him an enthusiastic
member, and he has on three oc-
casions occupied the position of
president. Apart from the claims
of his business and his duties in the
borough, Mr. Gorton is a Waltonian,
whose spare hours ate spent in
the delightful surroundings of Port
Hacking, from whose waters he has
MR. C. GORTON.
drawn many good hauls, which have
provided him with many hours of
exciting and recuperating sport.
On a beautiful site at Yowie Bay he
has built a handsome villa where his
family delight to spend the hottest
days in summer. His interest in
the question of fish supply is so
keen that he has accepted an ap-
pointment as honorary inspector of
fisheries. Mr. Gorton married,
after his arrival in the State, Miss
May Paterson, of Leichhardt,
Alderman JOHN FRANK COX
second son of Mr. H. E. Cox, ol
Portsmouth, was born at Ports-
mouth, south of England, on the
nth October, 1875. He was edu-
Hubert Newman. Sydney .
MR. J. F. COX.
cated at St. George’s College, situate
in his native city, and in the year
1887 came to Australia with his
parents. Shortly after his arrival
he entered the office of Dr. R. M.
Sly, barrister, now K.C., and,
after spending twelve months in
the doctor’s service, he entered the
office of the well-known firm of
solicitors, &c., &c., viz., Messrs.
Norton, Smith, Westgarth & Com-
pany, now styled Messrs. Norton.
Smith & Co. Mr. Cox remained
with this firm for five years, when
he was offered a position with
Messrs. Stephen, J aques & Stephen,
of O’Connell Street, Sydney, in
whose office he has been for the
past twelve years, and now holds a
responsible position. The subject
of this sketch takes a great interest
in athletic sports, principally of an
aquatic nature, having won no less
than eighty races, including two
championships, viz., 100 yards, East-
ern Suburbs, and the 100 yards
championship of the Waverley
Swimming Club as recently as the
Bth of February, 1902. Mr. Cox
was also for five years running one
of the Waverley Swimming Club’s
champion team, which won ou
each occasion the club champion-
ship of the great eastern district —a
record which proves beyond a doubt


that he is one of the most success-
ful handicap swimmers this State
has produced. The Waverley Swim-
ming Club, whose championship
he won in igo2, owes its origin
to Mr. Cox, by whom it was estab-
lished in the year iBgB. After
being four years its secretary, he
had, owing to stress of business, to
relinquish that post, much to the
regret of every member, who recog-
nised in him an organiser whose
energy and ability was responsible
for the high standard and successful
career held by it to-day, having,
as it has, produced some fine swim-
mers. Mr. Cox is still a member of
the committee. Upon the formation
of a Waverley branch of the Liberal
and Reform Association he was unani-
mously appointed its organiser and
secretary, a position he still holds.
The association regard in him a
man of keen perception as to the
requirements in political and muni-
cipal matters of his district. In ig(>3
Mr. Cox was one of those instru-
mental in securing the return to
the Federal Parliament in the in-
interest of freetrade the member for
Wentworth, Mr. W.H. Kelly, although
he was opposed by Mr. J. B. Dailey.
'1 he position of organiser and secre-
tary was carried out throughout the
whole campaign by our subject, who
had the satisfaction of seeing his
candidate obtain the magnificent
majority of S.iqg, being the largest
poll on record at any election. Mr.
Cox, whose abilities in this channel
have been sought on several occasions
in other parts where the want of such
an organiser has been severely felt,
but who owing to business ties has
been prevented from accepting the
responsibility, has therefore a record
which should duly classify him as a
champion organiser. In ißg3, at the
request of his numerous friends, he
contested a seat in the Waverley
Council, in opposition to Mr. E. R.
Abigail, a police court solicitor of some
note, and realised the largest number
of votes polled for a great many years,
without the assistance of either a
committee or secretary, beating his
opponent by nearly double. Mr.
Cox holds a commission of the rank
of second lieutenant in the 2nd Regi-
ment N.S.W. Infantry. He is also a
member of the Masonic order, being
associated with Lodge Prince of
Wales, No. qg.


The S.S. “Pluvius,” the Floating Fire Engine.
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES


Fire Brigades.
Before the advent of fire insurance companies in
New South W ales there were no fire brigades, the sole
aid to extinguish fires being the bucket, rope and gun-
powder. \\ henever there was danger of a conflagra-
tion assuming uncontrollable proportions, explosives
were freely brought into use, and this continued to be
a general practice long after fire engines had been
imported, and almost as late as the middle of the last
century, as the following instance illustrates. On the
night of March 17th, 1844, the whole of the Royal
Hotel, including the theatre in George Street, was
destroyed by fire. A drunken carter, who had been
indulging in copious libations to St. Patrick, amused
himself by smoking a pipe in an adjoining stable, and
the straw igniting, the immense stack of buildings—
one of the largest in Sydney—was speedilv in flames.
Mr. J. Wyatt, the proprietor of the Victoria Theatre,
valued his property at £12,000, of which only £3,000
wu.s insured. Mr. Sparkes valued his Royal Hotel at
£5,000, on which there was no cover at all. The whole
of the hotel was entirely burnt out, at a loss of about
£20,000, and Colonel Barney, of the Royal Engineers,
who superintended the extinguishing operations, de-
clared that if the wind had set in either from the south
or west no human means could have prevented build-
ings being destroyed to the value of half a million ster-
ling. A grand ball was taking place at Government
House when the fire broke out, and Colonel Burney,
Lieutenant Lugard, and other officers rushed down
and took charge of the salvage work. By levelling
several tenements in the rear Lieutenant Lugard prob-
ably saved the main building of the Victoria Theatre
and also Mr. Nash’s residence from being consumed,
and Colonel Barney, anticipating from a slight breeze
to the southward that the flames from the hotel might
communicate to Macdonald’s range of buildings, had
a train ready to blow up the two first houses and
thereby save the rest from destruction ; but this was
rendered unnecessary by the provident lulling of the
wind. It was in this fashion that the flames were
fought in Sydney in almost every case of fire until the
insurance companies, first singly and then mutually,
imported primitive appliances and banded more to-
gether- to use these in minimising their losses when-
ever an outburst occurred. The proprietors of the
theatres also raised small bodies of fire-fighters. These
likewise merged into No. 1 and No. 2 Volunteer Fire
Brigades, and initiated the movement of volunteer
companies, which has endured to the present day.
The central station of the Insurance Fire Biigade was
situated in Bathurst Street, opposite St. Andrew’s
Cathedral ; and the No. 1 and No. 2 Volunteer Bri-
gades had their quarters in Pitt Street South and
Phillip Street South respectively. The No. 2 Volun-
teer and the Insurance Companies had steam fire
engines at work by the year 1840, and later on No. 1
Volunteer was similarly equipped.
These conditions in the main endured until as late
as 1884. although the insurance companies’ brigade
had given way to subsidised companies of firemen long
before that year. But matters never worked smoothly
until, under the authority of the Fire Brigades Act
passed in that year, a metropolitan fire brigade board
and thirty-three country boards, with registered bri-
gades, were established. The cost of maintaining the
metropolitan, brigade was contributed to in equal
amounts by the government, the municipalities within
the proclaimed area, and the fire insurance companies
holding risks within these municipal districts. The
total amount levied on the companies towards the ex-
penses of the board during 1905 was £14,300, from forty-
two companies, and the net risk held by these com-
panies in the metropolitan area on Decembei 31, 1906,
represented upwards of seventy-eight millions sterling
This amount more than doubles the total (£36,691,000)
of the risks held when the Act came into force in 1884.
Under clause 20 of the Fire Brigades Act authority is
given to extend its provisions to the country districts ;
but, owing to an ambiguous clause in the statute, the
fire insurance companies do not consider themselves
called upon to contribute anything towards the main-
tenance of the country boards, hence many of the
municipalities have not taken any steps to come under
the Act, further than to be gazetted.
The metropolitan brigade consists of 13 stations,
and from 330 to 350 firemen, engine-keepers, &c., as
follows : —Headquarters, Castlereagh Street ; No. 2,
George Street West ; No. 3, George Street North ;
No. 4, Darlinghurst ; No. 5, Newtown ; No. 6, North
Sydney ; No. 7, Marrickville ; No. 8, Alexandria ; No.
9, Woollahra ; No. 10, Redfern ; No. 11, Paddington ;
No. 12, Balmain ; No. 13, Waterloo. The metro-
politan volunteer companies have stations at Ash-
field, Burwood, Concord, Drummoyne, Glebe, Gran-
ville, Hurstville, Kogarah, Leichhardt, Liverpool,
Manly, Mosman, North Botany, Parramatta, Rich-
mond, Rockdale, Rookwood, Waverley and Willough-
by. Country companies have been established at
Adamstown, Albury, Armidale, Ballina, Balranald,
Bathurst, Bega, Berry, Boolaroo, Bourke, Bowral,
Braidwood, Broken Hill, Camden, Campbelltown,
Carrington, Condobolin, Coon amble, Cootamundra,
Corowa, Deniliquin, Uubbo, Forbes, Gladesville, Glen
Innes, Goulburn, Grafton, Grafton South, Grenfell,
Gunnedah, Hamilton, Hay, Hillgrove, Inverell, Isling-
ton, Jerilderie, Junee, Kempsey, s Kiama, Lambton,
Lambton New, Lismore (2), Lithgow, Liverpool, Mait-
land (East and West), Merewether, Minmi, Moama,
Moruya, Morpeth, Moss Vale, Mudgee, Muswellbrook,
Narandera, Newcastle (city, central and west), Nowra,
Orange, Parkes, Plattsburg, Wabsend, Queanbeyan,
Richmond, Singleton, Stockton. Tamworth, Taree,
Temora, Tenterfield, Tighe’s Hill, Tumut, Wagga
Wagga, Waratah, Mayfield, Wellington, Wentworth,


Wickham, Wilcannia, Windsor, Wollongong, Vass and
Young.
In the metropolitan area the stations aie con-
nected by telephone with the wharves and principal
buildings in the city. Those firemen not living on a
station are in communication with it by means of
electric house-bells or telephones. Horses are kept
ready for immediate duty, day or night. All stations
%/ %/ ' C V*
are supplied with patent snap harness, and the horses
number 118. Included in the plant are 16 steam fire
engines, the petrol motor pumping engine, the petrol
motor chemical engine, 5 chemical engines, 24 manual
power engines, 18 telescope ladders, 3 hose vans. 7
hose carriages, 76,920 feet of hose, spare hydrants,
ladders, standpipes, &c., in all valued, on January 1,
1906, at £141,979. Telephones to the number of 300
connected with the fire stations are placed in fire alarm
boxes throughout the most important localities in the
city and suburbs. Firebells are used in the suburbs for
assembling the firemen, but they are unnecessary in
the permanent brigade, with all its members in direct
electrical communication with their respective sta-
tions.
The area covered by the operations of the metro-
politan fire brigade is 241 square miles, or 12 square
miles larger than the afea covered by the London fire
brigade. The number of men working under the
superintendent’s orders is 383, including 210 partially
paid and 21 auxiliaries. To accommodate these men
there are 37 stations, extending as far as Willoughbv
on the north, Campbelltown on the south, and Penrith
on the west. In addition to the above detailed plant,
the brigade is well equipped with life-saving apparatus.
It has six life-line guns, whicu throw a rope over a
building 150 feet high, and there are three kinds of
gear used to protect the firemen from smoke and
poisonous fumes. Another feature lately introduced to
fight the smoke is a spray branch worked by a lever,
which causes a jet of water to become a sheet of spray,
and these beat back smoke however dense. At head-
quarters there is an up-to-date blacksmith’s shop,
with electrically-driven furnace, boring machine lathes
and cutting machine, and as a carpenter’s shop is also
provided, the brigade can effect all its own repairs.
The training of the men is so perfect that within ten
or twelve seconds of the call being received the super-
intendent has the motor chemical engine outside the
station and travelling at 20 miles an hour to the place
of danger, being promptly followed by such other
ppliances as are found necessary to send.
The methods of extinguishing fires are entirely
different now from those employed a few years ago.
With first-class appliances and good water supply, it
rarely happens that an outbreak gets away ’’ from
the firemen. On the arrival of the motor a man takes
a small hand extinguisher into the building to check
the outbreak. If it has too big a hold for this to be
effective, the chemical engine is brought into use, and
50 gallons of chemicallv charged water are thrown on
c' •/ O
the flames. If the building is too well alight, a water
main is tapped, and with the pressure of 60 lbs. or
80 lbs. to the square inch the flames are attacked. If
the latter still hold possession the steamers are hur-
riedly brought into use. Canvas dams are erected,
and out of these each of the steam engines pumps 250
to 400 gallons of water a minute. When the fire is a
big one the two leviathan engines at headquarters are
brought into the fight, one of these throwing 1,000,
and the other 750, gallons per minute. Water is
poured into the fire from all sides and from all ele-
vations. If the outbreak show signs of beating the
force pitted against it, the call “ all help ’ ’ is trans-
mitted to tlu outlying stations, and in response every
fireman available in the metropolitan brigade turns
out. No matter how far away, whether Parramatta,
Bexley, Botany or Burwood, everyone of the 37 metro-
politan fire brigade stations sends on its men to help
in the struggle. On an average the metropolitan bri-
gade receives between six hundred and seven hundred
calls yearly.
The members of the Fire Brigades Board are :
Messrs. Charles Bown, J.P., who has been connected
with the Sydney fire brigades for nearly half a century,
chairman ; Edward J. Love, vice-chairman, and repre-
sentative of volunteer fire brigades ; George H. Pope,
J.P., representative of fire insurance companies, hav-
ing their head offices in Sydney ; H. F. Francis, repre-
sentative of fire insurance companies whose head
offices are not in Sydney ; Alderman E. L. Thompson,
J.P., representing the Sydney Municipal Council ; and
Alderman William Taylor, representative of other
municipal councils. The secretary is Mr. Z. Collis
Barry ; the superintendent and inspector of kerosene,
Mr. Alfred Webb ; and the assistant superintendent,
Mr. N. G. Sparks.


Mr. ALL RED WEBB, Super-
intendent of Fire Brigades of New
South Wales, was born 26th April,
1850, and educated at Christchurch
School, Hampstead Heath, London.
At the age of fifteen he joined the
Royal Navy. After spending three
years under the flag, a portion of the
time being at sea, he left, and joined
himself to the London fire brigade
in September, 1868. Two years
later he vacated his post, and went
to Canada, and was engaged in sur-
veying and other pursuits, returning
to London, 1874, atu i rejoined the
fire brigade. For six years he acted
as secretary to Sir E. M. Shaw,
K.C.8., then in command of the
London brigades, and in March of
J. Hubert Newman . Sydney.
MR A. WEBB.
1888 received the appointment of
deputy-superintendent to the Sydney
fire brigades, which position he oc-
cupied until September, 1898, when
he was appointed superintendent.
In the year 1903 he was commis-
sioned by the New South Wales
Government to visit London and
America, with a view to ascertaining
what improvements there were to he
procured in the interest of establish-
ing our brigades upon the highest
possible standard. From his ob-
servations the New South Wales
brigades compare very favourably
with those of other parts of the
world, but one thing is necessary,
more men and materials are required
to cope with immediate require-
ments. Improvements have been
introduced in the alarm, Sydney,
and are now being carried into effect;
also a number of appliances, new to
Australia, are being obtained, and
will be found of very great service in
the effectual working of our system.
Mr. CHARLES BOWN, J P.,
Chairman of the Fire Brigades’
Board, Sydney, was born in London
on 21st October, 1836. He came to
Sydney when twenty years of age, in
1 857, upon the invitation of his uncle,
the late Mr. Thomas John Bown, the
founder of the firm of Messrs. T. J.
Bown & Co., and with whom he
accepted a business engagement.
This business was established, in
1841, as a depot and a manufactory
of plumbers’ and gasfitters’ supplies,
and fire-extinguishing requisites. In
addition brass-finishingand engineer-
ing work of a like character was, and
still is, carried on as an important
section of the business. In 1870
Mr. Bown became a member of the
firm. After the death of Mr. T. J.
Bown he became senior partner,
while to-day he is sole proprietor of
the business. His connection with
the fire brigade system of Sydney
dates from 1857, the year of his
arrival in New South Wales. His
uncle wasat that time Superintendent
of the Insurance Companies’ Fire
Brigade. This body he joined as an
ordinary member. In the following
year he was raised to the rank of
foreman, and in 1867, in succession
to his uncle, who had held the office
continuously since the foundation of
the brigade in 1850, he was appointed
Superintendent. For years prior to
1883 futile attempts had been made
to place the fire brigade system of
the State upon a satisfactory basis.
The work of the original fire depart-
ment increased with the growth of
the city, but the system was notori-
ously inefficient. Mr. Bown in his
reports to the board of management
of the Insurance Companies’ Fire
Brigade urged the necessity for a
comprehensive Fire Brigades Act.
This was achieved in 1883 ; and the
Insurance Companies’ Fire Brigade
was disbanded in December of that
year. Upon the creation of the new
department the then Premier of Xew
South Wales, the late Sir Alexander
Stuart, in response to a numerously
signed citizens’ petition, urging him
to do so, offered the position of
Superintendent to Mr. Bown. This
he was compelled to decline, giving
as his reason that his private business
would not allow him to accept it.
He, however, accented the nosition
of Acting-Superintendent, the duties
of which office he carried out until
the Government made arrangements
of procuring a superintendent from
London in 1884 On 4th April
of that year he was appointed
government representative and
chairman of the Fire Brigades’
Board for the metropolitan district,
a position he has held ever since.
As chairman of the board, during
his twenty years’ occupancy of the
position, he has not been absent
from a single meeting, either through
illness or any other cause. During
his lengthened connection with the
metropolitan fire brigades Mr. Bown
has had some thrilling experiences
and not a few narrow escapes
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. C. BOWN.
from fatal or serious injury. He
has, however, been fortunate to
escape with nothing more serious
than bodily bruises. The fire bri-
gade system of Sydney is to-day
one of the best in the world. With
a sound basis and a fixed revenue
Mr. Alfred Webb, the present
Superintendent, has brought his
charge up to a high standard of
efficiency. Mr. Down’s public career
is limited to his connection with the
fire brigade system of the metropolis.
To this important public service
he devotes his best energies. Ever
since his appointment as chairman
he has been in regular communication
with the leading fire organisations of
Great Britain and America. Keep-
ing in close touch with these bodies
he is at once in possession of the
latest methods and appliances used
483
the cyclopedia of new south wales.


in the leading cities of the world.
Mr. Bown has on several occasions
the wards for the City Council, but
the control of his commercial interests
and his heavy responsibility in con-
nection with the Fire Brigades’ Board
tilled in all his time. He was one of
the promoters of the Equitable
Permanent Building Land and
Savings Institution, and he has been
a trustee thereof since March, 1874.
In October, 1888, Mr. Bown was
gazetted as Justice of the Peace for
New South W ales.
M r. ZACHARY COLLIS
BARRY, Secretary of the Fire Bri-
gades’ Board for the Metropolitan
District, is a son of the late Rev. Dr.
Zachary Barry. He was born in
Fremantle, where his father was the
Imperial chaplain in the days when
Western Australia was a Crown
colony with a convict establishment.
With his parents he went to Ireland,
and thence, after some time, came
ro Sydney, where he was educated
J. Hubert Newman . Sydney .
MR. Z. C. BARRY.
at the Sydney Grammar School, and
at the New School of which the late
Professor Stephens was principal.
He matriculated, passed the first
year’s course in arts at the Univer-
sity of Sydney, and then went to
Tasmania, where he was articled to
a solicitor in Launceston, but re-
turned to Sydney upon the firm
giving up business. He has had
experience in surveying and in
journalism, and in September, 1890,
received his present appointment,
being selected out of a large number
of candidates. Mr. Barry has always
taken keen interest in athletic sports,
and gained his University “blue.”
He played Rugby football with the
University team for several seasons,
during what was perhaps its most
brilliant period, being usually full-
back, but from time to time filling
every position in the field; he also
represented the State. In 1891 Mr.
Barry married Mary Emily, young-
est daughter of the late Dr. Glennie,
of Singleton, and has a family of two
daughters.
484
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


Department of Charitable Institutions.
The Inspector-General of Charities is responsible
to the Colonial Secretary for the administration and
management of the following institutions: —Macquarie
Street Asylum, Parramatta ; George Street Asylum,
Parramatta; Cottage Homes for Aged Couples ; Rook-
wood Asylum ; Liverpool Asylum ; Newington Asylum.
He has also been appointed inspector under the Public
Institutions Inspection Act, 1901, to visit and inspect
all public charities, and conduct inquiries and exami-
nations in respect to the management of the same.
There is no statute under which the asylums are
controlled and governed, and inmates may take their
discharge whenever they desire. No maintenance
charge can be demanded ; the relatives of a few of the
inmates contribute towards their maintenance, but
these contributions are purely voluntary. In the
cases of Imperial pensioners, if the pensioner is an
inmate of a Government asylum a moiety of the pen-
sion is deducted for maintenance. A liberal diet is
provided for all inmates, there is regular medical
attendance at each institution, and medical comforts
and extra are issued as ordered by the medical officers.
Members of every religious persuasion attend fre-
quently and hold Divine service in places set apart for
the purpose. Many inmates who are entitled to the
old-age pension have surrendered their certificates and
prefer to remain in the asylums. This really means a
saving to the State, as the annual cost of their keep is
less than their pension. On entering an asylum the
old-age pensioner’s certificate is cancelled.
Very few people have any idea of the number of
inmates and hospital patients housed at these institu-
tions, or the ability and tact required in the adminis-
tration of such a large department. On the 30th June,
1906, the total population of the various institutions
was 4,070, as shown by the following statistics
General inmates, 2,565 ; hospital patients, including
incurable consumptive, cancer, paralytic and other
chronic cases, 1,505 ; total, 4,070. There is a large
number of incurable cases under 40 years ol age, as the
general hospitals take casualty and acute cases onl\.
The average cost per inmate, taking the five insti-
tutions, and including the cottage homes for destitute
and aged married couples, is, approximately, £lB pei
annum. The expenditure for the year ended 30th
June, 1906, including stores, amounted, approximately,
to £72,000.
There are extensive grounds connected with the
Government hospitals and asylums at Rookwood and
Newington. They are well laid out, being divided
into flower and vegetable gardens, and utilised lor
dairy farming and pig and poultry raising. A con-
siderable quantity of vegetables and fodder is grown.
There are three silos for ensilage, and the dairies and
piggeries are built on up-to-date lines. A scheme is
benig prepared for the purchase and slaughtering ol
cattle at Newington asylum, and for The delivery of
meat supplies direct to the various institutions.
Bakeries are established at the Liverpool and Parra-
matta asylums, which supply bread to all of the insti-
tutions. In the course of time, and with the assistance
of legislation, these institutions will be largely self-
supporting. It is hoped that many malingerers —
comparatively young —who find their way into the
asylums, will be made to work for their maintenance
or be suitably dealt with. The staff is as follows
Administrative Office : Inspector-General of Charities,
1 ; chief clerk and inspector, 1 ; clerks, 5 ; total, 7.
Reception-house, Macquarie Street, Parramatta : The
staff here includes a visiting medical officer, a visiting
dispenser, clerk, matron, and artizans, attendants, and
others. The area covered by buildings is 1 rood 30
perches, and of the gardens, &c., 3 roods 9 perches.
The population is : hospital patients, 20 ; inmates, 252 ;
total, 272.
Applicants for admission into a Government
asylum —except in special cases —must first present
themselves at the Admission Depot, Health Depart-
ment, Svdnev, and be examined by a Government
medical officer. If passed by the Government medical
officer, the applicant is provided with a railway pass
and an admission order to the Reception House, Mac-
quarie Street, Parramatta. After admission and medi-
cal examination at the Macquarie Street depot the
inmate is drafted to a suitable institution. In the case
of female applicants, orders are issued by the Health
Department for admission direct to Newington asylum
for women. Incurable consumptive and cancer male
patients are admitted, on orders of Government medi-
cal officer, direct to the asylum at Liverpool. Chronic-
cases are admitted direct from the Coast Hospital,
Little Bav, and metropolitan and country hospitals on
medical certificates. It frequently happens that men
under the age of 60, and as young as 40 years, suffering
from destitution, rheumatism, or alcoholism, are ad-
mitted on orders from the Admission Depot. Public
Health Department. As soon as the visiting medical
officer certifies these men as fit to work they are dis-
charged from the asylum. The very old and blind
inmates only are allowed to remain at Macquarie
Street Asylum for any length of time.
George Street Asylum, Parramatta. —At this in-
stitution there are a visiting medical officer, visiting
dispenser, superintendent, assistant super-
intendent, clerk and storekeeper, and 11 artizans,
attendants, and others. Area covered by buildings,
&c., 12 acres, and within them are : Hospital patients,
269 ; inmates, 587 ; making a total of 856. Nearly
all of the inmates ai this institution are old men.
Cottage Homes, Parramatta, for destitute mar-
ried couples. — Here there are a visiting medical officer,
visiting dispenser, attendant in charge. The buildings
cover two acres ; another two acres are used for graz-
ing. The number ol homes is 20, and in them aie
housed 46 inmates.


In a report of the Director of the Government
Asylums, dated Ist May, 1891, it is stated that at the
Government asylums for infirm and destitute in 1888
there were a number of respectable aged married
couples who, in the decadence of life, after having per-
haps been companions for nearly half a century, had
fallen into poverty or chronic illness and had sepa-
rated —the husband to go to Liverpool or Parramatta
and the wife to Newington. Some of these cases were
very sad, and the constant appeals of both husbands
and wives for re-unition were most painful. In August,
1888, the Colonial Secretary formulated the idea of
re-uniting them in cottage homes or alms-houses, and
soon afterwards directed that steps should be taken to
provide these refuges. It was decided to locate them
so that the occupants might enjoy the privileges of
ordinary citizens,\ and be free from the restrictions
and surroundings of institutions.
Rookwood Asylum.—This institution has a staff
of 30, including medical superintendent, dispenser, lay
superintendent, matron, storekeeper, clerk, outdoor
foreman, 8 nurses, 15 engineer, artizans, at-
tendants and others. The area covered by buildings
is 2l| acres, and for farm, gardens, dairy, piggery,
grazing, &c., another acres are employed.
There are also 396 acres under lease at Mulgoa,
for grazing. The live stock includes 15 horses, 181
dairy cattle, 257 pigs, and 250 poultry. There is a
fine irrigation scheme in connection with the farm and
garden, and two silos for ensilage. The hospital
patients number 533, and the inmates 738. There are
two lock wards at this institution, and isolation wards
for epileptics and skin disease cases. Plans are being
prepared for two more general hospital wards. There
are a number of young men at Rookwood suffering
more or less from various diseases.
Liverpool Asylum. —Staff of 16 : Medical super-
intendent, dispenser, matron, clerk, 5 nurses, 7
artizans, attendants and others. The area covered by
buildings is 9 acres ; the gardens, piggery, &c., repre-
sent 16 acres. In the hospital there are 160 con-
sumptive, 51 cancer, and 194 general patients, making
with the inmates a total of 803 souls. Separate wards
are provided for the consumptives ; a number of these
patients' are comparatively young men. The cancer
patients are kept in hospital wards in an isolated part
of the grounds ; most of these patients are old men.
Arrangements are being made for the removal of the
consumptive and cancer patients to a more suitable
place at an early date. The live stock include 5 horses
and 155 pigs. A large quantity of vegetables are
grown at this institution.
Newington Asylum for Women. —Staff : 1 visit-
ing medical officer, 1 visiting dispenser, 1 matron super-
intendent, 1 housekeeper, 1 clerk and foreman, 1 clerk
and storekeeper, 9 nurses, 5 engineer, artizans, attend-
ants, &c. Area covered by buildings, 22 acres ; gar-
dens, dairy, piggeries, &c., 27| acres ; grazing land,
164| acres. Live stock : 100 horses, 70 dairy cattle,
250 pigs, 400 poultry. The dairy, piggery, farm and
gardens are excellently kept, and are a special feature
of this institution. The population of the hospital is :
16 consumptive, 20 cancer, and 242 general. In the
asylum the ordinary inmates number 519, and, in
addition, there are working men (gardeners, dairymen,
&c.), 25.
There is an isolated ward for epileptics at this
institution. Cancer, consumption, and skin disease
cases are kept apart from other cases. In addition to
the official staff at these institutions, there are minute
clerks, tradesmen, gardeners, laboureis, wardsman
Htchenmen, and others, who assist in a small way, and
are allowed extra diet, tobacco, or small cash gratui-
ties for the work they do.
Previous to the Ist August, 1888, the asylums for
the infirm and destitute were under the control of a
manager of asylums, and special investigations into all
institutions wholly or partly subsidised from State
funds were conducted by an inspector gf public chari-
ties. On the date mentioned a new office, designated
44 Director of Government Asylums and Boarding-out
Officer,” was created. Subsequently, owing to in-
crease of work and special legislation, the offices of
Director of Government Asylums and Boarding-out
Officer for Children were divided. The position of
Inspector General of Charities was created on Ist
February, 1906.
These institutions were first established solely for
aged and destitute persons. In the year 1885 there
were 1,280 inmates in the general divisions of the
asylums, and only 448 in the hospitals. In 1890 the
general wards contained 1,515 inmates and the hos-
pitals 988. On the 30th June, 1906, the general
wards contained 2,565 inmates, and the hospitals 1,505
patients, the hospital patients being equal to *369 of
the total population at that date, which is exclusive of
the yard inmates under medical treatment. Prior to
1887 the sick inmates did not enjoy the advantages of
a trained nursing staff, but were attended to almost
wholly by the more able-bodied inmates, who received
for their services small gratuities, ranging from 3d. to
Is. per day, a system which was reported to have
distinctly failed and too frequently attended with
grave abuses. In June, 1887, the Colonial Secretary
wrote the following minute on the subject : — 44 In the
division of the inmates under future management,
those who are suffering from disease or wounds should
be placed under hospital treatment quite separate
from those not so affected. Not only for these, but
also for the aged and infirm, I consider a limited staff
of trained nurses should be provided.” Shortly after-
wards effect was aiven to this minute by the engage-
• O c
ment of several female nurses for Newington Asylum
for Women, and a few trained male attendants, pos-
sessing general hospital experience, for the Parramatta
Asylums. Female nurses and trained male attendants
are now employed at all of the Government hospitals.
It will be seen from the foregoing that the Govern-
ment asylums for the infirm and destitute have been
so far diverted from their original purpose that they
are now practically hospitals tor chronic and incurable
diseases, as well as homes for the infirm and indigent.
They are relieving houses for the metropolitan, sub-
urban and country hospitals, and the figures already
quoted show that more than one-third, or 37 per cent.,
are classed as hospital patients. The Government
hospitals now treat all the indigent, incurable con-
sumptive patients, male and female, and cancer cases


in the Btate, as well as indigent persons suffering from
heart disease, paralysis, and senile decay (imbecility
arising from old age).
Owing to the large increase in hospital patients of
recent years, and to relieve the overcrowding in the
hospital wards at the Liverpool and Rookwood asy-
lums, a site has been secured by the Government at
Waterfall for the erection of hospitals for indigent,
incurable consumptive, cancer, and general chronic
cases. Waterfall is on the South Coast railway line,
and is situated about 24 miles from Sydney. The site
selected is 1,000 feet above the sea-level, has a mag-
nificent prospect, and affords splendid facilities for
water and sewerage services. The work of clearing,
preparation of plans, &c., is progressing as rapidly as
possible, and the present Government is to be com-
mended for pushing on with a work so urgently needed.
The introduction of special legislation and the
classification of inmates will tend l to their greater com-
fort, and it is quite possible to make these institutions
largely self-supporting.
The Neglected Children and Juvenile
Offenders’ Act.
This Act came into operation on Ist October, 1905,
and makes better provision for the protection, control,
education, maintenance and reformation of neglected
and uncontrollable children and juvenile offenders,
and for the licensing and regulation of children trading
in the streets and in certain places open to the public.
Excellent features of the Act, which are novel to this
State, are the comprehensive definition of a 4 ‘ neglected
child,” which includes children between the ages of
5 and 16 years found in vicious surroundings habitu-
ally wandering, or without adequate means of support ;
the constitution of Children’s Courts, where all cases
affecting children shall be heard, and the provision
that during the hearing the presiding magistrate may
exclude all persons not directly interested in the case ;
and the establishment of what is known as the pro-
bation ” system. The object of the special Court for
Children’s cases is to remove the children from contact
with the contaminating influences of the ordinary
police court. The Court is held in a room divested of
all the appurtenances of a court ; only those persons
who are immediately concerned are admitted; the
police officers on duty are not allowed to appear in
uniform; and the adjudicating officer, in addition to
his function as presiding magistrate, is there in the
capacity of a sympathetic and friendly instructor,
whose maxim is 64 to help and advise, and not neces-
sarily to punish.” The Metropolitan Children’s Court
is held at Ormond House, Paddington, and for the
initial six months ended 31st March, 1906, 728 cases
were dealt with. In 324 fines were inflicted for minor
offences, 50 children were taken charge of by the State
Children Relief Department and boarded out, 149
cases were withdrawn, 140 children were released on
probation : and 64 committed to either the industrial
schools or reformatory for more serious offences, while
one boy was committed to gaol, but released under the
First Offenders’ Act. Many of the children brought
before the Court are guilty of minor offences, which are
due to mere waywardness, and lor which the severe
punishment of removal from their parents and com-
mittal to an institution is not merited. They require
merely to be brought to realisation of the error of their
conduct, and to have friendly supervision and good
counsel for a period after their appearance before the
Court, to prevent any relapse or development into
more serious misconduct. The supervision is exercised
by the inspectors of the State Children’s Relief De-
partment ; and the wisdom of placing the children
under what is practically a policy of suspended sen-
tence is demonstrated by the fact that of the 140 to
whom it had been applied only two have had to be
brought before the Court for any breach of the con-
ditions.
The State Children Relief Board, under the presi-
dency of the Hon. C. K. Mackellar, M.L.C., controls
the boarding-out system under the State Children’s
Relief Act, and the licensing of institutions for the
reception and care of children under the Infant Pro-
tection Act, while the Department with which the
board is incorporated executes, under the direction of
the Chief Officer, Mr. Alfred William Green, the work
incidental to the other Acts.
The State Children’s Relief Department.
This department was created in 1881 by the
passing by the Legislature of the State Children Relief
Act, when the ‘ ‘ boarding-out ” was substituted for
the “ barrack ” system as the national policy of
dealing with the dependent children of the State, and
the diversity and naturalness of thi family life was
made avilable to the orphaned and destitute little ones
of the community in place of the colourless unnatural
life of the asylum. The Act empowers the boarding-
out of children under payment until they attain the
age of 12 years, but the period may, in special cases,
be extended to 14 years, when they are apprenticed,
the boys in the majority of instances to farmers, pas-
toralists and mechanics, and the girls to domestic
service, as dressmakers, &c. A scale is provided of
wages, which are collected by the department half-
yearly and lodged to a general fund, out of which the
children are paid an average of £l6 each on completion
of their indentures, while the guardian is required to
pay a further graduated scale of pocket money to the
apprentice each week, and to maintain a clothing
outfit to a prescribed standard. Children under seven
years of age whose parents are dead, or who have been
surrendered for the purpose, are adopted for lile by
reputable guardians of comfortable means —generally
childless married couples —the age of the children
being limited to prevent unscrupulous persons from
taking older boys and girls ostensibly for adoption,
but actually to obtain cheap servants. The children
are visited in their homes three times annually, at
unexpected and irregular periods, by a staff ol trained
inspectors, whose duty it is to see that they are pro-
perly fed, clothed, have suitable and sufficient sleeping
accommodation, and are treated with proper consider-
ation ; and their welfare is further safeguarded by the
oversight of honorary local committees of ladies who
are vested with powers similar to those of the inspec-
tors, but whose visit-- are made more frequently.


At the close of the first year (March, 1882) there
were 103 children under the control of the Depart-
ment, 100 of whom were paid for es boarders, and 3
were permanently adopted without payment. The
number has now (1906) increased to 3,890, of which
2,368 are entirely supported by the Government, 254
are adopted, and 1,268 apprenticed. Four years
after the inception of the system it was found neces-
sary to make special provision for the invalid and
delicate children who were brought to the care of the
Department. Although not suffering from active dis-
ease, they could not properly be boarded-out in the
ordinary way, because their extremely debilitated or
deformed or crippled condition required more care
than, could reasonably be expected of the ordinary
foster mother. Special homes were accordingly estab-
lished for them under the style of 44 cottage homes,”
each of which accommodates 15 children under the
charge of a ' k mother,’ ’ whose duty if is to manage the
home, and, under medical direction, nurse the chil-
dren. The homes are situated at Pennant Hills and
Mittagong to secure to the children the advantages of
a salubrious climate, and the accommodation is limited
in each, to preserve the boarding-out or family aspect
of their management. As soon as their health will
permit, the children are transferred and placed with
ordinary foster mothers. Two of tjie homes are at
Pennant Hills and seven at Mittagong, and the average
capitation cost of the 180 inmates, including all
charges, is approximately £24 per annum.
To overcome the difficulty experienced in obtain-
ing a regular supply of good fresh milk, butter, eggs,
fruit, vegetables, poultry* &c., for the Mittagong
homes, a farm is operated by the Department. No
cost whatever to the State is involved, as the value of
the products which otherwise would have to be pur-
chased has considerably exceeded their working ex-
i/ o
penses ; and ample quantities of the articles referred to
are provided for the homes.
Under the 44 barrack ’’ and ther oiginal 44 board-
ing-out ’’'system the children were necessarily removed
from the custody of their natural parents, but in 1896
sentimental considerations induced an amendment of
the law, and the children under 12 years of indigent
widows and deserted wives of good character may now
be boarded-out to their own mothers at rates determined
by the State Children Relief Board according to the
merits of each case. Generally the change merits com-
mendation, because of the opportunity afforded of pre-
serving intact the close association of a worthy mother
with the care and training of her offspring ; but, un-
happily it has been attended with some pernicious
results, by destroying thrift and independence in some
and inducing deliberate misrepresentation of their cir-
cumstances by other women ; and relatives who can
an(? formerly /did help the mothers renounce their
family obligations and ties of relationship, and compel
the aid of the Government Last year the law was
further amended to prevent the imposition above re-
ferred to, and the obligation was imposed on the appli-
cants of testifying on oath, in the newly constituted
Children’s Court, as to their indigence. A diminution
has occurred both in the total number of applications
for relief and in the proportion of requests that have
been refused, and it would appear that fear of the cross-
examination by the Court has deterred malingerers
from seeking aid. A total of 6,259 applications have
been received for this form of relief, of which 4.194
were granted and 2,065 refused.
Originally created solely for the maintenance and
control of the dependent children of the State, the
functions of the Department have been widely ex-
tended from time to time, and they now embrace the
administration of the 44 Children’s Protection Act, ,?
the 44 Infant Protection Act,” portions of the 44 Ne-
glected Children and Juvenile Offenders’ Act,” inves-
tigations into the cause of truancy of children from
the schools of the State, investigation of subsidy claims
from benevolent societies, distribution of blankets to
the indigent. The two last-named have no special
reference to children, and are really foreign to the
legitimate purposes of the Department, but the inspec-
torial organisation has been availed of by the Govern-
ment for the work.
The Children’s Protection Act.
The purpose of this measure is to suppress baby-
farming, and this end is secured by the prohibition,
under pain of a heavy penalty, of the acceptance out-
side stipulated conditions of a premium for the adop-
tion of any child under three years of age : by the
registration of all children of the age mentioned who
may be placed with foster-mothers under payment ;
and by the registration of confinements and still-births
occurring in lying-in homes ; while protection is
afforded to children employed in public entertain-
ments of a dangerous character. Each custodian of a
registered child is supplied by the Department with a
printed copy of instructions on the feeding of nursing
children, compiled under the authority of the Board
of Health, and thechild is visited in the home by the
inspectors, who give any necessary advice or direction
as to its care and treatment, or suggest action where
there is evidence of neglect or ill-treatment. Heavy
penalties by fine or impi isonment are provided for
failure to register the reception or change of custody
or for any improper treatment of a child ; 1,531 chil-
dren were under in this division during
1905, 2,614 confinements in laying-in homes were
recorded, and 133 children were licensed to take part
in public entertainments.
The Infant Protection Act.
This measure is designed for the protection, main-
tenance, education, and care of infants. It is an
amendment and extension of the affiliation law of the
State, but it includes provision for the inspection,
supervision and control of places established or used
for the reception and care, apart from their mothers,
of two or more children under seven years of age.
Each place must be licensed for a number of children,
which is regulated according to the accommodation
and the facilities afforded for securing the good health
and kind treatment of children. The Act was in
effective operation for the first time during 1905.
when eleven institutions were licensed, one lor 75.
1 for 50, 5 lor 20, 2 for 12, 1 for 10, and 1 for 6 chil


(Iren. The age limits during which children are ad-
mitted vary from infancy to a maximum of 12 years,
and the children are retained in some instances until
18 years old, being maintained and educated until
either adopted or sent to employment. The institu-
tions are supported by voluntary contributions —with
one exception —in which subsidy is granted by the
Government.
Hospitals and other Charitable Institutions.
Though the general condition of affairs in Aus-
tralia has always been prosperous from the earliest
times in its history, there have been ,numerous cases
in which charity has had to be extended beyond what
may be termed the official groove ; and public gene-
rosity has never been wanting in making arrangements
for th care of persons who, by ill-fortune or accident,
or otherwise, been rendered destitute. This is parti-
cularly the case in the annals of New South Wales,
where the entertainment of the aged and destitute
poor, official and unofficially, has been on so liberal a
scale as to attract undesirable immigrants of that class
from other colonies. This in a manner can be excused
in respect to early days, when the objects of public
charity were in very many instances men who had
lived lives of privation in the arduous work of pioneer-
ing the country and the development of its resources.
Sentiment notwithstanding, it is natural to expect that
a country known and honoured all the world over for
the liberality, not to say extravagance, of its private
hospitality, should err on the side of generosity in the
treatment of its destitute poor. However, a more
systematic order of things has gradually been adopted,
the opportunities for overlapping have been minimised,
and in none of the States now does there exist a dis-
position to spend public money for the purposes of
charity extravagantly. But even to-day in this State
there is no definiteness regarding the dispensing of
donations, excepting the provisions made on such
occasions as Hospital Saturday and Sunday. For-
merly benevolent private persons instituted charities
for the relief of distress, and when they had exhausted
all the funds they individually could spare, they used
their influence with the Government of the day to sup-
plement their income. There being no questions as
to the good faith of the movers, successive adminis-
trations saw in this an easy method of discharging one
of the main duties of civilised governments. They
had too ready to their hand an easy way of complying
with the requests of the charitably disposed without
in all cases contributing money to the desired extent.
Land was liberally alienated from the colony. Unfor-
tunately no provision was made for Government in-
spection, and to this day the State distributes large
sums of money every year in the disposal of which it
has little or no voice. The custom still continues of
subsidising private subscriptions to charities by a
pound for pound subsidy up to a certain limit. This
custom is liable to abuse, in that the charity concerned
may not really be required, or not required to the
extent supposed. If there were a system whereby
local charities were subsidised by local rates, the
persons who had to provide these rates would be
careful not to indulge in extravagant or unnecessary
outlay. But where it is the whole body of the tax-
payers who contribute to the establishment or main-
tenance of a benevolent institution, the temptation is
great to erect a larger building and to give it a larger
staff than is required by the circumstances.
Besides the Government institutions already re-
ferred to, the care of the sick is undertaken in all cases
but one by hospitals under private management, sup-
ported by voluntary contributions, and subsidised by
Government to a certain extent. It frequently hap-
pens, however, that besides these subsidies, special
grants are made in individual cases. The only limit
to Government generosity in the matter is that insti-
tutions under sectarian, control are excluded from
State assistance. The chief hospitals in Sydney are
the Sydney, Prince Alfred, and St. Vincent’s, but the
leading suburbs have their own institutions, sup-
ported by local effort, subsidised by the Government.
The only purely public hospital is that situated at
Little Bay, about ten miles from Sydney. Originally
constructed during one of the smallpox scares, the
hospital is now devoted to typhoid cases and infectious
diseases generally. Private munificence has erected
the handsome and commodious Walker Convalescent
Hospital on the Parramatta River. According to the
latest authorative returns (1904) the hospitals or
infirmaries in the State number 130, of which 122 are
subsidised by the State ; there are, besides, seven
lunatic asylums, six for ordinary insane, and one at
Parramatta for criminals, all under Government con-
trol, and provision is made for the treatment of the
insane in licensed private asylums, subject to the
inspection of Government officers.
The number of beds in these institutions was
3,935, of which 3,358 were intended for ordinary
cases and 577 foi infectious cases. The death-rate
per 100 pel sons under treatment during the past ten
years (1894-5 —1904-5) was 7'3, while the rate for
J 904-5 was 6*3, or 14 per cent, below the centennial
average. This rate in New South Wales, compared
with that of Europe, is undoubtedly very high ; but
this to a large extent is owing to the number of deaths
from accidents, which form a very considerable portion
of the total number registered —a circumstance due
to the occupation of the people and the dangers inci-
dental to pioneering enterprise. Application for ad-
mission to the metropolitan hospitals are made to the
Government medical officer, and it is the duty of that
officer to assign the cases to the different hospitals
and asylums in accordance with the nature, severity
and special character of the ailments from which the
patients are suffering and the accommodation avail-
able at the various institutions. The number of appli-
cations dealt with during 1904-5 was 13,734, as com-
pared with 12,974 in the preceding year. These
figures represent cases, not individuals, in some
instances the same person being in an institution
several times during the year.
The amount expended by the State in the year
1904-5 for the maintenance of the sick poor was
£29,976, the principal beneficiares being the Prince
Alfred H ospital, the Sydney Hospital, the Moorcliff
Hospital, at £35 per bed, and the Carrington Con-
valescent Hospital at £l7 10s. per bed. According


to the hospital accounts the total expenditure of the
Government in connection with the hospitals in the
metropolitan area in 1904-5 was £59,976 ; while in
the country hospitals the expenditure reached £53,686.
The number of outdoor patients during the same period
was 77,039. Since 1902 a dental hospital has been in
existence lor the benefit of the poor, the number
receiving relief in 1904-5 being 12,266. Omitting the
Government establishment at Little Bay, the expendi-
ture of 1904-5 of all the hospitals in the State for
purposes other than bedding and repairs was £166,664,
representing an average of £46 4s. Id. per bed. The
total revenue of these institutions, with the afore-
mentioned exception, was £220,840, and the expendi-
ture £197,961. At Little Bay Hospital 3,731 patients
were treated during the year at a cost of £20,537, so
that the total expenditure of the State on hospitals
amounted to £218,498. The number of lepers under
detention at the lazaret at the end of 1904 was 17, or
four in excess of what it had been five years previously.
Besides hospitals properly so called there exist
various institutions for the reception of fallen women,
for the treatment of the blind and the deaf and dumb,
for the relief of consumptives, for ministering to the
wants of destitute women, for granting casual aid to
indigent persons, for the help of discharged prisoners,
and for many other purposes which elicit the charitable
aid of the people. The Infants’ Home, Ashfield ; the
Hospital for Sick Children, Glebe ; the Institution for
the Deaf and Dumb and Blind, Newtown, besides
other institutions in different parts of the State, receive
help from the Government ; but they are maintained
principally by private contributions. The manage-
ment of these, and, indeed, almost all institutions for
the relief of the sick, is in the hands of committees
elected by persons subscribing towards their support.
In addition to the above, there are St. Vincent’s and
Lewisham Hospitals, and several other institutions
under the control of the Roman Catholic body, and
supported entirely by private charity. The total
expenditure by the State in aid of hospitals, hospitals
for the insane and other charitable institutions
amounted in 1904-5 to £476,782 ; adding to this the
amount of private subscriptions, donations, and other
receipts of the hospitals, &c.. the poor and the unfor-
tunate benefited during the year to the extent of about
£724.000. The expenditure by the Government dur-
ing this period upon all eleemosynary institutions —
excepting hospitals for insane and mission stations
for aborigines —was £336,779. Private subscriptions
amounted to £247,554, distributed as follows :
Hospitals, £128,487 ; Hospitals for Insane, £23,226 :
State Children’s Relief Board, £1.531 ; charitable
institutions, £72,696 ; charitable societies, £20,501 ;
and Aborigines Protection Board, £1,116. It was
anticipated by the introducers of the old-age pensions
scheme that there would be a reduction in the Gov-
ernment expenditure in charity, especially in asylums.
Experience has, however, proved otherwise, the classes
of people affected by the two systems of rebel
being widely different, and no reduction has been de-
tected hitherto. The cost of old-age pensions in
1904-5 amounted to 7s. 4d. per head, and of all other
charities to 6s. 7d. per head.


Mr. ARTHUR HENRY BRAY,
Grand Secretary of the United
Grand Lodge of Freemasons of
New South Wales, is a son of the
late Mr. William Bray, who was a
member of the well-known Sydney
firm of Messrs. Prince, Bray and
Ogg, was born in Sydney on Octo-
ber 22, 1853. He is also a grand-
son of the late Mr. Thomas Boul-
ton, who will always be remembered
among Freemasons as one of the
founders of the craft in New South
Wal es. The subject of this sketch
was initiated in Unity Lodge, No.
1,169, English Constitution, on
October 22, 1878, and became
Master of the Lodge in 1882. On
July 1, 1884, he was appointed
as District Grand Secretary of the
District Grand Lodge in New South
Wales, under the English Constitu-
tion. In 1887 he received the
jubilee appointment from the Giand
Master of England (His Royal
Highness the Prince of Wales) of
Past Grand Standard-bearer of the
Grand Lodge of England. Upon
the occasion of the foundation of the
United Grand Lodge of New South
MR. A. H. BRAY.
Wales,“in August, 1888, Mr. Bray
was unanimously elected by the
English, Scotch, and New South
Wales bodies as Grand Secretary of
the United Grand Lodge, a position
he still holds. Mr. Bray is also
representative in the Grand Lodge
of New South Wales for the Grand
Lodge of Western Australia.
Mr. JOHN WHEELER, J.P.,
ex-Mayor of Petersham, and ex-
M.L.A. of New South Wales, was
born in New South Wales in 1853.
Upon leaving school he engaged in
mercantile pursuits, and for two years
he was employed in his father’s
business. In 1870 he entered the
service of the Newcastle-Wallsend
Coal Co., where he made rapid
progress. For several years he has
held the position of general manager
to that body, and, being an incor-
porated accountant, he has had an
extensive experience in dealing with
finances. Outside of his career in
commerce and finance, Mr. Wheeler
has occupied a high and honourable
position as a public man. At the
general election in 1887 he contested
the Canterbury electorate in the
interests of Freetrade, and although
unsuccessful, he polled a very large
vote. At the next general election,
which took place in 1889, he suc-
ceeded in being returned for that
constituency second on the poll, with
no less than 5,658 votes to his credit.
At the general election in 1891,which
brought the Labour Party as a
distinct force into State politics, he
was again declared elected with
4,349 votes ; but some months after,
upon a recount, the next candidate
was awarded the seat. Since then
he has not sought to enter the Legis-
lative Assembly. Upon the intro-
duction of the Electoral Act creating
single constituencies, he was ap-
pointed, and still holds, the position
of returning officer for the electorate
of Petersham. In municipal govern-
ment, Mr. Wheeler has also had many
years’ experience. He was elected
an alderman of the borough of Peter-
sham in 1884, and attained to the
dignity of mayor in 1886. In proof
of the confidence reposed in him by
his fellow-aldermen, he enjoyed the
distinguished honour of being re-
elected to the mayoralty five years in
succession. In 1888 the burgesses
of Petersham presented him with a
massive silver salver, and a tea and
coffee service, as a centenary gift
for Mrs. Wheeler. He has been
associated with the Municipal Asso-
ciation of New South Wales since
1886, and was that year elected a
member of the executive committee.
In 1894 he attained to the position of
a vice-president of that body and the
following year senior vice-president.
In 1894 Mr. Wheeler was unani-
mously elected Right Worthy Grand
Master of the Loyal Orange Institu-
tion, a position he has continuously
held ever since. He also takes an
active interest in friendly benefit
societies, and from 1885 to 1894 he
filled the position of Worthy Grand
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. J. WHEELER.
Master of the Protestant Alliance
Friendly Society of Australasia. Mr.
Wheeler was nominated to the Com-
mission of the Peace in 1887.
Mr. WILLIAM JOHN WALKER,
J.P., General Secretary of the order
of the Sons and Daughters of Tem-
perance registered friendly benefit
society, son of the late William
Walker, for many } r ears a public
accountant in Sydney, is a native of
Sydney, where he was born on the
13th June, 1874. He began his
education at a private school, after
which he attended the school con-
ducted under the auspices of Christ
Church, St. Laurence, finishing at
the Crown Street Superior Public
School. Upon termination of his
schooling he secured the position of
a junior clerk in the office of the
“ Evening News ,l which he eventu-
ally left, and after making various
changes, attended an examination
in the beginning of 1895. held by the
Metropolitan Board of Water Supply
and Sewerage in connection with
their clerical branch and in which
over eighty took part, he more than
satisfied the examiner, passing first,
and was appointed to the account-
ants’ branch of that department in
July of that year. After spending
nine years in this office, he severed
his connection upon his election as
general secretary of the Sons and
Daughters of Temperance in 1904,
an appointment confirmed in April
of the following year. During his


stay in the Water and Sewerage
Board, in addition to being hon.
secretary of their picnic committee,
he was hon. secretary of their branch
of the Public Service Association
from 1902 to 1904, and for the year
1903-4 sat as their representative in
its council. Mr. Walker became
associated with friendly societies in
1888, being then only fourteen years
of age, and was in July of that year
initiated into the Good Intent Divi-
sion of the Sons and Daughters of
Temperance. It took
office, viz., that of assistant recording
J. Hubert Newman Sydney.
MR. W. J. WALKER.
scribe,the night of his initiation, and
after occupying various offices was
elected W.P. in January, 1897, an
office held by him for three consecu-
tive terms. In January, 1898, he
was elected as representative to the
Grand Division, and in March of
that year was elected as their repre-
sentative to the National Division
of the order. Various other offices
marked his connection therewith,
viz., that of Grand Sentinel, 1898-9 ;
M.W. Auditor, 1899, 1900 ; G.W.P.,
1900-2 ; M.W. Superintendent Ju-
veniles, 1901-3 M.W.A., April, 1904,
and at a special session in June,
1904, he was elected its general
secretary. Mr. Walker, being a
fluent and ready speaker, prompt
and fearless in debate, has by his
deliberations, as seen in connection
with the propaganda and legislative
sections of the order, strengthened
the session in arriving at their de-
cision as regards his appointment to
his present position. For over three
years Mr. Walker has been represen-
tative of the Cossipore Division of
the order to the General Committee
of the Sydney United Friendly
.Societies’ Dispensary and Medical
Institute ; for two years of that time
he was auditor, and at the annual
meeting held in January, 1905, was
elected a trustee of that institution.
In recognition of the valuable ser-
vices rendered as G.W.P. of No. 1
Grand Division, that body presented
him with a gold emblem, suitably
inscribed, on his retiring from the
position in January, 1903, and early
in 1905 the members of R. T. Booth
Division presented him with a silver-
mounted pipe (in case) and tobacco
pouch, suitably inscribed, for ser-
vices rendered by him to that
division for the five years prior to
its amalgamation with the Rose of
Australia Division. Mr. Walker was
connected with the St. Andrew’s
Cathedral Young Men’s Institute
and Debating Society for some years,
was a member of its council and
organiser of several entertainments
in aid of the poor of that and other
parishes. He has been a represen-
tative to the N.S.W. Alliance for the
past few years and at present is a
member of its council. In connec-
tion with the Crown Street School
Old Boys’ Union, which was inaugu-
rated in 1899, Mr. Walker became
an office-bearer from its inception,
and for the past three-and-a-half
years has been joint hon. secretary.
He was the prime mover and one of
the joint hon. secs, to the public
reception tendered by that union to
Victor Trumper (an old boy) in
Sydney Town Hall in December,
1902. Mr. Walker was appointed
an honorary magistrate for the State
in 1902, and elected a life governor
of the Benevolent Society of New
South Wales at its annual meeting
in 1905.
Major C. A. WILSON, V.D.,
J.P., Grand Secretary of the United
Ancient Order of Druids, was born
at Penrith, N.S.W. in the year 1838.
He began his education as a pupil at
the old Sydney College (now the
Sydney Grammar School), College
Street, Hyde Park. Later he attended
.St. James’ Grammar School, in
Phillip .Street, subsequently passing
the University examination when
that institution was situated in
College Street, with the late Dr.
Woolley Ging the principal. Upon
the termination of his scholastic
career, Mr. Wilson preferred to
pursue a mercantile life, which he
commenced by entering the office of
Messrs. Gilchrist, Watt & Co., where
he had the opportunity of becoming
associated with the shipping inter-
ests of the port of Sydney, with
which he afterwards identified him
self for many years, and tells us of
the time when the arrival of a vessel
of 900 tons was an object of great
interest. In the year 1854, being
then but sixteen years of age, he join-
ed the first regiment of the Sydney
Volunteer Rifles, and was connected
with the military forces of this State
until his retirement in 1895 on his
present rank. His long, continuous
service of forty-one years, it would
appear, was suitably acknowledged
by the military authorities in
conferring upon him the Victorian
decoration, which he received the
same year. P'rom 1868, when he
first became initiated into a friendly
benefit society, lie has ever
taken a very keen interest in that
most humane work during which
period he has held many prominent
positions connected therewith, being
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MAJOR C. A. WILSON.
in 1898 elected to the positionhe now
holds, viz., that of Grand Secretary
of the United Ancient Order of
Druids. We may conveniently add
here that Mr. Wilson lias been for
many years connected with various
church choirs, being one of the first
choristers of St. Andrew’s Cathedral,
and also that he has the honour of
being a Justice ot the Peace, having
been gazetted in the early part ot
1890.


Mr. THOMAS JOHN IREDALE,
born at Newcastle-upon-Tyne 1836,
came to New South Wales in 1852.
For some time he occupied a position
in the employ of Messrs. Iredaleand
Co., Ironmongers, of George Street,
and afterwards entered upon mer-
cantile pursuits, finally with Mr.
Ebenezer Vickery, as storekeeper and
salesman. With this firm he re-
mained continuously for thirty-five
years. He is a foundation member
of the Protestant Alliance Friendly
Society of Australasia, having joined
it upon its inauguration in 1873.
He took a prominent part in the
J. Hubert Newman Sydney.
MR. T J. I REDALE.
inauguration and management of
the Waverley branch of the order,
occupying for five years the position
of Secretary, and for four-and-a-half
years that of Worshipful Master.
In 1877 he was for the first time
elected a representative on the
Grand Council of the society,
which honour has been confirmed
to him each year consecutively
ever since. In 1879 he was ap-
pointed Grand Secretary to the
order. During his term of office
no less than fifty-seven new lodges
have been opened, fifty of which
are still in existence. By the author-
ity of the Grand Council he offici-
ally attended and opened the first
lo 'ge of the society in Perth, West
Australia, in 1895. He filled the
position of President of the Friendly
Societies’ Association of New South
Wales for a period of four years,
to which he was unanimously re-
elected. He was appointed to
represent the friendly societies of
this colony on the organising com-
mittee of the Government for the
inauguration of the Commonwealth,
in the year igoi. He was also
appointed trustee by Sir W. J.
Lyue, Colonial Treasurer, in con-
junction with Messrs. David Davis
and Samuel Smith, Ms.L A., for the
carrying out the functions of the
Friendly Societies’ and Trades
Union Sports day, a spectacular dis-
play which proved the most attractive
and popular of the many magnificent
fetes which inaugurated the Common-
wealth, during the first week of
January, 1901. The great banquet
which concluded the festivities on
that historic occasion, held in the
1.0. Hall, was presided over by
Mr. T. J. Iredale. Amongst the
guests present were the Right Hon.
(now Sir) E. Barton, first Premier of
the Commonwealth, Sir W. J.
Lyne, and other members of the
Ministry, beside other distinguished
citizens. Having filled the position
of President of the Association during
the passing of the Amending Act of
the Friendly Societies Act, which
was passed in 1899, and after a period
of four years he resigned that office.
His services were recognised by the
Association at a fraternal gathering
on the 14th March, 1901, presided
over by the Hon. J. L. Fegan,
Minister for Mines, when he was
presented by Bro. G. T. Clarke, on
behalf of the Association, with a
Waltham gold watch and chain,
suitably inscribed. He has for many
years represented his order at meet-
ings of the Association.
Mr. JAMES CLARKE, Grand
Master of the Manchester Unity
1.0. in New South Wales, was
born at Launceston, Tasmania, in
1857, and was educated at a public
school in his native town. Upon
leaving school he learned the hair-
dressing business, at which he was
employed both in Tasmania and
New Zealand. Coming to Sydney
in 1877 he established himself inde-
pendently in King Street, and within
a few years controlled the largest
establishment of its kind in New
South Wales. In 1894 he disposed
of this business in order to devote
his attention more closely to sport.
For many years Mr. Clarke has been
the owner of horses, and has often
proved successful upon the principa.
racecourses of the State and else-
where. He is one of the founders
of the City Tattersall’s Club, of
which he has been elected chairman
eight times in succession and with-
out opposition. In developing the
interests and influence of this club,
Mr. Clarke has devoted much time
and attention. It started with fifteen
members, now it has over 300. It is
a purely sporting and racing club.
Two important race meetings are
held under its auspices annually, and
it was largely due to Mr. Clarke’s
efforts that these days were obtained.
In addition to sporting Mr. Clarke
takes a deep interest in friendly
societies. In 1879 he joined
No. 1, Strangers’ Refuge Lodge,
J. Hubert Newman . Sydney.
MR. J. CLARKE.
M.U.1.0.0.F., the oldest lodge of
the order in Australasia. Initiated in
that year he set himself assiduously
to the work of the lodge, and passed
through the various offices until in
1903 he attained the dignity of Pro-
vincial Grand Master of the Sydney
district, and in May, 1904, he was
elected Grand Master of the society
in New South Wales. The member
ship of this society at Ist January,
1904, was 24,128, with a capital of
He is also a member of
the Royal Gladstone Lodge, No. 157,
E.C., Free and Accepted Masons.
As a sporting gentleman, Mr. Clarke
is one of the most popular in the
city. With regard to racing, he
possesses a keen interest and a
thorough practical knowledge of the
same,


M r . G E O R G E E I) W A R D
ARDILL, J.P., Director of the
Sydney Rescue Work Society, the
Society for Providing Homes for
Neglected Children (which embrace
Our Children’s Homes, Liverpool),
the Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Children, the Women's
Crusade, tne Home of Hope, the
Open-all-night Refuge, the Hoys’
Farm Plome (Camden), the Home
Training School, the Lying-in Hos-
pital, the Babies’ Home, the Dis-
charged Prisoners' Mission and also
hon. secretary for the Aborigines’
Protection Association, was born at
Parramatta, New South Wales, in
1851. where he received his educa-
tion. He is a son of Mr. Joshua
Ardill, one of the oldest citizens of
that district. Leaving school at
thirteen years ot age, he entered
upon a mercantile career. Two
years later, and when but sixteen,
he was entrusted with the control
of three large business establish-
ments. Upon reaching his eighteenth
year he became interested in a print-
ing and publishing business in Parra-
matta and Sydney, which he carried
on under his own name. During
this period he published the In-
vestors' Gazette , the Cumberland Argus
and several other minor publications,
in addition to the general printing.
In 1882 he disposed of his business
and entered upon charitable work, in
winch, from boyhood, he had always
been interested and devoted fiis life
to ever since. Most of the organisa-
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. G. E. ARDILL.
tions enumerated at the head of this
notice Mr. Ardill was instrumental in
founding. In addition Mr. Ardill
acted as secretary for the New South
Wales Alliance,an influential political
and temperance organisation, that
has its headquarters in Pitt Street.
This position he was compelled,
through stress of other duties, to re-
linquish in 1903. Mr. Ardill also
acts as hon. secretary to the Public
Morals Committee of Sydney. He
is also a member of the Aborigines
Protection Board,' the Evangelical
Council of New South Wales, vice-
president of the New South Wales
Alliance and of the committee of the
White Cross League. Mr. Ardill
has been identified with the work
among the aborigines of the State
for the past twenty-six years. In all
charitable work Mr. Ardill has ac-
quired a thorough practical experi-
ence. In 1887 married Miss L.
Wales, daughter of Mr. Thomas
Wales, of England, and has two
children. In Mrs. Ardill her hus-
band has found an ardent supporter
in all his charitable work. She has
taken practical control of the various
agencies established for the ameliora-
tion of distress among the fallen
women, also of the homes and agen-
• r ,
cies for similar work among helpless
children, and is a capable public
speaker, taking an active part in
temperance work, especially under
the banner of the Women’s Christian
Temperance Union,


Medical Institutions.
Medical affairs in New South Wales are under the
control of the Medical Board, formed under the Medical
Practitioners Act. No. 26, of 1868. By this statute
the Governor is directed to appoint a Board of not
less than three members of the medical profession,
with one of them president and a permanent secretary.
The members of the Board are removable at will.
Practitioners wishing to obtain the certificate of the
Boaid, or to register any additional qualifications
they may possess, and desiring to have them recorded
on the official list, are required to attend personally
to submit their qualifications to the Board, who re-
gister those approved and publish the names in the
Government Gazette. Candidates have to submit their
degrees, diplomas or other certificates of qualifications
to the Board for examination. In June, 1900, it was
notified, per medium of the Government Gazette, that,
under an order made by Queen Victoria, with the
advice of the Privy Council, the second portion of the
British Medical Act of 1886 would for the future apply
to New South Wales. The significance of this an-
nouncement is that the degrees of M.D., M.B. and
Ch.M., conferred by the University of Sydney are
now recognised in ‘the United Kingdom,' and' that
holders of the same may be registered there, without
further examination, in the same way that holders of
British degrees art registered in New South Wales.
Act No. 26 of 1898 also defines the qualifications
of medical witnesses on coroners’ inquests and other
inquiries. A legally qualified medical practitioner
therein is described as follows ; —“ Any person who
shall prove to the satisfaction of New South Wales
Medical Board that (I) he is a doctor or bachelor of
some university or a physician or surgeon licensed or
admitted by some College of Physicians or Surgeons
in Great Britain or Ireland ; (2) he has passed through
regular course of medical study of not less than five
years’ duration in a School of Medicine, and that he
has received, after due examination from the Univer-
sity of Sydney or from some university college or
other body duly recognised for that purpose in the
country to which such university college may belong,
a diploma, degree or license entitling him to practice
medicine in that country ; (3) he is a member of the
Company of Apothecaries in London or of the Apothe-
caries’ Hall, Dublin ; or (4) a medical officer of H.M.’s
sea or land service Any person not a duly qualified
medical practitioner within the meaning of the Medical
Practitioners’ Act of 1898 is prohibited under the
Medical Practitioners’ Amendment Act, No. 33,
1900 from using the title of physician, doctor of medi-
cine, licentiate in medicine and surgery, bachelor of
medicine, or surgeon, or any other title implying that
he is a legally qualified medical practitioner as afore-
said, under a penalty of £5O, and, in case of a continu-
ing offence, a further penalty of £5 a day from the date
of the first offence or imprisonment for a term not
exceeding twelve months,
The composition of the New South Wales Medical
Board is as follows : —President, Sir A. Renwick, Kt. ;
members : Drs. C. W. Morgan, F. H. Quaife, J. A.
Beattie, Sir P. Sydney Jones, E. ,j. Jenkins, J.
Foreman, Thos. Dixson, W. C. Wilkinson, G. E.
Rennie, G. T. Hawkins, Win. Chisholm, and Chisholm
Ross ; secretary, Dr. A. Houison.
The Board of Health deals with all matters affect-
ing the general health of the community. Under the
Public Health Act, No. 30, of 1902, the householder
or occupier of any house or premises in New South
Wales in which there has appeared a case of smallpox
or any eruptive fever which may reasonably be sup-
posed to be smallpox, and the medical practitioner
attending the case, is compelled, under a penalty of
ten or not more than fifty pounds, to immediatelv
report such case, in writing, if it occur in Sydney, to
the officer in charge at the nearest police station or
lock-up, or to the officer-in-charge at the Central
Police Station, or to the Health Officer of the Port of
Sydney, or to any member of the Government medical
staff, or the Secretary of the Board of Health, and, if
the case occur beyond the city of Sydney, to the nearest
magistrate, office of police, clerk of petty sessions, or
to the Government medical officer. Under the same
penalties every leprosy case has also to be reported.
Under the Dairies Supervision Act, No. 26, of 1901
the following are declared to be infectious diseases in
human beings : —Bubonic plague, cholera, enteric fever,
smallpox, scarlet fever, diphtheria, measles, and
syphilis ; and on the appearance of any of these dis-
eases in a dairy or milk store the owner or the medical
practitioner has immediately to report Ahem to the
proper authorities or he becomes liable to a penalty
not exceeding twenty pounds. The Governor, on the
recommendation of the Board of Health, is empowered
by the provisions of the Dairies Act to add, alter, or
amend the declaration of what are infectious diseases
within the mean ing of the Act, and a copy of such addi-
tion has to be furnished to every local authority.
The Dental Board of New South Wales was estab-
lished under the Act recently passed by the Legis-
lature for controlling dentistry. The members of this
body are ; Messrs ('has. G. Hodgson, J.P. (president),
Henry Peach, D.D.S., Cornelius C. Marshall, J.P.,
Charles Hall, Dr. Palmer, Dr. Kirkland, John Stinson,
Geo. Norton Russell, J.P., and H. Taylor, J.P., regis-
trar. According to the provisions of the Act any
person who (1) holds some recognised certificate and
who proves to the satisfaction of the Board that he is
of good character ; (2) has for a period of two years
before the commencement of the Act been bona fide
engaged in New South Wales in the practice of den-
tistry. either separately or in conjunction with the
practice of medicine, surgery, or pharmacy, and who
has made application for registration to the Board
within one year from the commencement of the Act ;
or (3) has attained the age of twenty-one years and h^s


been engaged during a period ol not less than loin*
years in the acquirement of professional knowledge
in dentistry, and has passed an examination before th 3
Board according to the prescribed regulations ; or
(4) has attained the age of twenty-one years, and shall
have been a pupil or apprentice for a period of not less
than two years to a dental practitioner entitled to be
registered under the Act ; provided that such pupilage
or apprenticeship shall have been commenced at least
six months before the commencement of the Act, and
shall have expired before he shall be entitled to be so
registered ; or (5) has obtained a diploma or degree in
dentistry from a University in Australia. There is
also a Dental Association of New South W ales, of
which Mr. Charles Hall is president ; E. Gillman Moon,
vice-president; W. R. Fitzsimmons,honorary treasurer ;
and Mr. D. P. Foley, honorary secretary.
The Pharmacy Board of New South Wales was
established under the Pharmacy Act of 1897, and
administers at the same time the Poisons Act of 1902.
Mr. Wm. Short is the president; Mr. T. S. Loney, hono-
rary treasurer; and Mr. A. Forster, registrar. Up to
the end of 1905 this corporation had granted certifi-
cates of registration to 889 pharmacists. The Board
accepts the certificates of registration issued by the
pharmaceutical societies of Great Britain and Ireland,
and the pharmacy boards of Victoria, Queensland and
South Australia. The officials connected with the
Pharmaceutical Society of New South Wales are :
Mr. T. S. Loney, president ; Mr. C. J. Carroll, vice-
president ; Mr. E. Faris-Ings, hon. treasurer ; Mr. A.
Forster, hon. secretary.
To teach people how to render efficient aid to
wounded persons prior to the arrival of the medical
man is the motive of the St. John Ambulance Associa-
tion. The president is the Hon. Sir F. M. Uarley,
G.C.M.G., C.J. ; the chairman of the Executive
Committee is Col. Reuter R. Roth, D.S.O. ; the hon.
treasurer, Charles A. Maxwell ; and the secretary for
the New South Wales centre, Mr. Chas. A. Maxwell.
Great success has attended the efforts of the asso-
ciation to encourage the spread of first-aid knowledge.
During the year ended September 30, 1906, fifty-three
classes were formed and instructed ; and of the 1,019
students attending a full course of lectures, 725 ob-
tained the association’s certificate, and 42 qualified
for the medallion. Since the formation of this useful
centre between 11,000 and 12,000 members have
been instructed in first-aid and home nursing. The
St. John Ambulance Bngade is of a more practical
scope than its kindred association. It affords holders
of the latter body’s certificate opportunities for meet-
ing together for ambulance practice ; to render first-
aid to sick and wounded on public occasions ; to supply
supplementary assistance to military and other authori-
ties ; and to train men in ambulance transport duties.
The strengthening of existing divisions of the brigade
and the formation of new ones has been pushed on
during the last two years, and a profitable feature of
the enlargement of the work has been the amalgama-
tion of the Civil Ambulance and Transport Brigade
with the St. John Ambulance Brigade. The chief com-
missioner for Australia is Major G. L. Mullins, M.D.,
and the deputy commissioner, Dr. T. Storie Dixson.
Mr. ROBERT THOMSON
BATON, M.D., F.R.C.S., London,
Government Medical Officer, was
born in Edinburgh,in 1856, and is the
third son of the late John Govan
Stewart Baton of that city. Hestudied
at the Royal College of Surgeons and
the University of Edinburgh, becom-
ing a Licentiate of the Royal College
of Physicians and Surgeons, and
afterwards a Fellow of the Royal
College of Surgeons. He further
prosecuted his medical and surgical
studies in London - and Belgium,
and >graduated as an M.D. at the
Brussels University. In London
J Hubert Newman. Sydney.
DR. R. T. PATON.
he made a special study of eye dis-
eases and was for some time attached
to the Moorfields Hospital. He
came to Sydney in 1885 and com-
menced the practice of his profession.
In 1886 he was appointed Resident
Surgeon to the Trial Bay Prison,
and three years later was transferred
to Sydney to fill the position of
Government Medical Officer and
Vaccinator. Dr. Patou is also Police
Surgeon for the State, Visiting Sur-
geon to Darlinghurst Gaol, and
chairman of the Metropolitan Board
of Old Age Pensions.


Banking
RANKING may be said to be the most important
department of the science of economics, which,
from its derivation —-the law of property —repre-
sents the science of commerce in its widest extent.
“ Wealth,” said Aristotle, “ we term everything whose
value is measured by money,” that is to says everything
which is exchangeable, as Money itself is an exchangeable
quantity. This definition of the ancient sage of Stagira
has been accepted by r modern economists as a true one.
For instance, John Stuart Mill defines wealth thus ;
“ Everything forms therefore a part of wealth which
has power of purchasing,” and from this arises the
general conception that wealth is anything, whatever
its nature may be, which may be bought and sold —
everything which can be exchanged separately and
independently of anything else. There is really-, then,
only one criterion of wealth, and that is—Can it be
valued ? can it be bought and sold ? can it be
exchanged separately and independently of anything
else ? Simple as this may seem, some of the most
eminent authorities are agreed that to discuss what is
and what is not separate and independent, exchangeable
property requires a thorough knowledge of the most
abstruse branches of law and commerce. That
eminent writer on banking, Mr. Henry Dunning
Macleod, M.A., terms the science of wealth “ the pro-
foundest and most complicated branch of human
knowledge, and requires a greater amount of know-
ledge than any other.” Further on he adds “the
business of banking consists in creating, buying and
selling, transferring and extinguishing the species of
commodities or merchandise termed debts. The
theory of credit and banking is now brought to the
strictest mathematical demonstration.” He likewise
says, ‘ ‘ Credit is to commerce exactly what steam is
in mechanics ; it is the great moving power of modern
times.” Daniel Webster writes even in a higher strain,
putting it this way ; ‘ ‘ Credit has done more a thousand
times to enrich nations than all the mines of the world.
The system of credit has two great divisions —com-
mercial and banking. The first is outside the scope
of this article. The second is where bankers buy
commercial debts on credits by creating debts of their
own. Banking credit is usually created payable on
demand, and must be capable of being paid if demanded.
But, unlike commercial credit, it is not intended to be
extinguished ; on the contrary, it is created with the
hope and expectation that it will not be extinguished,
but that it will continue in existence and do duty as
Money. “It is perfectly possible,” Macleod affirms,
“ that much of the banking credit which exists at the
present may have been originally created by the very
first banks founded in this country ” (England), “ and
there is no necessary reason why it should not continue
to the end of time.
It has frequently been asserted that the word
“ Bank ” is derived from the Italian word “ Banco,
a bench,’ ’ owing to the fact that, copying the fashion of
the East, the Italian money-changers always had their
money, necessary to the day’s business, piled on a
bench before them, and hence they were termed ‘ ‘ ban-
chieri.” Furthermore, the same authors have defined
the business of a banker as that of an agent acting
between persons desirous to borrow and those willing
to lend ; the banker’s profits consisting of the difference
between the interest charged the borrower and the
interest paid to the lender. But Macleod shows that
this derivation of a bank and the nature of banking
business is entirely erroneous. After quoting Muratori,
who says, “ to me, on the contrary, the word seems to
have come from the German word ‘ Banck,’ which is
a very ancient word in that language.’’ He explains
the word “ Bank ’’ to have originated this way :
“ During 1171, whilst the city of Venice was at war
both with the Empire of the East and of the West, the
Great Council levied a forced loan of 1 per cent, on
the property of all the citizens, and promised them
interest at 5 per cent. Such a loan has several names
in Italian, but the most usual is ‘ Monte,’ a joint
stock fund. ... At this time the Germans were
masters of a great part of Italy, and the German word
‘ Banck ’ came to be used as synonymous with ‘Monte ’
and was Italianised into ‘ Banco,’ and the loans, or
public debts, were called indifferently ‘ Monti or
‘ Banchi.’ ” The learned author then proceeds to
quote a number of examples showing that Monte and
Banco are synonymous, and mean a heap or mount, or
a Joint Stock Fund formed by the contributions of a
number of persons ; and, after remarking that this
was the meaning of the word ‘ ‘ Bank when it was
first introduced into England, he proceeds to add ; “ So
Benbrigge in his ‘ Usnra Accommodata,’ published in
1646, says, ‘ For their rescue may be collected Mens
pietatis sive chantatis or Banke of Piety or Charity, as
they of Trent fitly call it.” Again, “ For borrowers in
trade, for their supply, as occasion shall require, may-
be erected Mohs Negotiatonis, or Banke of trade.
In ‘‘A Discourse concerning Banks,” published in
1697 by a Director of the Bank of England, at least
that was the opinion at the time. It says there are three
different classes of banks—the first for merely depositing
money, the second for profit, and the third for the
convenience of the public and the advantage of tin
undertakers. These last, it is explained, “having
advanced sums of money at their establishment, did
not only agree for a fund of perpetual interest, but
were allowed the privilege of keeping cash.” The
Bank of England was of this last kind, being formed of
an association of persons, who, advancing a sum of
money to the Government, received in exchange an


A guinea
£
. . I
s.
2
d.
0
A Johannes
.. 4
O
0
A half-johannes
. . 2
o
0
A ducat ..
. . o
9
6
A gold mohur ..
. . I
17
6
A pagoda
. . 0
8
0
A Spanish dollar
. . o
5
0
A rupee ..
. . 0
2
6
A shilling
. . O
1
1
A copper coin of
I oz.
. . o
0
2
A ii it ii
i ..
. . o
0
1
A
it ii M
i ..
. . 0
0
annuity, or right to a series of payments for ever from
the State. It may be of interest to mention that only
in one instance has there been a bank in England which
did not receive cash deposits. This was the ‘ ‘ Million
Bank,’ ’ and consisted of a company, whose shareholders
unitedly advanced a million sterling to the Government
shortly' after the establishment of the Bank of England
in 1694. This financial concern w r as wound up at the
close of the eighteenth century, and during its existence
transacted business on the lines of the original Bank of
Venice.
The same misconception prevailed for many
y r ears as to the meaning of the word “ Banker ’’ and
the nature of Banking. Gilbart defines a banker as a
dealer in money, borrowing of one party and lending to
another, the difference of interest at which he borrows
and that at which he lends forming the source of his
profit. This describes the money scrivener of former
times, or the solicitor, whose clients give him money
to invest, of to-day. But no one ever calls money
scriveners, or solicitors, bankers —a term which only
came into vogue during the reign of King Charles 1.,
when people found it advisable to place whatever
treasure they possessed in the hands of the goldsmiths.
The essential feature of a Banker is that when his
customers pay in money to their accounts they cede
the property in the money' to the Banker. The money
placed with him is not a bailment, but a mutuum, a
loan, or sale, directly to himself. Actually the money'
is sold to the Banker ; and in lieu his customer has a
credit to demand back the equivalent at any time he
chooses, and which he can transfer to any'one else.
A Banker, therefore, creates credit, and he essentially'
is a trader, whose business is to buy r money and debts
by creating debts. So much for a definition of terms
and the theory of Banking.
There is not, perhaps, any portion of the British
Empire in which the monetary sy'stem is more healthy
and the banking arrangements more satisfactory' than
in New South Wales. From 1788 to 1817 the penal
settlement of Botany Bay conducted its financial
affairs without any banking institution, properly so
called ; but, although the total population was small,
the need of a bank, was soon severely' felt. The primi-
tive method of barter, mostly through the medium of
spirituous liquors, supplied the wants of the people.
On the occasion of the performance of the first play,
on the 16th of January, 1796, it was publicly announced
that the price of admission was one shilling, paid in
meal or rum, taken at the door ! Very soon, how'ever,
the settlers began to issue promissory notes, payable on
demand, in copper coin, generally for five shillings each;
and the Government gave store receipts for wheat,
which passed from hand to hand as currency. Notes
payable on demand were also given for any' service
rendered to the Government, and these Government
issues became known as sterling currency'. The notes
of private individuals were called “ colonial currency',’’
to distinguish them from the Government issue, and
formed the chief circulating medium of the settlement
till about the year 1830, when they began to be driven
out of circulation by the issue of bank paper. Some
idea of the amount of inconvenience this medium of
exchange occasioned may be gathered from the follow-
ing advertisement, which appeared in the Gazette of
nth June, ißoj :—“ Simeon Lord begs leave to inform
his friends and the public in general that, in conse-
quence of the great stagnation of the circulating notes
of the colony, which has so materially inconvenienced
all descriptions of traders, he has been induced to foibear
presenting his accounts for the last six months ; but as
he has considerable sums to pay to the Masters of the
‘Cato,’ ‘ Rollo ’ and ‘Bridgewater,’ which must be
forthwith liquidated, he trusts that all persons indebted
to him will be careful to be provided to settle their
accounts by the 24th instant, as he will not have the
opportunity of consolidating any bills after the 30thinst.
until the expiration of ensuing quarter.” In addition the
circulating medium comprised coins of all descriptions,
the relative value of which Governor Hunter, in the
year 1800 proclaimed as follows
Copper was also made a legal tender for £5 in place of
for five shillings, as at present.
It can readily be believed that this colonial currency
was much abused ; and Mr. W. C. Wentworth, referring
to this period, stated to the Committee on Monetary
Confusion, many years afterwards, that before the
establishment of any bank every person who thought
fit used to issue his promissory notes varying from five
pounds to five pence, payable on demand, and these
notes used to circulate freely. This paper was some-
times depreciated to the extent of 25, 30, or 40 per cent.,
as compared with the Government issue, or sterling
paper of the country, which was itself largely depre-
ciated. From the earliest years of settlement, owing
to the scarcity of the currency, the barter of spirits
was almost universal. Rum paid for everything. The
leading merchant, Mr. R. Campbell, advertises in the
Gazette of sth October, 1806, that he will give “ ten
gallons of good spirits as a reward for the detection of
the person removing the locks from his sates at Canter-
bury,’ ’ and similar notices in the semi-official newspaper
of the day were of frequent occurrence. Efforts were
made to check the evil, but these for a long time met
with little success. At the beginning of 1806 Governor
Bligh issued the following General Order:—“His
Excellency the Governor laments at finding by his late
visit through the colony that the most calamitous evils
have been produced by persons bartering or paying
spirits for grain of all kinds, the necessaries of life, and
labourers for their hire; such proceedings depressing the
industrious and depriving the settlers of their comforts
and wants. In order to remedy these grievous com-
plaints, and to relieve the inhabitants who have suffered
by this traffic, he finds it his duty to put a total stop to


this barter for the future, and to prohibit the exchange
of spirits, or any other liquors, as payment for grain,
animal food, labour, wearing apparel, or any other
commodity whatever, to all descriptions of persons in
the colony and its dependencies.” Failure to obey
this order meant one hundred lashes and hard labour
for twelve months to prisoners ; forfeiture of Crown
indulgences, three months’ imprisonment and £2O
fine to settlers free of servitude, No.; and a £SO fine to all
other inhabitants. Nevertheless, the barter in spirits
by all sections of the community continued. Another
attempt to induce the circulation of coin was made a
few months later, when the Governor ordered all cheques
and promissory notes drawn on and after Ist January,
ISO 7, to be made payable in sterling ; and in order to
ensure no silver leaving New South Wales shipmasters
had to enter into a bond of /200 that they would not
.-o -
receive any aboard. If they did, not only was this bond
estreated, but they forfeited their vessel and everything
appertaining thereto besides. In ISI2 the Governor
sanctioned the issue by private individuals of promissory
notes, for not less than 2s. 6d., payable on demand in
copper; and the public were prohibited from circulating
them at different rates of exchange. The Spanish or
“pillar” dollar, issued in iSiq and valued at ss.
until IS2O when it was called in, did duty for 6s. 3d.,
namely, a dump (a circular piece punched out of the
centre) valued at from rod. to 13d., and the rim, or
“holey” dollar, legally circulated at ss. Before this
the legal tender of copper had been limited to 13d. This
confusion in the currency continued till the close of
iSih, when a meeting was held, by the direction of the
Governor, on the 22nd November, at the chambers of
Mr. Judge Advocate Wylde, “ to take into considera-
tion the present state of the colonial currency and what
would be the consequence of an immediate sterling
circulation.” It was resolved “ (1) That the present
meeting is desirous that a sterling currency should take
place in this colony, under such regulations and pro-
visions as his Fxcellency the Governor may deem
proper and applicable to a reduced price of labour and
rate of sterling charges in every kind of dealing and
trade within the colony ; (2) that a sum of not less than
£20,000 in shares of not less than (/Too) each in a public
colonial bank, transferable by assignment or otherwise,
in due course of law, will be necessary for supplying a
circulating medium for the uses of the colony ; that
every subscriber of (/Too) have a right of a single vote
at every general meeting to be assembled in the year
upon all general questions with regard to the govern-
ment and general interests of the bank, and upon the
appointment of the .... Committee and officers and
passing of the accounts, no subscriber being allowed to
have it in right of any number of share? in the said bank,
more than . . . votes upon any question submitted to
the meeting ; (3) that the immediate management of
the bank and its immediate concerns be committed to
a chairman and (six) persons chosen by the subscribers
yearly, and appointed directors of the same ; that
the general object and business of the bank be to advance
upon due interest, and the credit of the bank, pecuniary
assistance to the colonial trader, agriculturalist and
settler, as well as to afford a safe depository of money
Committed_ to its security and charge; (6J_that no
dividends shall ever take place or be made upon the
fund of £20,000, as first established, but that the same
shall be made the interest of the bank capital, at such
rate and times as a meeting shall authorise, upon sug-
gestion from the directors in that respect ; (7) that in
conviction of the beneficial results that would thus be
given to the colony, in every view of its best interests,
as well as to put an end to the destructive consequences
and embarrassment of the present colonial currency,
the undersigned then voluntarily pledge themselves
as approving the measure of a sterling currency as
above suggested : the establishment of a colonial bank
upon proper regulations, as hereafter to become con-
sidered and adopted, and to become subscribers thereto
and to support the measure with all their influence and
interest, provided his Excellency the Governor be
pleased to sanction the same with his general approba-
tion and permission.” These resolutions were sub-
mitted to the Governor, signed by G. Molle, Lieutenant-
Governor ; J. Wylde, Judge Advocate ; D. Wentworth,
Richard Jones, Alex. Riley, Thos. Macvitie, J. R.
O’Connor, Richard Brooks, C. Hook, J. T. Campbell,
S. Lord and Thos. Wylde ; and, apparently, Governor
Macquarie's permission was accorded immediately, for
the following day a notification appeared that a second
meeting of the public was convened for the 2qth idem
At this addresses in support of the project were de-
livered by Judge Advocate Wylde (who spoke on the
subject for an hour and a half), Messrs. E. S. Hall and
A. Riley, and Dr. Townson, of Bringelly. Shares to
the extent of {7,000 were subscribed for, and at a third
meeting, on the following Thursday, another (3,000
worth of stock was taken up. The share list now
included the following -Messrs. G. Molle, J. Wylde,
D. Wentworth, Richard Jones, A. Riley, T. Macvitie,
R. Jenkins, J. R. O Connor, R. Brooks, Chas. Hook,
J. T. Campbell, S. Lord, Thos. Wylde, F. Garling,
Wm Browne, Jas. Binnie, Wm. Redfern, John Harris,
Wm. Gore, Ed. Riley, John Wentworth, Geo. Howe,
M. Robinson, Jas. Foster, Ed. Eager, Wm. Roberts,
J. J. Moore, G. Crossley, John Grono, Wm. Hutchinson,
John Hosking, Wm. Davis, Ed. Redmond, Joshua Holt,
Geo. Bowman, Jas. Smith, Thos. Wills, S. MeGuigan,
Captains H. C. Antill and J. Gill and Sir John Jamieson,
of Sydney ; Thos. Moore and C. Throsby, of Liverpool ;
Rowland Hassell, of Parramatta ; Robt. Lowe, 0 f
Bringelly ; Jas. Metcham, of Windsor; and Wm. Brough-
ton, of Hobart. These gentlemen met again at the
Courthouse on 7th February, 1817, when a series of
rules and regulations were submitted and approved 0
unanimously. For the election of seven directors there
were eleven nominations, a ballot resulting in the
following being returned :—Messrs. D’Arcy Wentworth,
John Harris, Robert Jenkins, Thos. Wylde, Alex.
Riley, Win. Redfern and J. T. Campbell; the latter
being appointed president, with Mr, E. S. Hall as
secretary. Shortly after his election Mr. A. Riley
resigned, and the vacancy was filled by the selection of
Mr. Win. Gore. The charter for the incorporation of
the bank was delivered to the directors on the 22nd
March, and having called up the first instalment of the
subscriptions at the rate of 25 per cent., the Bank of
New South Wales opened for the despatch of business
at a house in Macquarie Place.


Abstract Balances.
Dr.
£
s.
d- £
s.
d.
Notes in Circulation
• • • •
•• 5.635
8
O
Personal Balances
• • • •
.. 1,859
4
8
—
—
7,494
12
8
Bank Subscriptions Received —
ist Instalment
• • • •
.. 1,500
0
0
2nd
• • • •
•• I »35°
0
0
3 r <l
• • • •
775
0
0
3,625
0
0
Discount ..
• • • •
250
13
0
Premiums .,
• • • •
30
M
5
281
7
5
£JM 01
0
1
THE BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
On the 22nd February, 1817, the following adver-
tisement appeared in the Sydney Gazette, prior to the
opening of the Bank:—
Bank of New South Wales. —Wanted for this establish-
ment a suitable, strong, well-built house, situate in or near George
Street. Also two persons of respectable character, who can give
good security for their fidelity, to fill the situation of cashier and
principal accountant. It being intended to open the bank on the
Ist of March next ensuing, no time is to be lost in making tenders
ot houses or services for the above purposes. Applications to be
made to the undersigned, the President of the Board of Directors.
—J. T. Campbell.
The Bank originally opened in premises at the corner
of Bridge Street and Macquarie Place, near where the
present Royal Exchange Branch is. After some years
the Bank removed to premises in George Street, on the
site now occupied by Messrs. Walter Bradley’s Auction
Rooms. In February, 1853, the Bank occupied new
premises at the corner of George and Wynyard Streets.
Later on the adjacent lot in George Street was pur-
chased, and the building extended thereon. Other ad-
jacent allotments in Wynyard Street were also acquired.
The present banking chamber is about 170 feet long by
76 feet wide.
The Bank opened for the despatch of business,
at a house in Macquarie Place, on the Bth April,
1817. At the outset —an advertisement in the
Gazette of 12th April, 1817, tells us “ Tuesdays
were set aside for the discounting of bills and
issuing of loans. Persons requiring bills discounted
or loans on lands or houses have to write their
usual signatures in a book kept for the purpose in the
Bank to which they may have access daily during
bank hours (10 to 2), and those requiring loans are to
inform the bank solicitor, Mr. Wylde, three days at
least previous to the application being laid before the
board, of the nature and extent of the security to be
offered, and also of the amount required to be bor-
rowed.” Another notice in the same issue intimates
that a general meeting of proprietors would be held on
the following Wednesday, when 1 ‘ some matters of
importance are to be submitted to their consideration.’ ’
There were troubles ahead even in those infantile
days. Evil-disposed persons, interested in the perpetua-
tion of the colonial currency, which the Bank struck
a death blow at, spread reports that the charter granted
by the Governor was not sufficient to protect share-
holders from risk beyond the amount of their stock ;
and these rumours created so much uneasiness that it
was deemed expedient to have an assurance froraGovernor
Lachlan Macquarie on the point. A deputation waited
on His Excellency on the 26th April, 1817, with an
address of thanks, in which appeared the following
paragraph: ‘‘ln taking occas-on to express our un-
shaken confidence in and reliance on the validity of
the charter ... we are solely actuated by a wish to do
away those idle reports which have gone abroad as to
its being incomplete in the principal point of securing
and exempting the subscribers from persona' liabilities,
and which appears to have been circulated with no
other view than to injure the establishment in its
infancy.” The Governor, in the course of his reply,
said ; —“ Your good sense, gentlemen, in not yielding
in any degree to the efforts thus made to shake the
stability of the Bank gives the best assurance of its
future success, whilst the clear ?.nd unequivocal terms
in which the charter has been framed by the first law
authorities in the colony will dispel the doubt of those
few who have questioned its legfl operations, particu-
larly on the point of personal liability, whereon all
legal authorities have agreed in declaring there was
not even a possibility of a charter of incorporation
being defective. ” With this assurance the little storm
ended.
Although the authorised capital of the Bank of
New South Wales was £20,000 in 200 shares of £lOO
each, the subscribed capital was only £12,600 ; and the
first ledger, still in existence, shows that operations
were commenced with a paid-up capital of £3,625,
expressed in dollars—the British sovereign not then
having assumed its lawful sway in the currency system
of the country. But the year 1817 was the turning
point in the history of commercial enterprise in New
South Wales. Consequent upon the cessation of the
long Napoleonic wars, great activity obtained in busi-
ness affairs, and a large influx of capital was attracted
by the handsome returns obtainable. The first account
was opened by a private in the 46th Regiment, who
deposited £5O on the day the bank threw open its
doors. Notes were issued for 2s. 6d., 55., 10s., £1 and
£5 ; and the bills discounted to the end of the year, a
period of nearly nine months, amounted to £12,193.
Two more calls of 25 per cent, were made in June
and November, 1817, respectively; and on the
21st January, 1818, the first balance-sheet, to 31st
December, 1817, was presented to the shareholders.
First Balance-Sheet of the Bank of New South
Wales.


Cr - £
s.
d.
Bills in 1 reasury, Store Receipts and Specie on hand 3,613
2
10
Bills of Exchange Falling Due .. 5,693
r
Mortgages.. .. .. ,. .. ., 1,381
J
0
0
Office Goods and Furniture—cost .. .. .. 340
10
4
Bank Expenditure for Salaries, Wages, Stationery, &c. 373
I
10
£11.401
0
1
R Campbell, Jun., Accountant.
Certified correct, B. S. Hall, Cashier.
Compared, correct, 13th Jan., 1818,
J. T. Campbell (President), W. D. Wentworth, William
Redfern, Thomas Wylde, R. Jenkins.
In February. 1818, Mr. K. S. Hall, the cashier and
secretary, resigned his position, and Mr. Francis
Williams, who had previously been the book-keeper and
accountant, was appointed to succeed him. A change
was also made in the directorate, Mr. E. T. Riley taking
the place of Air. Wm. Gore, retired. The discounting
business of the Bank had now assumed considerable
proportions, the bills increasing from £12,193, in the year
1817, to £81,672, during 1818, and £107,236, in 1819.
No bills were accepted by the Bank for any amount
under £2O or over £500; or with a of less than
fourteen days or more than three months. Even at
as early a stage as this complaints were not infrequent
regarding the exclusive character of the Bank’s ope-
rations, leading members of the mercantile community
alone being able to get their bills discounted. This
created an unhealthy condition of affairs —many of
the Bank’s customers availing of their credit to borrow
money to lend again—in some instances at exorbitant
rates of interest ; thus increasing the evils of usury.
At the end of 1818 the first dividend was declared, at
the rate of 12 per cent, per annum on the Bank’s trans-
actions during the term of its existence ; and for the
succeeding twelve months the proprietors received
21 per cent, per annum on the capital value of their
shares, a sufficient testimony that by this time the
Bank had placed itself upon a stable footing. An
interesting glimpse of banking operations in those
days can be gathered from the President’s remarks
at the meeting called for 31st July, 1819, to declare
the first half-year’s instalment of this dividend. After
directing attention to the great success which had
attended their exertions, Air. J. T. Campbell said that
“ their career was unparalleled in the annals of banking,
inasmuch as so far it had been unabated by any losses
whatever.” He intimated to the Court of Proprietors
that 527 bills of exchange and notes to hand, the aggre-
gate amount of which was nearly £56,000, had been
discounted by the Bank within the last half-year, all
of which had been promptly met without any recourse
to legal or compulsory processes. At the same time,
the loans made on mortgages had not been so numerous
as formerly “ which might in a great degree be attributed
to the prosperous circumstances of landholders ; whilst
at the same time the board was also ready to extend
their loans in as full a proportion as their means would
admit, with a view to the encouragement of agriculture,
and to rescue individuals from the hard grasp of sordid
and avaricious money-lenders, to which they had been
exposed. As the most gratifying test of public con-
fidence the folios of the bank’s ledgers were thrown
open to show the accounts of the numerous individuals
who had deposited their wealth with the Bank, a con-
fidence of the highest importance, as it enabled the
directors to enlarge their sphere of action in the public
service, and afforded the fairest prospect of answering
all the purposes for which it was intended. The board
had been able to declare a dividend of 12 per cent, on
the capital stock for the last half-year, which the
proprietors were at liberty to call for on the following
day, the Ist August next, to receive their respective
quotas, either in. commissariat notes, dollars, or the
notes of the Bank of New South Wales.” During this
year—lBl9 —Air. W. Broughton took the chair of Mr.
Riley on the board. There was a peculiarity of jiractice
attaching to the election of these ear y directors, a
modus operandi which wou'd hard-y harmonise with
our own, self-assertive ideas. It is illustrated by the
following advertisement : —‘ ‘ Notice is hereby given
that a Court of Proprietors of Bank Stock will be held
at the Bank Building on Monday, Ist August, 1819, at
12 o’clock, noon, to elect, a director in the room of
Robert Jenkins, resigned. And it is further notified
that on 24th July, 1819, the Board of Directors resolved
that Henry Golden Antill is well qualified for election
to the board, and the directors accordingly recommend
that gentleman for the favourable consideration of the
Proprietors.” Needless to add the board’s nominee
was elected. In fact, Proprietors seem to have had
but tw'o alternatives in the matter of the selection of
their representatives, either to accept the directors’
nominees or to take the chance of a snubbed board
resigning in a body.
The year 1820 brought the directors a new experi-
ence, not of a pleasant nature. A large number of ss.
bank-notes were cleverly forged. These circulated
extensively before the fraud was discovered, and the
forgers, who reaped a good harvest, succeeded in escap-
ing detection. In September, 1820, Air. Williams
resigned the secretaryship, his successor being Air.
Nicholas Bayly. Business slackened this year on
account of a temporary depression of trade, as shown
in the reduced total of bills discounted, which amounted
to £98,498. At the commencement of 1821 the Bank’s
note circulation was £5,902 ; commissaries’ bills on
the Treasury were held for £22,427 17s. ; store receipts,
for which bills on the Treasury could be demanded,
represented £i7,4°s> anc i ie Bank’s mortgage securi-
ties amounted to £4,172. The death of Captain Wm
Minchin, principal Superintendent of Police, created
another vacancy on the board, which was filled by r
Air. W. Browne, who, in turn, resigned after a nine
months’ term of office. Dividends of 12 per cent, per
annum were declared in the y r ears 1820 and 1821, and
15 per cent, per annum for 1822. During this last
period the Governor gave legal sanction for the bank
to charge interest on overdrafts, &c., at the rate of
10 per cent, per annum. Bank-notes and Spanish
dollars were in 1823 the sole currency. This condition
of affairs was due to the action of Governor Brisbane,
who, greatly to the alarm of the mercantile community,,
issued instructions that all claims on the Treasury had
to be paid by dollars, instead of pounds sterling —a


Liabilities.
Dollars.
Capital paid up
43,200.00
Notes in circulation ..
115,940.00
Deposits
297,158.98
Dividends unclaimed
Profit and Loss, June
486,00
30 to Dec. 31,1825
11,195.21
468,180.19
Assets.
Dollars.
Dollars in chest ..
I2 7’479-5°
Government Store
receipts ..
27,691.24
Bills
291,208.28
Mortgages ..
20,295.67
hurniture
I.505-50
468,180.19
medium of exchange always unsatisfactory, owing to
its fluctuating value. As the result of a meeting of
Bank Proprietors in May, 1822, it was decided to no
longer receive Spanish dollars in payment until their
specific value was officially determined. This pro-
hibition endured until the 1st of July following, when
the rate of exchange was fixed by the directors at
4s. 2d. each, or five dollars to the pound sterling. The
beginning of 1823 found the board considering the
question of a new charter, and the issuing of fresh
scrip consequent thereon. Meetings were held anent
the matter, resulting in an application to the Governor
to have the charter extended for another seven years.
This was granted by Governor Brisbane on 24th July,
1823, with no alteration of the original charter, except
in one trifling particular. Still another change in the
secretaryship had taken place during the previous
May, when Mr. Nicholas Bayly resigned. Mr. A. K.
Mackenzie was appointed in the place of this gentle-
man ; but by a strange oversight on the part of the
directors the appointment was not confirmed, as re-
quired by the provisions of the Bank charter, and
Mr. Mackenzie had to be reappointed at the end of
1824. Upon the issue of the charter the directors
called in their sterling notes for redemption by dollars
or Treasury bills —the notes commanding a premium
of 15 per cent. Incidentally it may be mentioned here
that the second bank in Australasia now sprang into
existence. The Bank of Van Diemen’s Band, which
underwent reconstruction just twenty-five years ago,
was successfully established at Hobart this year, Mr.
Ed. Eord being the prime mover in the flotation. At
the beginning of 1824 all the notes of the old Bank
were called in and new ones issued for one, three, five,
ten, twenty and fifty dollars ; amounts which the critics
of the day pronounced as better suited to trade require-
ments. And no doubt they were. They were supple-
mented six months later by the issue of a hundred
dollar note. The new paper, however, had a very
short currency, as, in accordance with the law, another
issue of sterling notes had to be made in 1826 of £1,
£2, £5, £10 and £20 values. The end of 1825, therefore,
saw the last balance-sheet of the Bank in which the
dollar was shown as the unit of account ; and in July,
1826, when the Act of Council was passed, this medium
of exchange entirely ceased to have a currency in the
ordinary course of business. The figures of the balance-
sheet are noteworthy, and ran thus : —
Balance-Sheet of the Bank of New South Wales
31st December, 1825.
From this statement it will be seen that the paid-up
capital of the Bank had increased to 43,200 dollars,
equivalent, at the current rate of exchange, to £IO,BOO.
The profit for the half-year was approximately £2,798,
and the dividend declared was £g ss. sterling, or thirty-
seven Spanish dollars per share of £3O; equivalent to 61J
per cent, for the year. At the meeting to declare this
dividend it was also decided that the rate of discount
should be reduced from 10 to 8 per centum. Events,
shortly to mature, explain the necessity for taking this
step ; but at the time it created much opposition, the
feeling being that the Bank ought to make as much
profit as it could Mr. W. Cl Wentworth strongly
combated this view, and pointed out that the idea
Judge Advocate Wylde had in originating the insti-
tution—an idea equally shared by the other promoters
who acted upon his suggestion—was “ only to establish
the Bank for the public good. Profits at the first
assembling of the Proprietors were considered a sub-
ordinate matter. The colony at that time was being
ruined by a debased and spurious currency, and the
Proprietors clubbed their subscriptions in order to
provide a wholesome circulation, and to make loans to
the fair and honest tradesman, and farmer. The Bank
might discount twice, nay, four times as much as it
had ever done, and, in fact, it would have discounted
a great deal more but for a bugbear which the directors
would allow had always frightened them. He alluded
to the hostility, real or supposed, of the Commissariat
Department. The directors had always been afraid
that the Commissariat Department would hoard the
bank’s notes and in an evil hour present them for
payment.” Before the end of January, 1826, Messrs.
W. C. Wentworth and Thos. Raine were elected to the
board, to take the place of Messrs. Oxley and R. Brooks,
who, not agreeing with the policy of their co-directors,
had resigned office. Some time prior to this Mr. J. T.
Campbell, President of the Board, had given way to
Captain J. Piper, the chief naval officer in the colony.
There w'ere now troublous times in store for the
Bank. It was not likely so flourishing an institution,
regularly returning substantial dividends, with its £3O
shares commanding £75 in the share market, would be
allowed to enjoy a monopoly of banking for long ; and
the beginning of 1826 saw many envious eyes cast in the
direction of the Bank of New South Wales. Schisms
were rife too, not only in the ranks of the shareholders,
but among the directors. In the opinion of these
dissenting members the operations of the Bank were
too contracted. A large amount of business was
flowing into other channels, owing to the exclusive
policy of the directors, who, there were not lacking
some to declare, were turning this exclusiveness to
their own advantage. Discontent soon crystallised
into active opposition. At a meeting convened by
Messrs. J. T. Campbell, John Oxley, Thos. McVittie—
all ex-directors—and John McArthur, and held at the
offices of Messrs. Berry & Woolstoncroft, in George
Street, it was decided to establish the Bank of Australia,
with a capital of £IOO,OOO, in 1,000 shares of £IOO each.
Subsequently the stock list was extended to 1,200
shares. Four hundred shares were taken up by Go-
vernment officials ; settlers subscribed for another five
hundred shares, and the remainder of the scrip was
disposed of to the friends of the promoters at a premium
of from 30 to 50 per cent. The mercantile community


was almost entirely shut out of the share list, but ten
of its representatives being able to secure any stock.
It is not to be wondered then that when the public
were crying out about the narrow policy of the old
Bank, the determination of the promoters to keep the
new institution even more exclusive should bring a
third rival into the field. This was the Sydney Banking
Company. At a meeting of merchants, held in the
Sydney Hotel on 27th February, 1826, and which was
largely attended by shareholders of the Bank of New
South Wales, it was proposed to float the Sydney
Commercial Bank with a capital of £IOO,OOO, in £SO
shares ; £lO per share to be called up, and the share
list to be open to every free person in the colony. This
institution was intended to form a deposit and discount
bank, ‘ ‘ upon the principle of the Scotch banks, and
to do away with the inconvenient method of pay-
ment in property.” About seven hundred shares
were subscribed for within a week ; Mr. T. Horton
James, a merchant, was elected president, and Mr.
John Black secretary pro tern. Meanwhile the directors
of the Bank of New South Wales had not been
’die. Viewing the interests of the two banks,
i.e., the proposed Sydney Banking Company and
the Bank of New South Wales, as identical, they
evinced a disposition to amalgamate, and a meeting
of proprietors was held on 18th March, 1826, to consider
what action should be taken. At this resolutions were
proposed by Mr. W. ILttchinson to the effect that the
two banks amalgamate ; that the capital be increased
from £30,000 to £IOO,OOO ; and that a vice-president,
with three additional directors, be appointed. In
urging this coalition Mr. Hutchinson stated a Mr. Hogue
was expected hourly from Calcutta for the purpose of
establishing a strong bank ; and, that unless they offered
the invader a united front there would be little chance
of successfully combating his powerful opposition.
Mr. Hogue, however, proved in the end to be a financial
“ Mrs. *Harris.” The majority of shareholders were
opposed to union, and they carried the following mo-
tions • (1) That it is expedient that the residue of the
capital stock of £30,000 be paid up by the Proprietors
as follows ; £2O per share on the 15th April, £2O per
share on the ist June, and £3O per share on the Ist
July ; (2) that it is expedient to increase as soon as
possible the number of proprietors ; (3) that to accom-
plish these ends it is expedient that a by-law be framed
to subdivide the 300 shares created by the charter into
tenths these tenths, or so much of them as the pro-
prietors are willing to part with, to be thrown open to
the public and sold publicly or privately at the option
of the Proprietors; (4) that the directors be empowered
to give public notice of the manner in which the residue
of the bank stock should be paid up by the Proprietors ’ ’
These resolutions practically covered the ground of the
obiecting shareholders of the Bank of New South
Wales who had been instrumental in promoting the
Svdney Commercial Bank; and, with their acceptance,
all hopes of a third bank being established passed away.
Commenting upon the settlement thus arrived at, the
editor of the Sydney Gazette, in his issue of 19th March,
1826, writes:—“The Sydney Commercial Bank has
almost, if not entirely, met with annihilation. Ihe
directors of the Bank of New South Wales would not
have thrown open the shares for the benefit of the
public but for the Sydney Commercial Bank Proprietors.
Amalgamation could not have been arranged except
by the destruction of the charter, but the Proprietors
were not prepared to agree to this.” Ten days after-
wards a deputation, consisting of Captain Piper (Presi-
dent), Messrs. W. C. Wentworth and H. Grattan Douglas
(directors), and Messrs. S. Terry, A. B. .Sparks and
T. Horton James (Proprietors), waited upon Governor
Darling to extend their charter of incorporation from
300 to 1,000 shares ; and were told in reply that if,
upon looking over the charter, no difficulty should
occur they might depend upon receiving all the assist-
ance in the Governor’s power. The intention to assist
the Bank proved, in the sequel, stronger than the deed ;
for a few weeks after Governor Darling intimated to
Captain Piper that, on looking over some of Lord
Bathurst’s communications to Governor Brisbane, he
had found a letter dated July, 1823, on the subject of
the renewal of the charter, forbidding him to do so ;
which rendered it unnecessary for Governor Darling
going further into the subject. Other troubles were in
store for the Bank and dark days had now to be faced.
.Several adverse factors were at work. The Bank of
Australia, soon to be thrown open for business, threat-
ened to be the means of the withdrawal of the
support of a number of influential patrons and
shareholders ; shipments to London and the Cape
to the extent of 105,000 dollars caused such a dearth
of specie that the quantity of silver in the colony was
reduced to a mere sound”; and reports got abroad that
a certain prominent Bank official was not only incom-
petent, but dishonest. The general position of the
commercial community was exceptional ; on the one
hand a solvent Bank, and on the other a country terribly
embarrassed by the lack of currency, ’lire Bank could
not go on renewing and discounting bills under such cir-
cumstances, and it was clear a crisis would only be a
matter of time. It came on the 10th May, 1826, when
all sections of the community were stirred by rumours
that the Bank had stopped payment. The report arose
through a cheque for 800 dollars, drawn by a customer
with barely a quarter of that amount to his credit,
being dishonoured. The cheque was passed round as
evidence of the Bank’s failure to meet its liabilities, and
adverse reports were circulated in all directions, before
the necessity for making inquiries appeared to dawn
upon the busy calumniators. The directors convened
a Court of Proprietors at once, at which Messrs. W. C.
Wentworth, J. T. Campbell, W. Walker, Wools-
toncroft and S. Levy spoke on the expediency of
ceasing further dollar payments and having recourse to
sterling issues as soon as practicable ; and it was re-
solved ” that from the inspection of the bank accounts
now submitted to the proprietors, this meeting is fully
satisfied as to the stability of the Bank, and pledge
themselves to give it their best support and to take and
circulate the bank paper as usual ; (2) that this meeting
pledges themselves to take the British silver currency
in payment of Spanish dollars engagements at the rate
of premium of the day ; such rate to be fixed weekly
by the directors, who, it is understood, are not to allow


the Bank to derive any profit from the premium.” De-
positors had not the same confidence in the position of
affairs as the Proprietors, and a run on the bank led to
qo,ooo dollars being withdrawn in one week. The
directors then decided to wait upon Governor Darling,
explain the position of the bank, and solicit the imme-
diate aid of the Government. The Governor, upon
being satisfied by the President, Captain J. Piper, as
to the Bank’s solvency, offered to advance £20,000 on
the security of the most remote bills held by the insti-
tution, and upon the understanding that the two direc-
tors about to be elected met with his Excellency’s
approval. At a Court of Proprietors, convened on
the 17th May, 1826, the nature of the terms were ex-
plained by Air. W. C. Wentworth, one of the deputation ;
whereupon Messrs. E. Maziere and Prosper De Mestre,
who were standing for the vacancies on the board, both
withdrew their candidature. Other of the proprietors
strongly objected to the Government having any voice
in the direction. Accordingly the president left the
meeting to interview the Governor again, and, upon
returning, he intimated that his Excellency would be
willing to give the credit required by the bank on the
terms proposed, under the following restrictions :
“ (1) The appointment of three new directors ; (2) the re-
duction of discounts of 25 per cent, per week until the
Ist January, 1827, previous to which period the whole
amount of the capital is to be paid up ; (3) that there be
no division of profits until the claims of the Government
be fully satisfied ; (4) that the earliest and most effective
measures be taken by the bank to keep its accounts and
to make its payments in sterling.” These conditions
created a storm of opposition ; and during the discussion
which ensued it was stated, ‘ ‘ as showing the Bank
could afford to be independent of the loan,” that
several of the wealthiest proprietors were arranging to
send au agent, properly equipped, to effect a loan of
£50,000 in London. Messrs. R. Jones and W. hithgow
(Commissary of Accounts) were elected to the board,
and in the end, as a matter of policy, it was decided by
a large majority to accept the Governor’s terms. Not
a penny of the money, though, did the bank receive.
Public confidence, inspired by the Governor’s action,
was promptly restored, and so briskly did business
return that, at the half-yearly meeting, held 21st July,
1826, a dividend of 40 dollars on shares paid up to £SO,
and 24 dollars on shares paid up to £3O, was declared,
to be carried to credit of the capital stock of the Bank.
Matters now went on smoothly for a while. In vSep-
tember, 1826, it was decided to issue only notes of
sterling denomination for the future ; and at the end
of the year Messrs. P. De Mestre and E l hs M. Scott
were returned to the board. The beginning of 1827
saw Mr. D’Arcy Wentworth presiding director. In the
following month the question of opening fixed
deposit accounts was brought to the front. At a
meeting held on the 27th February, 1827, Mr. E. S. Hall
—at that time editor of the Monitor —moved that 5 per
cent interest be payable on sums of not less than £lO
and more than £IOO, deposited for six months. This
resolution was opposed by Mr. J. T. Campbell and
Dr. Douglas, and lost on the vote by an overwhelming
majority ; although prospects had never appeared so
flourishing. Capital account now represented £20.000,
and deposits exceeded twice that amount. Some
time after this meeting the death of Mr. D’Arcy Went-
worth occasioned another alteration in the directorate.
Mr. W. Redfern was elected to the vacancy and Mr. R.
Jones appointed president. But what marked 1827
was the discovery then made, and which bore out
Mr. W. C. Wentworth’s repeated statements, that the
charter of incorporation was so much waste paper,
giving the Bank nc other status than that of an ordinary
trading company. To adjust this undesirable position
of affairs, on 10th October, 1827, a Court of Proprietors
was held, to take into consideration the advisability of
changing the Bank into a Joint Stock Company. Ihe
necessity for this was in consequence of intelligence
from the home authorities stating that the late Go-
vernor, Sir Thomas Brisbane, had no authority to grant
a charter to the old Bank. Mr. J. T. Campbell was
voted to the chair, and it was decided unanimously
“ that the Bank be converted into a Joint Stock Com-
pany, with a capital of £150,000, in 1,500 shares of £IOO
each ; the shareholders to pay up 20 per cent, at the
time of signing the deed of settlement, and as much
more as the proprietors may think proper, in sums of
not less than £5 on each share, the proprietors under
the charter to have the first option of becoming share-
holders ; that the number of directors be seven, who,
together with a cashier, are to be appointed by the
Proprietors, and a Proprietor, in order to qualify himself
for a seat in the direction, must pay up, at least, the
sum of £3OO on his bank stock ; that no one will have
a vote under £IOO ; and that the Bank will commence
operations under the new constitution on Ist January,
1828.” At another meeting, on the 7th November,
the deed of settlement embodying these resolutions,
and further providing that the Bank should be carried
on for a term of seven years, was agreed to. Messrs.
R. Jones, W. C. Wentworth, P. De Mestre, J. T. Camp-
bell, Captain Allman, Drs. Wardell and Redfern were
returned to the board, and Mr. A. K. Mackenzie was
reappointed, for the second time, secretary and cashier.
Towards the end of the ensuing year the bank was
again in rather low water, which, it may be added, was
the last occasion in the history of the institution when
a crisis threatened its financial stability ; a fact which
speaks well for those entrusted with the management.
But this somewhat anticipates events. The colony
was now passing through a period of severe stress ; and,
although there still remained the Government loan of
£20,000 to fall back on, the directors, notwithstanding
the pressure of the times, were firm in their decision not
to borrow under the conditions the Governor had
imposed ; and it was resolved to endeavour to carry
on without external assistance until business improved'
The strain, in the end, proved too great for the bank’s
store of specie. At a meeting held on the 17th October,
1828, Mr. W. C. Wentworth presiding, it was decided to
endeavour to allot the remaining four hundred shares,
either for cash or notes of hand at three months ; the
latter to be renewed three times, reducing the original
amount one-fourth each time. The shares were all
taken i.p, but almost entirely by the old proprietors.
Expenditure at this meeting was brought under review


Dr.
To Deposits ..
.. .£17,709 0 0
,, Notes in circulation
.. 10,663 0 0
0 0
Cr.
By Commission
•• /341
14
10
,, Bills
• • 59.582
H
1
,, Mortgage deeds .
270
0
0
,, CrOOds • • •
5 T 3
0
0
— 60,707 8 11
Leaving a balance in
favour of the bank
of /32.335 8 11
and the establishment revised as follows :—Cashier, £550
per annum ; accountant, £350 ; collector, £3OO ; teller,
(as receiving teller only), £2OO ; engraver, £IOO, and
watchman, £IOO. As a result of this retrenchment
the cashier, Mr. A. K. Mackenzie, notified his intention
to resign at the end of the year. The house rent was
set down in the expenses at £175 per annum. Finally
it was resolved that a committee, consisting of Messrs.
Walker, Horton, James, McQueen and the directors be
appointed to suggest some means for negotiating a loan
in London of £SO 000. This proposal had been mooted
before, but ere practical effect could be given to it now,
the tide of adverse affairs necessitated immediate
financial assistance, and so the Government was again
appealed to for aid. The relief was promised to the
extent of £15,000, but on terms more drastic than those
originally offered. A paragraph from the Government
organ of the day throws a lurid light on the position :
“ A Legislative Council was convened,” the writer says,
“on Thursday last. The object, it is reported, was the
affairs of the Bank of New r South Wales with regard to
the loan that institution so distressingly needs, and
without which—well, w r e will say no more. But w r e are
told things are in a hapless way, that the bank will not
listen to the proposals of the Government, and that, of
course, there’s an end to the negotiations, if not an end
to us all for some months to come. Why not the bank
consent to any terms ? and if it be a sine qua non that
the bank should be dissolved in a given period, why
not consent ? and when the Government are satisfied
with the repayment of the loan, establish a bank upon
more solid principles.” This was written on the 24th
December, 1828. Three days later on, a meeting of
shareholders w r as convened, to consider whether the
loan should be accepted on the conditions imposed by
the Governor-in-Council, Mr. R. Jones, President, being
in the chair. Mr. Savage moved, and Mr. S. Terry
seconded, that the loan be accepted on the terms pro-
posed. Mr. Cohen objected on the grounds that it
would mean the annihilation of the bank in twelve
months. Mr. Wentworth moved aa amendment to
the effect that the bank had better struggle on under
existing difficulties than accept the loan and consent
to a dissolution of the institution. When put to the
vote the motion was carried by a majority of 132.
Now the newspaper critic comments again thus :
” By this it would appear that the bank will be put
in possession, on condition of winding up its affairs in
twelve months, of a sum sufficient to save the bank
from immediately closing its doors, and thus involve
the whole colony in deeper distress than that to which
wc are already' obliged to succumb. But it certainly
was made apparent to the proprietors that unless the
loan was accepted in the way proposed the bank must
shut up shop ; and yet to convince the public of the
absolute solvency and prosperity of the institution, we
think it. necessary to close these remarks with the
condition in which the bank stood on Friday last ;
One matter, small in itself, but, as it turned out, of
considerable import to the bank, has escaped attention ;
that is the selection of Mr. John Black, the accountant,
to succeed Mr- A- K. Mackenzie as secretary and
cashier. It was not a walk-over for the incoming
official. He had a stout opponent in Mr. Terence
Murray, a colonist of high repute and long standing ;
and on the results of the ballot Mr. Black, to-day,
would have been declared beaten. For the voice of
the meeting was against both candidates, Mr. Black
being in a minority of 55, whilst Mr. Murray’s minority
was only 14. The chairman, however, ruled that, as
neither candidate had secured a majority there must
be another election. It was eventually decided, how-
ever, to leave the matter in the hands of the board ;
and the directors, happily for the welfare of the insti-
tution. appointed Mr. Black on probation in February,
1829, the proprietors confirming this action at their
next meeting the following August. That appoint-
ment, it is not too much to say, saved the bank. Already
Mr. Black was one of the best known and esteemed
men in the city, and when he found himself at the head
of affairs he very soon Infused new life into the insti-
tution. It was an open secret that the sympathies of
Governor Brisbane were with the Bank of Australia.
He had announced his intention of abolishing the Bank
of New South Wales as ‘‘ a useless institution,” and
would have been glad if its failure to meet, at due date,
its obligations to the Government, assisted him in his
purpose. But Mr. Black made it his special business
to see no such aid was forthcoming. He set his wits
to work, and by indefatigable efforts succeeded, ere long,
in getting in enough money to place the bank on a
footing of comparative independence. The statement
of accounts presented at the half-yearly meeting in
August showed the bank to be well in funds, with an
increasing business. A dividend of 8 per cent, per
annum was declared, and it was decided to put 3I per
cent, to the sinking fund. Before the end of the pre-
scribed period Mr. Black’s energetic and judicious
management led to his being able to repay the Govern-
ment, and free the bank of so dangerous a liability.
Its threatened dissolution was thus averted, although,
it is said, that after the Government claims had been
met, the cash in the bank’s treasury chest amounted
to only JTq.
/V -/
In 1834, with the extension of the term of co-partnery
for another twenty-one years, the paid-up capital of the
bank was increased to £40,000; and in October of the
same year a special meeting of the shareholders rejected,
by a substantial majority, a proposition—carried four
years later —to increase the shares from 1,500 to 3,000,
and reduce the rate of interest f rom 10 and 12 per cent, to
8 per cent. The rapid extension of operations, not-
withstanding the fact that the arrival of an English
banking establishment of “ Goliath ” proportions in 1835


Liabilities.
Circulation.
Deposits.
Total.
Bank of New
South Wales
Bank of Aus-
£32,138
O
0
£120,480
4
5
£152,618
4
5
tralia ..
Commercial
35>939
0
0
108,066
5
1
i 44,o°5
5
1
Banking Co.
of Sydney .,
Bank of Aus-
28,160
0
0
90.340
0
0
118,500
0
0
tralasla
11,894
4
47-5 2 3
4
9
59,418
3
1
Total ..
£108,131
18
4
£366,409
14
3
£47454!
12
7
Assets.
Bullion.
Securities.
Total.
Bank of New
South Wales
Bank of Aus-
£56,027
0
10
£192,823
*5
5
£248.850
16
3
tralia ..
Commercial
39,208
3
8
192,826
14
1
232,034
17
9
Banking Co.
of Sydney..
Bank of Aus-
45, i 68
0
0
182,804
0
0
227.972
0
0
tralasia
34.791
16
3
78,417
9
3
113,209
5
6
Total
£i?5,’95
0
9
£646,871
18
9
£822,066
19
6
.
—
made opposition a quantity to be reckoned with, fully
justified this strengthening of the foundations. But
in the days of doody doings ‘ ‘ gang wary ’ ’ was a motto
the bank played upon to such an extent that unfavour-
able views were formed of its caution, and there
were those not backward in terming it a “ family
concern.” The year 1836 saw, however, the initiation
of a more progressive policy, and the paid-up capital
was now raised to £IOO,OOO ; the competition of a
“ foreign institution ” no doubt assisting in the re-
quired advance. This, to extremists, disturbing ele-
ment created more than a little ‘ ‘ feeling ’ ’ amongst
bank shareholders and speculators generally. The
head office of the Bank of Australasia being in London,
no seasonable return of the position of affairs was
obtainable, a condition of affairs which occasioned a
good deal of dissatisfaction. This was partially over-
come by an Order-in-Council providing that all banks
doing business in the colony must submit to the Govern-
ment, for periodical publication, returns of their assets
and liabilities ; and the first of these abstracts appeared
in the Government Gazette in August, 1836, as follows :
An Abstract of the Average Weekly Liabilities
and Assets of the Several Banks in New South
Wales
For the Half-year ended June 30, 1836.
The publication of these returns showed that the Bank
of New South Wales maintained the premier position
in financial circles, besides demonstrating this other
fact —that so far as local interests were concerned the
so-termed “ Goliath ” of antipodean banking was not
so formidable as some people had asserted. “It does
not appear,” wrote the S. Herald of the day, ” that
the English bank has lowered our old establishment in
the estimation of supporters when we find that the
following sales have been effected during the past week :
Ten shares in the Bank of New South Wales, on which
£3O had been paid, sold at 95 per rent, premium ; and
fifteen shares in the Bank of Australasia on which
£3O had been paid, sold at 85 per cent, premium.”
In 1837 Mr. R. Jones, M.C., was president of the
board ; his co-directors being Messrs. W. Hutchinson,
Jas. Chisholm, J. B. Bettington, N. Aspinall, W. Lawson,
W. I.ithgow, M.C., R. Campbell, P. De Maistre, R.
Fitzgerald, W. C. Wentworth and G. T. Savage. The
bank’s solicitor, considered one of the staff in those
days, was Mr. C. H. Chambers ; Mr. J. H. Potts was
the accountant ; Mr. T. Ford acted as assistant cashier ;
and three junior clerks made up the office establishment.
At a meeting of the proprietors held on the 16th
August, 1838, the following resolutions were passed
“ (1) That no member shall in future possess or hold
more than fifty shares or £5,000 stock in the capital
stock of this company, unless the same shall stand
this day in his or her name, or have accrued to him or
her by marriage or as lawful representative of a deceased
proprietor, and if his or her number of shares shall by
any other means than those above mentioned exceed
the number of fifty shares, or £3.000, the dividends
and interest payable in respect of those shares that
are held contrary to this resolution, shall sink into
and become merged in the capital stock of the company
and form part thereof ; (2) that 1,500 shares of £IOO
each be created, in addition to the same number of
shares already in existence in this bank ; (3) that the
new shares be divided amongst the proprietors in pro-
portion to their capital paid up on the 30th day of
September next ; (4) that the first instalment of £lO
per share upon every new share be paid by the Ist
January, 1839 (upon which day they shall be issued),
failing which the share or shares to be forfeited and
sold by auction for the benefit of the old proprietors ;
(5) that, as a general principle, no payment can be
made upon a new share at the option of the proprietors
except the sum of £lO per annum at the end of each
year.”
It was not long ere the wisdom of expanding the
stock list became manifest. The assets of the bank
(£248,850 16s. 3d.) on 30th June, 1836, and increased
to £323,568 os. 2d. at the end of 1838, had swelled to
but thirteen thousand pounds short of half a million
sterling by the close of 1840. And still they grew.
Addressing shareholders at the beginning of 1842 the
President said :—“ There is every reason to hope from
the increase of our population, and the consequent
development of our trade, and the internal resources
of the country, for a great and permanent ex-
tension of the field for banking enterprise, and
we are confident that colonial banking with judicious
and economical management will continue to afford
a highly remunerative investment for capital.”
Perhaps this rosy outlook was too limited in its
scope, for drawing nigh and gradually enveloping


Liabilities.
Dr.
Capital Paid-up
£125,284
0
0
Notes in Circulation
33,7 11
0
0
Deposits
215.335
7
3
Surplus Fund
10,919
16
6
Net Profit after payment of Expenses ..
9,323
1
9
£394-573
5
6
Assets.
Cr.
Coin and Bullion
/143 233
13
8
Landed Property, including bank premises
I 5> 2 55
13
0
Bills Discounted, and other debts and
securities
236,083
17
10
£394.573
5
6
the colony was a long period of disaster worse
than any experienced before —which left credit
in a state of utter collapse. But the bank by this time
was built up solid enough to Stand four square against
all storms ; although, for a while, it had to bend to
the breeze. At the close of 1844 its capital was reduced
by about £68,000 written off for bad debts, and about
£34,000 returned to the proprietors ; but a considerable
portion of the amount written off was afterwards
recovered. Banking was still being carried on upon
lines severely contracted, as the following advertise-
ment, under date 17th June, 1847, attests : —“ From and
after the Ist July next no checks {sic) on the
undermentioned banks otherwise than payable to bearer
will be honoured ; and that all such checks must be
confined to sums of not less than £2. Only exceptions :
Checks on public accounts, checks for dividends on
insolvent estates, checks for balance of account ; all
of which may in case of need be drawn under £2.
For and on behalf of the Bank of New South Wales,
J. Black, cashier ; for the Commercial Banking Co. of
Sydney, L. Duguid, manager ; for the Bank of Aus-
tralasia, C. Falconer, manager ; for the Union Bank
of Australia, J. Sea, manager.” In 1847 the paid-up
capital was £104,272 10s., and a reserve fund of £33>°B6
had accumulated. In the following year an addition
was made to capital “ from profit account ” of £20,854,
thus bringing the former up to the sum of £125,126.
In the discussion which took place at the meeting
of July, 1849, it was stated that during the existence of
the bank it had paid in dividends to the shareholders
the sum of £306,979 13s. Bd. In 1851 when all
accounts of the old bank had been closed off, the
total distributed amounted to £362 542 ss. pd. Of
the sixty-one dividends declared the following were
the rates One at £sl 7s. pd. per annum ; one at
£qi 13s. qd. ; two at £33 6s. Bd. ; one at £25 ; nine at
rates varying from 20 to 25 pet cent. ; sixteen at from
15 to 20 per cent. ; twenty-five from 10 to 15 pc* cent. ;
and six under 10 per cent.
The closing years of the forties and the early years
of the fifties made an important epoch in the history of
the bank. In 1848 the term of co-partnery had yet a
third of its currency to run, but a continual increase in
business had demanded the opening of branch offices
in Melbourne and at Moreton Bay settlement, as well
as in London. It was recognised that under these
altered conditions increased powers were essential, if
the bank were to retain its position in the forefront
of our financial world ; and, at a meeting of proprietors
held in March, 1848. authority was given the directors
to revise the deed of settlement, and enter into negotia-
tions with the Government for a new Act of Incorpora-
tion. The execution of these matters occupied con-
siderable time, and it was not until after the meeting
of proprietors held on the 19th January, 1850, that
the directors were able to bring their labours before
the shareholders for review. Interest in this meeting
of January centres in the fact that it marks an im-
portant era in the history of our premier bank’s affairs.
The accounts presented dealt with a half-yearly period
completing the thirt y-third and final year of the expiring
bank’s existence. Although, it must be mentioned, in
the ordinary course of events, there was another gather-
ing of proprietors to be called ere their new bank
could become a fait accompli. The balance-sheet dis-
closed the following position :
Mr. J. R. Holden, Vice-President, occupied the
chair and moved the adoption of the report ; which
recommended the payment of the usual five per cent,
dividend for the term the figures embraced, leaving
£3,058 to be carried forward. The report further stated ;
‘ ‘ The most eligible site that the city affords for the
creation of a new banking house has been purchased
from the Government on very favourable terms, and,
as soon as the proposed alteration of the plan of the
adjoining land has been definitely fixed by the Govern-
ment, the necessary arrangements will be made for
the erection of a banking house.” June and July, 1850,
were busy months with the Proprietors, several special
general meetings being held to consider the draft deed
of settlement ; but at the half-yearly meeting held on
the 19th July, 1850, the directors were able to make
this statement ; —‘ ‘ In conformity with a recommen-
dation of a general meeting of Proprietors in March,
1848, the directors have devoted unremitting attention
to the revision of the bank deed, and they are happy
to say that the object of their labours is now nearly
consummated. A new deed, the terms of which have
already received the sanction of a special general meet-
ing will be ready for signature in the early part of next
month ; and an Act for incorporating the company
will probably pass the Legislative Council within a
short time afterwards, the provisions of which the
directors trust will be such as to ensure entire satis-
faction.” In the new deed the co-partnery was for no
fixed term, but to continue until dissolved, in con-
formity with provisions 122-129. The clauses relative
to the directorate were given greater elasticity, pro-
viding that at the half-yearly general meeting to
be held in October, 1851, one director shall retire, and
not be clegible for re-election until the following half-
yearly meeting, and so on every half-yearly meeting ;
and in reference to voting the number of votes in pro-
portion to capital was fixed at a vote for every five
shares up to 250. On the 22nd August, 1850, the
co-partnery closed its existence, and the following day
the new company was formed under a deed of settle-
ment bearing date 23rd August. The company thus
constituted was incorporated by Act of Council on 6th


September, 1850. This step necessitated the accept-
ance by shareholders of shares under the new con-
stitution ; and, as pointed out by a writer in the Review
of Revieivs some years ago, it furnishes the answer to
a question not infrequently asked, viz., “ How is it
that if the bank w r as established in 1817 its last report
is called the mth half-yearly report, instead of
the 178th ? ” From the 18th April, 1817, when the
doors of the bank were thrown open, till the 22nd
August, 1850, there were paid in dividends and bonuses
£340,000, or, in round numbers, about three times
lhe amount of the paid-up capital.
Of the constitution of the new bank, and par-
ticulars regarding its general business, the information
furnished in the following advertisement, dated 30th
October, 1850, justifies its reproduction ;
BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
Incorporated by Act oe Council
For Issuing Notes —Receiving Deposits—Discounting
Bills—Making Advances on Approved Securities —
Granting Cash Credits
And
Transacting every kind of Banking Business.
Commencing Capital, £125,000, in 6,250 shares of £2O
each.
Directors : John Thacker, J.P. President, D.
Larnach, R. Campbell, W. R. Scott, D. Cooper, Jr.,
Robert Towns.
Auditors ; Jas. Milson, Jr., E- C. Weeks.
John Black, Cashier.
i
In order to meet the growing wants of the northern
districts of the colony the directors have now established
a branch bank at North Brisbane, Moreton Bay,
under the management of Mr. Wm. Richardson, where
every department of the banking business wifi be con-
ducted.
The bank has also established agencies in London,
Adelaide, Hobart Town, and Calcutta ; and will pur-
chase approved bills at the current rates of exchange ;
or will undertake the collection of bills at any place in
the United Kingdom, in the adjacent colonies of Van
Diemen’s Land and South Australia, or in India or
China. The bank will issue drafts on the London Joint
Stock Bank at the current rates of exchange. Letters
of credit will also be granted on such terms as may
be agreed upon.
Cash credit accounts will be granted to respectable
parties on personal or other securities satisfactory to
the bank.
Bills will be discounted at the current rates.
The board meets for discounts every Tuesday and
Friday.
Current accounts kept on the usual terms. Divi-
dends received and local bills collected for customers
free of charge.
The corporation being empowered to increase its
capital from time to time by the creation and allotment
of new shares, it is proposed in future allotments of
new shares to secure a preference after the then existing
proprietors, according to the priority of their several
applications.
The bank will close for half-yearly settlements on
the ist and 2nd April and ist and 2nd October.
The only holidays will be Christmas Day, Good
Friday, the Queen’s Birthday, and the Anniversary of
the Colony.
Hours of public business : 10 a.m. to 3 p.m.
By order,
J. H- Baillie, Secretary.
Note here. The office of cashier and secretary
has been dissociated under a new order of affairs
since 1842, Mr. Black retaining the managerial position
and Mr. Baillie carrying out the secretarial duties.
In this same month of October the proprietors
of the old bank held their first meeting on the seven-
teenth to receive the report of the board of directors
as to the arrangements entered into for the realisation
of the capital, and the liquidation of the liabilities of the
company. The report, which was adopted, was as
follows ;
Bank of New South Wales,
Sydney, October 15th, 1850.
The board of directors have now the satisfaction
of reporting to the proprietors the proceedings adopted
towards realising the capital and liquidating the lia-
bilities of the bank. By discounting with the new
bank bills current on the ist October your directors
have had available cash, not only for the repayment
of all the depositors’ accounts, but also of the paid-up
capital ; by which means the parties transferring their
interest to the new bank have been enabled at once to
pay up their shares in full, and the remaining portion
of the paid-up capital is now in course of repayment to
the retiring parties. To provide for the payment
of the notes in circulation your directors have reserved
in their own. hands an equivalent amount of the most
easily convertible of the assets of the bank. And in the
present state of affairs they consider the reservation of
the surplus fund a sufficient protection to the guarantee
given to the new bank for the bills under discount.
There is at the credit of profit and loss, as will be seen
by the accompanying accounts, the sum of £5,462 ns.;
out of which the proprietors think it advisable the usual
dividend for the quarter may without inconvenience
be paid. After which it will not be practicable to
make any further dividend until the final distribution of
the surplus fund. In the meantime it will be necessary


Year.
Deposits.
Net Profits.
Profits added Total
to Capital. Reserve.
1851
• • £382,561
• • £22,478
— ..£10,000
1852
.. 1,367,041
98,834
.. £64 045 .. 25,000
1853
.. 2,056.257
.. 178,196
.. 100,000 .. 50,000
1854
.. 2,112,604
.. 160,819
.. 75,000 .. 80,000
to provide the necessary machinery for winding up the
company’s affairs ; and, in the opinion of your directors
the most eligible course will be to engage a competent
person forthat purpose,to be paid by a stated percentage
on the amount that may be made available for final
distribution. Messrs. Rarnach, Campbell, and Cooper
having resigned in order to their election in the new
bank, and Messrs. George John Rogers and Frank
V ilson having become disqualified, it will be necessary
to elect five new directors to supply the present vacan-
cies. And as each director must retain a qualification
of £3°° paid-up capital your directors have to submit
as a matter of justice that interest at the rate of 10
per cent, on such capital should be guaranteed by the
proprietors as a first charge on the remaining assets
of the company. Syd. R. Campbell, Sen.
On the motion of Mr. Wentworth, seconded by Dr.
Witt, Mr. D. Rarnach was appointed general manager
with power to take all the necessary steps for converting
the remaining assets into cash. During the course of
the meeting it was suggested that the board had treated
with the new bank on much too liberal terms ; but, to
quote the words of the reporting scribe, ‘ ‘ the general
feeling of the meeting appeared to be that of entire
satisfaction with the proceedings of the board.’ ’
It was soon apparent that the anticipated in-
crease of business, which induced the enlarged con-
stitution of the bank, would be fully realised, deposits
rising from £250,351 in June, 1850, to £295,628 in
March, 1851. But a tremendous impetus was given
everything in x\ustralia by the gold discoveries. The
prophetic words the president of the board addressed
to the shareholders in 1842 were now to become facts.
The golden magnet attracted shiploads of colonists
from all corners of the earth, and that tide in the affairs
of the bank set in “ which taken at the flood leads on ’ ’
to substantial profits. The following statement shows
the measure of the bank’s success whilst the gold
fever raged ;
To increase the capital, and so take full advantage
of the promising field which offered for the rumunerative
employment of money, was the principal concern of
the directors in those golden days. At the third half-
yearly meeting, held in April, 1852, in addition to the
usual dividend of 10 per cent, per annum, an extra
dividend of 10 per cent, for the half-year was declared,
to be applied to the extension of the capital. This was
rendered necessary by a restrictive provision in the
Act of Incorporation limiting the issue of notes to the
amount of paid-up capital. From the position the
bank had already obtained in New South Wales and
Victoria, and its rapidly extending mercantile connec-
tion, the directors were assured that this additional capi-
tal could be put at once into profitable use ; and they re-
commended the creation of 2,500 new shares of £2O each,
to facilitate the payment of which the extra dividend of
10 per cent was declared. “We think it proper to
state,” they added in their report, “our objection to
the existing limitations of the note circulation and our
intention of applying to the Legislature for an amend-
ment of the Act, proposing to obtain sanction to the issue
of our notes on the best of all security—an equivalent
deposit of specie or bullion.” In the following month of
July the bank applied to the Governor-General for a
further extension of capital, and on August 3rd,
1852, received an intimation from his Excellency that
any further extension beyond £300,000 must depend
on the previous sanction of her Majesty’s Government.
Application was at once made to the Lord Commissioners
of the Treasury for an extension to £500,000, and in
due course this was granted. Meanwhile as they could
hardly expect to learn the result of the application
for eight or nine months, the directors, owing to the
accelerated necessity of bringing all the branches into
vigorous operation, decided to ask his Excellency to
anticipate the reply of the Lord Commissioners, and
sanction an extension of capital to £400,000 on his
own responsibility. This he agreed to do, and at a
meeting of shareholders held on the 20th of January,
1853, resolutions were agreed to empowering the
directors to issue 5,000 new shares, at £2O each ; and
to apply a bonus of £6 13s. 4d. on the existing stock,
out of the profits of the bank in payment of such
new shares. It was further resolved at this meeting
that “ the number of shares that may be held by
any one proprietor be extended to 1,000 shares.”
Another highly successful statement of affairs was
presented to the shareholders at the expiry of the
succeeding twelve months, the report stating the
result of the year’s trading was without parallel in
the history of the banking enterprise. In conformity
with the resolution of the special general meetings of
proprietors held on 20th and 27th January, 1852, the
sum of £IOO,OOO was appropriated from the profit and
loss account in extension of the capital, and the sum
of £1,260 as a bonus to the directors, and after such
appropriations there still remains divisible by the
present meeting the sum of £37,749 12s. 3d. Deducting
£15,000 for the dividend, and £14,280 16s. f° r the
reserve fund, and £3.508 4s. 3d. for bills maturing,
there remained £4,960 11s. 3d. to be carried forward to
the new account for equalisation of future dividends.
The reserve would thus be increased to £40,000 ; which,
added to the successive appropriations from the profits
of the bank in extension of the capital—amounting
in the whole to £164,045 is. lod. —-would give a total
surplus of £204,045 is. lod. accumulated since Ist
October, 1850,00. an original capital of £125,000.”
The report adds : —‘ ‘ But although the harvest of the
gold discoveries has now been reaped, and the profits of
banking are rapidly returning to their former standards
there is every reason to hope, from the increase of our
population, and the consequent development of our
trade, and the internal resources of the country, for
a great and permanent extension of the field for banking
enterprise. And, notwithstanding the temporary draw-
back that may be occasioned by foreign competition,
originating in a false view of the position and wants
of this community, we are confident judicious and eco-
nomical management will continue to afford a highly
remunerative investment for capital.” Evidently that
long-cherished antipathy to “foreign competition”


Year
Note
Deposits
Paid-up
Capital.
Year’s
Total
ending
Circula-
and other
Net
Reserve.
f Sept.
tion.
Liabilities.
Profits.
i860 . .
/54 i ,i62 ..
£3. 2 7 2 .893 ••
£750,000..
£100,485
.. 205.372
1870 ..
551.273 ..
4,728,135 ..
1,000,000 . .
122,667
.. 300,000
1880 ..
648,332 ..
9,039,196 ..
1,000,000 . .
189,151
.. 490,000
1890 . .
645,748 ..
18,290,521 ..
1,250,000 ..
237.225
.. 950,000
1900 ..
890,837 ..
23,844,652 ..
2,000,000 . .
200,321
1,250.000
1906 ..
959.908 ..
28,166,047 . .
2,000,000 . .
259,773
1,475,000
was to die hard. How true the iorecast, however, has
turned out the following statistical testimony to
“judicious and economical management ” eloquently
tells
Since the foundation of the new institution there has
been a pleasing procession of progress without any
material variation.
At the hal f -yearly meeting in April, 1854, the
directors referred to the death of the secretary, Mr.
J. H. Baillie, and stated they had voted his widow a
bonus of £l,OOO. The cashier, Mr. J. H. Black, aged
in the company’s 'service, they further intimated
“ would retire at the end of the half-year, and, having
been a faithful servant of the bank for more than
thirty years, they had resolved to present him on his
retirement with £l,ooo.’’ Perhaps it is not too much
to say that during the long course of the bank’s exist-
ence, to no servant have the shareholders been more
indebted than to John Henry Black. And tins testi-
mony can be given without reflecting in the slightest
upon the splendid work rendered by the responsible
officers who have succeeded him. When the Bank of
New South Wales —an institution the public have long
looked up to as a national monument of our resources
-—was perilously near the rocks, and upon there, if not
driven there, by adverse gales of gubernatorial preju-
dice, Mr. Black, with unwearying energy and unerring
acumen, not only extricated the institution from
disaster, but established it solidly on foundations which,
under normal conditions, are likely to endure for all
time. True, there are many who would say, and no
doubt many have said, “other managers in his position
would have done as much. ’ ’ But this does not diminish
the fact one iota. There was the task to be done. The
up-hill battle to fight, step by step, from the lowest
round to the highest rung, and he successfully fought it.
There was no continuity of service in Mr. Black’s case,
the brief break of a few years occurring during his
accountantship. Joining the bank in 1821, he held the
position of principal accountant until the following
year, when he was succeeded by a Mr. J. C. Phelps,
to whom the official gazetteer of the day quaintly gave
the social distinction of “gent.” There was a
punctilious code ruling in those times, which required
that responsible officers should be “esquired,” that
clerks holding positions of trust should be “ mistered,”
and the smaller ranks simply recognised as plain ‘ 1 John
Smiths.” But “Mr. J. C. Phelps, Gent.,” appears
for some, at present, uncertain reason to have stood on
a medial platform in these social grades, quite unique.
In the early twenties, society’s “gents ” were not to
be picked up anywhere as readily as the strewn leaves
at Vallombrosa were supposed to be. Perhaps this
fact gave point to the distinction with which Mr. Phelps
seems to have been treated. At any rate, without
pursuing this somewhat intrusive speculation further
here, in 1826 Mr. Black was secretary, pvo tern., of that
very short-lived nursling, the Sydney Banking Co.,
and the same year saw him recommencing a service
which was to endure till the closing months of 1854 ;
the years of his administrative charge going back to
February, 1829. Even at this early time he was one of
the best known and esteemed men in Sydney. Heart
and soul his life centred in the bank chambers, from
which he was never willingly absent. Upon one occa-
sion, it is said, when illness confined him to his room,
he sent Mrs. Black down to the bank, to write up the
books and print off any notes required. Mr. Black’s son,
the Hon. R. J. Black, M.L.C., a veteran banker,
can speak of the times when he, in the glorious glow
of youth, would take advantage of occasional slack
moments to go fishing in that historical Tank Stream,
which thoughtful Governors took care to see provided
occupation for others of the unemployed; although
their compulsory labours, if more profitable, were
hardly so congenial. Tank Stream ran at the back
of the premises then occupied by the bank, lower down,
and on the opposite side of George Street, to the present
building. It was during Mr. J. H. Black’s management
that the present site, or rather half of it, was acquired;
the whole being considered then rather too ambitious
Bank of New South Wales, 1825.
(From drawing presented by Reginald Black, Esq.
a purchase for the bank to make, Rater on the Bank of
New South Wales and the Commercial Banking Co. of
Sydney each bought up half of the intervening block,
upon which shops then stood, and the present buildings
came into existence. The board when writing to
Mr. Black on his retirement, in 1854, said; —•“ The
progress of the country is written in indelible characters
in the annals of New South Wales. The small penal
settlement, not seventy years ago, neglected and almost
unknown, now holding the place of chief of Britain’s
colonies, affords not a more striking comparison than
that of the state of the Bank of New South Wales
when you received charge of its homoeopathic treasury,
and its present state of wealth and influence, with its
numerous branches and agencies spread to all parts
of the world.”
Mr. R. Woodhouse, who succeeded to the secretary-
ship in 1853, also took over the duties of cashier upon
the retirement of Mr. Black in 1854. This dual charge
merged five years afterwards into the position of in-
spector and secretary—a change necessitated by the


expansion of the institution in the country and in the
other colonies. And once more his office was altered
in 1863, when he became the second general manager.
During this year, in lieu of the officers and clerks of the
bank finding sureties through the medium of personal
friends or guarantee societies, the directors established
Mr. Robert Woodhouse, Second General Manager Bank of
New South Wales.
the foundations of the present officers’ provident fund,
or, as it was then termed, the fidelity guarantee and
provident fund. In the half-yearly report for 1864 the
directors set aside, for the third time, a direct appor-
tionment of £5OOO from the finances of the bank for the
benefit of this useful institution ; a proposal which
did not fail to secure the shareholders’ commendation.
In 1864, upon the death of Mr. Woodhouse, Mr. Shepherd
Smith was appointed general manager, remaining in
command, with results that fully justified the confidence
of the directors, until his unhappily early demise in 1886.
Mr. Shepherd Smith, Third General Manager Bank of
New South Wales.
Joining as a lad on his arrival from England in 1853,
he rose rapidly in the bank’s service, and when the
board appointed him, at the early age of 29, their
chief executive officer, with singularly good fortune
they a man whose extraordinary qualifica-
George Street in 1863. Showing Bank of New South Wales and Commercial Banking Company of Sydney.


tions and force of character placed him all through
his masterly career ahead of most, if not all, of his
contemporaries in the colonial banking world. A
born financier, strikingly illustrating by his natural
abilities the inexpedience of the policy of the English
banks, which induced them at that time to rely almost
exclusively on their home-trained staff for their chief
colonial officers, he would have made his mark as a
banker even in the great banking centre, London. His
devotion to the bank’s interests was unparalleled. It
has been said of Mr, Smith that his zeal for the bank
caused him at times to deny the claims of the indi-
vidual ; and that in his banking heterodoxy he would
attempt to popularise the bank in the eyes of the
public. Such opinions generally emanated from
enemies. Whatever suspicion of truth they might
contain, his actions were as a rule characterised by a
strict adherence to the claims of justice, while those
who knew him intimately recognised his charitable
nature and innate kindness of heart. In the early
years of his career, i.e., in iB6O, he saw a heading opened
in the bank ledgers for the Governmental account.
And during five-and-twenty years the institution had
the honour of being the sole bankers of the New_ South
Wales Government —a position which at one time no
doubt contributed to its prestige as a bank. However,
in January, 1885, as Mr. Smith’s regime was drawing
to its close, the bank lost the public account ; the
immediate cause being the failure of the parlies to agree
on the interpretation of certain clauses of the agree-
ment under which the account was carried on. In
connection with that event, which caused considerable
excitement in commercial circles at the time, a long
correspondence between the bank and the Colonial
Treasurer —himself at one time an officer of the bank
took place, which was conducted with remarkable
ability on both sides. This correspondence was after-
wards published and referred to by some of the
London financial journals as a model of style and
clearness. A lawsuit between the bank and the Gov-
ernment followed the withdiawal of the account, two
points in. particular being in dispute ; one as to the right
of the bank to charge interest on certain advances to
the Government, the other as to commission on flota-
tion of loans. The bank succeeded on one point, the
Government on the other. It is doubtful, not with-
standing the friction which undoubtedly occurred at
the time, whether the account would have been, with-
drawn had not a feeling been gaining ground that the
Victorian system of dividing the account among the
Associated Banks was preferable to that of dealing with
01 e bank exclusively. The loss of the Government
account, however, had no effect in checking the divi-
dends paid to shareholders. By many it was re-
garded as being beneficial rather than otherwise. Its
removal not only materially lessened the danger ol
an erratic policy being pursued, such as in. days gone
by was, lightly or wrongly, attributed to the bank ;
ard it saved the necessity of being prepared at any
moment (colonial borrowing being then m full swing)
for transactions of enormous magnitude—a necessity
which undoubtedly compelled the bank in many in-
stances to treat its own borrowing customers in a manner
which under other circumstances it would have been
loth to do. In 1893 the bank once more became the
custodian of the public funds, owing to the temporary
suspension of some of the banks among which, at that
time, the account was divided. It is a proof of the
resources of the institution that this re-transfer was
effected in the ordinary course of business, and without
disturbing the financial relations of the bank with its
constituents in any way ; showing that in the volume
of its business the bank will bear comparison with
the leading banks in Great Britain or America. Taking
into consideration the relative ages and populations
of those countries and Australia, this is a fact of
which both the bank and the colony may well be
proud.
Upon the death of Mr. Shepherd Smith, in 1886,
the position of general manager was offered to, and
Mr. George Miller, Fourth General Manager
Bank of New South Wales.
accepted by, Mr. Geo. Miller, the then manager of the
Melbourne branch of the bank. He was a very old
and popular officer at this time, having had experience
iji New Zealand, New South Wales, and \ ictoria, in
which last-named colony he had conducted the business
of the branch on safe and conservative lines. Upon
his assumption of the general managership he con-
tinued this policy, being ably assisted at the head of
affairs by the chief inspector, Mr. John Russell French.
The administration of Mr. Miller is remarkable for the
fact that it embraced the banking crisis of 1893 —Aus-
tralia’s most violent period of financial unrest, when
monetary institutions of all descriptions were toppling
down like so many houses of cardboard. Through this
fierce ordeal the bank safely passed scatheless. But
the experience brought with it a lesson the “wise
heads ’’ on the board did not fail to avail of. At the


Liabilities.
Proprietors’ Capital,
62,500 shares
£20 each, fully paid
up
/ 1,250,000
0
0
Reserve Fund
• • • • • •
1,000,000
0
0
Notes in Circulation
• • • • • •
660.325
0
0
Bills payable
.. .. • s
I 448 407
2
4
Deposits and other Liabilities ..
20,418,942
10
10
Profit and Loss ..
• •
137-939
9
4
/24,91s,614
2
6
Assets.
Coin and Cash Balances
• • /3.403.769
M
1
Bullion
42,193
11
2
Government Securities ..
560 972
11
6
Notes of other Banks
.. io,ii6
0
0
Bank Premises
589.668
9
9
Bills receivable, bills discounted
and
■ other debts due to the bank ..
.. 20,308,492
i7
11
Insurance Account
.. 400
18
1
£24,915,614
2
6
end of Match, 1593, the statement of affairs disclosed
the following strength :
It was fortunate for the shareholders that at this
critical stage they could command the ripe experience of
Mr. Thomas Buckland, the President of the board. For
many years he had had the management of the Cooper
estates. The Waterloo Warehouse—that historical
emporium, at the corner of George and Market Streets,
prominent in old Sydney as a sort of Exchange, where
so many early schemes of wealth were conceived and
consummated—he was also long associated with. In his
time he had seen many crises, but none so frenzied or
so far-reaching in its effects. When the crisis reached
its climax, in April, 1893, he was one of the few who
retained a cool head. His seasoned judgment and wide
knowledge were invaluable. In his address at the
half-yearly meeting, held on Monday, Ist May, he said :
“ In the first place you will observe that in our recom-
mendations we have thought it prudent to omit the
usual bonus of 21 per cent, per annum, although the
profit which has been earned might in ordinary times
have justified such an appropriation. The board
realises that at this juncture it is better to continue
strengthening the reserve fund (although already at
£1,000,000) by the customary addition of £IO,OOO,
and to carry forward a larger amount than usual —
a policy that feel assured will be heartily approved
of by you with your knowledge of present surrounding
circumstances.” But the voice of prudence was not
to be silenced here. On the 27th September following
at a special general meeting of the shareholders, it was
decided to increase the capital of the bank to £2,000,000
by the creation of 37,500 new shares of £2O each. And
the ensuing half-yearly gathering of shareholders dis-
closed that, by further precautionary measures, the
board had provided in every possible way to safely
guard against all contingencies. To quote the President
again : —‘ ‘ One of the natural results of so panic-stricken
a period has been to draw forth an unusual amount of
criticism on the banking system of these colonies. In
times of business prosperity most of us are apt to lose
sight of the weak links in the chain of our business
methods, and no doubt the outcome of that criticism
will be that all those who are entrusted with the control
of our financial institutions will look more closely into
the conditions under which they have been working in
times past, and, where necessary, will make such a
change of front in their operations as will conduce to
the building up of an impregnable position in the future.
It is with this object in view that your board decided to
recommend to the shareholders that the paid-up capital
of the bank should be increased to the substantial sum
of £2,000,000, and it is a matter for congratulation that
already there has been a hearty response thereto, and
that considerable sums have been paid in advance of
the time fixed for the first instalment. In putting our
proposals before you we clearly laid down that it is
our determination, while we are in charge of the bank’s
affairs, to keep invested a sum equal to the additional
capital received, in British consols and other such solid
and readil)' convertible first-class securities of like
nature as will serve for a thoroughly effective second
line of defence, behind the substantial amount of coin
and cash balances which it has always been the policy
of this bank to hold. . . . We have not thought it
needful to recommend any additions to our Reserve
Fund. The premiums on the shares representing the new
capital will be a substantial augmentation of that fund,
and we have considered it sufficient, under existing
circumstances, to carry forward, to be dealt with as
circumstances may hereafter determine, the substan-
tial sum of £20,864. ... I cannot allow this oppor-
tunity to pass without a reference to the action of
Sir George Dibbs and his coadjutors at the commence-
ment of the crisis. It is not too much to say that the
colony’, and those who have any interest in its welfare,
owe them a debt of gratHude for the patriotic action
they took in connection with the trouble. By the
Premier’s promptitude, thoughtfulness, and energy in
initiating legislation (legalising temporarily bank-notes)
with the approval of Parliament, to meet an emergency
which pressed upon every phase of business life and
was the outcome of sustained and increasing panic, the
colony was saved from a severe financial strain.” As a
result of the altered conditions produced by the crisis
and the wise precautions taken by r the bank of largely
increasing its capital, the rate of dividend on its
enlarged capital was reduced to 9 per cent, per annum
for some years. The determination announced by Mr.
Buckland to build up a second line of defence is a
reflex of the policy of the bank, which has long made
safety the first consideration ; and this has doubtless
often led to the institution being spoken of as ‘ a
conservative one.” But it was, nevertheless, the
policy that carried it triumphantly through the debacle
of 1893. In the following year illness compelled the
retirement of Mr. Miller, and he was succeeded by Atr.
J. Russell French, the present general manager.
Mr. French joined the bank in February, 1863,
and, after nine years’ service in various capacities, was
appointed to the Inspectors’ staff in New Zealand in
1872. He returned to Sydney in March, 1887, having


March, 1851.
Sept., 1906.
Paid-up Capital
. . /l22,I20
. . /2,000,000
Reserve Fund
5.500
1450,000
Notes in Circulation
33.833
959 938
Deposits
295,627
.. 24,812,021
Coin and Liquid Assets
226,766
,. 12,316,285
Bills discounted and
ad-
vances
• • 34 2 > 2 5°
• • 19 7o5.6o4
Bank Premises
O of)?
715,000
Amount of Dividend e
T.d
Bonus for half-year
5.540
100,000
Rate of Dividend ..
.. 10% per an.
10 % per an.
been appointed Inspector at the head office. His
appointment as Chief Inspector followed in iSgi, and
that of General Manager on the ist July, 1894. To
quote a critic in the Review of Reviews, “ Mr. French
Mr. J. Russell French, Present General Manager Bank of
New South Wales.
is an up-to-date manager in every way. He is dis-
tinguished by clear-sightedness and power of concen-
tration, qualities invaluable in the position which he
holds. His keen, incisive manner betokens an accu-
rate knowledge of men and affairs, while his suavity of
manner and popular business-like methods conduce to
His popularity both inside and outside the institution
he represents.” It was on the initiative of Mr. French
and Mr. Dibbs, of the Commercial Banking Co., both
of whom recognise the importance of the matter, that
a Conference was held in Sydney in 1895 having for its
object the securing of uniform banking legislation in
the various colonies. Mr. PTench was also largely
instrumental in founding the Institute of Bankers of
New South Wales, and has always taken a keen interest
in its welfare.
Obviously an institution such as the Bank of
New South Wales must owe its premier position to the
skill with which its affairs have been conducted by the
directors and managers. In this respect the bank has
been singularly fortunate. In the early days the
ablest representatives of official and commercial life
were to be found sitting at the Board assisting to control
its destinies. The influential roll of presidents includes
the names of such prominent citizens as the Hon. J. T.
Campbell, Captain J. Piper, Messrs. J. Thacker, D.
Larnach, Kobt. Towns, R. Jones, M.C.,W. C.Wentworth,
Thos. Buck!and, J. R. Holden, M.C., R. Campbell, pin-,
Geo. Allen, Daniel Cooper, Kobt. Tooth, Thos. Walker,
F. Tooth, J. S. Willis, T. Cadell, Alex. Stuart, J. R.
Hill, Senator the Hon. J. T. Walker, Hon. C. K.
Mackellar and Sir Normand MacLaurin. Another
favourable factor is that the bank has had connected
with it gentlemen whose single aim has been to
advance its best interests, and against whose personal
honour there has never been a breath of suspicion.
One remarkable circumstance is the length of time
most of its higher officials held their positions.
Taking the President of the bank first; Mr. D. Cooper,
1855 t° 1861; Mr. G. Allen, 1861 to 1866 ; Mr. T.
Walker sat in the chair from 1868 to 1886 ; Mr. T.
Buckland, from 1886 to 1594 ; Mr. J. R. Hill, from
1894 to 1900. Then as regards the chief executive
officers : Mr. Black, the first noteworthy officer of the
bank, had control from 1829 to 1854 ; Mr. Woodhousc,
1854 to 1564 ; Mr. Shepherd Smith, from 1864 to 1886 ;
Mr. George Miller (after thirty years’previous service)
from 188 b to 1894, and since that year Mr. J. Russell
French has been in command.
In March, 1851, the bank’s only branches were
in North Brisbane and Melbourne. Now it has 231
branches and agencies, giving employment to 1,400
officers, scattered all over the Australasian colonies
(excepting Tasmania) and Fiji, in addition to a London
branch, on the register of which a quarter of the capital
now appears. The authorised capital of the bank is,
£3,000,000, only £2,000,000 of which has been paid up,
so that there is still provision for expansion.
The following comparison is between the bank’s
figures in March, 1851, and September, 1906 :
The net profits earned by the Bank since its
establishment in 1817 to the end of 1906, including
premiums on new shares issued, amount to £10,929,354,


and its present annual credit transactions amount to
roughly £700,000,000.
A feature of the Bank for over 50 years lias been
and is its well-equipped up-to-date gold melting and
assaying department at the Head Office, where at
present about 12 tons of bullion are treated annually.
The present board is constituted as follows :—The Hon.
Chas. K. Mackellar, M.L.C., president ; the Hon.
R. J Black, M.L.C. ; Sir Jas. Fairfax, Knt. ; Mr. R.
Binnie ; the Hon. Sir N. MacLaurin, Knt., M.L.C.,
and Senator the Hon. J. T. Walker; with
Mr. J. Russell French as general manager. The
Interior of Present Bank Building.
The operations of the bank are directed from
Sydney, the governing body being a Board of Directors,
with whom is closely associated the general manager.
London board consists of Sir Robert L. Lucas-Tooth,
Bart., Frederick Green, Esq., and Mr. David George,
manager.
The Bank of New South Wales Head Office, George Street.


THE COMMERCIAL BANKING COMPANY OF SYDNEY,
LIMITED.
On the sth of September, 1834, the following
notification appeared in the newspapers : —“ It is pro-
posed to institute an additional Discount Bank in
Sydney, to be conducted on the principle of the Scotch
banks.” A meeting was held on the 9th idem the
outcome being the flotation of the Bank, with a
nominal capital of £300,000 in 3,000 shares of
£IOO each. A board of directors was elected, con-
sisting of the following : —Chairman, W. Macpherson
(Collector of Internal Revenue) ; deputy chairman,
John Lamb (merchant) ; members, Messrs. Thos.
Barker (miller), Robert Scott (Glendon), R-
Johnston (Annandale), Thos. Marsden (merchant),
Robert How (merchant), F. A. Hely (Principal Super-
intendent of Convicts), T. J. Goodsir (Deputy Assistant
Commissary-General), Joseph Hickey Grose (mer-
chant), Roger Therry (Commissioner of the Court of
Requests), and Thos. Potter Macqueen (Segenhoe).
Mr. Leslie Duguid was appointed managing director
and cashier, and Mr. Francis Stephen the solicitor to
the bank. Operations were commenced on the Ist
November, 1834, at temporary offices, No. 1,
Colonnade, Bridge Street. Interest was allowed at
3 per cent, on three months’ deposits and upwards,
and when half the shareholders had signed the Deed
of Settlement notes were ” issued of £l, £5, £ lO an< l
£2O values, payable on demand.”
Success attended the operations of the new bank
from its earliest dar r s. The position of the parent bank
as the leading financial institution was challenged
almost at the outset, and it very soon became apparent
that a severe and protracted struggle for supremacy
was inevitable. In those days the controlling banking
authorities considered it sound policy to work on a
small proportion of their capital, and thus they re-
frained from calling up more than this small propor-
tion. But the large extent to which the provision
permitting shareholders voluntary payments on their
scrip was availed of, altered this general position,
and gave the Commercial Banking Co., relatively a
powerful hand. At the beginning of 1838 its ope-
rating force represented a paid-up capital of
£175,000 —a basis for movement considerably more
solid than that of any rival. In the returns,
already published, of the four banks doing business in
New South Wales on the 30th June, 1836, the Com-
mercial Banking Co. occupied second position, and at
the end of 1838 in the matter of assets it held the lead.
P'or the short time the bank had been in existence this
progress was as satisfactory as it was exceptional ; and
it speaks forcibly for the safe and liberal lines upon
which the directors, then presided over by Mr. Robt.
Scott, were discharging their trust. In 1835 the bank
removed to a portion of old Sydney, better known as
Moore’s Corner; and, on the voice of the shareholders,
Messrs. Win. Cox, jun., and H. G. Smith took their
seats at the board table in the room of Messrs. R.
Johnston and Thos. Marsden, two of the original
directors. The following year saw agencies established
at Maitland and Goulburn; and it also witnessed another
alteration in the headquarters, on this occasion the
bank’s premises being removed to George Street,
four doors from the intersection of King
Street, where business was carried on until a further
removal brought the bank to its present quarters.
Mr. W. Macpherson again filled the chair upon the
directorate, the deputy-chairman being Mr. Thos.
Barker. The other directors were Messrs. R. Scott,
R. How, Thos. Marsden, T. Goodsir, J. H. Grose,
R. Therry, T. P. Macqueen, Wm. Cox, jun., H. G. Smith,
C. W. Roemer and W. H. Moore, whilst Mr. L- Duguid
still acted as managing director and cashier. In
1840 the directors determined to disassociate
Mr. Duguid’s dual office, and the accountant,
Air. Ed. Courtney, was appointed cashier at a remu-
neration of £SOO per annum, with supervision of all the
books, subject to the control of the managing director.
Dividends were being paid regularly, averaging from
10 to 15 per cent, per annum, and the bank’s stock
commanded a premium of £l2 per share. The agencies
at Goulburn and Maitland gave place to branches, an
advertisement from the latter office intimating that
“ from Ist April, 1839, Mr. J. S. Mein, the cashier, will
allow interest at 4 per cent, on deposit receipts and
accounts current.” Later on other branches were
opened at Windsor and Melbourne. So far the career
of the bank had been one of even and continuous
prosperity. The returns at the close of the half-year
ending 31st December, 1840, showed a general advance
of more than 100 per cent, on the turnover of 1836, the
comparative figures being : —Total liabilities : 31st
December, 1836, £136,963 Bs. 3d. ; ditto, 31st Decem-
ber, 1840, £327,917 9s. Total assets : 31st De-
cember, 1836, £268,191 165.96. ; ditto, 31st December,
1840, £585,778 14s. Some of the shareholders
urged a wider field of operations, and there also was
talk of increasing the capital to £1,000,000, but this
proposition did not materialise until many years after-
wards, and then under an entirely different condition
of affairs.
The ensuing year, 1841, appears to have been a
turning-point in the career of the old Commercial
Banking Company. Very gradually, but in a steady,
though small, stream, business began to fall off. Then
the depression of 1842-4 ensued, and in the middle of
that disastrous period, in 1843, as the volume of trade
was now much diminished and at least two of the
country branches were being worked at a loss, the
board gave instructions that all of them should be
closed, from 31st March, 1844; a decision which greatly
aro sed the ire of the good folk of Goulburn, who
forcibly impressed upon the directors their objection to
a reversion t o the system of “ carrying on business per
medium of dirty, unreadable slips of paper as a circu-
lating medium when the Commercial Bank’s branch
for seven years, without losses by robbery, had directly,


or indirectly, through local bills being
sent down on (sic) expenses limited to
the salary of the agent.” But the board,
strongly imbued with the wisdom of a
stay-at-home policy, remained obdurate.
Simultaneous with the closure of the
outside offices, by way of further reduc-
ing working expenses, all the members
of the staff were brought under a scheme
of retrenchment. Besides the loss of
trade consequent upon unprofitable
seasons, there was a leakage tending
to diminish the proprietors’ profits.
Five years prior to this the accountant-
ship had been placed in the hands of
Mr. Townsend, a nominee of Mr. Du-
guid’s ; and in 1847, during the pro-
tracted absence of Mr. Courtney, serious
frauds in the accounts branch were
brought to light, involving the managing
director. A clerk, named Harkness,
discovered that the books were being
systematically falsified daily. Informa-
tion of the delinquencies was given the
managing director on several occasions,
but, finding nothing would be done to
check the peculations, Harkness brought
matters under the notice of Mr. H. G.
Smith, one of the members of the board.
He and the chairman of directors, Mr.
T. Barker, immediately interviewed Mr.
Duguid, who at first refused to let them
inspect the books, or to supply any in-
formation at all. In the end Townsend
was criminally prosecuted and Duguid
dismissed, their joint abstractions total-
ling £10,700.
Mr. (afterwards Sir) Edward Knox, Managing Director in 1847.
George Street, showing Bank Premises and corner of King Street in 1847. when Mr. Di bbs
received his first appointment.


Liabilities and Assets as on Dec, 31,
1848.
Dr.
To Capital paid up
£7* *765
5
0
,, Amount due by the bank, viz.:—
Notes in circulation .. 0 0
Deposits .. .. .. 148,470 13 jo
—
i 74,°7i
1 3
10
,, Amount carried to Profit and Loss
6,542
x 4
0
£252,379
12
10
Cr.
By British coin ..
9
10
,, Bills discounted and debts of every kind due to
bank •• • • • • •• • • • •
168,382
11
4
,, Landed property
3.600
0
0
,, Preliminary expenses attending the formation
of the bank
672
11
8
£252. 379 12
Examined and found correct.
C. S. Vallack I .
~ 0 ~ ■ Auditors.
Gho. S. Thorpe j
Edwd. Knox, Manager.
1
In July, 1847. Mr. Edward Knox was appointed
managing director ; and in the following October the
directors issued a notice convening a meeting for the
purpose of considering the propriety of extending the
co-partnership—already extended in 1841—for a
second term, when it was discovered by the solicitor
of the bank that the deed of settlement only pro-
vided for one extension. Since its establishment,
in 1834, the dividends paid to the proprietors up
to 30th June, 1847, amounted to £232,178 17s. 3d.,
or an average of 11J per cent, upon the paid-up
capital, results, the Board claimed, rarely equalled
by any banking establishment. A meeting was
held on the 22nd November, 1847, Mr. John Lamb,
M.C., presiding, and among the resolutions were the
following : That the capital of the bank shall consist of
£150,000, divided into 6,000 shares of £25 each;
that the following nine gentlemen, five of whom
shall constitute a quorum, be requested to form
a provisional committee to carry into effect
the resolutions of this meeting: Messrs. John
Lamb, S. K. Salting, A. Donaldson, George Miller,
H. G. Smith, Thos. Barker, John Alexander, H. W.
Parker and John Thacker. The committee subse-
quently added Messrs. David Jones, J. B. Darvall and
W. Walker to their number, and upon Mr. J ohn Thacker
declining to act, his place was filled by Mr. Robert
Porter. On the Bth February, 1848, it was decided
by the shareholders to form a new company with a
capital of £120,000, to be divided into 4,800 shares of
£25 each, £1 to be paid on deposit for each share. The
deed of settlement was executed on the 15th May, 1848.
On the 17th June, 1848, an Act 11 Vic.—
‘‘lncorporation of the Commercial Banking Co.
of Sydney ”—was assented to, empowering the company
to commence business as a bank of issue, &c., when the
whole of the said capital of £120,000 had been sub-
scribed, and a moiety of the said sum actually paid up.
The principal provisions of this Act were that the whole
of the capital must be paid up within two years ; that
“ when the moiety of the capital has been paid up and
the whole of the capital subscribed it shall be lawful for
the bank to issue notes for twenty-one years for £l, £2,
and £5 and upwards, but the issue shall cease in the
case of the suspension of specie payments on demand for
sixty days ; that after the expiration of twenty-one
years it shall not be lawful to issue or carry on business ;
that the issue of notes be limited to the amount of
capital paid up ; that the liabilities shall not exceed
three times th°. amount of subscribed capital.”
The new bank opened for business on the Ist July,
1848, and since that time its record is indeed a mar-
vellous one. The first report read at the meeting of
shareholders on the 10th day of January, 1849, showed
the following balance-sheet :
At the meeting of shareholders a dividend of 10 per cent,
was declared.
In this year, Mr. (afterwards Sir Edward) Knox,
who up till then had been managing director of the in-
stitution handed over the responsible charge to Mr.
A. H. Hutchinson, in order to devote his attention to
his private affairs ; but he was elected a director, in
the place of Mr. T. W. Smith, and continued to serve the
bank in that capacity until his death in iqoi, when he
had for several years acted as chairman of the company.
Sir Edward Knox may justly be called the founder of
the present bank, having, as previously stated, been its
first manager. Ever ready in the hour of need to throw
all his energies into the heat of the fray, and battle for
better conditions, he practically devoted his life’s work
to the promotion of two great institutions—the one under
review and the Colonial Sugar Refining Company.
Noted for his public acts of charity and his readiness to
assist those in distress, he was a man of unblemished
character and upright principle. For many years he
promoted the interests of his adopted country as a valued
member of the Upper House, having honour of knight-
hood bestowed on him as a reward for services. It was
in 1851 that in conjunction with the Bank of New
South Wales the board secured the site of their present
offices, adjoining that institution, and opposite the
General Post Office, the position being one of the finest in
Sydney.
In 1852 the capital of the company was increased
by the issue of 1,200 new shares, from £'120,000 to
£150,000, part of the money being supplied by the appli-
cation of £15,000 of the half-year’s profits to the purpose.
In the following year a further issue of 2,000 new shares
at £25 each brought the capital up to £200,000. Before
the close of 1852 an amending Act (16 Vic.) was assented
to, repealing the sections limiting the amount of bank-
notes payable on demand and the amount of the liabili-
ties ; and providing that the total amount of bank-notes
issued and in circulation shall not at any time exceed the
coin, bullion, and public securities held by the bank,
and that the total amount of liabilities of the bank
shall not at any time exceed three times the amount
of coin, bullion, and public securities.” A further
Amending Act (18 Vic.) was passed in November,
x 85- repealing the limit imposed on the issue of bank-
notes and the amount of debts ; and providing that the
corporation have power to issue up to the extent of the
paid-up capital and its coin or bullion (assayed), further
making all notes issued payable at the head office, as
well as at the place of date, and limiting the liabilities
of the bank to three times the amount of the actual paid-
up stock of the corporation. In January, 185 p


First Bank on Present Site (Erected 1857), showing shop then occupying part of site.
As Enlarged in 1867, when Mr. Dibbs became General Manager.


Dr.
Capital paid up
• « • •
..
£ 600,000
0
0
Reserve fund
• • • •
•.
610,000
0
0
Profit and loss account
• • • •
109,017
3
8
/i,319,017
3
8
Notes in circulation ..
• • /523.971
0
0
Bills in circulation
8,427
17
10
Deposits and other liabilities
.. 6,594,261
3
8
7,126,660
1
6
Total
, #
5
2
December, 1848.
June, 1887.
Paid up capital
• .
£7 l ’7G5
/6oo,ooo
Reserve fund
. .
993
725,000
Notes in circulation ..
.. 25,601
401.323
Deposits
148,471
8,879,768
Bills payable
.. nil
397,286
Advances
.. 168,382
8.265.136
Bank premises
3,600
302,000
Amount of dividends paid lor halt-year 3.237
75,000
Rate of dividend
• •
10%
25 %
a branch of the Commercial Banking Company was
opened in Melbourne. This, however, remained open
a very short time, the directors, content in the know-
ledge that the Commercial was doing the leading banking
business in New South Wales, evidently believing in the
adage of leaving well alone. On the 2nd of May, 1853,
the Victorian branch was again withdrawn. Since that
time the Commercial Banking Company has opened
(in August, 1859) a branch office in London ; otherwise
its held of operations has been strictly confined to New
South Wales and Queensland. Mr. J. Taylor succeeded
Mr. Hutchinson as chief executive officer during 1852,
retaining this position until 1857, when Mr. Z. Ingold
became manager ; the latter, in turn retiring after
little more than a twelve months’ term of office, to be
followed by Mr. Robert Napier, Melbourne manager
of the London Chartered Bank of Australia. It was
about this time that the name of the present manager,
Mr. T. A. Dibbs, appeared in the reports as the accoun-
tant of the bank. The following peculiar passage
formed a part of the report presented to the shareholders
in January, 1858 ;—“ On the 18th November last the
directors united with the other banks in allowing interest
on fixed deposits and current accounts.” This new
departure, however, did not last long as far as current
accounts were concerned, for in July, 1858, it was an-
nounced “ that in conjunction with all the other banks,
the practice of allowing interest on current accounts
was discontinued on 21st March last.” In the report
dated July, 1859, th e shareholders were informed that
the bank was in a position to draw direct upon its Lon-
don office ; also that during the half-year branches had
been opened atAlbury, Wollongong and West Maitland,
which with those at Haymarket (Sydney), Goulburn,
Morpeth, Queanbeyan, Kiama and Shoalhaven com-
pleted the list of outside offices within the colony.
The first Queensland office was not established until
December, 1862 ; when there were fifteen branches in
New South Wales. The capital of the bank now
amounted to £320,000 ; the reserve fund represented
£68,000 ; and the dividend for the year was at the rate
of 15 per cent.
Upon the death of Mr. Napier, in March, 1867, Mr.
T. A. Dibbs was selected to succeed to the general
managership, and he has, therefore, held this responsible
position for more than forty years. The twenty-
fifth anniversary of the bank occurred in 1873. The
position of affairs at that time may be summarised as
follows :—Capital, £400,000 ; reserve, £l5O 000, divi-
dend (for 1872)17 percent, per annum ; branches, 38.
At the half-yearly meeting held in J une of that year the
chairman, Mr. R. Jones, reported that during that year
the business of the bank had doubled. ” This state of
things,’ ’ he added, ‘ ‘ was due probably in, some measure
to the few changes which had taken place in the manage-
ment. It would be gratifying to them to know that
there were two gentlemen still connected with the
bank who had been with it since its commencement :
he alluded to Mr. Knox, a director, and the general
manager, Mr. Dibbs.” From 1873 the progress of the
bank can only be described as phenomenal. In
January of that year the dividend increased from 15 ] er
cent, per annum and ss. per share bonus—a rate which
had been regularly kept up since 1864 —to T 5 P er cer d.
and 12s. fid. per share bonus. In 1874 it was further
increased to 20 per cent. In 1875 a 22 per cent, dividend
was paid, and in 1876 the maximum of 25 per cent, was
reached. Capital and reserves were mounting up more
and more, and in 1878 they almost equalled each other
in amount ; the capital standing at half a million ster-
ling, whilst the reserve funds were £475,000. Four
years later these liabilities stood at £600,000 and
£610,000 respectively. The dividend declared at the
meeting in January , 1883, was at the rate of 25 per cent. ;
£lO,OOO was added to a special reserve fund for the
equalisation of future dividends ; £10,987 was carried for-
ward to the next account, and a bonus of 10 per cent, was
granted on the salaries of the staff. The total liabilities,
in proportion to the capital and reserves, shown on the
balance-sheet at the end of that year, were as follows
This was in a measure a record year with the Com-
mercial Banking Co. of Sydney. The bank was then
doing the largest business in a single colony of any
bank in Australia, and its trade in New South Wales
represented £11,376,528, or £3,316,635 more than the
leading Victorian institution, the Bank of Victoria,
was doing in that colony. Its other trade was confined
to Queensland, where the figures stood at £1,021,854,
representing a total per balance-sheet of £12,398,382.
At the commencement of 1885 the bank, with certain
associated banks, divided the N. S. Wales Government
account, which was retained until 1893.
The end of the first half-year of 1887 terminated
the twelfth year of dividends at the rate of 25 per cent,
per annum ; and the following comparison between the
bank’s first and seventy-eighth half-yearly statement
should prove interesting :
Of the capital in, 1887 £40,000 represented profits
capitalised, and of the reserve fund £IOO,OOO was for
premium on one fresh issue of shares ; so that of the
combined capital and reserve funds (£1,325,000) capital
to the extent of £660,000 only was supplied by
the shareholders. In addition to £665,000 under
profits, the sum of £3,037,926 had been paid in
dividends, whilst during the previous twelve years
the shareholders had had their capital returned
to them three times over. The reserve fund had


The Bank in 1907-from the drawing of the Architects, Messrs Kent and Budden.


Liabilities.
Capital •• •• • • •• •• ••
. . 600,000
0
0
Reserve •• •• •• •• •• ••
.. 680,000
0
0
Reserve for equalisation of dividends
.. 150,000
0
0
Notes in circulation ..
477,808
0
0
Bills in circulation
566,588
*4
2
Deposits and other liabilities
.. 11,444,743
11
4
Profit and Loss Account
.. 105,902
8
10
/14,025,042
M
4
Assets.
Coin and bullion in hand and cash at bankers
.. £ 1,702,51 1
8
0
Government securities
. . 885,800
0
0
Notes and bills of other banks
. . 26,209
4
11
Bills discounted and all debts due to the bank
. . I 1,016,522
1
5
Bank premises, furniture, &c.
•• 394.000
0
0
4
been increased£36s,ooo, and shares in 1887, representing
by Stock Exchange quotations £456,000, had been
originally acquired by shareholders at a cost of £120,000
par value, equivalent to a bonus of £336,000. After
reading so marvellous a record one can understand
the £25 shares changing hands at £ll4, the then price
of the stock, equivalent to £2,736,000, as the market
value of the bank in 1887 as a going concern. No bank
in Australasia, before or since this period, has distributed
higher dividends than the Commercial Banking Co.,
confining itself to the two eastern colonies. The Com-
mercial Bank of Tasmania and the Western Australian
Bank have paid 20 per cent., each limiting operations
to the colony where its head office is. This exceptional
rate of 25 per cent, per annum was paid right up to the
year 1893, out of profits legitimately earned, and not
as a result of any of the juggling operations which
characterised so many of the boom companies. From
the establishment of the bank up to the end of 1892
the following dividends were declared
Years 1840 to 1852 . . 10% per annum.
„ 1853 tO 1856 (average) 175%
„ 1857 15%
„ 1858 to 1863 .. 151%
„ 1864 to 1872 . . 17%
„ 1872 to 1874 .. 20%
~ 1874 tO 1875 .. 22%
„ 1875 to 1892 .. 25%
The balance-sheet submitted to the shareholders for
December, 1892, was as follows :
With a position of strength such as this balance-sheet
indicates the bank found itself confronted by the crisis
of 1893. The directorate at this time was composed
of the following able members : —The Hon. E. Knox,
M.L.C., chairman ; Mr. G. J. Cohen, one of the most
experienced of Sydney’s financial magnates, vice-
chairman ; the Hon. H. E. Kater, M.L.C., the Hon. H.
Moses, M.L.C., and the Hon. R. Jones, M.L.C. The
trouble had its origin in the custom of getting high
rates of interest on capital in Australia. “In a young
and prosperous country like Australia,” wrote the late
Professor Fawcett more than forty years ago, ” the
current rate of interest is sure to be higher than in an
old, thickly-populated country like our own. In this
case the high rate of interest is not to be accounted for
by a want of security with regard to property. A
generally high rate of profit is sure to prevail when
there is a plentiful supply of fertile land.” The old
opportunities for extending profitable business in
Australia have long since been reduced by the fall in
the selling prices of produce, the high cost of labour,
and a diminished desire to take to agricultural life.
Other fields of investment have had to be sought.
For awhile the overflow of capital chose the easy,
stay-at-home path to profit offered by gambling in
mining stock, and thence to gambling in real property
was an easy descent. With the collapse of the land
boom, amidst times of abnormal depression, came the
spectacle of public feeling giving way to doubt, distrust
and unreasoning fear. The crisis passed through many
phases. The first stage was one of pure distrust of
certain institutions believed to be mixed up with land
and house property speculations. Down came the
Commercial Bank of Australia, followed by two other
banks, whose position was believed to be some-
what stronger than the first named. Kindred insti-
tutions commenced falling like leaves in autumn, and
there ensued a general period of distrust of all banks,
aggravated by a lack of united action, at once injudicious
and lamentable on the part of the concerns that were
really sound. During the second stage cash was persis-
tently withdrawn in Australia, and a well-founded loss of
confidence in the position of affairs induced notices of
withdrawal to be sent from England and Scotland. The
third stage was reached when the scarcity of cash, so
produced, began to cause a run upon the admittedly
sound banks remaining, for the purpose of obtaining
currency, without reference to the stability of the
establishments called upon to supply hard sovereigns
or notes. People were known to withdraw money,
previously left on deposit, in gold, putting the sovereigns
so withdrawn into strong boxes and leaving them again
under the charge of the very bank from which the cash
was withdrawn. When this stage was reached the
popular pendulum had swung from peace to panic,
and all discrimination had ceased. It was a case of
sauve qui pent. Within eight weeks no fewer than
fourteen banks collapsed, with liabilities close upon
eighty millions sterling, in the form of deposits alone—
an occurrence without parallel in the history of banking.
On April 20th the coin, bullion and Government securi-
ties in the Commercial Banking Co.’s possession
amounted to £3,000,000, or about ss. in the pound
in the total liabilities. Nevertheless a dead set was
made at the bank. When the run commenced the staff
of tellers was more than doubled. The panic, however,
increased until the 15th May, when a million of deposits
had been withdrawn- It appeared-as if nothing would
check the wild rush of men temporarily insane ; and in
the face of a pressure which might have caused the
strongest banking institution to totter, the board, in
order to do justice to all alike, rightly determined on
that evening to close the doors of the bank, and issue
a circular to its creditors asking time for the repayment
of deposits pending the receipt of fresh capital to be
called up from the shareholders. The extraordinary
part ol this episode in the bank’s history is that its real
solvency was never for the moment doubted, even by
the very people who withdrew their funds. It was the
sudden loss of nerve occasioned by the swing from one
extreme to another which created this insensate demand


Mr. G. J. Cohen, Chairman of Directors since the death of
Sir Edward Knox, in January, 1901.
for sovereigns, that were neither wanted for use nor
could be used. The cause of suspension was merely
the temporary shortness of gold at a particular centre.
The bank had ample supplies in London, and if it had
been possible to obtain them by cable the run would
have soon ceased. But the time element was fatal
and excited depositors could not discuss the position
reasonably. So the following notification was circu-
lated : ‘‘The directors of the Commercial Banking
Co. of Sydney have decided to close the doors of
the bank pending its reconstruction. This step has
been deemed necessary in your interests owing to the
withdrawals of deposits since the 21st ultimo, and
particularly during the last few days, which amounted
in all to above £1,000,000. Annexed you will find the
proposed scheme for reconstruction, from which you
will see that the depositors are not expected to take up
any preference or other shares. The bank is in an,
exceptionally strong position, and is amply able to
meet all its obligations in any reasonable course of
payment. It will be seen that the proposed new bank
will have a capital to be paid up of £1,000,000 ; the
uncalled capital will be £1,000,000, while it will
receive the benefit of the old bank’s reserve
funds and internal reserves exceeding £1,000,000.
At the time the panic set in the bank held in
gold £1,800,000, and the cash balances in London
and the Government bonds represented another
£1,200,000. The directors desire to point out
that the bank has a thoroughly sound business,
the successful management of which in the past
is partly evidenced by the sums which they have
been able to set apart as reserves, amounting
to over a million; that its valuable business
freehold premises throughout the colony stand
in the books at less than two-thirds of their
cost, whilst the banking-house in Sydney stands
at £23,000 only ; that the bank has invariably
refrained from accepting deposits in Great
Britain in excess of £600,000. Under these
circumstances the directors rely upon the pro-
posed scheme of reconstruction meeting with
your prompt approval, as it is evident that
liquidation under existing circumstances would
prove disastrous to every interest concerned,
and should by all means be avoided.” The
reconstruction scheme which proposed that a new
bank be incorporated as a limited company, with
a capital of £2,000,000 divided into 80,000 shares
of £25 each, was sanctioned by the Supreme
Court on 16th June, and two days later busi-
ness was resumed, ‘ ‘ Limited ” being now added
to the bank’s title. At the meeting of creditors
in London the same enthusiasm was displayed
that marked the meeting of shareholders and
creditors in Australia. Resolutions were passed
expressing sympathy with the directors at the
very trying period through which they had
passed, approving their conduct in the past, and
expressing confidence in their conduct and man-
agement in the future.
Within a fortnight from the date of opening
all the current accounts held by the old bank
were released, and at the next division of nrofits
for the period ending 31st December, 1893, the
directors were enabled to declare a dividend for
the half-year at the rate of 10 per cent, per annum.
Comparing that balance-sheet with the one of the
old bank submitted in the previous May, the board
pointed out that the new bank had not only been
materially strengthened by the addition of £191,701
to capital, but the liquid assets now amounted to
£3,270,000, an increase of £1,140,000 Of the called-up
capital of £400,000, a first instalment was due on the
Ist proximo ; a sum of £191,701 had already been
received. Deposits had increased to the extent of
£612,000, and business was daily increasing. The
policy of paying the extended deposits was made
known in June, 1894. In that half-year’s report, after
alluding to the difficulty of obtaining easily convertible
securities, the report stated that for want of these the
directors contemplated the payment of a portion of
the deposits due in 1898 and 1899. The report pre-
sented in January, 1895, says : “ We have during the
past six months released the whole of our deferred
deposits, reducing our indebtedness under this head


Half-year
ENDED
Liabilities.
Dec. 31, 1893.
June 30, 1905
Capital paid up ..
Reserve Fund
Notes
Bills
Deposits, &c.
Profit and Loss ..
•• /791.7 01
.. 1,000,000
393.293
238,364
.. 10,688,141
7L9°4
■£1,000,000
1,070,000
428,059
399.331
12,338,812
93,654
/13,203,403
/15,529,856
Assets.
Coin, bullion, Government securi-
ties, &c £3,270,693
Bills discounted, and all debts due to
the bank .. .. .. .. 9*535 3 22
Bank premises, &c. .. .. .. 397*388
£6,347,800
8.723.455
458,600
£13,203,403
£i5.5 2 9 856
by about £2,000,000 sterling.” In June, 1895, these
prepayments had been extended to £4,525 000; and on
the 24th January, 1896, the crowning achievement was
announced, when Mr. Knox was in the gratifying
position of being able to inform the shareholders that
in two-and-a-half years from the date of suspension the
whole of the deferred liabilities of the old bank had
been discharged. He went on to say : ‘‘lt now only
remains for me, in using for the last time the words
‘ deferred deposits’ to express the heartfelt thanks of
the shareholders to the thousands of customers and
friends of the bank to whose good feeling and unabated
confidence we owe the speedy and final removal of
every disability.” It has been justly said that as a feat
in banking pure and simple, this achievement is probably
without parallel. A large proportion of the increased
capital involved in the reconstruction scheme was paid
up before it became due, and the whole amount was in
hand in the early portion of 1896. The reserve fund
was also increased to a million sterling, and in the
accounts of the year just mentioned stood at £1,010,000.
But little more remains to be told, and that of a
highly satisfactory nature, indicating, as it does, that,
although the era of 25 per cent, dividends has passed,
and most probably will never return, the business of
the bank grows continuously ; and as year follows year,
under the excellent management the shareholders can,
fortunately, command, the position of this profitable
institution becomes more and more impregnable. Ad-
dressing the shareholders in January, 1899, upon the
balance-sheet to 31st December, 1898, then submitted,
Sir Edward Knox, M.L.C., said, “ Comparing the present
balance-sheet with that of the corresponding period of
1897, it is with much satisfaction that I call your atten-
tion in the first place to the increase in the volume of
business of exactly three-quarters of a million sterling ;
it stood on 31st December, 1897, at £12,765,000, as
against £13,515,000 at the present time. Going into
detail, the amounts show an increase in every item ;
the note circulation amounts to £443,000, which is equal
to between 36 and 37 per cent, of the entire circulation
of the colony, and is £27,000 in excess of the amount
shown on the 31st December, 1897. As this item
depends entirely upon business demands, it is a sure
indication of the active nature of our business ; and the
same may be said of the next item, bills in circulation,
now £752,000, or an increase of £174,000 on the previous
year." The deposits during the same period show an
increase of £548,000. On the credit side of the balance-
sheet the coin has increased by £274,000, and a further
sum of £272,000 has been invested in Government
securities. The total liquid assets have been augmented
by £732,000, and now amount to £4,510,000.” The
following comparison is between the first half-year’s
report of the reconstructed bank and the report for
the period ended 30th June, 1905 :
Throughout the past the history of the bank has
always been associated with men of prominence, who
have successfully identified themselves with the progress
of the colony. Amongst those who have controlled the
destinies of the institution are to be found the names of
Wm. Macpherson, John Lamb, Robert Johnston, Thos.
Barker, Thos. Marsden, J. H. Grose, R. Therry, J. H.
Challis, J. B. Darvall, Sir H. W. Parker, R. Porter,
}. Thacker, Geo. Miller, G. King, S. A. Donaldson,
G. W. Lord, John Brewster, B. W. Levy, R. Jones,
A. Lamb, F. H. Dangar, John Frazer, H. E. Kater,
Sir E. Knox, Henry Moses, and G. J. Cohen. Typical
amongst these was Mr. R. Jones, who presided over the
board for nearly a quarter of a century—longer, in fact,
than any other chairman. .Mr. Jones arrived in the
colony in 1838 and followed his trade as a compositor
until 1842. When elected to the first Legislative
Assembly he had retired from business, a comparatively
wealthy man. In 1857 he accepted a portfolio in the
Cowper Ministry as Colonial Treasurer, but it was not
long before ill-health drove him from the field of politics.
He then confined his attention to the various companies
he was interested in, becoming a director of the Com-
mercial Banking Company in iB6O, and continuing to
hold that office uninterruptedly until his death in 1892.
Mr. G. J. Cohen now ably presides at the board, his
co-directors being Hon. H. E. Kater, M.L.C.; Hon.
H. Moses, M.L.C. ; Hon. R. Jones, M.L.C., and Hon.
F. T- Humphery, M.L.C.
Regarding the administrative arrangements of the
bank it has been said before and may be repeated here
that the long connections with the bank of such men as
the late Mr. Jones, Sir E. Knox, and the present general
manager, Mr. T. A. Dibbs—who is a brother of the late
Sir George Dibbs, K.C.M.G., ex-Premier of the colony
—has been as good a guarantee for sound progressive
management as any body of shareholders could desire ;
and as a consequence of this the Commercial Banking
Co. of Sydney stands to-day, as regards its in-
ternal organisation, pre-eminent for the esprit de corps
which exists amongst its officers, whilst the confidence
of the public in its soundness and stability is evidenced
by the fact that the shares command in the open market
a higher proportional premium than the stock of any
other bank doing business in Australasia. Mr. Dibbs
has held his present position since 1867, and has long
been a man of mark in the city. A native of Sydney,
he was only 35 years of age when entrusted with his
onerous charge. He entered the bank as a junior, and
rapidly rose through the various grades of the service
until, upon the death of Mr. Napier, he became the
chief executive officer. Few men have retained such
a responsible trust so long ; fewer bank managers have
discharged that trust more profitably. Under the


31st Dec., 1866.
30th June, 1907
Capital
• • • • • «
. .
£ 1,213,566
Reserve
•. .. ..
.. 104,000
I > I 7 2 »7 I 3
Notes
• •
196,592
558,328
Bills
..
3,664
B047.073
Deposits, &c.
• • ..
1,629,123
14,851,561
Profit and loss account
59,827
105,030
Totals
• •
/is,948,291
Coin and bullion
£314-903
£3,454.689
Cash at bankers ..
—
117,308
Money at short call in London
—
897,400
Government securities ..
—
2,094,550
Other bank notes, &c. ..
14,128
125,894
Bills receivable in London, &c.
—
x. 915.256
Bills disctd. and all debts due to bank
2,025,505
9,875,819
Bank premises, &c.
38,670
467.375
Totals
£2.393.206
£18,948,291
direction of Mr. Dibbs the bank rapid!v
acquired the reputation for exceptional and
safe progressiveness which has characterised
it so long. Those best acquainted with him
agree that he is one of those men favoured
with the happy knack of always doing the
right thing at the right time. The emergence
of the bank from its ordeal in the crisis of
1893, stronger than ever, is a proof of this,
and a convincing reply to those critics
who, in connection with its suspension, con-
sidered Mr. Dibbs precipitate in advising
his board to reconstruct. The secret of
Mr. Dibbs 5 success as a manager is said to
lie in his firm belief in the great destiny
which awaits Australia, and his clear iuda-
>> o
merit and decision in action, combined
with that quick perception which is so
necessary in estimating character. Through-
out Mr. Dibbs 5 principal care has always
been the interests of the institution he
represents with such noted success. His
prominent position in financial circles has
led him, it is understood, to be the adviser
of various Cabinets on weighty matters of
monetary concern ; and some years ago he
was a leading member upon a Civil Service
commission. He is the originator of the
daily settlement and exchange svstern now
prevailing among the banks in Sydney—a
system believed to embrace all the advan-
tages of the Melbourne Clearing-house,
without its defects, and it is needless to
add that Mr. Dibbs’ opinion on banking is
regarded with the greatest respect by his
confreres and financial men generally.
Mr. Dibbs is ably seconded by an admir-
able staff.
Prominent among the higher officials
are Mr. T. B. Gaden, assistant manager and
chief inspector ; Mr. A. J. Soutar, chief
accountant ; Messrs. W. C. B. Tiley, H. H.
Massie, and W. H. Pinhey, inspectors ;
Mr. J. Clayton, branch accountant ; and Mr. M. S.
Grant, secretary.
The important office in London is under the
management of Mr. F. A. Scrivener, and the directors
there are Messrs. F. H. Dangar, B. W, Levy, and the
Hon. H. S. Littleton.
The colonial branches of the bank number 161,
of which 138 are in New South Wales and 23 in
Queensland.
From the date of its incorporation in 1848 the ban k
has paid to its shareholders in dividends the sum of
£5,045,819, of which £4,341,830 has been divided dur-
ing the 40 years of Mr. Dibbs’ management.
The marvellous expansion which has taken place
during that period may be seen by comparing the
following figures, taken from the 37th and the 118th
published balance-sheets :
The Veteran Banker, Mr, T. A. Dibbs, in his forty-first
Year of Office as General Manager.


At extraordinary general meetings in April and
May, 1907. tlie shareholders adopted proposals bv the
board ot directors for the increase of the bank’s paid-up
capital of £1,000,000 to £1,250,000, by the issue
of new shares. The premium on these goes to aug-
ment the reserve fund, and as a result of the operation
the security to the public is increased by £550.000.
"With the interesting comparisons and record of
progress during the 40 years of Mr Dibbs’ general
managership contained in the chairman’s speech at
the half-yearly meeting of shareholders on 19th duly,
1907, this sketch may fittingly conclude. Mr. G. J.
Cohen said : ‘ 4 When I had the pleasure of present-
ing our last half-yearly balance-sheet to you I was able
to report a very substantial expansion of the bank’s
business, and it will be gratifying to you that the state-
ment now placed before you shows still further im-
provement. As compared with those of twelve months
ago. our figures show a very satisfactory increase.
The total figures have expanded £1,434,000 —made up
on the debit side by increases under the following-
headings : —Capital, £213,565 ; reserve fund, £92,713 :
notes in circulation, £66,000 ; deposits and other lia-
bilities, £1,280,000 ; profit and loss account, £10,560 :
while there has been a shrinkage of £208,745 in bills
in circulation, but this is always a fluctuating item.
On the other side there has been a decrease of
£1,019,000 in money at short call in London, which
is more than compensated for by increases in coin and
cash at bankers of £566,000, Government securities
£465,000, and sundry other items amounting to
£284,000, which, summed up, give an increase in our
liquid assets of £297,000. The proportion of liquid
assets to our total liabilities to the public is well main-
tained at 10s. sd. in the £. There has been also the
very satisfactory increase of £1,130.000 in our lendings
under the heading of bills discounted and all debts due
to the bank. The reserve fund now stands at
£1,120,000. As I stated to you at the extraordinary
general meeting of shareholders held on the 19th of
April last 4 the directors considered that the time had
arrived when they were warranted to still further
increase the strength of the bank, because of the large
business we are now doing, and the great confidence
reposed in us by the public generally.’ The proposal
made then to the shareholders and confirmed at the
subsequent meeting of 10th May last provided that,
by issue of new shares, further capital to extent of
£250,000 should be called up in four equal quarterly
instalments beginning 29th June last, at the same
time giving shareholders the option of paying up in
full on that date, with participation in profits from
Ist July. lam now in a position to inform you that
the shareholders so largely availed themselves of this
option that actually over 85 per cent, of the whole
£250,000 was paid up on 29th ultimo, with a similar
proportion of the addition to reserves derived from
the premium of the new shares. On the 7th inst. our
general manager, Mr. T. A. Dibbs, completed his dia-
mond jubilee of 60 years’ service in the bank, having
been appointed a junior clerk in July, 1847. On the
20th March last he attained his 40th year as general
manager. In these circumstances I propose on this
occasion to give you some particulars of the past his-
tory' of the bank and its great progress during this
period. (1) The shareholders who, in 1848, when the
bank was incorporated during Sir Edward Knox’s
management, numbered 160, have all passed away.
The only surviving officer of that date is your general
manager. (2) The directors, who appointed Mi'. Dibbs
general manager in 1867, are all deceased. (3) Of the
625 officers now in the bank, no less than 606 were
appointed by the various boards of directors on Mr,
Dibbs’ recommendation. Only 20 members of the
staff including himself now remain of those in the
bank when he took charge in 1867. (4) The total
amounts of dividends paid to the shareholders during
the management of Mr. Dibbs is £4.391,830 2s. Bd. :
the total amount paid previous to this being only
£703,989 14s. Bd., making a total of £5,095,819 17s.
4d. paid since the incorporation of the bank —and dur-
ing the same period the directors have not been un-
mindful of the staff, bonuses having been paid to them
approaching £200,000. (Applause.) (5) The average
rate of dividend paid by the bank for the 40 years
under Mr. Dibbs’ administration is upwards of 17 per
cent. (6) The reserve funds in 1867 amounted to
£117,818 Is. Id.; they are now £1,240,373 Is. Bd.,
showing that the large sum of £1,122,555 os. 7d. has
been added to the reserves during his 40 years’ man-
agement. I should like to emphasise the fact that
during this long period the average annual addition to
the reserves amounted to £28,000. To have done this,
and so to have built up the strength of the bank to its
present position, are evidences of careful and prudent
management, and must be highly satisfactory to the
shareholders. (7) It is worthy of notice that the totals
of the balance-sheet in 1867 were £2,393,000 ; in the
detailed accounts now presented to you, you will ob-
serve they are £18,948,000, showing the .large increase
of £16,555,000. (8) The number of branches in March,
1867, was 37, whilst, including the branch in London,
we have now 162, showing an increase of 125 ; most of
the early branches were opened personally by Mr.
Dibbs in the pioneering days, when the facility for
travelling on railways with the luxury of sleeping cars
was unknown, (9) The coin and cash balances, includ-
ing British consols, Government debentures, &c., are
now £8,605,000 : in 1867 the total was £329,000 — ex-
hibiting the substantial increase of £8,276,000. I have
now to move the adoption of the report and the state-
ments of account, and that the same be printed and
circulated among the shareholders, and in doing so I
can state that this balance-sheet is the strongest, with
the largest totals, of any I have had the pleasure of
presenting to you, and 1 congratulate the shareholders
on the position of the bank, which has shared in the
general prosperity of the State.” (Applause.)
S PE CIA L R E SOLUTI C) X.
Mr. E. W. Knox moved the following resolution ;
44 That the directors be requested to procure a portrait
of Mr. T. A. Dibbs to be hung in the banking-room as
a remembrance of his long and successful term of office
as general manager, and that a service of plate be pre-
sented to Mr. Dibbs in commemoration of the com-
pletion of the sixtieth year of his employment by the


bank. (Applause.) Mr. Knox said : — 44 In propos-
ing this resolution which I have just read, I would first
say that I submit this not as one who has on several
occasions served on the board, not as a shareholder
and customer of nearly forty years’ standing, but as
the son of the man who appointed Mr. Dibbs as a junior
officer, and who for more than half a centurv was him-
self intimately connected with the development of the
business which is the pride of al! of us. As Mr. Dibbs
entered the bank three months after I was born —two
or three hundred yards from here —I cannot claim to
have known him during the whole term of his service,
but ] was not very old when I began to hear my father
speaking of his ability and his interest in the work,
and 1 know that he never afterwards ceased to hold
the highest opinion of your general manager or to
recognise the great services he had rendered to the
bank. Now it is proposed that his portrait shall be
placed alongside those of the other two men who
worked so long for you in building up the Commercial
Bank —Richard Jones and Edward Knox —as a token
of our appreciation of the single-minded service and
the unceasing work which has earned for him the
esteem and the gratitude of the shareholders. I feel
sure that there will be no voice of dissent in regard to
such a proposal nor to the presentation to Mr. Dibbs
of a memento of what is almost a unique record of
work in one employ seeing that for forty years of it he
has had to bear the great strain of the administration
of a business such as this.” (Applause.)
The Honourable H. C. Dangar : — 66 I have the
greatest pleasure in seconding the resolution so ably
and clearly put before you by my friend. Mr. Knox.
It seems to be hardly necessary to put this to the meet-
ing, as I feel sure it will meet with your entire approval.
When I listen to the wonderful history of the bank’s
progress and success during Mr. Dibbs’ management,
I feel that, in the ordinary language of the day, a
4 record ’ has been established. I support this reso-
lution for a double reason. It is proposed that we
present ourselves with Mr. Dibbs’ portrait, to be
hung with the existing portraits of the late Mr. Richard
Jones and the late Sir Edward Knox, and further that
Mr. Dibbs be asked to receive a memento of his dis-
tinguished services. I trust tha the portrait will not
onlv be a record of his career, but will serve to remind
the younger officers of the bank to 4 go and do like-
' „ ? 5 ?
wise.
Mr. Josiah Mullens : ” It gives me great satisfac-
tion on this occasion to support the resolution which
has been submitted by Mr. Knox and seconded by
Mr. Dangar. My career runs very much alongside
that of Mr. Dibbs, only that I have gone out of mine
and he is still at work. lam sure that there has been
no more faithful service in the world than that of
Mr. Bibbs'.”
The chairman, Mr. G. J. Cohen, said that he had
much pleasure in submitting the resolution, and that
in doing so he heartily endorsed all that had been
uttered by the previous speakers. He had been on the
board of management of the bank for the last twenty-
three years, and during all that time he had marked
the keen attention of the general manager to detail
and the work of the bank, and that he found him
to-day just as strong and alert as ever.
The resolution was carried with acclamation.
Mr. Dibbs, who was received with long and sus-
tained applause, said : —“ Mr. Chairman and Gentle-
men, — This resolution, so eloquently proposed by Mr.
Knox and seconded by Mr. Dangar, has taken me com-
pletely by surprise. Our worthy chairman has told
you of the success of the bank during the past forty
years. Of course I feel proud of the bank, but I feel
prouder of my officers. I need not comment on what
the chairman has said. Facts speak for themselves.
Of course it will please my wife and family and my
friends to have this acknowledgment you are now
giving me —nothing could please me better than to have
my portrait hung side by side with the portraits of the
two men with whom I have worked so long and to
whom I owe so much —the late Sir Edward Knox and
the late Richard Jones. I can never forget Mr. Knox
who was my first master, and it was through him that
lam standing here to-day. I treasure the remarks of
my old friends, Mr. Knox and Mr. Dangar and Mr.
Mullens (one of our oldest shareholders), who spoke in
such complimentary terms. Without the support of
the present able and wise board of directors and their
predecessors, and the loyal assistance of a zealous and
efficient staff, the business of the bank would not be
what it is to-day —and I fully recognise this fact, and
regard it as a pleasure to work under these circum-
stances. I feel that I cannot say more than that I
sincerely thank you for the kind manner in which you
have received me this day.” (Hearty applause.)


Statements of Receipts and Disbursements of the
Bank
of Australasia from November, 1832, to
3 ist March,
183
5-
Received on account of instalment on shares
• • 15.439
0
0
Received for interest on capital invested
in
exchange bills
1,386
12 TO
Received on instalment
35
I I
6
Received for office fees cn the transfer of shares 101
l8
0
/i 963
O
4
Disbursed
For law charges .. .. .. 2
9
,, advances to colonial officers on
account of salaries and outfit .. 450 0
0
,, expenses of home establishment
including salaries and all other
■charges .. .. .. .. 1,152 15
7
Total disbursements .. /2,04b 1
4
In hand on 31st March, 1833—
In exchequer bills .. / io 5>575 4
10
Cash in banker’s hands .. 9.341 19
2
— /i 16,963
2
4
THE BANK OF AUSTRALASIA.
The first general meeting of proprietors of the
Bank of Australasia was held in London on Ist June,
1835, and some months later the first balance-sheet
was published by Sydney board :
Messrs. William Hayward, A.C.C. ; Robert Campbell,
Juu. ; Wm. Dawes and J. Barrow Montefiore were the
first Sydney board of directors. Branches were opened
in Hobart and Launceston simultaneously on Ist
January, 1836.
A branch of the bank was opened in Melbourne on
28th August. 1838. and five months later business was
commenced at Adelaide. The Melbourne branch was
under the management of the late Mr. D. C. Macarthur.
The Governor gave free passes per the revenue cutter,
44 Ranger 55 for the transit to its destination of the
embryo bank and its belongings. Imagine a voyage
of six weeks from Port Jackson to Hobson’s Bay.
Mr. Macarthur’s suite consisted of an old clerk, named
Dunbar, and two fierce-looking bull-dogs, the bank’s
guardians, with a stock-in-trade of £3,500. The party
arrived safely at Hobson’s Bay, in July, 1838. Only
one boat, belonging to the Custom House, was on the
Yarra, and this had to be borrowed to go ashore. The
44 Ranger’s ” boat went up the Yarra, and Mr. Mac-
arthur helped to fasten the boat by warps to trees on
the Yarra bank. Only one vessel was lying at anchor in
Hobson’s Bay, and this sailed a few days afterwards,
leaving the bay absolutely empty. Three brick build-
ings were all Melbourne possessed, and another brick
cottage was being put up between Little Collins and
Bourke Streets. This Mr. Macarthur rented for £2OO
a year, and converted it into a bank, the first of its
kind in Victoria. A removal was effected two-and-a-
half years after to an edifice specially put up for the
bank in Collins Street, on an allotment next to which
the present bank stands.
The advent of, what was then termed, a foreign
bank to participate in the profits of colonial banking
created a considerable amount of feeling in certain
quarters which it would require some little imagination
to term friendly. Before the bank had settled down
to business the Sydney Gazette came out with a de-
cidedly hostile leader, in which the following appeared :
44 The new banking company, the mighty Bank of
Australasia, the great Goliath, having at last fairly
commenced operations, leaves us now at full leisure to
speculate on the event. What effect has it had on the
existing banks ? What will it have upon the public \
Here we may say the effect has amounted to a mere
nothing as yet, but it will most likely be a mixture of
both good and evil. In our opinion Goliath’s power
has been rated far too high. Here he has already
settled down into a quiet money-making Hunks, dis-
counting decent bills, and condescending to allow cent,
per cent, upon ceitain deposits deposited for a certain
time ; with cash credit of a certain rate, to certain poor
people. Still, however, with all his inoffensive ways
we do not altogether like Goliath. What guarantee
have the public that a tenth of a tithe of his talked-of
capital has yet reached, or will ever reach, the colonies ?
What security that the exclusive privileges of a Royal
Charter may never be turned to the exclusive prejudice
of the colonies hereafter ? Goliath is not exclusively
in the hands of resident colonists ; but, to all intents
and purposes, in the grasp of non-resident English
money-lenders. These, with objection yet to be taken,
are too obvious to be overlooked. We, therefore,
doubt Goliath, and shall not fail to keep a sharp watch
upon all his movements.” Mr. Kinnear at once re-
paired a little oversight by distributing his advertise-
ments.
The second annual report, published in June,
1836, stated: 4 4 Considerably more than the shares
reserved to Sydney have been applied for, and those
in Sydney allotted. The preliminary expenses for
London amounted to £3,719 2s. 2d., and for the
branches at Sydney, Hobart, and Launceston,
£1,543 4s. Bd., making a total of £5,292 6s. IGd. :
which the directors propose to extinguish bv
annual payments from January Ist, 1836, being the
day up to which the expenses are calculated, and on
which business will have commenced in the colonies.”
At the third annual meeting the court of directors
declared a 4 per cent, dividend for the half-year ended
30th June, 1837. The previous May the capital had
been increased to £400,000, the whole of the new
stock being made payable before December Ist, 1838.
Hitherto shares were not allowed to be transferred
from place to place, but at the beginning of 1838 this
restriction was removed. Soon afterwards the com-
pany’s stock commanded a market value of £l3 pre-
mium in Sydney, and about £2O premium in London.
At a meeting in June, 1838, another 4 per cent, divi-
dend for the half-year was declared. Before the
end of 1838 the first branch in this colonv had been
opened at Bathurst. Mr. Kinnear resigned, and his
place was filled by Mr. Chas. Kinnear, the accountant
of the bank in Sydney. The latter’s assumption of
office was signalised bv an intimation affecting that
' *■ o


Liabilities.
Notes in circulation
£ j 3,54 2 17
7
£48,529
18
5
Deposits..
67,500 16
9
339,162
4
1
£81,043 14
4
• • £387.692
2
6
Assets.
Securities
2
2
..
17
5
Coin and bullion
50,024 19
7
9L3 I 5
18
3
1
9
• • £795,785
15
8
Assets.
Government stock
specie and cash ..
£619.519
5
0
Bank premises
.. • * .. ..
.. 28,910
12
7
Bills receivable and other securities ..
283,532
12
7
£1.931.962
10
2
Liabilities.
Capital
• • •• •• ••
.. /qoo,ooo
0
0
Circulation ..
• • •• •• ••
119,650
0
0
Bills payable and
other liabilities
279,632
9
11
Deposits
• • •• •• ••
596,424
3
5
Profit and loss
• • •• •• ••
36,255
16
10
931,962
10
<0
long vexed question—interest on current accounts.
For the future interest would only be allowed on fixed
deposits, the rate for these, viz., 5 per cent., remaining
as before. About the middle of 1839 Mr. G. R. Griffith,
founder of the present well-known family of that
name in Sydney, arrived from London to take control
as inspector of colonial branches. His term of office
lasted little more than two years ; being succeeded in
1:842 by Mr. W. H. Hart (his descendants being the
Hart family now of Brisbane, one son being a
member of ti e firm of Hart and Flowers, solicitors),
who was styled “ superintendent of colonial estab-
lishments ”—a title (though later on reduced to superin-
tendent) identified since then with the chief executive
officer in Australasia. In the sixth annual report
(June, 1840) the opening of the Adelaide branch was
recorded, and it added “a branch was about to be opened
at Maitland.” The inspector recommended opening
soon a branch at Parramatta. The Melbourne branch
was paying well, and the Bathurst branch was also
satisfactory. A branch at Swan River (W.A.) was
contemplated, and an amalgamation with the existing
bank there. The capital had been increased to £600,000
by the creation of 5,000 new shares at £4O each ; and a
dividend was declared at the rate of 8 pm cent, per
annum. In addressing the proprietors the chairman
stated that in the first year their profits were £21,960 ;
in the second year, £29,500 ; and in the year under
review £24,300. The following statistics indicate the
progress of the bank with more clearness :
The expansion of business had brought with it a corre'
spending increase in the local board, the members of
which now were :—Major G. Barney, R. E., J. Bowman,
T. C. Breillat, W. Dawes and A. B. Smith.
But the bank was to have a chequered career before
arriving at its present high position- In 1844 its paid-
up capital was £900,000, and up to that time the share-
holders had received good dividends. A disappointing
interval now occurred, as will be seen from the history
of distributions. A dividend of per cent, appears
to have been paid in April, 1846 ; but at the meeting
held on the 22nd June of that year it was announced
that dividends would be suspended for the present,
the losses—including heavy costs in the action against
the local Bank of Australia, for recovering £lBO,OOO,
lent to that institution. In 1847 there were
more losses, and disagreement arose between Mr.
Hart, the colonial inspector, and Mr. Atherton, a
director ; the result being the removal of the former.
In 1845 the dividend was \\ per cent, for the year ; in
1846,11 per cent ; in 1847-8, nil; in 1849, per cent;
in 1850, 3 per cent. ; in 1851, 4 per cent. ; and in 1852,
5J per cent. The report presented to the shareholders
in June, 1851, went very fully into the bank’s position,
indicating—as indeed turned out to be the case—that
the turning-point had been reached and future prosperity
was assured. It stated ;—“ The statement of accounts
now submitted shows that the result of the business of
the corporation during the year ending 14th October,
1850, has fully borne out the assurance which the
directors gave at the last annual meeting that the cur-
rent business of the bank was of a heal thy, profitable and
improving character. The bad debts of the year have
been unimportant and all are provided for ; the profits
have greatly increased ; and considerable progress has
at length been made in the realisation of the securities
held against the old dependencies. (2) It will be in the
recollection of the shareholders that both in the last
report and in the statement laid before the meeting in
December it was mentioned that further considerable
losses would be developed by the realisation of securi-
ties, but so much disappointment has followed the most
careful estimate the directors have been able to make,
that for the future they will offer no valuation, but write
off all loss as it is ascertained, and appropriate the
surplus yearly profit after paying dividends to this
object. The following estimate has been made in con-
formity with that principle. The greater part of the
securities have been realised, and the directors have
now the satisfaction of assuring the shareholders that
any further losses which can reasonably be expected to
arise from the sale of those which remain will be more
than covered by the balance at credit of profit and loss
account. (3) Notwithstanding these losses the direc-
tors are gratified to find they were fully justified in
paying the increased dividend in April last. And,
although the current business of the bank leads them
to hope that ere long a further increase may be made,
the rate of 4 per cent, will be continued for the
present, under the strengthened conviction that it will
not be prudent to increase it until all the old depen-
dencies are completely settled. Little doubt is enter-
tained that this will be accomplished this year, and that
the entire profit of the bank may then be devoted to
more remunerative dividends, and to the establishment
and augmentation of such a reserve fund as will secure
them permanency under all reasonable contingencies
The assets and liabilities at 15th October, 1850, stood
as follows :
The condition of the colonies, with the single ex-
ception of Van Diemen’s Land, has continued steadily
to improve in respect to commercial and monetary
affairs. The production of the great staple industries has
been unprecedentedly large, and the state of the home
markets has been such as to afford due encouragement
to the settlers ; while prices have ruled so high as to


Notes in
Deposits.
Paid-up
Net
Rate ot
Circulation.
Capital
Profit.
Dividend.
i8 5 i
• • £149.059 ••
£707,566 ..
{goo, 000 ..
£70,071
.. 4 pc.
1852
• • 659 646 ..
2,208,800 ..
900,000 ..
193,282
.. 7 p.c.
1853
112,853 ..
4»°77» I 53 ••
900,000 ..
250,783
.. 15 P- c -
cause apprehension that a spirit of speculation will be
engendered. The prosperity of Van Diemen’s Land
wears a less favourable aspect, which may be attributed
principally to the unsettled state of the convict question ;
but as soon as this important point is settled, there is
no doubt that the colony with its great natural advan-
tages will partake of the progress common to the whole
continent.
The gold discoveries of 1852 had the following
remarkable effect on the figures of the bank
The dividend in 1854 was at the rate of per cent,
per annum and for the next five years a distribution
of 20 per cent, per annum went into the proprietors’
pockets. In July, 1850, Mr. J. J. Falconer, who had so
long and so ably conducted the management of the
bank in Sydney took a holiday to Europe, returning as
superintendent in 1852. Mr. J. Henderson, the accoun-
tant of the Sydney office, acted as manager during Mr.
Falconer’s absence, and, upon the latter’s return, was
confirmed in his appointment. Operations had been
extended to Queensland some time before this, and
branches opened at Brisbane and Ipswich. In 1853
the local directorate was reduced to three members,
viz., Messrs. W. C. Bott, John Brown and John
Thacker. But, apparently, this alteration was in the
nature of an experiment, and did not find favour with
the court in London, for in 1855 the board was at its
full strength again, represented now by Messrs. W. C.
Bott, Jacob L. Montefiore, Severin K. Salting, W.
Brown, and A. C. Daniell.
Like some stately ship the bank held on its course
of progress, steadily expanding under the influences of
fair winds, and but little affected by the buffets of
adverse gales. In a useful little book entitled the
“ Banking Institutes of Australasia,” published by Mr.
R. L. Nash in the early nineties, the author reviews the
first half century of the Bank of Australasia’s accounts
and points out that the net profit of seven millions sterling
has been made, upon an average capital of one million
sterling ; the average net profits over the entire period
being at the rate of 13 per cent, per annum. Deposits
grew from nil for the first six years to thirteen millions
sterling, of which ten millions sterling represented money
in Australia. The report of the bank in 1872 alludes
to the redundancy of money during the period under
review, and mentions that to find employment for all the
surplus capital, considerable amounts had to be remitted
to England from Australia. Another of the reports at
a later stage, dealing with a period when the colonies
were emerging from one of the periodical overflows,
illustrates a peculiar feat in colonial banking. The
directors state that the advance in the rates of interest
in the Australian colonies had resulted from the in-
creasing legitimate demands for banking accommo-
dation, and they were looking forward to the employ-
ment in the colonies of all the resources of the bank at
an early date. At the meeting to which this report was
presented the chairman (Sir J. B. Darvall), in answer
to a question from a shareholder, said that all the
money borrowed by the bank on deposit had been paid
off, presumably referring to money taken up on fixed
deposit in England, and which the bank had just been
able to get rid of when a fresh demand for accommo-
dation sprang up in the colonies, and money from
England was finding its way there.
The year 1882 witnessed another ” boom ” in
Australian banking, causing large demands for accom-
modation, and an extraordinary general meeting of
the proprietors was held in January to consider a
resolution to increase the capital of the bank by £400,000
by the issue of 10,000 new shares at £4O each. Mr. M. R.
Smith presided, and stated that the directors were
unanimous in recommending the proposed increase.
The shareholders were united in their support of the
proposition, and the paid-up capital has remained
at £1,600,000 ever since. This year the total assets of
the company amounted to £1,680,675, having more
than doubled since 1862, when they represented
£838,844. The total business the bank was now doing
in Australasia aggregated £12,869,080 divided amongst
the colonies as follows : —Victoria, £5,795,176 ; New
South Wales, £2,624,341 ; New Zealand, £1,478,165 ;
South Australia, £1,393,877 ; Queensland, £944,658
and Tasmania, £632,653. On the 16th October its
accounts showed the following figures :—Capital,
£1,200,000 ; reserves and undivided profits, £479,000 ;
liabilities to the public, £9,252,000 ; total, £10,931,000
—placing it fourth on the list of Australasian banks.
At the annual meeting the chairman intimated that
upwards of £9,000 had been set aside for the purpose of
giving gratuities to all the officers of the bank for their
successful services during the past year. Meanwhile
since the appointment of Mr. J. J. Falconer as super-
intendent there had been a number of administrative
changes. In 1857 Mr. D. C. Macarthur, the veteran
manager of the Melbourne branch, was appointed
assistant superintendent, a position which he held for
ten years, when he succeeded Mr. Falconer as chief
executive officer. The same year (1867) Mr. E. S.
Parkes received the appointment of general inspector
of branches, and upon the retirement of Mr. Macarthur,
in 1876, he was placed in supreme control; holding this
responsible post until nth May, 1888, when he met an
untimely death, through a railway accident, whilst
returning home after his day’s work. ‘‘lt is due to
Mr. Parkes,” writes Mr. Thos. Walker, himself a
financier of no mean repute, ‘ ‘ to say that he was a man
of exceptional financial ability and that he was a
highly esteemed honorary contributor to the editorial
and other columns of the Australasian Insurance and
Banking Record, a journal that is admittedly an
excellent exponent of Australasian finance. The death
of Mr. Parkes suggested to the Record, as a testi-
mony to his banking ability, a comparison of the bank’s
balance-sheets at the time of his death. As the figures
are an interesting commentary on the bank’s progress
a few are appended, viz. :
14th Oct., 1867. 16111 Oct., 1886.
Paid-up Capital .. .. £1,200,000 .. £1,600,000
Guarantee or reserve fund .. .. 210,247 .. 800,000
Notes in circulation .. .. .. 281,155 .. 466.680
Deposits .. .. .. .. 2,781,419 .. 11,778,583
Bills payable .. .. .. 839,694 .. 1,764,286
Bills receivable and other advances 3,767,100 .. 12,875,793
Net profit for the year .. 120,283 •• 260,616


Net Profit
Aug.,
1905.
£132,276
Feb.,
3906.
£133,154
Aug.,
1906.
£201,400
Dividends, Amount
75.000
75,000
105,000
,, Percent
11
10
10 and
Reserve ..
15,000
15,000
2% bonus
35.000
Bank Premises ..
10,000
10.000
10,000
Officers’ Guarantee Fund
4.000
4 000
20,000
The reserve fund now stands at £1,
120,000.
I'he managership in Sydney in 1874 was held by
Mr. E. W. Morrah, in the following year by Mr. Thos.
Ingram, and in 1878 by Mr. E. Hughes, who dis-
charged the office until 1887, when his successor, Mr.
Ames Hellicar, was appointed.
In common with three other financial institutions,
mentioned under their respective headings, the Bank of
Australasia kept its doors open during the financial
debacle of 1893 —a period of panic described by the
chairman of the board (Sir Thomas Sutherland,
K.C.M.G.) at the meeting of shareholders on sth October,
1893, ‘ ‘ as far more serious and far more severe than the
crisis of 1866-7, when 50 many eastern banks were swept
away ‘ like chaff before the wind.’ ” He repeated,
‘ ‘ that crisis in Australia had had no parallel in his
time. . . . The height of the storm, if he might
so describe it, occurred in the middle of the month of
May, and as one bank after another closed its doors the
alarm of the depositors grew to a panic, and it seemed
at one time that it was utterly impossible that any
bank should be able to stand the pressure upon its
strength. He was proud to be able to say on behalf
of the proprietors that there was never at any moment
anything approaching a run on the Bank of Australasia.
They had, of course, a considerable amount of gold
withdrawn from their coffers at that moment when
there were only three of the leading banks left in the
colony with their doors open, and the feeling of terror
and distrust was so great that, as he was credibly in-
formed, and as he believed to be the case, people took
their gold and buried it in their gardens rather than
trust it in any bank or in securities of any description.
At that time the board considered it would be a sound
policy to ship gold to Australia. He was glad to say
that the credit of the bank was maintained, and not
only so, but he could, moreover, assert that the action
of the chief representative of the bank in Australia,
combined with the action of the chief representative of
the Union Bank of Australia, constituted the turning-
point of the great panic, for the managers of those
institutions decided to disobey the proclamation of the
Government of Victoria, which had ordered a mora-
torium for several days, (and thereby succeeded in re-
establishing confidence.” The diminution of profitable
business which succeeded the crisis was reflected in
a reduced rate of dividends for several years. Low-
water mark was reached in November, 1895, when
the dividend declared was only 5 per cent.
The bank is represented in all the Federal States,
and also in New Zealand, having 168 establishments, 37
of which are in New South Wales. The superintendent
who succeeded Mr. Parkes in 1888 was Mr. John
Sawers, a gentleman long distinguished for his ability
as a banker and greatly esteemed for his innate
courtesy and kindness of heart as a man. Mr.
Sawers retired in September, 1905, and the chair ol
control in Aust alasia was filled by Mr. Ames Hellicar.
inspector in New South Wales, after a short te m
du.ung which Mr. C. R. Cowper officiated as acting-
superintendent The Sydney branch of this bank is
justly entitled to rank as one of the soundest in the
parent colony. The local manager is Mr. O. C.
Williams, an experienced and value 1 officer of the
bank. At the close of the half-year, ended October
10th, 1904, the deposits stood at £16,286,330 against
£15,186,394 at the close of the previous financial year.
The cash items and securities were given as £6,765,732,
against £5,897,930, and the bills receivable, advance?
on securities, and other assets as £l5 055,970, against
£14368,061 six months earlier.
Union Bank of Australia.
The Union Bank has long had the reputation of
adhering to a policy in pursuance of the old conser-
vative lines of banking in Great Britain. The Bank
will have been in existence seventy years on May 1.
IgoB—a long time in the life of an individual,
but a short time in the history of a bank or a
nation —like Australia the bank is really in the
first vigour of youth, still “ strengthening its stakes
and lengthening its cords” in a manner that is the
admiration of onlookers. Although not first in the
amount of business transacted, the Union Bank of
Australia Ltd. is by many considered the chief Aus-
tralasian bank. Of the large colonial banking institu-
tions it affords the broadest basis of security to its
customers, resting as it does on such a grand foundation
of paid-up capital and reserves, with a still larger reserve
liability on the part of its shareholders. In the
federated States of the Australian Commonwealth the
principal portion of its business is transacted in Vic-
toria. Like the other three Anglo-Australian banks,
it has never taken quite the position in Sydney as far
as the magnitude of its operations is concerned, which
its strength and resources warrant. Perhaps the reason
of this is that to all intents and purposes the Anglo-
Australian institutions here are only central branches,
their chief offices for the colony being located in
Melbourne. Since Mr D. Finlayson was appointed
inspector and general manager, Messrs. James Orr,
A, H. B oyd, W. Lees (afterwards general manager
in Melbourne), J. G. O’Neill and H F, Sendey, in
succession, have had charge of the Sydney office, the
latter being the present manager. The general man-
ager, Mr S. Hallamore, succeeded Mr. I). Finlayson
recently. Mr. C W. T. F. Russell is the chief inspec-
tor, Mr. A. H Chambers filling the office of inspector
in New South Wales. In all the bank has 145 branch
offices, distributed through Australasia as follows :
Victoria, 33 ; New South Wales, 28 ; Western
Australia, 25 ; South Australia, 15 ; Queensland, 14 ;
Tasmania, 3, and New Zealand, 27. Particulars of
the last three balance-sheets are summarised as follows :


London Bank of Australia.
Incorporated under the Companies Acts, 1862 to
1890. Subscribed capital, £1,276,707 10s. Paid up
capital, £448,015. Uncalled, including reserve liability,
£728,732 10s. The bank was founded in 1852 by the late
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. J. E. G. MILLETT.
eminent London ship-owner and merchant, Mr. Duncan
Dunbar, in conjunction with some well known Australian
colonists of the early days, notably Mr. William Fane de
Salis and Mr. Thomas Dyer Edwards. The management
Banking Premises, London Bank of Australia,
Martin Place.
was first entrusted to Mr. Charles Falconer, who was
succeeded by Mr. John Bramwell, and subsequently by
Mr. Edwin Brett and Mr. Charles Guthrie. At present
the inspector and general manager is Mr. 0. Mornce
Williams, whose headquarters are in Melbourne. The
local directors of the bank in Melbourne are Hon. W.
L. Ballieu, M.L.G., and Mr. Edward Fanning, and in
Sydney Messrs G. S. Littlejohn and Allen Taylor. Mr.
John Millett is manager in Sydney and Mr. P. L. Strong
manager at Melbourne branch. The board of directors in
London are Mr. David Finlayson, chairman; Messrs.
Gordon Huntly Campbell, Andrew Cunningham, David
Quixano Henriques, Robert Rome, George Slade and
Right Hon. Sir Walter Foster, M.P. The bank has 48
branches and agencies in Victoria, 20 in New South
Wales, and 2 in Queensland. The balance-sheet for 31sl
December, 1906, shows assets of £5,717,486 18s. Bd.
The cash balances and investments total £1,576,125, and
the dividends paid to shareholders for 1906 amount to
£ 18,653.
Australian Joint Stock Bank.
In the middle of October, 1852, a meeting of pro-
fessional and business men was convened by Mr. Jas.
W, Bligh, at the Royal Hotel, George Street, for the
purpose of discussing the prospects of another banking
establishment in Sydney. The outcome of this private
gathering was the appointment of a provisional com-
mittee composed of the following members :—Messrs.
J. Alexander, Wm. Bradley, Thos. Barker, T. C.
Breillat, J. W. Bligh, Adam Bogue, J. B. Darvall,
Jas. Henderson, Thos. Holt, jun., Clark Irving, D. 1).
Joubert, David Jones, M. E. Murnin, A. Moses, W.
Richardson, G. J. Rogers,, John Walker, and J. R.
Young. A prospectus was issued on 29th October,
1852, as follows; —“ The commercial transactions of
the city of Sydney having greatly increased since the
recent discovery of gold, and there being a large amount
of colonial capital unemployed, it has been considered
desirable to establish a new joint stock bank of issue
and deposit, which it is proposed to do on the following
basis ; The capital to be £250,000, in 25,000 shares of
£lO each, to be paid up as follows : £1 per share on
the allotment of shares; £1 per share on notice being
given that deed of settlement is ready for signature ;
£3'per share during the first six months after the allot-
ment of the shares, in calls of £1 per share on a similar
notice at such times as the directors shall appoint. The
capital of the hank to be increased to £500,000 if re-
quired. The management of the bank to be vested in
a board of five directors, one of whom to retire annually
and not to be eligible for re-election until the expiration
of twelve months. The qualification of directors
is to be 100 shares. General meetings are to be held
half-yearly, at which a full report and statement of
accounts, duly audited, shall be submitted to the share-
holders. The proprietors shall be entitled to vote ac-
accoiding to tlm number of shares held by them re-
spectively, in the following proportions : Ten shares and
under 20 shares, on vote; 20 shares and under 50 shares,
two votes ; 50 shares and under 100 shares, three votes ;
100 shares and under 200 shares, four votes ; 200 shares


Balance Sheet, June 30. 1853.
Dn. Liabilities.
Capital called up
£125,000
0
0
Notes in circulation ..
52,004
0
0
Balances due to other banks
621
5
9
Deposits and liabilities
156 048
8
6
Deserve fund ..
276
6
2
Profit and loss account
2,486
15
9
GO
•'T
CO
CO
16
2
Cr Assets.
Coin and Bullion
£112,926
11
0
Balances due by other banks
49.277
8
4
Bills discounted and other debts due bank
172,404
5
10
Bank premises it prop, of prelim, expenses
1,890
11
0
£336,498
16
2
and under 500 shares, five votes ; 500 shares and up-
wards, six votes and not more. The allotment of shares
is not to take place until one half have been applied
for. The first directors and the two auditors to be
elected by ballot at a meeting to be held within four-
v O
teen days after the allotment of shares, and thereupon
the business of the bank to commence* The deed of
settlement containing all the necessary clauses and
provisions will be' submitted to, and approved by, a
general meeting ; and each shareholder is to execute
such deed within one month after notice of its being
ready for signature. Power to be given by such deed
for the directors to apply for an act of incorporation,
with limited liability.—(Signed) Jas. W. Bligh, M.L.C.
Hon. Secretary).” A first meeting of shareholders was
held on th 1 26th November, 1852, for the purpose of
electing directors. The provisional committee reported
that ; hey had received and considered applications
for shares much in excess of 48,000, and allotted the
number into which the capital had divided, i.e.,
25,000, amongst upwards of 350 individual applicants ;
that the allottees of the several shares had in the
terms of the published prospectus paid into th"
hands of the provisional committee in respect of
such shares the sum of £24.590, leaving only £4lO
due by an allottee temporarily absent from the colony ;
that the following gentlemen had notified that they
were candidates for the office of first directors of the
Australian Joint Stock Bank :—Messrs. J. J. Alex-
ander, Thos. Barker, J. W. Bligh, T. C. Breillat, G.
Crawley, J. B. Darvall, Thos. Holt jun., Clark Irving,
M. E. Murnin, T.W. Smart, J. R. A r oung, and D. Jones.
Messrs. Irving and Alexander being interested in
other banks withdrew their candidature, and the ballot
resulted as follows :—Thos. Holt, Jun., 380 ; T. W.
Smart, M.L.C., 358 ; J. B. Darvall, M.L.C., 277 ; J. R.
Young, 268 ; T. C. Breillat, 235 ; M. E. Murnin, 213 ;
T. Barker, 204 ; D. Jones, 197 ; J. W. Bligh, M.L.C.,
179 ;G. Crawley, 73. The first five were accordingly
declared elected as directors, and Messrs. G. King and
F. Ebsworth returned as auditors. Mr. W. Clark had
previously been appointed by the provisional committee
as secretary pro. tem., and an office engaged for the
time being in Exchange Buildings This was removed
at the end of December to 397 Pitt Street North, and
there the bank started upon its career on January 24th,
1853, under the superintendence of Mr. Alex. Hart,
manager, the accountant being Mr. Ashton B. Ottley.
At the end of the first six months the following balance-
sheet was presented to the shareholders.
The Act of Incorporation received the royal assent
in September, 1853, and under this Act the bank carried
on business until 1855, when it was amended. In-
creased powers were given the corporation, among
them being the right to issue and have in circulation
promissory notes payable on demand, to the extent
of the amount of its actual paid-up capital ; and to
such further amount in excess of the said capital as
the corporation shall hold gold or bullion for. This
power, it may be noted, was granted until such time “ as
some general provisions should be made by the Legis-
lature in respect of the issue of promissory notes payable
on demand.” “ Liberal/’ writes a critic, “as it
was in the way of sanctioning an ample note-issue, the
Act of 1853 was, however, just as illiberal in another
direction, inasmuch as it included the bank in the pro-
hibition then directed against all other kindred insti-
tutions in the colony, viz., lending money on the
security of land, or houses, or on shops, or pledges of
merchandise. Whatever may be urged in favour of
such restrictions from the conservative English point
of view, it is evident that in the conditions prevailing
in the colonies it was absurd ; for the prohibited securi-
ties were just those which formed the bulk of the assets
of the colonists, and those in which they most required
to deal. Hence this provision was more honoured in
the breach than in the observance ; as to adhere
strictly to it would have been to virtually close the
channels for the profitable employme .t of banking
funds.” The balance-sheet at the end of 1853 showed
a marked increase in business. The report of the meet-
ing at which it was presented says : “ As recommeudel
in the report adopted at last half-yearly meeting, the
earnings of the bank up to that period have been left
undivided, viz , £2,486 15s. 9d. ; to which are to
be added the profits for the half-year, amounting to
£6,912 19s. Id., less 10 per cent, carried to reserve
fund, £691 ss. lid., equals £6,221 13s. 2d; leaving
at the credit of profit and loss, £8,708 Bs. lid. The
reserve fund will thus be increased to £967 12s. Id.
Taking into consideration the prevailing low rates
of interest, and that this establishment is as yet in
its infancy, the directors consider the above statement
is most satisfactory, and recommend that a dividend
be declared for the half-year at the late of 4 per
cent, on the paid-up capital of £1,250,000; which
will require £5,000, and leave for the equalisation of
future dividends, £3,708 Bs. lid.; making together
£B, 708 8s lid.’' Before the presentation of this report,
the manager, Mr. Alex. Hart, had been succeeded by
Mr. A. B. Ottley, who, himself, was replaced in 1855 by
Mr. E. Wrench. The latter held office until 1859, when
Mr. A. H. Richardson was appointed general manager,
a position he retained for the next ten years.. Agencies
had by this been arranged in London, Belfast, Melbourne
and Geelong. In 1856 branches were opened at Mait-
land and Armidale in New South Wales, and at Brisbane
in Queensland. The A.J.S. Bank has never opened
a branch in Victoria, all its business in that colony
being conducted through the Bank of Victoria, an
arrangement which is reciprocal,i Some ten years
hence (1866) a London office was opened, the bank
having previously suffered through the misfortunes of
its agents in the crisis in London in 1865-6. Matters


Year j .
Notes in
Circulation.
Deposits
and other
Liabilities.
Paid-up
Capital.
Years
Net
Profits.
Rate
of
Premium,
Per cent.
1853
76,155
295,911
125,000
9.676
4
1858
149.782
968,223
253,000
11,710
10
1863
173 970
900,302
375,000
50,953
9
1868
189.503
1,232.972
*484,656
49,331
4
1873
262.461
1,825,829
484,656
68,932
n
1878
2S9,300
2,704,528
500,000
86.490
1883
401,382
4.607.402
500,000
84,299
124
1888
463,893
7.353,396
500,000
90.257
13f
1892
451.549
10.764,429
704,500
127.451
15
progressed smoothly and with creditable alacrity until
1860, at the close of which year a period of trouble
ensued. Heavy losses had been incurred at the Maitland
and Braidwood branches, and a swindler named Miranda
got to the right side of the bank’s books to the extent of
£25,000. Altogether the losses represented £35,000.
In addition divided counsels prevailed at the board.
Two of the directors, Messrs. Clark Irving and R. M,
Robey, were associated, more or less, with rival sugar
interests. Mr. Robey had been granted a large over-
draft, and at a time when all his resources were extended
to their utmost limit, he was suddenly called upon to
put himself right with the hank. In return he published
a pamphlet making certain charges of mismanagement
against the board ; and also accusing Mr. Clark Irving
of having caused the bank to lose £IB,OOO through the
overdrafts persons who owed him money had obtained
through his influence. Mr. Robey was suspended by the
directors, and his friends appealed to the general body
of shareholders to have the suspension removed. The
board then resigned. Two stormy meetings were held
on 26th July, 1861. and 29th August, 1861. During
the course of the latter so much personal invective was
indulged in that, after stating his opinion that “ it
would have been better in the interests of the bank if
the disputants had settled their grievances in a 21 ft.
ring,'’ Sir John Bayley Uarvall woundup a character-
istically sarcastic speech with the biting remark that
it appeared to him he hardly had had “ the honour
of addressing men of business.” The shareholders de-
cided against Mr. Robey, and re-elected three of the old
directors, viz., Messrs. T. Holt, jun., T. W. Smart, and
Clark Irving ; selecting Sir J. B. Darvall and Mr.
Daintree for the remaining vacancies. With the
cessation of internal strife, and under the careful con-
trol of Mr. Richardson, ably backed up by Mr. F. Adams,
who was appointed assistant manager in 1863, it was
not long before the affairs of the bank were placed upon
a sounder footing. There were at this period twelve
branches operating in New South Wales, and four in
Queensland. Progress was steady if not startling, and,
notwithstanding keen opposition, the bank more than
held its own. The trying years, 1867-68, left their mark
on the A J.S. Bank as well as upon other kindred insti-
tutions. Its large reserve fund was swept away, and
£1 per share written off its capital. But the swift
recovery disclosed in the following year’s reports
showed how well the bank passed through that ordeal ;
and until the fatal year 1893, progress was an un-
interrupted success. There was a change in the chief
executive office in 1868, when Mr. V. W. Giblin
was selected by the board to take the place of
Mr. Richardson ; and the bank continued under
the managerial control of the first-named gentleman
until 1884, when he was succeeded by Mr. F, Adams,
who filled the position with such marked dis-
tinction. From per cent, in 1873 the dividends rose
to 12| per cent., and remained at that rate for many
years afterwards. In 1888 they were increased to 13|
per cent., and the next rise in the distribution of profits
brought them to 15 per cent. The operations of 1883
were so eminently profitable as to enable the directors
to grant a bonus, or an increase of salary, to all 1 he
members of the staff. At the end of 1887 the number
of officers, including the head office, was JlO ; the paid-
up capital was £500,000 ; the reserve fund, £290,000 ;
the amount of the last dividend, £31.250 ; the rate of
dividend 10 per cent., and a bonus of per cent. ; the
aggregate market value of stock, £1,062,500 ; the
aggregate liabilities, £6,876,338 ; the proportion of
paid-up capital and fund to liabilities, 11 per
cent.; the subscribed capital and reserve fund, £852,500,
proportion of subscribed capital and reserve fund to
liabilities, 12 per cent. ; the aggregate of subscribed
capital, reserve fund, and reserve liabilities, £1,477.500,
and their proportion to the liabilities, 21 per cent.
These figures exhibit the position of the bank five years
before 1893 ; and that further material strength was
added to its foundations during the intervening years
is shown in the following table of quinquennial
returns :
*£l per sba r e returned to shareholders.
Tlie balance sheet of accounts to the end of 1892-
when a dividend of 15 per cent, was given the share-
holders, and in addition £9,595 transferred to the
reserve fund, bringing its amount up to £510,000 —
was as follows :
Liabilities.
Dr.
Capital paid-up, viz., £9 per
share on 78,293 shares of
£lO each, leaving £1 per
uncalled .. .. £704,037 0 0
Reserve Fund.. .. .. 500,405 0 0
Profit and Loss .. .. 100,004 19 4
Shortly after the publication in London of this highly
satisfactory state of affairs came the commercial cata-
clysm ; the crisis which shattered the belief that the
position of the Australian banks was impregnable.
In the financial collapse which characterised that year
the rush of excited depositors to withdraw the funds
was even more intense while it lasted in Sydney than
in Melbourne ; and after bravely battling with the
stoim for some time the board felt it was necessary to
close the doors of the institution, even if only tem-
porarily.
On resuming business after the Easter holidays
the bank held in coin, £650,000 ; a sum, although some-
what out of proportion to the liabilities, yet sufficient
for any normal condition of affairs. But it was an
extraordinary state of conditions that had very soon
to be faced. The suspension of the Commercial Rank
of Australia, followed up by that of the English, Scottish
and Australian Chartered Bank, thoroughly alarmed the
Sydney public, and withdrawals from the A.J.S. Bank
assumed such proportions that at the close of busine. s
on April 20th the till money represented no more than
£150,000. Within four or five days half a.million in


gold had been taken away. That night there was a
consultation between the board and the chiefs of the
leading local banks. Accommodation to the extent of
three millions was mentioned-—one million, at once,
another million a little later on, and in all probability a
third million. The matter was considered so urgent
that the directors pressed for a reply before morning.
This was too much, and as the banks consulted were
unable to pledge their resources at so short a notice
the request had to be declined. At midnight the board
decided that it had become necessary for the protection
of all parties concerned to suspend payment, pending
reconstruction, and the following morning saw the
doors of the bank closed. The announcement of this
step caused widespread surprise, commingled with
feelings of regret that a bank whose credit had endured
for forty years should have to yield to the pressure of
the times. But, nevertheless, the end was not yet.
Fortunate during its career of securing the friendship
and co-operation of prominent citizens, the bank did
not lack support even at this critical juncture, and
found its champion in the Hon. W. McMillan, ML.A ,
and one of the most esteemed of our public men.
The original scheme of reconstruction put forward
met with some opposition, and upon the acceptance
of a modified scheme —under which the bulwark
against loss was : Old bank capital, £704,709; fresh
capital, £469,803 ; reserved liability, £391 505 :
reserved fund ,£529,373 ; inner or secret reserve,
249,043; total £2.344,485 banking was resumed
on June 19. In its general provisions the scheme
of reconstruction was fair and reasonable, although
depositors, as the course of the money market after-
wards proved, were put upon too favourable a footing,,
by being allowed interest at the rate of 44 per
cent, per annum upon their extended deposits. This
subsequently led tothe offer by the bank of prepayment
of a portion of these deposits. In his address to the
shareholders in December; 1894, the chairman of the
board said : 4 6 Our arrangements with our depositors
was not sufficiently elastic, for we have now reserved
the right to give notice of prepayment, and the board
therefore has announced its>willingness to prepay upon
application half the amount of the extended fixed
deposits due in June, 1897, provided the other half is
extended to be repaid during 1902 ; the amount thus
to be repaid cannot exceed £300,000, which will be
nearly equally divided between the colonies and Great
Britain.” 1 Again, In July, 1895, it was reported:
44 During the half-year we have been enabled to dis-
charge the extended deposits of the old bank by the
large amount of £421,569, which, added to the amount
stated in January, makes the total discharged to date
two-and-a-half millions sterling the exact amount
being £2,521,432. One beneficial effect of the crisis,
o ■'
which led to the temporary suspension of the hank, was
an arrangement by which a number of unprofitable
branches were closed in country towns. Up to 1893
the competition for business was so keen between the
banks that there is no doubt country branches were
unduly multiplied. Taking advantage of the oppor-
tunity, the few banks which reconstructed afforded, the
A.J.S. Bank judiciously reduced the number oi its
establishments, retaining, however, 102 in New South
Wales, besides the head office ; 18 in Queensland, and
the one in London.” There were at the end of
1904 58 branch establishments in this State, 12 in
Queensland, making, with the three central offices, a
total of 73. The magnificent head office, situated at
the corner of George and King Streets, forms one of
the most striking architectural features of the city.
It is thus technically described: —“ The elevations
are in brown Pyrmont stone, with polished granite
base and columns, the whole being surmounted by
a fine dome and lantern, rising to a height of 100
feet above the footpath. Fine white marble statues
of Justice and Plenty, by the English sculptor Birch,
form a conspicuous feature in the design. The bank-
ing-room, 70 feet long, 48 feet wide, and 33 feet high,
is very handsome, and is placed at th p angle of the
building. The cost of the site, buildings, safe and
fittings was about £120.000. The bank is conducted
by a board of directors and a general manager. The
present members of the directorate are : —Mr. Phillip
H. Morton (chairman), Mr. C- H. Myles, Hon J. Norton,
LL.D., M.L.C. ; Mr. Rowland H. Ducker, Sir William
P. Manning, Knt., the Hon. Sir Francis B. Suttor, and
Dr. G. I). Sly, Knt., M L.C. Mr. Francis Adams
succeeded Mr. Gibhnin the year 1884 as general
manager. Mr. A. P. Stewart, the chief inspector,
received well-earned promotion on the death of his
predecessor, Mr. Barton Lodge, in 1894, and upon
Mr. Adams taking a v,e'l-earned holiday in 1895, Mr.
Stewart acted as his Iccum tenens. He is an old and
experienced officer and has the affairs of the institution
well in hand. Mr. Adams resigned August 16, 1907,
and Mr. Stewart was appointed acting general
manager. Mr. H. T. Webster is Sydney manager, and
Mr Reid secretary of the bank.
National Bank of Australasia.
The National Bank of Australasia was founded in
Melbourne in 1858, with an Australian proprietary.
A preliminary prospectus was first issued in 1857 but
nothing was completed until June, 1858, when a second
prospectus was sent out, and incorporation followed
two months later. About half the shares were sub-
scribed in South Australia, where the bank opened
simultaneously with the head office in Victoria. The
capital was {1,000,000, in 200,000 {5 shares, to be paid
as follows : tos. preliminary deposit, {1 10s. per share
first call, after which no further call to exceed {1 per-
share. At the date of inauguration the subscription
was as follows :—Victoria, 54,000 ; South Australia,
11,320 ; other colonies, 2,932, the total being 68,252
shares or {341,260. The National suffered severe
losses and paid no dividends in the first year of its
existence, and its board of directors had to be re-
modelled and a net loss of {14,651 17s. nd. transferred
to an appropriation for losses account. In addition,
there were losses to the extent of {52,285 9s. rod.
provided for by the reduction of paid-up capital. Two
years later this sum was again restored to capital
account. During 1859 the amount of {250,000 was
paid out of the stock, and branches were established in


all the principal towns of the two colonies. Under the
management of Mr. Fred. Wright, the South Australian
business grew so that in iB6O the number of share-
holders and the amount at deposit exceeded those at
the head office in Melbourne In this year Mr. Cun-
ningham was appointed manager and Mr. Young
accountant, and from this date the bank began to
prosper. There was a fresh increase of capital made in
1864 the total then being £400,000. Further additions
raised the paid-up capital as follows :—1866, £540,000 ;
1869, £660,000 ; 1875, £750,000 ; 1879, £BOO,OOO ; and
1887, £1.000,000. In 1866 Mr. Wright was appointed
general manager, and continued in charge until 1870,
when he returned to London, from which branch he
had come. Mr. Young was appointed to succeed him.
The bank sustained severe reverses again in 1870, the
losses being estimated at £IOO,OOO. In 1871 important
changes were made in the management. Mr. Young
retire! and Mr. Frank Grey Smith assumed charge. He
came with a long banking experience and high repu-
Crown Studios.
MR. G. Turnbull.
tation from the Bank of South Australia, and under
his control the deposits increased from a modest million
sterling to more tha n seven times that sum. In October,
1885, this powerful Melbourne institution opened a
branch in Sydney. Many years previously it had been
resolved to take this step, and the officer selected to
be its manager in 1885 occupied a high position in
another bank. Mr. James Balfour, who had previously
heen connected with the Oriental Bank, received the
appointment of manager. The Sydney office was
rather unfortunate in the earl} 7 portion of its career,
as several material losses w 7 ere made, In 1890 Mr.
Balfour was succeeded by Mr. G. Turnbull, the present
manager, who joined the service of the National nearly
five-and-thirty years ago. After twenty-four years’
experience in Victoria, during which period he managed
many banks, Mr. Turnbull joined the inspectors’ staff
and was finally transferred to Sydney. He was sta
tinned in “ the Kelly country ’ ’ during the Kelly scare,
and can tell many stories of exciting episodes during that
now 7 almost-forgotten period. Between 31st March,
1861, and 31st March. 1893, the bank declared dividends
to the amount of £2,686,329 3s. 3d. In addition to
this distribution from time to time, £150,000 has been
written off the premises account, and out of the profits
the sum of £194,424 has been added to the reserves.
Up to the 31st March, 1893, the bank’s net profits,
represented £2,946,241 ; its assets increasing from
£5,450,200 in 1877 to £11,481,611 in 1892. During
the second week of April, 1893, uneasiness mani-
fested itself amongst the constituents of the
The National Bank, Pitt Street.
National Bank of Australasia, and dating from 10th
April withdrawals of deposits took place, The sus-
pension of another bank as from 13th April accentuated
the feeling of unrest. A draining process commenced
on the National Bank, and by 24th April the bank had
lost deposits amounting to £300,000 since the date of
its balance-sheet, viz., 31st March. The successive
suspensions of two other banks deepened the distrust,
and, slowly bleeding at all branches, the National lost
£350,000 between 24th and 29th April, making a total
of £650,000 in about four weeks. The general


Liabilities.
1877.
1902.
Bank Stock
.. £725.000
£2,000,000
0
0
Reserve Fund
275,000
81.294
10
3
Notes in Circulation
442,428
876,253
0
0
Bills in Circulation
.. 2,126.676
1,552,361
3
10
Deposits and other Liabilities
.. 6,124,534
12.523,491
4
5
Net Profits for the Half-year
72,717
274,329
0
0
£9.786,355
£17,307.728
18
6
Assets.
Coin and Cash Balances .. £940,742
£2.225.800
17
4
bullion 500,433
155,818
7
1
Government Securities, Ac. .. 399,911
4,520.556
17
9
Landed Property, Ac 121,450
525,770
14
8
Dills Receivable and Securities
in London 2,745,257
1,228,644
12
4
Assets Board Realisation De-
bentures _
1,025.000
0
0
Bills Discounted and other Debts
due to the Bank .. ..5,052,576
8,028,107
9
4
£9,786,355
£17,307,728
18
6
character of the demand for gold convinced the
directors that the only justifiable course left to
them was to suspend payment. On Monday, ist
May, the bank was closed pending reconstruction,
and did not commence business again until 26th
June, 1893, some delay being occasioned by the
London shareholders objecting to the scheme of
arrangement as first promulgated. The modified
terms, ultimately accepted by all but seven dissentients,
representing about £2,000, provided for the formation
of a new bank with a nominal capital of £400,000, in
150,000 preferential shares of £lO each, fully paid up-
preference as to capital to cease when ten half-yearly
dividends at the rate of 7 per cent, had been paid—
and 250,000 ordinary shares of £lO each, paid up to
£4 ; and the balance by instalments as the directors
might decide. When the National Bank of Austral-
asia recommenced business with ‘ ‘ Limited ’ ’ added
to its title the institution was found to be as
firmly rooted as ever, and subsequent years have
proved that the confidence of the public in its stability
has never abated one tittle. The paid-up capital now
amounts to £1,498,220 and the reserves aggregate
£820,464. At the head office the chief manager is
Mr John G. Addison, with Mr. A. W. Cunningham as
assistant chief manager. Altogether there are no
branches in the four States—66 in Victoria, 29 in
South Australia, 13 in Western Australia, and two
in New South Wales, these last being Sydney and
Broken Hill. Sir William McMillan, K.C.M.G., is the
local director here, co-operating with Mr. Turnbull in
looking after local interests.
Bank of New Zealand.
The Bank of New Zealand was founded in 1861*
and after twenty-one years’ existence was doing the
largest single business in any colony in Australasia.
During that time £1.862,000 had been dispensed in
dividends, the paid-up capital increased from £IOO,OOO
to £1,000,000, and a reserve fund was built up amounting
to £600,000. This rapid growth was to a certain extent
to be traced to the Government connection, which in
many ways gave the bank advantages not possessed
by its competitors. The Sydney branch of the Bank
of New Zealand was opened at 131 Pitt Street in 1875.
The office here and those in other Commonwealth
States are maintained chiefly in connection with the
exchange operations of the bank. By 1888 business
had assumed gigantic proportions, and the distribution
of dividends to that year exceeded two-and-a-half
millions sterling. Then theie was a great shrinkage
of values, occasioning diminished profits retarding
opeiations, and leaving the bank at the end of 1892 in
much the same position as it was in 1877. The
balance-sheets for these two periods compare as follows :
For a number of years prior to 1886 the bank paid 15
per cent, dividend on £1,000,000 of paid-up capital ;
then 12| per cent, for one year ; but in October, 1887,
the dividend was omitted. In May and November,
1888, and May, 1889, 7 per cent, dividends were paid,
making nearly £250,000 distributed since the founda
tion of the bank. In March, 1905 and 1906 dividends
at the rate of 5 percent, on preference and ordinary
shares was paid. In 1887 Mr. N. F. Giblin assumed
charge in Sydney of the Australian offices, a position
which he retained for five years. Mr. G. A. Wilson,
then took over the managerial duties, until he was
appointed Chairman of the Civil Service Board in New
South Wales, when he was succeeded by Mr. P. T. J.
Parfitt, an officer who had served the bank from its
earliest days in London, Melbourne, New Zealand,
Adelaide and Fiji. Mr. Cecil B. Pike, the present
manager, has held office since 1899.
City Bank of Sydney,
The City Bank of Sydney was founded at the
beginning of 1864, under the style of “ The City
Bank 5 ’ ; the words “of Sydney” were added by an
Act of Parliament assented to 16th March, 1893. At
a meeting of gentlemen favourable to the establish-
ment of a joint stock bank held at the office of Mr.
W. Barton on August 11th, 1863. a provisional com-
mittee was appointed and a prospectus was agreed
to as follows:
Bank be started with a capital of £200,000,
in shares of £lO each, with liberty to extend to
£500,000, and of limited liability, as ini the case of
j *
the other banks. A provisional committee has been
appointed, consisting of Messrs. Morris Alexander, M.P.,
John Alger, M. Baar, Alex. Brown, M. Bur dekin, M.P.,
John Caldwell, M.P.; Ed. Chapman, F. H. Dangar,
Geoffrey Eagar, M.P., Peter Faucett, M.P., W. Har-
bottle, Ed. Hunt, S. A. Joseph, F. Lassetter, John M.
Leigh, Wrn. Love, Jas. Martin, M.P., Moses Moss,
P- N Russell, John Russell, Alex. Thomson, Geo.
Thornton and Wrn. Tucker. Eleven years have elapsed
since the establishment of a colonial bank, and the
growing wants of the colony render it necessary that
another similar institution should be provided- The
imports and exports during that period have been very
materially increased—the former, in 1861, to £6,391,655,
and the latter to £5,594,839. The fact of the banks pay-
ing interest on a very large amount is sufficient to show
their inability to meet the demands of their customers
front the capital of their shareholders, and the legiti-
mate proportion of the deposits of their customers.
With the aid of additional capital obtained by fixed


deposits, the discounts have been increased £750,000
within the last twelve months. By the last quarterly
returns furnished by the banks to the Government
and published up to 31st March, it appears that the
amount of deposits lying at interest is £2,688,100, and
the sum deposited without interest is £2,960,600 ; ro
that it may be assumed that from three to four millions
of the aggregate of £5,648,700 are lying almost wholly
unproductive and waiting investment as opportunity
may arise. The difficulty of obtaining profitable and
permanent investments is thus apparent —is confirmed
by the reports, and, indeed, is universally admitted-
The high premiums demanded for shares in the prin-
cipal banks are as follow :—Bank of New South Wales’
shares of £2O, dividend 20 per cent... price £sl, or 155 per-
cent. premium ; Commercial Bank shares of £25, divi-
dend 15 per cent., price £54, or 116 per cent. ; A.J S.
Bank shares of £lO, dividend 8 per cent., price £l3 10s.,
Alger and 0. B. Ebsworth \n office was opened at
the corner of George and King Streets; Mr. J. T. Ford
was appointed manager, and Mr. Wm. Woolley,
accountant ; the bank’s solicitors being Messrs-
Billyard & Curtis.
The first half-yearly meeting was held on the
12th July, 1864, when accounts up to the preceding
30th June were presented, as follows :
Balance-Sheet of the City Bank of Sydney as at
30th June, 1801.
Dr.
To Capital paid up .. .. £196,457 0 0
~ Notes in Circulation .. 18,926 0 0
~ Deposits and other Lia-
bilities .. .. .. 170,089 9 1
~ Profit and Loss .. .. 625 2 11
~ Deserve Fund .. .. 500 0 0
Banking Chambers of City Bank, Pitt Street.
or 35 per cent. Apart from the field thus offered for
the investment of capital, it is believed that by the
establishment of this bank greater facilities than now
exist may be afforded to the smaller class of traders,
without excluding the larger operations usually taken
up by banking institutions, No application will be
entertained for more than 500 shares. It is proposed
to call up not more than £5 per share of the capital
stock at present —say, £1 deposit on notification of
the allotment, £1 on the execution of the deed of
settlement, and £3 on the Ist October, or at a subse-
quent date to be determined by the directors ; with
liberty, however, at that time, or at the commencement
of every half-year, io pay the whole. Calls to be made
at intervals of not less than six months.” Later on
the following directors were elected ; —Messrs. J. L.
Montefiore (chairman), Eh H. Hangar, Wm. Harbottle,
Alex. Thomson, 8. A-Joseph, the auditors being A, J.
Cn
By Coin in hand .. .. £40,178 11 8
~ Bank Premises and Fur-
niture 4.297 18 4
„ Bills Discounted and other
Debts due to the Bank 342,721 2 0
A paragraph in the report states : “ A large and profit-
able business has been initiated. Many valuable
accounts have been opened with the bank ; no losses
whatever have been sustained, and all circumstances
yield a very fair augury of the future success of the
institution. For the first couple of years of the bank’s
existence things went smoothly. Then came the
year 1866—a period of crisis, when the bank suffered
in common with many others. After this things
became normal as far as the bank was concerned and
so continued until 1870, when the shareholders were
informed at the half-yearly meeting for December of


Liabilities.
£
8.
cl.
Capital ..
400.000
0
0
Reserve Fund ..
7,500
0
0
Notes
85,830
10
0
Deposits, &c.
.. 1,125,813
10
0
Profit and Loss
8.364
9
10
£1.627,517
9
10
Assets,
£
s.
d.
Coin and Bullion
272,116
7
2
Consols and Government Stock
50 0C0
0
0
Advances
.. 1.160,804
17
8
Premises
144,506
5
0
£1.627.517
9
10
that year that very considerable losses had been sus-
* J
tained, and it was proposed that £2 per share should
be written off the capital to meet those losses —thus
reducing the capital account by £59,260. This bold
course was adopted, thus ensuring for the bank a con-
tinuance of the confidence of both the shareholders and
the public. But at the same time a dividend at the rate
of 8 per cent, per annum was paid—a proceeding which
the report admitted was unusual. In August, 1871, Mr.
Ford, the then manager, was succeeded by Mr, W. Neill,
the secretary of the Commercial Banking Company of
Sydney. This gentleman, who became a prominent
figure in commercial circles, retained the position until
up to November, 1890. Hitherto thf business of the
bank had been confined to the city, but in 1874 the
J '
dir?ctors decided to extend their operations to the
country, and opened a branch at Young, having in view
further extensions as opportunity afforded- Once more,
in 1875, when Mi. James Watson, M.L.A., was chair-
man of the board, the bank had to face losses, and the
amount was written off the reserve fund, which at this
time stood at £45,000. Dining the next two years,
under the well-directed efforts of the management the
interests of the bank were successfully advanced, and
satislactoxy distributions reached the shareholders’
pockets with unbroken regularity. The paid-up capital
of the bank in 1882 amounted to £240,000, and the
fund in reserve represented £95,000- In 1885 the Act
of Incorporation under which the bank traded having
expired the diiectors obtained from the Legislature a
renewal for twenty-one years. Tim figures of the bank’s
business had by this time attained a very respectable
magnitude, the total of the balance-sheet being over
two millions. It will be seen from the foregoing that
during the first two decades of its existence the bank
had rather a chequered career. Various causes led up
to this, but the flow of success which had endured
from 1875 to 1885 still continued unabated up to the
1893 crisis. That crisis came with crushing effect upon
the banking system of Australia, terminating com-
pletely the existence of some institutions and trans-
forming others, while some few managed to survive
with little apparent damage. The City Bank of
Sydney was one of those few which survived the r n
without actual disaster, but, in common with other
banks, was compelled to call up more capital to the
extent of £120,000, making its paid-up capital
£400,000 —at which it still remains. The crippling
effect of this upheaval was felt for many years,
restricting business and profits. Its dividend rate
had consequently suffered, more especially as its
capital is now both actually and relatively very much
larger than formerly. From a depositor’s point of
view, its position shows unusual strength. The
original premises, where operations were initiated
only affoided a temporary accommodation. Alter
awhile the bank removed to more suitable quarters
opposite the General Post Office, in Pitt Street, and
remained there until the widening of the thoroughfare
in front of the latter building necessitated the resump-
tion of the land on which the bank stood. I he business
was then removed to temporary premises, until he
new building just above King Street in Pitt Street
one of the most elegant in the city, was completed in
1894. The banking chamber has been described as
a gem of architectural design and beauty and is large
enough to provide accommodation for a tenfold increase
of business. The bank still continues as a consistent
dividend-paying establishment, though, in the long
period of drought and depression the colony recently
passed through, like those of other financial institutions
the rate of its dividends had to be reduced- On the
whole, however, the shareholders have fared better
than those of many Australian institutions. The net
profits at the end of the last half-year amounted to
£6.049, and the position disclosed in the statement of
accounts was as follows :
The present directorate consists of the following mem-
bers :—Mr. Hugh Dixson (chairman), Senator the Hon.
Albert J. Gould, and Messrs. Ed. H. Rogers, Andrew J.
Sievers and Sir James Graham ; M.D., the chairman
being a gentleman whose name has been familiar in
commercial circles for a long term of years. 4he
present general managei, Mr. Jas. Hmderson, suc-
ceeded Mr. Cyprian Stanton, in 1897, after holding the
office of assistant manager and inspector for a long term
of years. Like his predecessor, he is an exceptionally
able and popular officer, commanding the goodwill
both of his customers and his brother general managers ;
while, in addition, he has long been a valued contri-
butor to Australasian banking literature and a welcome
lecturei at th Institute of Bankers. It has been truly
said that to his research much of the information
obtained concerning the early history of banking in the
colony is due. The protection the City Bank of Sydney
affords its constituents is as follows:—Paid-up capital,
£400,000; reserve fund, £8,500; reserved liability ol
proprietors together £950,054. In addition to the head
office, ther ; are six city and suburban branches, with
twenty-one other branches, all in the State of New
South Wales, In London the “ City 55 is represented
by the London Joint Stock Bank Ltd., being the only
local bank without an office there.
Commercial Bank ol Australia.
Incorporated under the Companies Statute of 186 ,
which limited the liability of shareholders to the extent
of their shares, the Commercial Bank of Australia vas
floated in Melbourne in 1866 with a capital of £500,000,
in 50,000 shares of £lO each, with power to increase to
£1,000,000. It was decided the first issue of shares
should not exceed 25,000, 10s. per share to be deposited
on application and 30s. on allotment. Mr. J. Napier was
the first chief executive officer. Shortly afterwards Mr.
Henry Gyles Turner was installed as general manager,


Statement of Accounts from 6th June to
31st December, 1872.
Liabilities.
Dr.
Capital Paid up
• •
£105 826
0
0
Notes in Circulation
• •
13.865
0
0
Bi 1 Is,, ,, • • • •
• •
103
18
0
Deposits ..
• •
130,086
0
2
Balances Due other Banks
• •
5,512
1
4
£255,392
19
G
Assets.
Cr.
Coin in Hand ..
• •
£58,340
16
1
Bullion in Hand and in transitu
. •
21,955
14
9
Bills Receivable and all other
Ad-
vances
• •
91,443
16
2
Balances Due by other Banks
• •
73,442
14
3
Preliminary Expenses..
• •
2,626
18
10
Bank Premises ..
• •
6,198
19
7
Profit and Loss Account
• •
1,383
19
10
£255,392
19
6
and Mr. Service became a director, and the association of
these two able gentlemen, with, of course, the assistance
of the able and energetic board of directors, was the
main factor in the phenomenal progress and popularity
of the bank. The absorption of the Australian and
the European Bank in 1879 added a new and valuable
connection to the Commercial Bank. From the date
of this amalgamation onward the institution steadily
advanced until it commanded the) largest business of
any bank trading in Victoria. In 1882, when operations
were initiated in London, the paid-up capital was
£400,000 and the reserve fund £55,000. The following
year an issue of 25,000 additional shares brought the
paid-up capital to half a million sterling : an amount
further icreased in 1884 to £600,000, whilst in these
two years the reserves had swelled to £185,000. In May
of the last-mentioned year the opening of a branch of
the Commercial in Sydney was followed by a similar
step on the part of the National Bank of Australasia :
these proceedings being incidents in the struggle for
commercial supremacy between the two leading cities
of Australia, which began at the end of the seventies,
and which still continues unabated. The business of
the bank was conducted in premises at 171 Pitt Street,
under the management of Mr. J. D. St. Pinnock, who
was succeeded very shortly afterwards by Mr. J. D.
Ogilvy, an old Oriental Bank officer. Mr. Ogilvy, in
turn, gave way to Mr. John Bartholomew in 1889, and
during his term of office the branch was removed to
122-4 Pitt Street. In 1891 the business of the Mercantile
Bank of Sydney was taken over by the Commercial
Bank- The Sydney office is now under the management
of Mr. Alban Hill, who received his appointment in 1904.
Preceding Mr. Hill were Mr. John Blair, who assumed
the managership in 1894 ; Mr. John McNall, in 1896,
and Mr. Legoe in 1899. The registered capital as
shown in the report presented to the shareholders at
the ordinary General Meeting in 1907, is £3,150,000, of
which £2,2i2,636 is paid up ; and in addition, there is
a Special Assets Trust Reserve of £224,000. Branches
in Victoria number 79, excluding receiving offices. In
New South Wales there are eight offices, in South
Australia fourteen, Queensland five, and Western
Australia nine, besides the London office, where Mr.
G. W. Wallace presides. The General Mavnager is Mr.
H. L. Heron, who was appointed in 1901, with head-
quarters in Collins Street, Melbourne. The board of
directors is composed of W. H. Calder, Esq., chairman,
Hon. Robert Harper, M.H.R., Hon. W. H. Emblmg,
M.L.C., J. C. Syme, Esq., Hon. Duncan E. Mcßryde,
M.L.C. The main features of last (1906) balance-sheet
presented to the shareholders showed: Assets, £7,830,078;
capital, paid up, £2,212,636; special assets trusts
reserve, £224,000; and deposits, £4,479,251.
Queensland National Bank.
Perhaps no bank in Australasia has had such a
remarkable career in its younger years as the Queens-
land National Bank. Until the financial crisis of 1893
the progress made with unprecedented rapidity from
the earliest days was continued uninterruptedly. Like
its confrere, the Bank of New Zealand, it enjoyed the
Government’s exclusive patronage ; a good thing for
young banks in its way, but not without dangers. The
bank was established in June, 1872, Mr. E. R. Dnury
being appointed general manager, a position which he
held fill his demise in 1896. He had co-operating with
him on the directorate the Hons. F. H. Hart and John
Bramston, with Mr. Arch. B. Buchanan. The first
report was issued early in 1873, and with it was
presented the following balance sheet :
At the beginning of 1876 the subscribed capital
amounted to £500,000, of which £250,000 was paid up :
and at an extraordinary meeting held later on in the
same year it was decided to increase the capital to
£1,000,000, by the issue of 50,000 shares at £lO each,
with the view of extending operations beyond the
colony. The report at the twelfth half-yearly meeting,
on July 15th, 1878, stated that an office had been
established in London, and a share register opened
there, 12,500 shares, paid up to £5, being issued at
£6 10s. On the colonial register 15,098 new shares,
paid up to £5, were issued at the same time at a
premium of £1 55., resulting in £37,622 being carried
to the reserve fund. Again, one year later the report
contained this paragraph : —“ In view of the enlarge-
ment of the bank’s operations that will result from the
acquisition of the Governmentaccount it was considered
prudent to increase the capital of the bank by the issue
of 12,500 shares on the London register. The directors
have been advised by cable that these shares have been
placed, and by this means the paid-up capital will
be raised to £450,000. The reserve fund in 1880
amounted to £IOO,OOO, and a dividend at the rate of
10 per cent.per annum was declared for the third year
in succession. In the sixteenth report the shareholders
were informed that “ the directors after careful con-
sideration, having concluded that the bank’s interests
would be promoted by the establishment of a branch
in Sydney, took steps recently to secure eligible
premises in that city. Arrangements have been com-
pleted for purchasing the freehold and building now
occupied by the Bank of New Zealand in Pitt Street,
for £12,000. Mr. J. A. Johnston was appointed
manager, a position he continued to hold until
succeeded by the present manager, Mr. Win, Sewell,
in 1899. From the quarterly returns published in this


Liabilities.
To Bills in circulation
£1,522
,, Balances due other banks
88,330
,, Deposits
143,824
£228,676
Assets.
By Coin
.. £167.304
Landed property
14,837
,, Notes and bills of other banks
1,408
,, Debts due to the bank..
43,899
£227,448
colony to the end of 1883 the liabilities and assets of
the Sydney establishment were as follows :
Arrangements for the banking business of the Govern-
ment were extended for another three years in 1882,
and the directors in announcing this congratulated the
shareholders upon the marked success of the bank
during the first ten years of its existence. What that
success amounted to, and the extent to which it had
reached ten years later may be guaged from the fact
that operations had more than doubled. The assets of
the bank on June 30, 1882, were £5,128,826 ; on
December 31, 1892, they represented £10,622,970.
When the financial storm came in 1893 the Queens-
land National Bank suspended operations on 15th
May, and the reconstructed bank did not throw open
its doors until 2nd August. During the interval, with
the sanction of the Supreme Court, the accounts of
customers were carried on in trust, and the connection
of the bank was thus largely preserved. An Act was
passed empowering the Queensland Treasurer to enter
into an arrangement with the bank for repayment
of the Government deposits. The new bank started
with a nominal capital of £1,600,000, in 200,000
shares of £8 each, which was reduced in 1897 to
£1,000,000 in 200,000 shares of £5 each. Under the
existing agreement the Queensland National Bank
will continue to act as bankers to the Government of
Queensland until June 30, 1921. The subscribed
capital now amounts to £BOO,OOO, and the paid-up
capital to £460,154 14s. Bd. In Brisbane the board
consists of :—Messrs. J. Munro, chairman, Hon. A. J.
Callan, M.L.C., John Cameron, M.L.A., Jas. Milne
and F. Lord. Mr. W. V. Ralston, who still holds office,
succeeded Mr. E. R. Drury as general manager : Mr.
Alex. Steuart is chief inspector, and Mr. J. P. Mac-
kenzie, manager. There are sixty-one branches estab-
lished in Queensland, but beyond the borders of that
State colonial expansion has been confined to Sydney.
Bank of North Queensland.
T 1 ie Bank of North Queensland was established in
Townsville in 1888. It has an authorised capital of
£700,000, and tbe subscribed capital and reserves amount
to T 870,000. Its bead office is now in Brisbane and it
has ten branches in Queensland and seven in New South
Wales, The Bank has agents throughout Australasia,
Great Britain, America and the East. The Chairman of
Directors is Sir Alfred Cowley and tbe General Manager
is J. Mackenzie Lees. In New South Wales, Col. James
Hums, of Burns Pbilp & Co , Ltd., is Local Director and
Mr. Oinny, Manager for Sydney, The Balance-Sheet on
Kerry & Co.
MR. J. P. CANNY.
80th June, 1907, shows as follows:—Liabilities, £518,741,
Assets, £645,288. Tbe dividend paid is now at the rale
of 4 per cent, per annum.
Institute of Bankers of N.S.W.
The first general meeting in connection with the Insti-
tute of Bankers of New South Wales was held in the
vestibule of the Town Hall, Sydney, on Friday evening,
6th November, 1891. Mr. J. H. French, chief inspec-
tor of the Bank of New South Wales, presided, and, in
opening the proceedings, said they were met for the
purpose of deciding whether they could give shape to
the movement which had been started for the purpose
of forming an Institute of Bankers in this colony. So
far as he understood, no public meetings had been
held up to the present, but a provisional committee
was appointed, which had submitted the matter to the
various officers of banks, and he thought he might sav
that the returns were generally favourable to the
formation of the Institute. The object of the Institute
was chiefly educational. He supposed there might be
other collateral objects, but as he had said it was
chiefly for the purpose of educating the rising genera-
tion of bankers in the principles of banking that the
Institute had been formed, and that object would be
attained partly by lectures, the formation of libraries,
and examinations. The Institution would also con-
stitute a rallying-point where the younger members
might meet with the older men, and from their ex-
perience learn something of the profession. The pro-
moters of the Institute were Mr. D. J. Brownhill
(provisional lion, sec.) and Mr. E. L. Cooper, both of
the Commercial Banking Co. of Sydney. The Institute
was established with a membership roll of 589. The
sub-committee to draft rules and perform preliminary
work consisted of: Messrs. J. Henderson (City Bank),
W. Sewell (Queensland National Bank), I. Toole (A.J.S.
Bank), F. J. Townsend (Bank of Australasia), D. 8. K.
Miller (Bank of New South Wales), E. L. Cooper (Corn-


mei’cial Banking Company of Sydney), and the
secretary. Lord Jersey was the first president, and
the vice presidents were Messrs. F. Adams, George
Miller, C. Stanton and T. A. DiLhs, The council
consisted of: Messrs. Barton Lodge, F. P. G. McCrae,
A. Hellicar, J. R. French, G. A. Wilson, A. J.
Patterson, Jas. Henderson, Jno. McNalh J. Bartholo-
mew, Fletcher Dixon, E. Macdonald, Thos. Buchanan,
W. T. Smellie, Geo. Turnbull, Jas, Steele, L. A. John-
stone, A. B. Boyd ; and the committee : Messrs. I.
Toole, T. M. O’Neill, F. J, Townsend. M. C. McCaus-
MR. G. M. ALLARD.
land, W. J. Edwards, H. S. Begbie, R. B. Rigg, H. H.
Scarr, H. Gilfillan, W. Mclntyre, W. H. B. Piddington,
E. L. Cooper, A. W. Rae, P. A. Rabett, Jno. Docker,
J. E. G. Millett, T. A. Edmeades, W. Sewell and A. C.
Godhard. The trustees were : Messrs. W. A. Long,
Thos. Buckland, and G. J. Cohen ; the hon. secretary
Mr. D. J. Brownhill ; hon. treasurer, Mr. D. S. K.
Miller ; secretary and editor, Mr. J. Henry Barrows.
The first offices consisted of a suite of rooms on second
floor leased from the Commercial Bank of Australia;
corner of Pitt and Rowe Streets for three years, at a
rental of £lOO for the first year and £125 per year for
the two succeeding years. The banks contributed
over £5OO, and, with subscriptions and donations, the
Institute started with well over £l,OOO in the hands
of its treasurer. The rules were adopted and officers
appointed. Votes of thanks to the secretary and com-
mittee for their exertions in bringing the institution
movement to such a satisfactory issue. Mr. Brownhill,
in responding mentioned particularly the names of
Mr. E. L. Cooper and Mr. D. S. K. Miller as having
worked very energetically in connection with the
Institute. Three cheers for Mr. French concluded the
meeting.
The inaugural meeting was held at the hall of the
Y.M.C.A., 29th January, 1892, when Lord Jersey, the
first president, delivered an address to a large assem-
blage of bankers and others, after which Mr. T. A.
Dibbs delivered a very interesting inaugural address,
for which he was loudly cheered. The first issue of the
Journal of th > Institute appeared in March, 1892, and
it has run an uninterrupted course of monthly issues,
which record the history of banking in this State, since
the Institute’s inauguration. The Journal is mailed
free to all members, and provides a fund of useful and
interesting information, including the lectures de-
livered before the members of the Institute and all
legal decisions which define or alter the law relating to
banking. The council of the Institute takes special
interest in promoting measures calculated to attract
and interest all those who are in the service of banking
institutions by examinations, prize essays, &c. The
Institute possesses a very valuable library for the use
of its members. All officers in banks are eligible for
membership. The fifteenth annual report expresses
satisfaction with the Institute’s work and position.
The receipts for the year were £761 Is. Id., and the
expenditure £657 11s. 9d. ; at December, 1906, the
Institute had a surplus of over £833. The president
is Mr. J. Russell French, and vice-presidents Messrs.
T. A. Dibbs, F. Adams, J. Henderson, and 0. C. Wil-
liams ; hon. sec., Mr. W. Clarke ; Iron, treas., Mr. D. S.
K. Miller. The office of the Institute is at Equitable
Building, George Street. The first secretary and
editor, Mr. J. H. Barrows, was succeeded in
April. 1893, by Mr. Robert Osbiston, whose services
the Institute lost by his death in November, 1898.
Mr. G. M. Allard, the present secretary and editor, was
selected from a large number of applicants for the
position in January, 1899. Himself having had con-
siderable experience in bank service, both in England
and in New South Wales, brought to the Institute
ability and experience, which to a large extent ac-
counts for the success of the Institute in later years.
Mr. Allard is also Secretary of the Sydney Clearing
House, and a public accountant of high rank, being a
Fellow of the Corporation of Accountants, as well as
examiner to that body and for the Institute. Upon
the taking over by the University of Sydney of the
Junior Examination, held for many years by the
Sydney Chamber of Commerce, Mr. Allard was invited
by the Senate to act as one of their examiners.


The Pastoral Industry.
WHAT is wool —the Golden Fleece of j the An-
tipodes? Science replies : ‘‘ Wool is,a peculiai
modification of hair, chaiacteiised by fine transverse
or oblique lines from 2,000 to 4.000 in the extent of
an rnch, indicative of a minutely imbricated scaly
surface —when viewed under the microscope—on which
and on its curved or twisted form, depends its remark-
able felting property.” The statistician tells us wool
is the most important item of production in New South
Wales, and upon its market largely depends the pros-
perity of the State.
Of the thiee great primary industries of Australia
—the pastoral, the agricultural, and the mining—in
importance, as it does in bulk and as a wealth-pro-
ducing factor, the pastoral stands first Especially is
this so in New South Wales, where for more than one
decade it formed the basis of an unparalleled pros-
perity. Roughly speaking, mor e than half the territory
of the mother State of the Commonwealth may be
regarded as the most suitable spot of all the broad
areas on the face of the globe for the production of
wool —the finest class of wool, too The development
of this great industry in New South Wales runs parallel
with the history of Australia itself. As it has been
well said, “ the world’s history holds no parallel for
the amazing development which took place in the
pastohal industry of Australasia during the last fifty
years of the nineteenth century.” Perhaps the most
striking example in the arithmetic of human affairs
ever recorded is the multiplication that has taken
place hr a hundred years in the numbers of live stock
in Australasia. At the end of 1787 excepting a few
pigs—descended from Captain Cook’s stock —there
was not a domestic animal browsing on the virgin
pastures of these colonies. At the beginning of 1788
Captain Phdlip landed at Botany Bay, bringing with
him one bull, one bull calf, four cows, one stallion,
three mares, three colts, forty-four sheep, four goats,
twenty-eight pigs, and some fowls and turkeys. In
1888 sheep had multiplied to 46,583,469 ; cattle to
1,622,907 ; horses to 411,368 ; and swine to 248,583 ;
and art the end of 1904, when the industry was reviving
from the disastrous effects of the drought years 1891-
1902, the value of pastoral property in this State re-
presented £133,553.000.
To visit a modern sheep station in any part of the
colonies is to discover the highest class of animals
under the most favourable conditions for the pro-
duction of wool. Having experienced this, it is hard
to realise that the sheep of to-day trace their family
descent from such indifferent parent stocks as Cape
sheep and Bengal sheep, which browsed under the
gums long before the arrival of the silky-coated merino
or the fleshy Leicester and) South Down. Governor
Phillip obtained all the sheep he landed from the native
flocks at the Cape. These Barrow, a traveller of the
eighteenth century, gives the following description of :
They are long-legged, small in the, body, and thin
in the forequarters and across the ribs. They are of
various colours, having small necks, long hanging
ears, with strong frizzled hair, fit for mattresses, which
is neither washed nor shorn, but drops off of itself in
the spring months. They have little internal or ex-
ternal fat, but it is collected on the rump and on the
tail, proving them to be either a variety of steatonyqa ,
or a mixture of them and broad-tailed sheep. The
tail ib short, broad, fiat, naked on the under side, ami
weighing" from 6 to 12 lbs.’ 1 '
Many of the sheep which Phillip landed died soon
affccr ? through grazing, it was upon unsuitable
grass ; other accidents happened, and'in a few months’
time only one sheep remained. To add to -these
troubles, the caretaker allowed the two bulls with four
cows to roam away, and they were lost. When all
hopes of recovering ,tliese had 1 been given up, the re-
maining cow. 1 not being in calf, was killed and eaten.
Phillip, writing' to the Secretary of the Colonies notify-
ing hrs losses, sard : “ One sheep only remains of up-
wards of seventy which I had purchased at the Cape.
It is the rank grass under the trees which has destroyed
them.” Rank neglect would perhaps have been
nearer the truth, as in the confusion of arranging the
settlement, the sheep were kept confined for safety
and, under the charge of a convict, allowed to starve.
More stock had to be obtained, and these were
brought from the Cape in 1791. and from Calcutta in
1792, H.M.S. ‘‘Gorgon” arrived from Capetown on Sep-
tember 21. 1791. with 23 cows, 18 sheep and 11 hogs ;
in the following year H.M.S'i “ Atlantic ” landed
from Calcutta 10 ewes, 2 bulls, and one cow —as many
others being lost on the voyage. These were the first
Bengalee sheep, “ small, laifk and thin, and the colours
of three-fohirths of each flock is black or dark grey.
The quality of the fleece is worse, if possible, than its
colour ; it is harsh, thin and wiry to a very remarkable
degree.” Simmonds, who thus describes these ani-
mals, adds : “ The fleece of the Indian sheep ordinarily
weighs but half a pound ” ; and Hoyle asserts : “ No-
where is the mutton finer than that of the grain-fed
sheep of the plains of India.” Phillip took his depar-
ture in the “ Atlantic,” December 11, 1792, giving
each married settler one ewe for the purpose of breed-
ing. Immediately before this distribution,, the public
stock, kept at Parramatta, numbered 3 bulls, 2 bull
calves, 15 cows, 3 calves, 5 stallions, 6 mares, 43 hogs
and 105 sheep.
The “ Atlantic ” had hardly cleared the Heads
when the greater portion of the settlers offered their
ewes for sale. “I was absolutely obliged to encou-
rage and promote the purchase of them by the officers,


dreading that, without this precaution, the dissipation
of a week would exterminate effectually a stock that
had been the work of years to collect.” Thus Lieu-
tenant-Governor Grose, who, soon after taking charge,
reported that he had “ allotted to such officers as had
asked, one hundred acres of land, which, with great
spirit, they, at their own expense, are clearing. . . As
I am aware they are at this time the only description
of settlers on whom reliance can be placed, T shall
encourage their pursuit as much as h in my power.’
Grose by that action really laid the foundation of the
vast pastoral and agricultural industries of this State ;
and consequently of our wealth of 1 to-day ; although
his grants did not mean the actual alienation of the
land. The socialistic idea of land being the property
of the State prevailed in those days. Land so granted
was secured to the State by the payment of quit-rent,
according to acreage ; this State-acknowledged right
being maintained until, after years of persistent effort
on the part of the colonists and several alterations of
the rate charged, the quit-rent was quietly surren-
dered. There was another impost too : the recipient
of free acres had to support a certain number of' pri-
soners, accordrng to the extent of hrs grant.
Some of the officers who received grants, notably
Captarn John Macarthur and Ensign William Cox,
proved to be the very backbone of the colony. Mac-
arthur, a man of high principles, of extraordinary
energy, determination and foresight, arrived in the
colony as lieutenant in the New South Wales Corps in
the beginning of 1790. In June he took up his quar-
ters at Parramatta for a time, but was soon recalled
to Sydney, where he was appointed, in February, 1792,
Inspector of Works. In the beginning of 1793 he was
sent back to Parramatta in charge of the settlement,
where he received a grant of land. February 12, 1793,
and on April 1 another grant of 100 acres. It was not
until the fall of 1794 that he turned his attention to
bleaters, when he had on his farm a few horses and
cows, 130 goats, and upwards of 100 hogs.” At that
time there were only 526 sheep in the colony, held
almost wholly by officers of the establishment. The
Government stock consisted principally of cattle
augmented this year by the discovery, at the Cow-
pastures, of a wild herd, the progeny of the beasts
which had strayed away in 1788 Prices according to
Collins, ruled as follows : —Cape ewes, from £6 to
£8 Bs. ; Cape wethers, from £4 to £4 10s. ; she goats (full
grown), £8 Bs. ; English cows, £BO, and horses, £9O.
“The sheep I began to breed from,” Captain
Macarthur deponed before the Committee of the Privy
Council for Trade in 1803, “ were of the Bengal race,
weighing about 6 lbs per quarter. I improved these
by rams obtained from a cross between the Cape ewe
and some rams of the Spanish breed. I cannot ascer-
tain the particular breed of the rams I afterwards
obtained a number of ewes of the Cape breed, and these
I continued to cross with rams bearing wool. By this
means I obtained what I conceived to be a fine breed
of Spanish sheep, and bied as many of this pure breed
as possible, and crossed all the ewes bearing coarse
wool, or being of the hairy sort, with rams of the
Spanish breed. The sheep of the country is the hairy
sort I conceive there exists a preference in the colony
in favour of sheep 1 bearing inferior wool, founded on
an opinion that the carcases of such sheep are more
profitable.’ ’ ‘
This statement was amplified in the evidence he
gave to M,r. Commissioner Bigge in 1820 : —“ In 1794
I’purchased from an officer sixty Bengal ewes and iambs
which had been imported from Calcutta, and very
soon afterwards I procured from the captain of a trans-
port from Ireland two Irish ewes and a young ram.
The Indian sheep produced coarse hair, and the wool
of the Irish sheep was then valued at no more than
ninepence per lb. By crossing the two breedSs I had
the satisfaction of seeing the lambs of the Indian ewes
bear a mingled fleece of hair and wool.”
Before Macarthur embarked in' sheep-farming he
had watched the efforts of the pioneers preceding him
—Messrs Palmer and Bass, Lieutenant Shortland,
Ensign Wm. Cox, and the Rev. Samuel Marsden—the
pastoral parson, “ mighty fond of shee'p, ” as the old
hands used to say. Their lambs suggested to him
what experience later on enabled Wentworth to affirm,
that “ there is in its climate alone a peculiar conge-
niality for the amelioration of wool, which has been
found of itself to occasion, in a few years, a very
perceptible improvement in the coarsest breeds of
sheep. Even the East Indian sheep (of the colony),
which in its natural state is entirely covered with
hair, produces, without any cross with a finer race, a
progeny, the superiority of whose fleece over that of the
parent stock is visible in every remoter generation.”
Macarthur thought that with an improved cross still
better results could be obtained, and when his experi-
ment with the Irish cross bore out his" suspicion, he
determined to introduce a strain of the Spanish
merinos, then in highest repute for beauty and value
of their fleeces. So /energetically ■ were his farming
operations conducted that at the end of August, 1795,
Mrs. Macarthur was able to write, “ Our] stock of
cattle is large. We have now' fifty head] a dozen
horses, and about a thousand sheep.”
In March, 1797( Captain Waterhouse, of H.M.S.
“ Reliance,”' owner of Waterhouse Farm, on Liberty
Plains, was ordered to the Cape to fetch stock. He
carried with him commissions to obtain sheep for his
brother-in-law, Mr. Bass, and Lieut. Shortland ; and
when getting their supplies he also purchased 24 head
on his own accofint. Of these 13 were of the Spanish
breed, purchased at £4 each from Mrs. Gordon, widow
of Colonel Gordon, an'English officer in the service of
the Dutch. “ I offered all mine to the Governor,”
Waterhouse wrote to Sir Joseph Banks, / “ but I sup-
pose he was satisfied that they were in the colony, as
he declined purchasing them. Captain Macarthur then
offered me fifteen guineas each if I would let him have
the whole. This I declined, Wishing to distribute them.
I supplied Captain Kent, Captain Macarthur, Mr.
Marsden and Mr. Laycock ; as the Spanish ewes had
lambs (ndne but Spanish rams running with them): I
supplied Mr. Williamson, Captain Rowley, Mr. Moore,
Government, and, in fact, any person who wished to
have them. I never had any other than Spanish rams
with my flock, and on quitting the colony sold the
flock to Mr. Cox, the paymaster, with the exception of
a few to' Captain Macarthur,” These 'sheep'imported


by Captain \\ aterhouse were the first Spanish merinos
introduced into Australia, but whether they were of
pure stock is doubtful. Nine years later Major Johnstone
Sale Catalogue or the First Shipment of New South Wales Wool
sold in London, 1821.
wrote : 4 6 The 21,000 sheep that were in the colony in
August, 1806 were composed of all the different breeds
that had been imported, and very few comparatively
fine-woolled, sheep amongst them. No real merinos
had been imported till the arrival of the 4 Argo/ in
June, 1805.” This ship brought out the sheep pur-
chased by Captain Macarthur at Kina George’s sale,
The statement is most probably correct, for, according
to Count Lasteyrie, the author of one of the best works
on this celebrated breed of sheep. “ the first merinos
introduced into Holland had degenerated through the
negligence of their owners. Hence some animals
imported prior to 1789 have left a posterity no longer
boasting the original excellence of fleece.” And there is
every reason to suppose it was some of these progeny
Mrs, Gordon sold Captain Waterhouse.
During the first dozen years there arrived in the
colony 304 sheep. The live stock returns then (Feb-
ruary 15, 1800) showed that we possessed Mares,
99 ; horses, 59 ; cows, 584 ; bulls and oxen, 245 : sheep
5,676 ; goats, 3,088, and swine. 2,300. In September,
1800 Macarthur, who desired to leave the colony,
offered his live stock and farm to the Government for
the sum of £4.000. 44 Fifty head horned cattle, at
£37 per head ; 10 horses at £65 per head, including 5
mares of the Indian breed, and one remarkably fine
stallion from America ; 600 sheep, several of which
are Spanish, and the most of the flock of that breed,
at £2 10s per head. The farm contiguous to Parra-
matta to be givenin.” Governor King strongly recom-
mended the purchase of this, 44 the best grassed and
stocked farm in the colony ” ; but the Duke of Portland
declined the offer and censured Macarthur’s command-
ing officer for allowing him to continue 4 a farmer ’
to the extent he appears to be.” As events turned
out, it was most fortunate for the colony that his offer
was not accepted.
A year later Macarthur left New South Wales
under arrest to answer, at Whitehall, a charge of fight-
ing a duel with his commandant. Colonel Paterson,
who again received a reprimand whilst Macarthur got
off scot-free. Apparently it was his destiny to come
out of his troubles on top. He took with him to Lon-
don several specimens of the wool of his merinos and
of his cross breeds, and was told by the experts that
the best samples possessed a softness equal to any
Spanish. 4 ‘ Could the colony produce such kinds of wool
it would be a great acquisition to our manufactory in
England.” Of the fleece of the Bengal sheep he was
told, 44 The hair only fit for the bricklayers to mix
amongst their mortar.” ! Finding his better-classed
wools received so favourably, he now made great en-
deavours to bring into prominence the potentialities
of New South Wales as a wool-producing country.
His efforts weie directed in two directions. He sought
by an appeal to the Crown a diversion in his own favour
of the primitive land laws of the colony ; and he at-
tempted also to induce British capitalists to finance
a pastoral company for New South Wales pastures.
The last project, it may be noted, contained the basis
of a scheme for the formation, two decades later, of the
Australian Agricultural and Pastoral Company
On July 26, 1803, Macarthur delivered a state-
ment of the institutions and progress of the breed of
fine-woolled sheep in New South Wales to Under-
secretary Sullivan, at the office of Lord Hobart, then
Colonial Secretary. This commenced the campaign.


Captain Macaxthur has now about 4,000 sheep,
amongst whom there aie no rams but of the Spanish
breed. He calculates that they will, with proper care,
double themselves every two-and-a-half years ; and
that in twenty years they will be so increased as to
produce as much tine wool as is now imported from
Spain and other countries at an annual expense of
£1,800,000. sterling/’ (This amount represented the
then value of British imports.) c - Captain Macarthur is
so convinced of the practicability of supplying this
country with any quantity of fine wool it may require,
that all the risk attendant upon the undertaking he
will cheerfully bear —he will requiie no pecuniary aid ;
and all the encouragement he humbly solicits is the
protection of Government, permission to occupy a
sufficient track of unoccupied land- to feed his flocks,
and the indulgence of selecting from among the con-
victs such men foi shepherds as may from their pre-
vious occupations know something of the business.”
About six months later tin. prospectus for the
company was issued. A capita] of £20,000 was re-
quired. Sir Joseph Banks, who warmly supported
the patriotic scheme/’ thought that “if due en-
couragement were given ” (by the authorities)
“ £40.0C0 at least will he raised by subscription.”
The promoter was to dispose of all his farm and act as
managing director. The speculation, however did not
'catch on.” At first the wary speculators said,
Get your land first, and then we will consider the
scheme.” But the “sufficient track of unoccupied
lands ’ asked for bulked into a rather momentous
question. It was known that a square mile would
carry but 200 sheep, and the necessary area tr» suc-
cessfully develop the scheme embraced a much larger
horizon than official niggardliness could bring itself to
contemplate. Sir Joseph Banks, foreseeing the diffi-
vuHy, threw out a proposition as a feeler, in which lay
the kernel of the future squatting system. While
portions of the soil would be granted for purposes of
agricultural settlement, he submitted that other poi-
tions could be utilised as sheep-walks till required for
settlement. He uiged that the State allow the pro-
jected company to run stock ovei certain areas, subject
to an o-der for removal ; 100.000 acres might be lent in
the first instance, and, as sheep increased, other runs
ot similar size should be allowed up to the extent of a
million acres. This eventually became the first squat-
ting rule. A squatter held the area for its grass alone,
and removed elsewhere when the Government notified
that it was required for other uses. Sir Joseph’s pro-
position could net mature, as the proposed company
fell through. No end of concessions were made to
quicken the cautious capitalists, who could hardly bring
themselves to look at Botany Bay through friendly
glasses, no matter how tempting the prospects. Mac-
arthur met their demands that he should take up
“ a sufficient number of shares to secure to the com-
pany his utmost attention in procuring the intended
object ” ; and then they modestly proposed “ that the
required indulgences being obtained by the company,
the whole risk and responsibility should be borne by
Captain Macarthur.” Negotiations closed. The finan-
ciers ofj Bartholomew Lane lacked the prevision of
Captain Peron, of the French Discovery Expedition,
whojj predicted/in 1802 % that colonial wool would be
“ the introduction to Great Britain of a new bianch
of commerce as easy as it is profitable.”
Official interest, however, had now been aroused* The
Lords of the Committees of the Privy Council for Trade
and Foreign Plantations, having examined Macarthur,
“a conditional giant of land of a reasonable extent
may be, perhaps, with safety granted to Mr. Macarthur
for the pasturage of sheep only, provided a power br
reserved m such grant to resume the same at any
future period on giving other lands further distant
from the cultivated land of the colony.” Thanks to
the steadfast support of the British manufacturers and
Bjr Joseph Bank’s private influence with the Ministry,
Macaithur secured more liberal concessions than he
would otherwise have obtained. On the recommen-
dations of Earl Camden he was granted 5,000 acres of
land at the Cowpastuies, not as a free grant as gene-
i ally supposed nowadays, but on payment of a certain
number of rams at the rate of fourteen acres for each
ran: —a fair price considering the value of merinos at
the time. Macarthur, after obtaining permission to
resign his commission, returned to New 'South Wales
about the middle of 1805, when he selected a pasturage
near the Nepean Kiver, afterwards known as the Camden
Estate. Two large medals were voted him by the Society
of Arts ; and to further encourage his spirit of enter-
prise Parliament enacted that “ no higher duty than
Id. per lb. should be charged on New South Wales
wool imported into England.” Shortly after sailing
from England he purchased, at the famous sale of
George lll.’s Negretti merinos, at Kew, ten rams and
ewes for £llO 6s , these constituting the consignment
per “ Argo ” before referred to. Macarthur died in
1837, and the bulk of the sheep he left behind him
were disposed of twenty years later, some of them
going to England, where they have been found to
thrive well. The flock at its maximum numbered
about 400 ewes of the first class and 500 ewes of the
second class. A small flock of about 50 of the direct
descendants of the Negretti sheep purchased by Mac-
arthur from the Royal stud farm are still kept at Cam-
den Park. Like Horace, he could say, “ I have fin-
ished for myself a monument more lasting than brass.”
Whilst Macarthur was prosecuting 1 his affairs in
England, Ensign Cox and the Rev. S. Marsden, rival
pioneers, were actively pursuing sheep-rearing in the
colony. Marsden, in fsheep was unquestionably an
authority second to none, and in the improvement of
stock Be held an equally high reputation. “ Sheep in
New South Wales,” he wrote in the earliest days of
their farming, “ can never suffer from want of food or
the severity of the weather as in colder climates. The
ewes lamb three times in two years, and the rams may
be put with the progeny when the latter are eighteen
months.” 44 Put everything into four feet ” was his
advice, and He acted upon it. Macarthur aimed at
the perfection of the fleece in his breeding ; but the
“ energetic parson ” was more ambitious, striving to
unite beauty of shape, excellence of constitution
weight of carcass, and goodness of wool. By careful
selection and unceasing perseverance he gathered
together a flock of first-class character, and the Mars-
den breed commanded long prices for many years.


At ter his death, Cox, who retired from the service as
a captain, purchased from the settlers at Brush Farm
a farm of 1,400 acres, and here he began a record in
sheep-breeding which has continued unbroken in his
family for upwards of a century, his grandsons being
known as having worked up at Mudgee one of the finest
flocks of the Saxon merinos in the State. In 1806
Captain Cox was the only person who had an English
bull in the territory, the fee for each cow being £3 3s.
He afterwards continued sheep-breeding at Clarendon,
and whilst there constructed a road across the Blue
Mountains, for which he was rewarded with a grant of
2.000 acres at Mulgoa. There his son carried on an
extensive sheep farm, purchasing a number of Ram-
bouillet merino ewes from Sir John Jamieson, of
Regentville, and rams from Mr. Riley, of Raby, who
was one of the first to follow in the lead of Macarthur.
W hen the country became sheep sick 55 the flock was
son-in-law of Marsden, from which it is probable that,
as Riley and the Coxes moved their sheep from the
unhealthy coast to Mudgee, so Marsden moved his to
the Molong district. Some time about 1840 John
Smith became the owner of Garnboola by purchase
from Betts, and in 1848 he purchased runs from the
A.A. Company ; later he imported Negrettis from
Spain. This so tar seems to be the source of the flock,
for though other purchases were made, in no case do
they seem to have been used beyond the stage of ex-
periment. Pure Saxon merinos were tried and found
to be more delicate than the Spanish, and Mr. Smith
always made constitution a greater point than any
other. Rambouillet was tried, but for some reason
discarded. In the early days of the Tasmanian sales
Mi’. Smith caught the prevailing craze and bought a
Tasmanian ram. This was a failure. In 1862. at a
wool show, Mr. Smith exhibited rams’ fleeces of which
Grand Champion Housed Ram. Rouse Bros., Biraganbil, Gulgong.
removed to Mudgee, where the Saxon merino wag
found to thrive excellently, and that particular breed
has been adhered to since by Messrs. Cox. At the
Technological Museum is a fleece from one of these
Saxon merinos, which experts have pronounced un-
surpassable anywhere for general excellence.
There are in the Molong district very old grants
in the name of the Rev. S. Marsden, who it has been
already mentioned purchased some of the famous
Spanish merinos on their being brought over from
the Cape of Good Hope by Captain Waterhouse in
1797. Marsden proved a careful and capable breeder.
There is still extant a collection of samples of wool
from his Bengal ewes producing hair through first,
second, third cross, &c., with merino ranis, showing his
difficulties and endeavours to arrive at a merino Hock.
Hefts, the owner ol Gamboola, near Molong, was
the greasy average was 11 lbs. 7 ozs. These were
heavy weights, but the medal was lost for the reason
that the wool was not sufficiently fine. Those were
the days of fine wool. Now in a show-ring the then
Gamboola sheep would probably be voted too fine.
About 1879 Mr. E. H. Kater (of Messrs. Kater
Bros., Mumblebone, Warren) made his first purchase
from Mr. Smith, of about 75 ewes, being one-half of a
picked lot sold to Barton and a’Beckett, and an old
stud ram. This was before the time of his purchase
of a Tasmanian. Mr. Kater then bought his cast
for age ewes for several years, and two or three old
rams beside flock rams. The last flock 'of ewes
contained a number of separate mark, plainly half
Tasmanian, and not nearly so good as the pure sheep.
There were also bought ewes from Mr. E. A. Smith
ol Gamboola breed


In several respects the year 1804 was a memorable
one in the history of the colony Circumstances
brought the land difficulty into existence, and it very
soon became a live question requiring solution. There
had lately been a great increase in the flocks, and
Governor King was able to write home hopefully re-
garding pastoral pursuits. “ Leaving out seven-
eighths,” he wrote, “which have little or no wool
and averaging each of the eighth at three pounds a
fleece, the quantity of good wool obtained this year
will be about 6,200 lbs. As the fleeces are constantly
improving by the distribution of rams from the
Spanish, South Downs, Teeswater and Irish rams, it
may be inferred that the wool will in two years have
a much greater increase. ... To feed this increasing
stock requires pasturage. To give all two or three
hundred acres each would soon alienate all the dispos-
able land adjacent to the settlers, and to give particular
people 300 or 400 acres each, in places of their own
selection, would soon reduce the small farmer to sell his
farm and stock, because he cannot feed them, to the
persons who can command money or its worth.” The
time has arrived to change the system. For years bona
fide settlers have clamoured to get rid of quit-rents, re-
gardless of the fact that, with the cessation of this im-
post, free grants would stop too. Not that this mat-
tered much to the sheep farmer. Even grants of 1,000
acres would be of small service to him when at least
three acres were needed to sustain one sheep. But the
lands surrounding the settlement were invitingly acces-
sible. King grasped the position, and, still adhering to
the theory of State-ownership, introduced, in his pro-
clamation of August 11, 1804. the now historical leas-
ing idea —which at a later stage was strongly supported
by Commissioner Bigge. This was the Governor’s pro-
ments bounded by others, and it being impracticable
to locate larger allotments to all who now possess, or
may hereafter possess, stock in order to secure to their
use pasturage for rearing and maintaining cattle and
Mr. William Cox, a pioneer in the pastoral industry.
sheep, his Excellency has deemed it expedient to allot,
by grants under his Majesty, certain portions of grazing
lands hereunto stated. The Leases will be made out
in the names of those persons resident in each district
who are named by the rest and approved by the Gov-
ernment. 55 The idea of these regulations was to
induce persons of respectability to rear sheep on an
Merino Ram.
clamation —important from the fact of its being the
initiator of the now famous Squatters 5 Leases
“Whereas it is necessary for the preservation and
increase of the breeding stock that portions of land
should be reserved adjoining those districts where a
number of settlements have been fixed in small allot-
extensive scale in the interior of the country. What
their immediate effect was will be shown further on.
It will be convenient at this stage to concisely
summarise, as far as space permits, the leading
events of the succeeding years that bear upon the
pastoral industry.


Facts and Figures about Sheep.
When Governor Phillip set out to farm in Aus-
tralia he stocked 49 sheep After sustaining many
losses, he left a Government herd of 105 behind him
at the end oi 1792. It was not a great start, even for
those primitive days, and the settlers soon showed
they were equal to much better work. In 1808—the
twentieth year of the colony—thei* flocks represented
59,241. This' numerical progress, once set going, con-
tinued until 1901, without any halt; rnaugie official
rebuffs, periodical droughts disease and an elasticity
of market capable of fluctuations from between £4
and £5, to Is. per head. In that year (1901) it became
apparent that the runs were overstocked. The flock-
masters adopted prompt measures to put themselves
nght in this respect ; but Dame Nature, in her old-
fashioned way, took the matter out of their hands.
incomes of from £5OO to £5,000 from this source wer
to be met with all over the.colony—“ more, in fact, here
than in any other part of the world. ’* This addendum
in quotes is from Dr. J. I), Lang, a shepherd who never
took his gaze off the sources of collections. In 1842,
we read of 4,804,946 sheep : in 1862, of 6,145 141 ; in
1882, of 36,114,814; and in the great record year of
1901,' of 61,831,456. It was* something like a fall
when sheep statistics fell to 26,649,424 in 1902 ; and
few in the industry found themselves equal to review-
ing the position placidly. To sustain an average
annual drop between the years 1890-1900 of 3 4 per
cent., and for the first four years of the new century
an additional -4 per centum must be trying to even the
fattest pocket. This steady decline compelled the
pastoralists to subdivide their flocks, and of late years
they have made a marked difference in the carrying
Grand Champion Unhoused Ewe. Executors late D. McCaughey, Coree, Jerilderie.
with an emphasism which gave the antipodean world
pause and made it cry out “ Pity the poor squatter. ’'
From 1892 to 1903 there was not a single favourable
season except 1900, when a little lost ground was picked
up. Steadily flocks went down from the record in
1891 until the climax was reached in 1902. Then the
pastoral pendulum swung back —at first, oh, so slowly !
Two millions increase in the herds in 1903, six millions
more in 190-1 : hut 1905 put sheep-rearing in its normal
position again, and there has been no backward march
since. To detail figures—ln 1828 the official score
stood at 536,391. Then several years were leapt over,
without any tally, by the gentleman supposed to count.
The wide-awake newspaperial chronicler of the day,
however, informs us that the number of bleaters m
New South Wales would probably be, at the end o f
1837, not less than 2.000 000; and settlers deriving
capacity of theii holdings. In the boom year 73 hold*
ings each carried a million sheep and upwards ; now
only five depasture that number. On the other hand,
7,606 holdings in 1891 with 1 to 1,000 sheep on each,
had swelled bn 1901 to 12,732 holdings.
Financially things were at their best when the
advent of the Australian Agricultural and Pastoral
Company, in 1825, created a boom in sheep, which sent
up the general prices at a bound from normality to four
and five guineas per caput ; they bottomed at one
shilling per sheep in those terrible times of disaster,
which induced Henry O’ Brien, a Yass squatter, at the
suggestioir of F. Ebsworth. of Sydney, to start boiling
down, and thus open up a field of unexploited riches —
“saving the industry,” some sen nationalists said.
Those were the days when, on the dictum of \V ('.
Wentworth, men possessing 10,000 sheep were unable


to get credit ior a bag of sugar.. The new process
caught on. In 1844, barely a year after, the earliest
announcement of the plan, '217 ; 797 sheep were boiled
down ; in 1845 there were 56, and in 1850 110 boiling-
down establishments. During these :seven years the
sheep converted into tallow numbered 2,364,539 ;
whilst, in addition, 260,000 cattle were so used. At
the beginning of sheep-breeding pure and cross breeds
were imported without any official restrictions, the
settlers endeavouring to obtain whatever strains they
considered "‘most likely to improve the local supplies.
Thus the Spanish merino, Cape and Bengal, South
Down, Teeswater and Irish rams and ewes found their
way into the country. Then through fear of scab and
other diseases importations were entirely forbidden
until 1888;, since which year Lincoln. South Down,
Shropshire, Leicester, Vermont and other pure-bred
sheep have been introduced into Australia. Tasmania,
however, still supplies us with the cream of the stud
stock. In 1850 an abortive attempt was made to
introduce sheep from South America. Some years
afterwards 300 alpacas and llamas were brought oyer
for the' Government ; but their wool proving of inferior
quality, the flock was sold in small lots, and the ex-
periment has not been repeated.
The Financial Side of the Flocks.
Six years after Macarthur had shown the samples
of his fleeces to English experts, he ventured (1807) on
the London market with a modest consignment oi
247 lbs. Evidently results were encouraging, as the
following year he wooed the home buyers with another
parcel of 586 lbs. These exports were followed by
167 lbs. in 1811 ; 32.971 lbs., in 1815 ; 73,161 lbs., in
1816; 13,616 lbs., in 1818; and 74,284 lbs. in 1819.
Prices for this produce ranged from 2s. Id. to 6s per lb. ;
some of the wool, when washed, and sorted, being
valued at 10s. 6d. per lb. Charges—by no means
excessive as times went —were sufficiently hea\y to
make it unprofitable to send any but the best quality
away. Freight was 44d. per lb. until 1818, and 3d.
per lb. for many years afterwards ; dues this end, car-
riage, sorting, Ac., came to another 4d. per lb. or there-
abouts ; the British Parliament levied a duty of Id.
per lb. on colonial wool till 1823, 3d. per lb. till 1826,
and then 6d. a pound. This charge was subsequently
remitted on all wool .transported in British bottoms,
as well as the auction duty upon public sales of New
South Wales wool. Perhaps it was this last import
which led to all shipments of wool prior to 1818 being
disposed of to private buyers. The 1819 wool, how-
ever—about 250 bales, still very largely Macarthur’s-
went to the highest bidder ; and the following clipping
from the “Annual Report” of January 17, 1820,
furnishes interesting particulars of the sale: “ New
South Wales.—Some specimens of wool, we believe the
first ever sent to England the produce of this colony
were sold on Friday by public auction at ‘ Garraway’s ’
and obtained prices that cannot but be gratifying and
encouraging to the agriculturists of that settlement.
Wools in general have seldom been known 1 so low as
nt the present period ; yet many samples of that from
New South Wales were purchased at above 3s. the
pound. The whole averaged a higher price than some
Spanish "we offered at the same time, and more than
double that of some specimens of German growth,
also sold on Friday at Garraway’s. Some excellent
judges of the article, who were present at the sale,
declared that had the wool been more carefully sorted,
and the finer portions of it effectually separated from
the coarser, considerably higher prices would have
been given. The farmers: of the colony have suc-
ceeded perfectly in producing fleeces of a fine quality,
and'have only to learn the further art of assorting it
for the British market. The wool from New South
Wales pays no duty ; the whole amount, therefore, is
divided'between the grower and the importer.” The
grower could certainly not do so well as this in his
home market. A notice in the Sydney ('revette of 1819
sets forth that “ Mr. Raine will give lOd. per lb. for
wool delivered at his store, when washed before being
shorn and duly tied in separate fleeces.”
“Wool-growing,” wrote Commissioner Bigge in
his report to Parliament in 1822, “ must prove the
principal, if not the only, course of productive industr}
within the colony, from which the settlers can 'derive
the means of paying the advances made to them from
the mother country, or supplying their own demands
foi articles of foreign manufacture. This was written
at a time when Wentworth asserted “ there were not
10,000 sheep of a good sort throughout New Holland.”
But the commissioner was no false prophet. As early
as 1820, when 100,000 lbs. was exported, the wool of
the colony began to assume a character of importance
in the English market. By 1842 the exports of wool
had increased to 517,537 lbs. ; in 1862 they w T ere
13,482,139 lbs. ; in 1882, 146,221,132 lbs. ; and in 1891,
they had amounted to 374,742,701 lbs. Adding to
this the'amount used locally, and the total, clip for
that year reached the immense quantity of 375,600,000
lbs , valued at £11,059,305. In 1904 the clip repre-
sented 249.140,000 lbs., of the value of £9,274,387.
Owing to the increased attention bestowed on breeding
there has been much improvement in the weight of
the fleece during the last twenty-five 'years, with the
result that the losses of bad seasons have been greatly
diminished. Figures best illustrate this : In 1879 the
average weight of the fleece from sheep shorn in the
greasy was 5 lbs 1 oz. ; in 1904 it was but half an ounce
short of 7 lbs.
The Seamy Side of Sheep-Farming.
Like the Egyptians of old, those in Australia who
look to the land for a living have to face years of lean
kind as well as years of plenty : unlike the Egyptians,
the colonists have done little —comparatively nothing
to tide over their periods of leanness. Of course,
there have been exceptions —notably that of the great
sheep king, Sir Samuel McCaughey ; but his splendid,
and. alas ! isolated example, only emphasises the above
reflection. To-day the seamy side of sheep-breeding
may be summed up in two words —drought and flood.
Visitations of disease there have been —anthrax, foot-
rot, scab, fluke, worms, Ac. ; but, generally speaking,
in point of health sheep fare remarkably well in New
South Wales. The rabbit has more or less to be con-
tended with, and many thousands of pounds sterling
have been spent in futile efforts to exterminate him.
But with the termination of Dr. Danysz's labours it is


to be hoped Bunny will be effectually got xid of ; a
consummation the spirited action of the pastoralists in
bringing the eminent scientist to Australia richly
deserves. Tattle good can be done here by detailing
the disasters of the past. Their enumeration will
suffice. The first set-back of moment happened in
1798-9, when, after no rain for two months, “the
whole country in a blaze and streams of fresh water
dried up," a terrible flood swept doyni the Hawkes-
bury, resulting in heavy losses of stock. In 1806 that
river of disaster again rose in flood, 78 feet above its
ban*vS, sweeping out to sea bags of wool and almost the
whole of the settlers’ animal wealth. Again, in 1809,
in 1816, an : in 1819 the Hawkosbury overflowed above
the high level of 1806 with like consequences. The
serious droughts of 1813, 1814 and 1815 occasioned an
immense diminution of herds and flocks, and drove
were bad ones for the sheep farmers, occasioning the
loss of moie than 8,000.000 sheep. But this disaster
dwarfs besides the losses of 1892-1900 and 1902, when
unfavourable seasons, protracted beyond all experi-
ence, were responsible for the sacrifice of 23,000,000
sheep.
Expansion and Settlement.
The history of exploration in New South Wales
is the story of settlement and of the expansion of the
pastoral industry. Fiom the county of Cumberland
settlement advanced westward, and after the alluvial
lands of the Hawkesbury and Nepean valleys had
been taken up, the occupation of the lower portion of
the Hunter River in 1809-10 gave some idea of the
illimitable areas inland awaiting occupation. But
this gentle wave of pastoial occupation, whose how
then could barely .be perceived, came without question
Grand Champion Unhoused Ram. J. S. Horsfall, Widgiewa, Narrandera.
numbers of ruined settleis to the depletion of their
more fortunate neighbours’ stock. During the years
1827. 1828 and 1829 New South Wales was visited
with another most afflictive and unprecedented drought,
the effect of which was to ruin hundreds of sheep
farmers, many of whom found themselves saying of
the sheriff :
“Having got all he could by the writs of ft fa,
By way of a change he’d brought up a ca sa "
Bad times ” came round again as a result of general
financial disoider in 1841-2-3, driving the squatters to
tallow and ‘’portable soup” in order to avert the
days of wrath. Another dry period of unusual severity
passed over tin* colony dining 18(54, 1865 and 1866,
crippling many station-holders until the middle of the
seventies. The veais 1883-4. especial!v tne latter vear.
when a way across the Blue Mountains was found, the
Dividing Range was crossed and the grassy western
plains were depastured. Here the flock-master, ever
a pioneer, found his Eden. Very soon after the fertile
counties grouped around the cities of Bathurst, Orange
and Mudgee had been settled, Oxley’s expeditions to
the Lachlan River and Macquarie marshes in 1817 and
1818 opened the way to a further vast expansion of
back country. Brisbane’s term of office (1821-5)
proved. an era of discovery. The Maneroo country,
first named Brisbane Downs, was disclosed in 1823 ;
Oxley discovered the Brisbane River in the same year ;
in 1824 Wellington Valley was settled, and Hume led
i!.e way to Port Phillip. In the following year Cun-
ningham explored the magnificent pasture lands of
Liverpool Plains. The Australian Agricultural Company


formed in 1825 for pastoral purposes, more powerfully
influenced prices in New South Wales than any pre-
ceding occurrence. The company managed to obtain
what had been refused Macarthui—a grant of a million
acies of land absolutely free, With this license their
manager, die celebrated Polar-regions hero, Captain
Parry, absorbed 316,000 acres on one side of the Peel
River, and 500,000 acres on the rich soils on the western
side of the Liverpool Range —the finest lands in the
colony. Previous to their advent which provoked a
mania that sent sheep prices up to more guineas
than the animals were worth in shillings, there was
practically no freehold in Australia In 1831 their
wool-clip of 145 bales produced a profit of £4.129;
part of the clip of 1835, 363 bales, averaged 2s. 7d.
i ir lb ; at the end of 1841 the company had 74,469
‘ heep ; and after weathering the bad ‘‘forties,” in
1845 their flocks numbered 145,532. Before 1831 The
whole of the country between the Pacific and the Far
West, and the Murray River and the Darling Downs,
had been disclosed to the squatter, who was not back-
ward to turn to his advantage these far-reaching op-
portunities. Sheep were no longer cribbed, cabined
and confined. It was their golden era. Everywhere
was to be found free, open country, splendidly grassed,
and settled for depasturage, at the cost of a few simple
habitations of slabs' and shingles, no fences to be
erected, rabbit-proof or otherwise, no spaces to be
cleared. “ The main hut, on the head station. ” writes
Hodgson in “ Reminiscences of Australia,” “is of
various sizes. . . For the accommodation of 1 two,
a hut 40 feet long by 14 wide,' and divided into one
sitting-room, 14 feet square, two bedrooms, 9 feet
long, and a smaller one of 8 feet, is sufficient; added to
which on three sides) perhaps, are little sloping rooms,
which will answer well fori pantry, store-room, or a
friend’s bedroom ; in front, a large verandah, eight feet
wide, is erected, both as a promenade and lounge, as
also a shelter for the sitting-room. . . . The sides are
built of large slabs. . . . A roof of bark or shingle is
arranged from the face of the top sleeper. . . . The
whole is . . . out of the ground, and it might be re-
moved entire anywhere if you could find sufficient
power to draw it Some have a light coat of osnaberg
nailed inside to exclude the draught” Contrast this
with the station oh to-dav —a station of the best, say,
North Yanko, carrying its 110,000 sheep and lambs,
its 1,200 crtttle, its 500 horses, itf> 200 to 300 employees,
rabbit-poisoners and shearers included : their quarters
a pile of brick buildings, containing bedrooms, reading
and dining halls, and kitchen arrangements, all these
carried out on a scale of comfort unequalled in Aus-
tralasia : the modern stables and cart sheds, mini-
mising labour ; the fire-proof sheds, capable of stacking
several thousand tons of hay, as a stand-by against
adverse seasons ; the machine sheds and their multi-
farious equipment, permitting every requisite to be
made locally, including elevators, excavators, vehicles
and woi'k of the skilled mechanic; and, above all, the
handsome palatial home of the knighted squire, an
illustration of which is given in these pages. Verily
the times change, and pastoralists change with them.
Still more pastures were sought for as the periodic
waves of progress multiplied flocks with marvellous
rapidity, until the occupation of the million of acres
north of the Murray and Darling Rivers —capable of
fattening sheep and cattle to any' extent —practically
completed the pastoral settlement of New South Wales.
The Story of the Squatter
The term “ squatter is a word only to be found
in modern dictionaries, being originally used in Canada,
and, at the outset, meaning to settle on new lands with-
out a title. Time has mellowed this significance into
a breeder who occupies extensive tracts of Government
land, at a very small rental. Bonwick,. in his “ Ro-
mance of the Wool Trade,” says : “ Squatting ” (in
Australia) ‘ ‘ was almost unnoticed in its birth, slow in
its development, fitful in its progress, but raging in its
later history” Occasionally, and especially at times
of legislative fever, it still rages —not always without
reason. It will hardly be denied that squatting was
commenced in the early days of this colony by cattle
and sheep stealers. Only grants or purchased land
then carried stock. As' the larger grants were beyond
the settled locations reached by the law, and as the first
shepherds were prisoners assigned to sheep farmers,
jt can easily be conceived that on the outer edge
of civilisation there soon gathered all the wanted-by-
the-police and other members of the rougher elements
of colonial society. Cattle-duffers and sheep-stealers
found it essential to their liberty to transfer their pur-
loinings from place to place outside the boundaries of
granted territory ; and upon these “ waste lands,” as
they were officially termed, the lawless drovers squatted
to graze their beasts. It required more moral stiffen-
ing than they could boast to convince these rovers
that they were not entitled to possess the grass on
lands taken by the right of might from the black-fel-
lows. The settlers, short of grazing areas themselves,
soon complained of this free occupancy, and the
squatters were threatened with pains and penalties if
they contbiued in their wayward pursuits. But as
the only effect of such fulminations was to make the
objects of official wrath shift further afield, respecta-
bility soon began to take a hand in this profitable
process. A sen or an employee undertook the charge
of grass-feeders for a consideration, and thus mer-
chants, settlers and civil servants squatted by proxy.
When the time came that the flock without required
more care than the flock within, the parent or master,
as the case might be, himself assumed control of the
more important branch of his business and blossomed
into a squatter. Thus squatting became respectable
by a change in the social positions of the squatters
With this conversion illegality was ignored, and rights
were demanded for what was distinctly a trespass and
a crime, Much (good arose from this unrecognised
occupancy of Crown lands Flocks had more elbow-
room to develop ; wool-growing made tremendous pro-
gress, and meat became more plentiful
It has already/ been stated that when the settlers
within the territory complained of the burden of quit-
rents Governor King introduced a system of leasing,
and thus, initiated the system of squatters’ leases,
which has since prevailed. Sections of land adjoining
settlement, and consisting of GAO acres, were leased at
a small rental to the: stockholders, and the revenue
thus derived was placed to the credit of the territorial


fund. The rent of these “ common lands,” as the sec-
tions were termed, was at the first only £1 per annum,
but it was raised in 1840 to £5. These common lands
were, soon outpastured, and the flocks and herds grazed
on the 1 waste territory beyond ; so that they who [held
leases had- to go beyond their boundaries, and thev
who had nope ran their stock on unleased ground
Governor Macquarie, in 1815. proclaimed against the
trespassers in tlest’, le of the period ‘ ’ expressing his sur-
prise at such unwarrantable and disrespectful conduct.”
Then Letters of Occupation were issued to the favoured
few. Still the area was far too (contracted and the
Government herd took up much land. A serious com-
plaint in 1820 induced Macquarie to notify “ that
such settlers as are possessed of herds or flocks mav send
land was so great that in six months all sales were
stopped. In 1826 Tickets of Occupation were with-
drawn, but 4 4 permissions ” were given to temporarily
graze on payment of 20s. per annum for every hundred
acres, and 1 undertaking! to quit on a six months’ notice.
The same year a Land Board was appointed, and an
order was issued that aieas on permit could be in-
spected and then tendered for. As nobody tendered,
another order, issued in August, 1828, permitted land
to be put up to auction, but no one could bid without
the license of the Governor. Again the land was
rushed, and sales once more prohibited in August,
1829. Some months prior to this the squatters’ regu-
lations were altered again, with the express view of
41 further restraining unauthorised individuals from
Angora Goat, “Perfection,” Blaxland and Knox, Wyalong, N.S.W.
them for a time, hereafter to be limited, to depasture
the fertile tracts of the new country,” ie. fifty miles
from Sydney.
Stockowners with land grants now* found they had
to pay 3s. quit-rent for every twenty acres, and later
on 5 per cent, on the value of the land. Each grantee
had to keep and clothe one prisoner for every hundred
acres. This was increased in 1824 to five convicts per
one hundred acres, and those holding grants foi 2,000
acres’ pastuiage had to keep thirty convicts and cul-
tivate 120 acres. Governor Brisbane, in l the same
year, byway of concession, offered to sell waste lands
adjoining grants at ss. an acre, but still subject buyers
to a quit-rent of' 2s. per 100 acres. The demand for
driving and depasturing their cattle in all parts of the
colony.” Grantees could occupy waste lands near
their own locations at an annual rental of 2s. 6d. per
100 acres; but the Government/ could take possession
ny giving a month’s notice to the occupant. Such
were the odds the eatrly graziers had to fight against
On August 1, 1831, Governor Darling’s Land Act
came into force Sales at ss. per acre were subject to
only a peppercorn quit-rent, but coal and precious
metals were reserved. It also provided that “any
purchaser who within ten years of his purchase shall
by the employment and maintenance of convicts have
relieved the public of a charge equal to ten times the
amount of purchase will have the purchase-money


returned, but without interest. It is computed that
for each convict employed and wholly maintained by
the purchaser for twelve months £l6 will have been
saved the public ”
At this time the settled portion of the colony was
divided into nineteen counties, afterwards increased
to twenty, and these again into parishes, and settle-
ment or occupation was only permitted within the
boundaries of the counties. But the restrictions
proved useless. The Hocks and herds expanded and
roamed and settled far beyond the limits provided. An
Act was, therefore, passed—4 William IV., No 10 —pro-
viding for the appointment of Commissioners for Crown
Lands to prevent intrusions* trespass, &c. As well
try to sweep back the ocean with Dame Partington’s
broom. The irrepressible squatters scaled mountains
and crossed seas to get beyond the commissioners,
and Governor Bourke was constrained to cry to the
Secretary of State* October 10, 1835 : — 64 It is only by
a free range over the wide expanse of native herbage
which the colony affoids that the production of this
article (wool) can be upheld. The colonist must other-
wise restrain the increase or endeavour to raise arti-
ficial food.” This had the desired effect, for in 1836
another Occupation Act—7 William IV., No. 4—was
passed, under which squatters were permitted to de-
pasture stock on Crown lands; with a license, re-
newable every year, under certain conditions, one of
which was a yearly payment? of a license fee of £lO,.
Breaches of the law were punishable by a fine of £lO
for the first offence, £2O tor the second offence, and
for the third and' any subsequent offence £50,, to be
recovered in a summary way before any Justice of the
Peace.
The main object of this system of licenses was to
prevent persons of improper character from depas-
turing stock on the Crown lands; and also to enable
the commissioner and' his agent to, ascertain at once
if parties who had no honest ostensible means of obtain-
ing stock of their own, were depasturing Hocks and
herds. But in a short time this was found insufficient,
and an amended Act was passed in 1839, imposing a
small half-yearly assessment on all live stock, as fol-
lows : — <fc For every ram, ewe, wether and weaned lamb,
one halfpenny ; for every bull, ox, cow; steer, heifer
and calf above the age of six months, one penny half-
penny : and for every horse., mare, gelding and foal
above the age of six months, the sum of threepence.”
The proceeds of this tax was appropriated to the main-
tenance of a rural police, known in the colony for many
years as the Border Police.
Under these, the early squatting Acts, the extent
of territory occupied by the various squatters respec-
tively was not verv clearlv defined. Each man took
j t •/
as much as he wanted, or rather in most cases verv
extravagant notions of the increase of his stock led
him to hope he might want ; and as there seemed to
be aii illimitable extent of territory over which they
might spread, this was not found to be of much incon-
venience.
In 1839 Governor Gipps received instructions from
Lord Glenelg to raise the minimum price of land from
ss. to J2s. per acre. This caused great dissatisfaction,
and sales of Crown lands fell off considerably. Gipps,
also under orders from the Secretary of State, had to
«/
restrict the dispersing of Hocks, and, although con-
vinced of the helplessness of the attempt, after raising
the annual rental for each 640 acres from £1 to £5. he
divided the colony for land purposes into the northern,
the middle or Sydney, and the southern or Port Phillip
districts. No change was to take place in the middle
district, but in the southern, and after a time in the
northern. Crown lands were to open for purchase at one
uniform price, viz., £1 per acre. A petition to the
Home Government led to these instructions being
rescinded in 1841 Then came depasturing licenses,
to be put up to auction, instead of yearly leases. Still
there was no security of tenure, as the purchaser of
any land occupied under license could take possession
after a month’s notice. Again, the price of all Crown
lands was fixed at a minimum rate of £1 per acre under
Act 5 and 6.. Victoria, chapter 36. Bad times in No-
vember, 1843, necessitated more legislation to give
validity to mortgages on stock and to prevent secret
securities.
In 1844 the whole system was brought under
review by Gipps. The immense increase of stock and
the rapid occupation of large areas of territory by
single individuals was thought to be impolitic ; but
there can be no doubt that the main object sought by
the astute Governor was to raise a revenue from
squatting licenses which should compensate for the
almost total failure of that derived from the sale of
Crown lands. Accordingly, on April 2, 1844, the
Government issued a very stringent code of regulations
dealing with the land. The promulgation of these
caused very great excitement among the oppressed
squatters; and meetings were held ini different parts of
the colony in order to organise measures to oppose
them. The result of these meetings was the estab-
lishment of the Pastoralists’ Association of New South
Wales, the roll of; whose members included a great
majority of the large squatters of the colony. The
renowned Benjamin Boyd, then holding large squat-
tages in the Monaro district, was elected chairman,
and Chas. U. Logan was appointed secretary j the
committee consisting of W. Bland, M.C. ; M. C. O’Con-
nell, W. C. Wentworth, M.C. ; W. Dumaresq, M.C. ;
Thos. Walker, M.C. ; Geo. McLeay. John Dobie., R.
Graham, Dr. Nicholson, M.C. ; F. Taaffe, R. Gore,
W. Foster, Chas. Cowper. M.C : 0. Bloxsome, J. Blax-
land, sen., M.C. ; H. H. McArthur, M.C ; R. Windeyer,
M.C. ; Robt. Johnstone, Robt. Lowe, M.C. : F. Lord,
M.C., and W. H. Suttor, M.C.
The main points the squatters complained of were,
that the imposition of a license for each run, with the
fee proportionate to the stock carried, was an unjust
tax and an entire departure from the principle on
which the license fee had been first established—not for
purposes of revenue, but as a certificate of character ;
that they really gave no fixed tenure, no rights of pre-
emption and no compensation for improvements on
Crown lands They contended that their occupation
ought to be in some degree permanent ; that the
squatter ought not to be ousted from a station to the
ruin of his property because some person chose to
purchase from the Crown the choice bit of land which,
perhaps, gave all the pastoral acres that surrounded


it. They urged that, if at the claim of intending
purchasers land were put up for sale, the occupying
squatter should have the option of buying it at the
upset price ; and they demanded that if the stations
were taken from them, there should be full value for
all improvements made upon them Political privi-
leges were demanded. Why should only the squatters
be excluded from a vote ?
Vainly Gipps tried to calm the tumult by promis-
ing an eight years’ tenure to those who bought a por-
tion of their runs. The vigorous exertions of the
association produced a modification of the regulations
and a new code was issued on July 10, 1845, of a more
liberal character But lacking the three F’s ” —fixed
tenure, fixed rents, and free sale of rights—this gave
little satisfaction to the squatters, who carried their
granted for eight years, and in the settled districts
leases for pastoral purposes might be granted from
year to year.
%/ %/
This was the position politically speaking in which
the pastoral industry stood at the beginning of 1850 ;
and it may be added that it was only under the Con-
stitution Act of 1855 that the population outside the
elective areas was allowed the elective franchise.
With representative Government the squatting dis-
tricts were made under certain combinations into
electoral districts and the representatives from their
wealth and territorial dominions were soon able to
exercise very considerable influence in the legislature
of the colony. When, however, the colonists, ever
more numerous in towns, realised this they sought to
restrict the privileges of the pastoralists ; and hence
Grand Champion Housed Ewe. J. S. Horsfall, Wedgiewa, Narrandera.
grievances to London, where the merchants ably
seconded their efforts. The agitation proved success-
ful. An Order-in-Council w'as issued on March 9. 184 7 ,
and came into operation on October 7 of that year,
under which squatting was carried on for many years
afterwards. It was the squatters’ Magna Charta.
Under this the public lands were to be divided into
three classes —the settled, the intermediate and the
unsettled. Tin* Governor was empowered to grant, for
fourteen years, leases in the unsettled districts, at £lO
for every 4,000 sheep or the equivalent number of
cattle, according to agreement as to capacity for the
run of stock ; with permission to the lessee to cultivate
tor his own use, but not for sale or barter. After the
first lease, the rent w r as to be raised 'for the improved
land. In the. intermediate division leases could be
arose an antagonism —between the squatters and selec-
tors, or those who sought to break down what they
considered a monopoly —which has never quite died out.
From the days of Robertson’s historical Selec-
tion before Survey” Land Act, when hundreds of
those persons whom Sir Daniel Cooper described as
possessed of nothing but a revolver and a harness-
cask,” were permitted by law to “ peacock ” the best
of the pastoral lands throughout New South Wales,
there has been a tendency in all land legislation to
cripple the squatter under the idea that he bars the
road to settlement. When it is borne in mind that
the progress made by New South Wales in its earlier
decades was in a great measure due to the un-
tiring energy and indomitable pluck of the pioneer
pastoralists ; that the labours of their successors to-day


account for nearly half our export trade ; that they
find a living for about 30,000 of the working popu-
lation ; that pastoral property and stock representing
the enormous value of £140,000,000, form by fai the
largest factor in our national wealth, it must strike the
impartial observer that in the matter of tenemental
facilities the squattei has not been dealt with in that
spirit of fairness he has a right to expect. This feature
is not peculiar to New South Wales , it n- a phase of
popular poLtics which has coloured all Australian legis-
lation. In other respects, legislative and adminis-
trative —in Acts dealing with disease, in measures for
the eradication of noxious pests. in efforts to amelio-
rate the dire effects of dry seasons —happily much,
quite beyond private effort, has been.and is being done
to foster this important industry. Since the “ golden
fifties” circumstances socially have altered with the
squatter as with other colonists ; and notwithstanding
the pursuit increasingly demands larger expenditure
he enjoys life now in a style never dreamed of in the
days when the autocratic Gipps so persistently en-
deavoured to tax him off the face of the earth.
[Stud Sheep Sales.
“ Be not one of the annual crop of fools who go
to Svdney to buy a stud ram of any breed, or to buy
long-woolled rams, because they think their ewes are
too short in staple ; then dense rams, because their
ewes are too open,” &c., was the advice of one of the
most experienced sheep-breeders of his day in Aus-
tralasia ; and this would be beneficial counsel to the
rash man on experiment bent. There can be no gain-
saving the fact that every sheep-farmer, who possibly
can should attend the annual stud sheep fairs, pri-
marily on account of their enormous educational value,
and, secondarily, because they put opportunities in
the way of men striving to raise the quality of their
fleece, which otherwise they could not command.
How beneficial this institution of these stud sheep
sales is may be gauged from the fact that the fairs are
yearly increasing in value and importance. That for
1907, just finished, established a record for value
(£62,092) realised, and was only surpassed in the years
1894 and 1895, in the point of sheep sold.
The sales were well attended, from beginning to
end, and interest was manifested in them right up to
the last. Without being sensational, they were, on
the whole, very satisfactory. Many of the well-known
Hocks fully maintained the record ; while others made
appreciably lower averages ; but this was not due to
any falling off in the quality of their sheep, but wholly
to the reaction in favour of another type of animal.
Still, the change of fashion notwithstanding, good
prices were realised for a few wrinkly sheep. A fea-
ture of the sales was the willingness of buyers, who
exercised great discrimination in their purchasings, to
pay high prices for sheep of good quality and of the
type they required. In most cases medium-quality
rams did not sell so well as iu former years, but there
were instances in which extraordinary prices were
obtained for flock rams. Stud ewes of the best quality
were also eagerly sought for at satisfactory prices,
but here, again, inferior animals were not wanted.
The highest-price sheep sold was the Esk Vale ram,
Benbow. sent in by the executors ,of the late Thos.
• %/
Gibson, and purchased by Mr. Geo. Merriman, of
Ravensworth, Yass, for 700 guineas. This sheep was
champion at the recent Campbelltown (Tasmania)
show, and elicited fairly keen competition from a few
leading breeders. The same stud gained the second
highest price at the sales for the Campbelltown reserve
champion, Baronet 111., which was bought for 610
guineas by Mr. J. B. Bettington, of Brindlev Park.
O 1/ O ' «■'
The other two Esk Yale rams made 290 guineas, th<‘
four averaging £420, which was the highest average
at the sales. Amongst other Tasmanian studs which
secured good prices were Belle Vue, whose 10 rams
fetched £624 155., or an average of £62 9s. 6d., the
highest price for a single ram being 100 guineas.
Mr. R. T. Gibson, of Esk Vale, sent in four rams, and
realised 370 guineas for Radiance and a total of £630
for the lot, which works out at an average of £157 10s.
Radiance was bought for Cannonbar Station, out
Nvngan way. The noted Sir Thomas flock was repre-
sented by three rams, which averaged £47 55., the
highest fetching 75 guineas.
The sale of New South Wales merinos was on a
very extensive scale, and though the highest price for
an individual sheep and the best average were not
secured by a local stud, on the whole the resultsi ob-
tained for sheep from this State were the great feature
of the sales. The concensus of opinion was that the
average quality of the sheep was well up to that of
previous years, whilst the very high prices realised
for some of the rams astonished many breeders. The
well-known Havilah stud was pretty strongly repre-
sented, and, as usual, the sheep were in strong demand.
The 30 stud rams in this draft averaged £63 95., the
highest selling for 300 guineas, and another at 175
guineas. The Harben Vale rams (Havilah blood) also
attracted good attention on the whole (one of them
went up to 380 guineas), and the same may be said of
the Wallinga sheep, 16 of which averaged over £3O.
The Widgiewa sheep found many admirers, despite the
turn in the tide against the American merino, and the
rams sent in were big-framed strong-constitutioned
sheep, with good neckfolds and almost perfectly plain
bodies —in some instances quite plain. Had it not
been made known that they belonged to Widgiewa,
they would have been taken by manv breeders to have
4/ J %,
come from a pure Australian merino stud. The cover-
ing on the sheep was of good quality and dense and
the staple of good length. The rams sold up to 130
guineas each, the 12 disposed of making an average of
£6l 15s. 6d. “ To a man who had not seen the
sheep,’’ said a breeder after the figures had been
made up. “ the average might appear a good one ;
but for rams of their merit they should have brought
more, and they probably would have had they been
put up under some other name. I am not a Vermont
man myself, but I’m not prejudiced, and for the
money they sold at I’d sooner take Widgiewa rams
than any others sold so far at bigger prices. In other
words, my opinion is that buyers of Horsfall’s rams
have got the best bargain up to this time.” Paren-
thetically, it may be mentioned here that Mr. Horsfall
sold, outside the sales last week, one ram for 250


guineas, one for 150 guineas, and another for 100
guineas. These and the rams offered by auction,
totalling altogether 15, realised a sum of £1,266, or
an average of £B4 2s. Bd.
I he Hathrop sheep did not make as good prices
as their merit deserved. On the other hand, the
Springfield Pastoral and Estates Company Limited,
the manager of which is Mr. A. F. Webb, obtained
satisfactory figures for their lot, the sheep being in a
condition that was quite .a credit to their breeder.
One of the surprises of tlie sales was furnished bv
Willandra Station, whose sheen are of the Wanganella
Stud Ram, President, bred by Hon. Jas. Gibson. Sold by
Goldsbrongh, Mort & Co. for 1,600 guineas.
strain, and were seen for the first time at a Sydney fair.
The fine average of £l4O Bs. 9d. was obtained for four
rams, the highest price being 240 guineas, and the
next 150 guineas. The Collaroy Company’s rams also
attracted good attention, and sold at very satisfactory
figures ; twelve realising a total of £546, or an average
of £49 12s. Bd. For two less Messrs. Litchfield Bro-
thers, of Hazeldean, Cooma, averaged £45 13s. 6d., or
a total of £546. The rams were of the Rambouillet
type, and good robust sheep, with a densi* covering of
bright wool. Another breeder who had nothing to
complain about as to treatment of buyers was Mr. C.
Mills, of Uardry, who got an average of £67 11s. lOd.
for 10 rams ; but the Bundemar Estate did much bet-
ter, its 15 rams —all big-framed smooth-bodied sheep,
with vigorous constitutions —making the splendid
average of £99 15s.
Mr. Albert Austin sent in 12 rams from his Wan’
ganella stud and they came in for a lot of examination
before the sale. The first one offered was competed
for with spirit, and obtained by Mr. Turner, of Vic-
toria, for 500 guineas, another went to Mr. Minnford
for 230 guineas, two changed hands at 190 guineas and
170 guineas respectively, two more went at 100
guineas each, and the 12 rams realised the gratifying
average of £146 11s. 3d., or a total of £1,758 15s.
Astonishing though this sale was, the result was even
outdistanced in the case of 15 rams, sold on behalf of
the executors of the late Thos. Millear, of Wanganella
Estate, Deniliquin, and which brought the splendid
total of £2.715 14s. 5d., or an average of £lBO 13s. 3d.
The highest-price ram of the lot was 500 guineas, and
lie was purchased by the Bundure Estate, Narrandera.
Mr. Clark, of Cobram, got the second highest for 420
guineas ; two others sold at 320 guineas apiece, three
more realised each over 100 guineas, and three were
sold at 100 guineas each,
The draft from the Haddon Rig stud, which ob
tained the best average at last year’s sales, represented
another lot that elicited keen competition, with the
result that the very good average of £133 for 24 rams
was established, the top prices for single rams being
280 guineas, 250 guineas, and 230 guineas, two realis-
ing the latter figure. Mr. Thos. Millear, of Deniliquin
Park, had a lot of sheep that were admired. Twelve
of his stud rams averaged £B5 6s. 3d., whilst the total
sum realised for six selected rams works out at £25 7s.
6d, each. Twenty yearling flock rams from the same
stud averaged £22 15s. 2d.
Shropshire breeders did not find for their <heep as
good a demand as was experienced in previous vears.
Mr. A.E. Mansell, well-known breeder of Mount Vernon,
Tasmania, sold 12 rams at an average of £35, the
highest bringing 100 guineas, and going to Mr. J. A.
Sellar, of Cooma The second highest was bought bv
Mr. G. E. Faithful!, for 70 guineas. These were a long
way the best prices obtained for the breed, the ewes of
which sold relatively better than the rams, the highest
average being secured by Messrs. Button Brothers, of
Oatlands, Tasmania, who sold three yearlings at the
rate of £2O 6s. each. Next to this Mr. Studley Steele’s
average of £l5 6s. 7d. for five ewes was the best, then
came Mr. Mansell with an average of £l4 Bs. for 13.
followed by Mr. S. J. M ebb, of Holly Green, Victoria,
with £l2 3s. 7d. each for five, and Mr. T. J. Burbury,
whose total for 13 ewes works out at an average of
£l2 Is. 6d.
That Lincolns have increased in favour amongst
those who are devoting attention to the lamb-raising
industry the good demand for them was prettv plain
evidence. It was quite the best this breed has ex-
perienced for many years past, and so far as we can see
Waterloo Champion Ram, by President. Bred by Hon. Jas.
Gibson, M.L.C., and purchased by A. A Dangar, Baroona,
for 580 guineas.
and judge there is likely to be a good demand for some
time to come. Mr. B. S. Oppenheim’s rams and ewes
met with a gratifying reception at the hands of buyers.
His 22 rams averaged £l3 13s. whilst the total sum
realised for his 12 ewes works out at an average of £l2
7s. 3d. Mr. E. A. Porter, of Roxburgh Park, .Victoria,
sold rams at from 6 guineas to 30 guineas, and one
ewe at 15 guineas,


Hill, Clark (0 C
N.S.W. Merinos—144 stud rams
ompany .
Amount.
£12,000 19
6
Average.
£83 6
9
,, ,, 415 flock rams ..
6,774
1
6
16
6
5
, # 50 flock ewes
283
10
0
5
13
4
Tasmanian Merinos— 43 stud rams
1,198
11
6
27
17
6
,, ,, 28 stud ewes
80
6
6
2
17
4
,, ,, 162 flock rams
438
2
3
2
14
1
Total ; 812 merinos, £20,775 11s.
3d., averaging £24
19s.
5d.
British Breeds.
Shropshires (Tas.) — 15 stud rams.. £77
14
0
5
3
7
,, 13 stud ewes ..
158
11
0
12
3
11
,, 223 flock rams..
712
13
9
3
3
10
,, 103 flock ewes..
171
1
6
1
13
3
Lincolns —47 stud ram
651
0
0
13
17
0
,, 37 stud ewes
337
1
0
9
2
2
,, 85 flock ewes
513
9
0
6
0
9
,, 59 flock rams
393
15
0
6
13
6
Border Leicester's —73 rams..
340
4
0
4
13
2
English Leicester's— 8 rams..
£51
19
6
£6
9
11
,, ,, 2 ewes..
30
9
0
15
4
6
Southdowns —33 rams
81
12
9
2
9
6
,, 5 ewes
16
5
0
3
5
0
Total : 713 British breeds, £3,53
5 16s., averaging £4 19s
2d.
Grand total, 1,545 sheep, £24,311 7s. 3d , averaging £1
5 14s. 8d.
Weaver (0 1
N.S.W. Merinos —417 stud rams ..
5 erry .
£9.143
19
0
621
18
6
,, 96 stud ewes ..
689
6
6
7
3
r?
i
,, 704 selected and
flock rams
3,720
8
3
5
8
Total: 1,217 sheep, £13,553 13s. 9d , averaging £11
2s. 9d.
British Breeds.
Lincoln — 28 rams .. .. .. £132
6
0
£4
14
0
ff 109 ewes
397
9
0
3
13
0
English Leicester—50 rams
225
15
0
4
10
4
,, 35 ewes
9 9 * *
161
8
9
4
12
3
Border Leicester —25 rams
105
0
0
5
5
0
43 ewes
, , 17
166
19
0
3
17
7
Romney Marsh 179 rams
536
1
3
3
0
0
Dorset Horn—2 rams
4
4
0
2
2
0
Shropshire—63 rams
210
7
0
3
6
9
tt 37 ewes
145
2
3
3
18
6
Angora goats —18
67
9
3
3
15
0
: 584, £2,152 Is. 6d., averaging £3 13s. 8d.
Grand total ; 1,801 sheep, £15,705 15s. 3d., averaging £8 14s. 5d.
Goldsbronyh, Mart
Tasmanian—217 stud rams ..
(ft Company.
£6,492 8
0
£29
18
5
N.S.W. —18 stud rams
218
8
0
12
2
5
Tasmanian —351 ewes
1,437
3
9
4
1
11
N.S.W. —20 ewes
107
2
0
5
7
1
Tasmanian—1,558 selected rams ..
7,193
5
3
4
12
4
N.S.W. —20 selected rams ..
124
19
0
6
5
6
Grand total: 2,184 sheep, £15,573 6s., averaging
£7
2s. 7d.
Trebeck , Son & Company.
British Breeds.
Shropshire—124 stud ewes .. .. £896 8
9
£7
4
6
9t 56 stud rams
741
6
3
13
4
9
Border Leicester —10 flock rams
65
2
0
6
5
2
f , ,, 6 stud rams
37
16
0
6
6
0
6 stud ewes
56
14
0
9
9
0
English Leicester —10 flock rams ..
52
10
0
5
5
0
,, 24 flock ewes ..
90
8
0
3
15
4
Romney Marsh —21 flock ewes
88
4
0
4
4
0
Shropshire—224 flock ewes ..
592
19
9
2
12
11
„ 561 flock rams
1,638
4
3
2
18
1
Grand total; 1,045 sheep, £3,259 IBs., averaging £4 Is.
Bd.
New Zealand Loan and Mercantile Agency Company.
British Breeds
Amount
A verage.
Border Leicester —20 rams ..
£99 15
0 .. £4 19
9
English Leicester—188 rams
8(33 17
9 ..
4 11
10
,, ,, 138 ewes
558 17
3 ..
4 1
0
Shropshire—314 rams
723 19
6
2 6
2
,, 237 ewes
404 15
6 ..
1 14
2
Lincoln—41 rams
253 3
0 ..
() 3
6
,, 12 ewes
82 8
6 ..
6 17
4
Bomney Marsh—59 rams
255 3
0 ..
4 6
6
Grand total: 1,009 sheep, £3,241 19s.
(3d., averaging £3 4s 3d
Grand Totals.
Messrs. Hill, Clark & Co., 1,545 sheep
.. £24,311
rj
7
3
Messrs. Weaver & Perry, 1,801 sheep
.. 15,705
15
3
Messrs. Goldsbrough, Mort & Co., 2,184 sheep
.. 15.573
6
0
Messrs. Trebeck, Son & Co., 1,045 sheep
4,259
13
0
New Zealand Loan and Mercantile Agency
Co.
Ltd., 1,009 sheep
3,241
19
6
Grand total, 7,584 sheep
.. £63,092
1
0
Or an average of £8 6s 5<i. each.
Last year’s grand total was 7,492 sheep for
£60,893, averaging
£8 2s. 6d each.
English and Border Leicester's also met with a
better demand, thus showing that their good qualities
for mutton-producing purposes are becoming more
widely recognised. The highest selling price for
rams was 37 guineas, and for ewes 9 guineas.
Summary of Sales.
Following is a summary of the sales and prices realised :
JOHN MACARTHUR, Father of the Wool Industry.
Cattle.
“ The breed of cattle have been from tdie Cape of
Good' Hope and the small buffalo breed from Calcutta
An Andalusian cow was left by Commodore Malaspina
in 1794 ; another was brought from St. Catherine’s, and
a few are of the English breed ; but the most valuable
cross of the Cape and Bengal cows was a bull and cows
of the English breed, sent from Sf. Helena in 1796.”
Thus Governor Bligh, in a report, August, 1806. summa-
rised the beginnings of cattle-breeding in Australia.
Further on he adds: ‘‘As no females are ever slaughtered,
and no cattle are more free from any disease the in-
crease of the tame breeds will, in a very few years,
be immense, nor can there be a doubt that in less than
15 years the wild and tame herds will produce so great
a stock that they may be killed for their hides and
tallow. ... It does not immediately appear that


New South Wales can benefit by tlie numerous herds
it can and no doubt will raise, than in supplying the
inhabitants with food and leather. A forecast few
would take exception to. At that time there were
5,286 cattle in the colony ; in 1825 they had increased
to 134,519 ; in 1845 to 1.116.420 ; in 1875 to 3,134,086
-high-water mark ; in 1895 they numbered 2.150.057 ;
and in 1904-5, 2,149,129. The* year 1885 returned a
smaller number (1.317 315) than a v corresponding
period since 1848.
There has been a large increase in milking cattle
of late years, owing to the coastal stockowners finding it
more profitable to devote more of their attention to
dairying than to fattening. Milch cows in 1904-5 num-
bered 424,936 and breeding cows 592,000 ; the average
calving being 62 per cent. The principal breeds of
cattle in New South Wales are ; Hereford, Durham
(Shorthorns), Devon, Alderney, Jersey. Black-polled,
Ayrshire and Holstein. A steady improvement in the
breed of cattle throughout the State has been going on
for some time, owing mainly to the importation of good
stud stock. During 1904 440 pure-bred beasts were
imported from Europe and the other States of the
Commonwealth. At Berry, Shoalhaven River, the
Government keep a small farm for a number of dairy
cattle of different kinds, imported from England a few
years ago for the purpose of infusing new blood into
the dairy herds.
In 1905 several small shipments of cattle were
sent to the Far East, but so far no regular trade has
been established. Many years ago —in the thirties—
Australian salt-beef found its way to India, and was
pronounced of excellent quality on board H.M. ships
on that station. Efforts were also made then to place
it on the London market ; but owing, it was said, to
the cattle being slaughtered too young and to the
inferior qualitv of the salt u-ed, the venture resulted
disastrously Practicallv bovine exports have been
lini'ted up to the present to by-products.
Horses.
The versatile Dr. Lang, who, amongst other
notable accomplishments, appears to have been well
versed in Australian horseflesh, tells us that “the
colonial horse is of much more varied parentage than
the colonial man. . . . The English racer, the draught
horse from the Midland counties ,of England, and the
farm horse from the west of Scotland, horses from the
Cape of Good Hope, horses of thei genuine Arab breed
from Persia and horses of Spanish origin .from \ al-
paraiso ; Acheen ponies from Sumatra, and ponies of a
still more diminutive size from the island of Timor,
have all been naturalised and have all thriven in the
colony.” This was written in 1851 or thereabouts.
Thirty-five years before then Australian equines had
secured a footing in the East Indian and Dutch East
Indian markets. When shipments were first made
from these shores to the East is doubtful, but in the
earlier years the consignments could only have been
small, as up till 1825, when the population numbered
33.700, there were not more than 6.000 horses in the
Territory In 1842 they numbered 56.585, and from
that point until 1894, when the official return showed
518,181 animals, they increased year by year with
marvellous uniformity. Since then bad seasons have
somewhat reduced their numerical strength, the figures
for 1904-5 being 482,663. During the eighties there
was a marked falling off in the trade with India, which
has always been a hazardous one to shippers, not
withstanding the Indian Government being the prin-
cipal buyers ; but since 1895 there has been a revival,
and in 1904 the value of Eastern business exceeded
50 per cent, of the foreign trade. The total export-
that year amounted to £332,181, of which £248,130
represented interstate requirements. New South
Wales is unusually suited for the breeding of good
equines, and it is doubtful whether her saddle and
light harness horses can be outclassed for speed and
enduranee anywhere.
Swine and Swine’s Flesh.
In the early days of infancy, when the colonv
was held in the grip of famine, swine proved of ines-
timable value to the colonists, who could procure
neither mutton nor beef ; and to-day they are as pro
Stable, when properly managed, as any other stock ;
only the farmers have failed to rise to the fact so far,
and persist in limiting the benefits of the homelv hog
to dairying. In 1800 the swine numbered 2,390 ; in
1825, 39,096 ; in 1845, 60,008 ; in 1875, 199,950 ; and
in 1904-5, 330,666 It will be seen by these figures
that they have increased in spite of this neglect ; but,
bearing in mind the large factor ,in dairy-farming swine
should be, their production is far behind what it might be
expected. The breeds generally met with in the State
are : the improved Berkshire, Poland. China, Yorkshire
and Prince Albert ; and crosses from these are num-
berless, the progeny deteriorating so much through
neglect in the breeding that dairymen find it difficult
to obtain a good class of store pig. In some parts of
the colonv, about the Macquarie Marshes and' other
places, there are thousands of wild pigs, the progenv
of escapees, which when yarded and fed soon become
tame. The number of swine slaughtered during 1904
was 232.955, of which 101.856 were killed at the metro-
politan abattoirs. In 1895 the production of bacon
and bams amounted to 5,250.717 lbs., and in 1904 it
had increased to 10.680,532 lbs . nearly four-fifths of
which came from the Central Division, the North
Coast district contributing 3.137,642 lbs. At present
there is a need for more bacon factories, fitted with
refrigerating plants, so that curing may be continued
during the summer months
Dairying Industry.
The extraordinary development of the dairying
industrv during the last few years is another striking
instance of the practical benefits that can be obtained
bv the application of science to agriculture. It was
formerly pursued mainly in the Illawarra and South
Coast districts, but it is in the Northern coastal dis-
tricts. all along the Northern rivers, that the most
remarkable expansion has taken place. In rhe North
Coast, including the Hunter and Manning districts in
1897 there were 120,855 dairy cows in milk ; in 1905
they had 184.903 ; the butter made during these re-
snective vears was 9,822.059 lbs. and 30.365,813 lbs. ;
V **


the cheese 62.288 lbs. and 4,940 lbs, ; the bacon and
hams cured, 1,087,333 lbs. and 3,932,929 lbs. ; and tin*
total yield ot milk (1905 only) was 78,864,308 gallons.
On the Illawarra and South Coast districts, Cumber-
land included, the figures were: —Cows (1897), 137,643;
(1905) 127,052; butter, 15,088 881 lbs and 16,402,605
lbs. respectively; cheese, 3,630,633' lbs, and 3,944,120
lbs ; bacon and hams cured, 4,044,063 lbs. and
4,317,300 lbs. respectively; and yield of milk in
1905, 51,097,280 gallons. The effect of the rapid
development of the industry in the north is visible
in the hustle which has been infused into life at
Lismore, Casino, Coraki, Woodburn and Maclean.
But while dairying [must be mainly confined to
the coast, the industry will be actively pursued
to meet local wants in non-coastal regions, and
there is hardly an inland centre of any import-
ance where a refrigerating plant does not supply
good butter in the warmest season ot the year. The
warmest thanks of the community are due to the late
T. S Mort for his untiring efforts to prove the prac-
ticability of keeping perishable goods for long periods
by the means of cold storage. The introduction of
the factory system, the consequent improvement of
appliances, and the establishment of speedy communi-
cation with the metropolis have done much towards
developing the industry. During 1895-1904 the fac-
tories dealing with dairy produce increased from 338
to 465, the .employees from 1.032 to 1,320 ; the value
of plant from £211,462 to £251,322, and the butter
from 23,295,512 lbs. to 53,591,243 lbs. In 1890 an
export trade was commenced, which has swelled from
281,341 lbs in that year to 20,153,300 lbs. during 1904
—the proportion of factory-made butter increasing
from 72 to 92 per cent, within this period. Unfortu-
nately the increase in the quantity of cheese has not
kept pace with that of butter. Cheese made in 1904
only aggregated 42 per cent more than that made in
1895, whilst the proportion of butter increase was
130 per cent. Of the total manufacture of cheese in
1904, i.e., 4,223,621 lbs., the coastal division is respon-
sible for 3,949,060: lbs., all of which, excepting about
11,000 lbs., was made on the South Coast. At Boma-
clerry. near* Nowra, and at Pitt Town-‘two factories deal
with condensed milk, and a third at Belford, near
Singleton, manufactures concentrated milk, their com-
bined output in 1901 being 927,272 lbs.
Surplus Stock.
With the danger of over-stocking during a suc-
cession of good seasons, there has always been the
pioblem to solve of a profitable disposal of the surplus
stock ; and as the meat works,in the State have proved
unable to absorb this, an opening disclosed itself some
years ago for the establishment of a trade in frozen
meat. This has now'become an important branch of
the pastoral industry, The first shipments were made
in 1881 of 9.980 cwt of frozen meat and preserved
meat to the value of £176,721 —including extract of
meat In 1894 the money value of these exported
products was £193,760 and £206.054 respectively ; in
1904 these relative amounts represented £213,064 —
made up of 34,500 quarters of beef and 570,934 car-
casses of mutton —and £135,073—the value of 8,136,873
lbs. of preserved meat. Efforts were made in 1894-5
to establish an export trade in live cattle with the
United Kingdom, but, owing to the high mortality on
the voyage, these had to be 'abandoned
Other and By-Products.
The minor products arising from pastoral pursuits
include tallow, lard and edible fat ; skins and hides,
furs, horns, hoofs, hones and hair. Tallow production
in old times was of far more importance than it is
to-day. In 1850 it amounted to over £3OO 000 ; in
1896 the output was 28.549 tons, and in 1904 17,840
tons. Of late years the fluctuations of the product
have been due to a falling off in the live stock depas-
tured- During 1896-7 a quantity of edible fat
was exported to the United Kingdom, but the trade
for awhile fell off. In the last official returns the
exports valued £4.340. The value of the net export of
skins and hides in 1904 (including £lO5 952 for rabbit
skins) was £462,578 ; hoofs, horns and bones repre-
sented £14,740 ; hair, £9,655 : slue and sinews. £6 538.
and furs, £1,971.
The Homestead Residence of Sir Samuel McCaughey, at North Yanco—one of the finest homestead residences in Australasia.
Mr. Herbert E. Ross, Architect, Equitable Building.


Mr. A. H. PRINCE, J.P., Hon.
Secretary of the New South Wales
Sheepbreeders’ Association, was born
on Broadclyst Estate, County of
Devon, England, in April, 1838, and
was educated at Magdalen College,
Exeter. He arrived in Australia in
March, 1852. J At an early stage of
his Australian career he became
connected and held important posi-
tions with the celebrated coaching
firm of Cobb & Co., whose ramifi-
cations are so well known throughout
the whole of Australasia Mr. Prince
has on more than one occasion
voyaged from Australia to Ceylon
and India, taking shipments of
horses. He also lived some years
in China and Japan. In the sixties he
became joint owner of “ Corinella ”
and “ Westaway,” sheep stations in
Dudley Yorke . Melbourne,
MR. A. H. PRINCE.
Victoria, on the borders of Gipps-
land. Bad seasons, combined with
scab and fluke, compelled him to
abandon this venture. After ex-
periencing severe losses, and having
learned that there were good oppor-
tunities for pastoral pursuits in
Japan, he determined to start sheep-
farming in the land of “ fans and
geisha girls.” Upon arrival, how-
ever, at Yokohama he discovered to
his chagrin that the Government
would not grant any land ; he
therefore reshipped his sheep and
sold them in San Francisco Having
accepted the position of general
manager of the Japan Mail, the
leading English newspaper in Yoko-
hama, he remained in Japan. This
position he held over five years,
when he returned to Australia and
renewed his connection with Cobb
and Co, In 1898 Mr. Prince assumed
the secretaryship of the N S.W.
Sheepbreeders’ Association, and it
is owing to his untiring energy and
ability that itoccupiesits present posi-
tion. When he became its executive
officer the association was virtually
articnlo mortis ; to-day, however, it is
the leading association of the great
staple industry in the southern
hemisphere. The association is not
a money-making concern, but is
primarily and purely an educational
association, a university with only
one chair—a chair of sheepbreeding.
It is practically a technical college,
where sheepbreeders may learn the
finer elements of their great pursuit.
Its highest aim is the development
of the staple industry of New South
Wales—the industry of sheepbreed-
ing and wool-producing. That the
association has been successful in
realising to some extent the import-
ant objects of its existence is amply
proved by the fact that in the five
years ending 1902 —the last year of
the prolonged drought—the average
weight of the fleeces of this State
increased by over sixteen ounces.
Superficially this may not appear to
be anything to boast about, but the
fact assumes a different complexion
when one realises that when the
numerical strength of the flocks of
the State are in their normal con-
dition it means in the aggregate an
increase in the value of our wool
output of about two-and-a-half
million pounds sterling per annum.
Mr. Prince has been one of the
council of the Royal Agricultural
Society of New South Wales. He
filled the position of honorary starter
to the Australian Jockey Club from
1879 to 1881 ; is a member of the
Royal Sydney Yacht Squadron.
He is also a keen and enthusi-
astic fisherman. Several years back
Mr. Prince received a numerously
signed and highly influential requi-
sition to stand for the constituency
of Argyle, N.S.W., as representative
in the Legislative Assembly, but,
having no inclination for politics, he
declined the honour. Mr. Prince
has filled the position of a magistrate
of the territory for many years.
rrxsart
Mr. ALBERT WILLIAM
PEARSE, Secretary of the Stock-
owners' Association, and editor and
part proprietor of the Australian
Meat Trades' Journal , was born in
London, 1857. He received his
education at the Islington Proprie-
tary School, and afterward entered
upon a seafaring career. For many
years he traded between Great
Britain and West Indian, Mexican
and South American ports, namely,
with the Royal Mail Packet, South-
hampton. Later he joined the ser-
vice of the Orient S.S. Company
as an officer, and made repeated
voyages to and from Australia in
several of that company's steam-
ships. In 1887 he left that service,
and went to New Zealand and
engaged in gold-mining on the
Molyneux River. He subsequently
met Mr. Twopeny his present
partner then editor of the Otago
Daily Times. In 1891 Messrs.
Twopeny and Pearse came to
Sydney together, and, having formed
the firm of Twmpeny, Pearse & Co.,
started the Pastoralists' Review, and
subsequently the Australian Meat
Falk.
MR. A. W. PEARSE.
Trades' Journal. Mr. Pearse is
a member of the Chamber of
Commerce He has also taken a
practical interest in public affairs,
and was largely instrumental in the
formation of the Taxpayers' Union
and afterwards the People's Reform
League.
Mr. JOHN MAIR, Secretary of
the Pastora lists’ Union of New
South Wales, was horn in London
in 1855, and came to Australia with
his father, the late Mr. George C.


Mair. He was educated in Flin-
ders’ College, Geelong, and after-
wards went to Melbourne, where he
engaged in mercantile pursuits, and
afterwards embarked in the manu-
facture of boots and shoes upon an
extensive scale, in which he con-
tinued fourteen years. In 1892 he
was appointed secretary to the
Pastoralists’ Association of Vic-
toria, which included pastoralists of
southern Riverina. He filled the
position until 1902, when he received
an invitation to fill the position of
general secretary of the Pastoralists'
Union of New South Wales. Mr.
Mair was one of the founders of the
Employers’ Union of Victoria, and
for a time occupied the position of
president of that body. Mr. Mair
J. Hubert Newman . Sydney.
MR. J. MAIR.
is a member of the council of the
Employers’ Federation of New
South Wales.
Mb, F. D. BADGERY, of Goul-
burn, is one of the seven surviving
sons of the late Mr. Henry Badgery,
of Vine Lodge, Exeter, whose father
was among the earliest English
farmers who came to settle on the
Hawkesbury River in 1798. (The
fact is that the old gent, was a
Devonshire farmer from Exeter, and
a worthy man, who bred good horses
and cattle.) Of his family the late
Henry Badgery, of Exeter, near
Moss Vale, was the eldest son. Mr.
F. D. Badgery was born on 24th
October, 1842, at his father’s home
and it was at this spot he gained his
first knowledge of stock manage-
ment, by which he has since been
able to make the reputation so widely
known. His education began at
the Goulburn Grammar School,
MR. F. D. BADGERY.
under David Patterson, after which
he went to the King’s .School,
Parramatta, which he left in 1859
to join his brothers in pastoral life.
They laboured together and suc-
ceeded. In 1871 Mr, Fred. 1).
Badgery married Miss Ann Hill, of
Sydney, and upon the death of his
brother and partner, Theodore, in
1872, Fred, earned on pastoral
pursuits alone, purchasing several
properties in New South Wales and
Queensland. In every case he spent
much labour and capital in improving
the stations and increasing their
capabilities ; and though he had the
disasters of drought and the fluctua-
tions values of stock to contend with,
he has been able to retire from active
service in favour of his two sons,
who have enjoyed the advantage
of an excellent pastoral education.
Mr. Badgery’s judgment in matters
pertaining to his calling may be
estimated by the fact of his having
for about fifteen or sixteen years
been elected chairman of the Goul-
burn Pastures and Stock Board.
He has for five successive years
been elected to represent the Pas-
tures Boards in the Council of Ad-
vice for the eastern division of the
State. He is a vice-president of
the Agricultural and Pastoral Socie-
ties’ Union of New South Wales,
and he has for many years been
president of the Goulburn Agri-
cultural Society ; being, in short,
at all times a supporter of anything
in the interests of the country, 01
people with whom he lives,
Mr. JOHN LEAHY, General
Secretary for the Machine Shearers’
Union, is a native of the south of
Ireland. After a few years in a
primary school he embarked upon a
seafaring career. Later on he
turned his attention to pastoral
pursuits. For some six years he
had a varied career among the cattle
and other live stock stations of the
western .States of America, acquir-
ing a knowledge of sheep-shearing
and stock-raising. Returning to
Great Britain, he remained in
London for a time and then came to
Australia. He arrived in Sydney
in 1888, and proceeded to North
Queensland, where for some years
he followed droving as a pursuit, and
subsequently sheep-shearing. Dur-
ing this latter experience Mr. Leahy
recognised the necessity for a
second shearers and shed-workers’
union. Under the old order of
things, shearers and shed-workers
Brand. Sydney .
MR J. LEAHY.
had to wander out hundreds of miles
in search of a “cut”; no organised
system or practical effort was ever
attempted to secure employment for
its members. In 1902 the Machine
Shearers Union was brought into
existence, and Mr. Leahy was ap-
pointed general secretary. Despite
the virulent opposition it encountered,
within twelve months of its incep-
tion it enrolled over three thousand
members. Ihe union is a purely
industrial combination of the best
machine shearers and shed-hands in
the Commonwealth.


Insurance.
It has been well said that insurance, or assurance, is
essentially a business of the future based upon the
conditions of the present and the experiences of the
past. Careful present management under the light of
the past ensures the safety of the future. So much for
the general principles upon which this variety of com-
mercial speculation is founded. The scope of this
article is to depict the development of insurance in
New South Wales, so that there is no room to dip into
the ancient history of other countries for a description
of beginnings, or to enlarge upon the ethics of, perhaps,
the most useful business that ever engaged the attention
of money-making men, even were this necessary, but
it is not. Nowhere in the world is insurance better
understood and practically appreciated than in Aus-
tralasia, and nowhere in Australasia than in New South
Wales. On the testimony of Mr. E. Scott, foreign
vice-president of the Equitable of New York, we possess
more assurance in the colonies than in any other portion
of the globe ; and it is only fair to that able authority to
add that the real point of this statement lies in a correct
interpretation of the word ” assurance.”
History repeats itself in divers ways. There has
been the same introducing of assurance into Australia
as there was in the old world. Marine first, life next,
fire ensuing, and accident bringing up the rear. Um-
brella insurance, so far, has been confined to staid,
stony, “ sweet ” auld Edinboro. It is a ” cover ” the
chevalier d’ industrie has yet to convey to our shores.
Although the carriage preserver and the co-operative
insurance projector have already prospected to our
national loss, we only narrowly escaped a visitation
from the apostle of ‘ ‘ assessment ’ ’ assurance, and but
for the caution with which any new enterprise is always
regarded in Sydney, the Sayles and the Tigg Montagues,
or colonial editions of these enterprising rascals, would
have been afforded full opportunity to juggle themselves
into comfortable existence with the aid of their jobbery
and robbery. There has been the same disputing over
the honour of originating life assurance in the mother
colony as there was amongst Continental nations con-
cerning its introduction into Europe. Accuracy is as
the breath of life to the actuary, or it should be ; but
apparently it does not cover every matter connected
with his business which happens to be outside the bor-
der of tabulated data. If it did, there would be less
difference of opinion amongst leading authorities
concerning our days of doody doings. In a prize
essay read before the Insurance Institute in a.d. 1904,
the figures of a leading actuary in this city were quoted
to show that life insurance in the mother colony com-
menced in 1849, an d that until 1869 there was only
one office in New South Wales covering life. Five-
and-twenty years, or so, earlier another actuary, from
the same office, furnished the following information
to the public : “ Life assurance has risen from very
small beginnings in the year 1836, or thereabouts, when
a company was established in Sydney. There was
established in 1839 a British company, which absorbed
the small business of the first . . . and in the early
part of 1852 ... an amalgamation was effected be-
tween it and the Liverpool and London.” This is a
strange confusion of facts, but confusion gets worse
confounded when a leading statistical publication sup-
plies this information in a.d. 1883 : “ The Guardian
Assurance Company (London) established the first life
insurance agency” (in Sydney). "The Standard
Insurance Company (of Edinburgh) followed. . . The
Hon. Thos. Holt, the late Mr. John Fairfax, and a few
other gentlemen, in laying the foundation of the A.M.P.
in 1849. are fairly entitled to be regarded as the authors
of Australasian life assurance. . . The Victoria Insur-
ance Company in 1849, and the Australian Alliance, in
1862, were next,” &c., &c. Advertisers, when not
dropping to the superlative degree, are fairly reliable,
and the notices of the day place it beyond doubt that
the Guardian did not enter the colonial field until 1880 ;
that the Standard was first heard of here in the early
sixties, and that between the advent of the A.M.P. and
the Australian Alliance more than a dozen local and
foreign life societies were doing business in Sydney.
With divergences such as these to make a start from
fortunate indeed would be the writer who did not
require to put ‘‘ E. and 0.E.” at the foot of his notes.
Upon this point all are agreed—no insurance com-
pany was established in New South Wales prior to 1831.
There had been a considerable amount of talk about
starting a marine company, but it did not materialise
until the latter portion of that year, when the Australian
Marine Assurance Company commenced business, with
a nominal capital of £140,000, divided into £IOO
shares, £ls per share being paid up. The office
of the company was at Terry’s Buildings, Pitt
Street South, Mr. R. Hutchinson Bell, the father
of Australian underwriting, being the secretary.
Mr. R. Jones, M.C., the chairman ; Mr. R. Campbell,
jun., acting chairman. Messrs. H. Donnison, John
Maclaren, Thos. Walker (Bunker’s Hill), S. Terry
(merchants), W. Hutchinson (shipowner), W. C. Went-
worth (barrister) and Dr. R. W. Archell constituted the
board of directors. Incorporation under 3 William IV.
was effected on 27th September, 1832, the deed of
settlement providing : (1) that no dividend should be
declared for the first three years, (2) that after seven
years the company was to be dissolved. The first pro-
vision was subsequently amended. Premiums ranged


from 7s. 6d. to £3 per cent. Vessels engaged in the sperm
fishery were rated at from Bs. to 9s. per centum for twelve
months, and no risks were accepted for the passage
through the Torres Straits. The premiums for the first
year amounted to £3,371, and the losses represented
£1,556. From 1834 to 1840, notwithstanding compe-
tition had to be faced after the first twelve months, the
dividends averaged 15 per cent., and scrip by 1838 had
reached a premium of £lO. The forties brought days
of disaster. Rates which at that early stage had to be
cut to retain business proved too favourable for assurers,
and the shareholders, on 6th September, 1843, decided
to wind up. On the whole they had little to complain
about, for the final dividend completed 90 per cent, of
the paid-up capital.
The next company to enter the colonial arena was
the then termed Alliance British and Foreign Life
Assurance Company. Opening a life agency here in
1835 some considerable time was allowed to elapse ere
the fire branch found a footing on colonial soil; and
only after a further period of watching and waiting for
half a century was the time considered ripe to expand
the marine business to Australia.
The Alliance Assurance Company Limited.
The Alliance British and Foreign Life and Fire
Assurance Company was established in 1824 upon a
registered capital of £5,000,000, divided into 50,000
£IOO shares, paid up to £lO per share, each shareholder
as a condition for holding his shares being obliged to
take out a policy for £I,OOO in either of the two depart-
ments. A few months later the directors saw the possi-
bilities afforded by a change of legislation to profitably
take up marine insurance. One of the shareholders,
however, a Lloyds underwriter, objected ; and this
necessitated the constitution of the Alliance Marine
Assurance Company in 1825. Incorporation as a
limited company under the Companies Acts, and
an extension of powers covered by the customary
terra “ general ” ensued in 1881 and 1892 respec-
tively : the old names being altered to the Alliance
Assurance Company Ltd., representing life and fire,
and the Alliance Marine and General Assurance Com-
pany Limited confined in its objects to marine
operations. Early in 1835 a life agency was opened
in Sydney under the representation of Messrs.
Montefiore & Co. Eleven years later a branch
for fire business was projected and risks taken at
the following rates; —Stone buildings detached, with
incombustible roof, 7s. 6d. per cent. ; with shingle roof,
10s. per cent. Stone buildings connected, with incom-
bustible roof, 13s. per cent.; with shingle roof. 15s. per
cent. Stone buildings connected with buildings of
inferior construction, 15s. and 255. per cent, respectively.
Wooden buildings, 40s. per cent. The board of
directors were Messrs. John Thacker (chairman), Hon.
C. D. Kidd, M.L.C., A. W. Young and W. Walker ;
and Mr. G. K. Mann acted as secretary and surveyor.
On 18th May, 1847, ie following notification
appeared in the papers : “ That in consequence of the
London board having intimated their opinion that
fire assurance business in this colony at the rates of
premiums which can only be obtained is of too hazard-
ous a nature to admit of a profit, no more business
will be transacted after this date, and for renewals
policyholders must apply to headquarters direct.’' The
fire branch accordingly was closed ; only to be opened
again, as an agency, under Messrs. Thacker & Co.,
at the beginning of 1849. Meanwhile the life
department was favourably managed by several
agents. From Messrs. Montefiore & Co. it
passed in 1851 to Messrs. J. B. Ware & Co.,
of Circular Wharf, and again in 1871 to Messrs.
G. King & Co., who in turn handed it over to Messrs.
Daniel King & Co., of 10 O’Connell Street, in 1880.
Alliance Assurance Co.
From 1873 the two departments were placed under
the one agency, and remained so until the end
of the eighties, when the expansion of colonial
affairs rendered a local fire branch again desirable.
Ere this, in fact for some years prior to this, the
life department had taken no colonial risks. The fire
agency was closed finally in 1891 —a branch was
established in Sydney, and Mr. Janies Anderson,
who had succeeded Mr. Jas. Clarke as manager, of
the marine company, appointed manager for both
concerns, with Mr. W. Gordon Dixon as secretary.
In 1885 the Alliance Marine and General Assurance
Company opened an office at 447 George Street, with


Mr. P. J. Clark in charge to conduct the business of
the Sydney Marine Insurance Company, which they
had first acquired. The Alliance Marine, as it had
previously been called, was founded in 1825, with
a subscribed capital of £1,000,000, paid up to
£250,000, and in 1884 its annual premium income
amounted to £82,483, with net assets representing
£37 1 A?6- A Sydney directorate was formed in 1885, con-
sisting of; Messrs. R. Jones (chairman), the Hon.
H. Mort, M.L.C., G. S. Caird, and W. McMillan. The
local agency of the Adelaide Marine Insurance Company
was transferred to the office in 1888, and in 1890 the
Australian General Assurance Company of Sydney was
absorbed. Soon there were more transfers. The
Union Fire and Marine Insurance Company of New
Zealand passed its branches over to the kindred Alliance
companies. In 1894 the Alliance Marine Assurance
Company acquired the marine connection of the
British and Colonial Insurance Company Ltd. of
Sydney, and the Imperial Fire Company, with
a premium income in 1901 approximating three-
quarters of a million sterling, was taken over
by the Alliance Assurance Company in 1902. By
the death of Mr. James Anderson in 1895, Mr. W.
Gordon Dixon was appointed to succeed him as general
manager. This position he still holds, the assistant-
manager being Mr. A. D. Stobo. The present direc-
torate consists of the Hon. R. Jones, M.L.C. (chairman),
Messrs. A. H. K. Maxwell (acting chairman), Hugh
Dixson, D. Carson, L- Herring, and the Hon.
E. Vickery, M.L.C. At the end of 1905 the two
companies decided, after existing as separate entities
eighty years, to merge into one.
A second sea company was chartered in 1836 to
woo public favour. This was the Union Marine Insur-
ance Company of Sydney, with a working capital of
£12,500. During its first four years risks were covered
to the amount of £836,390, and in the next half-3’ear
they amounted to £160,316, the increase being due to
the establishment of an agency in London. Shares,
paid up to 505., rose to a premium of 80s. ; a dividend of
15 per cent, for the half wear was declared, and the
shareholders were so satisfied with their prospects that,
after increasing the remuneration of their secretary,
Mr. Adam Wilson, to £SOO and expressing themselves
duly grateful for his skill in lining their pockets with
dividends, they decided their chartered life should be
prolonged for another ninety-nine years. Alas, that it
should not be ! The year 1843 shook the slender
pedestal of insurance from base to capital. And it
affected the company’s capital also. The prospects of
uncertain prosperity made the shareholders timorous
and, after facing increasing losses and diminishing rates
for another three years, they rescinded their lease of
life and resolved to exist no more.
This same year, 1836, witnessed the birth of a cor-
poration of very different metal—the originally named
Australian Fire and Life Assurance Company, altered
in 1839 to the Australian General Life and Marine As-
sociation for obvious reasons ; and again changed dur-
ing 1843 to the Australian General Assurance Company,
under which title it was ‘ ‘ boa-constricted ’ ’ some
fifteen years ago by the Alliance of London. This
was the first purely local fire and life office estab-
lished in the colony, and must not be confounded, as it
has been, with the London company of somewhat simi-
lar name which took over its life business at a later
stage. Apart, however, from the marked success the
Australian General met with in the branch it ultimately
confined itself to, as a pioneer it is due a word or two of
notice. The capital of the original corporation was
£200,000 (nominal) in shares of £IOO each, paid up to
£5 per share. Business was conducted at 458 George
Street, opposite the Barracks’ Gate, upon the site
where the handsome premises of the Equitable Life
Association of the United States have been erected.
Mr. John Lamb was the chairman of the board of
directors, Mr. A. B. Sparks the deputy-chairman, Mr.
J. C. Philps the secretary ; and it is a significant fact
that, although the business had a life of fifty-five years’
duration, the only officers in charge were Captain H. T.
Fox, Messrs. J. Anderson and J. C. Philps. The tariff
of fire rates the company established was ss. 6d., 7s. 6d.,
and 12s. 6d. per cent, for the three classes of risks re-
spectively, a scale competent authorities considered
sufficient to yield a fair margin of profit with only a
moderate amount of assurance. During the first twelve
months losses represented a low average and the com-
pany made money. Fire premiums amounted to
£2,956, and life policies yielded £1,702, fire claims
totalled £416, whilst a sum of £2,689 was accumulated
for the discount of bills, or about 27 per cent, on the
paid-up capital. The shareholders, however, in No-
vember, 1843, determined to drop further fire risks, and
continue the marine branch, added in 1839. Foreign
traders were rated for protection at from 2.J per cent,
to 2 per cent. ; coasters from 2 per cent, to f per cent. ;
time risks from g per cent, to 3 per cent.; and whalers
for the voyage from 10 per cent, to g per cent. The
life department ran a sickly career for five years, effect-
ing during that time about thirty policies, all of which
were for large amounts and on the lives of leading
citizens. Eventually it was handed over to the Aus-
tralasian Colonial and General Life Assurance and
Annuity Company of London. After the troubles of
1843, which led later on to the Sydney companies all
suspending marine business, the Australasian General
was the only one to resume underwriting operations.
From that time until the end of a career confined
strictly to its own legitimate preserves the profits on its
covers were substantial and continuous, and when the
finish came proprietors holding scrip under the recon-
struction of 1865 had received a total distribution of
£8 os. 3d. on shares paid up to £3 10s.
Another local venture was promoted in 1839 —the
Sydney Alliance Marine, Fire and Life Association.
It started with high hopes of success, having a long roll
of leading citizens on its share list, a powerful direc-
torate, including such names as J. B. Darvall, J. Hos-
king, R. Dacre and M. D. Hunter, and a large paid-up
capital. The first year’s transactions proved highly
satisfactory, a 15 per cent, dividend being declared and
a surplus of £7,600 carried to reserves. But the summit
of folly was reached when, in the face of such bright
prospects, quarrelling began at home. Over what ?
The imperfect records of the period furnish no infor-
mation on the point. All that can be gathered is, the
directors tried to force the hand of the shareholders bv


resigning in a body at a needful moment ; and the
shareholders, without yielding in any way, proceeded
to elect others more in harmony with their own views.
There could only be one result, and as the ascent was
with the speed of the rocket, the descent, as a matter
of course, was like the stick that guided it upward.
Before the end of 1843 the Sydney Alliance was only a
remembrance.
Three more new companies were added during 1840
to those already listed. The first, a Melbourne fire and
marine concern, incorporated under 4 Victoria, made
short effort to secure a footing in Sydney until stress of
circumstances carried away its legs. The remaining
two are typical of the first colonial efforts to meet the
demand that was beginning to find expressiqn for mutual
charters. The Mutual Indemnity Assurance Society,
limited to owners of vessels belonging to the port of
Sydney, was intended to afford protection to vessels
employed in the coasting trade. Its articles in the
light of the present times will be regarded as something
in the nature of a curiosity. The intention of the little
band of well-meaning promoters was that all colonial
vessels under twelve ‘ ‘ if in good condition ’ ’ and all
British vessels ‘ ‘ of an age to be hereafter agreed upon ’ ’
should be insured for not more than £BOO or less than
£2OO, provided these limits did not exceed three-fourths
of the ship’s value. No risks were to be taken on vessels
venturesome enough to trade to the northward of
Moreton Bay or to the southward of Twofold Bay, or
on vessels employing masters contrary to the wishes of
the company, and no drunkard was to be employed on
any vessel at all. Whether the age of the British
vessels trading within the prescribed zone was ever
agreed to is open to doubt. But this much is certain.
The company was formed and registered, and, what is
not at all surprising, numbered before long amongst
the forgotten circumstances of the past.
The history of the Mutual Fire Insurance Association
constitutes, perhaps, the most extraordinary episode in
the annals of Australian assurance. It is a story of the
perfervid philanthropy of two or three good souls,
inducing leading members of the community, highly
respectable men, of marked ability in their respective
avocations, to make eminent asses of themselves, by
giving their countenance and practical support to
one of the wildest fancies ever hatched for mischief
in the brain of a “wild-cat ” promoter. At a public
meeting, held on 27th April, 1840, in Tyons’ Rooms,
at the corner of Charlotte Place and George Street
for the purpose of establishing this association
the committee appointed to make the preliminary
arrangements ‘ ‘ begged to present the following
prospectus that the company may see the utility
of such an institution. The great principle of the
projected association is Reciprocal Indemnification
for loss by fire ; and this with the most efficient aid at
the time of need and at the least possible expense.
When a fire occurs the amount of loss sustained will be
paid by all the members contributing in proportion to
the sum for which they are severally insured, thus
securing their personal as well as pecuniary assistance,
upon the basis of their individual interest. No paid-up
capital of any considerable extent will be required.
Profit forming no part of its objects, exorbitant pre-
miums will therefore be unnecessary to support a fund
for such a purpose, the design of this association being
simply Indemnification, and its capital still circulating
in the affairs of its individual members. The association
will commence when property to the amount of £1,000,000
is insured. There will be no limit to the amount of its
policies. A fund will be formed for purchasing appa-
ratus by every person paying on joining the association
4 per cent, on the amount of his policy. The manage-
ment will be conducted by twenty-four directors.
Insurers will, contrary to the present practice, in all
cases within the limits of their policy be paid the full
amount of their loss. By order of the committee,
Henry Bailey, provisional secretary. We, the under-
signed, consider the formation of such an association as
the foregoing highly expedient, and concur in the call
for a public meeting.—(Sgd.) Chas. Appleton & Co.,
Win. Bland, surgeon, Jas. Blanch, J. W. Browne,
Henry Bond, Robt. Browne, Wm. Barnes, Prosper
de Maistre, Henry Day, Abraham Elias, Jas. L.
Frew, R. C. Gordon, Francis Gibson, Jas. Holt, Wm.
Hutchinson, Hebblewhite & Vickery, David Jones
and Co., J. C. Maclaren, H. Russell, Alf. Saunders,
Isaac Pendray, J. G. Richardson, Isaac Simmons,
John Sterling, Wm. Sooles, G. Smith, Chas. Windeyer,
Wm. Wyatt, Jos. Wyatt, F. Watkins, Alex. Young.”
The meeting was held on 27th April, 1840, Mr. Prosper
de Maistre in the chair, when it was decided not to
limit the number of shares or the amount to which
any individual might assure. There was considerable
discussion as to why there should be any capital raised,
many of the promoters thinking it quite unnecessary, but
eventually it was resolved that there should be a fund.
In order to prevent the directors trading with this perma-
nent fund, it had to be divided whenever it rose above
a certain amount, to be fixed by the directors, who
were in office, as well as the officers of the association.
Messrs. Roger & Young were appointed attorne} T s for
the company, and Air. Andrew Oliver the actuary for
the ensuing year. From statistics read it appeared
that during the previous ten years the loss by fire in
.Sydney did not exceed £I,OOO per annum. The
association was formed in May, 1840, and chartered
under 5 Victoria. The rules provided : (1) That before
any person shall become a member of the said association
or effect an insurance therein he shall execute a bond in
a penalty to be named by the directors to abide by and
perform the rules in existence and such other rules as
shall at any time be made, and to pay all such sums of
money as shall be payable in performance of his insur-
ance by any call of the directors ; (2) that every member
shall, in proportion to the sum for which he may be
insured be answerable for and liable to pay all losses
or damage by fire which shall be sustained by any mem-
ber of such association, and also all calls or demands
made by virtue of the rules ; (3) that any person exe-
cuting the bond required by the association in effecting
an insurance shall be deemed to be a member, so long
as the policy shall be valid, and no longer. Provided,
however, that nothing shall void any liability that shall
attach to any person during the time he may have been
a member of the association by reason of his being such
member thereof, notwithstanding that the validity of


such policy may have ceased. Here is mutuality in its
widest significance, a co-partnership charging mem-
bers with a share of losses as well as profits; co-
operation far wider than the imported interpretations
ot the mutual system we have grown accustomed
to. Premises were secured at Mr. A. Sillitoe’s
establishment in George Street, and the doors opened
for business on Ist September, 1840, the personnel of
the officials being as follows :—Trustees, Messrs. Jas.
Macarthur, Wm. Macpherson and Jas. Norton ; direc-
tors, Messrs. R. Bourne (chairman), W. Hutchinson
(deputy chairman), J. Andrews, T. Burdekin, E. Flood,
A. boss, R. C. Gordon, J. Holt, E. Hunt, A. R. Huntley,
L. Iredale, D. Jones, R. Jones, M. Joseph, T. Lord,
P. de Maistre, A. Mitchell, J. G. Richardson, A. Sillitoe,
C. Smith and W. Wyatt ; auditors, Messrs. J. Andrews,
G. Chisholm, J. G. Richardson and C. Younger ; bankers,
the Sydney Banking Company ; solicitors, Messrs. Case
and Rogers ; surves*or, Mr. J. Hume ; managing direc-
tor, Mr. A. Sillitoe. Business w r as carried on without
accident until the 28th May, 1845. Then news came in
that during the previous night the shop of one of the
members, Mr. C. E. Ellis, at the corner of Pitt and King
Streets, had been destroyed. It was not a crushing
calamity ; £s°° would cover everything ; but the results
of the set-back were surprisingly sweeping. The bene-
volent pass-round-the-beaver campaign completely
collapsed. Mr. Sillitoe couldn’t gather. His victims
refused to “ante-up” when the collector called, and the
burned-out brother found the only consolation left him
was to sit among the ashes of his carbonised household
gods and sorrowfully sing :
Three years did little Mutual stay,
It came but for this quest ;
To take my cash and steal away
To its eternal rest.
The Elysian experience did not exactly bring
Elysium, but it brought enlightenment. Within a
couple of months of the fire the following adver-
tisement appeared : ‘ ‘ We, the undersigned, directors
and members of the Mutual Fire Insurance Association,
being of opinion that in case of fire the pecuniary call
upon the members of the association would be more
than is consistent with the advantages, do request that
at the earliest opportunity allowed by law the direc-
tors will call a meeting of the members of the asso-
ciation for the purpose of discussing its present pros-
pects and the propriety of its dissolution. ’ ’ The earliest
opportunity was availed of. Within a few weeks the
members had to attend their own obsequies and sign
the deeds of dissolution.
With 1842 arrived the second life insurance com-
pany from London—the Australasian Colonial and
General Life Assurance and Annuity Company, estab-
lished in 1839, with a capital of £200,000 in 2.000 shares,
and which, after the first call of £5, gratified the hearts
of its shareholders with the pleasant announcement
that, owing to the influx of premiums, further calls
would be unnecessary. Participation in profits, with
a 25 per cent, reduction in prevailing rates, were the
leading features of the message this proprietary insti-
tution had to bring to antipodeans ; and it is an inter-
esting speculation how much the reception of thus
message influenced the promoters of the great scheme
of mutuality which after the lapse of a few years was to
revolutionise, for all time, life assurance in Australasia.
An account of the principles adopted by the Austral-
asian Colonial and General will assist the speculative
mind in determining this point. Half profits were
divided among the assured and annuitants, but in the
first instance one-fifth of the whole was retained to
form “ an extra precautionary fund.” For the profits
to which the assured became entitled at each quinquen-
nial ‘ ‘ rest and division ’ ’ a separate policy was issued.
This, being unencumbered by the payment of premium,
constituted absolute reversion payable at the death
of the assured, increasing without cost in value every
year, and which the society was always ready to pur-
chase on equitable terms, or to receive in commutation
of future premiums on the original policy. The bene-
fited members of the company consisted of the first
thousand policyholders for the time being—for the
whole of life assured for £SOO or upward, in one or
more policies ; and of the first thousand annuitants for
the time being who had paid £3OO or upward for their
annuities ; every vacancy amongst the benefited policy-
holders or annuitants to be filled up by the next oldest
interested, “ on the plan of the Equitable Society in
London ” ; the assured and annuitants, however only
to succeed to the vacancies in their respective classes.
In addition to the order, or even scale, of premiums
the company had an ascending or descending scale to
suit all parties ; and —an evidence of the growing
tendency to slacken hide-bound restrictions —residence
in “ New Holland or Van Diemen’s Land ” and voy-
ages from port to port in approved vessels were per-
mitted without additional loading. An energetic board
of directors was established in Sydney in 1842, Messrs.
Thos. C. Breillat, John Mackay and T. Kemble being
the members. These gentlemen initiated proceedings
at 448 George Street by acquiring the languishing life
business of the Australian General Life and Marine
Association, shortly to be better known as the Austra-
lian General Assurance Company Branches were soon
afoot in Melbourne and Adelaide, and under a
progressive policy prosperity attended operations for
some years, assurances averaging £30,000 per annum.
However, in the early part of 1852, when the company’s
business at home and abroad was drooping, an amalga-
mation was effected with the Liverpool and London
Insurance Company, by that masterly prince of insur-
ance managers, Mr. Swinton Boult, whose astute in-
stincts enabled him, first of all others, to rightly antici-
pate the great benefits his company would derive from
making its investment in colonial securities.
Insurance offices had now been operating on
colonial soil for twelve years, and to little advantage.
Although Australia’s assurable population did not
exceed 75.000. and fire and marine insurance had met
with but the approval of a few. between 1831 and 1843
seven colonial companies were p emoted and two British
offices imported. Of these, six local ventures were either
dissolved or in extremis. The Australian General, now
limited to marine risks, the Alliance British and


Foreign and the Australasian Colonial and General,
transacting life assurance, alone were active in the field.
This left an opening for a local fire office, which was
soon fillea. Towards the end of October, 1844, the
Sydney Fire Insurance Company was founded, not as
a joint stock company, but on the lines of an association
" for the mutual indemnification of its members against
damage by fire, on the principle of the Gotha Mutual
Fire Assurance Company.” No single risk was allowed
to exceed £3,000, and the liabilities, limited to four
times the amount of the annual premiums paid, were to
absolutely cease at the expiration of the members’
respective policies. The directors on the first board
were Messrs. T. W. Smart (chairman), Chas. King (deputy
chairman), Thos. Agar, R. M. Robey, Thos. Holt and
R. W. Scott. Mr. George King, who succeeded Mr. E.
Hancock after a brief term as secretary, had his office,
first at 14 Jamieson Street, and subsequently at 357
Pitt Street, and —nota bene, Mr. Manager, worn out with
the worries of the wild world that rushes by you to-day—
the advertised office hours were from 11 a.m. till 1 p.m.
A tariff was framed on the scale that ‘ ‘ cut ’ ’ previous
rates ; the directors ‘ ‘ having made the discovery ’ ’ that
the moral risk home companies were in the practice
of charging extra for had no existence, and therefore
loading on this account was only a little "squeeze
pidgin.” First-class buildings were charged from
6s. to 12s. ; second-class, from Bs. to 18s. ; third-class,
from 15s. to 305., and 50 per cent, again was allowed
on renewals for twelve months. The insurable property
in Sydney at this time was estimated at £2,000,000.
Not more than a quarter of that amount had been
insured, and of this proportion the Sydney Fire Insur-
ance Company held risks in 1850 for £284,880. From
1844 until 1850 the company enjoyed a time of pros-
perity and future prospects looked remarkably rosy. No
fire claims had diminished the funds ; from a busi-
ness which, in the first year, represented £76,501
covers for four times that amount were being issued
annually ; and the accumulated funds had been in-
creased tenfold, whilst the liability of the members
unaer the mutual claim only represented £9,104. In
the fifties all this became changed. With the discovery
of gold came the ‘ ‘ fire bug. ’ ’ A wave of incendiarism
shattered the edifice so successfully built up. Before
being veritably burnt out of existence, doomed, phoenix-
like, to rise again, some years hence, from its ashes. In
October, 1845, a differently constitued specimen of the
fabulous bird arrived to pick up a few crumbs for awhile ;
—the Phoenix Marine Insurance Company, the first com-
pany from Calcutta to honour us with a visit. Messrs.
Smith, Campbell & Co., Campbell’s Wharf, held the
agency until the collapse of their sea insurance business
twelve months later closed it. A month after the
arrival of the Indian office the Imperial Fire Insurance
Company of London opened a Sydney agency in Spring
Street under the direction of Messrs. Fanning, Griffiths
and Co. who retained the management for thirty-two
years, when, in November, 1877, a branch was formed
at 123 Pitt Street. Messrs. F. C. Griffiths (chairman)
and C. Smith represented the directorate, the managers
in succession being Messrs. J. Martin, R. B. Treacy,
J. K. Fergusson and A. A. Locke. This company
during a course of fifty-seven 3 ? ears, established a most
successful colonial connection and continued operations
upon an extended scale until amalgamation with the
Alliance Assurance Company in 1902 merged into one
the two oldest British offices doing insurance business
in Australasia. To the enterprise of the Imperial
Sydney is indebted for the handsome block of buildings
the company erected in O’Connell Street in 1890.
Like its predecessor 1845, the year 1846 proved
"panicky.” The offices doing marine insurance closed
their front doors, with one exception —that of the
Australian General —for ever. Whether this general
shut down arose from the act of God, or through the
provocation of man, is not recorded by the news prints of
the day. From their advertising columns a little light is
gleaned. The middleman now appears for the first time.
Mr. Hutchinson Bell, erstwhile secretary of the Aus-
tralian Marine Insurance Company, notifies, in Novem-
ber, 1846, that " according to the practice followed by
Lloyds, he is prepared to procure and deliver policies
to be underwritten by parties of undeniable responsi-
bility and to receive orders for the insurance of ships
and merchandise.” On the Ist of March following
Mr. Sam. H. Smyth advertises that he is carrying on the
business of the late H. Bell, and also inserts this
explanatory notice : ‘ ‘ The Marine Insurance Companies
in Sydney having towards the close of the year 1846
suspended their operations —only one of which has
since resumed business —Mr. Smyth invites the public
to keep open a mode of insurance which has continued
to prevail in England.” The "mode” was kept
open, and Smyth’s Marine Assurance Office long con-
tinued to enjoy palmy days. But it did not constitute
a monopoly. Mr. J. B. Metcalfe was soon in compe-
tition as a ship and insurance broker, and with the
advent of another sea society from Tasmania —the
Derwent and Tamar—marine business boomed once more.
The Derwent and Tamar Assurance Company,
The Derwent and Tamar Assurance Company
opened an agency in Sydney under Mr. Arch. Campbell,
accountant, of 2 Bridge Street, in March, 1847. This
proprietary company was founded at Hobart in 1838
with a nominal capital of £IOO,OOO, now paid up to
£50,000. It is, therefore, the oldest colonial insurance
institution in Australasia moving to-day. Originally the
business of the company was life, fire and marine, but
the former branch was dropped once the popularity
of the mutual systems became incontestable. Marine
insurance alone was done in the Sydney office until
1890, when fire risks were taken up. From Mr. Campbell
the local agency here passed to Mr. J. Macnamara in
December, 1853, then to Messrs. Towns & Darley in
August, 1854 ; next to Mr. A. L- Park in February,
1883, and finally, in April, 1887, to Messrs. T. & W. Willis,
19 Bridge Street, in whose able hands it has remained
since.
There was now (1847) a short pause in the insurance
world. Company promoters rested on their oars, and
companies already established in other parts of the
world were not anxious to secure a doubtful footing in
the colonies. The year 1848 found two life, three fire and
two marine offices coping with local requirements, and
although no new ventures were put on the market
during the twelve months, as summer set in much
activity was displayed in arranging for the launching
of the A.M.P. at the commencement of the new year.


The Australian Mutual Provident Society.
For a parallel to the history of the Australian
Mutual Provident Society we must look doubtingly to
the future. The past can furnish none. Among the
many colonial institutions which attest the wonderful
progress made by the Australian colonies during the
major portion of the last half-century this office stands
out in splendid solitude, for the far-reaching effects of its
useful influences and the perfect success of its opera-
tions. Starting at the commencement of 1849, without
capital, without experience, and with little recommen-
dation, after fifty-seven years’ growth it is to-day, in the
matter of policies in force, annual income and accumu-
lated funds, the premier insurance company in the
British Empire. But it has attained a still higher
plane. As an institution which has popularised the
most beneficial work human agencies can turn their
attention to ; as an institution which has conferred on
the people of these colonies inestimable benefits, which
stands to-day as a monument to the industry and to
the sowings of self-sacrifice of the Australasian colonists,
and which is destined to play an important part in the
future national life of this continent, the A.M.P. is
absolutely unmatched.
The early beginnings of an institution that be-
comes great and powerful are interesting and instruc-
tive. In the case of the A.M.P., they have come to us
through the hazy atmosphere of antiquity in varied
form ; but perhaps the clearest and most definite story
is that told by Mr. T. S. Mort, one of the founders. t<>
Professor Smith, for many years chairman of the directors
of the society. Quoting the former : ‘ ‘ The original
promoters were Mr. Thos. Holt, jun., Canon Walsh and
myself—my interest in Mr. Walsh and his cloth gene-
rally having led on to it ” (the A.M.P.). “It occurred
in this wise. Mr. Walsh was out of health through
overwork, and I invited him to accompany Mrs. Mort
and myself to Camden for a few days. On our way
we visited Mr. Holt, at Sophensburg, near Liverpool.
During lunch I mentioned the necessity which existed
for some means of providing for and their
families in case of old age and death ; and, taking the
lead Mr. Holt at once suggested the establishment of a
mutual provident society which should embrace the
object. Mr. Holt was very earnest, and so was I, for
I saw at once how good the idea was ; and on our return
to town we agreed to put the thing before our mutual
friend, Mr. William Perry, then an official assignee of
very good status. You may sum up all in a few words.
Mr. Walsh was the instrument, Mr. Holt the performer,
and I the bellows-blower, and every man we met at the
time sang chorus to Mr. Holt’s solo.’’ So far Mr. Mort.
Then Professor Smith continues in an address to the
policyholders : “ The first advertised meeting of the new
society was held on 21st December, IS4B, and a code of
rules was adopted on 28th December. . . Business was
by no means lively. Proposals came in very slowly, and
the directors were very cautious in accepting them.
The office was an upper room in George Street (487),
near Hunter Street, over a grocer’s shop, above the
door of wffiich there projected a gilt I
have heard that the office-boy, finding the time heavy
on his hands, used to extract some amusement in
various ways out of that same gilded presentment.’’
The society was thus formed—Sir Alfred Stephen points
out at another meeting—“ not for commercial pur-
poses, not with the object of making money, but for
purposes of benevolence and extended usefulness.
It was with a desire to promote amongst the less think-
ing portions of the community habits of forethought
and carefulness, and to make persons who were living
simply by the daily produce of the hand, or the brow,
to provide in the case of death for those who were dear
to them, or to secure for themselves in old age the
means of retiring from labour with some degree of
comfort. These useful objects were the aspirations of
the men who started the society; but had it been
chiefly or solely a commercial enterprise greater success ’ ’
(it is now 1864) “ could not have attended its opera-
tions.’’ At the outset, however, this enterprise was
so timid a venture and for several years proved a plant
so tender that, according to Major Christie, an early
director, ‘ ‘ one or two deaths would have swamped
their resources and swept the whole affair out of exist-
ence.’’ The Major notwithstanding, there is an office
tradition that the first directors gave promissory notes,
to be kept in the custody of the society, and to be dis-
counted if necessity arose. But, thanks to good fortune
and to the unremitting exertions of the chief medical
officer, the Hon. Arthur M. a’Beckett, M.L.C., whose
care in selecting risks during the days of little doings
contributed so much to the society’s after prosperity,
no occasions for using these bonds arose. Three years
expired before the first claim had to be met, and by
that time the society was in a position to meet
liabilities as they arose from the accumulated funds.
Some of the first policies, too, had an exceptionally long
currency. In 1887 the oldest policy then existing
became a claim. This policy, which was the fourth
issued by the society, dated back to 28th March.
1849, and was for £250. The bonuses added amounted
to £s7®, the claim being for £B2O. The annual premium
of £6 18s. 4d. was paid for thirty-eight years, the result
being that the assurant had an investment yielding
him about 5| per cent, over the whole thirty-eight vears,
while the assurance, ranging from £250 to £B2O, had
been carried meanwhile for nothing. Another claim
which fell on the society quite recently, in the middle
of 1904 in fact, was that secured under the police
of Mr. Phillip Gidley King, a grandson of the third
Governor of the colony. In 1856 he effected, under
Table A, a policy for £l,OOO with the A.M.P., then a
very small affair, but seven years of age. How well
Mr. King’s confidence has been repaid is shown by
the final results, for the bonuses equalled more than
double the sum originally assured, and the total claims
amounted to £3,104 6s.
The fact that so little progress was made during
the first five years of the A.M.P.’s existence is
largely due to the mistaken notions prevalent
regarding mutual life assurance. Sir Archibald
Michie, one of the first directors, tells an amusing
story a piopos of this : ‘ ‘ The first person, ’ ’ it
runs, ‘ ‘ whom we induced to insure his life was a clerk
in a lawyer’s office. Some short time after he had paid
his premium he came to me to say that he had made a
discovery. It was that our company had no capital.
‘Of course not,’ I said ;‘it is a mutual office.’ ‘ But
wdio then,’ he said, ‘is to pay my wife if I die ? ’ * Oh,’


I said, ‘ you are not going to die.’ But that did not
quiet him, and ultimately I had to join my two co-
adjutors in giving him a personal bond that in
the case of death we should pay his relatives the
amount of his policy.” What the position of the
A.M.P. Society is to-day has been dealt with at
some length elsewhere. How from the forty-five
policies—assuring £IO,IOO and yielding in premiums
a yearly income of £361 —effected during 1849,
society’s business has marvellously expanded to the
enormous total of 197,851 policies—assuring £55,469,521,
and yielding a yearly income of £1,822,132 —in force
at end of 1905 has been recorded with telling effect
in the annual report of 1906, and shown in the
past year’s statement of accounts. The story
is too fresh in the public mind to be repeated here.
It shows how all kindred institutions —the great
Gresham, the long-established Equitable, the Scottish
Amicable, the Scottish Widows’ Fund, the Royal—-
with every point in their favour, have long ago been
overtaken in the race, and left panting, in the rear.
It shows how much of this phenomenal success all along
the line is due to a continuous policy of wise generosity to
policyholders, which has stimulated their active interest
and secured their confidence. One example may be quoted.
When in 1858 the British law courts ruled that life
assurance offices run no risks during days of grace,
until payment of premiums, the A.M.P. would have
none of it. An announcement was immediately made
that the policies of members would remain valid during
this thirty days’ extension ; and, stimulated by this
example, the British mutual offices subsequently
adopted a similar course. But, more than all, the
story shows to what great extent the policyholders
are indebted to the managerial officials and their
highly-trained and loyal staffs —the well-balanced
mechanism that has so effectively evolved a limitless
power for beneficence unparalleled in the history of
any financial institution, a power that will continue
unabated so long as wisdom shall prevail in the
counsels of the society and human sagacity prove equal
to human needs. One of the latest acts of the society
is to initiate a system of monthly premiums.
Two more companies established offices in Sydney
in 1849 —the Canton and the Victoria. Undeterred by
the ill-fate of the Phoenix of Calcutta, the Canton
Marine Insurance Company (Hongkong), or, as known
to-day, the Canton Insurance Office Ltd., appointed
Messrs. Thacker & Co. its representatives in June that
year. The agency since then has passed through the
hands of Messrs. Thacker, Danvers & Co., and Danvers,
King & Co., and from this last-mentioned firm to
Messrs. George King & Co., who now hold it. The
Canton is the oldest marine office in the Far East,
and perhaps the most stable. The paid-up capital of
500,000 dob, the accumulated funds 1,200,000 dob, and
the company’s risks are so well selected that it rarely
happens that shareholders do not get a handsome
return for their investments.
The Victoria Insurance Companies.
The institution known to-day as “ The Victoria Insur-
ance Companies ” has through force of circumstances
frequently altered its title, but through the changes
has scrupulously adhered to the name Victoria.
Established in Melbourne in 1849 as the \ ictoria Life
and General Assurance Company, the subsequent
divisions of the parent stock are recognised now as the
Victoria Insurance Company Ltd., the Victoria General
Insurance and Guarantee Company Ltd., and the
Victoria Life and General Assurance Company and
Savings Institute —the first doing marine and fire busi-
ness, the second adding to these financial guarantee
operations, and the last working out a life branch,
which in early days yielded handsome returns. In the
intermediary years of its existence the company has
been known at various times, wholly, or in divided
forms, as the Victoria Life and General Assurance
Company and Savings Institution, the Victoria hire
and Marine Life and General Assurance Company, and
the Victoria General Assurance Company. About the
middle of the eighties the concern of unlimited liability
was formed into a limited liability concern, the old
shareholders took up all the new shares, 10s paid up, at
a £1 premium, and received their money back within
thirty months ; whilst at the same time there were
accumulated funds amounting to £353>8°8 held in
reserve for emergencies. The Sydney branch in 1861 was
under Mr. Colin M. Smith. On the latter joining the Pa-
cific Company, in 1865, Mr. W. Jack took his place until
1871, when Mr. F. J. Jackson, the present manager of
the Life Company, was appointed general manager
of all the Victoria’s interests in New South Wales,
a position he held for the long period of thirty
years. His successor in the management of the Vic-
toria I. Company and the V.G.I. & Guarantee Com-
pany is Mr. Cameron.
The Church of England Assurance Institution, an
English office, established itself in the colony in 1850
under an honorary committee of management, consist-
ing of the Ven. Archdeacon Cowper, the Revs. R. All-
wood, H. W. Matthews, and J. W. Garling. Messrs.
Ronand Ronald, Burton and Pownall and H. Selwyn
Smith held the agency at various periods during the
ensuing decade, the latter agent performing the mourn-
ful office of closing up. During 1850 the fire offices
established their Insurance Companies’ Fire Brigade,
with which that seasoned authority on conflagrations,
Mr. T. J. Bown, who has so long held the office of chair-
man of the Fire Brigades’ Board, was for a considerable
time associated as secretary and superintendent.
When the Fire Brigades Act came into force in 1883
the occupation of the Insurance Companies’ Fire Brigade
as an independent body was gone. In 1851 Metcalfe’s
Marine Assurance Company was floated to take over
Mr. J. B. Metcalfe’s business, and continued to enjoy
a separate identity until the South British Fire and
Marine Insurance Company of New Zealand acquired
the underwriting connection of the concern, preparatory
to opening its agency in Sydney in 1872. Many asso-
ciations of early colonial history intermingle with the
transactions of this company. Amongst the policies it
issued was one for £2,500 in favour of the unfortunate
Bishop Patterson, on the hull of his missionary ship,
‘‘The Southern Cross,” current for one year, from
May, 1864, to April, 1865, at the nominal premium of
ss. per cent, and signed by thirty-one underwriters, for
sums varying from £25 to £l3O each. The Sydney


Marine Insurance Company was also established in
185 1 as successors to Smyth’s Marine Assurance Office,
under a council of underwriters,” with Mr. Sam. H.
Smyth as manager. He resigned in 1881. Mr. T. J.
Clark stepped into the managerial footwear, and trans-
ferred his services to the Alliance Marine Insurance
Company four years later, on the latter acquiring the
business of the Sydney Co. and all that thereunto belonged.
This company had a most fortunate career. Starting
with a capital of £IO,OOO in 10s. shares, it was able to
capitalise a like amount out of the profits and build up
the reserve fund to £20,000. Towards the end of 1851
another marine company, the New South Wales Marine
Association, was promoted by Mr. Michael Murnin, and
incorporated in 1852. The capital of the company was
paid up to £15,000. Mr. E. Knox headed the director-
ate, the other members being Messrs. J. H. Challis,
S. H. Donaldson, J. Gilchrist, R. Towns and J. Walker,
and that veteran underwriter, Mr. R. Garrett, was the
secretary. He held the appointment until 1875, when
Mr. A. J. St. Vincent Welch succeeded and continued in
the office until the company merged into the Commer-
cial Union, in 1881. When the liquidator had realised,
shareholders found the dividends came to £5 per share.
An interesting relic of this pioneer company can be seen
on the walls of the Commercial Union. It is the first
contract entered into by the New South Wales Marine
Co.; an open policy, dated 27th October, 1837, covering
the ship ‘‘ Cornelia,” voyaging from Manila to Sydney,
and bearing the signatures of Messrs. S. H. Challis,
S. Walker and John Fairfax, directors. An agency of
the Royal Insurance Company was also opened in
Sydney in 1857 by Messrs. Smith, Croft & Co.
The Royal Insurance Company of Liverpool
and London.
The Royal Insurance Company of Liverpool and
London was registered in the former city in March,
1845, pursuant to 7 and 8 Vic., C. no, with a capital of
£2,000,000, in 100,000 shares of £2O each, having for
its objects fire, life and annuities. It was not until
1851 that the institution sowed its first seeds upon
colonial soil in Sydney. The following year a head
office was established in Melbourne. No amalgama-
tion was arranged until the c ompany’s premiums had
reached £1,000,000 per annum. Then amongst those
interested in the Australian field of insurance were
the Midland Counties, the Lancashire and the Queen.
The latter was consummated in 189: Messrs. Ireland,
Laidley & Co. took over the Sydney office in 1851,
and with Messrs. William Laidley & Co., held it until
August, 1886, when Mr. H. T. Francis was appointed
branch manager. Business has been conducted in the
present offices, 74 Pitt Street, since November, 1899.
Four fresh companies were listed in 1852. I he
Australasian General Assurance Company was floated in
Sydney, with offices at 448 George Street, the capital
being £"400,000 in £4 shares. The board consisted of
Messrs. H. H. Browne (chairman), W. Browne (deputy
chairman), Alex Campbell, R. Graham, Robt. How,
and Dr. C. J. Alexander; the secretary was Mr. John
D. Gibson, and the company had Mr. I hos. Browne
pushing business in London a small item, perhaps, but
worthy of note. The remaining offices, all from London
were —The Trafalgar Assurance Association, Messrs.
Constable & Co., agents, transferred to the Briton in
1854 ? the United Guarantee Life Assurance Company,
Mr. Louis Barber, agent, transferred to the European
also in 1854; and the London and Oriental Steam
Transit Insurance Company, established to accept risks
on treasure shipped from Sydney to Southampton per
P. & O. boats. The Trafalgar, during its short stay,
issued £"SO “combination ” policies, payable in the event
of injury by wounds and other casualties, a species of ac-
cident business introduced into the colonies for the first
time.
Between 1852 and 1862 seven home offices estab-
lished themselves ; four as birds of passage, to perch
here for a brief space and then fly away The other
three companies, however, came to stay. Agencies
were also opened on behalf of three Tasmanian com-
panies, and another fire office was formed. Of the
English offices, the first to reach Australian shores
was the Liverpool and London Fire and Life Insur-
ance Company,
The Liverpool and London and Globe Insurance
Company.
The Liverpool and London and Globe Insurance
Company originated in Liverpool in 1836,, as a natural
outcome of that city’s rapid commercial expansion.
The project was favourably regarded by many of the
The Liverpool and London and Globe Insurance Company.
leading men of the city, and on May 21. 1836. the deed
of settlement was executed by which the Liverpool
Insurance Company, as it was then called, was
formally and legally established. In the following


July an Act of Parliament was passed for carrying into
effect the objects of the company, and the undertaking
was launched. In 1847 the Liverpool Insurance
Company acquired the business of the London, Edin-
burgh and Dublin Life Assurance Company, and
applied to Parliament for permission to change its
name to tie Liverpool and London, which was granted.
Thisjacquisition made it necessary to open a London
office. In 1864 the company was still further strength-
ened by taking over the Globe Insurance Company of
London, calling for another alteration of title, so that
it then became what it still remains, the Liverpool and
London and Globe.
In 1852 the Australasian Colonial and General
Life Assurance and Annuity Company transferred its
agents and liabilities to the Liverpool and London, and
in consequence of the large business of the former
company in Australasia, the latter company opened
branches in Sydney and Melbourne in 1853. The
Sydney office was situate at No. 3 Bridge Street, but
shortly afterwards a new building was determined
upon, to be erected in Margaret Street. The company
moved from this site in 1874 to their present quarters,
at the corner of Pitt and Spring Streets, formerly the
Bible|Hall. This building was pulled down in 1905,
and the present handsome and palatial offices erected.
The first manager of the company for Australasia in
Sydney was Mr. Styles, who resigned, from ill-health,
in 1854. His successor. Mr. A. Stanger Leathes,
retired in January, 1880, and was succeeded by
Mr. M. W. S. Clarke. In 1903 Mr. Clarke was joined
in the resident secretaryship generally of the Aus-
tralasian branch by Mr. Charles Danvers, and upon
Mr. Clarke retiring on 31st December, 1904, Mr.
Danvers became manager for the company for the
whole of Australasia.
The company, originally only represented at
Sydney and Melbourne, has now branches and agencies
at all places throughout Australia and New Zealand,
Then the Marine, Life and Casualty Mutual Assur-
ance Society commenced business in Sydney, the year
(1853) after its establishment, issuing policies from the
office of the P. & O. Company, where the agency has
since remained. The company is now known as the
Marine and General Mutual Life Assurance Society, and
its chairman, Sir E. T. Sutherland, G.C.M.G., LL.D.,
holds a similar position on the board of the P. & O.
Mr. Trelawney, the present local representative of the
Marine of London, only accepts sea risks. The year
1853 also brought us the Tamar Fire and Marine Insur-
ance Company of Launceston, whose agents while the
company operated in Sydney were Messrs. George
Thorne & Co. and Mr. H. H. Beauchamp. In 1854
the Tasmanian Fire Insurance Company appointed Mr.
G. Rees its Sydney agent. This office amalgamated with
the Alliance Company in 1892. The Launceston Fire
and Marine Insurance Company completes the list of Tas-
manian visitors. In 1855, when the local agency opened,
the manager was Mr. Llenry Fisher. Eight years after-
wards Messrs. Molison & Black looked after the com-
pany’s affairs until its foreign business closed. Messrs.
Beit & Sons, Macquarie Place, issued policies for the
Monarch (No. 1) of London from 1855 till 1857, when
the Liverpool and London took over its assets and
liabilities. Of the others what became of the People’s
Provident Assurance Co. and the People’s Provident
Industrial General Life Sy. is now matter of conjecture,
so far as concerns the date of their dissolution. Evi-
dently they belonged to that class of high-sounding
provident institutions so favoured of philanthropic
promoters, but upon whom Providence does not smile,
and which
“Come like shadows; so depart.”
In London the one board governed both of these ephem-
eral institutions. Here there were two agencies, held
by Messrs. Alex. Sage and Louis Barber respectively.
The latter’s office, it should be noted, was the first
industrial company in the colonies —presuming, of
course, that this feature was something more than a
name.
From the ashes of the defunct Sydney Fire Insur-
ance Company arose the Sydney Insurance Company,
Fire, Life and Marine, an energetic organisation, prolific
in light insurance literature, which brought out an
‘ ‘ almanack ’ ’ one Christmas, setting forth at great
length all the burning virtues of fire insurance ; and as
evidence that this spirited advertising was not exactly
thrown away, the company built the office (to house
for awhile the A.M.P.), now occupied by the Com-
mercial Union. From its windows, on the assurance
of a high actuarial authority, needy street students,
who procured their literary pabulum from the
boards of the Sydney Morning Herald used to be
cruelly catapulted by indolent clerks just at the
time when they had picturesquely fallen into wdiat
may be termed the reading posture. There was more
patriotism than philanthropy in the promoters of the
Sydney, as their prospectus stated in bald terms that
the raison d’etre of the new company was to ‘ ‘ pre-
serve ” —judicious word—the income of the old com-
pany from passing into the hands of the English capi-
talists. The pity of it ! After five and twenty years’
paying of fairly fat dividends this deserving preserver
of our national wealth found itself and its occupation
bought right out with British money—£23,7so being
the price and the Commercial Union being the purchaser.
But what though the shareholders’ patriotism had
petered out through the corrupting influences of
prosperity ! Was there not a sum of £4 10s. 6d. per
share to put in their pockets when the final settlement
was made? The original directors—Messrs. John
Fairfax, S. D. Gordon, R. Jones, M.L.A. T. C. Briellat,
F. Fbsworth and M. E. Murnin —have this to their
credit, that they introduced a scale of rates much
below those previously existing. Their tariff was
2s. 3d. and up for first-class, 3s. gd. and up for second-
class, and Bs. and up for third-class buildings. Messrs.
J. S. Mitchell, Joseph Dyer and A. Thomson succes-
sively held the office of secretary in this flourishing
speculation, the latter passing over with the Sydney to
its successors. With the Northern Assurance Company
the new arrivals for 1857 closed.
The Northern Assurance Company.
The Northern Assurance Company-fire and life—was
founded at Aberdeen in the last year of King William
IV., as the North of Scotland Fire and Life Assurance
Company, by Messrs. Adam and Anderson, the chief


promoters. Their prospectus gave prominence to a
life-long feature of the company, viz., the transaction
by a proprietary company of life insurance on the
mutual assurance system. In its earlier years the
company’s fire business was strictly confined to
Scotland and the north of Ireland. In 1839 a London
office was opened, but till 1852 the southern board
transacted life and finance operations only. Con-
nections in Scotland were strengthened by the purchase
of four small institutions, viz., the Western Fire
and Life Association in 1847, the Scottish Masonic
and General Life Assurance in 1848, the Bon Accord
in 1849, and the Forfarshire and Perthshire in 1857.
With the amalgamation of the Western F'ire and Life
the absorbing Company became incorporated by Act of
Parliament as the Northern Assurance Company, and
by the Act of 1867 the remodelled constitution gave it a
London domicile. Melbourne was made the head office
for Australasia in 1859, but in Sydney Messrs. Buyers
and Learmonth, 62 Margaret Street, had held the agency
four years prior to that date. In 1863 Mr. George
Watson, *' resident secretary,” was intimating to the
public that no loading would be made for assurants
joining volunteer corps where they resided or for voyag-
ing to intercolonial ports 25 degrees south of the equator.
Before the close of the sixties his office had been closed
and the fire and life branches separated. Messrs.
Fanning, Griffiths & Co. represented the one and Mr.
E. O. Smith, 5 Gresham Place, directed the other.
In 1881 Messrs. Robey Bros, had charge of the fire busi-
ness. Later on the departments were combined once
more and Mr. Montgomery appointed manager. He
resigned in May, 1897, being succeeded by the present
manager, Mr. W E Gates. The Northern is the one
British the colonies carrying on life
assurance.
From 1857 until 1861 the only new office to
open its doors in the colony was the Professional
Life Insurance Company, London, which established
ahead office in Melbourne, Messrs. J. G. Waller & Co.,
Wynyard Square, being appointed Sydney agents.
Chancery gave this concern the happy despatch in 1861.
Another institution, which received similar attention,
from this depot of dissolution, was the ill-fated Euro-
pean Assurance Company, which came amongst us with
a reputation for soundness exceeded by few, if any, and
which left a nasty savour behind it in 1872, painfully
remembered by many old colonists to this day. The
company, founded in 1854 for life assurance, fidelity
guarantee, endowment and annuities, established a
branch in Sydney in iB6O. The directors were Messrs.
J. Young and George Thornton, and the secretaries
Messrs. J. G. Waller & Co. Their successor was Mr.
F'. J. Jackson, sent out from home to discharge the duties
of resident secretary. Under his ripened experience
and judicious direction the colonial business assumed
important proportions, and there is little doubt but that
it would have become a lasting benefit to colonial assur-
ants had not the directors at home lost large sums of
money through wild amalgamations with worthless
foreign corporations, which brought the European down
with a crash at the beginning of 1871. Another un-
fortunate visitor in iB6O was the Waterloo Life Assurance
.Society, represented by Messrs. W. E. Sprigg & Co.,
Wynyard Square. Its mutual blessings were hedged in
by a proprietary, palladium, but this notwithstanding
both were laid to rest together in 1862. There is little
concerning the past to record of the Australasian
Insurance Company—fire, life and marine,—estab-
lished in Melbourne by that active company pro-
moter, Mr. T. Jaques Martin, in 1857. Its attentions
were not turned towards this colony until three
years afterwards. Messrs. Montefiore & Montcfiore,
Exchange Corner, Pitt Street, opened the agency
and closed it again in 1872, when it was absorbed by the
Australian Alliance Company
Quite a batch of offices increased the list of insur-
ance companies established in New South Wales in 1862.
made up of two local fire and marine companies, two
intercolonial and four foreign offices. Of these the
Batavia and Netherlands-India Fire and Marine Insur-
ance Company operated until 1901, when it ceased to
accept fire risks and withdrew. The agency was first in
the hands of Messrs. Frost & Kohler, Phillip Street, but
was held afterwards by Messrs. E. Chapman & Co. No
sooner had the London and Lancashire been promoted
in 1862 than it took steps to establish itself in Aus-
tralia, opening a chief office in Melbourne before the
middle of the year.
London and Lancashire Fire Insurance Company.
Floated on a cash capital of £185,200, the sub-
scribed capital being £2,005 987 in shares of £25, the
earlier years of the London and Lancashire Fire Insur-
ance Company, owing to inefficient management, were
not signalised by success. But when in 1875 the
control of affairs passed into the hands of Mr. Fother-
gill an immediate change for the better was observed.
London and Lancashire Fire Insurance Co.
The subscribed capital at the present time is £"3,000,000,
and paid-up capital £"227,500. The chief office for Aus-
tralia is in Melbourne, having been opened by the late
Mr. T. Jaques Martin in May, 1862, and controlled by
the late Mr. Mayhew A. Ridge as manager and super-
intendent for Australasia during the past ten years.
The Sydney agency was in the hands of Mr. G. A.
Llloyd, Llloyd’s Chambers, George Street, until 1864,
when it was handed over to Mr. W. H. Mackenzie.
On his retiring from commercial affairs in 1885, it
passed to Messrs. Gibbs, Bright & Co., only leaving
their office when it was determined, in 1887, to form a
local branch. Mr. Percy Rutledge controlled this last
until 1890, when he was succeeded by Mr. T. D.
Richards, who retired in 1897. Mr. Robert Kerr, the
present Sydney manager, took charge on Ist January
1898.


The history of the Pacific Fire and Marine Insurance
Company of Sydney would make quite a long story.
Very briefly must it be told here. It started in 1862,
under the most happy circumstances. The subscribed
capital exceeded the nominal capital by 50 per cent,
and there was such a rush for its shares that from the
overflow another company was soon afterwards formed.
For twenty years everything went swimmingly, 15 per
cent, dividends strewing the path of progress. At the
height of its prosperity, in 1882, the company went for
risks to London, and got them. Of a sort. It soon
found out that ’prentices in the “ little village ” had
forgotten more about the business than our pundits ever
knew. Losses poured in from every side, necessitating
the writing off of the capital and reserves and calling up
fresh capital. Still disasters came from the London
branch, until, panic-struck in May, 1893, the share-
holders sold to the British and Colonial Insurance
Company and sacrificed a sound Australian connection
for an insignificant consideration. The managers of
the Pacific, from time to time, were :—Messrs. F. M.
Smith, E. M. Montefiore, W. H. Mackenzie and H. G.
Keeling. From the subscribers shut out of the Pacific
Co.’s original share list the United Fire and Marine
Insurance Company, Sydney, was protected.
United Insurance Company.
This institution which owes its inception entirely to
colonial enterprise changed its name in 1871 to the
United Insurance Company, adding “limited ’ ’ during the
year 1890 on coming under the Limited Liability Act.
It was founded on the Ist September, 1862, the first
board of 1 directors being : —The Hon. Chas. Kemp,
United Insurance Company.
M.L.C., the Hon. Ed. Flood, Messrs. J. B. Rundle,
Wm. Moffit, John Binny and Maurice Alexander,
M.L.A. The original capital was £500,000, in 25,000
shares of £2O each, £1 being paid up on each share.
From time to time the stock was capitalised until at
the twenty-seventh annual meeting in 1889 a scheme
was submitted by the directors and ultimately adopted
for remodelling the company with a view to limiting
the shareholders’ liability. The capital of £500,000
became divided into 50,000 £lO shares. A total of
25,000 shares paid up to £2 10s. was allotted the exist-
ing shareholders, the balance being offered at £1 pre-
mium. Of the £341,610 capital thus subscribed £273,384
has been uncalled, leaving £68,245 as the paid-up
capital. The original idea was to take up fire and life
insurance, but marine business was adopted instead of
the latter. Tosses were certainly made when, fol-
lowing the example of other colonial institutions,
the United looked hopefully to London as a field
of expansion. But the lesson the experience
brought with it was availed of betimes, and,
with strict limitation of interests to risks destined
for the colonies, unprofitable transactions ceased.
The present board comprises Messrs. G. J. Cohen (chair-
man), T. S. Knox, Richard Binnie, T. Buckland, Dr.
Ewan Eraser and the Hon. E. Fosberry, C.M.G., M.L.C.
Mr. William Rae, who was appointed first manager,
went to London in 1875 and controlled matters there
until his death in 1901. His successor in Sydney,
Mr. F. T. Watkins, retired through ill health in Sep-
tember, 1881, when Mr. Thomas M. Tinley, the present
general manager, was appointed, subsequently having
for secretary" Mr. Bartin Haigh, placed in that position
in August, 1889.
'lire Unity Fire Insurance Association of London
had an agency in the hands of Messrs. G. A. Lloyd & Co.,
364 George Street, for a few months in 1862, which was
closed when the head office merged in the Liverpool and
London the same year. Messrs. Robert
Gilfillan & Co., 18 Macquarie Place,
secured the representation of the New
Zealand Insurance Company during the
twelve months, and were soon laying the
foundations of a most prosperous con-
nection.
New Zealand Insurance Company
Limited.
This company was the first local in-
stitution established in New Zealand. As
early as 1859, when Auckland had not
an existence of twenty years, the New
Zealand Insurance Company was pro-
moted in that city on a humble scale,
harmonising with the limited transactions
of an infantile commercial community.
In 1861 the original capital was increased
t 0 and in 1871 to £1, 000,000.
Again in 1905 to £h,250,000, on the
acquisition of the New Zealand Accident
Insurance Company’s business, and in
1906 it was further increased to £ 1,500,000,
of which amount £"300,000 has been paid
up. In the early part of 1906 the company
sustained losses at San Francisco to the amount of
£"300.000 ; and to meet these without seriously affecting
the reserves, the directors promptly formulated a
scheme to increase the capital of the company
t° £"1,500,000, divided into 150,000 shares of £"io


each, thus creating 25,000 new shares. The state
of chaos which prevailed after this terrible visitation
left great uncertainty about the insurance question,
some of the companies, recognising the equity of the
case, were prepared to pay in full, while others sought
to gain a reduction of 25 per cent. This action was
opposed by what was termed hundred per cent, com-
panies, and among these the New Zealand Insurance
Company was included. Another important step
was taken at the same time and the company
New Zealand Insurance Company Limited.
registered as a limited company. The Sydney agency
in 1867 was in the hands of Messrs. E. Chapman & Co. ;
in 1872 a branch was opened at 143 Pitt Street by the
resident secretary, Mr. S. Plague Smith. His resig-
nation in October, 1899, led to Mr. J. A. Minnett being
appointed to succeed him. The busine c s of the fire
and marine branch is under the management of Mr.
J. A. Minnett. at 81 Pitt Street, while the accident
branch is carried on in offices at 117 Pitt Street, with
Mr. A. E. D’Arcy as manager.
Another concern with a limited existence in New
South Wales was the Colonial Insurance Company of
Victoria, Messrs. Cook & Co., Wynyard Square, agents.
Life, fire, and guarantee of fidelit\" were its objects,
rates being from 3s. per cent, and upwards, and guaran-
tees ss. for the first year and 2s. 6d. afterwards. The
North British and Mercantile brought the number of
new companies operating in Sydney at the end of 1862 to
twenty-five. Besides these another twenty-three insur-
ance institutions in New South Wales had either dis-
solved, dropped out, or disappeared behind other masks.
North British and Mercantile Insur-
ance Company of London and
Edinburgh.
The North British and Mercantile
Insurance Company of London and
Edinburgh was incorporated by Royal
Charter in 1809 for fire insurance only,
and reconstructed in 1823 to take in life
and annuities. The funds of the fire
department are not liable for obligations
under the life department, and vice versa,
whilst the investments of both are
kept entirely separate. The nominal
capital of the company is
the total amount subscribed represents
£2, 730,000, and the total amount paid
up is 300. The agency in Sydney
was originally in the hands of Mr. H.
Moore, of Moore’s Wharf. In 1878 a
branch was opened under Mr. George
A Russell ; and upon his translation
to Melbourne in 1888 to assume the
managership of Australasian affairs,
Mr. George S. Arthur, the present
manager, took his place.
Three home companies opened
offices in 1863 whose connection was
not abiding. These were the Waterloo
Life, Education. Casualty and Self Relief
Assurance Company “ of London,”
Mr. C. E. Jeanneret agent; the British
National Life Assurance Association,
also in Mr. Jeanneret’s hands (till
wound up in Chancery in 1865) ; and
the Colonial Life Assurance Company
of Edinburgh, Mr. William Rae agent,
absorbed by the Standard of Edinburgh
in 1866. Companies now were arriving
quite out of proportion to the require-
ments of a limited and much scattered
population. But the fittest alone sur-
vived. and first in importance was the
British and Foreign Marine Insurance Companv Ltd.
British and Foreign Marine Insurance Company
Limited.
The British and Foreign Marine Insurance Company
is a Liverpool Office with only one home amalgamation
to its credit, i.e., the Universal Marine, inaugurated
in 1863, with a cash capital of £268,000, in shares
paid up to £2. In 1898 the Sydney business was
augmented bj’ the absorption of the Southern


Insurance Company. The agency here—one of the first
opened after the company got to work—has passed
through the hands of Messrs. Lorimer, Rome & Co.
(who held it for upwards of twenty-five years), J. E.
Bullard, H. W. Peabody & Co., and Henry Cornwell,
the present manager, whose board consists of Messrs.
W. J. Keep, George Maiden, Harry Austin and Russell
Barton. Mr. Charles Rennie is the general Manager
for Australia.
Messrs. Henriques, Joubert & Co. secured the
agency of the Britannia Life Company in 1864, and
opened their office at 229 George Street, where such
business as there was to be done passed through their
hands. By this time, however, a strong feeling was
growing against proprietary life companies, and the
office had to be closed in 1865 —a year noticeable for
the first appearance in the colonies of the Commercial
Union Assurance Company of London, whose agency
was at that time entrusted to Messrs. E. & W. Paul,
and held by them for several years.
Another company from New Zealand, the Otago
Insurance, Mr. S. L. Bensusan agent, New Pitt Street,
happened along after the Commercial, in company with
a French institution, the Registre Maritimes, or Inter-
national Lloyds, whose interests were, appropriately,
entrusted to their countrymen, Messrs. Henriques,
Joubert & Co. The one farewelled us in 1867 and the
other in 1870. The Southern Insurance Company of
Melbourne and the Universal Marine Insurance Com-
pany of London, new chums also of 1865, had a much
longer stay in their separate identities, for both were
under experienced eyes. Of the branch established by
the former the earlier secretaries were Messrs. G. H.
Howell and J. Laidley. Mr. Cornwell succeeded the
latter and held office till the company buried itself in
the capacious bosom of the British and Loreign last year.
Shareholders who had received retainers in the form oi
respectable dividends for nearly forty years retired at
the finish with ns. qjd. in their pockets for each of
their shares. The Universal selected the same exit as
the Southern for its departure, only thirteen years ear-
lier. Its affairs were kept moving here by Mr. W. H.
Mackenzie and the firm he affiliated with. Another
mammoth company took its first peep at us in 1866
the Norwich Union Lire Insurance Company.
Norwich Union Fire Insurance Society.
A centenarian in years and a “ millionaire,” or first-
class, company in financial standing, the Norwich Union
Fire Insurance Society was established in 1797 to do fire
business only, and no provincial institution, with the
same objective, has ever attained larger proportions.
One of the oldest, the wealthiest, and the most respec-
ted corporations in the world, its superlative qualities
find added emphasis in the fact that it has also been
one of the most successful; being especially popular
with the agricultural classes, amongst whom the tree has
expanded to its present enormous girth. The subscribed
capital is £1,100,000; the paid-up capital amounts to
£66,000 and the original shares, £l2 paid up, have a
market value of £l2O to-day. After being three
years in existence the premium income amounted to
£3,000, and when the company’s hundred and seventh
birthday came round there was a revenue of £1,140,350
to show for the year’s achievements. Going back to
1885, that year’s premiums were£sßß,B4l, losses £356,233
and total assets £799,618 ; in 1895 these items were :
£906,762, £527,710, and £1,259,460 respectively ; and
the last published balance recorded premiums£i,l4o,3so,
losses £586,346, and total assets £1,547,833. The tent of
the Norwich Union was pitched in New South Wales in
1865, on the site in Pitt Street now occupied by Messrs.
Penfold & Co. Mr. R. H. Sempill was the representative,
and he held the agency until 1873, when it passed to
Messrs. Mackenzie, Goddard & Co., falling into the
last-named member’s hands on the dissolution of that
firm in 1877. Since then Messrs. Goddard & Co.’s
management has remained undisturbed, and it may be
added that the Norwich Union is one of the few first-
class companies in Australia not only represented by,
but well satisfied to be represented by, agents. It has
good cause for this satisfaction, and it is doubtful if
better could be done locally under any other direction
of affairs. There have been no amalgamations in
this colony, but after the great Melbourne fire
the Norwich Union took over the business of the
South Australian Insurance Company Ltd. and the
Indemnity Insurance Company of Australasia. A propos
of the view of Norwich Cathedral which the company has
adopted for pictorial purposes, it is an interesting coinci-
dence that upon the site of the handsome Norwich
Chambers, at the corner of Hunter and Bligh Streets, was
built the first church in Australia. Whether this, in the
end will benefit local policyholders remains to be seen ;
but if it dees, those who take their risks to this grand
old institution are securing a double protection.
During 1866 the Standard Life Assurance of
Edinburgh took the place in the colonies of the Colonial
Life, an office which it had digested. Mr. William Rae,
who represented the departed body, now took up
the agency of the enlarged corporation, and held it until
a branch was established at 265 George Street in 1870,
Mr. R. Jones being chairman of the Sydney board. The
Australian business of the Standard was closed about
1883. 1 11 1867 we were left by the outside insurance
world to garner our own guineas in peace. The /Etna
Insurance Company of London, took up the
running in 1864 and was represented by Mr. F. J.
Jackson till such time as it banked its fires with the
European, and set, with that ill-fated enterprise, in a
sunset of disaster. South Australia during this year
entered the local arena under the wing of the National
Marine Insurance Company. That much-desired agent,
Mr. W V H. Mackenzie, took the National Marine under
his care and worked its business up to the importance
of a branch office with a local board, whereof was chair-
man, Mr. John Alger. But the name of the company
had fallen out of our records before the end of the
seventies —a happening which can be accounted for in a
variety of ways, amalgamation amongst them. This
year saw two more companies to its credit, the Cornwall
and the North China Insurance Company.
North China Insurance Company of Shanghai.
Like America China has her three wealthy companies,
only they deal in fire and marine insurance instead of
the life branch the ‘ ‘ giants ’ ’ of New York cultivate
In the Flowery Laud the North China Insurance Com


pany of Shanghai is one of the triad. This company was
incorporated in 1863 with a paid-up capital of 391,038
taels (£50,000). The agency in Sydney has only been
changed once. It was initiated in 1868 by Mr. W. H.
Mackenzie and transferred in 1882 to Messrs. Jas. Moir
and Co., who have held it since.
The Cornwall Insurance Company of Launceston, for
fire and marine, was not one of the come-to-day-and-go-
to-morrow class of companies. It remained here for
thirty years doing good, steady business, and finally
succumbed to the persuasive offers of a big sister—not
inaptly named the Commercial Union. The event
came off at the end of 1898, when the Cornwall was well
up in years, having been established in 1841. From
first to last it paid its shareholders £137.500, although
its capital for a while was only £5,000, and claims ex-
ceeded £300,000. The Sydney agency was in Messrs.
G. A. Lloyd & Co.’s hands for nearly a quarter of a
century and on that firm’s retirement from business it was
taken over by Mr. William McCredie.
More activity was displayed in assurance circles in
New South Wales during the last year of the sixties than
in any previous twelve months. Company promoters
had been enjoying a long rest, evidently a beneficial one,
for they now came to the front with the framework of an
institution intended to revolutionise the conditions
of life assurance by abolishing all grounds of forfeiture,
except non-payment of premiums. The Mutual Life
Association of Australasia was launched on this liberal
basis so successfully that among the New South Wales
companies mainly working on colonial resources the
society ranks second only to the A.M.P.
Mutual Life Association ot Australasia.
Forty years ago one Australian Life Office
enjoyed what was practically a monopoly of the
business throughout these colonies. The conditions of
Life Assurance in those days were such as would not
now be tolerated, and even then they were justly
regarded as extremely harassing and unfair. The
following quotation from the prospectus of the pioneer
society will be read with interest:—“The policy is
liable to forfeiture should the assured die by his own
hands, by duelling, or by the hands of justice, or from
habits of intemperance, or disease or injury therefrom,
or if he should be convicted of felony, or if it be proved
to the satisfaction of the Board that he has become
an habitual drunkard. ’ ’
Members were not allowed to reside or travel
within certain parallels except on the express per-
mission of ihe Board, who had power to grant the
concession “ on reasonable terms.’’ Again we read
that “Voyaging is permitted without extra pre-
miums (except in the case of seafaring persons), in
vessels of not less than fifty tons register, between any
part of the Australian colonies, including New Zealand,
and another, or between any of the said colonies and
Europe, or between one portion of Europe and another.
For the route to Europe by Suez the extra premium is
10s. per cent., and by Panama, 15s. per cent.’’
One of the oldest members of the Mutual Life
well remembers the alarm caused aboard a yacht,
which had cruised some miles outside the heads, by
one of the party recollecting that they were “ in a
vessel of less than fifty tons,” and so had vitiated their
assurances by “voyaging’’ without permission from
the then only existing Australian Life Office !
As a protest against these oppressive restrictions
a number of prominent gentlemen in Sydney met
together in 1867 at the invitation of Mr. Robert
Thomson (the well-known Actuary), and determined
to establish a Life Office whose policies should be
entirely indefeasible from date of issue, except on the
ground of fraud. Mr. Thomson laid the draft pros-
pectus of the new Association before the Hon. S. D.
Gordon and two or three others, and subsequently, in
me latter part of 1868, he resubmitted it to Mr-
Gordon, Mr. D. L. Murdoch, Dr, Foucart, the Hon-
Thomas Holt, Mr. (afterwards Sir) George Wigram
Allen, Mr. T. K. Bowden, Dr. a’Beckett, and other
gentlemen, and with their approval he then proceeded
to calculate the principal Tables of Rates, &c.
On April 19th, 186.9, another meeting was held,
and Mr. Thomson was authorised to prepare and have
printed a condensed prospectus for circulation. This
was accordingly done, and on May 28th the following
gentlemen formed themselves into a Committee, viz. :
The Hon. S. D. Gordon, Sir James Martin, Q.C.,
Judge Francis, Mr. (afterwards Sir) J. B. Darvall, Q.C.,
Messrs. E. W. Cameron, John Frazer, Robert G. Massie,
Edye Manning, J. L. Montefiore, and A. H. Richardson.
The first meeting of the Committee was held at
the Temporary Office, 130 Pitt Street, on Tuesday,
Ist June, 1869, when draft proposal forms, &c., were
submitted and approved, and other preliminary
matters satisfactorily settled.
To raise the necessary Guarantee Fund by the
most economical and effective means, it was decided to
issue a few fully paid-up policies, for Single Premiums
from fifty pounds upwards. These ‘ ‘ Original ’ ’
policies, as they were termed, numbering forty-
nine, were granted only upon select lives, and
for such sums as would include an addition, by
way of a guaranteed bonus, beyond the amounts
that the same premiums would purchase under
the ordinary Tables. In all other respects the
Original ’ ’ policies were placed on the same footing
as the Ordinary ones afterwards issued, and thus was
established, on a perfectly mutual basis, the Mutual
Life Association of Australasia.
It is interesting to record, after this lapse of time,
the names of a few of the ‘ ‘ Original Members ’' :
1 Gordon, Hon. S. D. .. .. Deceased.
2 Frazer, Hon. John .. .. Deceased.
3 Richardson, A. H. .. .. Deceased.
4 Massie, R. G. .. .. .. Deceased.
5 Francis, His Honour, Judge .. Deceased.
12 Smith, Shepherd .. .. Deceased.
21 Humphery, Hon. F. T. Chairman of the Boar
25 Dickinson, Samuel •• •• Deceased.
The original directors of the Association were :
Hon. S. D. Gordon (Chairman), Hon. J. B. Darvall,
Judge Francis, Hon. John Frazer, Professor Pell, Hon.
George Wigram Allen, and Mr. A. H. Richardson
(Managing Director), and offices were leased in Belmore
Chambers, 247 George Street, Sydney, the founder of
the institution, Mr. Robert Thomson, F.1.A., being
appointed Secretary, and Dr. a’Beckett,Medical Officer.
It may here be also mentioned that most valuable
services were rendered in the early years of the Asso-
ciation by Professor Pell as Consulting Actuary.


Mr. Thomson resigned in July, 1870, and was
succeeded in due course by Mr. Robert Gibson, who
had previously been Accountant and Cashier. Dr.
a’Beckett died in June, 1871, and was succeeded by
Dr. Andrew Moffit as Principal Medical Officer.
An Act incorporating the Association was passed
by the Parliament of New South Wales, and assented
to by the Governor on the 14th January, 1873.
Mr. Gibson died on the Ist June, 1873, and on
the 17th of that month Mr. John Cochrane Remington
was anuointed Secretary, his title being changed on
the 19th March, 1885, to that of “ General Manager,”
a position which he still holds.
Dr. Moffit resigned his position in February, 1875,
and was succeeded by Dr. (now Sir) Normand MacLaurin
as Principal Medical Officer.
The present Secretary of the Association, Mr. B. R.
Gelling, F.S.S., entered the service on the Ist May, 1888,
was appointed Assistant Secretary in December, 1891,
and promoted to his present position in February,
1896. The Actuary, Mr. R. D. Miller, F.F.A., has
been in the service since March, 1894.
Agents had been appointed throughout Australasia
in the earlv years of the Association, and were placed
Mutual Life Association of Australasia, George and Wynyard Streets,
Sydney.
under Ihe control of Branch Offices during subsequent
years as follows ;
New Zealand .. 1877 South Australia . . 1883
Queensland ~ 1880 Western Australia 1896
Victoria .. 1881 United Kingdom.. 1898
In July, 1877, the Principal Office was removed
to the corner of Geo”ge and Wynyard Streets, Sydney,
a lease of the premises having been secured for ten
years, prior to the expiry of which the Association
purchased the freehold, and in October, 1890, com-
pleted the erection of the fine building, of which a
picture accompanies this article.
The present Directors of the M.L A. are :—The
Hon. F. T. Humphery, M.L.C., Chairman; the Hon.
W. J. Trickett, M.L.C., Deputy Chairman ; Russell
Barton, Esq. ; the Hon. J, N. Brunker, M.L.C. ; the
Hon. L. F. Heydon, M.L.C. ; and the Hon. Sir
Normand MacLaurin, M.L.C.
The Policies in Force number 27,000 for £6,6c0,000.
The Annual Income is over £300,000, and the Invested
Funds exceeded Two Millions sterling on the 30:h
June, 1906.
It seemed as if the sea and fire companies and the
marine companies could not arrive quickly enough in
1869. And of seven only the Batavia Sea and Fire
Insurance Company established a firm footing. This
institution owes its origin to the enterprise of Dutch
merchants in the Eastern Archipelago. Soundly
founded on a capital of 3,000,000 dob, the wise heads
directing its course have enabled the Batavia to weather
all storms, and the company stands to-day as solid as
the kingdom it owns allegiance to. The agency here
was in the hands of Messrs. Mackenzie, Goddard & Co,
until 1877. It then passed to Messrs. Goddard & Co.,
and has remained with them since. What better testi-
mony of the satisfactory manner in which the Batavia
interests in Sydney have been looked after than this ?
The Oesterling Sea and Fire, the Colonial Sea and
Fire, the second Colonial, Germanic Lloyds, and the
Mercantile Marine of South Australia, all represented
by Mr. W. H. Mackenzie, and the United Ports and
General Insurance Company came to pick up any busi-
ness they could, and, excepting the Germanic and the
Mercantile, they were satisfied with their share ere two
years had elapsed. The Germanic lasted until 1876
and the Mercantile a year longer. One more company
from Melbourne, the Australian Alliance Assurance
Co., closed the year’s record.
Australian Alliance Assurance Company.
During the last half-century numerous Australasian
Fire and Marine Companies have disappeared through
absorption, an experience common also to many
British underwriting institutions of great magnitude.
Notwithstanding this craze for amalgamations, the
Australian Alliance Assurance Co. is to-day amongst
us an established institution, within a year or two of
completing its half-century of existence. The Aus-
tralian Alliance was projected in Melbourne, in 1862,
to transact fire and marine business. The nominal
capital was £IOO,OOO, in 20,000 shares of £5 each. In
the following month this was increased to £250,000,
in 50,000 shares of £5 each, and the objects of the
company were extended to life and fidelity guarantee.
Shares to the number of 39,369 were issued, paid up
to 10s. per share, giving a paid-up capital of
£19,684 10s. Subsequently 10s. per share was capi-
talised out of the profits, making the shares £1 paid up.
In 1880 10,631 unissued shares were given as a bonus
to the shareholders, these increasing the paid-up
capital to £50,000. In 1893 a further increase was
made by capitalising 30s. per share out of the profits,


so that became £2 10s. paid up and the
paid-up capital £125,000, at which it now stands.
These capital statistics bear more eloquent testimony
to the very great success of the institution than a
legion of words. A company which has been able to
quintuple its capital, not by the ordinary process of
making calls on the shareholders, but by the capi-
talisation of its profits during the forty years of its
flourishing existence, must have traasacted, as it still
continues to do, a great and highly remunerative
business, and must have been conducted, as it still is,
with the utmost tact, caution, ability and preference.
The fact that it has been able to pay out of the trans-
actions of one year a 60 per cent, dividend on the
original paid-up capital and yet display a conservative
spirit in liberally strengthening the reserves deserves
special notice. This was done in 1878, at the end of
which financial year the paid-up capital was supported
by a general reserve fund of £IOO,OOO and a life assur-
ance fund amounting to £107,133. Owing to the
basis of the life department differing now from its
status in the past, any detailed comparison of the
present position would be nugatory ; but it may be
stated generally that, whereas the total assets in 1879
were £302,816, in 1904 the}' amounted to £468,360,
notwithstanding the fact that between 1893-1904
distributions, &c., represented £219,471. One could
hardly expect any commercial enterprise with all this
bottled energy on hand to continue long on stock
lines without striking out in fresh directions. So it
has been with the A.A.A. In 1887 accident insurance
was added to the company’s branches, but the busi-
ness two years later was turned over to another com-
pany. The Southern Lloyds, of Melbourne, was
acquired in 1895. Much earlier, and pregnant with
far more important issues, was the acquisition of that
veteran office, the Australasian Insurance Company,
which took place in 1872. The Australasian was
founded in 1857, and up to 1865 had paid £115.000 in
dividends, a result even more marked than that of the
absorbing office. The fire and marine branch of the
Australasian was carried on separately until 1881,
when it practically disappeared in the business
of the Australian Alliance. Opening as an agencv
in 1869 by Mr. J. C. Xeild, iun., in 1875 it was
transferred to Messrs. Montefiore & Montefiore,
5 Gresham Place, and whilst in their hands increased
to proportions sufficiently important to warrant the
over-looking assistance of a board. This was formed
in 1880- Mr. J. Meyerfield and Captain Broomfield
being the first directors. Mr. G. B. Montefiore took
over the agency from his firm in 1882, at the time
when the company determined to give its constituents
the benefit of the mutual principle. There was no
further change in the local management until Mr. R. C.
Brindley succeeded to the representation in 1889.
Four years after the branch in O’Connell Street was
established under his superintendence, with Messrs.
A. G. Milson. Herbert Cunningham and G. C. Elliott
constituting the directorate. Mr. F. G. Horsey fol-
lowed as manager in January, 1897, and. after nearly
eight years’ occupancy, gave way, in October, 1904,
to Mr. G. B. Smith —a litterateur, whose educational
contributions have made him a persona insignis
in insurance circles all over the world. Since
Mr. Smith’s regime the Australian Alliance has
again extended its operations to the field of accident
insurance, embracing personal accident and sickness,
employers’ liability, workmen’s compensation, public
risks and the like, and in this department, as well as
in the others, the New South Wales branch is showing
evidence of building up a progressive and satisfactory
business, maintaining with the general public a repu-
tation of a very high nature for performing the respon-
sibilities it undertakes, and displa\dng a carefulness
and despatch in all its business dealings. These
features necessarily serve to keep the Australian
Alliance in the front rank of insurance institutions.
Australian Alliance Assurance Company.
The present Sydney board of directors consists of
G. C. Elliott, chairman (Messrs. Elliott Bros. Ltd.).
B. B. Allen (Australian Mortgage Land and Finance
Co. Ltd.), and F. J. Wallis (James Bell & Co.).
The fire business of the Queen of Liverpool was com-
menced in Sydney in IS7O. and continued till the amal-
gamation with the Royal, previously referred to. was
effected. Mr. (now the Hon.) J- C. Xeild. M.P.. opened
the agency, the succeeding representatives being Messrs.
A. L. Park. S. Lockwood, and John McDowell. Messrs.
Caird. Paterson & Co.. Wynyard Square, initiated opera-
tions on behalf of the Scottish Commercial, a Glasgow
fire and fife office absorbed by the Lancashire in 18S1 and
Messrs. A. Tange & Co.. 96 Pitt Street, also transacted
business for a brief term of 1870 on behalf of the China
and J apan Marine Assurance Company.
The year 1873 was a busy one and noteworthy for
the successful projection of the oldest local office, con-
fined to fire operations which exists to-day.


Australian Mutual Fire Insurance Society.
The Australian Mutual Fire Insurance Society is
a local office. In 1871 owners of private dwellings
had to pay an extreme rate for protection, a burden not
lessened by the knowledge that their fire premiums went
to swell an already swollen stream steadily flowing away
from the colony. To check this state of things a public
HEAD OFFICE
Australian Mutual Fire Insurance Society, Pitt and King Streets,
Sydney,
meeting, held in the Temperance Hall, on nth Decem-
ber, 1871, determined to form the company as a
“ mutual fire insurance society.” The concern was
successfully established in the following year, with a
nominal capital of £lOO,OOO, the paid-up capital being
£6,250 ; and operations were commenced on Ist February,
1872, in offices almost opposite the company’s present
premises, at the corner of King and Pitt Streets. The
first board of directors elected was as The Hon.
J. Sutherland, MX.A. (chairman), M. F. Josephson,
John Wetherill, Win. Hezlet, and Win. Day. Mr.
Jas. Henderson was the manager. The shareholders
included a large number of men of substance, with their
interests mainly in insurable properties. It was decided
that all holders of the company’s stock should receive
interest at the rate of 8 per cent, per annum upon
the paid-up capital ; payable every six months, with
half of the bonus distributed ratably amongst them at
the expiration of each official year. Under the deed of
settlement the directors had to lay aside out of the net
profits not less than 10 per cent, yearly to establish
a reserve fund. In 1877 the directors secured a pro-
perty at the corner of Pitt and King Streets, having a
fifty-one feet frontage to Pitt Street and a seventy-one
feet frontage to King Street. On this they erected the
present offices. The Hon. John Sutherland’s death,
in 1890, occasioned a change in the chairmanship. The
Hon. Geo. Thornton filled the vacancy for some years,
and his office to-day is ably discharged by Mr. Sydney
H. Cary. Mr. John Wetherill remains the one director
who took his term at the helm when the Australian
Mutual first inaugurated its mission of usefulness;
and with him on the present board are: Messrs. Jas.
Green, J. M. Pierce, and the Hon. John Kidd. Mr. Jas.
Henderson dying in October, 1876, the managership was
entrusted to the efficient hands of Mr. W. Church.
He parsed away after twenty-four years’ able adminis-
tration, and his mantle then fell upon the shoulders
of the present wearer, Mr. G. Howard Pope. From the
day the Australian Mutual P'ire Insurance Society
took its first risk no attempt has been made to extend
the operations of the society beyond the bounds of New
South Wales.
The Colonial Plate-glass Insurance Company of Mel-
bourne introduced this branch of accident insurance,
through Mr. E. O. Smith, 5 Gresham Place, in 1872.
Messrs. Scott, Henderson & Co., also this year arranged
preliminaries on behalf of the Home and Colonial Marine
Insurance Company, for the establishment of a connec-
tion, which was only broken when this office merged
with the Royal Exchange Assurance Company, in 1890.
Messrs. E. Chapman & Co. started, and have since re-
tained in their hands, the agexrcy of the Merchants’
Marine Insurance Company of London ; an office occupy-
ing a prominent position amongst the leading marine
companies in the United Kingdom, with an annual
premium revenue, averaging nearly a quarter of a million
sterling, and whose total assets at the end of 1903 aggre-
gated £391,134. With the South British Fire and
Marine Co., the year’s arrivals is closed.
South British Fire and Marine Insurance
Company.
In 1872 the South British Fire and Marine Insurance
Company of New Zealand opened an agency under
Messrs. M. Metcalfe & Co., having firgt acquired
the underwriting business of Metcalfe’s Marine Assurance
Company, which had been carried on for twenty-one
years by Messrs. Michael Metcalfe, assisted by J. H.
Storey, C. T. Metcalfe and H. C. Hirst.
South British Fire and Marine Insurance Company,
Bridge Street, Sydney.
The purchase of Metcalfe’s Marine Association was
arranged by the South British shortly after com-
mencing operations in 1572, and the local business
placed in the hands of Messrs. M. Metcalfe and
Co., the only agents who have represented this
office in New South Wales. Then America was
invaded. In South America, notwithstanding official
opposition, a campaign was conducted for some


years by Mr. G. H. Moore, the present manager here.
The business, however, was on a favourable oppor-
tunity offering sold in London to the Commercial
L nion and the Manchester. Briefly listed, the ramifica-
tions of the South British are to be found to-day in
all the States of the Commonwealth, in Fiji, the
Lnited Kingdom, Egypt. India and the Far East, the
Eastern Archipelago, South Africa, being confined to
British-speaking countries. The companv can hardlv
be termed sorbefacient, although three absorptions
stand to it c credit, viz., the Adelaide Marine and Fire
Insurance Office, the Commercial Marine Insurance
Company of Adelaide, and the Eastern business of the
Straits Insurance Company. The company in 1883
acquired the present site of the South British offices.
In 1904 the agency was formed into a branch, under
the control of the following board : —Messrs. J. H.
Storey (chairman), T. R. Allt, T. H. Kelly, A. D. Browne,
Dr. R. Read and J. C. Smith, with Mr. G. H. Moore
manager and Mr. C. T. Metcalfe assistant manager.
The Colonial Mutual Life Assurance Society
Limited.
The Society was established in Melbourne in 1873,
and almost simultaneously offices were opened in each
of the centres of Australia—Sydney Brisbane. Ade-
laide, Perth and Hobart. The "business was extended
to New Zealand in 1883, to Cape Colony in the same
year, to Natal in 1885. an d to London in 1886. The
affairs of the Society are controlled by the General
Committee of Management, with the principal Board
at Melbourne. On the establishment of each branch
a local directorate has been appointed under power of
attorney from the Board in Melbourne, and all
vacancies that have arisen from time to time have
been filled in a similar manner. The local directors of
each branch conduct the business under regulations
prescribed by the principal Board, the members of
which are directly responsible to and elected by the
members of the Society.
The Ocean. Railway, and General Traveller's In-
surance Company, the Realm Insurance Company,
and the Java Sea and Fire Insurance Company
complete the list of new companies for 1873. The
Java alone carried on business —through Messrs.
Mackenzie, Goddard & Co.—for any length of time.
Its colonial accounts were closed in 1883.
Between 1874 and 1878 the only Sydney office that
established itself was the City Mutual Fire Insurance
Company.
City Mutual Fire Insurance Company Limited.
The City Mutual Fire Insurance Company Limited,
a joint stock company, transacting fire business only,
was founded by Mr. j. P. Garvan in 1877. and regis-
tered under the New South Wales Companies Act,
37 Vic. No. 19. The nominal capital was £500.000,
subscribed £150,000, and paid up £15,000. In 1902
the subscribed capital was increased to £500,000 and
the paid-up capital to £37.500. At the end of the fol-
lowing year the financial position showed a total
security of £335,200. Business was commenced under
the management of Mr. J. Murphy, in Waterloo Cham-
bers, George Street ; the first board of directors being :
Hon. H. M. Fitzpatrick. M.L.C. (chairman), Messrs.
John See, J. P. Garvan. J. T. Toohey, T. M. Slattery
and P. Stanley. Notwithstanding this coterie of
leading men to steer the ship into the harbour of pros-
perity, there is nothing to be gained in disguising the
fact that in its early years the company was not suc-
cessful, and at the close of the year 1882 the position
was that, after five years’ work, no dividends had been
paid and the capital had been encroached upon to the
extent of £2.500, the total debit balance being /2,835,
notwithstanding the sum of £4.013 received for interest,
thus indicating an underwriting loss for the period
of £6,851.
It was at this time that the present manager,
Mr. Robert Kerr, assumed responsible charge, and the
company’s position at once showed improvement.
Messrs. (Alderman) Thomas Hughes,. J.P., and
Clarence Bridge, J.P., are the present directors. In
1861 the company took over the business of the
Sydney Mutual Fire. Branches have been established
at Melbourne, Ballarat. Adelaide and Perth.
Two fresh New Zealand fire and marine companies
now added Sydney to their list of agencies, the National
and the Standard, both of Dunedin. Otago. Of the last
little in the shape of history can be recorded b#y nd
this fact, that it has built up a reserve fund strong
enough to enable it to face all ordinary contingencies
with equanimity. Much of this success is due to
Messrs. Royle & Co., who have represented the
Standard here since 1880.
National Fire and Marine Insurance Company
of Dunedin.
The National Fire and Marine Insurance Company,
of Dunedin, commenced business in 1873. with a nominal
capital of £1.000.000. paid-up to £50,000 : and was the
third local office started in that colony. In March,
1882, it was decided to increase the nominal capital to
£2,000.000 and the paid-up capital to £IOO.OOO. The
London extension was then in sight, and when in
operation it proved no exception to the general ex-
perience of the Australasian companies that have
endeavoured to domesticate in ‘ ‘ the big smoke. ’ ’
Speaking at the annual meeting of the shareholders in
1891, the chairman said “ their going there had been
a bad business from first to last.” The fire branch in
London was liquidated in that year, and on 30th June.
1892. the National retired also from the general marine
department. Branches have been established in
even- State in Australia, all doing good service in
keeping the National to the fore. In Sydney the office
was opened in 1874. Messrs. F. Levick and W. S. Giddy
preceding Mr. W. A. Gibb, who has had managerial
control since 1884.
The connection of the Triton Marine Insurance
Company of Calcutta with New South Wales sets out
from this period.


Triton Insurance Company of Calcutta.
This is a company similar in character to the Canton
Insurance, a projection of Messrs. Jardine, Matheson and
Co., of Hongkong, the Triton being promoted in 1850 by
Messrs. Jardine, Skinner & Co., the kindred firm in Cal-
cutta. Originally the proprietors, who were very wealthy
merchant princes of the East, undertook an unlimited
liability; but seventeen years ago the Triton was reformed
as a limited liability company, with a nominal capital of
lacs of rupees (equivalent in its local currency to
£225,000). The company’s interests here are safe-
guarded by Messrs. Scott, Henderson & Co., of Eoftus
Street.
The Colonial Mutual Life Assurance Society, not
long started in Melbourne, now lost no time in getting
domesticated in New South Wales.
Another accident company from London obtained
a local standing about this time.
The London Guarantee and Accident Company Limited,
The London Guarantee and Accident Company Limited
was established in 1869 with a nominal capital
of £250,000 paid up to £75,000, in £2 shares.
The Australian branch is in Melbourne, the Sydney
agency being opened by Mr. E. O. Smith in 1872, his
successor being Mr. W. E. Dixon, who in time was
succeeded, in September, 1896, by Mr. A. Bryant, the
present representative, at Royal Exchange Chambers,
Pitt Street.
The list of marine companies was further swelled
by the Maritime Insurance Company of Liverpool,
whose affairs in this State are settled by Messrs.
Hogg, Robinson & Co. This completes the institutions
inaugurated during 1874-8. The Adelaide Marine and
Fire Insurance Company, whose advent dates from 1874,
stayed until 1891 ; and the Netherlands-India Sea and
Fire Insurance Company, arriving in the same year,
continued its agency until 1902, when further operations
ceased. The companies failing through one cause and
another to get anchored were the Imperial Marine Insur-
ance Company, the Britannia Fire Association, and the
Swiss Lloyds Marine Insurance Company, none of
which were doing business at the end of the seventies.
On the Ist July, 1876, the Sydney Underwriters’
Association was instituted with a membership of nine-
teen companies, the officers being: Captain H. T. Fox
(chairman), Mr. James Anderson (secretary) and Cap-
tains J. M. Banks, R. M. Pockley and S. S. Sustenance
(retained marine surveyors). Four years afterwards,
when the membership had increased to twenty-six, it
was decided to appoint an executive committee, the
following representatives being elected : Captain H. T.
Fox (chairman), Messrs. H. B. Montefiore, W. C. Goddard,
A. L- Park, F. T. Watkins, P. J. Clark, J. H. Storey and
and Mr. J. J. Bray (secretary). Captain J. Hall was
appointed marine surveyor to the association, to act
exclusively on its behalf, and in July, 1890, when it was
determined to secure a permanent secretary, Mr. J. E.
Woodthorpe received the appointment. On the death
of Captain Hall, in June, 1897, he was succeeded by
Captain Thomas Laidman, and Captain T. H. Bentley
was appointed salver and assistant marine surveyor. In
1902 Captain C. Spinks took Captain Laidman’s office,
and Captain J. Cuthbert was appointed assistant sur-
veyor, vice Captain Bentley, resigned.
At no time had fire and marine insurance looked more
discouraging than at the commencement of 1878, the
insuring power exceeding the risks to be covered by
fully 50 per cent. Nevertheless competition increased,
and rates on first-class dwellings were brought down as
low as is. 6d. per cent, by a combine of English offices.
Eighteen more companies, encouraged no doubt
by the golden times the colony was otherwise enjoying
put in an appearance during 1878 —one every three
weeks or so. Only six of these can be found to-da} T—
the Mercantile Mutual, the Australian Widows, the
Colonial Mutual Fire, the Union of Canton, the National
Mutual of Australasia, and the Ocean Marine of London.
Mercantile Mutual Insurance Company Limited.
The Mercantile Mutual Insurance Company Ltd., 120
Pitt Street, commenced operations on 10th January,
1878, at 168 Pitt Street, Sydney. Messrs. G. A.
Mansfield (chairman), George Hardie, John Broomfield,
John Pope and W. H. Paling were the first directors,
and Mr. Kelso King was instaUed as secretary. The
nominal capital was £lOO,OO0 — with power to increase
to £18,000,000 —of which the cash capital amounted to
£lO,OOO. In February, 1886, and again in 1889,
capital was increased—on each occasion by the issue of
25,000 £1 shares - and the liability now stands in the
books at £150,000 fully subscribed, paid up to £45,000 ;
Mercantile Mutual Insurance, Pitt Street.
the shareholders reserved liability amounting to
£105,000. City insurance business in 1878 was of a
limited character, and there were many rival hands
ready to di\ert it into their own counting houses.
When the directors, in 1885, found themselves in a
position to expend £33,000 on the site at the junction of
Pitt and Rowe Streets, and erect there the sightly and
spacious chambers in which the business of the Mer-
cantile Mutual has been carried on since Tune, 1886,
it is evident all (he corners had been turned. In 1889
the business of the Industrial Mutual Fire Insurance
Company was acquired, and four years later the New
South Wales Assurance Corporation was taken over.
On the other hand, the fidelity guarantee branch of the


Mercantile Mutual was closed in 1896, since which date
its operations have been limited to fire insurance
business only. A change in the administration was
made in May, 1889, when Mr. Kelso King assumed the
position of manager, and Mr. R. \V. Thallon, who had
been in the company’s service for twenty years, was
appointed secretary. In June, 1901, a branch was
established at Melbourne, where business is being con-
ducted under the supervision of the local directors,
Messrs. R. J. Alcock and J. M. Gillespie, and the resi-
dent secretarv - , Mr. Selwyn King. One of the original
directors —Mr. John Pope—is still on the board of
directors of this office ; his colleagues being Mr. Russell
Barton (chairman), the Hon. W. J. Trickett, M.L.C ,
Mr. Walter R. Hall and Mr. B. Mcßride.
Australian Widows’ Fund Life Assurance Society.
The Australian Widows’ Fund Life Assurance
Society first saw the light of day in Melbourne in 1871,
being promoted by the late Mr. T. Jaques Martin,
whose idea was to establish a life institution in Australia
similar to the Scottish Widows. It was incorporated
under the Victorian Act, and from the outset has been
conducted purely on the mutual system. The Sydney
branch, like others, has had its ups and downs. In
1878 a general agency was opened at 326 George
Street. Mr. S. Macdonnell was the resident secretary,
and the Hon. J. S. Farnell, Messrs. J. Halloran and
J. R. Street formed the board It was not a success, as
between September, 1878, to July, 1881, under 200
policies were issued. The board resigned in the latter
year, and for awhile affairs were carried on as an agency
under the head office. The business thus conducted
was a mere bagatelle, so in November, 1881, the
branch was reopened with a new board, headed by the
Hon. A. Renwick, M.D., M.L.C., as chairman, and Mr.
R. H. Atkinson resident secretary. Offices were secured
on a second floor in Hunter Street, and under these
fresh conditions within six months 449 assurants were
secured. The Melbourne board then decided to lease
the premises in George Street, facing Bond Street,
previously in the possession of the Mercantile Bank.
Five years later these were purchased for £19,000.
Mr. G. F. Murnin was appointed resident secretary in
March, 1884, holding this position until his death in
July, 1904, when Mr. V. H. Baxter, resident secre-
tary in New Zealand, was delegated to succeed him.
Colonial Mutual Fire Insurance Company.
The Colonial Mutual Fire Insurance Company, a
proprietary institution on the same basis as our mutual
companies here, originated in Melbourne in 1878 with
the object of carrying on fire insurance. Three years
afterwards the shareholders decided to extend the
company’s business to marine and accident insurance
and indemnity of employers under the Employers'
Liability Act, the latter extension being agreed to in the
following year. The resolution, as regards marine
business has never been given practical effect; and
it was not until 1889 that an>- accident prospectus was
issued. The subscribed capital is £250,000 and the
paid-up capital £IOO,OOO. At the formation of the
company 50,000 shares were allotted, 30,000 being
apportioned to Victoria and 20,000 to the other colo-
nies. The paid-up capital, from £21,425 at the end of
the first year, was increased to £37,500, which is 7s. 6d.
per share ; and from time to time since this the profits
have been capitalised until, with the allotment of
£25,000 from the profits at the last general meeting,
the whole of the subscribed capital is now fully paid up.
The company claiming to be the smallest in any respect,
outside of mishappenings, has yet to be discovered.
Numbers claiming to be the “ largest ” in the same
features are to be encountered at any time; so many,
in fact, that one feels inclined to wonder whether the
grammarian cranks have not arbitrarily imported a
wider meaning into this superlative term and, instead of
limiting it to one. provided room for many others on the
top, and among these may be found the Colonial
Mutual Fire office. There have been some amal-
gamations. The Victorian Fire Insurance Company
turned over its business to the Colonial Mutual Fire in
the eighties ; the Mutual Plate-glass Insurance Com-
pany was acquired in the nineties, and in 1901 an
agreement was entered into which led to the taking
over of the United Australian Mutual. In the last
months of 1878 Mr. Alfred Chandler opened the New
South Wales branch at 183-5 Pitt Street, his board of
directors being : Mr. William Watkins (chairman). Sir
J. George Long Innes, M.L.C. (vice-chairman), the Hon.
J. F. Bums, M.L.A., and Mr. James Byrnes, J.P. The
next secretary was Mr. J. Bell, followed by Mr. E. B.
McKenny, who officiated for some years, and in June.
1899, the appointment fell to the present occupant,
Mr. S. Hague Smith.
Union Insurance Society of Canton Ltd.
The head office of this company is in Hongkong, where
a business was commenced seventy years ago which
has now become world wide. In Sydney the agency
was established under Messrs. Gibbs, Bright & Co.
in 1878. It remains in their hands to-day.
National Mutual Life Association of Australasia.
Brazil is the land where the nuts come from, and
the National Mutual Life Association of Australasia is
the office where the non-forfeiture clause emanated
from. This institution is an outgrowth of the National
Insurance Company of Australasia, which was formed
in 1868 with power to carry on fife business as well as
fire: but it soon became evident that a proprietary fife
office in Victoria had little chance of succeeding, and
that the only plan was to adopt the mutual system.
This led to the formation of the National Mutual
in 1869. The society did not issue any foundation
policies. A guarantee fund of £IO,OOO was raised,
but no need ever arose for trenching on it. At the
quinquennium affairs were reported to stand this way—
total policies issued 1.141. assuring £379.500 and yielding
£12,946, the total funds amounting to £15.464. When
the resu’ts of the seventh “ rest,’’ covering the years
1889-92, were made known the position disclosed was —


policies issued 11,349, assuring £2,598,650 and yielding
£89,179 premiums. Another drop followed, the years
1892-5 showing policies issued 8,163, amount assured
£1,890,775, premiums £65,550. -Then came amalgama-
tion. The National Mutual swallowed up the Mutual of
Victoria as from 31st December, 1896, and increased its
funds thereby to over £2,500,000. The Sydney office
of this company was opened as a branch at 71 Pitt Street
in 1878. Mr. H. R. Francis was appointed resident
secretary, and sitting on the board were Messrs. E.
Chisholm (chairman), D. G. E. Alsop and Albert A.
Smith. In 1884 Mr. W. F. Remington became acting
resident secretary ; and in the following year Mr. H. C.
Evans resigned his position as chief clerk in the A.M.P.
office, Melbourne, to assume the management of the
National Mutual’s interests in New South Wales. To
what extent this society has become a thorn in the
competitive flesh of this colony is due to the energetic
ability with which Mr. Evans has dominated its affairs.
There is no ‘ ‘ Sleepy Hollow ’ ’ in the neighbourhood of
his whereabouts. The members of the Sydney board
of directors as at present constituted are Air. John Pope
(chairman), the Rt. Hon. G. H. Reid, P.C., K C., and the
Hon. Thomas Hughes.
Ocean Marine Insurance Company.
The Ocean Marine Insurance Company, established in
1859 in London, has a subscribed capital of £1,000,000,
paid up to £IOO,OOO, in shares paid up to £2 10s.
A Melbourne branch was opened in 1878, with a
general agency here, represented by Messrs. Metcalfe
and Co., in 1887. In 1892 the Ocean acquired the
marine interests of the City of London Marine In-
surance Company.
Three locally founded companies in 1878 deserve a
short notice. The Australian Standard Life Assurance
Company, with a paid-up capital of £25,000, was the first
and last attempt to establish in the colony a life office
on proprietary lines. Under cover of the New South
Wales Widows' Fund an effort was made to resuscitate
the obsolete and fallacious form of co-operative insur-
ance. Both attempts failed signally. The Australian
Accident Assurance Association may be said to have been
the first doing accident business in the field, for the
lethargic English agencies could hardly be dignified by
the name of competitors. It lasted, however, but two
years, to become merged into the New Zealand Accident
Insurance Company. Of the other companies, the In-
dustrial Mutual Fire Insurance Company was purchased
by the Mercantile Mutual in 1889; the Mutual Insurance
Society of Victoria amalgamated with the National
Mutual of Australasia in 1896 ; the Intercolonial Life
Assurance, Annuity and General Association Ltd. was
transferred to the Colonial Mutual in 1882, and the
Colonial Fire and Mutual Insurance Company of New
Zealand was sold to the Commercial Union in 1891.
The remainder, viz., the Globe Marine Insurance Com-
pany, the Hanseatic P'ire Insurance Company, the
Hamburg-Magdeburg Fire Insurance Company, and the
South Australian Insurance Company browsed on our
pastures for varying periods and then retired without
being missed. At the close of the year thirty-nine
offices were doing fire, thirty-five marine, fourteen life,
five guarantee, two plate-glass, and one accident busi-
ness, making a total of ninety-six companies. Little
wonder then that, with unusually heavy losses, the best
institutions were able to do little more than hold their
own now and for some time to come.
In 1879 the City Mutual Life Assurance vSociety
was successfully projected in Sydney. The Austral-
asian Plate-glass Insurance Company Ltd. was ex-
tended from Melbourne, and of the other squatters the
Phoenix Fire Office and the Sun Fire Office were imported
from London.
City Mutual Life Assurance Society Limited.
The City Mutual Life Assurance Society Ltd. was
founded by Mr. J. P. Garvan in October, 1878, and
commenced business in a small room in the old Waterloo
Chambers, George Street. The first board of directors
consisted of Messrs. John See, Edmund Barton,
P. Hogan and J. Hardie. Mr. Garvan continued as
manager until 1889. The record of the first year’s work
was very modest, the number of proposals being 52, for
assurance amounting to £9,500 and covering a yearly
income of £265. Imitating a policy which experience
had proved to be successful, the shareholders of the
City Mutual Life took the risk of premium claims on
their own shoulders, not paying one shilling for the
raising of any fund or guarantee, thus making the
foundation perfectly mutual. In this the company had
the assistance of the directors, chief medical officer and
manager, who gave their services for the first year for
nothing. Progress for some years was comparatively
slow. At the end of 1881 the policies issued during
that year only amounted to 306, assuring £51,122 and
providing premiums to the extent of £1,911. However,
with good times and care in selecting risks, between
1883-6, there was considerable improvement, the
funds at the end of 1886 being £30,847. In 1880 the
City Mutual placed upon a permanent basis the system
of industrial assurance in Australia. This society may
therefore claim to be the local parent of industrial life
assurance in this part of the world. Industrial busi-
ness was carried on for five or six years, at the end of
which time it had progressed so much that the directors
thought it advisable to establish a proprietary company
to conduct the business in its details. This society
(now the Citizens’ Life Office) took over the business.
The City Mutual henceforth confined itself to life
assurance, making a speciality of the class of business
that in America would come under the categor}" of
intermediate assurance, and which had to a great extent
been neglected in Australia. The term implies a
midway risk between that usually accepted by the purely
ordinary English or American office and the purely
industrial American office. Progressiveness, tempered
with care, has been writ broad across the doings of the
City Mutual throughout. The company never sub-
scribed to the theory that because a class of assurance
happens to be new it therefore cannot lie good and true.
For the first time in the history of life assurance the
City Mutual initiated a system of giving hospital treat-
ment to policyholders when necessary. It also instituted


a scheme whereby every member after three years’
payment has been made is entitled to a free policy
equal to the amount of premiums paid in by him. It
further gave assurants an innovation in life insurance
practice. Under this in the event of a member being
totally disabled the whole of the insurance money at once
becomes payable, and in the event of partial disablement
a proportion of the policy money immediately falls due.
In 1889 Mr. George Crowley was appointed secretary.
A site was procured for office purposes at the intersection
of Hunter, Bligh and Castlereagh Streets, upon which
later on the imposing buildings that now grace this
situation were erected. At the end of 1892 Mr. Crowley
was promoted to the managership, to take the helm and
continue the society’s policy of picking and choosing
its business wisely, and on the 2nd January, 1894, the
business was removed to the new head offices. During
the society’s twenty-six years’ history the total pre-
miums received have amounted to /700.000 on policies
covering £3.500,000 ; and £252,000 has been paid away
in claims to the relatives of deceased members or on the
attainment of birthdays, or by way of surrenders : thus
indicating that this meritorious institution has faithfully
carried out the raison d’etre of its existence. By sound
caution and conservative administration the City
Mutual Life possesses first-class investments exceeding
a quarter of a million sterling and an assured annual
income of over £65,000. The aim of the management
has been to make this society the most prosperous
Australian institution in its line. It lays claim to the
title of the most liberal and progressive life office in the
southern hemisphere ; and it points to the fact that it
has liberalised the conditions of fife assurance so that a
fife policy is as simple as an ordinary agreement. During
its twenty-six years’ history the City Mutual has con-
tested two claims only, the amounts aggregating to
/450. In contradistinction to this it can point with
some pride to the fact that it has paid some 2,000 claims
for a sum aggregating a quarter of a million sterling.
Plate-glass Company.
The Australasian Plate-glass Company, of Mel-
bourne, was established in 1869, and soon had an agency
opened in Sydney. This was conducted by Messrs.
Robey Bros, for some years, being taken over by Mr.
H. H. Robey in 1885, who has retained the connection
since. A considerable portion of the company's busi-
ness is done in this city. The capital of the company
is £20,000 (paid up to £6,000), in 8,000 shares of £2 10s.
each.
Phoenix Assurance Company Limited.
Metaphorically the Phoenix Assurance Company Ltd.
arose, like its fabulous namesake, from the ashes of
the fires of discontent. This commercial venture owes
its origin to the fact that towards the end of the eigh-
teenth century the sugar refiners of London, then an
important body, found difficulty in obtaining the large
amount of insurance required on their premises. They
took steps to organise a fire insurance office, but being
refused a charter by the Attorney-General, Lord Kenyon,
who discouraged the notion of commercial corporations,
they banded as private partners and formed a fire
assurance association. On this basis the business was
started on 17th January, 1780, as the New Fire Office,
the first policy issued bearing that date and covering a
sugar refinery for 6,000 dollars. The corporation was
the first British office to establish agencies on the Con-
tinent and in America. The voluntary association soon
after 1782 assumed the happy title of the Phoenix, and
although several modifications of its constitution took
place from time to time, it retained until 1886 its
original character of a private partnership, publishing no
disclosures of its business. In 1895 it was deemed
advisable to abandon the old constitution and to re-
organise the company on a basis more in accordance
with current notions The modern company has an
authorised and subscribed capital of £2, 688,800, in
£SO shares, paid up to £5. the stock being worth £3l.
In 1797 the society started the Pelican Life Office
opposite to the fire office. In September, 1846, the
Pelican took over the life business of the Manchester
and in 1903 repeated history by absorbing the British
Empire Mutual, enlarging its name to the Pelican and
British Empire Life Office. The chairman of the board
was Lord Hampden, G.C.M.G., who had been a director
since May, 1867. During 1878 the Phoenix entered the
colonial field, with Messrs. \V. H. Mackenzie & Co. to
pilot the company in the early years of its career. In
1891 a branch was established in .Sydney, Messrs.
S. R. Traill. \V. S. Southwell and \V. X. Farmer assuming
managerial responsibility here, in the order named.
In 1906 the Australian representation of the company
was re-organised by the formation of an Australian
branch. Mr. R. \V. Martin having been appointed
manager.
The Sun Fire Office.
The Sun Fire Office is the oldest fire office in the
world. The company originally constituted a private
partnership, the result of varied schemes projected by
Povey between 1706 and 1710. which culminated in
the last year in the inauguration of a proprietary
company of London insurers, entitled the Sun Fire
Office, which was formed into a public company in
1892. The local agency, established in 1879. now
held by Messrs. Royle & Co., of 5 and 7 Bond Street.
Four other concerns complete the 1879 list- The
Australian Lloyds was taken over by the Australian ;
the Glass Merchants’ Plate-glass Insurance Company
of Sydney, in which all the shares were taken up by
local merchants, and Mr. Leopold Barnett appointed
secretary : the Australian Civil Service Mutual Assur-
ance Company, a kindred scheme to the co-operative
venture of 1878, and victim to a similar fate ; and
the Boston Board of Underwriters, which no doubt
safely found its way home, more or less shorn, in the
fulness of time.
Xo Arabs pitched their tents in 1880 to silently
fold them and steal away again. All the new arrivals
were from London, and with the exception of the Lion,
amalgamated with the Yorkshire in 1902. and the Lan-
cashire. amalgamated with the Royal in 1901. their flags
are still at the masthead and likely to remain there, as
it would be hard to find a stronger pair than the Com-
mercial Union and the Guardian.


Commercial Union Assurance Company.
Ihe origin of the Commercial Union Assurance Com-
pany is a matter of history. After the Tooley
Street fire in London in 1861 efforts were made by the
insurance offices to impose higher rates and unpalatable
conditions. In opposition to this a number of leading
merchants determined upon forming a fire insurance
company upon a broad basis, whose prominent prin-
ciples should be liberality in conditions and very mode-
rate rates. The Commercial Union was accordingly
established and incorporated under Act of Parliament,
with a subscribed capital of £2,500,000, of which £250,000
islpaid up. The company at the outset intended to
confine operations to fire ; but shortly afterwards it was
Commercial Union Assurance Company, Pitt and Hunter Streets.
found beneficial and opportune to establish life and
marine branches, the accident department only coming
into operation as recently as the year 1900. Eminent
in all four sections of the business, the fire department,
probably because it is the fountain source of one of the
most prosperous undertakings of the age, commands the
largest share of attention. No assurance establishment
in the United Kingdom—or America for that matter —
has as yet acquired an equal fire revenue in a similar
space of time. For 1862 the fire premiums were £55,275
and the losses 367 per cent., while in 1863 on an income
of £57,931 the loss ratio was as low as per cent. But
iii 1905 on a giant income of £2,074,790, whereon the
payments for claims required £937,920, the losses were
at the phenomenally low ratio of 45 per cent ; a start-
ling triumph surpassing all former achievements. Since
the commencement the fire premiums have amounted
to £33>758>730> and the loss payments to £20,061,969.
In the life department in 1903 a record was established,
1,692 policies for £1,140,250. Prosperity in the
marine branch of the Commercial Union has be-
come proverbial, and the year’s premiums of
£287,255 furnished another instance in a long pro-
cession exhibiting fine profit results. The premiums
in the accident department amounted to £170,778 in
1906. Further evidence of the phenomenal vitality
of the Commercial Union and the progress it has
achieved would be superfluous. The policy of
universal expansion initiated at the beginning and
consistently followed has met with miraculous suc-
cess ; and it is no flight of fancy to say there is hardly
a centre of civilisation in any portion of the world where
the representatives of the company are not encountered.
Of the history of the company in New South Wales there
are really but very few incidents to record ; an unbroken
line of success summing up operations in a few words.
Between the time when the agency ceased to be in the
hands of Messrs. E. &W. Paul and when it w r as handed
over to Messrs. Chapman & Co., in 1874, there is a hiatus
of non-representation. Whilst in the last mentioned
firm’s hands the company’s affairs were looked after
by Mr. Chapman’s nephew, Mr. C. E. Hearn, the artist
underwriter, who subsequently followed art in England
successfully, and for some years was instructor
of painting to English Royalty. In 1880 the New
South Wales Marine Assurance Company and the Sydney
Fire Insurance Company were acquired by purchase
and with the business connections of these two com-
panies as a nucleus the present branch was formed
under an influential board consisting of Messrs.
C. T. Gedye (chairman), Hon. John Fraser (vice-chair-
man), D. G. E. Alsop, Ed. Chisholm, J. R. Fairfax,
John Hinchcliffe, R. Jones, John Newton and R. G.
Reading. Mr. John St. Vincent Welch, for many years
secretary of the New South Wales company was appoint-
ed manager. This position he still holds, having been
upwards of thirty years in the service of the two com-
panies. He is the oldest marine manager in New South
Wales, and as the author of that very essential com-
pilation ‘ ‘ The Register of Australian and New Zealand
Shipping”—a work following the lines of “Lloyds’
Register ’ ’ in the United Kingdom, and entailing an
enormous amount of labour —he is able to say, in the
words of the famed Venusian satirist of ancient days,
‘ ‘ I have built up a monument more lasting than brass.”
Not only can Mr. Welch claim this in the case of the
shipping register but also in his managerial capacity.
He has made the Commercial Union a household word
throughout the length and breadth of the land, and his
able management has placed the institution in the lead
amongst all rivals. In 1906 another addition was
made by the fusion of the Hand-in-Hand Fire and
Life Insurance Society with the company. This
corporation was one of the earliest established in the
United Kingdom and had a career covering nearly
two hundred years. The bill through Parliament to


effect this union received the Royal Assent on the
30th June, 1905. The present directors are the Hons.
Sir Norrnand H. MacLaurin, Henry Moses, and F. T.
Humphery, Ms.L-C.
Guardian Assurance Company.
The Guardian Assurance Company was established in
1821 by deed of settlement for the issuing of policies
of insurance against loss by fire and for assurance upon
lives. The amount of subscribed capital was £2,000,000,
of which £200,000 was paid up. Since those dim days
the paid-up capital has been increased, and now-
stands at £1,000.000. The number of proprietors is
about 1,500. The capital is invested separately, and
it is solely from the interest it yields and from the
profits of the fire department that the shareholders’
dividends are paid. In this city operations were
commenced in 1880 under Mr. A. S. Macdonnell, but
the agency was shortly thereafter transferred to
Messrs. Gibbs, Bright & Co., who stil! represent it,
Mr. E. W. G. de Gyulay, as manager of the insurance
department, having charge of the company’s affairs.
The name of the Guardian at the date of its estab-
lishment in 1821 was the Guardian Fire and Life
Assurance Company. This was altered in 1893 to the
Guardian Fire and Life Assurance Company Ltd., on
its registration under the Companies Act; and once
again the name was changed in 1902 to what it now
is.
Before the end of the 1880 the outlook brightened
considerably, all the branches of insurance showing
steady progress. A country fire tariff was agreed on
this year, and in marine insurance the classification
and proportioning was much improved.
With the promise of renewed prosperity at the
outset of 1881 companies poured in, the additions,
twenty-three in all, making the year a record one. Of
this number singularly few received a permanent
habitation ; in fact only the Reliance Marine, the China
Traders’ Association, and the New Zealand Accident
Insurance Company.
Reliance Marine Insurance Company Ltd.
Nearly five - and - twenty years ago the Reliance
Marine Insurance Company Ltd. drove its pegs into the
soil in Sydney with the view of domesticating.
Messrs. E. Chapman & Co. are the local agents. The
capital is paid up to £IOO,OOO.
China Traders’ Insurance Company.
The China Traders’ Insurance Company is one of
the largest of marine insurance companies located in
the East, and was established in 1865. The head
office is at Hongkong, with branches or agencies at
all the principal ports of the w-orld. The paid-up
capital and reserves amount to £200,000. The Syd-
ney agency was opened in 1881 at Terry’s Buildings,
Pitt Street, being transferred to Messrs. Wright,
Heaton & Co. in August, 1885. In November, 1886.
the office was converted into a branch under the
management of Mr. Leslie R. Mitchell ; and subse-
quently a local board was formed, consisting of Mr.
A. S. Sievers (Messrs. L'angar. Gedye & Co ), Mr.
C. M. Terry (Messrs. R. \V. Cameron & Co,), and
Mr. H. S. Holt (Messis. Hmchcliffe, Holt & Co.?,
New Zealand Accident Insurance Company.
The New Zealand Accident Insurance Company was
founded in 1879 with a nominal capital of £IOO,OOO, paid
up to £2,000. It has since been subscribed to £50,000
and paid up to £37,500. The profit and loss
account of the first twelve months was as follows; —
Debit :To preliminary expenses. £728 os. 3d.; paid for
compensations, £458 16s. nd.; commission, salaries
and general expenses, £1.833 ss. 6d.; advertising
£24 15s. 2d. ; stationery, £196 ss. 6d.; medical costs,
£l6 75. 6d. ; balance,£l,Bl3 7s. iocL; t0ta1,£5,070185. Bd.
Credit: By premiums, £4.953 9s. 2d. ; interest and
transfer fees. £ll7 9s. 6d.; total. £5.070 18s. Bd. And
in the report presented to the shareholders appears this
paragraph : i; The amount to credit of profit and loss
account is £1.813 7 s - iod., out of which the directors
recommend to pay a dividend at the rate of 10 per cent.,
which will absorb £2OO. leaving a balance to be carried
forward of £1,613 7 s - iod. Even- claim has been satis-
factorily settled, and. in addition to paying the entire
preliminary expenses contingent on the establishment of
a new undertaking, the business of the Australian
Accident Assurance Association Limited (now in liqui-
dation ) has been purchased and incorporated with this
company. Branches have also been established in all
the Australian colonies, and these have been supplied
with the necessary requisites to carry on an extensive
business.” In the statement of accounts for the year
ended 31st December, 1904. the principal items are :
Debit: To compensation paid and provided for.
£53.959 ns. 9d.; bonus policies, £977 16s. sd. ; general
expenses, £10,163 I2S - nd.; reinsurance reserve fund.
£2.500; government taxes, £847 4s. 4d.; balance,
£8,168 ss. 6d.; total. £76,616 10s. nd. Credit: By
balance less (£5.000) dividends. £2.647 4 s - 7<T ; net pre-
miums, £67,819 ißs.sd.; interest. rent,&c., £6,14975.1 id.;
total, £76,616 10s. 1 id. During the company’s
operations the total assets have been increased from
£12,000 to £176,000. and upwards of £300,000 has been
returned to policy holders for sickness and accident. At
first the branch, 81 Pitt Street, was managed by Mr.
S. Hague Smth. In succession followed Messrs. Stone
and Yates, A. Stone & Co.. S. Hague Smith and H.
Crossley. After the latter came Mr. A. T. Bullock, in
March, 1896, when the guarantee and burglary branches
were added. This Company was. in 1906. merged into
the New Zealand Insurance Company, with Mr. A.
E. D’Arcy as manager.
Independent Order of Foresters.
The Independent Order of Foresters is a life assur-
ance association only so far as it relates to its own
members, and with regard to these nothing on the fines
of regular fife assurance was attempted until the order
was reorganised in 1881 and changed from a death
assessment society to its present plan—which admits
to mortuary benefits males and females alike. The
system is therefore on its trial.


Of the other companies which started locally in
1881, the Commercial Marine Insurance Company Ltd.
of Adelaide (Messrs. Beilby Bros., agents) amalgamated
with the South British in 1884 ; the National of Aus-
tralasia allied in 1891 to the British and Colonial (Syd-
ney) ; the Merchants’ Mutual Insurance Company was
absorbed by the London and Lancashire in 1894 ; down
the same gullet disappeared the British and Colonial P'ire
of Sydney in the same year, having first gorged itself
with the share of the Pacific’s business it had taken over ;
the Queensland Fire Insurance Company divided up its
business, two years after coming here, between the
New Zealand Insurance Company and the London
Guarantee Company. The Union Fire and Marine
Insurance Company of New Zealand sold its assets
eventually to the Alliance of London, having previously
purchased the Equitable Fire and Marine. The birds
of passage were the Chinese Insurance Company, the
Civil Service Banking and Commercial, the P'ire Insur-
ance of London —a sensitive swallow, which flew away
‘ ‘ owing to agency losses ’ ’ in 1866 ; the Hobart-town
and Launceston Industrial Guarantee, Life Endowment
and Annuity Company Ltd. (W. Jarrett, agent) ; the
Netherlands P'ire, the North German Fire, the Insurance
Company of Hamburg, the Prussian National of Stettin,
the Scottish Imperial, the Marine Insurance Company,
the Adelaide British and Foreign Fire, and the Mer-
chants’ Marine and Fire of South Australia. Firebugs
were shaken this year by the conviction of Alphonse
Beche, a merchant, who endeavoured to defraud the
insurance companies of £14,000 by setting fire to his
warehouse in Market Street. Another legal incident of
wide interest was the claim the Merchants’ Marine
Insurance Company successfully resisted in connection
with the Susanne Godeffroy, an ill-fated coffin ship of
Kipling’s Bolivar type, |sj
“ Peaking like a lobster-pot, steering like a dray,”
which inconsiderately went down hurriedly off the
Nobbies on a voyage between Newcastle and Yokohama.
There was no paucity of companies in 1882, but
only one, he Manchester, held its ground, and this
office has now been absorbed by the Atlas Company.
The others taken collectively were a mixed lot,
comprising the City of London Fire, which sold out to
the Ocean Marine and the Palatine Insurance Co. in
1893 ; Sydney Lloyds’ Underwriters’ Association, ab-
sorbed by the North Queensland in 1896 ; Colonial
Mutual Life and Fire, purchased by the Intercolonial
Life Assurance and General Association in 1886 ; the
Equitable Marine, and the South Australian Mutual
Ldfe, Mr. E. W. Moon, agent; the Indemnity of Aus-
tralasia, Mr. A. L. Park, agent; the Mercantile of
South Australia ; the London and Provincial, and the
Australasian Mercantile Union. The last was a Vic-
torian institution, which had a steady career of losses
through selling insurance at nearly 40 per cent, below
prime cost. This year an initial conference of Austral-
asian marine underwriters was held in Melbourne, being
attended from Sydney by Captain H. T. Fox (Australian
General Assurance) and Messrs. T. M. Tinley (United
Assurance Co.) P. J. Clark (Sydney Marine Insurance
Co.), and W. H. Mackenzie (Sydney Lloyds). A tariff
of minimum rates on homeward and outward risks was
adopted, as well as a uniform hull policy.
The hrst ot the “ three giants " from America
established itself here in 1883, i.e., the New York
Life Assurance Compam.
New York Life Insurance Company.
Briefly told the history of its wonderful enter-
prise is this. In 1843 twelve men met in New
York and organised a purely mutual life in-
surance company as a protest against the oppression
of the existing stockholders, whose dealings vyere
conducted in a miscellaneous sort of way. The
company was incorporated by special Act of the
Legislature of New York in 1843, and com-
menced business in 1845. Few then would have been
bold enough to prophesy that this company was des-
tined one day to be one of the most potent influences for
good ever created. Yet such it has come to be, step by
step, from the day of its formation, until through a
period of six decades there is not a civilised nation in
any part of the world, or a State exercising legislative
functions, that has not ratified its constitution as origi-
nally drafted. That constitution is purely mutual,
there being no stockholders; and this permits the
assured obtaining their insurance at the lowest cost.
The great progress of the company practically proves
the success of its plans. Strictly speaking originally
it wore a new mask on an old face. The New \ork
is an evolution of the Nautilus Insurance Company
formed under the provisions of a special Act passed
by the New York Legislature on 21st May, 1841, autho-
rising its establishment for marine, inland navigation
and fire risks. Two years later the Act was amended
in such a way as to permit the company to do life
insurance business. It took two more years to organise
the company, the origin of which may be dated 10th
April, 1845, when twenty trustees and three inspectors
were elected. Policy No. 1 was issued seven days later on
the life of Lewis Benton for $5,000. Four years after, on
sth April, 1849, the title “Nautilus” disappeared, the
company assuming that of “ New York Life Insurance
C 0.,” and devoting itself to the transactions of life
insurance business exclusively. In 1845 there
only 359 policies on the company’s books, and
before the New York had been half a century in
existence they numbered over a quarter of a million.
The company has paid £66, 578,699 in death claims, pur-
chased policies, &c.; £"17,358,063 in bonuses and returned
premiums; and £"17,784,620 in endowments and annuities,
making a grand total of £"101,721,382 paid to policy-
holders; and after making these payments, it held on
January Ist, 1906, for the benefit of its policyholders
total assets to the amount of £"89,555,195. In the in-
vestment of these stupendous sums the company is
restricted by law to loans upon unencumbered real
estate, worth 50 per cent, more than the sum loaned
thereon, government bonds, and other first-class
securities sanctioned by the Insurance Department.
So much for general matters. With regard to
distinctive features, this institution claims to have
more endowment policies in force than any other
competitor, whilst its annuity branch, which is still in-
creasing in a large degree, a few years ago did
75 per cent, of the business of all the insurance
companies. Amongst the other advances associated
with the New York are the expunging of the suicide


clauses in 1850, and making fraud the only ground of
refusing to pay a claim ; the issue in iB6O of non-for-
feiture policies-a liberal course of action which led to
the Massachusetts Legislature, a few years later, passing
the first non-forfeiture law, making the application a part
of each policy ; adopting the tontine system, and incor-
porating (in 1885) principle of the mortuary division
system for mortuary dividends equal to one-half of all
premiums paid during a term of years, in the company’s
policies. In recent years the policy contract has been
greatly liberalised, and is now issued with but one con-
dition, viz., that the premiums be paid as agreed. It is
absolutely free as to restrictions, non-forfeitable and in-
contestable from date of issue, and embodies a maximum
number of guarantees. W ith such enlightened administra-
tion it is not surprising to find the policies of the New
York Life have ever been extremely popular. Since
the New \ ork extended its operations to these
colonies in 1883, opening an office over the Federal
Bank Buildings in King Street, its Australasian business
has been of a steady, progressive, and satisfactory
nature.
Along with the mammoth New York Co. the year
1883 brought the Indemnity Fire and Marine of Austral-
asia, a Victorian office, disposed of in 1898 to the Norwich
Union and the Thames and Mersey ; the Equitable
Fire and Marine of New Zealand, taken over by the
Union Fire and Marine of New Zealand in 1891 ; the
Hull and General Assurance Co., wound up during
1887 ; the International Marine Insurance Co., the
Amicable of Calcutta, the Mercantile and General of
South Australia, the Mutual Plate-glass of Australasia,
and the Scottish Union and National Insurance Com-
pany.
Scottish Union and National Insurance Company.
This Edinburgh office was established for fire and life
assurance eighty-one years ago, but it made no effort to
secure an interest in the colonial field until 1883, when
Messrs. Peile, Borradaile & Co. were appointed its
representatives for fire business. In June, 1901, Mr.
Geo. Chapman assumed charge of the company’s
interest in Australasia, Melbourne being his head-
quarters. With the large investments the company
had made in colonial securities it was determined to
establish a branch in Sydney the same year, and the
management of it was entrusted to Mr. W. S. Forbes,
who still holds this position of trust. The Scottish
National, another fire company, was amalgamated
in 1878 —a fusion which metamorphosed the old
Scottish Union —of the days and associations of Sir
Walter Scott, erstwhile a director—into the Scottish
Union and National of the present prosaic age. The
nominal capital of this old-time institution is £6, 000,000
paid up to and during its history it has paid
aw r ay in fire claims.
For several years the Governments of the day, and
Sir Henry Parkes’ in particular, had promised to bring
in a comprehensive Act dealing with fire matters
generally. But nothing was done till the insurance
companies threatened to disband their brigade in 1882.
Then legislation was framed and a Fire Brigades Act
passed through Parliament in 1883.
The New York was not long alone in the Australian
field, as within twelve months the Equitable Life of
the United States appeared on the field.
Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United
States.
“ Not for a day but all time ” is the motto of the
Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States.
Early in the year 1859 Mr. Henry B. Hyde, a member
of the staff of the Mutual Life of New York, decided
to found an insurance office on his own account and
after some delay, necessitated by collecting the
statutory deposit, required by the Legislature of
New York State before granting insurance com-
panies permission to commence business, he set the ball
rolling. The first president w T as Mr. W. C. Alexander,
who continued to hold office until his death in 1874.
Then Mr. Hyde w T as elected to the position which
he, too, held for nearly a quarter of a century, until
death removed him. Mr. Hyde at the outset was
the general manager, at the end of 1839 the assets
amounted to and policies w r ere written on the
books to the extent of
At the end of December, 1883, the Equitable initiated
proceedings in Australasia by opening its headquarters
in Sydney at the junction of Pitt, Hunter and O’Connell
Streets. Mr. G. Monro was appointed secretary later
on. A leading representative visited Australia for the
purpose of superintending arrangements; and established
a branch in Melbourne; the Adelaide, Brisbane, Perth,
Hobart and Wellington branches following in due
course. These, with the outlying offices of Bombay
and Colombo, are nominally within the control of the
head office here. In 1889 it was decided to erect with
the best local material obtainable, the massive and
handsomely equipped Equitable Buildings in George
Street. This important enterprise brought a mana-
gerial official to Australia again ; with him this time
the Society’s architect, Mr. Ralit, and, at a later
stage, the chief actuary, Mr. Phillips. The opening
of the new building in Sydney was performed by the
Governor of New South Wales, his Excellency Sir
Robert Duff, K.C.M.G. On the Ist January, 1896,
Mr. C. Carlisle Taylor assumed control as general
manager. The Hon. C. K. Mackellar, M 8., M L C.,
H. D. Bell, Esq , E. C. Shan ton, Esq., A. G. W ebster,
Esq., are the local directors.
The New Zealand Plate-glass Insurance Company.
In 1884 the New Zealand Plate-glass Insurance Co. of
Dunedin, then a young concern, opened a branch in
Sydney, placing the business in the hands of Messrs.
Royle & Co. The capital it operates on is
With this completes the companies that opened
offices in Sydney in 1884 and have rested in the
colony since. In addition there are nine others not to
be found in the lists of to-day. These include the
Equitable Life of New Zealand, the local branch of
which was taken over by the N.S.W. Assurance
Corporation in 1889 ; the Accident Indemnity Insurance
Corporation (of Melbourne), projected with a supposed
capital of and which went into liquidation in
1887 after its financial weakness was exposed by
the Insurance and Banking Record , and its affairs had been
transferred to the Fire, Marine and Accident In-
demnity Co.; the United Australian Mutual Fire
and Marine Insurance Co. (Melbourne), a powerful


proprietary, with a share list comprising 15,000 mem-
bers ; the Straits Insurance Co. (Messrs. Gibbs,
Bright & Co. agents), of Singapore, acquired by the
Commercial Union in 1903 ; the National of London
(marine); the Australasian Mutual Livestock Insurance
Co., the pioneer office to cover animals, liquidated in
1900; the New South Wales Live Stock Insurance Co.,
and the Metropolitan Guarantee and Accident Insurance
Co. of London—a wild cat, to the highest degree, only
checked in a most promising career of mischief here
by Mr. Justice Chi tty in England, ordering it to be
wound up, soon after the Sydney office was opened.
The promoter was “ Dr.” Philip Sayle, who, after
starting more than a dozen fraudulent companies, found
himself at last pulled up and sentenced to a long term of
imprisonment. The Insurance Institute of New South
Wales was established during the year, “for the dis-
semination of useful knowledge and the inculcation of
sound insurance practice,” aims not unnecessary in the
matter of tariffs, regarding the adherence to which
charges of Punic faith were constantly alleged.
The companies which were able to settle down
permanently in 1885 were as follows :
The Mannheim Insurance Company.
The Mannheim Insurance Co , of Mannhein, transacts
marine, river, inland, accident, liability, burglary, and
plate-glass insurance. Originally a marine company it
added the various accident branches in 1869. Messrs.
Montefiore, Joseph & Co. were originally Sydney agents
of the Mannheim, and upon the failure of that firm,
the agency devolved upon Mr. W. H. Rovvsell, 10
O’Connell Street, who is now the chief agent for the
Australian Commonwealth and New Zealand.
Employers’ Liability Company.
The Employers’ Liability Co. of London was originated
in 1880, and established itself in Sydney four years
afterwards. Mr. H. Lomas Smith held tlie agency for
some years, when it passed to the hands of the present
managers, Messrs. E. Chapman & Co.
The Union Marine Insurance Company.
The Union Marine Insurance Co. Ltd. was established
in Liverpool in 1863, with a nominal capital of
£”1,500,000, and a subscribed capital of £"1,308,000 of
which £”163,500 has been called up. Messrs. W. & A.
McArthur Limited have been managing agents for the
colonies since 1893. Agencies have been opened in
Brisbane, Melbourne, Adelaide and Perth.
In addition there were registered the North Aus-
tralian Lloyds, taken over by the North Queensland ; the
Industrial Mutual Fire of Australasia, a Queensland
office wound up in 1889 ; the Accident Insurance of
New Zealand, and the General Mutual Insurance Co.
Limited. Notwithstanding an apparent absence of
co-relation these last two were a brace of “ cats” out of
the one bag. The Accident Company, a Victorian
enterprise, opened an agency here under the direction of
one Francis B. Turner, from Melbourne, and in the local
office was hatched the Mutual Assurance Co. The share-
holders decided to wind up in 1887.
Tariff troubles were again to the fore in 1885. The
agreement current at the beginning of the year as to
fire rates was abandoned in March, renewed again by
a majority of companies on 15th October, and a few
months afterwards again finally dropped on account of
the withdrawal of several offices. Managers had good
cause to exclaim in Job-like vein “of the making of
tariffs there is 110 end and keeping them is much
wearying of the flesh.”
The year 1886 only fell short of 1883 by one in its
record of new companies, and again the great majority
of them abided with us for a period more or less
transient, all, in fact, excepting the Universal Plate-
glass, the North Queensland, and the Australasian
Temperance and General.
Universal Plate-glass Insurance Company
Limited.
The Universal Plate-glass Insurance Company of
Sydney was incorporated in 1886, with a subscribed
capital of £"2,500 to insure plate-glass windows, show-
cases, &c., Messrs. Peele & Co. being appointed manag-
ing agents. The present board of directors consists of
Messrs. D. G. Peele and Alex. Sinclair. Mr. W. C.
Peele is the secretary of the company. Agencies have
been opened in Brisbane, Adelaide and Perth.
North Queensland Insurance Company.
The North Queensland was floated in October, 1886,
with corresponding agencies in Brisbane and North
Queensland ports. The first issue of the share capi-
tal was £IOO,OOO, called up to £12,500. At a meeting
held on the 28th August, 1891, it was decided to in-
crease the capital with the view of commencing fire
business, and a fresh issue of 15,000 £1 shares was
made, paid up to 3s. Four branches were opened
in 1904, making ten of these offices in the different
States, in addition to the London business conducted
by Mr. H. Leonard Puckle. Fusion, so far, has
been limited to the Sydney Lloyds, taken over in
April, 1896. For settlements the company repre-
sents in Sydney the Saint Paul Fire and Marine,
the United Dutch, and the Tokyo Marine Insurance
Companies. The board of directors is composed of
the following members: Colonel James Burns
(chairman), Sir John See, K.C.M.G., Messrs. J.
Macpherson, A. Forsyth, and A. R. Troup. Mr. E.
J. Felton is the present general manager of the company
and Mr. Alex. McVernon is the secretary. The head
office of the company is situated in Bridge Street,
Sydney.
Australasian Temperance and General Mutual Life
Assurance Society Ltd.
Originally this company was the life assurance branch
in connection with the Kechabite Friendly Society, and
with the view of extending its operations the directors
registered the branch in 1876 as a distinct society and
severed its connection with the Kechabites. Policies are
classed in two sections, and each time there has been an
investigation, results have shown that the abstainers, or
temperance section, have as a body experienced a more
favourable mortality than the non-abstainers or general
section.


Scottish Widows’ Fund Life Assurance Society of
Edinburgh.
I he famed Scottish W idows Fund Life Assurance So-
ciety of Edinburgh does not pursue the ordinary busi-
ness of its office in Australia. It honours us by a practical
recognition of the value of Australian investments, and
has a considerable portion of its surplus fund invested
in colonial securities. To look after these an office was
established in Sydney, under a board of advice, in 1886,
with Mr. Joseph Mills in charge. Upon his death in
1893, Mr. Phillip H. Morton, M.L.A. for Shoalhaven,
succeeded to the representation, and when he retired in
February, 1901, the committee placed Mr. T. Horder in
charge. The latter still fills the office. Since 1900 the
company’s address has been Blackstone Chambers,
O'Connell Street.
Little is to be said of the other offices : they came,
saw and were not Caesars of the Julius brand. Detailing
the list scantily, the Glasgow and London Fire
appointed Messrs. Burns, Philp & Co. agents in 1887,
and in 1899 opened a branch under Mr. R. M. Berkely.
It absorbed the London and County Fire in 1890 and at
the beginning of 1891 had to liquidate. The New South
Wales Assurance Corporation met with the same fate
after a consistent career of seven years. Starting with
the heroic idea of breaking down the rates of the com-
bined insurance companies, it broke itself instead,
through a steady run of bad luck, and had to face losses
amounting to for the experience. The South
Australian Fire Insurance Co. also wound up, disposing
of its branches to the Norwich Union and China Traders.
The Newcastle Provincial Mutual Assurance Co-
operation Ltd. was formed to conduct fire business on
the mutual principle, and “ be identified principally with
Newcastle.” The people there, however, would not
identify, and they brought it to the liquidator instead—
poorer but much wiser. The Sydney Mutual Fire In-
surance Co. was sold to the Colonial Mutual Fire in
1890.
The Sydney Carriage and Accident Insurance Co ,
ordered to be wound up in 1888, the General Assurance,
London, the World Mutual Accident Society, Towns-
ville Lloyds, the Colonial Mutual Live Stock Insurance
Co., the Star Assurance Society, London, the Australian
Trust, Management, and Investment Co., and Scottish
Amicable Life Society, complete this somewhat for-
midable list.
From 1887 companies beyond our gates appeared
less anxious to acquire colonial experience, and they
came in two’s and three’s, instead of in dozens and
half-dozens. The last of the New York “giants”
—the Mutual Life—and the Citizens were the only
offices to put in lasting foundations during this year.
Mutual Life Insurance Company of New York.
The company which has in the ordinary course of its
business to pay over twenty-two thousand pounds a day,
just in settlement of the customary claims, is not inappro-
priately termed a “ giant.” The payments of the Mutual
Life Insurance Co. of New York, to policyholders dur-
ing the year 1905, amounted to or over
for every working day. The Mutual of New
York as known to-day, is the out-crop of a small com-
bine of level-headed men who established the office 1843.
Starting as a mutual company, without any funds, the
founders bound themselves to take out policies, aggre-
gating one million dollars’ insurance, and instead of
making the world the field, they considered it sufficient
to limit their missionising efforts to prospecting as far as
Virginia and Kentucky. Fortunately of the 470 policies
issued in 1843, no claim had to be met. Now the Mutual
of New York is possessed of nearly 700,000 policies, and
has to pay to its constituents a day. Further
figures relating to the company’s posiiion in our times
will be found elsewhere.
The Mutual commenced business in Australasia in
January, 1887, by writing policies insuring £\s,soo on
the lives of eleven prominent professional and business
men in Sydney. The company selected as its first repre-
sentative for Australasia Major Zenas C. Rennie.
Associated with him in the conduct of the Australasian
business were Dr. R. L. Faithful, as chief medical
referee, Messrs. Pigott & Stinson, legal advisers,
and Mr. H. E. Russell, J.P., supervising accoun-
tant. The first Sydney office was situated at
Bell’s Chambers, 131 Pitt Street, but it was soon
decided to show that the company’s interests were
bound up in its Australasian business. One of the
finest sites obtainable was purchased, and the palatial
block now known as the Mutual Life Buildings was
erected from the plans of Mr. J. Kirkpatrick,
architect, at the corner of Martin Place and Pitt Street,
at a total cost of close on a quarter of a million sterling.
This was opened for business on Ist October, 1895.
The affairs of the company throughout the Common-
wealth are directed from this centre. Applications for
insurance are finally dealt with, and payments under
the company’s contracts can be settled here, including
payment of death claims, matured endowments, sur-
render values, &c. Policies issued in Australasia are
specially slated on the contract to be subject to the law
of the State of issue. In March, 1904, after seventeen
years of management, Major Rennie retired from the
position of general manager for Australasia, and his son,
Mr. Richard Rennie, was appointed by the company to
the position. Dr. E. Faithful, Messrs. Pigott "and
Stinson, and Mr H. E. Russell, still hold the offices
mentioned above.
Citizens’ Life Assurance Company Limited.
The fertilising influence of life assurance activity
in Australasia is admirably exemplified in the
Citizens’ Life Assurance Company Limited, which
was founded by the late James P. Garvan, its first
managing director, in 1886, primarily for the pur-
pose of popularising life assurance amongst the
masses of the people, but also in the pregnant
belief that once this laudable object was achieved the
machinery would be available whereby other sections
of the community could be easily reached and there-
fore advantageously catered for. Mr. Garvan’s ideal,
which sprang from his profound conviction that the
good effects of a life policy consist more in the fact
of its being taken out than in the amount of it, was
a national life office, and every institution symbolic
of such an idea must seek its suffrages amongst all
grades of society. Stimulated by this inspiring con-
ception, he lavished an overflowing measure of ability,
energy, enthusiasm and forethought on the upbuilding
of the Citizens’, which stands to-day as a perfect


staircase of opportunity for all classes of the Common-
wealth and New Zealand to embrace and enjoy the
benefits of life assurance. Prior to the formation of
the Citizens’, Industrial Assurance had been transacted
on a somewhat restricted scale by the City Mutual
Life Assurance Society, which had been formed by
Mr. Gavran in 1879, but in 1886, if not earlier, he
clearly saw that the time was ripe to push the fortunes
of this branch of assurance business with greater
vigour and increased definiteness of aim, and decided
that the surest, quickest, and most economical way
to accomplish this end was by creating another
organisation with a wider charter and on a capital
basis, which would thereby permit the purchase of the
existing industrial connection of the City Mutual as
a nucleus of operation and allow of the inevitably
expensive work of rapid expansion being amply
guaranteed.
The transfer was effected for the sum of £IO,OOO,
the capital of the new company was fixed at £200,000,
all of which was readily subscribed and £20,000 of it
paid up, the balance forming a first-class reserve
if the exigencies of development had called for it.
An influential board of directors was secured, and
though at the outset of its career the company con-
fined the canvassing sphere to New South Wales and
Queensland, Victoria was soon laid under contribu-
tion, and ere the close of the first quinquennium,
flourishing branches had been established in South
Australia, West Australia and Tasmania. It is
inconceivable that such astonishing expansion would
have followed if the company had been constituted
on any other basis. The Industrial classes of the
Commonwealth would have had to wait a long time
ere their assurance needs were adequately provided
for by an office of the so-called mutual type. The
'co-operative principle which was wisely embedded
in the constitution of the Citizens’ is the true explana-
tion of its progress and success. But the early career
of the company was not all plain sailing. While the
necessity of its mission was patent to the fair-minded
and unprejudiced, the financial press of Australia,
to speak of only one body of criticism, did not extend
to it that greeting and encouragement which it
might have legitimately expected, and it is no flight
of exaggeration to say that the cost of the founda-
tion and educational work was considerably and
therefore quite unnecessarily augmented. But neither
the cold douche of criticism, nor opposition of vary-
ing hues from other quarters, materially retarded the
company’s onward course, though they certainly
entailed a heavier outlay than was contemplated in
the beginning. What a man wills that will he do,
and the leading spirit of the Citizens’ was compact
of dauntless determination. The brief space of five
years’ work told a tale of unique effort and unique
success. The question whether Industrial Assurance
was wanted in Australia was emphatically answered
in the affirmative, as a roll-call of 127,000 policy-
holders indisputably testified.
Policy contracts such as pre-eminently suited the
needs and condition of the workers had been eagerly
applied for, thanks to the indefatigable labours of a
splendid agency force which had been established in
all the important cities and towns of the continent.
Promptitude in the settlement of claims, the payment
of the policy moneys with the irreducible minimum
of formality and at the moment when they are most
likely to do the most good (the aim of the Industrial
contract) has been emblazoned on the company’s
banner as one of its perennial watchwords. More-
over, the fertilising nature of the Industrial base of
operation was significantly adumbrated in the
existence at the close of the period of over 2,000 Ordi-
nary policyholders. And to crown all, the company
triumphantly emerged from a rigorous actuarial test
such as no office of its age had ever experienced
before. Thus it started its second quinquennium
Head Office, Citizens’ Life Assurance Co.
with the hall-mark of popular support and the im-
primatur of actuarial solvency. The flowing tide
was with it ; new Industrial tables were launched,
and were warmly appreciated ; the Industrial stream
widened and deepened ; the possibilities of Ordinary
Assurance amongst the workers and other sections of
the community began to open up and out in a way which
strengthened the hopes of the first quinquennium that
the Citizens’ would eventually be a leading Ordinary
as well as the chief Industrial Office of Australasia.


New Zealand was invested with the magic of the
company’s name and programme in 1893 ; but to the
discerning eye the main achievement of these years
was the consolidation of the agency and superin-
tendency forces. To this really epoch-making event
much of the subsequent success is undoubtedly to be
ascribed, because it more than anything else made
for permanency of business and for character in the
field representatives of the company. While a big
business was certainly Mr. Garvan’s objective—and
one cannot understand the cultivation of the industrial
field in a perfunctory and go-as-you-please fashion —he
never for one moment lost sight of the paramount
duty of making full provision for all the obligations
which the issue of policies imperatively entails. It is
one thing to sound the loud timbrel of canvassing
warfare, it is quite another to be seized of the necessity
for establishing on a scientific basis the fund out of
which the policies must sooner or later be redeemed.
But Mr. Garvan had an uncommon endowment of
the two faculties, and to make assurance double sure
he adopted the excellent plan of an annual actuarial
investigation into the company’s affairs. By this
means he was enabled carefully to watch the growth
of the company’s indebtedness to the public on its
books and at the same time ascertain the profitable-
ness of the various forms of policies with which their
support was being solicited. A reference has already
been made to the co-operative element in the com-
pany’s charter, and a few additional words may be
here inserted.
By the articles of association the expenses of
the Ordinary branch are limited to a maximum of
15 per cent, of the total income (a rate about equal to
the average British and considerably less than the
Australian rate), which is a splendid guarantee that
economy in management will be rigorously insisted
on, and, as a reasonable return for conducting the
business inexpensively, provision is made whereby the
shareholders’ dividends from the Ordinary branch
are limited to 20 per cent. There is thus every
incentive to the management to work the business
in the cheapest manner, consistent with efficiency
and progress, and, concurrently, every encouragement
to the public to patronise an office where large
profit must be inevitably earned as a consequence of
economy.
The bonuses of the company have steadily grown
till they take rank to-day with those of the A.M.P.
Society itself, which has hitherto been the Australian
standard in this highly interesting matter, but this is
somewhat anticipating the course of events.
A survey of the financial world in 1895 —and his
vision extended far beyond Australia —convinced
Mr. Garvan that one of the vital problems confronting
every office in these parts was the rate of interest in
relation to the actuarial measure of their liabilities.
Quick to read the signs of the times, and the portents
of the future for that matter, he saw that the fall in
the rate of interest earned on the funds of the various
companies was no temporary incident, but a permanent
downward tendency, and he therefore decided that his
company, although the youngest, would enjoy the
distinction of being the first in Australasia to reduce
the rate of interest assumed in the valuation test from
4 per cent, to per cent. He was the real pioneer,
therefore, of making security the first consideration in
the conduct of Australian life offices. Thus, there is
every reason to regard 1895 as a far-shining year in
the annals of the Citizens’ and Australasian Insurance
development. But, unhappily, this was Mr. Garvan’s
last great statesmanlike act, since death claimed him
near the close of 1896.
The heavy foundation work of the company,
however, was completed, the stately proportions of
the edifice being reared thereon were discernible, and
the company to-day and for all time is his sufficient
monument.
If his motto had been that of the Emperor
Severus, “ Laboremus,” he has communicated its
spirit to others, and a fitting successor was found in
the person of his eldest son, Mr. J. J. Garvan, the
present managing Director who has worthily carried
on the traditions of his father’s herculean achieve-
ments and policy. At the time of Mr. Garvan’s death
the income of the company had reached £193,586,
while the accumulated funds exceeded £295,000, and
this fine result had been realised in ten years. At
the end of 1905, nine years later, the income was
£454,555, and the funds £1,538,372.. Surely the
Industrial classes of Australia, who want the amount
of assurance they can pay for and the mode of premium
payable conformable to their circumstances in life,
ought to hold in grateful memory one who brought
life assurance to their doors and made it sound and
wholesome and certain in its benefits. Despite the
removal of such a heroic figure, the progress of the
company continued unchecked. The most noticeable
feature of its work in the first half of its third quin-
quennium was the resolve, proclaimed with no uncer-
tain sound, to write in 1898 new assurances totalling
£1,000,000, and though there were many doubting
Thomases in the Australian insurance world as regards
its feasibility, the actual figures were £1,210,000, which
was a revelation of the latent talent of the Industrial
organisation for obtaining Ordinary Assurance. That
it was no mere flash in the pan is amply evidenced by
the fact that for eight successive years the company
has exceeded the million figures. The accomplishment
of such a feat has convinced Australians that the office
with the stoutest lien on the future is the Industrial-
Ordinary type, of which the Citizens’ is the supreme
embodiment.
The next self-imposed task of the Managing
Director was directed to the accumulated funds. In
1900 he made the prediction, which was amply fulfilled,
that these would reach £1,000,000 within twelve
months.
One historic event intervened ere this forecast
was fulfilled. While the company had always been
assisted by sound actuarial advice and knowledge, it
occurred to the Directors that the third quinquennial
valuation might be conducted with great advantage
to the company and its policyholders if an English
actuary of eminence were invited to Australia for the
purpose. Mr. R. P. Hardy, FT.A., F.F.A., of London,
who was in no way interested in the company, either
as policyholder or shareholder, and who had been, at


different times, consulted by the A.M.P. Society and
the Governments of New Zealand and Canada, in re-
gard to important financial matters, was requested
to conduct a personal investigation. This gentleman
spent six months over this onerous work, and at its
close furnished the Directors with a certificate of
solvency, which is certainly the finest testimonial any
Australian company has ever received. One of Mr.
Hardy’s recommendations, which was the fitting
pendant to the late Mr. Garvan’s decision in 1895.
resulted in the reduction of the assumed rate of
interest in the valuation test of the Ordinary Branch
liabilities from 3J per cent, to 3 per cent., which is
the most stringent basis of valuation adopted by any
Australian office. The engagement of Mr. Hardy
was a master stroke. His reports removed the last
regard to the present and the future ; and, on the other
hand, it was patent that the business of the Industrial
Branch had long since passed out of the experimental
stage. The solution of the arrears problem, the ever-
growing average duration of the policies, and the
rapidly decreasing lapse rate demonstrated a solidity
and stability which had been thought impossible of
attainment in Industrial Assurance. Ihe alleged
fluidity of Industrial Assurance in Australasia and
elsewhere had been arrested by the company, and
it was convincingly proved that by wise methods
of control and by inherently sound policy con-
tracts Industrial Assurance could be made to exhibit
the same permanency and adhesiveness as Ordinary
Assurance. The business that stays is the business
that pays ; the corollary of canvassing is retention,
Office of Citizens’ Life, 1886.
lingering doubts of those who were honest in their
criticism, and at the same time they made many
influential friends for the company.
It was now beyond question that the company
was in an exceptionally strong position. The adoption
of a 3 per cent, valuation test in the Ordinary Branch,
coupled with the character of the assets, as revealed
by the absence of overdue interest on loans on mort-
gage, the conspicuous absence of foreclosed properties
and mortgages in possession from the balance-sheet,
and the high percentage of the accumulated funds
invested in Government and Municipal Debentures, was
irrefutable evidence that security was no mere idol of
the market-place, whose mouthing made for actuality
with the management, but a living and potential fact,
imperative and ever assertive of its claims, both in
and the Citizens’ has sedulously devoted its best
energies to the realisation of this fine ideal. But the
company has never been content to rest satisfied on
its oars. As soon as one task is accomplished another
is entered upon, and so the company is for ever ‘ ‘ spin-
ning down the ringing grooves of change.” In keeping
with this progressive spirit, a new era of economy
was recently entered on, and bids fair to establish a
sensational record in Australia and even beyond. A
carefully thought-out policy of concentration aiming
at uniformity of practice, closeness of control, and the
avoidance of all duplication of the same order of work,
was launched, and already the outlines of success and
fulfilment are discernible. The total amount of ex-
pense was £16,281 less in 1904 than in 1902, while the
revenue was £50,213 greater, and the experience of


1 9°5 shows that the reduction had increased to
£20,948, while the gross income was £68,443 greater.
Ihe aim of the management is to conduct the Indus-
trial Branch in 1906 at a cost not exceeding 38 percent.,
which will establish a world’s record, and when this
is done it is intended within two years to carry on the
business of the Ordinary Branch at an expense rate
oi 10 per cent, of the premium income, which will be
considerably lower than any Australian office has yet
achieved. I hese are the words of the nineteenth
annual report, and they may be taken as a definite
pledge that the management will do its utmost to
reach the goal therein indicated.
an increase for the year, and for the fifth year in suc-
cession not a penny of interest was overdue, and the
fine total of more than £1,000,000 of new assur-
ances was recorded. Further, the actual profit for
the year permitted the allotment of increased bonuses
to participating policyholders, additions to the sum
assured ranging from £3 to £1 ss. per centum being
declared.
The raison d’Hre of the Citizens’ is its capacity to
make life assurance accessible and attractive to the
people, but more particularly co the working classes,
and as a concomitant, the positive and immediate
benefit it confers on the Industrial bodv of the State.
The late James P. Garvan.
The company has definitely entered the lists of
active competition for the cream of Ordinary Assur-
ance, and is certainly justified in seeking it in virtue
of the unequalled valuation basis and the splendid
bonuses accruing therefrom.
The total funds at 31st December, 1905, exceeded
£1,538,000, despite the fact that the assets had
been heavily written down as one step towards the
eventual disappearance from the balance-sheet of
freehold property ; the average rate of interest earned
by the invested funds was £4 9s. 3d. per cent., showing
That it has justified itself in the light of the first of
these conditions is evident from the strength of its
industrial connection (over 200.000 policyholders),
that it has proved, and is proving, itself a “ friend ot
the otherwise unfriended poor ’’ is shown by the
amount, nearly £lOO,OOO, it is annually paying in small
sums to individuals of that class. While the company
has become a great Ordinary Office as well, and is
destined to eclipse all that it has hitherto done in this
direction, let it ever be mindful of the spirit of that
famous saying, “ I am the procurator of the poor,”


An abortive attempt was made in 1887 to get the
Australian Mutual Prudential and Medical Assurance
Society on its feel, but it lacked legs. This company
started without capital, and after a troublesome career
of six months closed in a Avorse condition of neediness.
At the outset the directors, including Sir Henry Parkes,
permitted the managing director to defray the initial
expenses himself; at the finish the board, to save its
face, had to provdde the company with decent inter-
ment. Affording premierial patronage to plundering
parties evidently conduced to promoting business, as
another frail floAver crying for much financial forcing was
placed on the market in March, 1867. This Avas the
Australasian Assurance and Accident Co. With that
modesty which garbs true merit, all information leading
to identification of the promoters was prudently with-
held from the inquiring mind of a dubious public. “Be
Avise in time, ’tis folly to delay,” cried out an unknown
voice in the neAvspapers of the day. But “ wisdom is
justified of her children,” and a delay in realising this
led to that shortness of cash which not infrequently
terminates existence. A third offspring of similar port-
manteau proclivities was exemplified in the Fire and
Marine and Accident Indemnity Insurance Co , registered
in Melbourne to take over the business of the Accident
Indemnity Co. No time was lost in getting to work
here. In April, 1899, a balance Avas published, showing
the assets to be Bs. cash in hand, and a deficiency on
the year’s operations of When the concern
Avas ordered to be wound up the assets represented nil
and the debts stood at ,£"19,744. The British and
Colonial Proprietary Finance Insurance Co., of Mel-
bourne, established a local agency during the twelve
months; also the Mutual Union and the Trans-Pacific
—both fire companies. The first-named Avas in liquida-
tion at the end of 1889. The Mutual Fire and Marine
Insurance Co. of Australasia, floated in Sydney early in
the year, was the first link in a chain of colonial “wild
cats,” evolved from the notorious Anglo-American when
that fraud had been worked out. The subscribed
capital was someAvhat startling. The total amount Avas
fixed at divided into 5,000 cash shares £1
each, and 4,750 guarantee shares £2O each. Upon the
last only is. per share had to be paid up, £ig 19s. being
a reserve Avhich could not be touched “except in the
event of the funds of the company not being sufficient
to meet demands upon it.” But, according to the
prospectus, “the guarantee shares are in no case to be
called up faster than is. per month. So that the
guarantee could only be recovered in the course of
thirty-three years. The directors Avere Messrs. Chas.
Worth, J. R. Watts, F. A. Smith, and J. A. Hough, and
the manager, Mr. Frank Churton. On issuing the first
report it Avas seen that the net paid-up capital only
amounted to £463 13s. and that the underwriting had
resulted in a net loss of £26 ys. yd. Nevertheless the
shareholders were congratulated on the result, and this
was all they got by Avay of a return for their money.
The Australian Traders’ Mutual Insurance Co.
was floated in Sydney in January, 1888, with a capital
of ,£"250,000, and started business in the fire depart-
ment, under Mr. L. H. Macdonald, at once. The
directors were : Messrs. S. Beveridge, D. G. Peile,
Alf. Shaw, G. Spears and H. G. Wood; and the
managing agents, Messrs. Peile, Borradaile & Co. A
good deal of support was accorded this new venture, but
the war of rates in the end proved fatal to its existence.
After two or three previous attempts, which failed
through want of cohesion, the hire Underwriteis Asso
ciation of New South Wales was successfully formed
at the beginning of 1888, Mr. J. St. Vincent Welch
being elected chairman of the committee 1 he othei
members were : Messrs. W. Gordon Dixon, W. A. Gibb,
E. L. Montefiore, W. H. Rowsell, H. Lomas Smith,
R. B. Tracey and T. M. Tinley, with Mr. A. T. Wilshire
as secretary. At the commencement there were twenty-
seven companies represented. Mr. Wilshire resigned
the secretaryship in 1890, when the office was joined
with that of the Marine Underwriters’ Association, and
Mr. J. Anderson was appointed. The latter resigned
during the same year to take up the managership of
the Australian General, and Mr. J. E. W oodthorpe
succeeded him.
Messrs Geo. King & Co opened an agency for the
Hongkong Fire Insurance Co. in 1889, and had the
conducting of it until 1893, when the company retired
from business. The second link now appeared in the
Anglo-American chain. This was the Trans-Pacific
General Assurance Co. Ltd., which opened offices in
George Street, not wanting in brass-plate accessories,
and issued a prospectus, which, after inviting the public
to become shareholders, beautifully added “It is not
anticipated ever a call will be required. ’ The capital
was the customary million sterling, and the amount
subscribed but the paid-up capital was not
mentioned. The directors were : Dr. E. S. Piercy,
M.D., Dr. S. A. Dowe, M.D., W. S. Lloyd, J. Bealby
Smith and Wm. Duvier, also general manager. After
a short existence during which no accounts were ac-
cessible. though considerable business was done, the
shareholders, in February, 1891, decided to liquidate.
Then there were no assets. The Provident and In-
dustrial Insurance Co. of New Zealand and the
Palatine Insurance Co. established themselves in the
colony during 1889, and both are still in evidence, the
former having become the Provident Life Assurance Co.
Provident Life Assurance Company.
This Dunedin company was floated in December, 1903,
with a nominal capital of £ IOO,OOO, subscribed to
to take over a kindred institution of much
older age. The latter, the Provident and Industrial
Insurance Co. of New Zealand, was floated in 1889 with
a shareholders' capital of ,£"19,000, paid up to
and in turn had acquired, during its career, the Equit-
able Life Insurance Co. of New Zealand. The old
company entered the New South Wales field in 1897,
being represented by Mr. Thos. V\ alters.
Twelve institutions embarked in colonial business
in 1890, the principal one of these being the sturdy old
Atlas of the days of George III.; and the Royal Ex-
change Assurance Corporation, the latter an institution
grey in age before the Atlas had come into existence.
The Atlas Assurance Company.
At the time when Napoleon was collecting his flotilla
of barges at Boulogne to row across the Channel and
capture his “ nation of shopkeepers,” occasioning
thereby a scare fever throughout England which for
many months stood at a temperature of about no de-
grees; when Scotland was still sighing for “Bonnie
Prince Charlie,” long since dead; and Ireland was


literally on her knees beseeching the “ Frinch,” to
relieve her from the yoke of the Sassenach; certain
shrewd gentlemen were seized with the idea that there
was an opening for a new and progressive life company.
Ihe Allas Assurance Co. Ltd. was accordingly pro-
jected (1808) and chartered to transact fire as well as
life. Evidently good business was done, as at the
accession of King George IV., twelve years afterwards,
the company’s income was £"77,413, and the funds were
£"160,121. not a bad record for those prosaic days.
When W illiam IV. mounted the throne the financial
position of the Atlas was—income £"131,423, total funds
£"607,676; when Queen Victoria succeeded, the figures
were £"157,973, an d total funds £"915,082. The Atlas
evinced no hurry to come to Australia, but when its
Australian office was opened in Sydney in 1890 Mr.
Jas. M. Macadam, of the Australian Mutual Fire
Insurance Society, was selected to look after the com-
pany’s interests.
Royal Exchange Assurance Co. of London.
\\ hen the Royal Exchange Assurance Co. of London
opened its Sydney agency in 1890 the accumulated
funds were £4,000,000, built up during the very long
period of 170 years. Under Mr. W. A. Walton as
manager a branch was formed in 1901. His prede-
cessor was Air. Fred. H. Burbury, the deputy of the
Orient Steam Navigation Co. Alarine risks are also
accepted by this office.
A further link in the Anglo-American chain was
forged when the British, Australian and New Zealand
hire, Alarine and Accident Insurance Co. became estab-
lished at the beginning of the year. According to the
prospectus issued the previous November, the nominal
capital was £1,000,000, in 200,000 shares of £5. Of
these, 175,000 were reserved for the London market
and 25,000 for the colonial, 10,000 of which had been
allotted. Of the remainder applicants for ten shares
were to receive one fully paid-up share in addition. The
directors were : Alessrs. J. P. Howe, ALP., G. J.
Finlayson (also on the directorate of the notorious
Australian Alercantile Loan and Guarantee Co.), E. H.
Buchanan, T. D. Jones, J. Butterfield and W. S.
Dowell, the secretary being Air. W. J. Smith. Air.
Finlayson, who was the prime mover in this matter,
was to receive £5,000 in cash and 25,000 free shares, the
seven directors receiving 3,500 free shares; and accord-
ing to a return made by the company at the end of the
year its total paid-up capital was £30,800, of which
£28,500 represented the free shares issued to the pro-
moters. No balance-sheet could be obtained, notwith-
standing the fact that there had been no lack of
business, and the Court made an order for compulsory
liquidation in October, 1891. The Australian and
Caledonian Fire and Alarine Insurance Co., the Queens-
land General Assurance Co., the Guardian Accident
Guarantee Insurance Co. of Australasia, liquidated in
1896, the Industrial Life Assurance Society, the Indian
Imperial Insurance Co. and the Mutual Union
Insurance Co. of Hobart make up the remainder of the
companies which endeavoured to colonise in 1890.
Between 1890-4 (inclusive) thirteen companies
commenced business, the survivors being :
Caledonian Insurance Company.
The Caledonian Insurance Co., which transacts fire
and life in Scotland lays claim to being the oldest
Scotch company in existence, and with some reason too.
It has now become a centenarian, having been founded
in Edinburgh in 1805. The capital of the company
nominally is £T,000,000. It has been subscribed to
£"537,5°° ’ n £ 2 5 shares paid up to £s, these bonds
being listed at a market value of £"25 5s The local
branch was opened in 1891, by Mr W. S, Forbes. The
Caledonian, in the life branch, was the first to grant
policies without medical examination; a system con-
demned by many of the old school but which long ex-
perience has proved to be perfectly safe. The innovation
of course does not benefit Australia.
Indemnity Mutual Marine Insurance Company Ltd.
The Indemnity Mutual Marine Insurance Co. Ltd. is
an old office of Threadneedle Street, dating back to 1824,
with a called-up capital of £"201,000 and a subscribed
capital of £"1,005,000. New South Wales matters are
managed from here under a board of directors consisting
of Senator J. T. Walker (chairman), Hon R. J. Black,
M.L.C., and Mr. Ed. Rich. The local office was
opened as a branch by Mr. J. D. Macpherson, at 6
Spring Street, in 1891. At his death Mr. M. Montgomery
succeeded and was followed in the managership, in 1898,
by Mr. Walter E. Gates.
Thames and Mersey Marine Insurance Company Ltd,
The Sydney agency of the Thames and Mersey Marine
Insurance Co. Ltd. was opened by Messrs. T. & W.
Willis & Co., in 1892. From that firm it passed to
Messrs. Winchcombe & Co., who held it for some con-
siderable time, and then was transferred to the present
agents, Messrs. Arthur Muston & Son, 17 Bridge
Street. The company is comparatively modern, although
forty-five years old. It is paid up— £7. per share —to
£"200,000 and has a subscribed capital of £"2,000,000.
The Queensland. Mutual Insurance Co. was ab-
sorbed by the Manchester in 1898; the Union Fire of
London, the Singapore Insurance Co., the Esperance
Insurance Co. of Belgium, and. the Indemnity Fire
and Marine Insurance Co. of Australasia all retired
from the field. Two of them had to depart without
any option, only to their own sorrow' —the Federal
Fire and Marine Insurance Co. (Wellington, N.Z., and
Sydney), and the last of the Anglo-American batch,
the Mercantile Mutual Fire and Marine Insurance Co.
of Queensland, Both gloried in the usual paper capital of
a million sterling which in the Mercantile’s case w r as
fined down to a cash capital of £l2l 3s. 6d. Neither
displayed an anxiety to have their accounts criticised.
There were no assets.
Since 1895 to now the other companies, resembling
the Spanish fleet of Elizabethan times which the merry
old skipper “could not see, because it’s not insight,”
are the Queensland Mutual Fire, Marine and Plate-
glass Insurance Co., the Royal Exchange Insurance Co.
of Liverpool, the Australasian Fire Insurance Associ-
ation, the Continental Marine Insurance Co. of Mann-
heim, the Eastern Counties Fire Insurance Co. and the
Federal Mutual Live Stock Association. The last,
though not lost to memory dear, is not where its name


plate indicates it should be, and this is as much as can
be said concerning it.
Those who have outlived early struggles and settled
down to good work are the following: —
London Assurance Corporation.
The London Assurance Corporation for fire, life
and marine has not long to wait ere it will have an
existence of two hundred years. It has been circulating
its policies in all parts of the world since 1720. An
agency was established in Sydney under Messrs.
McArthur & Co. in 1894. On their resigning in 1902
an Australian branch was promoted at 20 Bridge Street,
under the management of Mr. H. V. Bath, who controls
the fire business at the present time. Messrs. Peile,
Borradaile & Co. are the society’s representatives in
the marine department.
Ocean Accident and Guarantee Corporation Ltd.
The Ocean Accident and Guarantee Corporation Ltd.
was incorporated in London in 1871, a year noted for
its great financial and commercial progress. Originally
the authorised capital was £400,000 in 80,000 shares of
£5. Of these 52,744 were issued, on which £lOO,OOO
was paid up ; there were in addition 11,814 shares of
£5 each fully paid up and 21,903 on which only £1 was
paid up. In 1889 there was a fusion with the Ocean
Railway and General Accident Company, when the
authorised capital of the combined companies was
increased to 200,000 shares of £5 ; the subscribed capital
to £621,540, and the paid-up capital represented
£172,308. The primary objects of the Ocean were
insurance against general accident, employers’ liability,
and burglar}", together with the issue of fidelity guaran-
tee policies. But all classes of accident and disease
insurance are transacted, amongst which are some very
original provisions, such as loss of sight by ordinary
causes as well as by accident, and compensation in the
event of permanent general paralysis. The Scottish
Metropolitan Accident business, the Sydney Merchants’
Plate-glass Insurance Company the guarantee depart-
ment of the National Insurance Company of Australia,
the Security Company, the Imperial Union Accident In-
surance Company, the Lancashire’s accident business,
the Lion Life accident business, the Employers’ Indem-
nity have each in turn been absorbed. Business in
Sydney was started in Pitt Street in May, 1885, but
it was not till the following year that the office was
removed to those larger and more central premises at
131 Pitt vStreet. Blanches later on were opened in
the metropolitan cities of all the other colonies. Sir
William McMillan and the Hon. A. W. Meeks repre-
sented the original directorate, and upon the former
resigning Sir John See and Colonel James Burns
joined the board. Mr. J. J. Allen was appointed
general manager for Australasia, and was in turn
followed by Mr. John Goodwyn, who was appointed in
January, 1906; the Sydney manager being Mr. E. N.
Parker. The present directors are the Hon. A. W.
Meeks, Sir John See, Messrs. J. Campbell Wood
and J. J. Allen
Yangtsze Insurance Company of Shanghai.
The Yangtsze Insurance Company of .Shanghai
established relations with Sydney through the China
Traders’ Insurance Company in March, 1888, and has
been doing business in this city since that time. 1 he
agency is now in the hands of Messrs. Barre Johnston
and Co.
People’s Prudential Assurance Company.
The People’s Prudential Assurance Company is a
proprietary concern, with a nominal capital of £IO,OOO.
paid up to £4,694. It conducts ordinary and industrial
life assurance. Profits are shared after one year in the
ordinary branch and fifteen years in the industrial branch.
The Prudential is a Sydney institution which purchased
the business known as the People’s Mutual Medical
Society for £3,500. The company transacts medical,
industrial and accidental business, and is now in receipt
of a considerable premium income. At the first quin-
quennium investigation by Mr. E. M. Moore, M.A.,
F.1.A., he found on a 3I per cent, basis there was a
surplus of £2,065 —a result which must be considered
highly satisfactory when the youth of the Prudential is
taken into consideration. The report showed that the
disbursements made by the company, in discharge of
obligations to members and policyholders during the
first six years of its career, amounted to £3 I -774- Since
then the payments up to 31st August, 1904, when the
Prudential completed the eighth year of its existence,
have increased to £41,532. The company at its inception
was located in Pitt Street, with Mr. T. S. Mulligan
managing. He was succeeded in 1897 by Mr. F.
Sparrow, F.S.S., who, in conjunction with F)r. Otto
Bohrsmann, form the board of directors.
Aachen and Munich Fire Insurance Company.
The Aachen and Munich Fire Insurance Company has
only been writing risks through its agents, Messrs. E.
Chapman & Co., Bond Street, for a comparatively shoit
space of time, having first initialed relations with this
colony in 1897.
World Marine Insurance Company of London.
The World Marine Insurance Company of London is
an infant compared to the majority of kindred associ-
ations in the United Kingdom. It was established in
1894 with a nominal capital of £"250,000, subscribed to
£"150,130 and called up to £"60,120. Messrs. E. Chap-
man & Co. have held the agency of this office since it
came to this colony.
Standard Life Association Ltd.
At the close of 1898 Mr. W. N. Dewar, who had
severed his connection with the Citizens’ Life Assur-
ance Company Limited some time previously, com-
pleted arrangements for launching the Standard Life
Association Limited, and competing in the industrial
field, taking up a class of business hitherto only at-
tempted by one or two offices then in existence. The
constitution of the Standard is a mixed one. In th°
Industrial department it is a proprietary company,
working upon a capital of £250,000, paid up to £12,500,


In the Ordinary department it is mutual. The direc-
tors are Hon. A. Kethel, M.L.C. (chairman),
Ihomas S. Kirkland, M.I). (deputy chairman),
J. H. McPhillamy, John Macpherson, Esq-, ] P.,
John Stewart, F.S.A.A. The chief melical officer is
Dr. George Armstrong ; general manager, W. N.
Dewar, F.S.S. ; actuary and secretary, W. R. Day,
FT.A.
The State Fire Insurance Company Ltd. of Liverpool.
The State Fire Insurance Company of Liverpool
was floated in 1891 with a nominal capital of £1,100,000
and a paid-up capital of £50,000. Messrs. Gibbs,
Bright & Co. were appointed agents in 1899.
Australasian Mutual Live Stock Company.
The Australasian Mutual Live Stock Company is an
old face with a new mask, having taken over tire busi-
ness of a company with the same name which went into
liquidation in 1901. The agency here is conducted by
Mr. J. Mackenzie, 121 Pitt Street.
Australian Metropolitan Life Assurance Co. Ltd.
The Australian Metropolitan Life Assurance Com-
pany Ltd. was founded in Brisbane in 1895, and incor-
porated under the Queensland Companies Act. The
head office was transferred to George Street, Sydney,
in November, igoi, and in September, 1904, the com-
pany took possession of its new offices at 30 Castlereagh
Street, opposite Moore Street. The subscribed capital
of this proprietary institution amounts to £"12,000, of
which £"9,222 has been called up. Ordinary assurance
and industrial business are transacted, the essential of
profit-sharing being that policies must have a cunency
of two years before the holders are entitled to a partici-
pation. Mr. W. A. Smith, the general manager, re-
signed in May, 1904, and his place was filled by
Mr. John A. Henderson, previously the company’s
secretary in Queensland. Mr. R. M. Phillips, J P., is
chairman of the board of directors, his colleagues being
Messrs. J. FT Ure (vice-chairman), V. E. Ludlow,
C. Manning and R. Watkins.
Bombay Fire and Marine Insurance Company Ltd.
The Bombay Fire and Marine Insurance Company
Ltd. is a new form of the Bombay Insurance Company,
a memory of the good old days. It was wound up in
1893, after twenty-one years’ existence of handsome
dividend-paying, its final act of beneficence being to
return the bondholders £ 1,228 for evety £"500 paid.
The capital of the reconstructed institution is 25 lacs of
rupees, divided into shares of Rs. 1,000 paid up to
Rs. 200. The marine business was closed in June,
1904. Monsoonal troubles evidently have borne with
some weight on the Parsee board of directors, for this
institution is “racy of the soil.” The fire branch of
the business subsequently merged into that of the
General Accident Corporation—the name being changed
to the General Accident, Fire and Life Assurance
Corporation Ltd. —T. & W. Willis still acting as
agents for the Bombay Fire and Marine Insurance
Company Ltd.
National Union Society Ltd. of Bedford.
The National Union Society Ltd. of Bedford, Eng-
land, is a provincial joint stock company, working now
on the so-called mutual principle of letting its customers
pluck a sleeve off the chesterfield of profit. Of the
£200,000 of subscribed capital £81,199 has been called up.
Business is multiform in its scope, extending from fire,
through the every-day paths of accidental insurance,
down to the loss of profits —a line which ought to have
a big future before it in Australia. The National has
been a presence in Sydney since 1901, the agents being
Messrs. A. Muston and Son.
Yorkshire Fire and Life Insurance Company.
The company that can digest a tough old Uion with
an auriferous lining as enduring as its own must be
pretty strong. This feat the Yorkshire Fire and Fife
Insurance Company performed about five years ago,
demonstrating thereby that, as its capability is equal
to its stability, its longevity must be greater than either
—a “ chance’ ’ problem under the Q.E.F. table which will
take some Euclid to wrestle with. The Lion had been
in existence since 1879, but the hardy Yorkshire was
formed in 1824. Mr. W. H. Rowsell held the Sydney
agency, established in 1901, until April, 1904, when
Air. M. T. vSadler succeeded him in controlling the
fire business the Yorkshire transacts in this colony.
Norwich and London Accident Insurance Association.
The Norwich and London Accident Insurance As-
sociation was established in 1856 and has attained a
greater age than any other kindred institution sharing
the spoil in Australia. Messrs. Royle & Co. represent
the Norwich and London Accident Insurance Asso-
ciation locally-
Palatine Insurance Company Ltd.
Ix 1890 the Palatine Insurance Company Ltd. which
derives its name from the County Palatine of Lancaster
having absorbed the business of the Mutual Fire In-
surance Corporation, of Manchester, extended its world-
wide operations to Australia, by the opening of an office
in Bond Street, Sydney, under the control of Mr. J D.
Wormald, who continues to direct the operations of the
Company in New South Wales, and is also controlling
officer for the Commonwealth. By the pm chase of the
“ City of London,” established in Sydney in 1883, a con '
siderable influx of business was secured. The head
offices of the company have been located at 24, 25, 26
Cornhill, London, since 1900, and branch offices have
been established in all the important Australian cities.
Phoenix Mutual Provident Society Ltd.
The Phoenix Mutual Provident Society Ltd. is a
relic, and a very old one too, of the early days of the
history of this colony. O the 4th December, 1846. a
meeting of members of the Wesleyan connection in
Sydney, with the Rev. S. Wilkinson in the chair, decided
to form the Wesleyan Mutual Benefit Society", an or-
ganisation on the mutual principle, aiming to provide
relief in cases of sickness or death. Included amongst
the founders, some of whom are still living, were Messrs
Burnett, Carruthers, A. Dean. S. Callaghan, S. Smedley,
P. Jesson, Albert Phillips, Blanchard, Currie McPhail,


Caldwell and McCutcheon. In 1888 the society was
reorganised, in order to broaden its basis, and the name
changed to the Protestant United Benefit Society. It
remained as such until 1902, when again the constitution
was changed by the removal of all sect and sex restric-
tions and the widening of its operative element so as to
permit of industrial insurance coming within its scope.
At the same time the present name was adopted. The
society is conducted entirely on democratic principles,
the members meeting annually to elect all the officials,
from the board of management to the messenger.
The directors are Messrs. P. McEwing (chairman), R.
D. Sippe (vice-chairman), W. C. Coleman, James
Pring, Leonard King, Joseph Jones, J. A. Kean, W.
H. Rafton, T. E. Geddes and John Jesson. The
general secretary is Mr. Henry Rafton.
The Union Fire Assurance Society, though a some-
what late arrival in Australia, is an old and firmly-estab-
lished concern, its birth dating back to a d. 1714- Since
that time it has proved itself a great traveller, agents
recommending the advantages of the Union, being
found in every part of the civilised world where business
is to be obtained, for, though known as one of the oldest
companies in existence, it is one of the most modern
in its methods of securing customers. Like many
other good offices, the Union felt the effects of the
disaster at San Francisco, and it speaks volumes for
the stability of the company that it was among the
first to pay up in full its share of the losses, being esti-
mated at somewhere about £BOO,OOO gross. This
prompt action met with the appreciation it merited,
and the company has been placed on the American
“ roll of honour.” In 1907 efforts were made which
resulted in an amalgamation being effected with the
Commercial Union, but so far as Australia is concerned
the Union Fire Assurance Society maintains a separate
existence- The general manager of the company is
Mr. Joseph Powell, whose name is well known in Lon-
don, where the head office is located. In Australia
Mr. Alan H- Russell is general manager, with his head-
quarters in Melbourne ; while in Sydney Messrs.
W- & A- McArthur Ltd. are the controlling agents for
New South Wales, the insurance manager being Mr.
A- W. H- Padfield, and there are branch offices or
agencies in all the other States- The Union has only
been represented in Australia lor four or five years,
but has alreadv secured a good footing throughout the
Commonwealth
Union Assurance Society of London.
The Union Assurance Society of London is one of
the fine old companies founded in the days of Queen
Anne, and for many years was conducted on rigid con-
servative lines, which have had to unbend to the move-
ments of modern times. In the first century of the
company’s existence its determination to follow a
stay-at-home policy was strictly adhered to. The
date of its entry into the Australian field may be
put down as 1902. although there had teen settling
agents at intervals before then In that year Messrs.
W. & A. McArthur Limited were appointed general
agents for New South Wales.
The Accident Underwriters’ Association of
New South Wales.
This association, which comprises all the leading acci-
dent insurance companies transacting business in the
State of New South Wales, was formed in February,
1902 ; the objects of the association being to promote,
by the adoption of agreements and otherwise, the main-
tenance of uniform and sound practices in accident
underwriting and friendly co-operation in all matters of
interest to those engaged in the business, having due
regard to the undesirableness of frequent alterations ;
also to watch all projected legislation in any way bear-
ing on the interests of accident insurance companies,
and to secure, as far as practicable, that the principles
in such projected legislation shall be fair and equitable
to the public and the companies. The companies who
are members of the association and their chief repre-
sentatives for this State are as follows ; Colonial Mutual
Fire Insurance Co. Ltd., S. Hague Smith, secretary ;
Commercial Union Assurance Co. Ltd., J.St. Vincent
Welch, resident manager and underwriter ; Employers’
Liability Assurance Corporation Ltd., E. Chapman and
Co. general agents; National Union Society Ltd., A.
Muston & Son, agents; New Zealand Accident In-
surance Co., A. E. D’Arcy, manager; Norwich and
London Accident Insurance Association, Royle & Co.,
general agents ; Ocean Accident and Guarantee Cor-
poration Ltd., A. J. Goodwyn, general manager for
Australia. Mr. E. Shirley Chapman, of the Employers'
Liability Assurance Corporation Ltd., is the present
chairman, and Mr. A. E. D’Arcy, of the New Zealand
Accident Insurance Co., is the vice-chairman of the
association. Mr. A. H. H. Aldworth, who has had
several years’ secretarial experience with a similar
institution in Sydney, is the secretary of the associ-
ation, be having held that position since its formation.
The offices of the association are at 1079 York Street,
Sydney.
Switzerland General Insurance Company Limited.
The Switzerland General Insurance Company is an
institution of modern proclivities. The agency was
opened in June, 1903, by Mr. S. C. Sadler, of 81 Pitt
Street.
General Accident, Fire & Life Assurance Corporation Ltd.
The General Accident, Fire and Life Assurance
Corporation Ltd. occupies a position in that depart-
ment of the insurance field dealing with casualties-
In 1904 it look over the business of the Magdeburg
Fire Insurance Company, discovering amongst that
old friend’s business sufficient inducements to follow
the Magdeburg’s example and make its policies appre-
ciated in Australia. Mr. Harington Cowpcr is the local
agent, Mr. Otto Bauer being a local director.
Australian Life Association Ltd.
The Australian Life Association Ltd. was incor-
porated on the 27th October, 1904, with a nominal
capital of £60,000, for carrying on ordinary and indus-
trial life assurance. At the outset it amalgamated the
business of the Australian Mutual Life and Co-operative
Benefit Society Ltd., an institution which had been in
existence fir some time- It was absorbed by the
Phoenix Mutual Provident Society in 1906-


Central Insurance Company Ltd.
Ihe Central Insurance Company Ltd., of London and
Birmingham, opened business in Sydney in December,
1904, Messrs. Barre Johnston & Co. being appointed
agents. A branch office was opened in 1906, under the
Central Insurance Company Ltd.
management of Mr. L. R. Mitchell. Originally this
company was the Birmingham Mutual, and thirty-seven
years ago it was reconstructed with a capital of
£”i,500,000, subscribed to £”800,000 and paid up to
£”87,065, under its existing name. Recently the purchase
was effected of the British Dominion Insurance Com-
pany, London.
Federal Marine Insurance Ltd.
The Federal Marine Insurance Company Ltd., of
Zurich, opened business relations with this in
1904 through the medium of Messrs. M. Rutty & Co.,
58 Margaret Place.
Hamburg Marine Insurance Company.
Another company to open an agency in Sydney at
the end of 1904 was the Hamburg Marine Insurance
Company, of Hamburg, Messrs. Rabone, F'eez & Co.
writing policies on its account. The Hamburg’s capital
is £1,000,000 and the assets approximate £200,000.
Messrs. Hogg, Robinson & Co.
Though at present accepting no risks mention must
be made of Messrs. Hogg, Robinson & Co., a firm iden-
tified with insurance agency business. They now
devote their attention solely to the settlement of claims,
representing amongst others in this connection the follow-
ing important associations and companies : —Lloyds,
Liverpool Underwriters’ Association, Austrian Lloyds,
Maritime Insurance Company (Liverpool), Sea Insurance
Company, Empress Marine, General Insurance Company
(Trieste), States Insurance Company (Genoa), Russian
Insurance Company, General Insurance Company
(Helvetia), the Polar Insurance Company of Bilboa,
and the Prudentia of Vienna.
Regarding assurance matters generally, no crying
evil exists to-day ; excepting, perhaps, the want of a
comprehensive Federal Act, providing uniform legisla-
tion throughout Australia. Tariff troubles, like the
poor, are always in evidence, and so they will be until
human nature, as constituted to-day, becomes changed.
Lack of space precludes further comment. Much has
had to be omitted and many matters curtailed.
Mr. RICHARD TEECE, F LA.,
F.F.A., F.S.S., General Manager
and Actuary of the Australian
Mutual Provident Society, was
horn on the 29th April, 1817, at
Pahia, in that picturesque and other-
wise delightful part of the North
Island of New Zealand, known
as the Bay of Islands, whence the
settlement of that then wild but
ever-charming country spread. The
general manager and actuary of
the Australian Mutual Provident
Society spent the first seven years
of his life where but a short
time before the tribal fights of
the ancient Maori had given
place to an organised attack
on the white population. Hone
Heke, the leader of the rebels, and
Tamtae Wake Nene, who proved so
noble a friend and ally to the white
population, were, with scores of
lesser leaders, well known to Mr.
Teece’s parents, who were among
the very early settlers- The settle-
ment of New Zealand was at that
time far from promising, and Mr.
Teece the elder determined to try
the parent colony. To those who
know New Zealand to-day it seems
strange that less than half a century
ago a tanner and leather factor
should find no suitable field for his
operations. Yet so it was, and our
subject’s father settled in Goulburn,
NSW., where he established exten-
sive factories. Educated at the
Goulburn Grammar School and the
University of Sydney, Mr. Teece, in
%/%/%/ ' 7
July, 1866, left the University to
enter the actuarial department of
the A M.P., then in charge of Mr.
H. S- Hawkins, M A , who prior to
accepting the actuarial chair was
mathematical master at King’s
School, Parramatta, and headmas-
ter of Goulburn Grammar School.
At the age of five-and-twenty years
Mr. Teece was appointed chief clerk
MR. R. TEECE.


of the head office, a position which
he filled with conspicuous ability for
a period of fifteen years, when his
services were rewarded by promo-
tion to the position of secretary.
Four years later, in succession to
Mr. M. A. Black, Mr. Teece was
appointed to the exalted position
of general manager and actuary.
This was in 1890- During the
twelve years that he has been the
official head of this great and pro-
gressive society Mr. Teece has won
for himsell high honours both at
home and abroad. He has intro-
duced attractive tables to meet all
the requirements of the public ; has
changed the basis of valuation from
4 to 3| per cent., has constantly
visited all the branches, and has
throughout exercised a close per-
sonal inspection of all matters con-
nected with the conduct of his
society. A fellow of the Institute
of Actuaries, of the Faculty of
Actuaries, and of the Statistical
Society, and member of the Actu-
arial Society of America, Mr. Teece’s
contributions to actuarial literature
have been received in complimen-
tary terms m both Europe and
America. He is a vice-president of
the International Congress of Ac-
luaries, has been three times pre-
sident of the Insurance Institute of
New South Wales, is a past-presi-
dent of the Actuarial Society of
t/
New South Wales, is a fellow and
a member of the Senate of the
Sydney University ; and in Masonry
occupies the proud position of Past
Deputy Grand Master-
Mr ROBERT BOTHWELL
CAMERON, the Secretary of the
Australian Mutual Provident So-
ciety, was born in Belfast, Ireland,
on the 19th of March, 1848- A son
of Mr. John Oameron, a mercantile
man of Belfast, our subject was
educated in his native town, and
came to Australia in 1863. Having
had a few months of office work in
the old country, and having made
good use of Ids opportunities, the
youth of fifteen had sufficient con-
fidence in his experience and abili-
ties to accept the only clerkship in
the Melbourne office of the A.M-P.
Society/- The Victorian office was
just then being opened, and the first
minutes of the Victorian board (the
meeting being held in Scott’s Hotel,
pending the preparation of the
offices) record Mr. Cameron’s Ap-
pointment- The A.M-P. was not
a giant in those days ; the total
assurance was under two millions,
and the new business for that year
was less than half a million. The
opening in Victoria, however, was
rapidly followed by a large increase
of business ; but the youthful clerk
proved equal to the occasion, and
all additions to the staff were by
way of juniors in rank as well as
period of service- Mr. Cameron
was fortunate in having as secre-
tary of the Victorian branch Mr.
W- T. Woods, a gentleman of exten-
sive British experience of life assur-
ance, for whose memory our subject
stills entertains feelings of affection
and gratitude. In 1877 Mr. Came-
ron was appointed resident secretary
for Tasmania, and commissioned to
open the branch for that colony.
Seven years later his energetic pains-
taking services were acknowledged
by his promotion to the resident
secretaryship at South Australia
lust prior to that promotion, Mr.
MR. R. B. CAMERON.
Cameron had been granted twelve
months’ leave of absence, but as
reorganisation in some departments
of the South Australian branch was
urgently needed, our subject gave
up his holiday, and at once entered
upon the duties. After some six
years of arduous Work in South
Australia, Mr. Cameron was invited
to the head office to occupy the
high position of secretary.
Mr. H. W. APPERLY, Manager
of the Industrial Department of the
A-M-P. Society, was born at Mel-
bourne in February, 1861. and edu-
cated at the Fort Street Model
School, Sydney, and Sydney Gram-
mar School. He left school in 1875
MR. H. W. APPERLY.
and commenced his business career
as a junior in the Sydney office of
the AMP. In 1889 he became
chief accountant in the head office,
and four years later resident sec-
retary in Adelaide. In 1895 he was
transferred to the position of resi-
dent secretary at Brisbane Queens-
land ; and on the introduction of the
Industrial department Mr. Apperly
was brought back to Sydney and
placed in charge of that branch of
the society’s business. During the
thirty odd years Mr Apperly has
been associated with the society the
business has made enormous strides,
the annual income having increased
from £345,000 to £2,800,000, and
the funds from £1,500,000 to
£22,000,000. the society being now
the largest mutual life office in the
British Empire. Mr. Apperly is an
honorary member of the Queensland
Institute of Accountants, and a J.P.
of Queensland and South Australia.
He is a noted chess-player, having
held the Queensland championship
for some years, and an enthusiastic
exponent of the “ royal and an-
cient ’ ’ game of golf, although at
the latter he has now to take a back
seat to his son, who is developing
championship form.


The firm of Messrs. ROYLE and
CO., of Royle’s Chambers, 5, 7 and 9
Bond Street, Sydney, General Mer-
chants and Insurance Agents, was
established in 1880. The founder of
the firm is Mr. C. J. Royle, whose
partners are Mr. G. B. Boucher,
Mr. F. A. Royle and Mr. C. A. Royle.
Messrs. Royle & Co. are general
agents for several leading British and
Australasian fire insurance companies,
among whom are the Sun Insurance
Office—the oldest purely fire office in
the world, having been founded as
far back as 1710. This office had at
risk in the city of London on the 31st
December, 1902, being
more than the company
holding the next largest amount.
ROYLE’S CHAMBERS, 5, 7 AND G BOND ST.,
SYDNEY.
Messrs. Royle & Co. are also
agents for the Standard Fire and
Marine Insurance Co., of New Zea-
land, having a capital of £1,000,000
sterling. They are also agents for
the Norwich and London Accident
Insurance Association, one of the
oldest and wealthiest associations
transacting this class of business.
The firm also represent the Com-
monwealth Insurance Co., whose
head office is in Melbourne, the
New Zealand Plate-glass Insurance
Co., the Monkhridge Iron and Steel
Co. Ltd., Leeds, Yorkshire, and
Kitson & Co., locomotive builders,
of the great Airedale Foundry,
Leeds.
Among the leading life assur-
ance societies pmely Australian,
the National Mutual Life Associ-
ation of Australasia Ltd. ranks
second only to its foimidable
competitor tlie Australian Mutual
Provident Society of Australia.
Established in 1869, the National
Mutual has enjoyed since then a
career of almost unexampled pros-
perity. Based entirely upon the
mutual principle, it offers peculiar
advantages which a large proportion
of the Australian public has not
failed to recognise. The head-
quarters of this important organi-
sation are in Melbourne, but its
operations in New South Wales are
of hardly less importance than are
those of the association in the great
southern State. In every Stale of
the Commonwealth the National
Mutual is making regular and satis-
factory advancement, as it is also
doing in New Zealand, South Africa,
and in Great Britain and Ireland.
The half-yearly statement issued in
July, 1903, showed that the associ-
ation consisted of no less than 55,000
members, who held policies to the ag-
gregate value of nearly
During the preceding half-year no
less than 3,295 new members were
added to the roll, representing poli-
cies amounting to and
yielding an annual premium revenue
of ,£"29,478. The total annual reve-
nue from premiums and interest
does not fall far short of £"600,000.
The gratifying progress made by
the National Mutual in New South
Wales is largely due to the spirited
policy carried out under the wise
direction of the Manager for New
South Wales, Mr. Henry Charles
Evans. This gentleman was born
in Sydney in the year 1857. His
education was commenced in one of
the leading public schools within the
metropolitan area. After graduating
through the several classes he was
transferred to the Sydney Grammar
School. In this important scholastic
establishment he succeeded in pass-
ing several important examinations,
intending later on to enter the
Sydney University. At this time
the Australian Mutual Provident
Society was under the managerial
control of Mr. M. A. Black, who
then, as subsequently, was recog-
nised as one of the leading actuaries
and authorities on life assurance in
the world. In 1873 Mr. Black, with
a view to the creation of a staff that
would efficiently carry out in every
branch and detail the functions of a
great and progressive life assurance
organisation, instituted a system of
competitive examinations for* the
admission of juniors into the service
of the society. The publication of
this scheme opened the eyes of many
an aspiring youth in the metropolis
to a life occupation that held out
promising prospects for advance-
ment and with high remuneration to
the successful. A large number of
youths from the various schools of
the city, as well as from several pro-
vincial ones, submitted themselves
for examination. Among those who
passed with credit was Henry
Charles Evans, who gained the
enviable distinction of receiving the
MR. H. C. EVANS,
Manager of the National Mutual Life
Association of Australasia Ltd.
first appointment under the new sys-
tem. Mr. Evans, from the outset of
his business career, assiduously ap-
plied himself to the mastery of the
many involved details associated with
life assurance. Passing through the
various departments of the head
office, he in a few years obtained
recognition as one of the most effi-
cient officers in the service of the
A.M.P. Society, ultimately filling the
important position of chief clerk and
accountant in the important branches
at Brisbane and Melbourne in succes-
sion. In the year 1885 f* le manage-
ment of the Sydney branch of the
National Mutual Life Association of
Australasia, which also controlled
operations throughout the mother


Total Issued.
In Force
31ST Dec., 1905.
Per cent, in
Force.
„ .. . Sums
Policies. Assured
Policies.
Sums
Assured.
Poli-
cies.
Assur-
ances.
357,718 £107,000,609
197,851
£55,469,521
55*3
51 8
State, became vacant. Mr. Evans
was selected to fill that onerous posi-
tion. Under his guiding hand the
progress made by the National Mu-
tual in New South Wales has proved
in the highest degree satisfactory.
Notwithstanding the onerous charac-
ter of the responsibility resting upon
the shoulders of Mr. Evans, that
gentleman has found time to take
part in local government affairs. As
mayor of Waverley he has rendered
important service to the burgesses of
that municipality. Among the fore-
most of those who are energetically
striving for the extension of powers
and the perfecting generally of muni-
cipal government in New South
Wales Mr. Evans is to be found. He
also holds a Commission of the Peace,
not only for New South Wales but
for Queensland as well. In social
life Mr. Evans shirks no respon-
sibility, and is to the fore in every
good work that has for its object the
advancement of the people as a whole.
Taking a keen interest in every manly
sport, he has frequently rendered
service to more than one city or sub-
urban club, especially those connected
with his own municipality he has
ever provided a good patron. The
only sport, however, in which he
actively participates is the fine old
English game of bowls. For many
years he acted as honorary secretary
for the New South Wales Bowling
Association, and as such has taken
a prominent part in arranging for
interstate and other interesting con-
tests.
M r. ED WIN J A MES FELTON,
General Manager, North Queensland
Insurance Company, was born in
London on September 30, 1872, and
is a son of the late Mr. Joseph Fel-
ton, who was attached to the Imperial
War Office. He received his educa-
tion at St. Mark’s, London, and at
Preslan, Germany. Returning to
London, he for two years studied the
law with a member of the Inner
Temple. Finding he had but little
preference for the law, he obtained
an appointment with the Home and
Colonial Stores, and subsequently
entered the service of the London
and Universal Bank, as foreign cor-
respondent, Mr. Felton arrived in
Sydney in 1893, ar| d secured an
appointment in the office of the
North Queensland Insurance Com-
pany as clerk in the marine depart-
ment. In July, 1903, he was selected
for an official visit to London, and
upon his return to Sydney, in the fol-
lowing December, he was appointed
Resident Secretary of the company.
He is a member of the Insurance
Institute of New South Wales, to
J. Hubert Newman. sydney.
MR. EDWIN JAMES FELTON.
which body he has rendered con-
siderable service. In the years igoo
and igoi, he contributed articles
upon “ The Development of Steam
Navigation,” on “Claims under
Marine Policies,” and on “ The
Valuation of Hulls.” For these
essays he obtained the Institute’s
first prizes in two succeeding years
mentioned. He has always taken
a deep interest in manly sport, more
particularly cricket and boating.
The AUSTRALIAN MUTUAL
PROVIDENT SOCIETY boasts
the proud distinction of being the
largest mutual life office in the
British Empire, and is the oldest
institution of its kind in Australasia.
These are big words to employ re-
garding an institution which is only
fifty-eight years old, and which draws
its business from a population which
even now does not reach 5,000,000,
and which is scattered over an area
of 3,000,000 square miles. The
society was established in 1849, and
though, as was to be expected, its
business for the first twenty years
of its existence was very meagre, it
has, during recent years, far outrun,
both in new assurances and in the
volume of its transactions, such
typical British offices as the Scottish
Widows’ Fund. Some idea of the
magnitude of its operations on the
purely assurance side of the business
during the brief period of its life will
be gathered from the following sug-
gestive table :
This table proves most unmistakably
the stability of the business. Of the
results of the efforts of fifty-seven
years, more than half remains intact
to-day. It is extremely doubtful if
any British office—certainly no office
of any other nation—can show an
equally satisfactory result. Further,
it is estimated that the total of the
outstanding assurances in Austral-
asia is over and of
this sum the A.M.P. Society alone
holds nearly one-half. As far as
Australasian business is concerned
it would appear to be another case
of “ Eclipse first, the rest nowhere ! ”
When we consider the financial
operations of the society the results
are no less startling. From the last
annual report of the society we gather
that it has received throughout the
fifty-seven years of its existence a sum
of £"5 1,524,991, and has disbursed
£"30,101,911, leaving in hand an
accumulated fund of £"21,423,080, and
this is being augmented at the rate of
about £"900,000 per annum. The
funds now in hand exceed the total
premiums paid by all members whose
policies are now in the books, so that
the whole disbursements of the society
for all purposes have been met by the
interest receipts and the contributions


of past members. Further, the in-T
terest receipts alone have been suffi-9
dent to meet the whole of the outgo]-
for claims by death and for-endow-|*
ment assurances and endowments *
matured. These are very startling
results and bear eloquent testimony
to the care and ability with which the
society has been managed. In view
of the facts above given it can be
readily understood that the society
has been pre-eminent as a bonus-
giver. In the days of small things
the society’s profits were distributed
every five years, but since 1883 the
distributions have been made annual-
ly. This change was rendered neces-
sary by the largely increasing amounts
of the annual surpluses. When a
society has something over half a
million available annually for division,
the distribution of five times such a
sum at one time might lead to a
troublesome displacement of the funds
or hamper their close investment. In
all the society has divided, as a cash
bonus among its members, nearly
sterling, and it is an
evidence both of the well-being of
these members and of their confidence
in the society that of this vast sum
only has been taken in
cash; the balance has been converted
into reversionary additions to the
policies. It will be surmised that a
success such as has been indicated
could only have been attained by
prudent management, by a timely
adaptation to advancing needs, and
by a policy of extreme liberality. Of
all these features the history of the
society affords abundant evidence.
At an early stage in the history of
the society the directors appear to
have become impressed with the con-
viction that the surest method of
obtaining business was to secure the
confidence of the public, and that the
best way to obtain this confidence
was to conduct its operations on
principles of the utmost liberality
consistent with the interests of the
institution. They accordingly stripped
the policy of every harassing con-
dition and left it free of all restrictions,
with the simple exception of suicide
within thirteen months. They agreed
to give liberal surrender values to
members who saw fit to relinquish
their policies after they had existed for
two years, and they agreed that such
surrender value should be held as a
fund out of which to pay premiums,
when the members themselves neglect-
ed to pay on the due date. 1 his
celebrated non-forfeiture regulation
has been of enormous advantage to
thousands of members who, through
forgetfulness or inability to pay, had
fallowed their policies to run overdue.
|The following table, taken from the
[fifty-seventh report of the
{society, shows the extent of the
under this regulation :
Total Policies overdue and
sustained out of Surren-
der Value .. .. .. 481,752
Number Reinstated .. 415,256
~ Forfeited .. 28,997
~ Surrendered .. 9,226
~ Dead .. .. 3,374
~ Matured.. .. 1,508
# 45 B >36i
~ Overdue and kept in force
31st Dec., 1905 .. .. 23,391
It is difficult to over-estimate the
significance of this table or to over-
value the benefits conferred by these
non-forfeiture regulations. In the
total of 481,752 the same policies of
course may occur several times, but
the fact remains that an enormous
number which became overdue, and
which in some offices would have
lapsed beyond hope of redemption,
have been restored to the books. Of
those so restored, 9,226 have been
surrendered owing probably to the fact
that the policyholders found them-
selves unable to continue payment of
premiums ; while no less than 4,882
came to a natural end by death or
maturity. As these policies with
bonus additions probably averaged
something like £350, it will be seen
that the society has paid out a sum
of about £i, 708,700, which, but for
thesel iberal regulations, would have
HEAD OFFICES OF THE A.M.P. SOCIETY, PITT STREET, SYDNEY.
remained in its coffers. As the pre-
sumption is that these policies were
on the lives of persons in financial
difficulties, the benefits to their de-
pendent families must have been
highly appreciated. The society’s
prospectus is a most comprehensive
volume, containing tables of rates
for no less than twenty-nine different
classes of benefits. In addition to
these the society is prepared to issue
policies covering any contingency
dependent on human life.
At the beginning of 1905 the
society inaugurated an Industrial
Department, the directors holding
the opinion that the privilege of
assuring with so pre-eminently an
Australian institution should be
extended to those classes of the
community whose means do not
permit of assurance in the Ordinary
Department. The system is now in
operation in all the large centres
of population right through the
Commonwealth and New Zealand,
and satisfactory progress with the
business is being made.


At the beginning of 1906 the
MUTUAL LIFE INSURANCE
CO. OF NEW YORK’S available
assets amounted to over
All this vast sum has been accumu-
lated during a period of sixty-three
years.
It is not easy to comprehend the
vastness of this company’s resources
by a mere statement of figures, but
a comparison with the great banking
OFFICES OF THE MUTUAL LIFE INSURANCE CO. OF NEW YORK,
MARTIN PLACE AND PITT STREET, SYDNEY.
institutions of the world may assist
the reader. For example :
CAPITAL.
Bank of England .. .. £14,553,000
Bank of France .. .. 7,300,000
Imperial Bank of Germany .. 6,000,000
Bank of Russia .. .. 5,505,000
Total .. £33,358,000
Funds held by the Mutual
Life Insurance Co. for the
payment of its policies,
December 31, 1905 .. £96,000,000
or about more than the
combined capital of four of the
greatest national banks in the world.
In 1843 the Mutual Life Insur-
ance Co. began business without a
dollar of capital, A number of
gentlemen held a meeting and each
agreed to subscribe for a certain
amount of life insurance in the com-
pany, and the premiums they paid
for their respective policies formed
the financial basis upon which to
establish the company’s future busi-
ness. The “ mutual plan” was
agreed upon.
The assets are invested in the
United States and in the count lies
where the company transacts busi-
ness. By judicious investments in
l heir securities railroads, school-
houses, canals have been built as a
consequence of the use of the funds
thus loaned by this company. The
Mutual Life in this way obtains a
safe investment, and the people are
in return benefited by the use of the
premiums they have paid to the
company for the insurance that they
or their heirs ultimately receive as
their policies mature.
The operations of the company
have been upon a large scale, and
vast fortunes have been committed
to its care by individuals. For in-
stance'’ It received the largest .single
payment, as a policy premium, ever
paid to a life insurance company—
being a cheque for over 18,750 —
on account of the Havemeyer family
of New York.
It issued at one time over seven
hundred policies at the instance and
on the account of one of the great
business firms of Chicago, insuring,
as a Christmas gift, nearly all of the
male employees.
It issued the largest single policy
ever written. It was for
on the life of James C. Colgate, of
New York.
Another policy for £ 200,000 was
issued to Frank H. Peavey, of Min-
neapolis. In this case the annual
premium payable amounted to close
on £ lO,OOO. This policyholder died
in 1901, and the claim was the
largest ever paid by any life insur-
ance company.
The Mutual has, outstanding, a
number of policies for or
more, including one on the life of
George W. Vanderbilt.
Mr. Samuel Newhouse, of Salt
Lake City, Utah, paid to the
Mutual Life a single premium ot
l9s. 3d. for two policy con-
tracts.
Mr. James J. Hill, president of the
Great Northern Railway, paid the
company a single premium of al-
most twenty-eight thousand pounds
sterling.
An English gentleman deposited
with the company’s London agent
eighty - six thousand, twenty - nine
pounds and five shillings—for an
annuity on his life.
It paid to Mr. Thomas Dolan, of
Philadelphia, president of the Manu-
facturers’ Association of the United
States, a sum nearly equal to twenty-
five thousand pounds sterling. This
was paid on a matured endowment
policy, being the largest amount
ever received by a living policy-
holder.
The business of the company in
Sydney, was inaugurated by Major
Z. C. Rennie, in 1887, and at a later
period he established branches in
Victoria, Queensland, South Aus-
tralia, West Australia and Tasmania.
In March, 1904, Major Rennie
retired from the management of the
Australasian Department, and was
succeeded by his son, Mr. Richard
Rennie, who has been in the service
of the company for many years, for
two years as manager of the West
Australian branch.


£
S.
d.
Liability under Policy Contracts ..
6,287
18
10
Surplus
1,499
15
10
Assurance Fund
• • i 7.787
8
Income.
3
1st August
1903.
1904.
1905.
Premiums
£
£
£
..
12,313
13,006.
r 3.47 6
Interest
37 1
4 X 9
480
Total
..
12,684
x 3>4 2 3
1 3-956
Disbursements.
Payments to medical profession
and
chemists, &c. ..
..
3.494
3.47 r >
3.503
Death claims
,,
686
9 1 7
I ,008
Surrenders ..
, .
377
487
Compensation (Accident, &C.) ..
• •
304
503
469
4>4 8 4
3.273
5.467
Expenses
• •
6,47'
6.453
6,844
Total
# 0
I0 i955
11,726
12,311
Excess of income ..
,,
x »7 2 9
1,699
!. 6 45
Appropriations—Divided at the rate of
5 per cent, per annum
..
233
236
236
Reduction of goodwill item
..
1,000
The People’s Prudential Assurance Company
Limited.
1 he People’s Prudential Assurance Company is a pro-
prietary institution with a nominal capital of £*lo,ooo
paid up to £*4,779. It conducts Ordinary and Industrial
[fife Assurance, and profits are shared after one year in
the ordinary branch and fifteen years in the industrial
branch. The Prudential purchased the business known
as the People’s Mutual Medical Society for ,£*3,s°°) and
transacts ordinary, industrial, medical, and accident
DR. OTTO BOHRSMANN.
business, and is now in receipt of a considerable premium
income. Upon the second actuarial investigation by Mr.
E. M. Moors, M.A., F LA., he found, assuring on a
per cent rate of interest, which was much below the rate
then being realised, there was a surplus of 499 15s.
iod., as at August, 1904, a result which must be con-
sidered highly satisfactory when the youth of the Pru-
dential is taken into consideration.
The Consulting Actuary forecasts a very promising
ordinary branch business. The number of contracts in
the industrial branch in 1904 was 6,315, with an annual
income of 4s. 6d.
The total funds of the company are liable for
claims, irrespective of whether they arise under indus-
trial or ordinary branch policies.
The valuation balance-sheet showed :
Of the surplus, £*l,ooo was devoted to writing
down the goodwill, £ 150 was set apart to provide a
reversionary bonus of £*l per cent, per annum for each
year the policy had been in force since the previous
valuation, and £*loo was carried forward as a reserve.
The reports showed that the disbursements made
by the company in discharge of obligations to members
and policyholders, during the nine years of the company’s
existence up to August 31st, 1905, amounted to £*46,999
14s. gd.
The Australasian Insurance and Banking Record, Oct.,
1905, comments as follows “ The principal item of
interest in the report is the reference to the appropria-
tion of ,£"1,000 to writing down goodwill, leaving the
assurance fund at ,£"8,196, which is 30 per cent, in excess
of the sum certified by the consulting actuary to be the
accredited liability to policyholders at the end of the
eighth financial year.”
Comparing the principal items in the revenue
accounts for the last three years
The company, at its inception, was located in Pitt
Street. Mr. F. Sparrow, F.S S., in conjunction with
Dr Otto Bohrsmann, form the Board of Directors.
The Prudential, in its medical department, provides
for medical attendance and medicine to members and
their families, and the disbursements under this head in
1905 were ,£"3,502 17s. yd. ; death claims, ,£"1,008 ss. sb. ;
surrenders, 2s. id. ; compensation for accidents
and diseases, 2s. sd. ; total for the year,
MR. F. SPARROW, F.S.S
£*5,467 7s 6d. The main items in the Prudential’s
assets are represented by—loans on mortgage, £*7,082
19s. Bd. ; loans on reversionary interest, policies, &c.,
,£*1,515 ss. id.; freehold properly, £600 ; cash (fixed
deposit and current account), £*2,219 I 9 S -
It is reasonable to expect that, under the present
management, the Prudential will develop into an insti-
tution of which New South Wales will not be ashamed.


Mr. GEORGE BAYLEY SMITH
is the manager of the Sydney branch
of the Australian Alliance Assurance
Company, one of the strongest and
oldest Victorian fire, marine and
accident companies, long and
favourably known in New South
Wales. Born in Buckinghamshire,
England, Mr. Smith received a
liberal education in a private school
at Ealing, near London, an insti-
tution widely known and of a class
second to none in the United King-
dom. Whilst still a young man he
entered the London head office of the
London and Lancashire Fire Insur-
ance Company passing through the
various clerical grades and receiving a
MR. G. B. SMITH.
thorough training in every depart-
ment of the work. There he stayed
for about eight years when he decided
to leave England for Australia. Ar-
riving in the colonies nineteen years
ago, his services were engaged by the
New Zealand Insurance Company,
Brisbane, Queensland. From thence
he was appointed secretary of the
United Insurance Company, Towns-
ville, North Queensland ; and after
five years in that trying climate, he
came to Sydney and joined the
Mercantile Mutual Fire Insurance
Company, under Mr. Kelso King, as
inspector. Then lie was made
manager to Messrs. A. B. Purcell
and Co., insurance brokers, and re-
mained with them until about three
years ago, when he was selecte 1 by
them to fill the position he now so
ably holds. As a master of the more
abstruse phases of fire assurance,
and as a prolific contributor to the
leading insurance periodicals of the
old and new worlds Mr. Smith has,
perhaps, no equal this side ot the
equator. He is an active member
or the Insurance Institute of New
South Wales, frequently occupying
the lecture platform at its meetings ;
and on account of his valued con-
tributions to the American insur-
ance press, he has been honoured by
being elected an associate of that
extremely conservatvie body, the
National Fire Protection Associa-
tion of the United States of America.
Mr. J A M K S S l' E P H E N
INCH was born in Loudon,
England, on the 3rd June, 1868,
and orphan at four years of age,
he left school at the early age
of twelve and spent six years in
London and provincial commercial
offices. He left England in Novem-
ber, 1886, sailed round the Cape of
Good Hope in the ship “ Cluny
Castle ’ ’ to Sydney, where he landed
early in 1887. Messrs. Edwards,
Dunlop & Co. entrusted him with
their shipping and customs work
shortly after landing, and the fol-
lowing two or three years were
spent in different parts of the colony-
in search of better health and ex-
perience. Mr. Inch left Australia
in 1890 for good in the sailing ship
“Trafalgar,” reaching England
four months later via Cape Horn.
After a few weeks he was advised
to return to Sydney for health
reasons. He came back in the
s.s. “Damascus,” via Capetown,
and a few years later entered
the public service under the
Registrar-General, in whose depart-
ment he served for about nine
years, during the latter portion of
which he held 1 he position of clerk in
charge of correspondence and re-
cords. With the advent of fede-
ration he visited various States tor
commercial purposes. In June.
1902, he decided to take up life
insurance as a career, and joined the
Mutual Life Insurance Company
of New York as agent. In
less than a year he was given
charge of the South Coast district,
and, shortly afterwards, of the
whole southern railway system ter-
ritory, which he developed in the
capacity of district inspector. On
the 17th April, 1905, Mr. Richvrd
Rennie, General Manager for Aus-
tralasia, appointed him to the charge
MR. J. S. INCH.
of the New South Wales agency
work- Since the Mutual of New
York ceased pushing for new
business, Mr. Inch has been asso-
ciated with the National Mutual
Life Assurance Co. in a repre-
sentative capacity. In 1895 he
married a daughter of Mr. George
Prosser of Bathurst, and has a
family of three sons and foui
daughters. His leisure time for
some y r ears was spent in the study
of philately, but more recently
he has devoted it to agricultural
pursuits.


Ihe CliY MU 1 UAL is the
youngest of the three purely New
Sout r \\ ales mutual life offices,
1c ,*1 °* establishment being
1679. Ihe progress of the society
during the past tweny-five years
has been in the direction of
solidity and strength rather than
inflation of figures, the idea of the
management being that, instead of
grasping for the whole earth—as
appears to be the custom of most
life assurance offices nowadays—the
City Mutual is content with a small
OFFICES OF THE CITY MUTUAL LIFE ASSURANCE SOCIETY,
HUNTER, BLIGH AND CASTLEREAGH STREETS, SYDNEY.
corner of it, provided such corner is
arable. The present position of the
society is that its liabilities amount
to about a million and a-half, its
invested funds to something over a
quarter of a million, its annual
income about sterling.
These are not very large figures as
life assurance figures go nowadays,
but the management points to the
fact that large assets mean corre-
spondingly large liabilities, and that
while assets have an uncomfortable
knack of shrinking when they are
wanted, liabilities never by any
means commit the happy despatch,
but have rather a habit of growing
larger and larger
The advantage of handling a
comparatively small sum of money
like a quarter of a million is that in
this State a ready outlay can be
found for it at a comparatively high
rate of interest with absolute secu-
rity, and the result has been that for
years past the City Mutual has been
in the enviable position of earning a
far higher rate on its investments
than any other life office doing
business in the Commonwealth.
This society claims the rather
ambitious title of being the most
liberal and progressive life office in
Australia, and it certainly offers to
the public a contract free from any
ambiguity.
For instance, on the back of each
policy is a fac simile of the proposal
and personal statement signed by
the assured. This is of the very
greatest importance, as it sometimes
happens that in the anxiety to do
business the agent omits to take
down accurately the statement made
by the proponent and possibly makes
a misrepresentation, which is fatal
to the payment of the policy in after
years.
To obviate this the City Mutual
gives each proponent a copy of the
document signed by him and invites
his perusal, and if incorrect to return
the policy for alteration, thus saving
future litigation and possibly pre-
venting some helpless dependent of
the deceased policyholder from
realising oidy too late that the prop
upon which he leaned was unstable.
It has, however, introduced so
many innovations in life assurance
practices that the claim to the title
xs not altogether a barren one.
It boldly announced some years
ago that any member who was ill
and could not afford to pay for
hospital treatment could go to any
hospital in the State and while there
receive the best attention that
medical skill could devise, payments
therefor being made by the society
out of its own funds. There was a
good business reason at the back of
this besides the desire to assist the
policyholders, as Mr. Geo. Crowley,
tiie very energetic general manager,
puts it —“ There is more joy in the
City Mutual over one life saved in
this way than over ten that become
claims through unsuccessful atten-
tion.”
This office, without any extra fee
or premium, guarantees in the event
of a policyholder losing his two arms
or two legs, or becoming incapaci-
tated through blindness, to treat the
policy as an absolute claim. The
argument of the management being
that if such a calamity happen a
man he is virtually dead to the
world. A proportionate allowance
is made in the event of partial dis-
ability caused by any of these
accidents.
Then the City Mutual goes on to
say to every policyholder that after
three years they can obtain a free
policy fully paid up equalling in
amount the whole of the premiums
paid by them, and this without the
payment of any additional premium.
This course, so far as can be ascer-
tained, is not adopted by any other
Australian life office.
Also permits of the transfer of
one policy to the life of another, so
that virtually the policy becomes a
transferable document.
These are a few amongst many
special advantages offered by this
popular society, and the result is
that in the Government departments


—notably in the railway service—a
policy in this progressive office is
eagerly sought for.
For the purpose of obtaining
better results for the life assurance
agents the general manager, Mr.
Crowley some few years ago wrote a
pamphlet on the subject, which
caused widespread discussion both
in this State and in the old country.
The idea then promulgated has of
late assumed a practical aspect, and
the City Mutual is the one office
which has up to date lent a willing
ear to the proposals made by the
Life Assurance Agents’ Union.
There is certainly room for im-
provement as regards the morale of
the life assurance agent in Australia,
and any steps taken to improve their
position would be welcomed by the
general public. Life assurance
soliciting should be a calling com-
manding the respect of all classes
of the community, but, unfortu-
nately, so desperate appears to have
been the competition amongst the
life offices in general o( late years to
secure business that a life assurance
representative of the genuine class
does not receive that consideration
which his work entitles him to. In
this as in other matters Mr Crowley
is a vigorous fighter, and does not
intend to cease agitating until his
ambition is realised.
ST. MARY’S CATHEDRAL, SYDNEY, 1848.


Shipping and Shipbuilding.
C HIPPING during the first few years of the colony’s
existence was confined to the movements of the
early fleets. Private enterprise had yet to arise. Ship-
building, too, was on. a similar tooting. Ihe officials,
to whom a small fleet of boats was all important, found
it was a mattei of considerable difficulty to commence,
as within the settlement there was not a single ship’s
carpenter to be found. However, a start was made
on December 30, 1788, when Governor Phillip laid the
keel of a small vessel designed for conveying pro-
visions to the agricultural settlement of Rosehill—
afterwards Parramatta, —and this boat was launched
in September of the following year. She was a large,
unwieldy affair, anything but a compliment to naval
architecture ; and, from the difficulty to move her,
she was nicknamed by her convict crew ‘ ‘ The Lump. ’ ’’
10 officialdom she was known as the “ Rosehill ” packet.
Not until 179° did any trading vessel visit Port
Jackson. Then “a Dutchman,” the ‘ ‘ Waaksam-
heyd, put in for fresh water, and was commissioned
to fetch much-required commodities from Batavia.
With the arrival of the third fleet came Captain Mel-
ville, of Messrs. Samuel Enderby & Sons’ ship “ Bri-
tannia, and the keen-eyed captain, who had spied
a cetacean on his way out, obtained the permission of
Governor Phillip to cruise for whales in Australian
waters ; thus laying the foundation to an industry
which was the prime factor in encouraging trade and
promoting colonial shipbuilding. By the end of 1791
the Mary Ann,” the ‘‘ William and Ann,” the
Matilda, and the “Salamander,” all transports,
were busily engaged hunting for whales and seals in
their haunts between the north-east coast of New
Zealand and Van Diemen’s Land, and the products
these ships took home soon set fabulous stories afloat
of the wealth to be amassed in the trade. It was not
long ere whaling in the southern seas became a mania
with British and Americans alike, leading to a great
deal of business being transacted in Sydney—what
with repairing the ships and provisioning their crews.
Sydney shipowners sprang into existence, and were
keen in the industry, to so great an extent that when
the fisheries were at their zenith most of the vessels
hailed from this port. Prominent among the local
shippers was Robert Campbell, who, defying the ocean-
carrying monopoly of the East India Company, de-
spatched the first local cargoes of skins, oil, &c., by the
“ Lady Barlow ” and the “ Honduras ” in 1805, to
the London market. The charter of the East India
Company, granted many years before the settlement
of Australia was effected, gave an exclusive right to
John ' ’ Company to carry all trade east of the Cape
of Good Hope ; and this drag-net influence almost
completely checked the development of colonial ship-
ping until the British Parliament passed an Act in
1819 under which direct shipments could be made
to London.
The “Pitt,” which arrived in February, 1792,
brought in her cargo the frames of a schooner for use
on the station. Great difficulty was experienced in
putting the parts together, there still being no com-
petent ship’s carpenter. It was not till after twelve
months’ delay that this little vessel, measuring 41
tons, and costing £9Ol, could be launched.
Captain Hunter comes to govern the settlement
in 1795, and brings with him Mr. Daniel Payne, “ a
worthy and promising young man ” he has selected in
Deptford dockyard for the much-needed appointment
of master boatbuilder. The colonists have been
trying to knock together a few broad-bottom boats
of the fashion of the “ Lump ” in their eagerness to
get commerce fairly on her legs ; crude efforts at ship-
building are reminiscent of our primeval ancestors.
In the Government dockyard, now inaugurated,
“ Chipps,” the good-enough carpenter for the average
Geordie,” and learned in the indifferent use of the
adze, is licked into shape by good Daniel Payne—who
disappears from the scene in 1796, and is succeeded
by Mr. Moore. Henceforth colonial-made sloops,
snows and schooners cease to be viewed as objects
of curiosity. The first work finished by the master
boatbuilder was a light craft—“ the largest and best
of all our boats,” says Governor Hunter in his de-
spatches—loyally named the “Cumberland,” and
doomed to an ill-fated end. Piracy, which flourished
with more or less success in Australian waters during
the first quarter-century of the colony’s existence, was
brought sharply under official notice in September,
1 797> by a gang of runaway convicts seizing the
Cumberland ’ ’ as she was proceeding to the Hawkes-
bury for supplies; and steering her on the broad waters
of the deep for that last port of call, which all reach
but whence none return. Misfortune appears to have
attended the name. Three years later, in July, 1800,
Governor King informs the Duke of Portland that
another vessel christened the ‘ ‘ Cumberland’ ’ of
about 27 tons burden, is on the stocks and will be
finished the following September. ‘' She is intended
to be schooner-rigged, and to be armed for pursuing
deserters.” However, in August, 1803, she is selected,
as the first vessel built entirely of colonial timber in
Australia, to convey Captain M. Flinders, with the
valuable papers relating to his discoveries, to England.
He calls in at the Isle of France, not as a belligerent,
but as a man of science. Nevertheless, the malicious
General de Caen, commanding there, makes him a pri-
soner and pounces upon everything; retaining the
vessel, in defiance of the order of the French Govern-
ment, when, several years later, he is compelled to
restore the Captain to liberty again. So in the epd


our first effort at naval architecture escapes the criti-
cism ot the home authorities and masters in the craft.
In September, 1800, Governor Hunter sent to
Mr. Under-Secretary King a list of the floating craft
belonging to the colony of New South Wales as follows :
—Colonial schooner “ Francis,” of 44 tons burthen ;
the “ Norfolk ” sloop, of 16 tons, built by Lieutenant
Governor Townson at Norfolk Island in 1798 ; three
long-boats, one of which was built at Port Jackson ;
a flat and a lighter for unloading, both built locally ;
a brig of 160 tons, frame raised and nearly timbered ;
a whale-boat for the Governor’s use, built at Port
Jackson ; two pinnaces of H.M.’s ships “ Reliance
and ‘ ‘ Supply ’ ’ left for the use of the colony ; a large
colonial pinnace rebuilt, and several smaller boats for
various uses, mostly, if not all, built at Port Jackson.
The brig of 160 tons, by far the most pretentious vessel
yet attempted, and intended for conveying troops to
Norfolk Island, owing to the scarcity of shipwrights,
was not launched for another three years, and then
she was named the “ Duke of Portland.” Up till
this time — i.e., September, 1800 —not one colonial
vessel had been registered for trading purposes, such
commerce as there was between the settlement and
Parramatta and the Hawkesbury being confined to
small open boats. It was unmistakably apparent
that the instructions given to Governor Phillip and his
successors to discourage the ownership of vessels by
the settlers had been most scrupulously carried out-
to this stage, at any rate. With the discovery of coal
at the Hunter, and the carrying trade it created, it
was plain a different state of affairs would have to
obtain, and Governor King faced the necessity by
acting upon his own responsibility. He explains his
action in the following extract from a letter he ad-
dressed to Sir Joseph Banks in 1801 : —‘ l The first cargo
of coals brought from the Coal River in a Government
vessel I exchanged with the master of the “ Cornwallis,”
who goes to Bengal from hence for iron, which he gave
at 30 per cent, profit for our coals at two pounds five
shillings per chaldron. I believe this is the first export
return ever made from New South Wales. How many
chaldron he will take from hence I cannot ascertain
until he leaves this, as he has got several small vessels
belonging to individuals bringing them round ; and as
such a produce ought not to be without some advan-
tage to the Crown, I have regulated the export of the
article, as expressed in the enclosed printed notice.”
[This forbids any boat or vessel going to the Hunter
for coal, timber or any other purpose without obtain-
ing a special license from the Governor’s secretary,
stating the purpose of such voyage, and to enter into
recognisances, themselves in £SO and two securities
in £25 each for the due performance of regulations re
loading, accounts of cargo and clearances and pay-
ment of local dues and King’s dues.] “ . . However,
I believe our exports will be small, except such ships
as bring convicts out may be induced to carry them
on to India, as our colonial vessel—that is the ‘ Por-
poise ’ —l hope will be fully occupied between this
and Otaheite in procuring pork. There is a brig
belonging to an individual here loading for the Cape ;
but as my instructions prohibit any vessel being kept
here belonging to colonists, she goes with my certificate
and permission to sell her as a prow. 1 his is note-
worthy as being the first official recognition ol a pri-
vately-owned vessel. Notwithstanding bureaucratic
prohibition, the colonial shipowner came some time
before the Governor addresses himself to his fidns
Achates, Sir Joseph Banks, and, hidebound regulations
notwithstanding, he came to stay. Ihe Enterpiise,
commanded by Captain Bampton, had been wrecked
at the end of 1797 on the New Zealand coast, near
Dusky Bay, the crew having to remain there fifteen
months before relief from Sydney arrived. During the
time, with the aid of shipwright Heatheilugh, the men
built’ a 60-ton schooner, entirely constructed of the
abundant timber, growing all along the coast to the
water’s edge. On arrival at Sydney she pro\ es an
eyesore to the professional talent scintillating there—
‘ ‘ a miserably constructed ’ ’ craft—but, nevertheless,
she commands a good price when put on the market,
and is purchased for £250, with the intention of being
put into the sealing trade. Governor King has to
carry out his instructions, and, strongly against his
inclinations to assist the settlers struggling to win
success, after much correspondence, the Assistance
is packed off to the Cape of Good Hope.
Whilst the authorities at home —who had been
unable so far to pick up the proper perspective of the
Australian territory and its possibilities were doing
all they could to paralyse the energy of the colonists,
thanks, mainly to the American, the oversea tiade,
like the snowball, was increasing in size from the loice
of its own momentum, and at last drowsy Downing
Street, with its out-of-focus eyesight, began to get
a suspicion of the necessity of further action. In 1797
Governor Hunter received advice from the Duke of
Portland that, in consequence of the increasing and
influential intercourse between Great Britain and
other countries with the colony of New South Wales,
it would be necessary to ascertain the number and
description of all such vessels as might arrive at Poit
Jackson in the course of each year. On receipt of
these instructions a port regulation was issued pro-
viding that no vessel was to be allowed to land any
article, or to break bulk, before the return of such ship
and of her cargo had been filled in and duly attested
by the master. In addition, the Home Office ap-
pointed Richard Atkins, the Registrar of the Vice-
Admiralty Court, to keep a correct register of all inward
and outward shipping at Sydney. 1 his was the first
attempt to obtain, officially, some definite knowledge
regarding our shipping trade and commerce. It also
aimed at “ regulating both the entries and the sale of
such articles as shall be allowed to be imported into
the colony in such manner as to prevent all monopoly
and afford the inhabitants an opportunity of pur-
chasing the same at a fair and reasonable price.” The
first return issued covered a period of about six months
-from November 3 ,1799, t° May 13, 1800, —-and
showed that six oversea vessels with cargoes had arrived
from London, Calcutta, Boston (America), and Cork.
There were also two whalers and an East Indiaman of
384 tons carrying despatches to China ; also H.M.S.
“ Reliance,” and a colonial schooner with a military
detachment from Norfolk Island, making a total ol
twelve vessels. Of the shipping prior to November,


T 799> uo mention was made, and there do not seem to
have been any authentic records preserved. From the
lists of shipping published three or four years after the
return referred to above, it appears that from the
landing of Governor Phillip in 1788 to the end of 1800
124 vessels visited the port, classified as follows
C onvict ships, stores and cattle transports, 62 ; mer-
chantmen, 34 ; men-of-war, n ; vessels to refit, 16;
and one piize. An analysis of the merchantmen
strongly reflects the indifference with which British
merchants viewed Australia as a field of commerce to
develop. Eighteen trading vessels that came to
Sydney purely as a matter of speculation sailed under
the American flag ; ten belonged to the East India
Company, who, after the arrival of the first fleet, con-
tracted for the conveyance of convicts in their own
ships ; one was a colonial vessel, and the remaining
five were English.
cipally), coal and sealing products are the principal
cargoes of those few owners in a position to furnish
satisfactory securities to Governor King that the
restrictions under which they have been permitted to
build small vessels will be duly observed. There is a
steady trade developing, too, with New Zealand and
the Southern Pacific in potatoes and porcine products ;
and even vessels of his Majesty’s navy coming to
Sydney have for the time being to drop their dignity
and become carriers of the much-needed supplies of
pork ; not lacking dangers, too, this insular intercourse.
At the Sandwich Islands the missionaries pave the
way, and business relations exist on friendly terms.
The Maoris, too, have always behaved amicably so
far. They conduct themselves as men in their deal-
ings with us ; able to look after themselves, if neces-
sary ; withal hospitable and ready to lend a helping
hand. Visiting whalers, rough old salts at the best,
Sydney Cove, from Fort Macquarie, 1850.
For the next few years expansion goes on slowly ;
for commerce is sorely beset and colonial enterprise
has many drawbacks to contend with. To wit, the
personal greed—aye ! and much worse than greed—
of officials high in position, who should never have
been allowed to enter the field of competition ; also
the increasing hostility of the all-powerful East India
Company, now fighting to secure the monopoly of
a carrying trade which would not have been developed
but 'for the speculative spirit of those colonists the
purse-proud nabobs of the East affect to disdain ;
and yet, also, the fatuous policy that urges the Home
authorities to check the progressive efforts of the
settlers to establish commercial relations with the
outer world in order that additional facilities may not
be afforded the convicts to escape. The less ships the
better was the high level British s, tecraft proved
equal to ; a reflex surely of the silly ministration which
precipitated the American war, Timber (cedar prin-
treat them and respect them accordingly. Captain
Rhodes, of the “Alexander,” speaks of their open-
handed barter and generosity in the highest terms ;
and when he induces the son of a north-end Maori
chief to visit Sydney, the lad of sixteen—“ intelligent
and of good disposition”—resides at Government
House. Bluff old Governor King, whose sailor heart
prompts him to appreciate any kindness shown towards
sons of the sea, is the host, and under his protecting
wing the youth finds himself in a fashionable whirl of
entertainment, only cut short by the termination of
Captain Rhodes’ stay in port. There was no patriot
in those days of national infancy to teach us our whole
duty towards our neighbours—white, black, or copper-
coloured—per medium of fifty word tests or other
evidences of squint-eyed genius. The natives of the
Society Islands prove of a different temper to the
Maoris, as a certain Canon Boyce is the first, but not
by any means the last, to realise, To borrow his


euphonising way of telling the story, he has a mis-
understanding with them when his ship pays an intro-
ductory visit to Ulitea, with an eye to the main chance.
They have a fashion of treating misunderstandings
somewhat summarily, these good people —so the Cap-
tain finds himself cut adrift from his moorings, towed
into shallow water Billy-Billy, and then attacked
cn mouse. It is a fight at close quarters with musket
and pike and hatchet and spear, all higgledy-piggledy.
But the crew are able in the end to get the vessel out
of danger with the loss of two of their number, and the
captain had to leave behind two of his best anchors
and cables as spoils. No such news has reached
Sydney officialdom before ; yet it is only a commence-
ment. As time goes on misunderstandings become so
monotonous, especially in the region of the Solomon
Islands, where a black Australia is the cry of the land,
that at last Governor Macquarie is compelled to issue
the following characteristic order to the shipping : —-
“No ship or vessel shall clear out from any port within
the territory, for New Zealand or any other island in
the Southern Pacific, unless the master, if of British
or Indian, or the master and owner if of plantation
registry, shall enter into bonds with the naval officer,
under £I,OOO penalty, that themselves and crew shall
properly demean themselves towards the natives, and
not commit acts of trespass on their gardens, lands,
habitations, burial-grounds, tombs or properties, and
not make war, or at all interfere in their quarrels, or
excite any animosities among them, but leave them to
the free enjoyment of their rites and ceremonies, and
not take from the Elands any male native without his
own and his chief’s and his parents’ consent, and
shall not ship or take from thence any female native
without the like consent, and without having first
obtained the consent of his Excellency the Governor
or his secretary, in writing, or in case of shipping any
male natives as mariners, divers, &c., then at their
own request at any time to discharge them, first paying
them all wages due to them ; and the natives of all
the said islands, being under his Majesty’s protection,
all acts of rapine, plunder, murder, piracy or other
outrages against their person or property will, upon
conviction, be severely punished.”
The colony now (1803) is fifteen years old, and
the arrival of a ship in the little community creates as
much excitement as a school of whales ‘ ‘ blowing ’ ’
in the waters of Port Jackson would to-day. ”We
stop the press,” says the editor of the Sydney Gazette
in one of his first numbers, ‘ ‘ to let our readers have
the earliest intelligence that a signal was made this
morning for a ship in sight.” Take a peep at the
shipping columns of this pioneer journal and one can
see how often the, no doubt, impatient subscriber has
to put up with having his news delayed on account
of shipping movements. Here is the record of a fort-
night —from 12th to 26th March :
‘‘Arrivals.—l3th March, H.M.S. ‘Glutton’ from
England ; 18th, ship ‘ Bridgewater,’ from England
with prisoners and stores ; schooner ‘ Francis.’ from
Hawkesburv.
*/
“ Departures.—24th March, ship ‘ Castle of Good
Hope,’ for India ; colonial schooners, ‘Lands ’ and
‘ Cumberland,’ for Parramatta,”
“ Remaining in Port.—H.M.S. ‘ Glutton,’ ‘ Buf-
falo/ ‘ Porpoise ’ ; ‘ Bee,’ sloop ; ‘ Lady Nelson/
armed tender, at Lane Cove ; ‘ Bridgewater,’ ship ;
‘ Surprise,’ sloop ; with ‘ Greenwich ’ and ‘ Venus,’
whalers.”
There are some not unimportant happenings in
this year of grace. Take the ' ‘ Castle of Good Hope,
which sailed down the harbour on the 24th March, jhav-
ing arrived on the twelfth of the previous month. Mr.
Editor has much to exercise his pen concerning this
noble craft. And so he writes “ On Saturday, 12th
ultimo (February, 1803), arrived the ‘Castle of Good
Hope,’ of Calcutta, Mr. Allan M. Askell, master, from
whence she sailed the Ist December last. She made
Ceylon the 13th of the same month, and on her way
hither passed through the Bass Straits. She brought
307 Bengal cows in excellent condition,” [N.B., the
first imported] ‘ ‘ a few only excepted, which were
rejected by the Government, none of which have died
since their landing. She also brought four Indian
mares and two horses (one of which is an Arabian
stallion), a quantity of spirits, sugar, rice, piece
goods, and various other articles. Of the cows,
250 were received by the Government at the
contract price, £2B per head, and there can be no doubt
of this great increase of breeding cattle lowering the
price of animal food. The ‘ Castle of Good Hope ’ is
the largest ship that has ever entered the port, and
measures about 1,000 tons. During the passage she
lost twelve cows and a horse ; fell in with no other
vessel and met with no accident. Her passage through
Bass Straits, instead of going round Van Diemen’s
Land, considerably shortened her voyage and saveu
many cows.” Mr. Robert Campbell is the consignee,
and the first general order published in the initial
number of the Gazette gives him permission to land the
spirits, and furnishes the general reader with an insight
into the manner in which the licensed trafficking in
‘ ‘ rum ’ ’ was conducted. It runs :
” The Governor having permitted Mr. Robert
Campbell to land 4,000 gallons of spirits for the domes-
tic use of the inhabitants, from the ‘ Castle of Good
Hope,’ it will be divided in the following proportions,
viz. :
For the officers in the Civil Estab-
lishment, including superinten-
dents and storekeepers . . 1,000 galls
“ For naval and military com-
manding officers .. .. 1,000 ~
“ For the licensed people .. 1,000
“To be distributed to such per-
sons as the Governor may think
proper to grant permits .. 1,000
The above to include the civil and military
officers at Norfolk Island.
“ By command, Wheate Chapman,
“ Secretary.”
Mr. Campbell finds it necessary to insert a notifica-
tion of sale as well ; so he advertises :—“ The sale of
the 1 Castle of Good Hope’s ’ cargo will commence at
Mr. Campbell’s on Tuesday, Bth current. Soft sugar
of a very fine quality ; sugar candy in tubs ; table rice,
pepper, saltpetre ; Europe and Indian soaps, tallow


and wax candles, pump and sole leather, with hides
for bellows. An assortment of piece goods consisting
of a variety of chintz handkerchiefs, blue gurrahs,
frocks and trowsers, soldiers’ plain and grilled shirts!
NB - —To accommodate the inhabitants copper coin
will be received in small sums and wheat receipts for
the current quarter. It is a good assortment of
general cargo, and brings much grist to the consignee’s
mill , a lact which leads in the hereafter to many nasty
remarks concerning the manner in which he has accu-
mulated his wealth. Wheat receipts as a form of
currency have come into general use. They are the
result of an increasing trade with the settlers at the
Hawkesbury, who have to send their produce on the
water to market. Boats constantly ply between that
disti ict and Sydney • all sorts and conditions of minia-
tme ships ■ even open boats rowed and sailed according
to weather conditions, taking seventeen days to and
from, and jettisoning half their freight each trip, as
the crew declare, under the pretext ol bad weather.
For awhile the settlers suffer severely under this organ-
ised system of robbery. But the practice reaches the
ear of Governor King, and it is stamped out by the
effect of the following general order, issued in March,
J Bo3 :—“ Repeated complaints having been made of
the great losses sustained by the settlers at Hawkes-
bury from the vexatious conduct of the boatmen by
whom they send the grain to Sydney, the following
regulations are to be observed ; Every person sending
grain from the Hawkesbury to Sydney in an open
boat, or a boat that is not trustworthy, the magis-
trates are requested to take notice thereof. If it
appears on proof that the master of a boat receives
more grain than the vessel ought to with safety, the
master shall make good any quantity he may throw
overboard or otherwise damage, losing the freight of
that part, and on conviction before two magistrates
forfeit £5 to the Orphan Fund. If it shall appear to
the magistrates that grain coming round to Sydney
has been wetted, that it might weigh heavier, or mea-
sure more than the quantity put on board, the master
will, on conviction, forfeit £5 to the Orphan Fund.”
The few shipowners in the colony are so high in their
freight charges that the struggling settlers are forced
to resort to open boats—a result of the prohibition
against colonists building ships, which cannot escape
Governor King. Yet he sends no letter home urging
the removal of this restriction, and commerce has still
to content herself with one leg for a support, and a
precious bad leg it is too, making it hard to say whether
the efforts of either pioneers on shore or of navigators
on the ocean will bear profitable fruit.
In August, 1803, Captain Flinders started for
England to lay before the Admiralty particulars of
his newly-discovered northern passage through the
Torres Straits, which was, in his opinion, to be the
future route for all shipping from the East ; and in
order to emphasise the benefit of this waterway he
persuaded the frigate conveying him and two accom-
panying merchantmen to avail of it. Many tales of
disaster in the waters adjacent to Australia have
been told since then, and some of them far more thrill-
ing ; but none exceed in interest the mishap which
befell the bold navigator on this journey, and none the
less is the interest sustained from the happy fact that,
although two vessels were totally wrecked, no loss of
life occurred. In the Sydney Gazette of nth Septem-
ber, 1803, was the following preliminary par. :—“ Cap-
tain Flinders, late commander H.M. sloop ‘ Inves-
tigator,’ and Mr. Park, commander ship ‘ Cato,’
arrived late on the Bth instant in a six-oared cutter
belonging to H.M.S. ‘ Porpoise,’ which ship they left
ashore upon a coral reef to the east of Sandy Cape,
and 729 miles from Sydney, without any prospect of
being saved. The ship ‘ Cato,’ which was in com-
pany, was entirely lost upon the same reef and broken
to pieces without a thing having been saved from her,
but the crew, with the exception of three, who have
now returned to port, are with the whole of the officers
and crew and passengers of the ‘ Porpoise,” upon a
small sandbank near the wrecks, with sufficient pro-
visions and water, saved from the ' Porpoise ,’ to
subsist the whole, amounting to 80 men, for three
months. Accompanied by twelve men, Captain
Flinders left the reef with three weeks’ provisions on
August 24, 1803, and on August 28, in the evening,
made the land near Indian Head, whence they kept
the coast on their board to Sydney. The shipwrecked
party left behind remained on the reef until the begin-
ning of October, when the ‘ Rollo,’ despatched by
Governor King, and Captain Flinders in the schooner
‘ Cumberland ’ took them off. The majority of the
castaways went to China, to be drafted there into
homeward-bound vessels ; whilst of the others, a few
accompanied Captain Flinders, who proposed taking
the charts and papers connected with his coastal
explorations to England ; and the remainder were
conveyed to Sydney in the ‘ Francis ’ and the ‘ Re-
source. In its effect this historical shipwreck was
momentous and far reaching. A strong prejudice was
engendered against the Torres Straits route which
half a dozen decades failed to entirely remove. Its
reputation as a track full of danger to mariners effec-
tually banned this ocean highway for ships and
steamers for half a century ; and even as late as
1851-2 in a Parliamentary report upon the question of
steam communication with Australia these words
bearing on the matter are to be found : “It is still
a matter ol doubt whether the passage from Singapore
to Sydney could with safety be made through the
Torres Straits.” As a regular waterway for traffic
between Eastern lands and Australia it was not until
the middle of the seventies, or thereabouts, that the
Torres Straits route became general.
With the expansion of settlement the opportunities
for shipbuilding widen. Andrew Thomson, an eman-
cipist, has gone into business on his own account some
time ago, and is now busily engaged turning out at
the Hawkesbury strong, well-built sloops, measuring
thirty-five to forty tons burden. Already has he
achieved a name for himself, and his work is in con-
stant demand. In the neighbourhood of the Hunter,
where but little of the wide expanse of rolling plains
now seen to-day has yet been won over to agriculture,
the chipping of the adze and the ring of the axe can
be heard from sunrise to sunset. And here in Sydney,
on the shores of ( ockle Bay, much caulking and pitch-
ing go on. Carroll, Simpson & Co —hardly a memory


now—advertise that with the facilities they can com-
mand they are prepared to build boats of any burden.
The yards of Keble & Underwood—on the latter’s
grant, which takes in the ground between George and
Pitt Streets, from a little below Bridge Street down
to the water’s edge—present an animated scene. The
firm in this month of May, 1803, is finishing the most
pretentious contract yet placed on the stocks ; a vessel
of seventy-five tons, which ‘ ‘ on pressing the bosom
of Thetis,” to borrow once again from the vocabulary
of the indispensable Mr. Howe, is given the name of
“ Governor King,” who has been released to authorise
the undertaking. But higher flights in maritime
architecture are soon to be attempted. Thirteen
months later they take in hand a project which has
been hanging fire for nearly two years ; that is, the
completion of the first three-masted vessel constructed
in the antipodes. Her burden was originally intended
to be upwards of 200 tons. It is actually 185 tons
measurement, the dimensions being 87 ft. all over ;
22 ft. 7 in. beam, and 14 ft. in the hold. The keel was
laid in May, 1804, and she is launched on the 19th
April, 1805 ; so that in the space of about twelve
months the largest maritime undertaking attempted
here will be completed. Not a bad accomplishment
for young Australia, who cheers lustily and is greatly
rejoiced when as she strikes the water the wife of the
Governor gives the vessel “ the illustrious appellative ”
of the King George.” A year flies by, and Governor
King, furnishing particulars of the colonial vessels
privately owned advises his Majesty’s Ministers that
1 ‘ twelve vessels from twenty to six tons have been
built and employed by individual proprietors going
between Sydney, Hawkesbury and Newcastle with
provisions, merchandise, grain, coals and timber.
These vessels also give bond not to navigate without
the limits. The whole of the private colonial tonnage
is 1,120 tons, which includes the Spanish brig purchased
by Mr. McArthur, which is under the same bonds as
the other colonial vessels.” Meanwhile another
schooner has been finished for the Government by
that master craftsman, Mr. Moore, who is likely to eat
his Christmas dinner with greater relish if he has read
the following paragraph, which appears in the issue of
the Gazette on 25th December, 1803 “ The schooner,
‘ Integrity,’ we are informed, will be launched either
on the first day of the new year or on the twelfth day ;
her hulk is now complete and has undergone an ex-
periment of being filled while on the stocks, in order
to prevent her making any water after being launched.
This vessel, built by Mr. Moore, is allowed to be the
finest piece of workmanship that has been performed
here ; her cabin is spacious and commodious, and by
the introduction of a sliding or shifting partition can
be extended forward as far as the forecastle bulkhead.
Her keel measures 48 ft. ; she is 60 ft. al! over, across
the beam 16 ft. 9 in., and her computed tonnage 59J
tons.” It is to be hoped for the sake of Mr. Moore’s
reputation the little schooner was constructed better
than his admirer’s phraseology.
So much activity in the shipbuilding yards makes
heavy calls upon the accessible supplies of suitable
timber, and to prevent unnecessary waste, as well as
illegal trafficking, regulations are issued from the naval
office in the middle of 1803 to the effect that any person
cutting down or destroying trees fit, or likely to become
fit, for shipbuilding, without the Governor’s per-
mission, if on any of the Crown lands, will be answerable
to the laws provided on that behalf and according to
the local situation of the inhabitants of the colony.
Masters and commanders of ships will be informed by
the naval officer where they may procure fuel for their
ships, and those who may obtain the Governor’s and
proprietor’s permission to cut down and remove timber
for the foregoing purposes, or for sale at any other
ports, are to pay a duty of £3 sterling to the treasurer
of the Orphan Fund for every thousand solid feet
taken abroad, of which they are to give notice to the
measurer (John Thomson) as often as they receive it
and before it is hoisted into the ship on pain of for-
feiting £5 sterling for each neglect. Governor King
cherishes ideas of a market being found in England,
and so Mr. Moore receives instructions to provide a
quantity of the best timber that can be procured for
shipbuilding. The trees are to be hewn according to
the scale and put aboard H.M.S. “ Glutton,” to be
conveyed to England ; red and other gums, stringy
and ironbark and other hardwoods will be selected
in preference to any other. They reach England and
are much admired, but hidebound prejudices and
wooden-headism successfully appealed to the Admiralty
against their adoption. A lively year this 1803, the
animation towards its close heightened no doubt by
the news the ‘ ‘ Paterson Aim ’ ’ brings of war being
declared again between England and France. Free
seamen are invited by proclamation to give in their
names ; those at least wishing to be trained in the
exercise of the cannon, held pieces, &c. ; foreigners in
the harbour are warned that to leave their ships and
live ashore will ensure their being put to ‘ ‘ public
labour ” till such time as they can be deported ; and
the closing days of December provide the spectacle
of Mr. Master Shipwright practising loading with
blank cartridge and bring the guns of the fort at an
imaginary enemy, there not being an artilleryman in
the whole of the colony. The little army Governor
King has at his command would form a fitting theme
for comic opera. But being a tough old salt, he in-
tends to fly the flag whilst one man can be found to
stand by him in its defence ; so he enrolls the redoubt-
able Loyal Association and personally instructs Mr.
Moore in the art of training field pieces.
Notwithstanding these extra duties imposed upon
the Government returns have still to be sent home,
and the first official account of our colonial fleet is
forwarded to the Duke of Newcastle, Secretary of
State for the Colonies, at the end of February, 1804,
showing four schooners and eighteen sloops engaged
in the coastal and insular trade. Of these Mr. Com-
missary Palmer— 1 ‘ Little Jack” he is better known
as —owns four ; Keble & Co. and Andrew Thomson,
three each ; and Tom Raby, two ; the remaining
owners possessing only one each. Four boats have
been built at the Hawkesbury, one at Richmond Hill,
one at Woolamoola—as it was then termed, —and the
balance at Sydney. “ Little Jack,” an official of
some standing who finds time in the midst of his
official duties to trade largely on his own account,


will be heard of again shortly. He stands first on the
list of owners, but only for a brief space of time, as
next year another will occupy this position. At the
end of 1805 the little fleet of trading vessels appears
in the official records thus :
Vessel’s Name. Tons. Men. Owner’s Name. When Registered
Hawkesbury .. 18 .. 4.. And. Thompson .. Mar., 1804
Speedwell .. 18 .. 6 .. do. .. Feb., 1804
Hope .. .. 11 .. 3 .. do. .. Oct., 1802
Governor Hunter 33 .. 6.. Isaac Nichols .. Jan, 1805
Venus .. .. 20 .. 3.. J. McArthur .. Mar , 1805
William and Mary 18 .. 3.. William Miller .. Nov., 1800
Bee .. .. 10 .. 3.. Crew & Abbott
Argument .. 9.. 2.. Benjamin Peate .. Oct., 1800
Improvement .. 10 .. 2 .. Jones & Smith .. Jan., 1804
Charlotte .. 25 .. 3.. Robert Inch .. Dec., 1803
Little William .. 8.. 2.. Bryan Hagan .. Jan., 1803
Raven .. .. 14 .. 5.. Raby & Willis .. Oct., 1800
Richmond .. 18 .. 3.. Morley & Watkins.. April, 1805
King George .. 185 .. 25 .. Kable & Co. .. Feb., 1805
Governor King .. 75 .. 8.. do. .. April, 1803
Contest .. .. 45 .. 6 .. do. .. July, 1804
Endeavour .. 31 .. 6 .. do. .. May, 1801
Marcia .. .. 26 .. 5.. do. .. Dec, 1803
John .. .. 31 .. 5 -. J. Palmer .. June, 1803
Fly 13 .. 4.. do. ..
George .. .. 34 .. 6.. do. .. July, 1801
Edwin .. .. 16 .. 3.. do. ..
Margaret .. .. 7.. 2.. Thos. Gilberthorpe Sept., 1805
Sophia .. *. .. .. • •
Twenty-four vessels aggregating a gross tonnage of
nigh upon seven hundred tons, or an average tonnage
of about thirty tons each. It is a substantial advance
in tonnage, at any rate, if not numerically, and tne
Governor is not quite easy in his mind as to how it
will be taken by the home authorities ; so he relieves
his doubts by drafting and publishing more regulations.
Prospective owners are reminded of the penalties they
will incur if they attempt to become possessed of any
boats before entering into the bonds which will still
fetter the growing spirit of enterprise for another
fifteen years. Vessels in the harbour must lie off at
a certain distance and allow no communication with
the shore after sunset under penalty of confiscation
or being ordered to sea at once and not permitted to
return. There is no room for misunderstanding.
“ No ship or vessel,” says the Governor in one of his
general orders issued at a later stage, “ colonial or
otherwise, when coming laden to this city from Eng-
land or the fisheries in these seas, is to proceed to any
other harbour to discharge but that of Port Jackson.
When making a clear and faithful entry of the goods
that are on board, if she is desirous of proceeding to
any of the outports a regular clearance will be granted
accordingly. A breach of this order shall subject the
said vessel to seizure and condemnation on conviction.’ ’
The author of this specimen of government undoubtedly
means business, and captains who have taken a couple
of hundred days to bring their speculations here are
not likely to transgress, preferring rather the burden
of double dues. The order is the work of his Excel-
lency Governor Bligh, of “ Bounty ” fame, a soured,
suspicious soul, who may be allowed to be only great
in his attempts to counteract the efforts made by his
predecessor to advance the interests of the colonists.
The shipping section of the community is particularly
favoured with his blighting influences, and he is at-
tacked on that useful principle which induces a
burgomaster to hunt a rat in a Dutch dyke —for fear
it should ruin a province. Hearken to Master Harris
opinion of Captain Bligh and his times, communicated
in private to the Kings who are now in England. Sur-
geon Harris, a naval officer deposed of office, has not
wasted his opportunities, and, besides many broad
acres, owns a deer-park beyond Ultimo, which has
perpetuated his name in its leading thoroughfare.
Writing to Captain King on October 25, 1807, he says :
“ Oh, tempora ! oh, mores ! Is there no Christian in
New South Wales to put a stop to the tyranny of the
Governor ? Campbell ’ ’ [Robert from Calcutta, at
the head of the community now] ‘ ‘ is everything
vith Bligh. He got him to give permission for the vessel
he built to proceed to China, which has involved me
in a troublesome lawsuit with Simeon Lord for £2,000
damages, as prize agent.” Hinc ilka lachrymcß—
characteristically translated by the grammar school
urchin as “hence these weeps.” The vessel is the
“ Perseverance,” of 136 tons burden, and the first
permitted to break through the regulations of the
East India Company, previously referred to, which
permits American vessels to deprive us of our legiti-
mate carrying trade. The Governor has previously
given permission for the “Santa Anna,” a prize
brought to Sydney by the British ship “Port au
Prince,” to be despatched on this journey; but the
imperious Campbell— ‘‘ the most haughty Bashaw
you ever saw. lording it over his vassals ” —gets his
vessel away instead ; and hence the lawsuit, Lord v.
Harris, with a spilling of much splenetic ink. Further
on the ex-Governor is informed by his correspondent
that “ ‘ Tittle Jack ’ goes on swimmingly. I cannot tell
you how. because I’m sure you can guess. Every
person who held any situation in your time is turned
to the right about. Robinson, who had charge of the
mill, was too much in ‘ Little Jack’s ’ way when he
wanted to get wheat ground ; therefore he has gone,
and Palmer has charge of the mill, which answers well.
I do not think that any Government account can ever
be made up by what I know without Palmer’s office
is burnt down.” To Madame King the irritable
medico writes more hurriedly, it is to be presumed,
than accurately. “It is completely the reign of
Robert-spere (sic) or that of Terror. The principal
agents are—who do you think ? Robert Campbell,
naval officer, collector, treasurer and factotum. It is
really distressing to see the arbitrary measures he
uses with all vessels but his own, consequently his do
as they please. His next in command is ‘ Little Jack
—Palmer, magistrate —total director of the public
stores, mills, grain and all other things or charge, and I
can assure you that Campbell and him do as they please.
You can now get what is wanted from the dry store
by backing Palmer’s bill, and I assure you I think
there is not many now afloat. Had P.G.K. (the
Governor that was) remained here there would un-
doubtedly (have) been a crash in the firm. These
things could not be easily got then. But now the
coach and four of both houses flourish in style. How
Mr. Palmer will make up his public accounts I know
not, whilst he is about nine hours out of twelve at
Government House. But this I know, that poor
P.G.K. had trouble enough with him on this score,
when he had nothing else to mind.”


Four months alter Governor Bligh issues his order
compelling the payment of port dues, twice he finds it
advisable to modify it. There has been some straight
talk from plain-spoken salts, who, finding they must
obey his instructions, give him their opinions whether
he likes them or not. Besides, experience shows him
he has put his foot into it, as the vessels likely to be
most affected are those chartered by the home govern-
ment to convey stores to the various convict settle-
ments. So he backs down and makes an exception in
the favour of vessels discharging at Derwent River,
Port Dalrymple, or Norfolk Island, keeping the impost
hanging over colonial craft nevertheless. His suc-
cessor in 1811 fixes the fees for colonial vessels on the
following apparently moderate scale :—“Entry and
clearance to the Hawkesbury, 4s. ; ditto to Norfolk
Island and Newcastle, 10s. ; ditto to the fisheries or
to the settlement at the south, 10s. ; to the naval offi-
cers’ clerk, 2s. but though this tariff wears a modest
look, in the aggregate it bulks to goodly proportions in
the State ledgers. Governor Macquarie hides his lights
no more than his name under a bushel, a characteristic
being able to claim three. This is G. Blaxcell, whose
trio consists of the “ Brothers,” 40 tons ; the ‘ ‘ Gover-
nor Macquarie,” 106 tons, and the “Cumberland,”
80 tons —all schooner-rigged. There is an ugly feature
to note : wrecks and piracies represent a deplorable
high ratio, suggestive of carelessness amounting in
many instances to criminality. Kable & Co., our
erstwhile leading shipholders, lead no longer, having
given way to J Underwood, whose “ King George,”
the one ship we have to boast of, still flies his burger
on the gaff, and “little Johnny’s” boats have all taken
their fright to “David Jones’ locker.” Simeon Lord
has been taking risks on cargoes for years, but hulls
have to insure themselves, and the popular voice has
long ago decided that Commissary Palmer would have
done better to stick to his stores and leave ship specu-
lations to legitimate traders. No more three-masters
have been attempted. There is a decided feeling in
favour of keeping on the middle line and limiting
“ leviathans ” to one hundred and fifty tons. In that
memorable year 1819, when the high and mighty
“John” Company, receiving its coup-de-grace lies
Sydney Harbour from Watson’s Bay. 1843.
thatjjfeads to the Earl of Bathunt receiving this infor-
mation in July, 1812 :—“ On my taking command of
the colony in the year 1810 the amount of port dues
collected did not exceed £B,OOO per annum ; and there
was only £SO or £6O of a balance in the Treasurer’s
hands ; but now port dues are collected in Port Jackson
to the amount of £28,000 or £30,000 per annum. In
addition to the annual dollar revenue there, port dues
are collected at Hobart Town and Georgetown, in
Van Diemen’s Land, to the amount of between £B,OOO
and £IO,OOO per annum.”
The building of ships is very snail-like during the
years 1806-20, and the last twelve months of this
period, in comparison to the close of 1805, shows but
a slight increase all round. Owners number 27, owning
31 vessels, measuring in the gross 1,594 tons. The
one-craft man stands very much in evidence here ;
out three firms possessing two vessels, and only one
squealing and sprawling on its back, and the colonists,
having won their fight against the aggressive cor-
poration of plundered wealth, can now convey their
own goods in their own ships to Great Britain, an
influential meeting is held in Sydney. There a remark-
able resolution is carried, well worth quoting in full,
as it sheds a strong light upon young Australia’s re-
liance and; resource. Here it is : —“ That the restric-
tions which prevent merchants from employing ships
of not less than three hundred and fifty tons burden
in the trade from the mother country to this colony
operate so as to amount almost to a prohibition, as few
mercantile adventurers here are willing, or able, to
employ the large capital necessarily required for the
cargoes of vessels of this magnitude, and we are con-
sequently left ill-supplied with many articles of British
manufactories, which habit has rendered necessary to
our comfort. But it is, therefore, e qpedient that an


application should be made, by petition, to his
Majesty’s Government, through his Excellency Gover-
nor Macquarie, praying that navigation may be opened
(as the British manufacturers and colonial producers)
through the medium of vessels of 150 tons burden and
upwards.” The petition bears on it the signatures of
Sydney’s leading citizens, mostly merchants —Sir John
Jamieson, W. Brown, E. S. Hall, J. Harris, E. Eagaq
S. Lord, G. Blaxland, W. Cox, R. Townson, W. Red-
fern and R. Brooks. Governor Macquarie can see
plenty of evidence in this that he rightly stated he had
found ‘ ‘ commerce in its dawn ’ ’ when he landed in
the settlement. It is little more than in its dawn now.
However, he forwards the petition to its destination
and promises to co-operate with the petitioners in
endeavouring to secure the alteration. It is of no
avail. Ihe prayer is refused with a snap, John Bull’s
official gorge rising at the idea of any of his bairns
presuming to suggest to him what will be good for
them. A trifle of revenue peeps from under this re-
fusal, as through it British merchants are able to keep
their hands on the whole of the export trade to Aus-
tralia for some years to come.
The over-ocean shipping during the period covered
by the years 1801-20 has a different story to tell to
that of our coastal commerce. Happily a brighter
story. The last three years of these decades see an
excess of fifty arrivals per annum ; and in 1820 they
came at the rate of two per week. This means much
benefit to the settlement, and we are soon going to
talk of going ahead by leaps and bounds. Not a day
too soon was that light put on the South Head in 1816.
It is the first invitation we have given ships that pass
in the night to look in. Commerce by 1820 has as-
sumed her proper position, and leads instead of being
led. Of the 595 ships which have brought their burdens
to Port Jackson since the beginning of the century 175
are oversea merchantmen—principally from India and
America, and 166 are engaged in the fisheries, the
South Sea Islands, and the inter-settlement trades.
Of the remainder the British Government despatch
173 to dump their human freights and cargoes of stores
on our shores ; 9 are prizes ; a similar number men-of-
war, and 63 visitors, vessels in ballast and ships re-
fitting.
Solid progress marks the decade 1821-30, a
period not too eventful and withal punctuated by
some important happenings ; most important of all
that it carries us into the era of steam. Now the East
India Company has no longer a monopoly of our export
trade, expansion becomes the order of the day ; fishery
products, timber and wool being the most frequent
entries on the manifests. That sample parcel of fleece
taken to England in Macarthur’s pocket in 1801 has
grown to 172,880 lbs. in 1822, and runs over a million
pounds weight, valued at £63,553 after seven more
years have passed over. It is going to quicken our
shipping and make Australia advance at a smarter
pace more than anything else we have to place in the
European markets, until the advent of the flourishing
fifties—the most eventful ten years in the history of
the whole of Australasia. The days when no ships arc
to be seen at anchor in Port Jackson have passed, and
ordinary souls, who do read the paper, woke up one
morning in 1822 to learn that ‘ ‘ we have now in Sydney
Cove twelve ships, five brigs and two schooners, in-
cluding,” Mr. Editor pleasantly adds, “ ‘Grace,’
1 Providence,’ and ‘ Glory.’ ” This same year twelve
vessels freighted with colonial produce leave New
South Wales ports bound for England. Nothing so
important has been accomplished before, and we are
inclined to crow a little over the record. Three years
hence there are no less than eight shipowners in the
port —to wit, Robert Campbell Jones & Walker Rame
and Ramsay, Icely & Hudson, Aspinall, Browne &Co.,
Robert Campbell, jun., A. B. Spark, and Cooper and
Levey. Sixteen other firms are conducting shipping
agencies ; and five years later the number of owners
has increased to twenty-three. The exports for the
year are just over the round sum of £IOO,OOO, an item
Mr. Commercial Editor does not consider worthy of
mention. But the fact makes a permanent impression
in the mind of the official who sits in the receipt of
customs ■ and he thinks it seasonable for an alteration
of dues, which have to be paid henceforth as under :
Naval Office Fees, 1822.
Entry for a ship with articles for sale, and on Govern-
ment service .. .. .. .. .. .. £0 13 o
Entry for a ship with articles for sale and not in
Government service .. .. .. .. .. x 10 o
Entry for a ship with no articles .. .. .. o 15 o
do. all foreign vessels .. .. .. .. 300
Permission to wood and water for every vessel not
exceeding 100 tons per register 100
do. do. 200 do. .. 200
do. do. 300 do. .. 300
do. do. 400 do. .. 400
do. do. 500 do. .. 500
Permission to wood and water tor every vessel up-
wards of 500 tons per register .. .. .. Coo
Permission to trade .. .. .. .. .. 110
Dues of each bond.. .. .. .. .. .. o 10 6
do. port of clearance .. .. .. .. .. 050
do. to the Naval Officer’s Clerk .. .. .. 026
do. do. do. for each permit to
land spirits or wine, per cask .. .. .. 006
For Colonial Vessels.
Deeds of entry and clearance to the Hawkesbury .. £0 4 o
do. do. Newcastle .. .. o 10 o
do. do. the Fishery or Settle-
ments southward .. .. .. .. .. 0100
Deeds of entry to the Naval Officer’s Clerk .. .. 020
Ships from any part of the world importing cargoes
(the manufactures of Great Britain excepted), to
pay a duty of 5 % ad valorem on the amount of
their respective invoices—
On every gallon of spirit landed .. .. .. o 10 o
do. wine do. .. .. .. 009
On each pound of tobacco .. .. .. .. 006
Wharfage on each bale, cask, or package .. .. 006
(The Naval Officer to receive 5 % on all duties
collected.)
Wharfingers’ Fees.
On each bale, cask, or package landed or shipped .. £0 o 3
Metage per ton on coals .. .. .. .. .. 026
Measure of timber, per 1,000 ft. .. .. .. 020
There will be more alterations of a sweeping nature
before long, and that hungry relic of “ squeeze pidgin,”
the naval officer, and his still more ravenous under-
strapper, the clerk, will become memories of the past
—giving way to collectors and controllers, and lockers,
jerquers, and tide-waiters and other human para-
phernalia for enriching the community at the expense
of the individual. Before this change can be effected


Year
E
NTERED
Cleared
Vessels
Tonnage
Vessels
Tonnage
1860
1,424
427,835
1,438
431.484
1865
1,912
635,888
2,120
690,294
1870
1.858
689,820
2,066
771,942
1875
2,376
1,109,086
2,294
1,059,101
1880
2,108
1,242,458
2,043
1,190,321
1885
2,601
2,088,307
2,538
2,044.770
1890
2,889
2,413,247
2,777
2,348,625
1895
3,121
2,929,758
3,090
2,930,280
1900
3,626
4,094,088
3.406
3,920,801
1901
2,760
4,133,200
2,853
4,274,101
1 902
2,888
4,367,739
2,835
4,325,480
1903
2,953
4,463,648
3,007
4,466,916
1904
Jan. to June,
2,718
4,419,179
2.767
4,460,014
1905
1,699
2,806,989
1,440
2,469,362
the shipping company has happened along, to borrow
an Americanism, in 1823. The Sydney and Van
Diemen’s Land Packet issue a prospectus carrying on
the face of it such influential names as Thos. Raine,
Ed. Wollstoncroft, Wm. Kermode, John Gaunt, P.
Dempster, Simon Lord, Daniel Cooper, Joseph Under-
wood, John Macqueen, and financial stars of lesser
magnitude. The plan of campaign is simplicity itself,
the directors are authorised to purchase a steamer
whilst one is building. But a trade, the primary
essential of success, does not exist ; neither does the
company after a very brief existence. Another ven-
ture has been set on foot in canny Scotland, about the
same time, to meet with no better success. A certain
Robert Brown promotes the Australasian Company at
the end of 1822 for regular sailings of Ai clipper ships
between Leith and Australia, the idea at the bottom
of this venture being to promote colonisation. Two
ships —the “Greenock,” Captain Richmond, 442 tons
burden, and the “ Triton,” Captain Crear, 404 tons —
are laid on, both good vessels, capitally appointed, and
commanded by popular skippers. The “Greenock ”
arrives in May, 1824, consigned to Macqueen & Fer-
guson, bringing 62 passengers, mostly artizans, and
her holds full ; the “ Triton ” also reaches Australia
a full ship, and two other boats follow. Then this
inflow of population tapers down the pawky propor-
tions, owing to adverse accounts of the settlement
reaching Scotland, and the Australasian Company
fizzles out. Failure No. 2 in a joint-stock line has a
disheartening effect upon adventurous speculation
and much time flies by before anything further is
attempted.
Maritime affairs move too actively now to admit
of all being detailed in this sketch of but one particular
branch of commerce. Henceforward the story of pro-
gress must be outlined in figures, and events sum-
marised sectionally ; due regard being paid to chrono-
logical order. The tonnage of trading vessels which
sailed from Great Britain for the Australian colonies
increased sixteen fold between the years 1820 and
1836 ; and in the same time the value of the exports
increased about seven fold. Taking these terminal
years for purposes of comparison, m 1820 the measure-
ment represented 1,291 tons tons, and the value of the
exports £124,232 ; m 1836 these items were 19,195
tons and £835,637 respectively. A word here to
emphasise the fact that these figures deal with private
speculations only, irrespective of the trade brought to
the port per medium of store ships and transports.
In the first six months of 1837 21 ships from
Australia entered inwards at London and Liverpool,
totalling 5,947 tons. For the same period in 1838
there was 8,384 tons, an increase on the half-year of
2,437 tons. Those ports, in return, sent us during the
first six months of 1837,14,901 tonnage of merchandise,
and 28,410 tons in the corresponding period of 1838-
an increase for the half-year of 13,509 tons, or nearly
100 per cent. Dealing now with the gross tonnage
entering Port Jackson :—ln 1826 62 vessels, measuring
70,178 tons, entered inwards and 60 vessels of 17,021
tons, cleared ; in 1836 these figures were : inwards, 269
vessels, 65,415 tons ; outwards, 254 vessels, of 62,834
tons. In 1839, when 563 vessels, measuring 135,474
tons, represented the inward entries at the Customs
House and 548 vessels, of 124,176 tons, the outward ;
137 ships hailed from Great Britain ; 290 from British
colonies ; 7 from the South Sea Islands ; 51 from New
Zealand ; 36 from the fisheries ; 4 only —the trade has
slipped away long before now —from the United States
of America ; and 88 from foreign ports. Of the des-
tinations of the outward bound, 39 ships sailed for
Great Britain, 303 for British colonies, 7 for the South
Sea Islands, 81 for New Zealand, 28 for the fisheries,
2 for the United States, and 88 for foreign stations.
The large number of vessels in this year bound for
New Zealand is to be accounted for by the news of
the intention of the British Government to colonise
the islands. Eleven previous, when there were
but twelve mercantile firms in Sydney, the bulk of the
old-world business being done by agencies ; when the
population of the colony numbered only 36,598 ; when
the first and second immigrant ships brought 596 free
immigrants and the bond arrivals were 2,712 ; when
the wool exports represented 834,343 lbs., and the oil
exports 7,647 tons ; when the revenue of the colony
was £122,722, and two banks met the requirements of
the public, trade in the ports of the territory was repre-
sented by 137 inward vessels, measuring 32,589 tons
and 168 outward vessels, of 37,586 tons gross measure-
ment. Thus within eleven years there was an all-
round increase of considerably more than 200 per cent.
In 1841 the number of vessels entered and cleared at
all the ports of New South Wales totalled 131, with an
aggregate tonnage of 43,117 tons. Nine years after-
wards ,immediately before the separation of Victoria,
the figures were as follow : 976 vessels entered, with
a tonnage of 234,215, and 1,014 vessels cleared, with
a tonnage of 263,849. In 1851, the year of separation
of Victoria from the parent State, the trade was con-
tracted to 553 vessels entered, of 153,002 tons, and 503
vessels cleared, measuring 139,020 tons. Buf theie
was soon to be a rebound. The discovery of gold
brought with it a large increase in oversea imports ;
and in 1855 shipping amounted to 1,152 vessels entered,
with a tonnage of 353,323 tons, and 1,185 clearances,
totalling 362,842 tons—a considerable increase on the
maritime commerce of the previous year. On the
whole the advance of shipping since that era,"though
occasionally checked by bad seasons, has been fairly
veil maintained. The following table furnishes a
return of vessels arriving in and departing from New
South Wales at intervals of five years from iB6O to
1900, for the four succeeding years, and for the first
six months of 1905 ;


Year.
Steamers.
No. Tons.
Sailing Yes els.
No. Tons.
No,
Totals.
Tons.
1880
12
861
29
1,938
41
2,799
1885
36
2,992
29
800
65
3,792
1890
6
697
9
394
15
1,091
1895
4
259
5
481
9
740
1900
10
687
13
662
23
1,349
These figures represent about one-third of the entire
shipping of Australasia, and greatly exceed any re-
presenting the trade of any other Australasian State.
What proportion of these figures has to be appor-
tioned to steamships there is no means of ascertaining
prior to 1876, as the records before then made no dis-
tinction between steamers and sailing vessels. In
that year the steam tonnage was 912,554 tons as com-
pared with 1,215,171 tons of canvas ; being 42.9 per
cent, and 57 1 per cent, respectively. The relative
positions were almost immediately afterwards trans-
posed, as in 1880 1,550,372 represented steam tonnage
and only 882,407 tons that of ships. In fact, in 1900
the gross measurement of sailing vessels, i.e. 1,523,397
tons, was no more than 308,226 tons in excess of 1876,
whilst the tonnage of steamships amounted to
6,491,492. To a very large extent the trade of the
State is carried on with Great Britain and British
possessions ; of 8,014,889 representing the total ton-
nage of 1890, only 1,168,397 tons being transacted
with foreign ports ; and of the balance, classed as
British, the shipping trade was divided as follows ;
To Australasia, 3,734,670 tons ; to the United Kingdom,
3,044,141 tons, and to British possessions outside
Australasia, 67,681 tons. The progress of the ship-
ping trade of Sydney has been of a uniform character
throughout, averaging since iB6O an increase of about
51 per cent, per annum. For natural advantages,
shipping appliances docking facilities and wharfage
accommodation the port of Sydney stands unrivalled
south of the equator. Newcastle, which commands
a volume of trade equal to about half that of Sydney,
and where vessels of 8,000 tons burden can berth with-
out danger, is also a well-equipped port, equal to load-
ing 25,000 tons of coal per diem. No other seaport of
the State can be compared to either Sydney or New-
castle ; though Wollongong has enjoyed a coal trade
of considerable consequence for some years past The
average tonnage of sea-going vessels lying m Sydney
harbour is slightly in excess of 8,000 per diem ; that
of Newcastle being about 35,000 tons. During the
wool season, when shipping the “ golden fleece is at
its height, these figures rise to 125,000 tons and
85,000 tons respectively. The value of the tonnage
ordinarily moored to Sydney, may be set down at two
millions sterling, and that of the port of Newcastle at
a quarter of this amount.
From a return issued by the Government 139 vessels
were constructed in the colony between the years 1822
and 1840, twelve being built in 1826, seventeen in
1837, twenty in 1838, and eleven in 1839. Their gross
tonnage amounted to 6,447, so that the average measurement
of each boat was a little over 40 tons. The colonial
fleet, though small in tonnage, was'getting strong in numbers.
About the middle of the period just referred t 0—1832
in fact —the vessels owned in Sydney and belonging
to this port numbered no less than 99, ranging
from 392 tons to 17 tons; seven measured over
300 tons; twenty-two were between 200 and 300
tons; and twenty-six between 100 and 200 tons; the classi-
fication being : 26 barques, 20 schooners, 18 brigs, 17 cutters,
11 ships, 5 ketches, 2 steamers, 1 scow, and 1 house-boat.
In this year “ it is understood that the Government dock-
yard will follow the fate of the lumber-yard in being broken
up, and the remainder of the Government vessels —the
barque ‘ Lucy Ann.’ the brigs ‘ Governor Phillip,’ ‘ Amity.’
and ‘ Mary Elizabeth,’ and the schooner ‘ Isabella,’ all of
which have been in the care of Mr. Daniel Egan, master
builder —will be brought to auction.” Everything in this
department is to be done by contract for the future. During
the forties the number of vessels constructed annually in-
creased considerably, 1849 establishing a record by turning
out from the different yards no less than thirty-eight craft,
measuring 1,834 tons. In the following year the output
was reduced again to eighteen vessels, aggregating 1,207
tons burden; this proving the commencement of a gradual
falling off in the shipwright’s work. With the general adop-
tion of steam traffic for the coastal trade imported iron
slowly displaced our indigenous woods; and when, in addi-
tion, the rate of wages made such a serious item in the ques-
tion of cost that owners turned to foreign markets for their
requirements, local ship-building received a check at a time
when conditions were more favourable for its successful
pursuit than at any former period in the history of the
colony. Cuthbert’s building establishment, commenced at
Millers’ Point in 1857, was equal to building vessels up to
500 tons, and. besides turning out a large number of sailing
ships, successfully undertook the construction of many
screw and paddle steamers, gunboats and dredges during
the next five-and-twenty years. Booth’s establishment, at
Johnston’s Bay, in 1870 occupied an area of 2|- acres and
had capabilities for ship-building up to 200 or 300 tons.
Hely and Harpur had capacious yards associated with their
floating dock, where for years vessels up to 250 tons were
constructed, and a considerable number of men employed.
Besides repairing the largest steamers at Mort’s Dock, M ater-
view Bay, steamers of a size suited for intercolonial traffic
were built every year, and at the works of the Australasian
Steam /Navigation Company, where on an average 400
persons were employed, a first-class plant existed, enabling
the company to build for private owners. Notwithstanding
these extensive means and the advantages accruing from
so much competition, the industry retrograded until the
beginning of the eighties, when there was an emphatic re-
vival, unfortunately of short duration. The years 1883-4
witnessed a remarkable impetus in the construction of
all descriptions of ships; 50 sailing and 53 steam vessels
being built in the first twelve months, whilst 64 steamers
and 39 sailing vessels were built in the latter year. Trade
then became less active and in a few more years showed a
tendency to collapse. In 1888 it had fallen lower than in
anv year subsequent to 1840, and there has been no marked
improvement since. We have gone back to those early days
when schooners and ketches, generally averaging consider-
ably less than 100 tons burden, were the principal classes of
sailing ships constructed. A quinquennial return of vessels
and tonnage built since 1880 is stated below ;
During 1900 works connected with the building or
refitting of vessels employed about hands, by
far the largest portion of whom were engaged in the
port of Sydney.


The Era of Steam.
The year 1831 was a critical era in colonial affairs—
a year of embarrassment more general and more seemingly
%/ O O •/
inextricable than hardly any preceding one ; a year of re-
stricted discounts, of dishonoured bills, of law-suits, of
sheriffs’ sales, of arrests, incarcerations, insolvencies, beg-
gary. For three dreary years the heavens and the earth had
combined to chasten the colony ; but in 1831 the visitation
of drought passed away. Despondency gave way to hope,
inactivity to industry, suspicion to confidence —and, later
on, penury to affluence. At this interesting crisis steam
navigation first brought its powerful aid to the develop-
ment of the country’s resources and the augmentation of
J ' o
wealth. Until then rivers had been traversed by incom-
modious boats, whilst the miserable small craft engaged in
the coasting traffic were not only as uncertain as the wind,
but were continually entailing loss upon infant commerce,
there being no insurance to cover their all too frequent loss.
The Parramatta River could boast no better conveyance
between the metropolis and the second town of the colony
than its wearisome 44 passage-boats.” Those who preferred
the river to the road had at least the advantage of a leisurely
contemplation of scenery which opened around them with
the slow and measured movements of a panorama. Five
hours from town to town was a very fair passage ; seven
hours by no means uncommon ; and the livelong day from
dewy morn to dusky eve was occasionally consumed in the
trip by those solemn-paced yachts.
Th° first steamboat that ever glided on the waters of
Port Jackson was the 44 Surprise,” a little packet of ten
horse-power, built for the Parramatta River by Mr. H. G.
Smith, of the firm of Messrs. Smith Bros. ; so that to this
gentleman belongs the honour of being the father of steam
navigation in Australia. At Neutral Bay towards the end
of 1830 Mr. Smith commenced laying down his craft, which
was launched on 31st March. 1831. But before her paddles
had made one revolution another surprise awaited the ex
pectant people of Sydney, the greater part of whom had
never beheld a vessel propelled by steam. Without any
previous announcement the 44 Sophia Jane,” of 154 tons
burden, formerly a padd!e passage-boat plying on the Thames,
between London and Margate, was brought out from Eng-
land as a speculation by Lieutenant Ed. Biddulph —the
father of steam navigation on the Hunter, —an officer in
the navy, and passed through the heads on the 13th May,
1831. Her experimental trip to Newcastle was made on
June 17th. So to her belongs the first vessel to bridge Great
Britain and Australia and to ply upon our southern waves.
Meantime the machinery of the 44 Surprise” was fitted in
her, and on June 23rd she made her first experimental run
up the Parramatta River, under circumstances of some
ceremony, being the first steamboat standing to the credit
of our national resources. After plying for a few weeks on
this harbour inlet it was found the fares charged stood in
the road of her financial success, so after running daily for
some months, she proceeded to Van Diemen’s Land, and
her place was supplied by a powerful horse-boat. —
“ Clap on all steam,” the captain cried, “ or else we shall be lost,”
And the engineer replied from the bank, “ The old horse is doing
its beat,” —
built on the same spot, as the second steamer turned out of
a colonial yard, which is another story. About the begin-
ning of 1831 Mr. J. H. Grose, one of the most prominent
of our pioneer shipowners, commenced building, in tin
establishment of Messrs. Marshall & Lowe, on the Williams
River, a paddle-boat named the 44 William 1V.,” measuring
59 tons. It is amusing to read to-day the following extract,
taken from an article in an issue of the Sydney Morning
Herald , published some years afterwards : 44 We well recol-
lect that on the arrival of the 4 Sophia Jane ’ a general feeling
of regret was experienced that Mr. Grose should have entered
into a speculation which has been thus interfered with, as
the idea of two steamers finding employment in our coastal
trade was not entertained.” However, she was launched
in October, 1831, and laid on, when finished, for a short
time on the same route as the 44 Sophia Jane,” extending
her trips to the Green Hills, near Maitland, thirty-eight
miles up the Hunter River. Contrary to expectations
both boats did remarkably well trading between Sydney
and Maitland; and in 1832, the colony beginning to feel
the impulse given to it by the immigration of persons ol
capital, it was determined to form a company termed the
Australasian Steam Conveyance Company, which was to
have the power of extending itself with the wants of the
colony. The association promised to itself a wide field and
a bountiful harvest; for its object was to watch the opening
capabilities of the colony for steam vessels and railroads,
and to take the first start in meeting the demands as they
should occur. The immediate object of this undertaking
was to run a steamboat up and down the navigable
inlet called the Parramatta River. J. W. Russell,
of Clarence Town, Williams’ River, was commissioned
to construct the 44 Australia,” a boat with engines
of 19-horse power ; and this finished in the early part of
1835. She ran her first trip on the 12th April of that year,
under the command of Captain John Morris —who had been
engaged on £BO per annum, —the Governor (Sir Richard
Bourke) b°ing present among the guests. Fares to Parra-
matta were 2s. fid. first-class and Is. fid. second-class, with
Is. fid. and Is. to Kissing Point. George Bunn, a leading
merchant and pioneer insurance agent, was chairman of the
directors; H. H. McArthur, deputy-chairman; 1). Pcole,
G. T. Palmer, F. Stephen, A. Hayward, John Lord, H. Fran-
cis, H. Baldy, H. R. James, R. D. Cunnyngham, H. A. Castle.
A. Foss, W. Morgan and Captain R. Duke constituting the
remainder of the board. The Rev. Ralph Mansfield, who
had a finger in every pie, and pudding as well, was honorary
treasurer; John T. Wilson, secretary and Sydney Stephens,
John Lord, and John Tingcombe, auditors. Whilst the
44 Australia ” was in course of construction John and Wil-
liam Byrnes, of Parramatta, had replaced the strong horse-
punt on the river with their colonial built steamer, the
44 Experiment.” This was early in 1834, and two years
afterwards she became the property of the Australasian
Company. For some years the shareholders received sub-
stantial dividends, 30s. per share half-yearly, and had the
company been judiciously managed, it might have ren-
dered the most valuable services to the colony and have
continued to yield goodly dividends upon its capital stock.
Unfortunately the leading spiiit, Mr. George Bunn, went
the way of all flesh whilst the company was still in the days
of infancy. An inert successor allowed the direction to fall
into the hands of the Philistines : for that immortal hero of
auctioneers and prince of rascals, John Thomas Wilson,
became its factotum, and, as a consistent result, its ruin.
By a tissue of chicanery, which the shareholders made a
thousand vain attempts to unravfi. he so involved the com


pyny in the meshes of litigation that it at length came to an
untimely and ignoble end.
J o
From the time when the “Australia” commenced
operations the colonial steam marine gradually increased.
As a proof of the success of the steamers trading to the Green
Hills, the Hunter River Steam Packet Association was
formed in 1834, with the object of procuring a steamer of
much greater power than that of the “ Sophia Jane ” and
the “ William 1V.,” to be appropriated to the trade of theii
river, and particularly adapted to the carriage of cattle and
sheep. The “ Ceres,” of 80 horse-power, was built in Syd-
ney by Messrs, Marshall & Lowe, for the association, and
“ started running at the beginning of 1836 —the largest and
best equipped boat in colonial waters.” Owing to gross
carelessness her career was brief and disastrous. At 8 p.m.
on August 30. 1836, whilst hugging the shore too closely,
she struck a reef off Nora Head, 25 miles from Newcastle,
and sank in four fathoms of water within fifteen minutes.
Three months afterwards the association was wound up, its
assets all going with the loss of this vessel. Meanwhile the
c? O
44 Tamar,” 50 horse power, originally intended for Laun-
ceston, arrived in Sydney in 1834, and was laid on the Hunter
Rivet line, in opposition to Grose’s boats, by J. T. Wilson,
her owner. The sun of this remarkable figure in the early
history of Australia was now at its zenith, but it was soon
to wane and be for ever submerged. Giving his horse to a
port r to take care of one afternoon in the middle of October,
1839. he left the Commercial Wharf by the 44 Sophia Jane,”
proposing only to go down the harbour ; but on getting
outside the heads, he boarded the brig 44 Venus,” which
vessel he had bought a short time previous, and laden with
a full cargo purchased from Sydney merchants. This was
the last heard of him. In 1836 the Australian and Tasma-
manian Steam Conveyance Company with a proposed
capital of £35,000, was initiated to establish steam com-
munication with Van Diemen’s Land, but the public looked
on this project as premature and declined to subscribe.
At the end of October, 1836, a second company, termed the
New Hunter River Steam Packet Association was floated,
with a capital of £25,000 in £25 shares, amongst the leading
promoters being R. Jones, M.C., A. B. Spark, Edye Manning,
Win. Dawes, J. H. Bettington, and G. S. Tucker, secretary
pro tem. This undertaking acquired the 44 Sophia Jane’
and 44 William 1V.,” which were put up to auction on the
dissolution of partnership between J. H. Grose and Thos.
Street; brought out the 44 James Watt ” from London, to
trade between Port Macquarie. Moreton Bay, and Sydney,
and also the ill-fated but perfectly constructed 44 Clonmel.”
The 46 Victoria ” and 44 Maitland,” two more locally-made
steam vessels were laid on to Wollongong and the Green
Hills respectively at the commencement of 1837, so that
regular traders were now running along the coast in all direc-
tions between Moreton Bay and Melbourne ; the principal
visitor to the latter settlement being, however, the schooner
44 Kate.” About the end of 1837 word was received from
Calcutta that a company had been started there at the insti-
gation of an Australian named Cracroft to establish steam
communication with the settlement in Australasia. Many ol
the leading citizens in the 44 City of Palaces ” took up shares,
but in the *,nd nothing practical resulted from the
speculation. The British and Australian Steam Navigation
Company was formed in London at the commencement of
1838 to kart a similar line between the two countries, and
had to dissolve two years hence owing to the determined
opposition of th 3 London merchants interested in Aus-
tralian shipping preventing the necessary capital being sub-
scribed. Towards the end of 1839 some gentlemen con-
nected with the Hunter River trade, being discontented
with the manner in which the steamers of the Hunter River
Association were conducted, resolved to have vessels over
which they had some control, and they formed the Hunter
River Steam Navigation Company, of which the original
shareholders were principally settlers or persons in Sydney
connected with the Hunter River district. This company,
which under various names has rendered so much service to
Australia for upwards of sixty-five years, imported in 1841
three steamers, the 44 Rose,” 44 Thistle ” and 44 Sham-
rock,” which plied regularly north and south lor upwards
of ten vears —a term of life quite unusual in those days ol
frail construction and careless manning.
Only ten years had elapsed since the colony partook ol
that great improvement in the art of transit —steam navi-
gation. and Sydney at the end of this decade was now em
ploying sixteen steamers, with an aggregate of 780 horse
power, as follows : —The 44 Sophia Jane,” 60 horse power,
in the Hunter River trade; the 44 Australia,” 19 h.p., built
in the colony by Russell, her engines by Biddulph, in 1834,
in the Parramatta trade; the 44 Tamar,” 50 h.p., imported
from England, in the Hunter River trade ; the * * Experi-
ment,” i 2 h.p., built in the colony by Russell, her engines
by Biddulph, in the Parramatta trade ; the 44 William 1V.,”
built in the colony by Marshall & Lowe, in the W ollongong
and Brisbane trade; the 44 Maitland,” 32 h.p., built by
Russell, her engines by Bourne, in the year 1838, in the
Hunter River trade; the 44 Rapid.” 29 h.p., imported, in
the Parramatta trade; the 44 James Watt,” 90 h.p., im-
ported, in the Hunter River trade ; the 44 Victoria,” 80 h.p.,
built in the colony by John Korff, in the Hunter River trade ;
the 44 Kangaroo,” 30 h.p., built by Korff, her engines by
Struth. in the Parramatta trade; the 44 Sovereign,” 50 h.p.,
built in the colony by Chowne & Thompson in 1840, in the
Hunter River trade ; the 44 Bessy,” a little insect of 2 h.p.,
built in the colony in 1839 and sent to ply on the Paterson :
the 44 Princess,” 20 h.p., built in the colony by Buddi-
vent, in 1841, for the Sydney Ferry Co., to ply between
Sydney and the North Shore ; and the 4 Rose,” 44 Thistle ’
and 4 ‘‘Shamrock,” 100 h.p. each, imported by the Hunter
River Steam Navigation Co., for the Hunter River trade.
At Port Phillip there was only one steamer, the 44 Fire-
fly,” four h.p., built in Sydney; in South Australia
there arrived the 44 Corsair ’’ and the 44 Courier, and
in Van Diemen’s Land they had the Surprise,’
plying between Hobart Town and Kangaroo Point,
and the “ Derwent,” in the river trade.
The successful flotation of this Hunter River concern
brought into the field another competitor for public favour
in the district of the Hunter, viz., the General Steam Navi-
gation Company. The latter was floated in July, 1839,
under the management of A. B. Spark, Colonel Shadford,
John Lord, and other directors, with George T. Wilson
secretary and S. Korff superintendent. Korff was respon-
sible for his company’s crack boat the 44 Victoria” —a
steamer unrivalled in colonial handicraft. V hen Lieu-
tenant Tollervev, R.N., brought his ss. 4 4 Clonmel’ to
Port Jackson —steamer of 527 tons burden and 240 horse
power, —and whilst the 44 lick” of home paint was still
fresh on her cabins he invited the 44 Victoria ” to race him
for ten miles outside the heads, so that he could show Aus


Narr e.
Class.
Where Built.
Date.
Tonnage.
h-p.
Pressure.
Wnere Engaged.
Tamar ....
Wood .
Grenock
1833
. . 130 . .
60
Low
Hunter River trade
Rose
Iron
Poplar
1840
.. 275 ..
100
9 9
Thistle
»♦
: 9
1840
.. 231 ..
100
y y
9 9
Eagle . . .
Wood .
Sydney
1849
224
80
Moreton Bay trade
y y
Shamrock . .
Iron
Burton
1841
.. 322 ..
100
9 9
Port Phillip trade
William IV..
Wood . .
Williams Riv.
1831
. . 84 . .
18
9 9
Wollongong trade
Emu
Iron
Sydney
1841
.. 72 . .
15
High
Parramatta trade
Comet
Wood . .
Williams Riv.
1842
.. 78 . .
29
Low
9 9
Brothers ....
9 9
Sydney
1847
. . 23 . .
12
High
Ferry, Pt. Jackson
Waterman . .
y y •
9 9 • •
1844
17 , .
8
9 9
• 9
Hawk
9 9
Brisbane
1849
.. 43 ..
12
9 T
Brisbane River
Agenona ....
y y •
Sydney
1850
.. 21 ..
9
9 9
Parramatta River
Pet
y y •
• 9 9 • •
1849
. . 10 . .
3
Low
Ferry, Pt. Jackson
Ferry Queen..
I ron
Balmain
1851
—
—
—
Building
tralians how his boat could walk away from anything in
colonial waters. He was left in the rear by more than a
mile; the same result occurring upon a second occasion ;
which shows that even in those early days we were able to
hold our own in point of speed with the best—as the 4 4 Clon-
mel ” was intended to be from British shipyards. Before
the end of 1839 closed a parting effort was made by Aspinalh
Browne & Co. to promote the Melbourne Steam Packet
Company, but it proved abortive. Between 1840 and
1850, or thereabouts, several vessels were built in the
colony, but it is believed that only three arrived
from England —the 44 Sea-horse,” 44 Cornubia,” and
the 44 Juno,” which were sent out under the auspices
of those extraordinary captains of commerce the
Messrs. Boyd. The former of these vessels struck on
a rock at the mouth of the Tamar, and in consequence
of lengthened litigation between the owners and the
O O
underwriters, laid for many years in Johnston’s Bay.
The “ Cornubia,” being from its great draught
unfitted for bar harbours, was converted into a sailing-
vessel, and traded with the Sandalwood Islands.
The “ Juno ” was sent to Manila and ran in the East-
ern trade as the pioneer of steam commerce for several
years.
In the same manner as with the colonial sailing-
vessels, a large percentage of casualties occurred with
our steam marine, most of them arising from culpable
carelessness, encouraged by the loose manner in which
the navigation laws were enforced. The “Ceres,”
already referred to, was woefully out of her track
when she ran on a reef doming up from Newcastle.
Who was to blame was never clearly ascertained, there
being some doubt about the officer in charge at the
time she took the rocks ; but there was no more excuse
for the accident than if she had run on to North Head.
All that was saved of her was the machinery, which
was afterwards put into the “ Victoria.” The “ Clon-
mel ” was totally wrecked on her voyage to Port
Phillip, the mate altering the course given him by the
captain and running her ashore in Port Albert. The
“King William” was run ashore near Newcastle,
although it must bo added this vessel ought never to
have been allowed to go to sea. She was only a river
boat, and was mentioned, in a report on steamboat
accidents in the House of Commons in 1839, as having
been refused a place on Lloyds’ Register, and been
purchased by Mr. Street for New South Wales. Her
engines were salvaged and put into the “ Sovereign ”
—a vessel which also went down at the entrance of
Moreton Bay. The “ Phoenix ” was driven ashore in
a violent gale of wind shortly after leaving the Clarence
and was broken up on the beach. But the pioneer
boats were of the stout fashioning of leaders, and
succumbed only to the influences of old age. The
“ James Watt,” after a service of twenty years, was
pronounced in a condition to be broken up, and her
machinery transferred to the “ Eagle.” The “ Sophia
Jane” was run until she was completely worn out,
proving herself an excellent boat, admirably adapted
for the Hunter trade, and doing an immense quantity
of work in this colony. Her engines, too, found a brief
home in the “ Phoenix.” These accidents and other
causes for departure left the following steamers,
owned by two companies, to carry on the entire coastal
trade twenty years after the first vessel propelled by
steam had been introduced :
There were at Port Phillip the “ Maitland,” “ Aph-
rasia ” and “ Derwent,” employed between Geelong
and Melbourne, and a fourth steamer, the “ Mel-
bourne,” intended for the Launceston trade, still in
the shipwright’s yard. Yet another boat was nearing
completion in England, ordered by Mr. H. G. Smith,
of Wollongong, and intended for the trade.
A word or two in review of the position in May,
1851, may be added. Four ephemeral attempts to
infuse fresh life in the industry were made in the forties.
The first, that of the Australasian Steam Navigation
Company, a joint stock venture promoted simul-
taneously in London and Sydney, was a speculation of
some pretensions ; the intention being to raise a quarter
of a million sterling and build or purchase steamers to
capture the intercolonial coasting trade, with as much
oversea business as an increased capital of £2,000,000
would permit. The idea was immense ; its magnitude
smothered it. The Sydney speculators then endea-
voured to raise a local company from the ashes of this
ambitious undertaking, to be named the New South
Wales Shipping Company, with a capital of £50,000 ;
but the effort met no better fate. A proposed Paterson
Steamboat Company and a Maitland and Paterson


Shipping Company complete the quartette of steam
enterprises that did not come off, and of those that
did. Seventeen boats in esse and three boats in posse
does not look much of a result for twenty years’ work ;
and one can scarcely fail to note that no item in the
list points to any steam trade with Great Britain.
Still the outlook is full of promise. A very large pro-
portion of the steamer trade is in the hands of the
Hunter River Steam Navigation Company; the one
line trading to the district now the lesser company has
been swallowed up by the larger. Nearly all the steam-
boats in the colony belong to them, and in the Hunter
River, Moreton Bay and Port Phillip trade there are
no steamers but theirs. The company finds, however,
that this monopoly is growing beyond its capacity and
measure, so it will be dissolved on June 30th succeed-
But it is necessary now to go back a few years.
The fact of steam communication being established to
India awakened hopes of securing similar advantages
for Australasia as far back as 1838. In that year an
attempt was made in London to float the Indian Steam-
ship Company Limited for the purpose of having steam
packets established on the station between Sydney
and the Cape of Good Hope, where the boats of the
company were to coal. A branch or auxiliary com-
pany to the head concern was to be formed in Sydney,
but when the matter was brought before the Australian
public it was decided that it would be preferable to
have an entirely separate local company superintend-
ing the portion of the route lying between here and the
Cape. The steamers were to be 1,500 tons burden
and 350 horse power, costing for the two required to
ing, and a new company —already formed with an
enlarged capital —is to take its place. This will be
named the Australasian Steam Navigation Company.
An agent is now in England purchasing vessels for this
concern, and at least three steamers, one a full-power
paddle-boat and two screw propellers, may be ex-
pected to arrive within the next few months. This
Australasian Steam Navigation Company, like its
proposed namesake, has an ambitious project in view.
There has been so much clamouring for steam communi-
cation with Great Britain, that should further delay in
joining the colonies to the Indian steam route take
place, it is possible the A.S.N. Co. will procure a
couple of suitable steamers and run them to meet the
P. and O.boats at Singapore.”
start the venture £IIO,OOO. At the first meeting to
discuss the flotation of the concern 651 shares of £SO
each were taken up, the principal subscribers being ;
W. Walker & Co.. A. Pollack, P. W. Flower, T. Gore
and Co , A. B. Sparks, L. Macallister, Aspinall, Browne
and Co., C. H. Chambers, J. & I). Macfarlane, Hughes
and Hosking, Barker & Hallen, R. Campbell, sen.,
T. V. Ryder, R. Duke, Sir .1. E. Jamieson, J. Lord and
Co., R. Dacre, Lamb & Parbnrv, Willis, Sandeman
and Co.. R. Jones, W. Lithgow, 1). Jones & Co., W.
Rutledge, R. Terry, P. Simpson, G. Townsend and
Henry Moore. A local directorate was formed and
further capital subscribed, but not sufficient to carry
the thing through, and it progressed no further so far
as the colonists were concerned. On 2nd September,


1845, a resolution was brought forward in the Legis-
lative Council by the late Mr. Robertson and unani-
mously adopted to the effect “ that an humble address
be presented to her Majesty praying that she may be
graciously pleased to extend to this colony the benefit
of the arrangement under which mails are now de-
spatched by steam conveyance to India and China, on
the same terms as to other British colonies.” In the
address were added the words: “ We beg to assure
your Majesty that by granting the prayer of your
petitioners your Majesty would confer a boon of the
greatest importance, not only on this, but on all other
of your Majesty’s colonies in this quarter of the globe.’ ’
In the following session the question was taken up by
the Colonial Secretary, who, on the 16th September,
1846, moved for the appointment of a Select Committee
to take into consideration the best means of establish-
ing a steam communication between this colony and
England, with instructions to take evidence and report.
The report was brought up on the 27th of October,
accompanied by a body of evidence of the most inter-
esting character. The main recommendation of the
c
committee was that towards the' expense of intro-
ducing steam communication the colony should con-
O v
tribute £SOO per month for a period of three years—
a recommendation which the Council cordially adopted.
Durino- the next four vears, however, the colonists were
mocked by a constant succession of hopes and disap-
pointments, the Home Government promising time
after time to comply with the requests, and time after
time receding from their engagements. On the 19th
July, 1850, therefore, Mr. Donaldson obtained the
appointment of a Select Committee to inquire into and
report upon the probability or otherwise of this colony
obtaining the advantages of steam communication
with Europe, by way of Singapore by any arrangement
to be made by the Home Government, and also by the
expediency of withdrawing the vote of £6,000 a year
which had then for four years been held at the disposal
of the Home Government for this purpose without
effect. The modification of that vote recommended
by Mr Donaldson’s committee was, that there should
be appropriated out of the colonial revenue sums of
£2,000, £3,000 and £6,000 respectively for the three
following purposes : —(1.) For the establishment of a
monthly communication by steamers between Sydney
and Singapore, to make the voyage by any route,
£2,000 per annum for a period of three years certain.
(2.) For the establishment of a monthly communication
between Sydney and Singapore, making the voyage to
Sydney by way of Cape Leeuwin and Bass’ Straits, and
from Sydney by way of Torres Straits and Singapore,
£3.000 per annum also for a period of three years.
(3.) For the establishment of a direct monthly line of
steamers between Sydney and Singapore, arriving and
departing by way of Torres Straits, the sum of £6.000
for three years.
Whilst all this was being done in Sydney corre-
sponding action was being taken in Great Britain, the
moving spirits being the Hon. F. Scott, M.P., Mr. Mark
Boyd, and Sir George Larpent, Bart., under whose
influences the association for the promotion of steam
communication with Australia was inaugurated and
the question constantly agitated in Parliament and
throughout the various commercial districts of the
United Kingdom. The Admiralty were, in conse-
quence, induced to advertise in 1847 for tenders for the
performance of a mail service to the dependencies in
the Southern Pacific, and a competitorship of rival
lines and rival companies was brought into the field :
some of the last being created for the occasion with
purely speculative objects in view, and without any
hena fide resources for carrying out such an under-
taking. Unhappily, amongst the parties tendering,
a company which had just started into existence and
of tained a charter of incorporation found favour in
He eyes of the Government, their tender being the
lowest. This was the Indian and Australian Royal
Mail Steam Packet Company, with a nominal capital
of £1,000,000 sterling in £2O scrip. A delay of several
months occurred in negotiating details, and that com-
pany, as all practical men had foreseen, ultimately
failed in complying with official stipulations, whilst
those who were interested in the object had the mor-
tification to find the prospect of its accomplishment
more* indefinite than ever. The uncertain action of
the Government and the failure of the Indian and Aus-
tralian R.M.S. Company to complete its undertaking-
compelled the friends in Great Britain of the Aus-
tralian colonies to adopt vigorous measures to bring
the subject again under the serious consideration of
the Houses of Parliament, and petitions were presented
to the latter signed by the leading merchants of the
principal cities of the United Kingdom. A committee
from the association was appointed to confer with
Lord John Russell, with Earl Grey and other Ministers
of the Crown, and the upshot was that the Government
again invited tenders for a service from Singapore to
Sydney, in connection with the China line, making
them returnable on 21st January, 1850. The candi-
dates for- the undertaking comprised promoters of
lines by the Cape of Good Hope, the Isthmus of Panama
and Suez, each route exhibiting several respective
advantages. Amongst these the proposals of the
P. & O. were in this instance approved of as the most
eligible ; but an unlooked-for impediment to any ar-
rangement with that company presented itself in the
refusal of the directors of the East India Company to
relinquish the packet service between Suez and Bom-
bay, hitherto performed by their navy, but which
the P. & O. agreed to undertake on terms that would
eff ct a large saving to the public. The East India
Company had a contract, which would not expire
until 1852, for carrying the mails in monthly steamers
from Suez to Bombay, for which they received £50,000
a year. The Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navi-
gation Company offered to undertake the duty in
connection with other arrangements, and also to carry
out the Australian service on payment of the above
sum : proposing, in fact, to carry mails 332,800 miles
for the amount paid for only 70,000 miles. Pressure
brought to bear upon the Ministry, conferences with
the East India Company, attacks upon the Govern-
ment, all failed to remove the obstacle in the path.
At last the demands of the public became so persistent
that the Admiralty were compelled to take the initia-
tive again, and once more tenders were called for fort-
nightly mails to the East, an express service to Malta,


and a line to Sydney via Singapore. The P. & 0. and
the Eastern Steam Navigation Company were the only
competitors , the former asking £199,600 per annum
for the three services, whilst the latter wanted £1 10,000
toi the lndo-( hina section and £166,000 per annum
for the Australian section. The tender of the P. & 0.
was accepted within ten days of its being handed in
to the Treasury a specimen of promptitude on the
part of the hitherto lethargic authorities which was
by no means a source of gratification to the rival ten-
derers, the Eastern Steam Company. In a report of
the directors of the latter body they stated: “Your
directors feel they cannot conclude without drawing
attention to the very unusual and remarkable pre-
cipitancy with which the question of the tenders was
disposed of. On the 21st February (1852) the late
Government resigned office. On the afternoon of the
26th tenders were delivered pursuant to notice. The
Ministers remained at their offices, it is understood,
until the close of the 26th February, and on the fol-
lowing day, the 27th, the present Government was
formally installed into office. The tenders in question
must therefore have been received, investigated as to
their respective merits, and reported upon by the
Admiralty, and adjudicated after consideration at the
Treasury in the few hours which intervened between
their delivery on the 26th and the formal relinquish-
ment of office by the members of the late Government
on the 27th February, hour directors believe these
facts, inconsistent as they are with all the deliberations
nreviously given to the subject and the greatness of
the considerations involved in it, to be quite unprece-
dented ; and, coupling them with the evident dis-
paragement of the terms of their tenders contained in
the Admiralty report, they submit them for the con-
sideration of the proprietors and the public at large,
strongly impressed with the conviction that the public
interests demand a clear explanatorv justification of
the circumstances from those upon whom the respon-
sibility now rests of having committed to the care and
keeping of one single body the exclusive charge of the
important mail communications and steam traffic of
this country, with its Eastern and Australian depen-
dencies for a further prolonged period of eight years,
in violation of a policy apparent on the face of it, and
of recorded resolutions of a Select Committee of the
House of Commons, specially appointed, and the
concurrence of the late Government, and to which the
main agents of this proceeding were approving par-
ties, with the express object of defining the footing
upon which such communications should be hereafter
placed/’ This report was unanimously adopted by
the proprietors of the Eastern Steam Company at an
extraordinary general meeting on April 3, 1852, and
the following resolution w 7 as also carried, without dis-
sent ; “ That it appears to this meeting that the cir-
cumstances under which the contracts for the India,
China and Australia mail service were allotted require
the grave considera ion of the public, and the directors
are earnestly requested to use every effort to cause
such circumstances to be thoroughly investigated.”
Nothing came of the remonstrances of the unsuccessful
tenderers except an official snubbing when they ap-
proached the Government to appoint a Parliamentary
committee to inquire into the circiimsiances attending
the acceptance of the tenders—a request which, need-
less to say, was curtly refused. But those in favour of
the Cape of Good Hope route did not cease endeavour-
ing to obtain their ends, and at last had the satisfaction
of seeing their efforts crowned with brief success. In
January, 1852, a committee of the House of Commons
reported in favour of steam communication with the
Australian colonies by the Cape of Good Hope. So
thoroughly convinced were the committee of the
necessity of immediately establishing this line, and
thus putting an end to the agitation of a question
with which successive Governments in England had
professed to be occupied for nearly two years, that
they divided their report into two parts, and with
commendable diligence dealt, first, with the Australian
part of the subject, in order that the larger inquiry
entrusted to them with reference to the Bombay service
might be no cause of delay. Notwithstanding the
anxiety of the committee that there should be no
further delay, three months were allowed to elapse
before anything was done, and then what was done
was almost worse than useless. The Admiralty invited
tenders for a bi-monthly communication with Australia
by way of the Cape of Good Hope at the rate of 8J
miles an hour —a limit of communication no
more than the slowest rate which steam vessels —
even in those early days —attained. The contract
was to remain in force for four years, subject to the
following and other minor conditions : — cc The tenders
are to be for vessels propelled by screws, and may be
made either for a line of steamers between the Cape of
Good Hope and Sydney, in continuation of the existing
line between England and the Cape, or for a new line
extending the whole way from England to Sydney ;
the parties tendering are to frame their offers for two
different contingencies—under the first the steamers
would be required to stop at King George’s Sound,
Adelaide and Port Phillip on their way to and from
Sydney ; under the second the steamers would stop
only at Port Phillip outwards, where a branch steamer,
to be provided by the contractors, would take the
mails and convey them to Adelaide and King George’s
Sound and return to Adelaide to meet the homeward
steamer ; the tenders are to state for what annual
sums each of these two routes would be undertaken
by iron as well as by wooden vessels ; the contractors
must engage to convey the mails and despatches six
times in a year each way, and will have to deliver and
receive mails at King George’s Sound, Adelaide and
Port Phillip, and at such other places as the Lord
Commissioners of the Admiralty may from time to
time direct, both on the outward and homeward voyage
to and from Sydney ; they must also engage to convey
them at a speed which, on the average of each voyage
shall not be less than 8| knots an hour ; and as a pre-
caution against failure in this condition, no vessel
will be accepted for the performance of the contract
which is not found on trial at the measured knot on
the Thames to attain the speed of 9 knots an hour to
the satisfaction of the commissioners, propelled by-
steam alone and without the aid of sails 3 they must
also engage to supply during the continuance of the
contract, vessels equal in nsnnber and size to those


specified in their tender, and these vessels are to be
subject at all proper times to survey by officers in the
employment of the Admiralty ; this survey to extend
to the crew, officers and engineers and machinery,
as well as to the hull of the vessels ; proper accom-
modation to be provided free of expense for the naval
officer in charge of the mails ; but the parties tendering
are at liberty to state what deduction they would
make in the event of this condition not being required ;
a penalty of £lOO to be incurred when the contractors
fail in providing a vessel, in accordance with their
agreement ready to put to sea at the appointed hour ;
and also the sum of £5O for every successive day which
shall elapse until such steam vessel shall actually pro-
ceed to sea ; but the payment of such penalty shall
not be enforced in the event of such default being
proved to the satisfaction of the commissioners to have
taking. . . The capital and enterprise of this count y
will not allow such a trade to remain without s
communication now that the screw propeller otters
the advantages which recent experience has proved it
to possess, and that communication will not be cou-
fined to six times a year, but will be weekly, by steam-
ships not depending upon a Government grant, but on
receipts from freight and passage money—receipts
which would be considerably increased by Govern-
ment allowing them to carry the mails, the owners
receiving such a proportion of the postage as may
remain after paying the inland rate or other charge
for which the Post-office authorities may be responsible,
and for which remuneration the usual Admiralty regu-
lations could be complied with.” The tender of the
Australian Royal Mail Company was accepted, and
thus, after nearly fifteen years’ struggling, the colonists
White Horse Point, Balmain, and Drummoyne, from Parramatia River.
arisen from circumstances over which the contractors
and their servants had no control ; a penalty of £lOO
to be incurred if the vessels stop, linger or deviate from
the direct course, put back or return, except from stress
of weather or other unavoidable circumstance, or unless
authorised by the officer in charge of the mails ; no
member of the House of Commons shall be admitted
to any share or part of the contract, or to any benefit
to arise therefrom ; the contractors to be bound with
two responsible sureties in the penalty of £4,000 for
the due fulfilment of the contract.” Even in England
these ridiculous terms met with general disapproval,
Voicing the prevailing sentiment of the times, the
Morning Chronicle wrote : “ The terms are considered
so absurd and of so valueless a character as to render
it very probable that no company at present estab-
lished will consider it worth the trouble of under-
had the satisfaction of seeing communication estab-
lished by two different routes every alternate month,
The first boats of the P. & 0. and the A.R.M. Co. that
reached Australia, in 1852, were the “ Chusan ” and
the “Australia,” and their advent was treated as a
national event, balls and other entertainments being
given in honour of the occasion.
The screw steamer “Chusan,” commanded by
Captain Henry Down, an old and experienced officer
in the P. & 6. Co.’s service, was originally intended
to run between Hongkong and Shanghai. Iron built
and barque rigged, her burden was 750 tons, being
propelled by a screw driven by an eighty horse engine,
but which it was said could work to nearly three times
its nominal power. AVhen making 95 revolutions a
minute her speed exceeded nine miles an hour, but
with wind and steam she was said to have run fourteen


knots. Her cabins were lofty—lo ft. 6 in.—and the
state rooms fitted up with all modern improvements,
carried three passengers each. There was a house
built on deck for the accommodation of the officers,
but, as it was not higher than the bulwarks, it did not
interfere with the symmetrical outline of the vessel.
In fact, with a long 32-pounder abaft, another long
18-pounder forward, and 12-pounder carronades on
the main deck, she had all the appearance of a man-of-
war. She carried four officers, a surgeon, a purser,
three engineers, several midshipmen, and a full com-
plement of seamen, stokers and servants. It was
intended that she should have left England on the
Ist May, 1852, but the strike among the engineers and
similar trades delayed her. In that case she would
have taken the mail direct to Singapore, to meet the
September steamer there. As it was, she sailed from
Southampton on Saturday, May 15th, from St. Vin-
cent, where she was detained five days, on May 30th ;
from the Cape of Good Hope, after another stay of five
days, on June 29, and from Melbourne on Ist August,
1852. The departure of the vessel was made the
occasion for considerable demonstration. When the
vessel cast off from the dock-head and proceeded on
her voyage there were fully 2,000 people assembled to
bid God-speed to those taking part in the pioneer
enterprise. A large party of the directors of the
company and their friends came down from London and
proceeded in the “ Chusan ” as far as Cowes, in com-
memoration of the occasion, amongst the party being
the Duke of Augustenberg, Earl Talbot, the Countess
of Morley, Sir W. Yerner, Sir Gore Booth, Mr. Rey-
nolds, M.P., Mr. Hamilton, M.P., Mr. R. Lowe, and a
large number of other notabilities. A banquet was
prepared on board, at which the chairman of directors,
Mr. De Salis, presided, and Mr. Lowe responded to the
toast of prosperity to the Australian colonies in what
the papers of the day described as a clear and eloquent
manner.
At the end of July, 1852, the Melbourne Argus
had a paragraph stating that “the Australian Royal
M ail Steam Navigation Company’s ship ‘ Australia ’
may be expected here in the course of a week, and
with very great foresight, for which we give the Govern-
ment credit, instructions have been sent down to
Williamstown to place a guard aboard her when she
arrives, and also for two boats belonging to the water
police to be kept rowing round her whilst she remains.
It would be bad indeed where we, after obtaining so
great a boon as steam navigation (that annihilator of
time and distance) not to afford every facility to the
vessel for quick despatch, and exercise the proper
precautions to prevent the desertion of her crew. With,
however, the very efficient body of water police at
present in existence it will be a difficult matter for
any of her crew to leave her. ’ ’ Evidently the establish-
ment of the service so long striven for threatened to
disturb the national equilibrium. The “ Australia,”
which arrived about a month after the “Chusan,”
both vessels coming round the Cape, brought out to
Australia the first mails delivered by regular steam
packets, and the “ Chusan ” similarly took the first
colonial mail to London. The “ Formosa,” “ Shang-
hai,” and other steamers followed, and mails continued
to be received with regularity until the end of 1854.
Then, on February 17th, 1855, news came to hand of
a suspension of the Australian branch of the P. & 0.
Co.’s mail service, and it was announced that the
January mails would be brought out under contract
by the clipper ship “ Lightning.” This report was
confirmed a few days later, when the accounts of the
annual meeting of the P. & 0. Company, held
November, 1854, were received. At this function the
chairman,. Rear-Admiral Sam. Thornton, informed the
shareholders “ that in consequence of the impress-
ment by the Government of so many of the company’s
ships for the Crimean war service, it is impossible
to maintain the Australian packet connection. Terms
with the Government had been arranged, freeing the
company of its obligations, and the outward service to
Australia would cease with the delivery of the mail on
January 9th, 1855.”
The interruption of the Australian service by the
Crimean war induced the colonial Legislatures to come
forward in 1856 with liberal grants towards the estab-
lishment of a regular monthly independent communi-
cation with Australia ; and advertisements were issued
in May, 1856, inviting tenders for the same. Four
tenders were submitted, two proving ineligible. The
choice lay between the proposals of the P. & 0. Com-
pany and those of a young venture called the European
and Australian Company. The latter agreed to come
under a system of penalties which the directors of
the P. & 0. declined, and the Treasury therefore ac-
cepted the tender of the E. and A. Co. at £185,000.
The successful tenderers at the time possessed but two
steamers, and when they heard of the acceptance of
their tender they offered to dispose of the contract to
the P. & 0., provided their boats were purchased with
it. This the comp iny declined, and the European
and Australian Company entered upon what proved
to be a most unfortunate career, opening its line in
1857 by chartering a Cunard steamer, the “ Etna,”
to leave Southampton and a P. & 0. steamer the
“ Sydney,” to leave Sydney simultaneously. Some-
what further on in its brief existence the E. and A. Co.
entered into another alliance with the Royal Mail
Company, and most strenuous efforts were made by
the United concerns to carry on the contract ; but
these failed, and the European and Australian Com-
pany was placed in liquidation in something like two
years, with a loss of upwards of £700,000. At the
request of the Admiralty the Royal Mail Company
continued to carry on the Australian s ervice for
another year after the collapse of the European and
Australian Company, but with a guarantee over and
above the amount of the latter’s subsidy, which
brought the payment for that year up to the very
considerable amount of £260,000 per annum. In
September, 1858, the Admiralty again advertised for
tenders for the conveyance of mails to the Australian
colonies, and two were submitted, one from the Royal
Mail Company for £250,000, and one from the Penin-
sular and Oriental Company for £IBO,OOO. The latter
was accepted, and the service commenced in March,
1859, via Mauritius, but the result of this route was
not found to be satisfactory, and in a few months’
time the itinerary of the line was changed so as to


Pelican
70
55
150
Parramatta
Emu
72
45
150
9 9
Black Swan
70
45
35
Brisbane Water
Victoria
107
60
200
Port Jackson
London
686
380
343
Governor-General
682
450
—
Refitting
Tasmania
424
70
212
Hobart Town
William Denny . .
595
200
298
Auckland
Grafton
315
100
158
Clarence River
Washington
192
120
300
Port Jackson
Kiama
144
60
72
Kiama
Pyrmont
6i
8
40
Port Jackson
Star
44
25
50
99
Pearl
25
13
40
99
Nautilus . .
22
13
40
*y
Tonnage.
Horse-
Power.
Wonga Wonga
. . 602
180
300
Melbourne
City of Sydney
. . 734
180
367
> >
Telegraph . .
. . 507
220
253
9 9
Boomerang
. . 324
106
162
Moreton Bay
Yarra Yarra
. . 526
200
263
9 9
Shamrock . .
. . 322
100
161
Wide Bay
Tamar
. . 200
60
130
Twofold Bay
Collaroy
. . 326
150
164
Hunter River
Illalong
.. 318
120
159
9 9
Thistle
. . 276
100
138
9 9
Waratah
. . 380
140
190
Eagle
. . 224
80
250
City of Melbour
ne.. 138
32
69
Laid up
Ben Bolt
. . 234
110
117
Hunter River
Samson
. . 91
60
—
Moreton Bay
Ballarat
. . 82
32
—
Hobson’s Bay
Rose
. . 172
100
—
Laid up
Paterson
. . 326
120
163
Hunter River
Hunter
. . 264
120
132
9 9
Williams
.. 310
120
155
9 9
Nora Cruna
.. 140
85
78
Shoalhaven
Illawarra . .
. . 203
80
101
Wollongong
Ferry Queen
8
4
40
Port Jackson
Brothers . .
. . 23
18
40
> »
Herald
. . 41
20
120
>>
Gipsy Queen
6
6
40
9 *
Alma
. . 28
20
80
9 9
Waterman
. . 10
10
78
9 9
Sun
. . 23
6
40
>»
Torch
—
—
—
Refitting
proceed via Ceylon —the payment being reduced to
£134,672 per annum, and the contract terminable at
six months’ notice by either body.
Of the progress of Australian shipping there is
little further to add in these general remarks, which
have dealt with the genesis of each branch of the in-
dustry separately and with a fair amount of compre-
hensiveness.
On January Ist, 1855, 1,342 ships, measuring
143,965 tons, and 58 steamers, registering 8,301 tons,
belonged to Australia —35 to Sydney, 20 to Melbourne
and 3to Hobart. Twelve months later, or fifty years
Woolloomooloo Bay.
ago, there were the following steamers, all told sailing-
out of Sydney and plying on the waters of Port Jack-
son :
What Australasian shipping means to-day let
“The Register of Australasian and New Zealand
Shipping,” compiled to June 30th, 1905, affirm.
On that date there were on the register 2,132
sailing ships, with a gross tonnage of 17-1,577, and
1,201 steamers, with a tonnage of 150,108. Of these,
the shipping tonnage of New South Wales greatly
exceeds that of any other province of the Australasian
group ; and is placed sixth on the list of ports in the
British Empire. The two oldest traders out of Sydney
are to be found in the “ Fanny Fisher,” built on the
Manning River in 1817, and the “ Moa,” brig, built in
Auckland about the same time. Fifty odd years ago
the “ Moa” traded regularly between Sydney and
Auckland, and has some very smart runs to her credit.


That the ship-building trade has not kept pace
in growth with the shipping goes without saying.
The cost of construction has proved an immovable
lion in the path, and effectually checked all efforts to
turn out boats worthy the importance of the port.
Over thirty years ago an iron screw steamer of 487
tons was built and engined at Mort’s Dock for the
Queensland mail and passenger service ; but no vessel
approaching her size has since been constructed in
any of the Australian ports. Considerably larger
wooden vessels were built in New South Wales in
former days, one of the largest being the “ Royal
Tar,” a barque of 598 tons, lost off the New Zealand
coast about five years ago. She was built on the
Nambucca River in 1876. Whilst, however, no very
large vessels have been built in this State, a great
number of small wooden ones of all descriptions have
been turned out, and a large number of men are con-
stantly employed in the industry. Statistics show
that there are approximately 2,275 hands steadily
engaged in thirty-one establishments in connection
with ship and boat building, and that the wages list
totals something like £158,000 annually. In ship-
building operations New South Wales leads although
at one time Tasmania ran this State very close There
is hardly a river or a coastal creek that has not had its
representative launched at some time or other. Bris*
bane Water stands an easy first of the country yards,
but Manning River, Clarence River, Jervis Bay, Port
Macquarie and Camden Haven can all lay legitimate
claim to having contributed to the fleet of coastwise
craft, both sail and steam. In the Sydney yards the
boats turned out —even if small compared with ocean
liners —are of the finest specimens of naval architec-
ture ; and Sydney-built craft may be found all over
Australia, New Zealand, and throughout the South
Seas.
To go back once more to the shipping trade, it
remains but to add that with very few exceptions —
three or four at the most, and those in the earlier years
of the colony’s history —have there been any financial
mishaps to the enterprises established. Amalgama-
tions and other alterations have been made galore.
Most of these, with a variety of other scrappy infor-
mation that make history, will be found in the par-
ticulars given of the public companies and private
trading firms connected with the trade of the port
of Sydney.
Blue’s Point


Mr. THOMAS ROBERT
ALLT, J.P., the third son of Thomas
Allt, Merchant, “ The Baltic,” Lon-
don, Chairman as well as Managing
Director of the North Coast Steam
Navigation Co. Ltd., arrived in
Sydney in the early fifties, and in
the year 1856 laid the foundations
of that extensive business afterwards
so familiar throughout Australia as
Allt & Co., wine and spirit mer-
chants, brewers and general mer-
chants. For some years Mr. Allt
conducted the business on his own ac-
count. His first headquarters were in
George Street, immediately opposite
the site upon which the city hall now
stands. From George Street he
moved to more suitable premises in
York Street, and afterwards into Pitt
Street. In 1874 Mr. Allt admitted
Mr. Frederick Harper into partner-
ship. The firm, however, dissolved
in 1879, and Mr. Allt again became
sole proprietor. The following year
a new partnership was formed when
Air. William Henry Tullock joined
with Air. Allt in the enterprise. For
many years the firm carried on busi-
ness through all the Australian
colonies. « In 1888 the partnership
was dissolved and the interests dis-
posed of. Air. Allt for many years
has been identified with many leading
commercial and financial enterprises
of the city. He was for over twenty-
two years consecutively chairman
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. T. R. ALLT.
of the board of directors of the
Clarence and Richmond River Steam-
ship Co,, which is now merged
into the North Coast Steam Navi-
gation Co. Ltd., and of which he and
the Hon. Sir John See are managing
directors. This is the largest steam
navigation company belonging abso-
lutely to New South Wales. Pie is
also chairman of directors of the
South British Insurance Co., and
chairman and director of the Assets
Realisation Co. This position he has
occupied since 1896. Mr. Allt is also
one of the directors of the Sydney
Hospital, and principal founder of the
Balmain Bowling Ground Co. He
has always taken a lively interest in
bowling, especially in the early popu-
larising of the game with his old
friend, Mr. John Young, of Annan-
dale.
Mr. WILLIAM GEORGE
TODD, Manager, Sydney P'erries
Ltd., was born at Millers’ Point,
Sydney, on June 29, 1859. He
entered the service of the Hunter
River New Steam Navigation Co. in
December, 1871, as receipt clerk. In
the following year he was promoted
to the position of assistant import
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. W. G. TODD.
and export clerk, that of chief export
clerk on February 21, 1875, and
accountant in November, 1883. This
latter position he held until December
31, 1891, when the Hunter River
New Steam Navigation Co. as a
separate institution ceased on its
amalgamation with the Newcastle
Steamship Co. Ltd. He joined the
amalgamated companies, under the
title of the Newcastle and Hunter
River S.S. Co. Ltd., on January 1,
1892, as import officer, and held that
position until May 1, 1897, when he
received the appointment of traffic
superintendent of that company. In
December, 1899, he was offered and
accepted the position of manager of
Sydney Ferries Ltd., and entered
upon the duties of that office on
January i, igoi.
Captain JOHN STRACHAN,
J.P., Navigator, Explorer, Author
and Pioneer Trader, was born in
Aberdeen, Scotland, in 1845, and
received his early education at
CAPTAIN J. STRACHAN, J.P.
St. Cyrus, near the seaport of Alont-
rose. When eight years of age his
family removed to Kingston, on the
Thames, near London, and his edu-
cation was continued at St. John’s
Academy, Hampton Wick. From
early boyhood he was noted for
his love of adventure and liking
for the sea. This tendency was
strongly discouraged by his parents,
who sent him to London to
learn engineering. But the lessons
did not accord with his tastes, and
he found his way to the Cape of
Good Hope instead, returning after
ten months’ absence, when he was
allowed to adopt the sea as his pro-
fession. During the first two years
of the American civil war he was
engaged in the transport service
between New York, Baltimore and
Fortress Alonro, and was in Hamp-
den Road, where he saw the Con-
federate frigate “ Yorktown ” run
the blockade and escape under the
protection of rebel batteries. During
the excitement and by the action of
Commodore Wilkes in stopping the
R.AI.S. “Trent” and taking pri-
soners Mason and Slade, the Con-
federate delegates, he thought it


wise to again sail under the British
flag, being apprehensive of a war
between Great Britain and the
United States of America. Joining
a Newfoundland brig, he sailed from
New York to St. Johns, where he
was frozen up all the winter, after-
wards spending spring and summer
on the coast of Nova Scotia and
Prince Edward Island. He re-
turned to Liverpool in the autumn,
and thence went to India, Japan
and China, between which countries
he cruised from 1864 to 1867. On
returning home he was induced by
his friends to abandon the sea, and
was sent to a cousin, Dr. Pratt, of
Bervie, to be coached for the uni-
versity. Whilst here he received
an invitation to a wedding at Peter-
head, where he was introduced to
several whaling captains. This up-
set all his friends’ calculations, and
he accepted an invitation from Cap-
tain Mackie, of the barque “Alibi”
to accompany him as surgeon.
Dr. Pratt, with great good sense,
devoted all the time at his disposal
to imparting practical instructions
to Mr. Strachan, which in the many
vicissitudes of an adventurous life
have proved invaluable to him.
The Arctic voyage covered a period
of six months; the commander,
Captain Mackie, proved a genial
fellow and the friendship between
Inm and Captain Strachan has con-
tinued ever since. Upon returning
to Aberdeen, he sailed for Japan,
be'ng fortunate in obtaining a posi-
tion there as naval instructor to the
Prince of Higo’s people. He held
this position until after the war at
Hakodadi broke out, when all
foreigners were dismissed. Joining
a British barque as mate he sailed
from Hongkong with Chinese pas-
sengers for Honolulu, where, on the
recommendation of his commander,
Captain Wilson, of Sterling, he re-
ceived a good appointment and pro-
ceeded to the Line Islands as
executive officer for Baker Island.
Having set to work he, by firmness
and conciliation, got the natives
under control, and all things went
along smoothly for some months
when, owing to some dispute, the
natives mutinied. While sympa-
thising with the natives Captain
Strachan conceived it to be his duty
to suppress the mutiny, which with
the aid of Captain Lanfrau, of the
American barque “ Robert ’ ’ and the
crew of an English ship, he suc-
ceeded in doing most effectively.
Forty-five men out of 180 on the
island having been tied up the others
retrrmed to their duties. Upon a
report of the mutiny reaching head-
quarters a vessel was despatched to
bring all concerned to Honohrlu,
where inquiry was held without any
result. The superintendent and his
family proceeded to the United
States and Captain Strachan to the
Australian colonies. Touching at
Auckland, he j oined the New Zealand
brig ‘ ‘ Rita ’ ’ as first mate, in which
capacity he arrived in Victoria early
in 1872, where he met Mr. Eugene
Aschenberg and was induced by that
gentleman to resign his position for
the purpose of taking command of
the Starbuck Island. After a stay
of sixteen weeks in Melbourne Cap-
tain Strachan accepted the appoint-
ment of superintendent of the A.A.
guano deposits in the islands of the
Coral Sea. While engaged here, on
January 28th, 1873, he had the mis-
fortune to be blown from the Bird
Island wreck reef in an open boat,
and was without food or water for
five consecutive days and nights.
The captain, who was accompanied
by a Tasmanian youth, fought his
way to the Queensland coast, get-
ting ashore on Sunday morning,
February 2nd, 1873, at East Point,
Facing Island, whence after a walk
of three miles they reached the light-
house at Gaicomb Head. Here he
was taken for an escapee from New
Caledonia. He returne via Sydney
and Hobart to his island, and spent
the remainder of the year there.
In 1874, in the company’s yacht,
Captain Strachan visited every is-
land a: .d reef in the Coral Sea as well
as many of the islands in the Torres
Straits and the coast of New Guinea,
On March 3rd, 1875, he married the
eldest daughter of Mr. Jonathan
Plummer, of Battery Point, West
Tamar, returned to the islands, and
during this year he circumnavigated
Australia. An interesting account
of this and the previous voyage ap-
peared in the Town and Country
Journal of August 11 and 12,
1876'. Retiring from the sea, he
spent some time in mercantile pur-
suits with varied success, until 1863,
when he again proceeded to the
north as leader of an expedition to
New Guinea, and since that time
Captain Strachan has been con-
tinuously engaged in an endeavour
to open up that country and the
islands adjacent. In 1886 and 1887
he explored McClure’s Gulf and
eastward to Lakahia, making in 1888
a visit to the old country, where he
published a book of adventure and
exploration. Returning to Sydney
in the same year, he sailed again for
the north, where he made some
important discoveries and brought
back to Sydney a cargo of spices,
pearls and pearlshell, the last result
being repeated on several occasions.
For many years he devoted himself
mainly to the spice trade and car-
ried into Queensland ports cargoes
of nutmeg and other products of the
islands of the eastern archipelago,
supplying the requirements of the
whole Commonwealth. He also
traded among the islands of the
Malay Archipelago, Sulus, Borneo,
the southern Philippines, the islands
situated on the western verge of the
Pacific, all round Dew Guinea and
the adjacent is'ands. Quite re-
cently he made a prospecting voyage
along the north coast of Australia
from Port Darwin to De Groan
Island. He describes the Northern
Territory as a land with a great
future, rich in minerals, mote es-
pecially tin, gold and coal, and
capable of growing many of the
most valuable tropical products.
Deeply interested in the politics
of State and Commonwealth, he
has been a candidate for both
Federal and State Parliaments, but
was not successful, being defeated
by Mr. W. M. Hughes for the State,
and Mr. J. Cook for the House of
Representatives. He is an uncom-
promising Imperialist and an abso-
lute believer in Mr. Chamberlain’s
policy of preferential trade ; a fluent,
fearless speaker, a clear, forcible
writer who has contributed volumes
of interesting matter to the press,
and he is at present engaged in
writing a book on his voyages,
exploration and adventures by land
and sea.
McMahon’s Point, North Sydney,
is the centre of activity in ship-
fitting, carried on by the firm of
W. Cone & Co., the resident partner
being Mr. C. W. WAIT, of Prin-
cess Street, North Sydney. Mr.


Watt claims Victoria as his birth-
place, his father having been one of
the early settlers who came out
from Edinburgh and took up land
in the district of Kyneton, and in
the State school of that town the
son gained the best education obtain-
able. Meeting with an irreparable
loss in the death of his father, he
spent some short time on the land
under the care of his brother. On
reaching the age of 15, he was
apprenticed to the building and
carpentering trade with a Melbourne
builder, remaining with him for six
years. He then secured employ-
ment with the firm of Cone & Co.,
but left them to dabble in mining ;
this life he followed for eight years,
when he returned to Melbourne and
joined himself to the old firm. In
the excitement of fitting ships for
the troops for South Africa, Mr.
Watt took a prominent part, and on
behalf of his firm came to Sydney
and superintended the fitting of the
“ Medic ” for the Victorians, and
the “ Surrey ” and “ Maori King ”
for New South Wales. The exten-
sion of business to Sydney led to
Mr. Watt being permanently located
here to conduct the business in this
State. I he wisdom of this step has
been fully demonstrated, as the firm
has been entrusted with the fitting
of fourteen ships for the Govern-
ments of New South Wales and
MR. C. W. WATT.
New Zealand, several for the Im-
perial Government, the “ Devon ” for
the West Australian Government,
and the “ Oronsay ” for the South
Australians. In fact, under Mr.
Watt’s direction they fitted ships for
30,000 horses, including the troop
horses for South Africa. In the
four months previous to the peace
declaration, some worth of
work was done, and during the
Russian-Japanese war the firm fitted
out ships for 10,000 horses, besides
having the fitting of vessels for the
Indian trade. Mr. Watt was elected
an alderman of the North Sydney
Municipal Council in February,
1906, for a term of three years. As
a cyclist, in his earlier years he took
a prominent part in many gatherings,
and won several good prizes, includ-
ing a silver tea and coffee service
and salver, inscribed “ M.B.C.
Autumn Race Meeting, 1888 Two
miles bicycle handicap race, second
prize, won by C. W. Watt.” Mr.
Watt’s brother, Mr. W. A. Watt,
is a member of the Legislature in
Victoria, and occupied the position
of Postmaster - General in the
McLean Government before he was
28 years of age. In 1898 Mr. Watt
married Miss Cook, second daughter
of the late Mr. H. H. Cook, who
was for some years Member of
Parliament, representing the Parkes
district.
SYDNEY GOING TO WORK.
SYDNEY FERRIES L T D.
1905


The Royal Exchange of Sydney.
*jj N no other city in Australia, and in very few in the
!■ world, is the citizen brought so directly in contact
with the commerce of his country as is the citizen
of Sydney. Wherever he turns he sees the spars of the
shipping and the tall funnels of the magnificent steamers
engaged in developing the trade of the port, while the
flags of every nation flying at their peaks indicate the
broad extent of its trading relations with other countries.
He notes with some concern the daily increasing
congestion of traffic in the thoroughfares of the city,
caused by the waggons and drays as they convey to the
various stores and wharves the produce of the country
for sale and shipment, and remove cargoes to the
warehouses for distribution. On his way to his home,
if it is in one of the many over-water suburbs, he
becomes familiarised with the activity along the wharves,
and if he is a discerning onlooker he realises that this
growing trade has a bearing on his avocation, whatever
it may be, and that he has an indirect interest in what
he sees around him, not only in the wharves and in the
warehouses of the city, but in the workshops surrounding
the docks and slips. Thus it is that he comes to
understand the value of this business and what it means
to Sydney. There were entered and cleared at the port
of Sydney in the year 1902 3,402 vessels, of' 5,934,41 1
tons. These figures speak for themselves, and are
quoted as further evidence of the rapid expansion of
the trade of the port. Let us hope that the harbour
trust commissioners will pursue a policy in the ad-
ministration of their trust that will help to further
develop its growth by increasing its conveniences, and
by the introduction of the most modern and up-to-date
appliances, whereby the rapid discharging and loading
of vessels may be secured at a minimum of cost. The
people of the State have a right to expect this. Nature
has done very much for them. In the magnificent port
she has endowed them with a heritage which will enable
them to hold the position to which they have attained,
provided the natural advantages are fully utilised.
What has cost millions elsewhere for the construction of
docks and other conveniences for shipping Nature has
given the citizens of Sydney without money and without
price. Favoured as the port is, therefore, it is not
unreasonable to expect that the commissioners will
avail themselves of their great opportunity to make
Port Jackson a still cheaper and more convenient and
expeditious shipping place. Connected as it is with the
interior by railways, nearly every line of which runs
through a coal-field, the railway commissioners ought to
be able, with the increase of production and consequently
of traffic, to carry produce at ever-lowering rates, and
thus add largely to the volume of its commerce.
This reference to the trade of the city leads us
naturally to that place “ where merchants most do
congregate ” —the Rialto of Sydney. When some fifty
years ago the foundations of the Royal Exchange of
Sydney were laid, there was a little band of merchants
who, in the midst of the excitement created by the
THE ROYAL EXCHANGE OF SYDNEY,
South-eastern Corner of Pitt and Bridge Streets.
discovery of gold in the colony, determined that the
guild to which they belonged should bear its part in
advancing the interests of the young colony. Their
names should be gratefully remembered. Though
Sydney was at that time but a mere village, and the
trade of all Australia was represented by very small
figures, they foresaw the coming importance of the city,
and determined that those engaged in the development
of its commerce should have an institution worthy of it.
To what dimensions that trade has already grown is


Trade of
the Chief Cities
in the Com
MON WEALTH.
City.
1891.
1900.
I icrease,
* Decrease.
Sydney
•• £ 35.377-745
£43.5'9.85o
Melbourne
31.508,051
3 I »54°»4 I 4
32,353
Adelaide
9.599,3!2
9- 1 °3>454
*495.858
Brisbane
■ • 4.745,4*8
6,610,064
1,864,645
Perth ..
2,133,811
9.505.531
7,37 I .72o
I894.
Decrease.
Hobart
. • T,6S3,270
1.532,388
150,882
shown by the following table, which also gives the
figures of the chief ports of Australia and Tasmania,
and the movement during nine years:—
Sanguine as were the public-spirited men of Sydney
with regard to the future, they could never have dreamt
that in a period so brief as fifty years the trade of the
chief centres of Australia would reach such dimensions.
The foregoing statistics are taken because they relate to
the decennial period between 1891 and igoo. We sub-
join the trade returns for igo3 : —Sydney, ;
Melbourne, ; Adelaide, £$ 862,245 ; Brisbane,
£g. 603,61 1 ; Perth and Fremantle, ; Hobart,
and Launceston, The building, the founda-
tion of which they laid and opened under very great
difficulties, remains as an evidence of their public spirit
and their faith in the future of the city. The records
state that many obstacles had to be overcome after
operations had been commenced. The attractions
of the gold-fields had disturbed the labour market,
and the cost of building materials had so increased
that the estimates were greatly exceeded. The
THE SYDNEY WOOL EXCHANGE
(In the Exchange Building.)
raising of additional capital became necessary; but
with the characteristic determination and energy of the
race of British merchants from which they had sprung
the representatives of the little mercantile community
pushed on with the work, and after many trials they
had the satisfaction of seeing the Exchange opened by
His Excellency Sir William Denison on 30th December,
1857, They thus gave their fellow-citizens not only a
place wherein merchants and others engaged in trade
could conveniently transact their business, but also
provided the city with a hall which for many years was
the only one wherein large public gatherings could be
A TELEGRAM WHICH ARRESTS THE ATTENTION
OF INSURANCE MANAGERS.
(In the Exchange Building.)
accommodated. That the foundations were well and
truly laid is demonstrated by the two storeys that have
been added to the building. The original structure,
although architecturally correct in all its details, being
an excellent design of the Corinthian order, had for
some time been dwarfed by the splendid edifices erected
in its immediate vicinity. The directors therefore
determined upon a departure from the plan prepared
for the completion of the original design, they having
been advised that the-walls were so built that two storeys
could be added. The architect, Mr. A. F. Pritchard,
is to be complimented upon his successful treatment of
the elevation. The Corinthian order has been continued,
and harmony in the blending of the new with the old
portion of the structure has been secured, which makes
it now one of the handsomest of the city’s many fine
buildings.
The statue which surmounts the pediment (upon
which there is a well-executed carving of the seal of the
Royal Exchange) was executed by Mr. James White,
sculptor, under the supervision of the architect. The
statue is 14 feet in height, moulded into shape by a
process known as “ repousse,” which was employed
in the making of the celebrated statue of Liberty,
standing at the entrance to New York harbour, and
which was introduced into this State for the first time
by the architect in the production of this figure.
The statue is a highly artistic and spirited design.
“ Commerce ” is represented by an ideal female figure
holding aloft in her right hand a laurel branch, sig-
nificant of her peaceful mission, and in her left hand the
caducens of Mercury, the symbol of commerce. The
winged head suggests transport over the earth, upon a
representation of which the figure is standing, while
placed on either side of the globe are emblems of the
staple industries of the State.


In the additions to the building provision has been
made for the accommodation of the Sydney Chamber of
Commerce, which since its foundation has had its offices
in the Exchange. The council chamber is a spacious
apartment suitably furnished and fitted for the conduct
of the important work which the members of the council
are called upon to perform.
THE COAL SECTION DISCUSS A NEWS ITEM.
(In the Exchange Building.)
In the centre of the two upper storeys is the Sydney
Wool Exchange, a spacious hall 37 feet high, fitted on the
most modern lines, with tiers of seats so arranged that
all the buyers are well within range of the auctioneer’s
eyes and ears. The rostrum for the accommodation of
the auctioneer and clerks is a handsome piece of
furniture, approached by steps on both sides. The
decorations of the hall are chaste. The ventilation is by
means of swing stained-glass windows, placed in the
deep cornice under the coved ceiling, and by Tobin
ventilators at intervals of 8 feet round the room a cool
current of air is maintained, draughts being avoided.
The lighting and acoustics are excellent, and with its
spacious gallery for the accommodation of visitors, and
smoking verandah opening out of it, the hall is con-
sidered perfect for the purpose for which it has been
erected. Here it is that the great staple of the country
is disposed of. While the prices obtained for it are a
matter of primary concern to buyers and sellers, we all
are indirectly interested in the state of the wool market.
When wool is up, we know that “ times are going to be
better.” Looking at the view of the hall, which is given
as one of the illustrations, with the buyers in their
places, it is hard to believe that these gentlemen, so
calm and collected, will a few moments after the
auctioneer calls “ Lot 1 ” be roused into a state of
frenzy; but such is the case, especially when the market
is buoyant, as happily it promises to be in the present
wool season. Two large lifts, capable of holding twenty
persons each, give easy and rapid access to the sale-room
and offices on the upper floors.
On the first floor are the committee rooms and
offices of the Fire and Marine Underwriters of New
South Wales. Close by are the offices of the Engineer-
ing Association of New South Wales ; and on the same
floor the National Shipwreck Relief and Humane
Society of New South Wales (a society founded by the
members of the Exchange, at the instigation oi
Mr. F. 11. Dangar) carries on its beneficent work*
Here, too, is the hall used for general auction sales,
meetings of public companies, arbitrations, &c. It has
raised seats accommodating three hundred persons, and
contains a platform that can be suited for sales or
meetings. Lectures are given here on commercial
subjects under the auspices of the Commercial Educa-
tional Section of the Chamber of Commerce.
The main hall on the ground floor, known as the
“ members’ room,” is very commodious and presents an
imposing appearance, being 100 feet long and 40 feet
wide, with height in proportion. It is surrounded with
Corinthian columns supporting the ceiling and the upper
floors; it is well lighted and fitted with reading-stands,
tables, and bulletin boards of every description. The
hall has entrances from Bridge, Pitt, and Gresham
Streets, and from early morning to the closing hour its
glass doors are continuously swinging. Information is
here given to members relating to shipping and com-
merce, together with current news of the day regarding
topics of interest to them. The leading papers published
in the commercial centres of the world, and magazines
and reviews sought for by those engaged in finance and
trade, are all to be found on the tables and are filed
for reference. The weather reports of this and other
Australian States are regularly posted. On the black-
boards at the western end of the hall telegrams and
other items of interest are conspicuously displayed, and
members when entering intuitively cast their eyes in the
direction of the boards. When our photograph was
taken the boards announced the condition of the late
President McKinley. Daily the bulletins were posted
and read anxiously by the members, until the last sad
announcement was posted, “ President McKinley is
dead,” when a trophy of British and American flags and
AT THE SHIPPING BOARDS.
(In the Exchange Building )
shields draped in mourning was placed opposite the main
entrance, and the red ensign hoisted at half-mast over
the building.
The Post and Telegraph Office is an important
feature in the room. This office, originally started by
the Secretary under a license to sell stamps, now returns
the largest revenue of all the branches of the General


Post Office. That the convenience is appreciated is
shown by the receipts, which now amount to per
annum. A pneumatic tube connects this branch with
the General Post Office, and a telephone bureau will
shortly be opened connecting Newcastle, Waratah,
WOOLBROKERS NOTE THE WEATHER
TELEGRAMS.
(In the Exchange Building.)
Bathurst, Blackheath, and Katoomba with the Ex-
change, for the convenience of the members and the
general public.
The illustration on page 54, taken during ’Change
hour, gives an excellent view of the hall, and in the
gathering the faces of well-known men are to be seen,
who are directing the agencies by which the resources
of the State are being developed, and whose work
has greatly assisted in putting together the figures
of trade which have been quoted, and which have been
courteously furnished by Mr. T. A. Coghlan, Govern-
ment Statistician.
From this description of the Exchange our readers
will be enabled to form an idea of this centre of trade,
the work that is being done, and the varied and import-
ant interests which it represents. Surrounded by the
offices of the shipping, insurance and coal companies,
wool warehouses, and the offices of the great pastoral
and finance companies, it may truly be said to be the
heart of Sydney’s commercial life.
These gentlemen are carrying on the work so well
commenced by their predecessors, and by the additions
recently made they have completed a building which
should be the pride of every public-spirited man of
business in the city, and no doubt the directors will be
encouraged by the cordial support of the commercial
community to still further increase its usefulness.
On the occasion of the unveiling of the statue of
Commerce, which stands on the pediment of the
Exchange, by Mrs. G. M. Merivale, wife of the chair-
man of the company, on 31st December, igoo, the
secretary of the Royal Exchange, Mr. C. El. Hayes,
made the following reference to the late Mr. Mort, which
we extract from the files of the Sydney Morning Herald: —
It is now nearly thirty years since the additions along the Pitt
Street front of the building were completed, when Mrs. Merivale’s
father, the late Mr. Wm. Laidley, was induced by the speaker to
take the offices still occupied by her worthy brothers, and it was a
coincidence that the daughter of their first tenant and the wife of
their chairman had unveiled the statue of Commerce that day.
It was, however, fitting, not only for the reasons he had mentioned,
but further as a niece of that great man, the late Mr. Thomas S.
Mort, whose statue adorned the opposite corner of the street,
looking towards the building. Pie was a man who had opened
out every avenue to Australian enterprise, a man who had cleared
the way and made rough places smooth, that those who followed
him might find their way made easier. The late Mr. d. S. Mort
was like one who had been born out of due season, and when the
rising generation asked why that statue had been erected they
might well reply in the terms of the simple inscription on
Sir Christopher Wren’s tablet in St. Paul’s Cathedral: “For
his monument, look around.” If they looked from where they
then stood at the palatial wool warehouses and the large shipping
and other offices doing business with them, when they heard the
roar of the furnaces and the clanging of the hammers at Waterview
—wherever men dug and delved, ploughed or sowed, reaped or
sheared, on every road leading to the development of this
MORT’S STATUE,
(Oppos te Royal Exchange.)
country’s resources they would find the imprint of his footsteps.
In all his works there was evidence of a man working before his
time, assisting in laying the foundation of the nation which would
unfurl its flag on the morrow. He saw that day more clearly
than they, and was sustained in his labours by the visit n of
the future.


The Sydney Chamber of Commerce.
The SYDNEY CHAMBER OF COMMERCE
may fauly claim to be classed among the oldest
representative institutions of New South Wales. Away
back in the dim past of colonial history, it was a force
in the community, and in 1826 its members presented
an address to Sir Ralph Darling, the seventh Governor
of New South Wales, on his arriving in Sydney to
enter upon his duties. The Chamber came into active
existence in 1851, a momentous year for the colony,
as the gold discoveries of that time completely changed
the whole tenor of mercantile life in the country, and
brought about a condition of affairs that operated most
beneficially on the future of this country.
In the oldest minute book of the Chamber are to
be found many items of an interesting nature, but
unfortunately, like most records of an analogous char-
acter, the minutes sometimes refer in exasperalingly
brief and concise terms to matters apparently of more
than passing interest. Nevertheless, the records, what-
ever their defects, afford at the present day the only
clue that can be obtained as to the doings of those who,
in their time, witnessed a metamorphosis of commercial
and mercantile enterprise in the mother colony. On
the 2gth of March, 1851, a meeting of the merchants of
Sydney was held to consider the expediency of establish-
ing a Chamber of Commerce in Sydney. The merchants
who foregathered on that memorable occasion were
strongly imbued with the idea that the country was
progressing rapidly, and that an association to conserve
and advance the commercial interests of the city was
required. At the initial meeting, a Provisional Com-
mittee was formed, and, as the result of their labours,
the Sydney Chamber of Commerce became an accom-
plished fact on the Ist of August, 1851.
The original rules of the Chamber were signed by
J. Walker, chairman of the first meeting held at Sam
Lyons’ auction rooms at the corner of what is now
George Street and Charlotte Place. Following the name
of the chairman, came those of twenty-eight of the leading
merchants of the metropolis. The records show that
at the initial meeting no less than fifty-three members
were enrolled, a circumstance which, considering the
size of the city in those days, is eloquent of the enthu-
siasm that must have been breathed into the movement.
Representatives of the following firms which still exist
to-day, and occupy a conspicuous place in the commer-
cial life of the Commonwealth, were amongst the first
members of the Chamber: —J. S. Willis and W. S.
Merry (Messrs. T. and W. Willis), W. Ranken Scott
and James Henderson (Messrs. Scott, Henderson and
Co.), J. R. Young (Messrs. Paterson, Laing and Bruce,
late Messrs. Young and Lark), John Fairfax (Messrs.
John Fairfax and Sons), R. T. Ford (Messrs. Ford,
Adams and Co.), J. B. Metcalfe (Messrs. Wall and
Molesworth), Robert Towns (Messrs R. Towns and
Co.), David Jones (Messrs. D. Jones and Co.), Edward
Knox (Colonial Sugar Co.), T. S. Mort (Messrs. Golds
brough, Mort and Co.).
The first committee consisted of Messrs. John Lamb,
J. S. Willis, Alexander Campbell, J. W. Gosling, Edward
Knox, John Alexander, T. Whistler Smith, Robert
Towns, George Rees, J. R. Young, M. E. Murnin, John
Walker, Thomas Walker, E. Ebsworth, and John Mac-
kay. On the yth of August a meeting was held to elect
the principal officers, when the following gentlemen were
appointed to the most responsible positions in the Cham-
ber : Commander John Lamb, Chairman ; John Walker,
Deputy-Chairman; J. W. Gosling, Hon. Treasurer; and
William Dawes, Secretary.
Amongst those who took an active interest in the
establishment and work of the Chamber during the period
of its infancy, were gentlemen whose names are still fresh
in the memory of the present generation, or who are still
amongst us occupying prominent positions, and enjoying
high reputations for their probity and worth, both as
business men and as citizens of the premier city of the
Commonwealth. Such men were Edward Knox, J. L.
Montefiore, S. A. Joseph, M. Metcalfe, J. H. Storey,
Captain Towns, Sir Alexander Stuart, C. F. Stokes,
J. S. Willis, W. C. Willis, George King, R. J. King,
A. C. Daniell, W. R. Scott, James Henderson, B. Moli-
neaux, Thomas Littlejohn, A. H. Macafee, Sir William
McMillan, Davidson Nicholl, W. G. Murray, J. H.
Challis, Donald Larnach, Thomas Holt, Sir Daniel
Cooper, Sir Saul Samuel, Sir Stuart Donaldson, Sir
George Dibbs, Sir Henry Parkes, J. B. Watt, Thomas
Buckland, and others.
A recapitulation of some of the conditions prevailing
when the Chamber came into existence, together with the
efforts put forth by its members to secure improvement,
will doubtless arouse interest. In those days the mails
between other parts of the world and Australia were
carried by sailing vessels, and as these were dependent
upon the vagaries of wind and weather, communication
with Europe and America, and even the intercolonial
ports, were both uncertain and irregular. ( This was one
of the first matters which the Chamber took under its
cognisance, as the minutes record that on the 31st of
December, 1852, members congratulated each other with
the following cheering prospect: “ There is no longer
doubt that within a few months the communication
between this city and England will be regularly established


by steam vessels in seventy days, or probably even a
shorter date.”
Some of the subjects taken in hand by the Chamber
proved perennial grievances, and despite the great
amount of magnificent work that has been accomplished,
much yet remains to be done, as the agenda paper at any
meeting of the Chamber bears witness. Marine, railway,
and telegraphic communication are so universally recog-
nised as potent agencies in the development and progress
of the country, that there is little need for the Chamber
now to trouble itself with these, but the exigencies of
everyday life are so prolific of novelty and change that
there is still plenty of work almost daily arising to tax
the resourcefulness of the Chamber. The questions of
brokerage, wharfage, insolvency laws, official assignees,
immigration, naval defences, mail contracts and rates,
mintage, bills of sale, the tariff and customs, stamp
duties, and trade development and expansion generally
were a few of the matters which absorbed the attention
of members during the first few years.
In 1858, the Chamber, for some reason, underwent
an eclipse, from which it duly emerged in 1865. During
this interregnum, the necessity for such an active in-
stitution was severely felt by the mercantile community.
It was realised that, if apathy were allowed to creep into
their deliberations, it would probably lead to a segre-
gation of interests, and thus they would be unable to
ventilate their grievances and urge remedial measures
with the force and insistence which could be exercised by
an aggregation of their numbers and influence. About
the middle of 1865, it was recognised that the time was
opportune to resuscitate the old energy and zeal of the
Chamber to continue the good work that had been so
persistently pushed forward some years before. Accord-
ingly, on the 23rd of August of that year a meeting was
held, at which there were present Captain Towns, J. S.
Willis, G. R. Dibbs. B. Molineaux, J. Alger, G. A. Lloyd,
S. A. Joseph, George King, T. C. Breillat, G. S. Caird,
and others. At this meeting a motion “ That it is desir-
able for the benefit of the mercantile, trading, and mari-
time interests of the colony to reconstruct the Sydney
Chamber of Commerce,” was adopted, and subsequently
a new set of rules was framed and confirmed. The
Chamber, as might naturally be supposed, was a strong
supporter of freedom in all trade matters, and con-
sequently when, at the end of 1865, a new tariff in the
direction of lessening the burden of customs taxation was
proposed, the Chamber gave its approval, but when the
bill in its passage through Parliament became so emas-
culated as to prove worthless, and its place was taken
by a proposal to impose ad valorem duties, the Cham-
ber became thoroughly aroused, and gave the measure
its strongest opposition, the head and front of which
was a vigorously worded petition to the Government
against ad valorem duties, which were declared to be
Irghly detrimental to intercolonial trade. While it
condemned the imposition of the stamp duties, the
Chamber fought hard to get the Government to arrange
for telegraphic communication to be made with various
coastal stations, so that the merchants, shippers, and
the public generally might be daily, if not hourly, in-
formed of the maritime movements and happenings
off the coast. Up till that lime no news could be
obtained regarding what occurred in the “offing” until
the vessel reached an anchorage in Port Jackson. Even
the position of shipping along the coast could not
be ascertained until the vessels were sighted from
South Head.
The boon then so much desired has long since been
obtained. As far back as 1868, the question of a uni-
form tariff and customs union for the Australian colonies
was discussed at the invitation of the Melbourne
Chamber. Great interest was taken in the matter, and
several meetings were held, at which it was debated at
length. Eventually the Chamber early in the following
year decided that the proposed customs union would
not prove to the benefit of New South Wales. In the
same year, the Chamber, at a special meeting held to
discuss the desirableness of establishing cable com-
munication between Britain and Australia, passed a
resolution urging upon the Government “The necessity
of telegraphic communication with the mother country.”
At the time of passing that resolution, the Chamber
probably entertained little idea that within about two
years the gigantic enterprise they were urging would
have become an accomplished fact, as the Eastern cable
service came into operation in 1872. The project for a
Pacific submarine cable from San Francisco via Hono-
lulu, Fiji, and New Caledonia, to Australia, which was
advocated by the Chamber in 1870, achieved a very
much more tardy realisation, as more than thirty years
elapsed ere the “ Orient and Occident” were brought
into direct communication by wire, laid along the great
ooze plains of the Pacific Ocean. During that long in-
terval the route originally projected was considerably
modified in directions that were approved of by the
Chamber, as the changes brought the surface entirely
under British control, the terminal points being located
in British territory at Vancouver, in Canada, and
Southport, in Queensland.
During the decade 1870-80 members of the Cham-
ber were particularly energetic, and many matters of
great importance were forced to the front by their
persistent advocacy. The establishment of more
efficient methods for the disposal of New South
Wales wool in London, and the proper protection of
the companies that were embarking in what was then
the hazardous frozen meat trade, were matters which
engaged serious attention, and received the best
advisory support of the association. The simplification
of the tariff and the abolition of ad valorem duties, also
the re-establishment of the San Francisco mail service,
insolvency law amendment, increased wharfage and
dock accommodation, and differential railway rates, so
as to bring a share of the Riverina trade to Sydney,
were amongst the multiplicity of matters to which the
Chamber bent its attention and energies. The suc-
ceeding decade, 1880-90, was occupied mainly in
advocating what might, with propriety, be designated
domestic reforms—that is, matters relating to improve-
ments of the port, and amendments in the mercantile
laws, especially that of insolvency. After years of
patient waiting and persistent agitation by the members
of the Chamber, a new Bankruptcy Act was passed in
1888, and the most sanguine anticipations were indulged
in regarding the working of this new measure. * From
the time of its inception the members of the association
had been prompt to show their loyalty to the reigning
House, and when in 1887 Her Majesty the late Queen
Victoria celebrated her jubilee the association adopted
an appropriate address of congratulation, which was
forwarded to the Queen in London.


The decennial period embraced between iBgo and
1900 saw many matters of importance discussed, and
in a number of instances the Chamber pushed its
conclusions to a practical finish. During this period
the inauguration ot a system of technical and commer-
cial education of the young was warmly espoused, and
the advancement that has been made in those directions
is largely the result of the strenuous endeavours put
forth by the Chamber. The reconstruction of the
Marine Board on lines more consistent with up-to-date
methods was strongly urged, and members were com-
plimented by having a number of their ideas on this
subject incorporated in a parliamentary enactment.
Notwithstanding the great number of local matters
dealt with by the Chamber, its members found time to
give careful consideration to many matters of special
concern, involving a reference to the Legislature.
Although Parliament could not always see its way to
adopt the recommendations of the Chamber, yet the
fact that the views of the association are reflected in
many of the statutes of the State is an evidence that
the deliberations of the Chamber were appreciated by
those composing the Legislature. In fighting for its
rights, the members of the Chamber have always taken
a broad and liberal view of all questions, and while con-
tinually on the alert to further the interests of the
commercial community, have not been unmindful of
the best concerns of the general public.
The year 1900-1 was a memorable one in the
annals of the Chamber, as the federation of the Aus-
tralian colonies was the precursor of many changes
which could not fail to arrest the attention of members,
and provide them with food for discussion, if not mate-
rial for action. In the round of celebrations which
heralded the inauguration of the Commonwealth, the
arrival of the first Governor-General, Lord Hopetoun
(Earl Linlithgow), and the visit of the Duke and
Duchess of York to open the first Federal Parliament,
the Chamber played a conspicuous part, befitting its
importance as the corporate representative of the
mercantile interests of the city. Many of the reforms
and improvements which the Chamber had for years
advocated were foreshadowed in the measure for the
creation of a harbour trust, and the provisions of a
new Industrial Arbitration Bill received due considera-
tion, as did a proposal to limit the number of public
holidays, the frequency of which seriously interrupted
the operations of trade. The Chamber also sought to
have the conditions relative to the export of produce
improved, and the Minister for Mines and Agriculture
promised to adopt some of the suggestions made to him
on the subject. During the passage of the Legal Pro-
cedure Act through Parliament, two cardinal clauses
were incorporated at the instigation of the Chamber.
The matter of the appointment of a commercial agent
to represent the interests of New South Wales in
London and to disseminate useful information regarding
the products of the State was not warmly espoused, but
the advisableness of appointing a suitable person was
urged upon the Government. A number of matters of
purely local concern which came within the Chamber’s
sphere of influence were placed prominently before the
“powers that be,” with every prospect of being dealt
with in a practical manner. During the year an inno-
vation was effected in the establishment of “ High
’Change,” by the secretary of the Sydney Exchange Co.
(now the Royal Exchange), which promised to enhance
the usefulness of the Chamber. This institution
aims at bringing the commercial men together in
an informal assemblage at a convenient hour of
the day to talk over matters affecting their affairs,
that could hardly be accorded a place at the more
formal meetings on ’Change. A very short experience
of this new procedure was sufficient to convince
members of its value as an adjunct to the more
definite work of the Chamber. The establishment of
the Federated Council of Chambers of Commerce of the
Commonwealth was consummated in 1901. By this fed-
eration it wasnot intended to interfere with, or supersede
any of the individual Chambers in the slightest degree,
but there were many matters, touching the commercial
interests of Australia as a whole, which could be dealt
with more effectively by a federated Council than by
the separate efforts of individual Councils, or even the
joint efforts of the various bodies. As the outcome of
a suggestion made by a member of the Council
(Mr. Barre Johnston), an Australian Chamber of
Commerce was formed in London to look after the
commercial interests of the Commonwealth in that
quarter.
The year had been one of onerous work steadfastly
pursued, but the following year, 1901-2, was destined
to be one of even greater responsibilities, to successfully
cope with which called forth increased activity on the
part of members of the Chamber. With characteristic
loyalty, members evinced their deep concern for the
welfare of the King during the anxious period caused by
the illness which resulted in the postponement of his
coronation, and when at last the brilliant ceremonial had
become a fact no body of men within the compass of
His Majesty’s wide dominions were more sincere in the
wish that “ his throne may be established in righteous-
ness that it may stand fast for evermore ” than the
members of the Sydney Chamber of Commerce.
During 1903 the Chamber was chiefly occupied in
combating what members conceived to be the arbitrary
administration of the Customs Duties Act. With firm-
ness, tempered by courtesy, the Chamber repeatedly
addressed the Department, and also interviewed the
Minister (Hon. C. C. Kingston) in the hope of getting
some of the regulations which were considered to be
altogether too drastic, and in some instances absolutely
subversive of business, removed or toned down. In this
matter the Chamber succeeded in achieving much.
Throughout its entire existence the Chamber has
pursued a thoroughly consistent course, and the record
of work done is a fitting testimonial to the value of such
an institution. Owing to its powerful advocacy of the
rights of the merchants, many effective reforms have
been won, vexatious conditions ameliorated, and the
whole of the commercial environment improved and
benefited. The energy, resource and capacity which has
distinguished the Chamber in the past is still inherent
within it to-day. In looking back over the past its
members have reason to be proud of the beneficent
result it has achieved, and while evincing a justifiable
pride in the influence and power of the Chamber, they
cannot refrain from according a due meed of praise to
those who, as officers, bore the heat and burden of
the day and successfully guided the Chamber through
many an anxious and trying time to victory, peace and
honour.


For many years the office of the Chamber of
Commerce has been located at the Exchange, in Bridge
Street, a most central and eligible situation, “ where
members most do congregate.” The present secretary,
Mr. Henry Charles Mitchell, than whom hardly anyone
is better known or more esteemed in the city, has held
the position for many years, and he has made the
interests and advancement of the Chamber matters of
intense personal concern. Energetic, shrewd and capable,
his advice is of inestimable value to the executive on
all occasions, while his suavity and bonhomie are
elements that find their reflex in the popularity he rightly
enjoys.
On 31st July, 1907, the Sydney Chamber of Commerce
held their annual meeting, on which occasion the follow-
ing gentlemen were elected as members of the Council
for the year ending 30th June, 1908 :—Messrs. H. Y.
Braddon (Dalgety & Co. Ltd ), A. A. C. Cocks (Arthur
Cocks & Co. Ltd.), J. Russell French (General Manager,
Bank of New South Wales), Moritz Gotthelf (Feldheim,
Gotiheif & Co.), Walter J. Keep (John Keep & Sons
Ltd.), S. E. Laidley (Wm Laidley & Co.), George S.
Littlejohn (Scott, Henderson & Co.), H. R. Lysaght
(John Lysaght Ltd.), G. M. Merivale, (Gibbs, Bright
and Co ), A. F. Robinson (Hogg, Robinson & Co. Ltd.),
E. H. Rogers (Brown & Co.), A. B. Templeman (Pater-
son, Laing & Bruce Ltd.), E.Trelawny (P. &O.S. N.
Co.), Geo. Wall, F. E. Winchcombe (Winchcombe,
Carson & Co.).
Subsequently the Council elected Mr. FT E.
Winchcombe as President, Mr. Geo. S. Littlejohn as
Vice-President, and Mr. Geo. Wall as Hon. Treasurer.
The Pacific Cable
The PACIFIC CABLE, after many years of
effort, opposition and exhaustive inquiry, was laid
in the year 1902 by a partnership of Great Britain and
her self-governing colonies, with the following general
objects : —(1) To promote Imperial unity ; (2) to
secure additional and alternative communication be-
tween the various States of the British Empire (which
might be invaluable in times of war, earthquake, &c.),
and (3) by opening up new routes, combined with
moderate tariffs, to stimulate the development of com-
merce and general intercourse both within and without
the Empire. The capital cost of the cable buildings,
&c., was almost exactly £2,000,000, which sum was
voted by the Imperial Parliament for the project.
The financial responsibilities for the repayment of the
capita] sum with interest by annual instalments in
fifty years, together with the provision of the annual
working expenses and renewal funds, were divided in
the following proportions ; —Great Britain, five-eigh-
teenths ; Canada, five-eighteenths ; the States of New
South Wales, Victoria, Queensland and New Zealand,
two-eighteenths each. By federation the Common-
wealth of Australia is therefore the largest partner in
the undertaking. The total length of the cable is
7,838 nautical miles, made up as follows : —Southport,
Queensland (the terminus), to Norfolk Island, 837
miles ; Norfolk Island to Suva (Fiji), 981 miles ; Suva
to Fanning Island, 2,043 miles ; Fanning Island to
Bamfield (Canada), 3,458 miles ; and the branch line
from Norfolk Island to Doubtless Bay (New Zealand),
519 miles. From Bamfield messages are transmitted
by the Canadian cables to Montreal, and thence to
Great Britain. The whole route being British-owned,
the advantages to Great Britain and the Common-
wealth in time of war are obvious. The cost of trans-
mission from the Commonwealth to London is 3s. per
word ; to New Zealand, qjd. ; to Norfolk Island, 3d. ;
and to Fiji, Bd., the rates to other places being equally
moderate. The Pacific Cable Board have now the
same facilities for conducting business in Australia as
the Eastern Extension Telegraph Company. Centrally
situated offices have been opened at Devon Chambers,
40 Hunter Street, Sydney, opposite the offices of the
Sydney Morning Herald. Mr. J. Milward, the board’s
chief electrician and inspector, who resides in Sydney,
is the representative in Australia, and the Sydney
office is under the management of Mr. W. Reichenheim.
an experienced officer of the board’s staff. The ter-
minus of the cable is at Southport. Queensland, where
•extensive buildings have been erected, and the cable
offices are a great source of interest to the numerous
visitors from all parts of the Commonwealth to that
favourite seaside resort. There is a direct wire from
Southport to the Sydney office, so that prompt de-
spatch of messages is ensured. At the other cable-
repeating stations commodious buildings have been
erected, every attention having been paid to climatic
conditions and the comfort and health of the board’s
staffs. As the Commonwealth have to bear their pro-
portion of the cost and annual expense of the Pacific
cable, and the cost of transmission of messages is the
same by either route, it is confidently anticipated by
the Board that as these facts become better known to
the geneial public they will accord it the support it
deserves.


Mr. GEORGE STANLEY
LITTLEJOHN, ex-President of
the Sydney Chamber of Commerce,
is a son of the late Mr. Thomas
Littlejohn, Chairman of the Board of
Directors of the Australian Mutual
Provident Society. He was born in
London on the ibthof August, 1862,
and came to Australia with his parents
in 1864. Primarily, Mr. Littlejohn
was educated at the Sydney Gram-
mar School, but for further scholastic
advantages he was sent home to
Edinburgh, where he attended the
High School of that great edu-
cational city. From there he went
to the Edinburgh University, and
after working through one session, he
began his commercial career in a
business house of London, where he
had special opportunities ot learning
the requirements of the Australian
J Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. G S. LITTLEJOHN.
export trade. After gaining the
valuable experience of a year’s train-
ing, the embryo merchant returned
to Sydney and entered the establish-
ment of Messrs. Scott, I lenderson
and Co., of which his father was one
of the partners. This was in 1881,
and some eight years later he was
admitted into the partnership. For
many years the father and son con-
stituted the entire firm until the
deatli of Mr. Littlejohn, sen. In
commercial circles Mr. George S.
Littlejohn is regarded as a man
of marked ability. He has stamped
his individuality not only upon
his firm’s business, but upon
many matters of commercial mo
meat. As a member of the council
of the Sydney Chamber of Com-
merce for many years he has
necessarily played a part of much
prominence in many movements
having tor their object the advance-
ment of the general interest, and his
labours have in many ways had
acknowledgment and recognition.
Mr. Littlejohn has always been
keenly alive to the necessity which
existed for the appreciation of a
system of commercial education, and
he enjoys the honour of having
originated the commercial education
scheme now in operation under the
auspices of the Sydney Chamber of
Commerce. For his efforts in this
direction alone he is deserving of
unstinted praise, but he is likely to
find his best reward in the general
benefit which must result from his
scheme. It should be mentioned
also that Mr. Littlejohn has served
two terms as honorary treasurer of
the Chamber of Commerce. Mar-
ried in 1895 to Miss McCorquodale,
only daughter of Mr. Alexander
McCorquodale, of Glasgow and
Auckland, N.Z., Mr. Littlejohn has
a family of two daughters.
Mr. CHARLES H. HAYES, the
Secretary of the Royal Exchange, of
Sydney, is one of the connecting links
between the past and present genera-
tions of Sydney merchants. Born at
Sydney in the year 1841 and educated
at St. (aines’ Grammar School, the
Rev. Canon Druitt at that time being
the headmaster. His first intro-
duction to mercantile life was as a
junior in the office of the White Star
Line of Liverpool, Messrs. H. T.
Wilson & Chambers of that city
having then a branch office in Sydney,
and with that firm he remained until
the closing of the branch, the agency
being taken over by Messrs. Lorimer,
Rome & Co., in whose employ he
continued until their business was
transferred to their Melbourne office.
Mr. Hayes thereafter was engaged
in mercantile and shipping pursuits
until the year 1871 when, while a
young man, he was offered the posi-
tion of manager of the Sydney
Exchange. His work in connection
with the resuscitation of that insti-
tution is so well known, and has
been so often referred to, that there
is no necessity to dwell upon it at any
length. One of the founders of the
Exchange the late Hon, Alexander
Campbell, when addressing the share-
holders in the year 1884, an d con-
gratulating them upon the improved
state of the company, said, in reference
to their depressed state a few years
ago, that the change had been brought
about by the appointment of Mr.
Hayes to the position of secretary.
He gave the company’s history from
the year 1851 stating “ that in 1871
it came to his knowledge that the
services of a gentleman could be had
to manage the Exchange and direct
the commercial interests to that
centre. He alluded to their worthy
secretary, Mr. C. H. Hayes. The
duty was discouraging at that time.
He, however, induced his fellow-
directors to appoint Mr. Hayes.
That gentleman was appointed and
Falk Studios. Sydney.
MR. C. H. HAYES.
they knew the result. It was mainly
to his undertaking the practical
management of the company that
the resuscitation took plane in 1871
and placed the Exchange on the
favourable footing it had since occu-
pied.” On the death of Mr. J. E.
Ebsworth, Mr. Hayes was appointed
secretary of the Sydney Chamber of
Commerce, a position which he re-
signed in 1885 owing to ill health and
the increasing duties of his dual
positions. When presenting Mr.
Hayes with a testimonial on behalf
of the members of the Chamber, the
chairman, Sir William McMillan,
said of Mr. Hayes : “ His work was
written on the minutes of the
Chamber and it was written in the


accounts of certain public manifesta-
tions on the part of the Chamber of
Commerce in which Mr. Hayes had
borne such a prominent part. The
outside public knew very little to
what an extent Mr. Hayes had
originated and promoted some of the
highest movements which had been
put on foot during the past tw r elve
years for the purpose of furthering
the interests of commerce in this
country.” In further recognition of
his services Mr. Hayes was made a
life member of the Chamber. The
establishment of the telephone service
of the city was due to Mr. Hayes,
who first connected the Darling
Harbour railway sheds, wool stores,
wharves and bonds together with the
stores and offices of a number of
firms with the switch-room, which he
had obtained permission to open at
the Exchange. The business grew
so rapidly that Mr. Hayes suggested
that it should be taken over by the
Telegraph Department, then con-
trolled by Mr. E. C. Cracknell. It
is not alone in connection with the
Royal Exchange that the subject of
our sketch is known. Elected to the
first council of the municipality of
Manly, when that suburb was in-
corporated, he served the ratepayers
for seventeen years faithfully and
well. During his term of office he
was three times consecutively
elected mayor. The services rendered
by him will long be remembered by
the residents of Manly, and his name
will always be associated with the
model borough—a title which he did
so much to create. His negotiations,
by which the pretty park in the centre
of the village was secured, and its
ultimate purchase by him on behalf
of the Government, together with his
labours in connection with the Manly
wild flower shows, by which large
sums were raised, not only for the
improvement and embellishment of
the park, but also to defray debts on
churches, are matters of Manly
history. He was one of those who,
with Mr. F. H. Dangar, its founder,
and others, took an active interest in
the formation of the Royal Shipwreck
and Humane Society of New South
Wales, and was elected a member of
the first committee, a position which
he still occupies. Nine years ago
Mr. Hayes left Manly to reside at
Wahroonga, on the North Shore line,
where, with the assistance of his
fellow-residents, he was instrumental
in forming a Progress Association,
which has already done splendid work
in that beautiful highland suburb.
It has been w r ritten of him that he is a
many-sided man, very thorough in all
that he undertakes, and once that he
takes up a good cause never drops
it until he carries it successfully
through. To hold an office for
nearly thirty-four years is a marked
event in a man’s life, but to have
succeeded in gaining general approval
is something still greater, and this
happily appears to be Mr. Hayes’
experience, and a very pleasant
experience it must be.
Mr. ROLLO A. CAPE, J.P.,
Vice-President of the Royal Ex-
change, Sydney, a son of the late
Mr. John Cape, Merchant, Tas-
mania, was born at “ Clonmines,”
the family home, near Launceston,
in 1840. He was educated at the
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. R. A. CAPE.
Tamar Street Grammar School of
that city, the headmaster of which
at the time was the distinguished
scholar, the late Rev. Charles Price.
Mr. Cape arrived in Sydney in 1859,
and shortly afterwards entered the
mercantile house of Messrs. Thacker
Daniell and Co , and subsequently
became their managing clerk, which
position he retained until 1871, when
he commenced business on his own
account in partnership with the late
Mr. W. H. Mackenzie, sen., under
the style of Mackenzie and Cape,
Public Accountants and Average
Adjusters. Since the demise of
Mr. Mackenzie in 1884, Mr. Cape
has continued the business in his
own name, He is a director of the
City Bank of Sydney, and also of
the Assets Realisation and General
Finance Co. Ltd. He has also filled
the position of director of the Sydney
branch of the Commercial Bank of
Australia Ltd., also of the Perma-
nent Trustee Co., of New South
Wales, and the Commercial Build-
ing and Investment Co. Ltd. Mr.
Cape is a corresponding member of
the Average Adjusters’ Association
of Great Britain. With his large
practical business experience in
Sydney, extending over a period of
forty-five years, Mr. Cape has proved
himself to be eminently qualified to
fill any position of trust and respon-
sibility which he would be willing to
undertake. Mr. Cape is also a
magistrate of New South Wales,
having received his commission in
1875, at which time he was mayor of
the borough of Marrickville.
Mr. GEORGE JUDAH
COHEN, Chairman of the Royal
Exchange of Sydney, was born in
Sydney on 27th April, 1842. He is
the son of the late Mr. Samuel
Cohen, who for twenty-five years,
up to 1861, was a member of the
firm of Messrs. David Cohen & Co.,
whose headquarters then, as now,
were in Spring Street, Sydney. Mr.
Samuel Cohen was for some years,
during the fifties, a distinguished
member of the New South Wales
Parliament, representing Morpeth
in the Legislative Assembly. Mr.
Samuel Cohen died over forty years
ago, during the exciting political era
covered by the agitation that brought
about the unlocking of the lands of
the colony, and of which the Robert-
son Land Acts were the result,
Mr. George Cohen was educated in
London, principally at the Univer-
sity College, Gower Street. Having
completed his education with a
view to entering the service of the
firm of which his father was a
member, and of which he is now
the senior partner. This was in
1861, and only four months prior to
his father’s death. Having spent
four years in the head house in
Sydney, he proceeded, in 1865, t 0
Maitland, in order to take charge of
the firm’s branch business at that
centre. This position he occupied
for sixteen years, only vacating it in
order to take charge at the head
office in Sydney. The business
carried on by Messrs. David Cohen
and Co. is one of the most pros-
perous in the Southern Hemisphere


and known throughout Australia
and Great Britain for more than
sixty years, having been established
in 1836. In addition to controlling
this great business concern, Mr.
Cohen is Chairman of the Com-
mercial Banking Co. of Sydney,
to which position he was elected on
the demise of Sir Edward Knox.
Mr. Cohen is also Chairman of
the Board of Directors of Messrs.
Tooth & Co. Ltd., and of the Aus-
tralian Gas Light Co.; also Chair-
man of the Sydney Exchange Co.,
to which position he has been
several times in succession elected.
Mr. Cohen is Chairman of the
United Insurance Co. Upon the
death of his uncle, Mr. David
Lewds, a prominent Liverpool
and Manchester merchant, in 1887.
Mr. Cohen inherited an equal
share with his brother-in-law,
Mr. Benjamin W. Levy, of London,
a vast sum of money, amounting in
the aggregate to over
This amount was bequeathed to
them in equal absolutely. The
announcement to them of the terms
of the will W3t accompanied by a
letter, in which the testator expressed
a wish that this vast wealth might
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. G. T. COHEN.
be applied for the industrial popu
lation of Liverpool and Manchester.
In accordance with this wish Messrs.
Cohen and Levy, the legatees, at
the earliest moment proceeded with
arrangements for the carrying out
of their late uncle’s desire in its
integrity. Owing to his business
interests in Australia Mr. Cohen
was not free to go to England to
supervise the application of the
money, as desired by the testator.
An influential committee of five
Liverpool and Manchester gentle-
men, which included Sir William
Houldsworth, was formed, who are
acting in conjunction with the
legatees and Mr. Louis S. Cohen, a
brother of Mr. G. J. Cohen and an
ex-Lord Mayor of Liverpool. In
connection with the trust a hospital
and other buildings, costing over
/*200,000, have been erected in
Liverpool, besides parks which
have been donated to Manchester and
suburbs costing over£ioo,oooas well.
Mr. Cohen was married in 1868 to a
daughter of the late Hon. L. W.
Levy, by whom he has a family
of six sons and two daughters.
Mr. Cohen resides at “ Engadine,”
Elizabeth Bay, Sydney.
PRESIDENTS
SYDNEY
CHAMBER OF COMMERCE
1851-1898


Mr. HENRY CHARLES
MITCHELL, Secretary, Sydney
Chamber of Commerce, was born at
Sydney, 14th February, 1846. He
is a son of the late Charles Mitchell
(of Mitchell & Co., ship chandlers)
and was educated at the well-known
schools of |. Fred. Castle, Austenham
House, Balmain Road, and of the
Rev. W. H. Surigney, Collegiate
School, Cook’s River. The subject
entered the office of Messrs. Mocker,
Daniell & Co. in February, 1862, and
in 1865 was in the employ of the well-
known firm of Messrs. Learmonth,
Dickinson & Co., where he remained
for three years. P'or the succeeding
three years he served with Messrs.
Scott, Henderson & Co., after which
he started as a commercial broker
and also filled the post of secretary
to the Steamship Owners’ Associa-
MR. H. C. MITCHELL.
tion. In July, 1885, he was appointed
to present position and has been re-
appointed annually ever since. His
modus operandi of all the transactions
of the Chamber, aided by a retentive
memory, enables him at a moment’s
notice to quote back work of the
Chamber with the greatest ease and
accuracy.
Mr. GEORGE WALL, J.P., ex-
President of the Sydney Chamber of
Commerce, is a native of the State
of New South Wales, and has been
connected with the shipping business
of the port of Sydney for more than
forty years. Entering the office of
Messrs. Michael Metcalfe & Co.,
customs shipping agents as a junior,
he in course of time joined Messrs.
Metcalfe & Powell as a partner.
Upon Mr. Metcalfe’s retirement from
the business he entered into partner-
ship with Mr. James Powell, and
succeeded to the ownership of the
business when Mr. Powell was ap-
pointed to the position of collector of
customs. In early years Mr. Wall
resided at the Australian Museum, in
College Street, with his father, who
was curator, and took great interest
in the work of that institute.' 51 Pie
assisted in the production of a
Henry King. Sydney .
MR. G. WALL.
catalogue of the birds contained in
the Museum, under the guidance of
the late William Sharpe Macleay.
Mr. Wall was one of the founders of
the Zoological Society’s gardens at
Sydney, and did much to popularise
that institute by succeeding in throw-
ing it open free to the schools of the
State as some return for the govern-
ment subsidy. He also took great
interest in municipal affairs, having
served as auditor, alderman and
mayor of the Randwick Borough
Council. As a member of that
council he took an active interest
in the movement for a system of
circular suburban railway and at the
first meeting was appointed honorary
secretary. The matter was advanced
so far as to be incorporated in a
measure. Upon its submission, how-
ever, it was defeated in the Assembly
by a single vote. Mr. Wall is a
director of the Royal Exchange of
Sydney, and is also on the council of
the Sydney Chamber of Commerce,
where his large experience of custom
and shipping law and practice has
been very useful. He was elected
president of the Chamber of Com-
merce for 1904 and 1905.
Mr. JO H N PERC I V A L
McARTHUR, Director of Messrs.
W. & A. McArthur Ltd., London
and Sydney, Soft Goods Warehouse-
men, Shippers, and Insurance Agents,
is vice - president of the Sydney
Chamber of Commerce. He is a
son of Mr. Alexander McArthur, and
was born at Sydney in 1858. When
quite a lad he accompanied his par-
ents to England, where he received a
thorough collegiate education. Hav-
ing completed his studies, and in
order to gain a practical knowledge
of business methods, he spent a
number of years in the warehouse of
Messrs. R. Bendy & Sons, Cheap-
side, London, in whose employ he
Stereoscopic Co. London
MR J. P. McARHTUR.
received his early commercial train-
ing. Leaving there he became con-
nected with W. & A. McArthur, and
for the next two years was engaged
in their London offices, being after-
wards admitted as a junior partner,
and paid a short visit to the colonies,
after which he was sent to Auckland
to assist in the management of the
firm's business there. For the next
six years his time was spent partly in
New Zealand and partly in London.
On the firm deciding to relinquish
their New Zealand business in con-
sequence of developments taking
place in Australia, he returned to
Auckland and was occupied for nearly
a year in settling matters in New
Zealand. About seven years ago he
J O


came to permanently reside in his
native city, and upon the conver-
sion of A. McArthur & Co., Sydney,
into a limited company under the
title of W. & A. McArthur Ltd., he
became one of the first directors.
In 1888-9 he was chairman of the
Warehousemen’s Association, and
was elected vice-president of the
Chamber of Commerce for the year
1904-5. During his visit to Eng-
land in 1900 he represented this
Chamber at the triennial meeting of
the Associated Chambers of Com-
merce. He is hon. treasurer of the
Women’s Hospital, and a director
of the Prince Alfred Hospital, and
one of the hon. secretaries of the
Boys’ Brigade, and a vice-president
of the Y.M.C.A. He also holds a
silver medal from the Shipwreck
Relief Society, for attempting a
rescue while a heavy sea was run-
ning off Bondi Beach.
Mr . JAMES MONT AG U E
SANDY, J.P.. was born at Sydney
in 1857, and is the only son of the
late James Sandy, who arrived in
Sydney in 1852, having left Eng-
land per a sailing vessel, “ Queens-
town,” 335 tons, in October, 1851,
the passage taking 152 days. The
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. J. M. SANDY.
subject of this sketch was educated
at Camden College and the Sydney
Grammar School. He began his
com niercial career in J an nary,
1873, with the firm of James Levick
and Co., hardware merchants, of
which his father was a partner.
His father the game year purchased
the business of Thomas Edens,
plate-glass, oil and colour mer-
chant, to which Mr. J. M. Sandy
joined himself, and who, since his
father’s demise in 1883, has carried
on the business. Mr. Sandy paid a
second visit to England in 1892,
and again in 1900, solely in the
interest of his firm. He was made
a fellow of the Imperial Institute of
England in 1885, and became a life
o 7 ~, •
governor of the same institution in
1900. He is also a life fellow of
the Royal Colonial Institute, hav-
ing been elected to that position in
1900. He has been a member of
the Sydney Chamber of Commerce
for a number of years, being elected
hon. treasurer for the year 1904.
He is a director of the Fresh Food
and Ice Co. Ltd., the Y.M.C.A., the
Sydney Female Refuge, and the
Benevolent Society of New South
Wales, being elected hon. treasurer
to the last-named institution for
the year 1904. He is a member of
the standing committee elected by
the Church of England Diocesan
Synod, and has been a synodsman
for the past eighteen years. On 9th
July, 1881, he married, at Albury,
N.S.W., Evaline M., the eldest
daughter of the late Joseph Back-
house, architect. There are six
children ; the eldest son, James
Lionel M., is engaged in the
business with his father. He has
also the honour of being a Justice
of the Peace, having been gazetted
on 31st October, 1902.
JAMES STEDMAN LTD.,
Clarence and Kent Streets, Sydney,
are known all over Australia as
Manufacturing Confectioners, the
purity of the firm’s wares having
gained a reputation second to none
in the Commonwealth. Eor thirty'
years their goods have been on the
market, and the steady demand
created is proof of the excellence of
their quality. A peep into Stedman’s
factory, where tons of sweets are
manufactured during theyear, leaves
no room for doubt as to the extent
to which the Imsiness has grown.
Mr. James Stedman, the head of the
firm, is an Australian,born at Parra-
matta in the year 1840. He entered
into business in 1875, having pur-
chased the concern formerly carried
on by Mr. J. M. Wright. All along
the line the connection has con-
tinued to increase, until recently
the firm were obliged to purchase
the adjoining piece of land, upon
MR. J. STEDMAN.
which have been erected extensiv,
additions to their already spacious
premises. To further the interest
of his business as well as to enjoy
a well-earned rest, Mr. Stedman
visited the mother country in 1889,
and again in 1896, bringing back
improved plants on each occasion.
Now no better and more fully
equipped factory is to be found in
the southern hemisphere. While
superintending a large manufac-
turing business, Air. Stedman has
been active in philanthropic move-
ments ; holding office as a director
of the Sydney Hospital, the Asylum
for Destitute Children at Randwick.
and the Benevolent Society of
Sydney. He is also director and
trustee of the Sydney Soup Kitchen.
At the same time no more loyal
patron of legitimate sport, such as
cricket and athletics, is to be found
in the State. Mr. Stedman in 1890
was appointed a Justice of the
Peace.


Sir WILLIAM LISTON-FOULIS,
tenth Baronet of Colinton and
Ravelston, with whose unosten-
tatious presence Sydney has been
honoured for some time past, is the
lineal descendant of Sir John Foulis,
Bart., of Ravelston, which latter
dignity was forfeited by the second
baronet, Sir Archibald Primrose,
who was beheaded for high treason
on November 15th, 1746, at Carlisle,
England. In the earlier days the
Foulises—who, it should be borne in
mind, are quite distinct from the
Munros of Foulis—were divided into
two main branches, for the lineage
of which a peep must be taken into
“ Burke.” This eminent authority
tells us that James Foulis, an emi-
nent lawyer, sat in Parliament,
was a judge in 1526, senator of
the College of Justice 1532, and
later on lord clerk register. He
acquired Colinton, married Cath-
erine Brown, and his son, Henry
Foulis. of Colinton, was deputy
marshal. The latter married Mar-
garet Haldane, and was father
of James Foulis, of Colinton,
whose wife, Agnes, daughter and
heiress of Robert Heriot, of Lum-
phoy, bore him four sons—(l) James
(Sir), his successor ; (2) George, of
Ravelston, merchant and bailie of
Edinburgh and Master of the Mint ;
(3) David (Sir), progenitor of the
English Baronet of Foulis (now ex-
tinct), who accompanied James I.
into England and, having obtained
a grant of Ingleby, in Yorkshire,
was created a baronet , February 6th,
1619 ; the eventual heiress, Mary,
only child of Sir William Foulis,
eighth Baronet of Ingleby Manor,
marrying Philip Lord de Lisle and
Dudley, April 23, 1850, and dying
June 14, 1891 ; and (4) John, of
Leadhills, whose granddaughter,
Anne, heiress of Leadhills, married
Sir James Hope, of Hopetoun. The
second son, George, had a son,
George, of Ravelston, also Master
of the Mint, who, marrying Jean,
daughter of Sir John Sinclair, of
Stevenson, was father of Sir John,
of Ravelston, created a baronet,
October 15, 1661. By his wife,
Margaret, eldest daughter of Sir
Archibald Primrose, of Carrington,
Bart., who acquired Dunipace and
settled it on her, he had, with other
issue, George Foulis-Primrose, of
Dunipace, who assumed the name
and arms of Primrose. The latter’s
son, Sir Archibald Primrose, second
baronet, v\ho sold Ravelston, mar-
ried (1) Mary, daughter of John,
Earl of Wigton, and (2) Mary,
daughter of Archibald, Earl of Rose-
berry, and, having taken part in
the rebellion of 1745, lost his head,
and the title and estate were for-
feited. The eldest James, was
succeeded at his decease by Sir
James Foulis, Knt., M.P., Edin-
burgh, whose only son, Alexander,
was created a Baronet of Nova
Scotia, with remainder to his heirs
male whatsoever, June 7, 1634.
His wife, Elizabeth, daughter of
Robert Hepburn, of Ford, and
widow ot Sir John Sturt, Sheriff
SIR W. LISTON-FOULIS.
of Bute, bore him an only son, Sir
James Foulis, the second baronet,
who was actively engaged in the
wars which ravaged Scotland after
the death of Charles I. In 1661 he
was constituted one of the senators
of the College of Justice, and in
1664 appointed Lord Chief and Jus-
tice Clerk, which high offices he held
under the titulary designation of
Lord Colinton. His lordship was
succeeded by his eldest son, Sir
James Foulis, third baronet, a lord
of session, Privy Councillor and
member of the last Scottish Parlia-
ment in 1706. His heir, Sir James
Foulis, fourth baronet, died un-
married, July, 1742, and the title
devolved upon his nephew, Sir
James Foulis, rifth baronet, only
surviving son of Henry Foulis (third
son of the third baronet) by the
niece of Sir John Foulis, Bart, of
Ravelston. This gentleman (Sir
James) was succeeded by his only
surviving son, Sir James Foulis,
sixth baronet, who sold Colinton
and died without heirs, 1825, when
the title devolved upon his kins-
man, Sir James Foulis, seventh
Baronet of Woodhall, the youngest
son of William Foulis. Sir James
married Agnes, eldest daughter of
John Grieve, of Edinburgh, and
had issue—(1) William (Sir), eighth
baronet ; (2) John, M.D., of Sydney,
New South Wales, whose second
wife was Jane Selina, daughter of
Isaac Nathan, of Byron Lodge,
Sydney. Her second son, William,
was joined in wedlock to Mary, the
daughter of John Bell, C.E., of
Sydney, N.S.W. Sir William, the
eighth baronet, was married, June
20, 1843, to Henrietta Ramage
Liston, of Milburn Tower, county
Edinburgh elder surviving daughter
of Captain Ramage Liston, R.N.,
and grand-niece and heiress of the
late Right Hon. Sir Robert Liston,
G.C.8., her Britannic Majesty’s
ambassador to the Sublime Porte,
and, in consequence of this mar-
riage, Sir William assumed the
additional name of Liston. His
eldest son, Sir James, ninth baronet,
succeeded, and by his marriage
with Sarah Helen, eldest daughter
of Sir Charles M. Ochterlony,
second Baronet of Ochterlony, had,
with other issue, Sir William Liston-
Foulis, tenth baronet, who suc-
ceeded his father, December 29,
1895. Sir William’s heir presump-
tive is his brother, Reginald John,
of Hatch Beauchamp, Somerset,
England. The family seats are :
Milburn Tower, Corstorphine and
Woodhall, both in county of Edin-
burgh ; and the Liston-Foulis arms
are —Ar., three bay leaves, slipped
vert. Crest —a dexter hand, couped,
holding a sword in pale, sustaining
a wreath of laurel, all ppr. Mottoes
-House of Colinton, “ Mente
manuque preesto ” (“ 1 am ready with
heart and hand ”); house of Wood-
hall, ‘ ‘ Non jure deficit ’' ( <: He is
not without the right”) ; house of
Ravelston, “ Thure et iuri ’ (“ By
religion and justice ”),


Mr. MILSON, whose death took
place on the 12th January, 1903, was
at the time of his decea e in his 89th
year He was ana ive of the colony,
being born a*; the Field of Mars, near
Ryde, Parramatta River, on 25th
November, 1814. He was an ear-
nest worker in all of the many voca-
tions and avocations with which his
name was for nearly seventy years
identified a merchant, a bank
director, a di ector of steam nav -
gation and sugar companies, a pio-
ne.r in Sydney’s steam fern," service,
a pastoralist, an energetic yachts-
man, and a liberal giver and worker
in charitable causes. In Mr. Mil-
son’s decease the present generation
has lost one more of the few remain-
ing links that connect it with the
early his ory o': the colony. He was
educated at the school in Phillip
St.eet. conducted by the late Dr.
Hafforan. As it was at this time
impossible to travel to and fro to
school from Milson’s Point (which
took its name from his father), he
went to live at the officers’ quarters
in Fort Street with Dr. Ivory, of the
Third Buffs. At the age of fifteen
he left school and entered into busi-
ness, obtaining a situation in the
firm of Aspinall, Brown & Company,
of Chariot ,e Place, merchants. After
a few years he joined the firm of
Robert Campbell, Jun., & Com-
pany, of Bligh Street, in which he
afterward: became a partner. Be-
sides being, until a short time before
his decease a director of the Bank
of New South Wales, he was also at
one time a director of the Colonial
Sugar Refining Company Limited,
the old Australasian Steam Navi-
gation Company, the Waratah Coal
Company, and many other public
companies. He took an active part
in the progress of North Sydney,
and was the owner of the well-known
Elamang and Cremorne Estates.
It was he who inaugurated, and
at first practically owned, the old
Milson’s Point ferry, which was
sold to the North
Shore Ferry Company, now the
Sydney Ferries Limited. Mr. Mil-
son took the greatest interest in
yachting, and was one of the pioneers
in th’s past me His first connection
with it was in the thirties. In 1836
an association was formed of yachts-
men, who flew a flag much like that
of the Royal Sydney Yacht Squad-
ron. A year later he entered his
fi si yacht, the “ Sophia,” for the
first anniversary regatta, lie then
gave up boating for a time. In 1841,
however, he again b ok up the sport,
and raced with the “ Friendship,”
a famous 12-ton decked boat built
specially for him. In 1855 he re-
turned from England with the “ Mis-
chief,” an n-ton boat, being the
first English-built boat in Port Jack-
son. In 1856-7 a club was formed,
and later on came the Sydney Yacht
Club and subsequently the Royal
Sydney Yacht Squ dron. In 1859
Mr. Milson built the “ Era,” which
came out in frame-work from Eng-
land. He was the first vice-commo-
dore of the Royal Sydney Yacht
Squadron. Mr. Milson took an ac-
tive interest in church work in con-
ned ion with the Church of England
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. J MILSON
at North Sydney. He was also
extremely charitable, but avoided
publicity in these matters, and most
of his benefactions were so unob-
strusively conferred that but few
persons were aware of them. He
was a member of the first volunteer
force in North Sydney. His father
before him had been a member of
the Duke of Rutland Volunteers,
raised in England at the time of the
French scare of 1798-9. In the
early days of pastoral settlement in
Queensland Mr. Milson, in conjunc-
tion with Mr. Oscar de Satge, took
up the well-known Wolfang Sta-
tion, near Clermont, which he im-
proved and developed, and sold out
in 1876. He then applied himself
to the development of Coreema
Station, near Aramac, which, after
he had stocked with well-bred sheep
and cattle and thoroughly improved,
he in 1882 sold to Messrs. C. W.
Little & Company, and went stiff
further west. He took up a large
area of country on the border of
South Australia, and acquired half
of Headingly Station adjoining,
and this property he called ” Caran-
dotta,” which, after effecting several
substantial improvements, he suc-
cessfully floated it in London as
“ The Carandotta Pastoral Company
Limited.” In all these pastoral
undertakings he was associated with
Mr. Oscar de Satge, as he also was
in the Springdale Station on the
Diamantina River, near Boulia, which
he held at the time of his decease.
He was largely interested with Messrs.
William and Arthur Kilgour in the
Herbertvale Station, on the head
of the Gregory River, on the South
Australian border and in the Nor-
thern Territory. Mr. Milson was
twice married. In 1852 he married
a daughter of Captain Grimes, a son
of the first Surveyor-General. Three
sons and four daughters were born
of the marriage. In 1869 he mar-
ried again, his wife being a sister of
Mr. Neil Stewart, of Parramatta,
who predeceased him and died in
1888. After his marriage in 1852
he went on a voyage to England,
travelling by the steamer “ Chusan,”
the first P. & O. steamer that came
out to Australia.
Mr. ALFRED GEORGE
MILSON, J.P., second son of the
late James Milson, is a native of
North Sydney (formerly called St.
Leonards), where he was born in
1856. He received his education,
first at the hands of the Rev. Mr.
Creeney, of St. Thomas’ Church,
afterwards at Miss Hall’s, Waverley
House, Waverley, and finally at the
Sydney Grammar School. Upon
completion of his education in 1872,
he entered the service of the Bank
of New South Wales, where he re-
mained four years, and in 1876 he
went to Queensland and spent some
time at Wolfang Station, Peak
Downs, which was tin n owned by
his father. He returned to Sydney
and was occupied in his father’s
business until the year 1884, when
he joined the Union Mortgage and
Agency Co. of Australia Ltd., as
sub-manager, and was afterwards
made manager of their Sydney office,


1895, when he left and took a trip to
England, from where he returned
the following year to take charge of
his father’s affairs. lie was for a
period of two years a director of the
old Australasian Steam Navigation
Co. previous to its being sold and
formed into the present existing
company, viz., the Australasian
United Steam Navigation Co., in
which sale he took an active part
with the late Mr. Ewan. He has
been a director of the Sydney Royal
Exchange for some years, and was
director of the Australian Alliance
Assurance Company. The subject
of this sketch has been an auditor of
the Bank of New South Wales at
intervals —two years on and one off
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. A. G. MILSON.
—for more than twenty years. In
1898 he joined the old-established
firm of Rabone, Feez & Co., general
merchants. Mr. Milson has been a
trustee of the Royal Naval Home
since its inception, and since 1896
has held the position of lion, treas-
urer and Iron, secretary. Like his
father he has been identified with
yachting for many years, and during
his connection with the sport has
owned the yachts “lone,” “ Wai-
tangi,” and at present the “ Era.”
He held office for eleven years in
the Royal .Sydney Yacht Squadron,
six years as vice and five years as
commodore. He has also been an
alderman for the borough of North
Sydney for some years, and takes a
great interest in municipal and other
matters appertaining to the welfare
of his fellow-citizens.
Mr. JOHN SHORTER, head of
the firm of Messrs. John Shorter
and Co., Clarence Street, Sydney,
and sole representatives in Austral-
asia of the famous English pottery-
ware manufacturers, Messrs. Uoulton
and Co. Ltd., was born in Stafford-
shire, England, in 1853. He received
his education at a leading scholastic
establishment of Newcastle-under-
Lyme, Staffordshire, upon the ter-
mination of which he entered upon
a mercantile career. Arriving in
Sydney in the early part of 1880, he
commenced business in King .Street.
Later on he removed to George
Street, near to the General Post
Office. Here he remained until
1886, when these premises in turn
proving too restricted he secured the
lease of a capacious warehouse in
Clarence Street. These premises
Mr. Shorter, in 1895, acquired by
purchase, and immediately entered
upon their enlargement by the addi-
tion of two lofty storeys extending
the full length of the structure.
This alteration at once constituted
the warehouse one of the most im-
posing in Clarence Street. Upon
the occasion of his visit to England
in 1903, Mr. Shorter completed ar-
rangements for the removal of the
original of the warehouse
with a view to the substitution of
one composed of Uoulton and Car-
rara wares—art pottery-w 7 ares speci-
ally designed and produced for the
beautification of public buildings.
In addition to their artistic merit,
Carrara-ware and Uoulton-ware, as
manufactured by Uoulton Ltd.,
possess the qualities of strength and
durability equal to the most enduring
artificial building material in the
world. Indeed, British architects not
only predict their increased employ-
ment in commercial architecture in
the cities of the old world, but also
in the building of private mansions,
public halls, and even in sacred
edifices. The warehouse of Messrs.
John Shorter & Co. presents the
first illustration of this remarkably
beautiful and artistic work in the
southern hemisphere. It is com-
posed of a chaste scheme in blues
and browns, and although of sub-
dued shades in its distinctive features
the fa9ade shows up in vivid contrast
to the heavier and more sombre
order of architecture of the surround-
ing structures. Messrs. Uoulton and
Co., first established in 1815, started
in a very humble way at Vauxall as
jnanufaclurers of ordinary stone and
pottery ware. In rB6y the Paris
Exhibition gave this progressive firm
its first impulse in the pioduction of
art workmanship. From that date
until to-day the progress of the firm
in its incomparable art productions
in pottery-ware has been uniformly
regular and rapid. Upon the occa-
sion of his first visit to the Lambeth
pottery (Doulton’s) in 1885, H.R.H.
the Prince of Wales (now King
Edward VII) specially honoured
Mr. Henry Uoulton by personally
presenting him with the Albert gold
medal. In 1887 Mr. Doullon had
the honour of knighthood conferred
upon him, and a few months later
he received from the French Govern-
ment the distinction of a chevalier-
ship of the Legion of Honour. In
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. J. SHORTER.
1901 Messrs. Uoulton & Co. Ltd.
were appointed by Royal warrant
potters to His Majesty the King, a
recognition which carries with it the
right to the prefix “ Royal ” to their
work, as well as its attachment to
their trade mark. At their Lambeth
works, where the general stone-wares
and Uoulton-wares are produced,
over 2,000 hands are employed. At
the Burslem factoiy, where white-
wares are produced, another 2,000
employees are kept perpetually busy.
At the Rowley Regis and Smethwick
factories, where the manufacture of
chemical wares, fire-clay rinks and
other kindred articles is carried on,
employment for another thousand
hands is found. At the St. Helen’s
factory over thirty miles of drain-
pipes are turned out weekly, and at


the Paisley factory some hundreds
ot moulders and iron and brass
workers find permanent employment
in producing the increasingly popu-
lar vitreous enamelled iron baths,
which have been adopted by the
Government of New South Wales
for their asylums, hospitals, and
other public institutions. Upon the
death ot Sir Henry Donlton in 1897
the business was carried on for two
years by his son, Mr. Henry Lewis
Donlton, but in 1899 it was con-
verted into a limited liability com-
pany, with Mr. 11. L. Donlton as
managing director, Messrs. John
Shorter & Co. are likewise Sydney
representatives for the Burslem
Pottery Co., Burslem, manufacturers
of fine scenic porcelain, and Messrs.
Walter Evans & Co., manufacturers
of the celebrated “ Boar’s Head ”
knitting, crochet, sewing and other
cottons; for Messrs. John Paton,
Son & Co., of Alloa, Scotland, knit-
ting wool manufacturers; for Messrs.
Thomas Perks & Sons, needle manu-
facturers, of Redditch ; and also for
Messrs. Roberts & Belk, manufac-
turers of the old “ Roman lamp
brand ” of silver and electroplated
ware. Mr. John Shorter, in the
interests of his firm, equally with
those of the great firms represented,
periodically visits the several States
of the Commonwealth, as well as
New Zealand.
Mr. JAMES INGLIS, Founder
and present Managing Director of
the firm of James Inglis & Co. Ltd.,
Tea Merchants. York Street. Syd-
ney, is a son of the late Rev. Robert
Inglis. M A*, and was born on the
24th November, 1845, at Edzell.
Forfarshire, Scotland- He received
his early education at the Normal
School, Edinburgh, the Watt Insti-
tution. proceeding afterwards to the
Edinburgh University, of which he
is a medallist. Mr. Inglis has tra-
velled extensively, and many of his
experiences he has published from
time to time in periodicals and book
form. He first visited New Zealand
in 1864, and thence to India in 1866,
where he saw a good deal of official
life, and in 1875 was Famine Com-
missioner at Bhangulpore. In 1880
he was sent to Melbourne Exhibi-
tion as the Executive Commissioner
for the Indian Government, and at
the end of 1881, on completion of
his work in connection with the
exhibition, he decided to settle in
Svdney, and founded the business
of James Inglis <fe Co. in that year.
From that time Mr. Inglis has been
a prominent citizen, active in com-
mercial and political life, and a fre-
quent contributor to the press He
was returned to the Legislative
Assembly of New South Wales as
member for New England, and sat
Talma. Sydney
MR. J. INGLIS.
in Parliament for 12 years. He was
Minister for Public Instruction in
Sir Henry Parkes’ Administration
from January, 1887, to January,
1889, and holds many important
offices and directorships of commer-
cial concerns. He was president of
the Sydney Chamber of Commerce
«/ j
for two years, 1892 and 1893, and
is chairman of directors of the
Sydney Harbour Collieries, the New
Hillgrove Proprietary ; director of
the Royal Prince Alfred Hospital,
trustee of the Savings Bank, trustee
for many years of the N.S.W. Com-
mercial Travellers’ Association, pre-
sident of the Sydney branch of the
Netherlands Chamber of Commerce,
fellow of the London Society of Arts,
and life member of the Royal Colo-
nial Institute and Edinburgh Uni-
versity Club- Amongst his many
publications those most familiar to
the general public are : “ Sport and
Work on the Nepaul Frontier”
(1880), “ Our Australian Cousins
(1882), Our New Zealand Cou-
sins ” (1886), “ Tent Life in Tiger
Land” (1888), “ Our Ain Folk,”
Ci The Humour of the Scot,” &c.
Mr. GEORGE MONTAGUE
M E RIVAL E, partner of the
firm of Messrs. Gibbs, Bright and
Co., Sydney, is a native of
Devonshire, England, where he was
born in the year 1855, and comes of
the well-known family of which
John Herman Merivale, the dis-
tinguished literateur, Herman Meri-
vale, the Under Secretary of State
for India, and Dean Merivale, the
historian of the Roman Empire, are
perhaps the best known members.
He was educated at Haidlebury,
and New College, Oxford, and
came to this State in 1880. He was
called to the Bar of New South
Wales in 1881, and the following
year changed his views, directing his
attention and abilities to mercantile
pursuits, and entered the Australian
house of Messrs. Antony Gibbs and
Sons, London, viz., Messrs. Gibbs,
Bright and Co. as a junior, and
now holds the responsible position
of partner in its extensive enterprise.
The subject of the sketch is an ex-
president of the Royal Exchange,
Sydney, and has been a member of
the Sydney Chamber of Commerce
for some years, being elected a
member of the Council for 1904.
The views held by the Hon. Mr.
Chamberlain of London, on prefer-
ential trade, are shared by the
subject, who attended and spoke at
J. Hubert Newman . Sydney .
MR. G. M. MERIVALE.
the public meeting held at the
Protestant Hall during March, 1904,
under the chairmanship of Sir
Normand MacLaurin, for the pur-
pose of discussing the subject. He


is chairman ot the New South
Wales Shale and Oil Co. He
holds the directorship of Alessrs.
Lysaght Bros. & Co. Ltd., and of
other companies. In the Church of
England Synod he represents the
parish of St. Alark's, Darling Point.
He married in 1881, Aliss Laidley,
a daughter of the late Hon. William
Laidley, whose family are so well
known in Sydney history.
Mr. ROBERT CHARLES REED,
member of the firm of Alessrs. Gibbs,
Bright Sc Company, Sydney, was
born at Liverpool, England, in the
year 1857, in which city he received
his education. Selecting for his
career the shipping business, he, m
the early seventies, entered one of
Liverpool's well-known shipping
firms, and went through the several
departments in connection with the
Hubert Newman . Sydney
MR. R. C. REED.
sailing - vessel trade and steamers
trading to the Mediterranean, Black
Sea, and the Danube. The subject of
this brief sketch afterwards entered
the well - known firm of Messrs.
William Johnston & Company,
Liverpool, in the year 1875,
to take charge of one of their
shipping Having
acquired a full knowledge in all
ground work of general shipping
business, he, at the close of 1877
came to Sydney and entered the
firm of Messrs. Bright Bros., well
known as one of the foremost busi-
ness houses in Australia, and which
js now known as Messrs. Gibbs, Bright
and Company, the Australian house
of Messrs. Antony Gibbs v Sons,
London, who have branches at
Liverpool, England, and Iquique
and Valparaiso, South America.
\fter twelve months' service, he
was appointed to take charge of
their shipping department, and. has
practically controlled that branch
of their business ever since. In
1893 Air. Reed received the firm’s
procuration, and on the Ist January,
1905, was admitted into the part-
nership. In the firm’s interest he has
travelled much through Australia,
New Zealand, and Tasmania, and
in 1889 paid a visit to China. Eng-
land and Europe have been visited
by our subject on no less than five
occasions, viz., in 1894, ’94, ’99,1904,
and again in 1905. In addition to his
trip to England and Europe he
visited in 1899 the United. States of
America, Canada, Japan and China.
He has been a Justice of the Peace
for several years, is a member of the
council of the Sydney Chamber of
Commerce, and a director of one or
two companies.
Mr. HUGH DIXSON , J.P., one
of the leading commercial men of
Australasia, is the eldest son of the
late Mr. Hugh Dixson, founder of
the great tobacco manufacturing
industry known as Messrs. Dixson and
Sons Ltd. He was born in Sydney
on 29th January, 1841, and educated
at the well-known Sydney College of
those days, conducted by the late
Mr. Timothy Cape. Upon the ter-
mination of his school career he
entered the employ of the late
Air. Phillip McMahon, timber mer-
chant and wharf proprietor. In 1856
he joined his father in the tobacco
manufacturing industry. In 1861 he
proceeded to Twofold Bay to take
charge of a general store which his
father had established at that port.
In the year 1865, the tobacco manu-
facturing business having made
marvellous progress, he was recalled
to Sydney to participate with his
brother Robert in its management.
Subsequently branches of the indus-
try were established at Alelbourne
and Adelaide, which were afterwards
acquired by purchase by Air. Robert
Dixson. The consolidation of the
great tobacco interests of Australia,
with which the Dixson family has
been associated for the last half-
century, was mainly effected by
Mr. Hugh Dixson, r Jn other exfen-
sive tobacco companies Mr. Hixson
holds large interests. He is the chaii -
man of the Board of Directors of the
American Tobacco Co. of Austral-
asia; also in the States 'Tobacco
Proprietary Ltd Mr. Dixson is a
large shareholder. Mr Dixson is a
director of the City Bank of Sydney
and also of the Strand Electric Light
Co. He is also an ex president of
the Chamber of Manufactures of
New South Wales, and is proprietor
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney
MR. HUGH DIXSON, SEN.
of the magnificent Strand Arc ade,
which extends from George to Pitt
Streets. Mr. Dixson is an active
and earnest member of the Baptist
Church and is an ex-president of the
Baptist Union of New South Wales.
He is also an ex-president of the
Young Men’s Christian Association.
He married, in 1866, a daughter of
tire late Mr. W. E. Shaw, of Ray-
mond Terrace, by whom he has had
a family of four daughters and five
sons. Of the former the eldest is
married to Mr. Ronald Keep, of
Lonsdale Street, Melbourne, and the
second to Mr. Eaton, of the firm of
Messrs. Eaton, Grant & Co., vine
merchants, of Sydney. Of the five
sons four of them are actively inter-
ested in the great enterprise with
which the family name is associated.
Mr. HENRY EDWARD RUS-
SELL, Financial Agent and Public
Accountant, Corporation of Account-
ants of Australia, Falmouth Cham-
bers, Pitt Street, Sydney, was born
in Jamaica in 1836, and was edu-
cated in London, where at the age


of seventeen he entered as a junior
the banking house of Messrs. Barclay,
Be van & Company, of Lombard
Street. He remained in this service
until iB6O, when he left for Australia,
arriving in Sydney in March, xß6r.
At the age of twenty-four years
Mr. Russell took over the manage-
ment of Messrs. L. Pi. Threlkeld
and Company, the large mercan-
tile auctioneering firm of Sydney,
with whom he remained until
after the panic of 1866. In the
following year he spent eight
mo ths in Queensland winding up
a large estate, after which he
returned to Sydney and entered
the service of the A.J.S. Bank.
Previous to severing his con-
nection with the bank, which he
MR. H. E. RUSSELL.
did in rBBo. he spent ten years in
managing three of its branches at
important centres, viz., four years
at Goulbu.m, two years at Rock-
hampton, and four years at Wagga
Wagga. His next step was directed
to pastoral pursuits, joining in
partnership with the owner of a large
squatting property in the western
district of New South Wales, at the
same time opening up business in
Sydney, ns an accountant and finan-
J • '
cial agent. The subject of this
sketch is the owner of a farm in the
north,which one of his sons, Edward,
manages. His eldest son, Wilfred,
has a farm of his own, situated at
Somerton, in the Manilla district.
His son, Harold, who is a member
of the Institute of Accountants is
with his father in the city business.
His eldest daughter is the wife of
Sir John Downer, K.C., of South
Australia. Mr. Russell was for
sixteen years chairman of the board
of directors of the old North
Shore Steam Ferry Co., and in
1904 l ie was again elected chair-
man of what is now the Sydney
Ferries limited. He was a director
of Tooth and Company for some
years, resigning in 1897 upon the
occasion of visiting England.
Mr. Russell in 1870 married
Frances Emily, daughter of the
late Hon. R. M. Robey, M.I V .C., and
has a family of six, three sons and
three daughters.
THE ASSOCIATED GENERAL
MERCHANTS AND IMPORTERS
ASSOCIATION was formed about
ten years ago, it having been found
that such an organisation was ne-
cessary to watch the interests of
the merchants and protect the
public as far as possible against
imposition or deception in respect
to the lines of goods operated upon.
As a natural sequence the condi-
tions of trade have materially im-
proved since the formation of the
MR. BORCHARD.
association, business being con-
ducted on certain well-defined lines
with regard to the regulation of
terms of credit, as well as in many
other respects. The association is
composed of some of the more
prominent men in the trade and of
high standing in the commercial
world. The council is composed of
a president and four members, and
exercises a watchful supti vision
over matters affecting the mem-
bers, while the sound knowledge cf
the trade, combined with tlu busi-
ness experienc. oi those elected to
the position, is a guarantee that
their interests will be safeguarded
in every respect. The officers for
the year 1907-8 are : President,
Mr. J. T. Tillock (Messrs. J. Tillock
and Co.) ; council, Mr. J 1). Fisher
(Messrs. John Connell & Co.), Mr.
P. C. Mitchell (Messrs. I). Mitchell
and Co.), Mr. N. D. Cohen (Messrs.
D. Cohen & Co.), and Mr. J. Hindle
(Messrs. John Bardsley & Co.),
with whom is associated Mr. Albert
Borchard, of the Equitable Build-
ings, as secretary.
O - J
THE HAYMARKET PERMA-
NENT LAND, BUILDING AND
INVESTMENT COMPANY LTD.
was established in 1880, and has
attained a solid financial position
in New South Wales. It was regis-
tered witha capital of £IOO,OOO. in
50,000 shares of £2 each, and has
now a subscribed capital of £93 072,
of which £87,728 is paid up, with a
reserve fund of £33,150, and a
contingent fund of £1,500. The
company was formed with the
X J
objects of acquiring by purchase,
lease, or otherwise lands, houses, or
other property in the State, the
erection of houses and buildings on
any lands of the company, the sell-
ing or otherwise disposing of all
properties of the company, and
other business usually carried on by
building and investment companies.
Mr. James Thomas Tillock was
th° hist chairman of directors, and
still holds the position. Associated
with him on the board are Mr. Wil-
liam Pritchard, one of the original
directors, and Messrs. H. J. Triggs,
J. W. Mortley, W. Harris, and J.
Foster. The manager is Mr.
Robert B. Barton, who has also for
several years filled the position of
secretary of the Royal Philhar-
monic Society. By judicious man-
agement the company has steadily
progressed and successfully with-
stood the financial embarrassment,
which during the banking crisis, fol-
lowed by the commercial depres-
sion, overwhelmed so many other
institutions. Amongst the various
properties purchased by the com-
pany the most successful invest-
ment was the purchase for sub-
division of the Furrucabad Estate,
in the New England district. Situ-
at ed within one mile of Glen Innes
railway station, comprising some of


the choicest agricultural land in
that most favoured district, and
divided into farms from 10 to 1,000
acres, to suit all classes, over 4,000
acres were soon disposed of. Its
Haymarket Building Society.
close proximity to the railway sta-
tion affords the farmers unusual
facilities for the disposal of their
produce, while the climate makes
the district delightful for residen-
tial purposes.
The firm of DAVID STOREY
AND CO-, Soft Goods Warehouse-
men, Importers of Hats, Shirts, Sec-,
85 York Street, Sydney, owes its
position in the trade and commer-
cial world to the strong personality
combined with straightforward and
business-like methods of its founder
and present proprietor, Mr. David
Storey, ML.A. Founded in 1879,
the business remained in Pitt Street
until 1882, when increased trade
necessitated' removal to Barrack
Street, which they occupied until
1896, when the present commodious
premises were acquired. In 1897 a
London agency was established, and
branches have been opened in Bris-
bane, Melbourne. Hobart, Perth and
Adelaide, thus avoiding the delay
and expense of sending goods from
Sydney. The York Street premises
consist of five storeys, each depart-
ment being well lighted and lofty,
with ample accommodation for the
large and varied stock, especially of
hats, shirts and mercery, which is
the firm’s speciality. I* loin small
beginnings the firm has risen rapidly
until now it is one of the leading
businesses of the State, and its great
success is due to the founder him-
self, who looks after every important
matter personallv In addition to
the goods imported, the firm also
manufacture several varieties of
hats, which have attained a per-
manent and popular place in the
market.
THE FOREIGN AGENCY, 169
Clarence Street, Sydney, was estab-
lished by Mr. Felix Schmelits-
chek in 1886, as an Import-
ing and Indenting Firm, in close
touch with some of the best foreign
houses. The increase of business
necessitated additional capital, and
Mr. F- Schmelitschek took into
partnership Dr. Paul Schwartz, of
Leipsic. The firm offers buyers
a most complete list of first-
class manufacturing houses in
England, America, Germany, Spain,
MR. FELIX SCHMELITSCHEK.
Italy, India, Java, Manila, China
and Japan. The Foreign Agency
are directly represented in Japan by
a branch house at Kobe, and are
doing a very extensive business with
the East, particularly in straw braids,
lacquered and bamboo wares, and
for silks their house is Mr. S. lida,
Takashimaya, of Tokio and \oko-
hama, one of the oldest, largest and
best-known silk manufacturers in
Japan. Amongst the German and
Continental houses for which the
Foreign Agency are the sole agents
are many with international repu-
tations, and well known for their
up-to-date goods, and although the
firm chiefly supply all materials for
hat factories, confectioners, brush,
bag, boot and cloth factories, they
also handle nearly every kind of
merchandise. Some of the well-
known English and Continental
houses which they represent are :
W. Ruttenau & Co., Ashton under
Lvne, hat leathers ; Hat Manufac-
turers’ Supply Co , Stockport, hat
leathers ; Dresden Cotton 1 bread
Factory, Dresden, cotton ; Gelatine
Works, Strassburg, gelatine ; Austro-
American I R Works, Vienna, LR.
balls, &c. ; Aloyse Baur, Florence,
Italian straws ; Leon Dubler, Woh-
len, Swiss straws ; C. G- Pass, Rem-
scheid, galloons; P. & C. Habig,
Vienna, hats ; Huppe & Bender,
Offenbach, bag frames ; United
Brush Works, Nuernberg, brush-
ware ; North German Brush Works,
Luebeck, brushware ; J. E- Fuller,
Todtnau, toilet brushes ; Miquel
Vincke & Meyer, St. Feliu de
Guixols, Spain, corks ; Leach and
Alsina, Barcelona, capsules ; H-
Scheibel, Hamburg, hops ; Salz-
mann & Co., Cassel, canvas : Morand
and Co., Gera, woollens ; Paul Sev-
fert & Co., Chemnitz, hosiery. The
Foreign Agency transact all Conti-
nental business through their Berlin
office, Messrs. Steffens & Noelle,
Berlin, Weidendamm. The Foreign
Agency has attained a prominent
o «/
DR. PAUL SCHWARTZ.
position in the commercial commu-
nity of Sydney under the manage-
raent of Mr. F. Schmelitschek and
Dr. P. Schwartz,


Messrs. WORMALD BROS., of
17 Bond Street, Sydney, are Sole
Australian and New Zealand Repre-
sentatives for the Grinned Auto-
matic Sprinklers and Fire Alarm,
and Manufacturers of Armoured
Fire Doors, Shutters, Chemical En-
gines. and other fire appliances.
The Grinned sprinkler is a patent
sensitive fire extinguisher, which
operates automatically and extin-
guishes a fire without human agency,
giving an instantaneous and con-
tinuous alarm. Should a fire break
out, the heat rising quickly melts
the solder, thereby releasing the
valve in the sprinkler, and water is
discharged over the fire. The Grin-
ned sprinkler has received official
recognition from fire insurance
companies in all parts of the world,
and special rules to regulate auto-
matic sprinkler installations have
been published, under which dis-
counts are given ranging from 25 to
50 per cent, off the premiums where
buildings are equipped with the
Grinned. The splendid “ saves”
already effected by the Grinned
system in Australasia since its in-
troduction speak for themselves.
MR. H. P. WORMALD.
Forty fires have occurred in build-
ings fitted with this system, the
insured value of these premises
amounting to £2,400,000, and the
total damage, thanks to the prompt
action of the Grinned, in every case,
was under £2,000, or an average of
£5O per fire- These fires have been
in ad classes of risks, warehouses,
drapers, universal providers, tobacco
factories, newspaper offices, timber
yards, &c. Most of the principal
firms in Australia have adopted tins
most perfect system of (ire protec-
tion, doubtless recognising that not
only does it reduce their fire pre-
miums, but prevents that disastrous
stoppage and dislocation of business
which is always such a serious mat-
ter. To give some small idea of the
vastness of the Grinned sprinkler
operations, and also of the good work
it is doing in all parts of the world,
it may be mentioned that over
100,000 buildings are now under its
protection. Thirty million sprinklers
MR. J. D. WORMALD.
are fitted in these buildings, and
more than 10,000 fires have been
successfully extinguished. Messrs.
Wormald Bros, have brought before
the public a number of other valu-
able appliances, including the
Grinned Water Curtain ” with
cornice sprinkler for the external
protection of premises from fire in
adjacent buildings ; the “ Grinned
Drencher System,” armoured fire-
resisting doors and shutters, and
also their patent wire gauze shutters
and wired glass windows, all offi-
cially approved by the Fire Under-
writers’ Association of New South
Wales. The factory and store are
at No. 7 Dean’s Place, Sydney, and
the business, which was started
nearly 20 years ago, is controlled by
the brothers, Messrs. J. D- and
H. P. Wormald from their Sydney
office, 17 Bond Street. Mr. W. E. L.
Wears, C.E., represents the Grin-
ned interests in Melbourne, and
principal agents reside in ad the
chief cities in Australia and New
Zealand.
Mr. H H N R Y C H A R U E S
B R I E R Ty E Y, F.1.A.V., J. P.,
was born at Sydney, and received
his education at the principal metro-
politan schools. Two years of his
commercial training were spent in
the office of a leading firm of stock
and share brokers. Mr. Brierley
then and for some years was engaged
in the counting-house of Mesa's.
Win. Gardiner & Co. For some
years after he was in charge of the
financial departments in soft goods
an I grain merchants’ establish-
ments, until he became accountant
to the Commercial Building and In-
vestment Company Limited, but
was prevailed upon to resume the
financial management of the grain
firm, and on 2nd July, 1891, while
thus occupied, Mr. Brierley was
elected an associate of the Incor-
porated Institute of Accountants,
Victoria, of which institute he was
subsequently made a fellow. He
then practised his profession in Bris-
bane, first under his personal control
and afterwards as a branch of the
Sydney business. The Brisbane
undertaking proved more than
ordinarily successful. The Brisbane
City Council in the year 1899 ap-
pointed him to make a special inves-
tigation into their accounts and
MR. H. C. BRIERLEY.
administrative plans ; in fact, to
place the whole of their system upon
a sound basis. His report, which
was favourably commented upon
and published in extenso, led to the
adoption of many reforms. Mr.
BrLrley was afterwards, bv a larne
_ - o
vote, elected city auditor, which
position he retained even after his
return to Sydney. Upon his arrival
in Sydney the subject of this sketch


continued to practise his profession
at his present address, and is well
known as auditor to the Savings
Bank of New South Wales and of
many leading insurance, shipping
and other public companies and
private firms. He was auditor of
the Ashfield Borough Council for a
number of years. Mr. Brierley is a
Past Master of the Grand Lodge of
New South Wales of Ancient, Free
and Accepted Masons, and has al-
ways taken a lively interest in public
matters. He is a member of the
parochial council of St. Paul’s
Church of England at Wahroonga.
LTpon the inauguration, in January,
1893, of the New South Wales
drought relief Lord Mayor’s fund
Mr. Brierley was appointed one of
the committee, which consisted of
the leading merchants and pro-
fessional and public men of the city
of Sydney, and conjointly with Mr.
T. H. Nesbitt, the Town Clerk, he
carried out the secretarial duties,
the position being an honorary one.
The amount raised and distributed
totalled £23,454. The report stated
that the best efforts of the committee
would h ve been of comparatively
little avail but for the splendid
services of its esteemed secretary.
Mr. H. C. Brierley, F.I.A.V. (of
Messrs. Brierley and Brierley, incor-
porated accountants), who devoted
a considerable amount of his valu-
able time to the accomplishment of
the ends the committee had in view.
To his powers of organisation, busi-
ness acumen and untiring energy are
very largely due the success that
has been achieved, and we un-
hesitatingly affirm that the inland
settlers, and the committee as a
whole, owe Mr. Brierley a debt of
genuine gratitude for the self-im-
posed burden he has so cheerfully
and capably borne in a noble
cause.” Associated with him in the
business is his son, Mr. Lionel
Charles Brierley, and they are
assisted by a competent and well-
trained staff.
Mr. WILLIAM ARTHUR BOL-
TON is one of those fortunate
citizens who can sit under the shade
of his own fig tree and watch the
wide world rush by, untrammelled by
its troubles. He is the son of Mr.
Charles Arthur Bolton, a naval
gentleman, for many years resident
at North Shore Sydney. Born on
November 30, 1867, at Sydney,
Mr. Bolton, jun., received his edu-
cative training in the high-class
private seminary, superintended by
Dr. Bayley, a gentleman well known
in the seventies and distinguished
for his classical attainments. Fi-
nance was Mr. W. A. Bolton’s metier.
For sixteen years he held various
responsible positions in the Bank of
New Zealand, and during the last
six-and-a-half years of active busi-
ness life he was manager of the
Oxford Street branch of the City
Bank of Sydney. On April 15th,
1893, he was married, at Padding-
ton, to Miss Hartley. That Mr.
Bolton played in his day with such
noted cricket clubs as the Ivanhoe
and the Verona is enough to say of
his prowess as a wielder of the
willow.
Hubert Newman. Sydney .
MR. W. A. BOLTON.
Mr. JOHN ROBERT STEWART,
eldest surviving son of the late
Thomas Stewart, of Redfern, was
born at Waterloo, Sydney, on 19th
September, 1873, and received his
education in the Bourke Street
Public School. His father was at
that time connected with the wool
industry in Arbitration Street, Cir-
cular Quay, and the son commenced
life in the office, but after twelve
months joined the firm of W. & A.
McArthur A Co., of York Street,
where he remained for eleven years,
and for the latter half of that time
was entrusted with the responsible
duties of town representative. On
severing his connection with the
firm he was presented b} r Iris co-
workers with a massive diamond
ring as an appreciation of his many
good qualities. He then joined the
firm of Robert Reid & Co., as town
representative, but, in consequence
of the death of his father in 1903,
he was compelled to resign his
position with the above firm to take
charge of the estate, which he had
been appointed to manage in trust
for the family. Mr. Stewart took a
prominent part in matters connected
with the Commercial Travellers’
Association while acting as represen-
tative of the firms previously men-
tioned, and through his efforts many
functions in connection therewith
were brought to a successful issue,
and so well were his efforts appre-
ciated b} the members that he was
made the recipient of more than one
presentation on their behalf. By
those w r ho know him he is regarded
as a keen business man. His know-
ledge of the requirements of the
travelling public, and his confidence
in the future of the city, has led
him to add to the large plant
already under his management, and
henceforth the Glenmore Road ser-
vice willy be under his control.
J. Hilbert Newman. Sydney.
MR. J. R. STEWART.
Incidentally it may be mentioned
that the late Mr. Thomas Stewart
was one of the oldest ’bus pro-
prietors in the city, having estab-
lished the business nearly thirty
vears ago.
* A


M ESSRS. HENRIQUES & CO..
Stock and Share Brokers, of 82 Pitt
Street' Sydney, is an old and well-
established firm favourably known
throughout the length and breadth
of the Australian Commonwealth.
Ihe firm is composed of the two
brothers, Messrs. George Herbert
Henriques and Walter Montefiore
Henriques, sonsof the late Mr. Joseph
Henriques, who came to Australia
from the West Indies in the early
forties. Ihe Messrs. Henriques are
also grandsons of the late Hon.
Joseph Barrow Montefiore, a name
J. Hubert Newman . Sydney.
MR. G. H. HENRIQUES.
indelibly registered upon the com-
mercial and public records of New
South Wales. The late Mr. Hen-
riques, sen., landed at Adelaide in
1842, but finding the scope for his
energies too restricted in that city
he came on to Sydney a few years
later. While in Adelaide he married
the daughter of the late Mr. J. B.
Montefiore. Upon arrival in Sydney
he launched out into the flour and
grain trade, in which he carried on
operations of a considerable character.
He died in 1875, leaving behind him
three daughters (since deceased) and
the two sons. Mr. George Herbert
Henriques was educated at the old
Fort Street Public School, for which
institution he still retains the deepest
affection. Among the leading public
men of New South Wales to-day
there are a number who were his
fellow-pupils at the old historic school.
At the age of sixteen he entered the
counting-house of Messrs. Gilchrist,
Watt & Co., where he remained
several years, I le subsequently ob-
tained a position in the service of the
Queensland National Bank, Sydney
office, which he occupied for ten years.
He left the service of this institution
in order to establish himself as a
stock and share broker, and became
a member of the Stock Exchange of
New South Wales in 1890. Upon its
lapse, in 1894, he associated himself
with the Sydney Stock Exchange, and
about the same time entered into the
present partnership with his brother.
Mr. Walter Montefiore Henriques
received his education at the
Sydney Grammar School, upon the
acquirement of which he entered
the counting-house of Messrs.
Montefiore & Montefiore, of which
his uncle was the principal partner.
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. W. M. HENRIQUES.
Subsequently he accepted the position
of accountant to Mr. E. L. Davis,
stock and share broker of Sydney.
Both gentlemen are natives of Sydney,
and the firm enjoys an extensive
mining and general investment con-
nection.
Mr. OSCAR T. LEMPRIERE,
Manager of the Sydney house of the
firm of Messrs. W. & J. Lempriere,
Ore Buyers, Wool Brokers and
General Merchants, was born in
Melbourne in August, 1873, and
educated in the Church of England
Grammar .School of that city. Upon
completing his education, he entered
the counting-office of Messrs. W.
and J. Lempriere’s Melbourne estab-
lishment, where he remained until
1894. I n that year he proceeded to
Zeehan, Tasmania, where for two-
and-a half years he studied metal-
urgy and assaying. He was then
appointed assistant assayer tor the
firm in that district, in which posi-
tion he remained twelve months.
Afterwards he spent six months on
thegold-fields of Western Australia,
and in 1897 he went to Broken Hill
and opened a branch office of the
firm, acting as chief assayer in
connection with their ore-buying
and machinery business. In Sep-
tember, 1899, he proceeded to
Queensland to inspect certain cop-
per properties in the northern dis-
tricts, and in May the following
year he opened a branch of the firm
at Herberton, North Queensland,
which he managed for the en-
suing eighteen months. In 1902
he established the Sydney busi-
ness, which since its inception has
proved so successful in every
branch of its operations. The firm
of Messrs. W. & J. Lempriere, ore
buyers, wool brokers and mer-
chants, of Sydney and Melbourne,
carry on extensive operations
throughout the five eastern States
of the Commonwealth of Aus-
tralia. The New South Wales
and Queensland sections of the
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
Mr. O. T. LEMPRIERE.
business are controlled from the
Sydney office of the firm, at O’Con-
nell Street, Sydney, while the head
office at Melbourne controls the
Victorian, Tasmanian and South
Australian sections. This firm has
been in existence since 1887, when
it was first established in Melbourne;
since then the operations of the firm
have extended to every State of the
Commonwealth.


New South Wales Chamber of Manufactures.
The council of the Chamber of Manufactures consists
of Dr. R. R. Hardman (president), Messrs. J. G- Farleigh
and A. Wunderlich (vice-presidents), Mr. C. A. L. honey
(hon. treasurer), Mr. George T. Clarke (secretary).
The chamber is established to foster and promote
the development of the manufactures, products, indus-
tries and commerce of New South W ales. By collect-
ing and disseminating information affecting the manu-
facturing. producing, industrial and commercial inter-
ests ; obtaining for the use of members a technical and
A. WUNDERLICH. Vice-President.
Tesla
G. T. CLARKE, Secretary.
Tesla.
DR HARDMAN, President.
statistical library, also copies of official and private
papers and documents, including Parliamentary papers
and Departmental reports, having reference to the
manufacturing, agricultural, commercial and general
industries of New South Wales, Australasia, and othei
countries ; exhibiting manufactures and primary pro-
ducts, and awarding prizes or certificates of merit for
the same ; assisting to promote the formation of pro-
vincial chambers; by promoting the objects of the
Chamber in every way that may be deemed advisable.
The office is'at 136-8 Elizabeth Street, Sydney.
J. G. FARLEIGH, Vice-President
Tesla
C. A. LONEY, Treasurer
656


The Commonwealth Portland Cement Company Ltd.
Amongst the new and, at the same time, most
important industries of Australia ranks the manufac-
ture of Portland cement by the Commonwealth Port-
land Cement Co. Ltd. The works of the com-
pany are situated at Portland, a rising town-
ship 110 miles north-west of Sydney, at an ele-
vation of about 3.000 feet, in the Lithgow district,
famous for its deposits of limestone, shale, clay,
iron ore, and coal, and were erected in 1901. The
buildings are of brick, iron, and steel, and are equipped
with the latest types of machinery, built by the most
renowned makers in Great Britain and on the con-
tinent of Europe. All recent important additions to
Swiss Studio.
DR. SCHEIDAL.
the plant were made at the large engineering works of
N?w South Wales. The enterprise is remarkable for
the occurrence of all the raw materials of excellent
quality and in inexhaustible quantities, and of coal, on
the same property, conditions which it is believed, do
not exist in any other similar undertaking in the world.
The raw materials, limestone, clay and shale, are mined
in the near neighbourhood of the works. The power
is derived from coal obtained from the company’s
Ivanhoe colliery, situated at a short distance from the
works ; it is generated by a 3,000 horse-power steam
and electric plant of the most modern type. The ap-
plication of electricity permits the detached plants to
be independent of the main shaft. The process lor
manufacturing cement is that known as the dry pro-
cess, in conjunction with the system of rotary kilns,
the latest and most efficient method of burning Port-
land cement. The works include large repair shops,
and an extensive plant for manufacturing cement casks
from the log, by which the company is enabled to
carry on an extensive export trade throughout Aus-
tralasia, and also beyond its limits. Ihe present
output of the works is at the rate of 1,000
tons per week ; about 350 hands are employed.
The company’s “Union” Portland cement has,
in consequence of its great strength, fineness and uni-
formity, rapidly become the favourite brand on the
New South Wales market, and has also secured a con-
siderable share in that of the other States of the Com-
monwealth of Australia, of New Zealand, and of the
South Sea Islands. The company has been successful
in all its public tenders, and has secured important
contracts from the Public Works Department and the
Railway Commissioners of New South Wales, the
Federal and the Imperial Governments, and many others.
All “ Union ” cement leaving the works is guaran-
teed to pass the tests of the Public Works Department
of New South Wales, which are considered the severest
in the world. A Government officer is stationed
at the company’s works, and attends to the
testing and despatch of all cement intended
for Government use and of that for private con-
sumers who require Government tests. The com-
pany’s product has given, wherever, and for
whatever work it was used, the most complete
satisfaction, as proved by the many testimonials from
Governments and public bodies, and from architects,
builders and contractors throughout Australasia ; a
large number of important buildings have been, and
are at present being, entirely built with the company’s
cement. The Cataract Dam, now in construction by
the Public Works Department for the water supply of
Sydney, is being exclusively built with “Union
cement.
The company produces, besides Portland cement
large quantities of building lime of excellent quality.
It further supplies limestone, almost chemically pure,
which finds extensive application in the large smelting
works of New South Wales, and coal from its own col-
liery, specially adapted for brick works and steam
generating purposes of industrial establishments.
The company’s Australian head office is at the Mutual
Life of New York Building, Martin Place, Sydney.


Mr. JOHN PLANT WRIGHT,
I.P , of the lirm of Messrs. J. P.
Wrght and Company, 280 Elizabeth
Street. Sydney, was born in the year
1842, at Castle Donington, Leicester-
sliiie, England He was educated at
a village school in his native city. At
the age of fourteen he was appren-
ticed to a coach-building firm in
Derby by the name of H. A.
Holmes, of Derby and London, who
were coach-builders to her Majesty
the late Queen Victoria The sub-
ject of this sketch served seven years
of apprenticeship, upon completion
of which he set sail for sunny New
South Whiles, and arrived in Sydney
in January, 1864. For a short time
after his arrival in Sydney lie was
employed at Messrs. Holt and Angus,
now known as Angus and Son, of
Castlereagh Street. Subsequently
he became connected with Mr. W J.
Hibbert, with whom he started busi-
ness as a boot manufacturer In the
year IS7O, in conjunction with Messrs.
Joseph Davenport and Thomas All-
cock, he formed the firm of Messrs.
Wright, Davenport, and Company,
tanners; curriers, and boot manu-
fr (turcrs of Marrickville and Barrack
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. J. P. WRIGHT.
Street, Sydney. Seven years later
the partnership was dissolved by
mutual consent, and Mr, Wright
paid a visit to England and the
United States Upon his return to
Sydney he erected premises in Eliza-
beth Street, opposite Behnore Park,
and started a boot manufacturing
business under the name of Messrs,
J- P. W’right and Company, which
terminated in the year 1903. Mr.
Wright, in conjunction with his son-
in-law, Mr. H. E. Pratten, carried on
the business known as Taylor Bros.,
jam manufacturers and fruit pre-
servers, of Annandale, Sydney, and
Hobart, Tasmania. For the past
sixteen years he has been a director
of the Vale of Clwydd Coal-mining
Company, Limited, of Lithgow, and
is a director of the Parramatta
Woollen Mills Company, Limited,
and chairman of directors of the
Williams Meat Preserving Company,
of Camperdown, Sydney. Mr.
Wright is treasurer, and an ex-
president of the Chamber of Manu-
factures of New South Wales, of
which he was one of the original
founders. He is also one of the
founders of the Employers’ Federa-
tion of New South Wales, of which
he is vice-president. In political
matters he takes a prominent part,
particularly in regard to all matters
relating to industrial developments.
In the year 1888 he was a candidate
in the interest of Protection for the
electorate of South Sydney, but was
defeated by the late Mr. James
Martin by the narrow majority of
six votes, at the same time polling
fourteen votes more than the Hon
B. R. Wise. Upon the Arbitration
Acts passing the Legislature, he was
nominated for election for (he posi-
tion of the representative of employers
in the Arbitration Court, and on this
occasion was defeated by Mr. W. D.
Cruickshanks, by one vote only ; but
at the recent election of 1904 he was
elected by the overwhelming majority
of 73 votes, having polled a total
of iog. In the year 1866 Mr. Wright
married Margaret, daughter of
Alexander Kennedy, of Hamilton,
Scotland, and has three sons and six
daughters. He resides in Ashfield,
one of the western suburbs of
Sydney.
Mr. HEDLEY VICTOR ATTEN-
BOROUGH, the Manager of the Port
Stephens 1 lardwood Co., was born at
Castlemaine, Victoria, in 1871. He
was educated at Wesley College, Mel-
bourne, and afterwards entered into
commercial pursuits, joining one of
the largest timber firms in Melbourne.
In 1895 he proceeded to Western
Australia, and after spending a few
years in the timber trade there came
to Sydney, and is now managing the
Hardwood Co. This company is
the largest timber concern in New
South Wales, and has spent a vast
amount of money in establishing a
log-band-saw mill at Port Stephens.
The timber is transported to Sydney
by means of the company’s railway
and a beet of steamers and sailing
# O
craft. Large foreign orders are
shipped' direct from Port Stephens.
The company has other mills in this
State, but the Band-saw has by far
the largest output of any mill in
New South Wales. Under the able
and skilful guidance of Mr. Atten-
borough the company has successfully
executed some very large contracts,
and in addition to doing an extensive
local business are the chief exporters
of every class of hardwood to all
parts of the world.
J. Hubert Newman Sydney.
MR. H. V. ATTENBOROUGH.
Mr. JOSEPH DAVID MACKEY,
j .P., is a native of Bendipo, Victoria,
where he was born gib May, 1861.
Educated in his native city, at
fifteen years of age he entered the
employ of the Australia Flint Glass
Co.’s Works at South Melbourne,
remaining there until be left for
Sydney in 1883. With a thorough
knowledge of the intricacies of the
manufacture of glass, and possessed
of great vitality and business energy
and acumen, he endeavoured to
establish the Flint Glass Co. of
Balmain upon a co-operative basis.
Factory and offices were established
at Abattoir Road, Rozelle Bay,
Balmain, its present site. The co-
operative principle failing, the enter-
prise was merged into an ordinary
business company, of which, he was
one of the principal shareholders,


The management was placed in his
hands in 1885. In that year the
total number of employees in the
factory numbered nine ; at the pre-
sent, under Mr. Mackey’s wise and
judicious management, the number
of men employed has increased to
nearly seventy, while the premises
have been enlarged, and the plant
and machinery extended and brought
up to date. Since the attainment of
federation great progress has been
made in the enterprise, and to-day
it stands the most extensive hint
glass manufacturing industry in the
Commonwealth. Every description
of glass, in every colour and size, is
produced at these works, equal in
quality to the best British or Con-
tinental productions. The company
manufacture railway roof lamp
glasses, all descriptions of lamp
glasses, covers and shades; bottles
in white, amber, blue, green, indeed
of every shade, shape, size and
quality. The company also produces
MR. J. D. MACKEY.
the best qualities of plain, frosted,
sandblast and cut glass. The manu-
factory is well worth inspection, and
annually a large number of interested
visitors take advantage of the cordial
invitation of the management to
witness the process of glass produc-
tion. Mr. Mackey has acquired the
reputation of being a liberal and
considerate employer. Very few
differences have arisen between the
employees and the company. In
every case these have been adjusted
without recourse to outside inter-
ference, and always in an amicable
spirit. In addition to controlling
this important industry, Mr. Mackey
takes a great interest in mining
matters. He is also a shrewd and
large speculator in real estate. His
knowledge and experience in finan-
cial matters is in considerable
demand, and, in consequence, he
fills the position of chairman of
directors of several important public
companies and organisations. Mr.
Mackey confines hisattention strictly
to business. He has been repeatedly
importuned to enter political life,
but has always declined the honour
sought to be confeired upon him.
In 1902 he was honoured by the
See Government by being appointed
to the Commission of the Peace.
Mr. ALBERT GUTHREY,
Manager of the Union Box and
Packing Case Co., is a native of the
State, having been born at Braid-
wood, New South Wales, in 1861.
Upon the termination of his school
career, and when but sixteen years of
age. he came to Sydney for his start
in life. Almost as soon as he reached
the metropolis he found employment
with Messrs. John Booth & Co., ol
Balmain. For the next six years he
remained with this firm, passing
through all the departments of the
factory and devoting all his ability’
and energy to the thorough mastering
of the details of the box-making
industry. Upon the formation of the
Union Box and Packing Case Co.
in 1885, the operations of which are
carried on at Johnstone .Street and
Rozelle Bay, Annandale, Mr. Guthrey
accepted an appointment in its ser-
vice as assistant manager. The
success of the new firm was assured
from its inauguration. The company’
was exceptionally foit unate in the
men it had secured for the control of
its operations, and it is admittedly
largely due to the business ability,
clear judgment and unceasing activ-
ity of Mr. Guthrey that it occupies
co-day its sound and influential posi-
tion. It was upon the demise of Mr.
Thomas .Scott, the first manager of
the company, in 1891, that Mr. Guth-
rey 7 succeeded to the supreme con-
trol of the opcrationsof the company.
Within a very short space of time
after his assumption of management
the business had so developed that
more extended premises and a more
comprehensive plant were found to
be absolutely necessary. Upon Mr.
Guthrey devolved the responsibility
of selecting a more suitable site for
the new factory. The designing of
the newstructure in which the future
operations of the company were to be
errried out was also left in hishands.
It was in 1898 that the block of land
with a frontage of 450 feet to John-
stone and Crescent Streets, Annan-
dale, was secured, and upon it the
finest and most spacious factory for
the production of boxes and packing
cases of everv description and size
was erected. The present output of
MR. A. OUTHREY.
the factory is enormous, and appears
to be an ever-increasing quantity.
An idea of its present extent is dis-
closed in the fact that the plant,
equal to the supply of a demand of a
hundred and fifty thousand to two
hundred thousand boxes per month,
has actually turned out as many as
seven thousand finished articles in
one day. Outside of the business in
which "he is so actively engaged
Mr. Guthrey has proved a useful
citizen. A resident of Annandab
almost since his first arrival in Syd-
ney, upon the formation of that
suburb into a municipality he was
elected an alderman. This dignity
he retained for four years. , In 1891
he was appointed to the Commission
of the Peace. He is a member of
the Sydney Chamber of Commerce
and occupies a seat upon the com-
mittee of the Sydney Timber Mer-
chants’ Association,


Mr. LEWIS GRANT ABRAMS,
J.P., 138 Fill Street, was born in
Sydney in 1861, and is the son of the
late Lewis J. Abrams, Esq. He was
educated at Fort Street and William
Street Public Schools, and later on
by private tuition. Upon the ter-
mination of his educational course in
1876 he studied law in the office of
M essrs. Want & Johnston, where he
remained for four years. In 1880,
having been offered the position of
clerk in the Engineer of Tramways
office, he relinquished the study of
the law. In 1882 he left the govern-
ment service in order to fill a lucrative
position with Messrs. S. Hoffnung
and Co., as manager of their shipping
department. With this firm he
remained three years, when he was
offered a similar position in the firm
of Messrs. Briscoe, Drysdale & Co.
Here he remained for sixteen years,
when in 1901 the federal tariff first
came into operation he decided to
establish himself as a shipping, cus-
toms and forwarding agent, and also
to give more personal supervision to
his broom and brush factory. While
associated with Messrs. Briscoe,
Drysdale & Co. Mr. Abrams started
the Co-operative Broom and Brush
Factory. This business, which com-
menced in a small way at the Glebe
in 1897 with only three hands, now
employs no less than nineteen. In
1897, owing to the increase of busi-
ness, the factory was removed to
larger premises at Pyrmont. Un-
fortunately the establishment was
burnt out in 1902. Undaunted, how-
ever, he in two days afterwards had
restarted, and to-day the output of
millet and hair brooms and brush-
ware of all kinds is far greater than
it has ever been. The factory is
co-operative not merely in name but
in practice, and it is perhaps because
of the application of the principle of
making the employees at the factory
participators in the profits so much
greater success has attended the
operations ot the business. Every
year after stocktaking bonuses are
J o
distributed among all the employees
according to results. Most of the
millet used in this manufactory is
grown in New South Wales. Mr.
Abrams is a member of the executive
council of the Chamber of Manu-
factures. He resides at the Glebe,
and was an alderman of that borough
for six years, being elected in 1893.
Upon retiring he received from his
fellow-aldermen and the ratepayers a
handsome gold watch and chain and
a testimonial in recognition of liis
public services as an alderman. Mr.
Abrams has taken an active and
practical share in the political life of
the State. Ile was one of the original
founders of the Glebe Freetrade and
Liberal Association, and for some
years acted as its honorary secretary.
W hilst occupying this position he
conducted the campaigns which
secured the return in succession for
that electorate of Messrs. Bruce
Smith, M. Champan, and James
Hogue. At the State election in 1901
Mr. Abrams was nominated as a
candidate, but owing to the Labour
candidate splitting the liberal and
demonstrative vote he suffered a
defeat. In 1902 he was elected a vice-
president of the Women’s Liberal and
Reform League. In the domain of
charitable effort Mr. Abrams has
J. Hubert Newman Sydney.
MR L G. ABRAMS.
beeffequally active. In 1891 he was
instrumental in the holding of a great
charity ball in order to relieve the
abounding distress in the western
suburbs during that year. He also
takes a keen, interest in healthy
sport. For twenty-three years in
succession he has acted as honorary
secretary for various cricket clubs,
several of them being among the
most important in the suburbs of the
metropolis. It is to Mr. Abrams that
the successful inauguration of the
electorate cricket system is largely
due. This classification of the sport-
ing effort is copied from the system
in vogue in England. A year later
Mr. Abrams succeeded in bringing
about this revolution in cricket and
football. He had to submit to four
yearly defeats before lie got his
scheme adopted, under which both
games are now played, and where
but two or three hundred persons
watched the games on a Saturday the
year before the introduction of elec-
torate cricket, nearly twenty thousand
were present at Wentworth Park the
second year of its inauguration. He
is a member of the executive com-
mittees of the New South \\ ales
Cricket Association and the New
South Wales Rugby Football Union,
and was several times appointed
manager of the State cricket and
football teams to Tasmania, Queens-
land, Victoria, &c., &c. In addition
to cricket, football and athletics, Mr.
Abrams takes an active interest in
aquatics. He is a Justice of the
Peace for the State of New South
Wales.
The FARMERS’ & DAIRY-
MEN’S MILK CO. LTD., Harris
Street, Ultimo, was formed in 1890,
for the purpose of placing the milk
supply of the metropolis upon a
satisfactory basis, and with the vast
improvements that have since been
effected in the method of handling
supplies, it may fairly be claimed
that the efforts of the company
have been successful. The guiding
principle throughout the existence
of the company has been the system
of co-operation ; on the one hand,
practical dairy farmers sending pure
milk to Sydney, andon the other hand,
reliable vendors delivering these
supplies to the public. These men
being shareholders, and having
mutual interests in the progress of
the concern have combined, and the
result of their efforts is a company,
whose position is a fine monument
to the soundness of the principle
upon which they have worked. At
the inception of the company, the
output of milk handled by them did
not exceed 500 gallons per week,
but from that date, a steady increase
has been maintained until, in 1904,
the weekly supply exceeds 30,000
gallons. This milk is received at
their depot in Ultimo, and, after
being thoroughly tested both for
quality and purity, is pasteurised by
the most scientific method known,
and is then delivered into more than
100 carts, which make deliveries
both morning and afternoon right
throughout the city and suburbs.
As an instance of the progressive
spirit actuating the company in


their desire to supply the public
with milk under the best conditions,
attention need only be drawn to their
pasteurising machinery. This plant,
which was erected in igoi, is un-
doubtedly the largest and most com.
plete for the purpose in Australasia,
and consists of two pasteurisers and
three coolers, &c., capable of treat-
ing over 2,000 gallons of milk per
hour. The creamery (where the
primest butter is made daily from
cream separated at the company’s
creameries in the country), the ice-
making plant and the cold storage
rooms at the company’s depot are
well adapted to meet all require-
ments in those branches of the busi-
ness, and with the large machinery
for refrigerating purposes, combine
to form one of the most progressive
of the big Sydney industries. The
affairs of the company are controlled
by a directorate composed of Mr. R.
H. An til 1, J.P. (Chairman), the
Hon. John Kidd, ex-M.L.A., Messrs.
G. H. McPhail, J.P., W. H. Cook,
J.P., Jas. Lochhead, Chas. Wagner,
Geo. Stephens, and I. Croft. Mr.
Neil Cameron, J P., is general
manager.
CHARLES HILLMAN and CO.,
Ice Manufacturers and Milk Con-
tractors, -48 to 78 Ivy 7 Street, Red-
fern, also ice works and chilling
rooms, Miller Street, North Sydney.
This business was established early 7
in 1894 by Mr. Charles Hillman, the
senior partner in the firm, in a com-
paratively small way 7 in Ivy Street,
Redfern. Since that time the
growth of the business has been
phenomenal. In the latter part of
1902 Mr. Hillman admitted to part-
nership Mr. Joseph Moore, a native
of Maryborough, Ireland, which
necessitated the present title of the
firm. Some conception of its rapid
development may be gleaned from
the fact that while the daily output
of milk in 1894 barely exceeded 160
quarts, in 190 J it had reached the
respectable average of over 8,000
quarts daily. This enormous quan-
tity is distributed throughout the
city and various suburbs by well-
appointed carts and waggons spe-
cially designed for the work. The
firm possesses a splendid farm at
Mittagong, where a large stock of
the finest milch cows arc kept. It
is not from this source alone, how-
ever, that the enormous supply of
milk required by the business is ob-
tained. A large number of leading
dairies of the southern and western
districts forward their daily supplies
to Messrs. Charles Hillman & Co.
The manufacture of ice was com-
menced by Mr. Hillman in 1899,
the output of which during the first
year was small, but in 1904 it had
reached an average of over 30 tons
per diem, which is supplied to
wholesale as well as retail cus-
tomers. The ice-making plant in
operation is one of the finest and
most up-to-date in the State, “ be-
ing of colonial manufacture, and
one of the largest machines built by
Messrs. Humble & Sons, of Geelong,
Victoria,” and the accessories are
of the most complete character, fur-
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. C. HILLMAN.
nishing every facility for the correct
handling of the food products con-
nected with this class of business.
Over sixty hands are employed in
the various departments of the
enterprise. Since 1895 the firm
has on their own premises carried
on the manufacture of all vehicles,
utensils, harness, &c., required in
the business, necessitating the em-
ployment of coachbuilders, painters
blacksmiths, tinsmiths, harness-
makers, carpenters, engineers, and
others. Mr. Hillman was born in
London in 1869, where his father
carries on business in the dairy
trade, and came to Australia in
1887, and subsequently in Sydney
established a similar business with
so pronounced a success. Mr Hill-
man is a prominent member of the
Masonic Order, and belongs to the
Killwining Lodge, Redfern.
Mr. WILLIAM WHITE,
active controller of the Great South-
ern Bread Factories of Redlern and
of the late Mr. William W hite, the
founder and builder-up of a great in-
dustry. The subject of this sketch
was born at Redfern in 1877, and
was first educated at the Cleveland
Street Superior Public School and
subsequently at Newington College.
The business conducted by Mr. W bite
has, in recent years, assumed gigantic
proportions, until to-day it is without
doubt the most extensive bread
manufactory in the southern hemi-
sphere. The factories, which are
situated at Redfern Street, Redfern,
and Erskineville Road, Newtown,
are magnificent structures, solidly
built and especially adapted for the
purpose of bread manufacture. Both
factories are fitted with the newes
and most up-to-date machinery ; in
deed it is doubtful whether, even in
the old world or in America, could a
superior plant be found. 1 he busi-
ness was founded by the late Mr.
William White, sen., in 1874. The
original establishment was in Walker
Street, Redfern, where operations
were conducted during the ensuing
nine years. By 1882 the business
had developed to such proportions
that it had become imperative upon
the proprietor to look out for a much
larger area upon which a more com-
modious factory might be erected.
Such a site was found in Redfern
Street and in the following year the
new structure was completed. At
the present time no less than forty
tons of flour are used every week in
the manufacture of bread, while
twenty-two waggons are daily em-
ployed in the distribution of bread
throughout the city and suburbs to
over five thousand customers. The
late Mr. William White, sen., to
whose splendid energy and fine busi-
ness qualities ju the founding and
building up of this great business is
primarily due, died in September,
1903. He was an earnest and active
member of the Baptist ( hurch and
was a truly liberal supporter of every
organisation and effort controlled by
that denomination. His active in-
terest and generosity, however, was
not confined to the Baptist Church
but every branch of Christian effort
found in him a practical and kindly


supporter. Tne charitable institu-
tions of the city also were generously
and continuously assisted by that
gentleman. In private benevolence
he was no less active ; indeed, he was
known throughout the city as a friend
ot the poor and distressed. Upon
his death the control of the business
devolved upon Mr. William White,
under whose auspicious management
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney .
MR. W. WHITE.
tie business continues to make the
same rapid progress.
Mr. JOHN CONLON, J.P.,
Dread Contractor, Castlereagli
Street, Redfern, is a native of
County Roscommon, Ireland, where
he was born in 1848. He was
educated at a private school in
his native town, after which he
was apprenticed to tiie trade in
which he is now engaged. He
arrived in Sydney in 1879, and with
characteristic energy established
himself in business at Pyrmont.
Success attended his efforts, and in
1885 he found it necessary to remove
to more extensive premises. Having
secured the site in Castlereagli
Street, he erected under his own
supervision his present factory and
stores at a cost of over
These are known as the Crown
Bakery. The enterprise controlled
by Mr. Conlon is one of the most
extensive of its kind in Australasia.
In addition to a very considerable
private business which extends
throughout the city, and to every
suburb in Sydney, Mr. Conlon is
contractor for the supply of bread to
the Imperial and Military Forces,
and to a number of Government and
other charitable institutions. In
1893 Mr. Conlon visited Europe for
the purpose mainly of purchasing
machinery for his rapidly extending
business. \\ bile in Great Britain
and upon the Continent he made a
thorough investigation of the latest
methods and appliances used in the
manufacture of bread and confec-
tionery. As a result of that visit
the plant now in use is one of the
most complete and modern in the
State. The output of flour weekly
already exceeds thirty tons. Mr.
Conlon takes more than a passive
interest in public affairs, but the
exigencies of business will not per-
mit of his active participation in
State or municipal politics. Upon
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR J. CONLON.
several occasions he lias been impor-
tuned to allow himself to be nomi-
nated for a seat on the Borough
Council of Redfern, but he has
hitherto declined. In 1902 Mr.
Conlon was honoured with a Com-
mission of the Peace.
Mr. FRANZ KONIG, principal
of the firm of Messrs. Konig & Co.,
Condiment Manufacturers, of Alice
Street, Newtown, Sydney, was born
at Prussia, North Germany, in iB6O,
where he received his education. At
fifteen years of age he entered upon
a mercantile career, and came to
New South Wales in 1887. Restarted
in a, small way at Newtown in the
linking, provision and grocery trades.
His present business was started in
1893. I n v^nture ' ie was a bb
assisted by Mrs Konig, who possessed
a thorough knowledge of the condi-
ment manufacturing business. Under
the combined management of Mr.
and Mrs. Konig this business has
increased to its present fine propor-
tions. In 1903 he erected a mag-
nificent factory on a site he acquired
in Alice Street, Newtown. This
erection is a substantial one of brick,
with a frontage of 133 feet and a
depth of 220 feet. The building is
divided into a factory proper, fitted
up with all the latest machinery and
accessories necessary for the manu-
facture of condiments, sauces, pickles,
vinegar, &c., and a store-room. \\ hen
this business was first started in 1893
Mr. and Mrs. Konig carried on the
business without a single assistant.
To-day over forty hands are per-
manently employed, with three
travellers. A large and ever-increasing
city trade has already been estab-
lished, but the reputation of Messrs.
Konig & Co.’s manufactures has
spread far beyond the confines of the
city and even the State. A large
trade has also been established in
Queensland and Tasmania. It is the
intention of the proprietary to float
the enterprise into a large company.
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. F. KONIG.
The firm has also secured the right
to use the name of George F.
Whybrow & Co. for New South
Wales. Mr. Konig takes a deep
interest in Masonic affairs, and is a
member of the Robert Burns Lodge.


Mu. FRANK IRELAND, J.P.,
Exporter of Produce, Grain, and
General Merchant, 138 Sussex
Street, is the second sou of the late
Mr. Jesse Ireland, and was born at
Newcastle in 1873. He was edu-
cated at Newington College, and in
1889 joined the business of his late
father then under the management
of trustees, eventually taking
charge of the produce department.
He carried on this department
until early the following year, when
the trustees handed over to his
charge the management of the Sus-
sex Street business. Subsequently
in 1891 he took over the whole of
the Sydney business which has
since then been carried on in his
MR F. IRELAND.
own name. Mr. Ireland acts as
buying and selling agent for the
Newcastle house, J. Ireland, Ltd. ;
of this firm, Mr. Frank Ireland is a
director. Mr. Ireland has agencies
in New Caledonia, New Hebrides,
and Durban (S A.), Manila, and acts
as agent for the leading firms in
India, China, Japan and the Straits
Settlement. He also does a large
export trade in wheat to the United
Kingdom and the Continent. Mr.
Ireland conducts auction sales of
farm produce daily at Redfern, and
has built up a reputation by securing
highest prices for all classes of con-
signments. During the drought he
was the means of rendering assist-
ance in the supply of fodder for the
starving stock in the interior. At
the time of the South African war
he displayed his business ability in
the position of secretary at Newcastle
to the movement which arranged the
“send off” demonstration to the
contingent which were conveyed to
South Africa by the s.s. “ Langton
Grange.” This was one of the most
exciting events that ever transpired
in Newcastle, and it is to the credit
of Mr. Ireland that the affair was
carried out so successfully. He has
always taken an active interest in
manly sport, and in 1903 he secured
the championship for the northern
district in cycling. He is a member
of Lodge No. 68, Free and Accepted
Masons. In 1893 he was honoured
by being appointed a justice of the
Peace.
Mr. CHARLES ANDERSON,
f.P., Managing Director of Messrs.
C. 'Anderson & Co. Ltd., of the
Federal Hat Mills, Nicholls Street.
Surry Hills, Sydney, is a native, of
Banffshire, Scotland, and came to
Sydney in 1882. He embarked in
business at Oxford Street, as a
military and merchant tailor, in
1883, and soon acquired a reputation
through his up-to-date knowledge of
the trade. Expansion was most
marked in the supply of military
uniforms —his experience in this con-
nection in England giving the initial
impetus to this department. In sup-
plying uniforms, he was brought in
contact so far back as the early
eighties with the leading military
officers, who promptly utilised his
knowledge by consulting him in re-
gard to the uniforms of the forces,
with the result that a regular con-
tract supply system of clothing of
local manufacture was established.
He was the first clothing contractor,
to the military forces, which he re-
tained uninterruptedly for nineteen
years. Indeed he has supplied the
majority of the military outfits for
the New South Wales Government
during that period. The various
general officers commanding have
on many occasions sought his expert
opinion on details in connection with
the evolution of military uniforms;
but he has, perhaps, been more
specially associated with the institu-
tion of the Australasian field service
dress. The Imperial troops in India
having adopted “ Khaki,” it was
proposed to follow suit here. Mr.
Anderson, however, offered the sug-
gestion that, for climatic and other
reasons a brown all-wool fabric would
prove more hygienic and serviceable,
whilst preserving the desired strate-
getic ad vantage of neutral colour. This
opinion was concurred in by the then
principal medical officer (now Sur-
geon-General W illiams, C. 8.), who
delivered a lecture on the subject
at New South Wales Military In-
stitute before an assemblage of
officers, amongst whom were General
Edwards and his staff, then fulfilling
an Imperial commission in Austral-
asia. A specimen suit of the pro-
posed uniform, made by Mr. Ander-
son, was exhibited in the lecture hall,
and, after critical inspection, General
Edwards expressed a decided opinion
that it was the best uniform for
general field service purposes which
had come under his notice. This
J. Hubert Newman, Sydney .
MR. CHARLES ANDERSON.
opinion strongly supported Mr. An-
derson in his suggestions regarding
the ideal uniform for New South
Wales. No greater compliment
could be paid to his judgment, than
the manner in which the New South
Wales uniforms withstood the hard
usage of the late South African
campaign, their enduring qualities
drawing most favourable reports
from Imperial and colonial officers.
Here it may be mentioned that the
Anderson establishment was en-
trusted with the clothing equipment
of nearly all the New South Wales
contingents despatched to the South
African war. Government House
patronage has been bestowed as the
result of high-class work so efficiently
done, under Mr. Anderson’s super-
vision ; and at various times all
classes of uniform worn in the Gov-
ernment services of the various
States have been supplied with the


same gratifying result. With the
adoption of the brown field service
uniform came the well-known military
felt hat. The large supplies of this
and other head-gear needed under his
military contracts was instrumental
in drawing Mr. Anderson into the
hat manufacturing industry, the de-
velopment of which manufacture
caused the establishment of the
Federal Hat Mills. Mr. Anderson
holds a Commission of the Peace for
New South \\ ales, and is a returning
officer for parliamentary elections.
Mr. ROBERT CHAUWICKMraiIs
from Bolton-le-Moors, Lancashire,
England, being born there in 1836.
He lost his father early in life, and
the family being disappointed in a
large legacy left by a relative to
MR. R. CHADWICK.
charities, they were induced to
emigrate, to seek their fortunes in
New South Wales, where they all
arrived in the first year of respon-
sible government. The subject of
this notice joined his brother,
Edward, and commenced business
as timber merchants in Liverpool
Street, remaining with his brother,
first as assistant and later on as
partner till his brother’s death.
The firm was then carried on as
Chadwick and Smith, and after-
wards, when Mr. Smith retired,
Mr. Chadwick managed it alone—
with much success —till 1886, when
he retired. The property in Liver-
pool Street, where the business first
began, and the mills at the Manning
River became in time his own
property,together with the Liverpool
vStreet saw-mills, and they still be-
long to him. Vessels would be laden
with his timber to Melbourne and
coals to New Zealand and also to
Noumea, returning with cargoes
from these places. Mr. Chadwick
joined soon after his arrival in
Sydney the parish Church of St.
Andrew, which was then the tem-
porary cathedral, the Rev. George
King being minister, and, though
only a young man of twenty, he
became a Sunday-school teacher.
Later on he held the office of church-
warden, and continued to act till
the congregation was transferred to
the new cathedral. On its consecra-
tion he was elected by the Synod a
member of the Chapter—continuing
so for thirty-six years—and was
appointed by the parishioners ot
St. Andrew to represent them in
Synod. He displayed great ac-
tivity and zeal in collecting funds
for the new cathedral, and also
undertook the responsibility and
risk of enlarging the temporary
structure when the large congre-
gations, drawn to hear the Rev.
Thos. O’Reilly, rendered this work
necessary. Later on he became one
of the principal movers in a scheme
to build a parish church in Pitt
Street, with the object of retaining
the services of Canon O’Reilly.
The project finally had to be aban-
doned, and the building was con-
verted into a Sunday and day school.
In 1876 Mr. Chadwick went to
Europe for two years after the death
of his first wife, and, whilst there, in
1878, he married the daughter of the
Rev. R. H. Hillick, a former rector
of St. Clement Danes, Strand, Lon-
don. On his return to Sydney
Mr. Chadwick took up his residence
in Woollahra, All Saints’ parish, and
was several times the Rev. Wallace
Mort’s churchwarden. Owing to
his multifarious duties he has often-
times refused to stand for Denison
Ward, preferring to spend his spare
time on behalf of the church, wtiich
he has done through all these years
most profitably.
Mr. PHILIP JOSEPH MUL-
HOLLANI), eldest son of Philip
Mulholland, was born at Penrith,
Nepean River ; the district known
as the “cradle of civilisation in
Australia.’’ His father settled
in that town as one of the first
employees in the locomotive de-
partment of the Government Rail-
ways, and had the proud distinction
of having driven the first train over
the Lithgow Zigzag. Like his father
Mr. Mulholland, jun., entered the
Government railway service, and at
the age of 14 years was employed in
the railway audit office. While
thus employed he succeeded in
passing various examinations, in-
cluding the Sydney University, and
won a medal in the railway ambu-
lance corps. The service, however,
had no attraction for him, and he
retired, to push his way in other
directions. This he succeeded in
doing, as a successful Boniface,
for six years subsequent to his
MR. P. J. MULHOLLAND.
retirement from the department.
His democratic instincts impelled
him to an active participation in
politics, and he soon gained a place
in the Political Labour Conference,
where he advocated currency reform
and bimetallism. It was on his
initiative that the conference adopt-
ed a resolution urging the appoint-
ment of a Royal Commission to
inquire into the question of currency
reform ; and at the subsequent in-
quiry by that commission, under the
presidency of Mr. Edwards, M.H.R.,
South Sydney, he gave evidence,
and valuable information supplied
by him was incorporated in the
report. For two years he was one
of the twenty-four elected repre-
sentatives of the Labour party for
664
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


the whole State on the Political
Labour League Executive, and re-
presented the Labour party for
Cook in 1901, and conjointly
with Mr. J. J. Power contested the
Lang election in 1902. Although on
both occasions unsuccessful, he
made a brave fight, and gave every
promise of usefulness in the near
future. Mr. Mulholland is passion-
ately devoted to journalism, and has
secured written testimony from Mr.
Bryant, late editor of the Daily
Telegraph, as to his capability in
this direction. With the persever-
ance displayed and the large reserve
of latent power from which to draw,
Mr. Mulholland is destined to leave
his mark on the sands of time.
Mr. ARTHUR SYDNEY
BURDEKIN, of 44 Castlereagh
Street, Sydney, captain of the Syd-
ney Rowing Club, is a son of the late
Bossley Burdekin, Esq., and is a
native of Sydney. He received his
education at the Scots’ College, Mel-
bourne, upon the termination of
which he engaged in pastoral pur-
suits in which he remained for the
J. Hubert Newman Sydney.
MR. A. S. BURDEKIN.
ensuing seven years. He then went
to Ballarat to attend the School
of Mines of that'city in order to
qualify himself as an assayer and
metallurgist. Upon passing his ex-
aminations he returned to Sydney
with a view to entering upon the
practice of his newly acquired pro-
fession, but he was induced to confine
his attention to the management of
the family estates. Mr. Burdekin
takes a deep interest in all manly
sports, more particularly in aquatics.
In 1898 lie became a member of the
Sydney Rowing Club and a few
years later he was elected its captain,
an honour he still retains. He
actively participates in the sport and
has competed in a number of leading
local contests. He also goes in for
single sculling. Mr. Burdekin is a
member of the New South Wales
Club.
Mr. GEORGE F. RITCHIE, son
of Mr. Wm. H. Ritchie, of Geelong,
Victoria, was born in that township
in the year 1880, and took his first
MR G. F. RITCHIE.
lessons in English in trie local State
school. These were afterwards sup-
plemented by the departmental
teachers at Hawthorne, where he
received a liberal education to the
full extent of the curriculum pro-
vided. As he had early evinced a
great inclination for wood-work, his
parents placed him in the cabinet-
making business carried on by
Mr. Harris in Gertrude Street,
Fitzroy ; and having passed through
the period of apprenticeship and
perfected himself in every branch of
the trade, at a comparatively early
age he started on his own account
in Latrobe Street, Melbourne. But
feeling the need of, and the benefit
that would accrue from 0 wider and
more varied experience, he decided
to dispose of his business, which he
succeeded in doing profitably. ’Then
he left the southern colony and
came to Sydney, where he remained
for three years, transferring himself
at the end of that time to Auckland,
New Zealand. This proved to be for
him a fortunate step, andone, thanks
to a lucky speculation, he had no
reason to regret. After a veiy short
stay in Maoriland Mr. Ritchie was
enabled to retire from trade and
return to the mother colony, where
he has since devoted himself to the
congenial role of society entertainer.
Mr. JOHN PHILLIP LUSCOMBE
was born in the county of Devon,
England, in 1859, his father being
Mr. Phillip Luscombe a master
butcher, of Plymouth, The lad
was educated at Christchurch
School, Plymouth, an institution
well and widely known and to
which citizens from all parts of
England go to acquire their educa-
tion. After leaving school, young
Luscombe served in the Donald
Currie line, the P. and O. Company,
and the San Francisco mail lines in
the capacity of a butcher, spending
some time aboard the s.s. “ Zea-
landia.” From that vessel he
opened as a butcher in Kingston,
near Newtown, but the prospects of
gain in the publican’s line led him
MR. J. P. JUSCOMBE.
to take an hotel, and afterwards to
manage several hotels for Messrs.
Allt & Co. Then Mr. Luscombe took
up restaurant-keeping, which still
engages his attention. x\t the same
time, through all his shore life he
has augmented his income by specu-
lations in tallow and hides, selling
the latter to the trade. His wife,
before marriage Miss Catherine
Kenny, has borne him six children
all of whom are living.


Mr. ARTHUR C. J. WOOD, J.P.,
principal of the well-known firm of
Messrs. Wood & Company, Funeral
Directors and Livery Stables Pro-
prietors, of Sydney, is a son of the
late Air. William H. Wood, of
Balmain, founder of the extensive
business now so ably conducted by
his son The subject of this notice
was born at Woollahra on 13th
August, 1856, the family removing
to Balmain shortly after his birth.
It was in that suburb he acquired
the fundamentals of a liberal edu-
cation, first at the Balmain Church
of England School, then at the
Balmain Public School, and subse-
quently by private tuition. Deciding
upon a commercial career, he entered
the employ of Alessrs. Barnard and
Hinton as a junior clerk. Alaking
rapid progress he secured a more
remunerative engagement with
Alessrs. Aloore, Henderson and
Bowcher, an old-time soft goods
firm of this city. Air. Wood re-
mained with this firm for a number
of years, when he transferred his
services to Alessrs. John Wilson and
Company. Although he entered
this office in a subordinate ca-
pacity, before he had reached
the e irly age of twenty five
years he was entrusted with the
control of the counting-house.
In the meantime the business con-
ducted by Air. Wood, sen., which
had long been expanding, was taken
in hand by Air. Arthur C. J. Wood,
who with the assistance of his brother
assumed full control. This business
was inaugurated as far back as 1857
in the populous suburb of Balmain.
When it was reorganised upon the
entry of Air. Arthur C. J. Wood, in
1886, the only offices in existence
were the original establishment at
238 Darling Street, Balmain, where
he lives, and the other at 799 George
Street, and afterwards at 8:0 George
Street, Sydney. The latter place
had already been constituted the
headquarters of the concern, and is
established upon the most prominent
site of the southern part of the city.
Since then branches have been
established at Balmain West, now
known as Rozelle, at Petersham,
North Sydney, Leichhardt, and
Chatswood. To the firm of Alessrs.
Wood & Company belong the credit
and honour of introducing to Sydney
reforms in the conduct of funeral
ceremonies of every class and
character, almost amounting to a
revolution. The plant employed by
the firm is claimed to be the largest
and most complete in the Austral-
asian States, and Messrs. Wood and
Company are enabled to cater for
every section of society. Particular
care is always exercised that every
interment, the humblest as well as
the most imposing, shall be carried
out with equal care and respect.
This is undoubtedly the secret of the
firm’s marvellous success in later
years. A most important depart-
ment connected with the business
calls for special reference —that is
that of embalming. Mr. Arthur
C. J. Wood was the first duly
certificated embalmer in the State
of New South Wales. In order to
qualify himself for this intricate and
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. A. C. J. WOOD.
almost sacred art he spent a con-
siderable time in studying the highest
and most approved methods followed
in Europe and America, and thus
constituted himself an able in-
structor, demonstrator and teacher.
Among the permanent staff a lady
embalmer is included, who also
possesses a diploma, and is always
available for the special treatment
of subjects of her own sex. It is
now unnecessary to offer one word
in commendation of the revival of
this art, all misapprehensions with
regard thereto having completely
vanished. Especially in a climate
such as ours the orderly preser-
vation by embalment of the sacred
forms of the loved ones departed,
between the moment of death and
the hour of interment, is obviously
an advantage not only from a senti-
mental, but from a hygienic point of
view. In the principal establishment
of Messrs. Wood & Company, a
private mortuary chamber has been
provided, and so arranged that
complete funeral obsequies, includ-
ing services, can if required be
conducted therefrom with all due
and musical solemnity. This is a
distinct innovation, and a much-
desired end has thus been achieved.
Incorporated with the business of
this progressive firm are their large
and extensive livery stables. These
are located near Hyde Park, in the
very centre of the city, and are
under the control of Air. Charles
J. W. Wood. In this department
may be found one of the best livery
plants in Australasia, Any and
every demand possible can here be
met, and with little difficulty.
Drags capable of seating from 100
to 250 in a single party, landaus,
carriages and vehicles of the most
modern build and of the most elegant
description are always available. It
should here be mentioned that many
of these, including the magnificent
array of mourning coaches attached
to the funeral department, were con-
structed in Messrs. Wood & Com-
pany’s own building sheds, some also
being specially imported. Of all thesj
varied activities Mr. Arthur C. J.
Wood, the principal, exercises the
controlling power, but the operations
of each branch and department are
administered by a capable manager,
who discharges his important duties
with absolute freedom. Mr. William
T. Wood is the general manager at
headquarters, 810 George Street,
and also of the Petersham branch,
whilst Mr. Edward Bromley is resi-
dent assistant at head office. Mr.
William Lloyd is local manager at
North Sydney, and Mr. William
Pagdin at Leichhardt, who is also
outside representative. Mr. Arthur
C. Green exercises the functions of
chief clerk and cashier. It is a fact
worthy of mention that the principal
employees have been for many years
in the service, two of them having
spent over twenty years with the
firm, viz., Messrs. William Lloyd
and E. A. Morley, who was until
recently the local manager at North
Sydney, but now one of the head
office staff.
As a citizen Mr. Wood displays a
similar activity to that which charac-
terises the conduct of his business
affairs. He is a member of several
friendly societies, but the body to
which he has given his best service
is the U.A.O. Druids, with which


organisation he has been associated
for many years. For two years in
succession he was president of the
order, and subsequently for many
years he was its efficient treasurer.
He is now a member of the board
of directors of the supreme body.
Mr, Wood is a member of the Man-
chester Unity LO.O F., .vhich he
joined when eighteen yearsofage. He
is also a member of the G.U.O. Odd
Fellows and of the Ancient Order of
h oresters. In the Masonic world
he occupies a high position, and is
the immediate Past Master of the
Star of Eastwood Lodge, at Ryde,
which body under his presidency
during 1903-4 made great and
unprecedented progress. In 1903
he held office in Grand Lodge, in
which he has again received pro-
motion. Mr. Wood takes an en-
thusiastic interest in all manly
sports, but it is in cricket he evinces
the deepest and most practical inter-
est. In the public life of the country
Mr. Wood has only taken a citizen’s
interest, but owing to the exigencies
of the great business concern with
which his name is associated he has
withstood all inducements to ac-
tively participate in public affairs.
On more occasions than one Mr.
Wood has been urgently requested
to allow himself to be nominated for
both municipal and parliamentary
honours, but upon all occasions he
has felt impelled to decline for the
reason stated. Mr. Wood some
years ago was appointed to the
Commission of the Peace for New
South Wales.
, From the above sketch of its
active and energetic principal it
may easily be understood how it is
that the great business of Wood and
Company has attained the premier
position as funeral directors and
embalmers, and while it con-
tinues to be headed by one whose
experience is so varied and com-
plete, aided by the capable staff of
competent managers and [assistants
which his acumen has gathered
around him, there is little doubt
that W ood & Company in the pub-
lic eye will continue to occupy the
position of the funeral directors and
embalmers of New South Wales.
Mr. WALTER STEWART,
Funeral Director, Embalmer, and
Proprietor of the Steam Saw-mills,
MR. W. STEWART.
129 Bathurst Street, Sydney, is a son
of the late Robert Stewart, Esq., for
some years a member of the Legis-
lative Assembly of New South
Wales, in which chamber he sat as a
representative for East Sydney. The
subject of this sketch was born in
Sydney in 1847, and was educated at
the Sydney Grammar School and the
Lyceum School. In 1858 he was
apprenticed to his father, iMr. Robert
Stewart, who then carried on an
extensive business as an under-
taker and a supplier of materials.
He also did a large business as n
cedar and turnery merchant, and
carried on business on the present
site of the Water and Sewerage
Board office. In 1875, upon the
death of his father, he succeeded to
the control of the business, which he
ha,' carried on ever since. Mr.
Stewart has always maintained an
enviable reputation in the conduct of
his business, and from time to time
has been entrusted with the mortuary
arrangements by many of the leading
families of the metropolis and of
other parts of New South Wales.
Mr. Stewart in years gone by took
an active interest in military matters,
and was one of the original members
of No. 6 Rides, Sydney Battalion.
He was also associated in the work
of the Metropolitan Fire Brigade
system, and for a lengthened period
acted as secretary to No. 1 Volunteer
Fire Brigade Company. ' In the
Masonic world he occupies a high
position, having filled all offices up
to that of principal of the Royal
Arch Chapter. He is a Past Master
of Lodge Leinster Marine, No. 266,
1.C., also of Zetland Lodge; also a
Past Master of 25 Mark Lodge, and
is at present one of the Past Grand
Wardens.


Mr. EGBERT EDWARD KEN-
NEDY, the eldest son of the late
Daniel L. Kennedy, was born on
March 7th, 1870, and married, o \
July 26th, 1905, to Miss Sadie
Thompson, of Mosman, Sydney.
His father, who was principal of
the collegiate schools at Sandhurst,
Victoria, for many years, and sub-
sequently headmaster of the Denili-
MR. E. F. KENNEDY.
quin and Wagga Wagga Grammar
Schools, superintended the lad’s
education so successfully that the
examinations of the Sydney Uni-
versity were passed with flying
colours. In 1887 young Kennedy
joined the Union Bank of Australia
Ltd., at Wagga Wagga, and in 1893
he was appointed auditor and ac-
countant for the bank’s pastoral
properties on the Barling River and
near Broken Hill. The year follow-
ing he was appointed to the Com-
mission. of the Peace, and had a
lively experience during the shearers’
strike soon afterwards, being in the
thick of the rioting at Tolarno sta-
tion. In 1897 Mr. Kennedy retired
from the bank's service and pro-
ceeded to Western Australia, where
he set up in business on his own
account. During the next five
years he saw a good deal of all the
goldfields in the colony. At the end
of this experience he returned to
Sydney, and established Messrs.
Kennedy Bros., property salesmen,
general financiers and company
managers. This speculation has
turned out exceedingly well. Mr.
Kennedy, who, needless to say, is
the leading spirit in the firm, has
successfully floated several import-
ant commercial concerns. Both the
Manly-Pi it water Motor Omnibus
Company Ltd., and the Manly and
Suburban Land and Investment
Company Ltd. owe their existence
to his energetic abilities, and their
future is safeguarded in the fact
that in each of them he carries out
the secretarial duties. Mr. Kennedy
resides at Manly, and has recently
opened a branch office there.
Mr. LOUIS NICHOLSON isthe
only son of Mr. J. C. W. Nicholson,
who for many years has been head
of the firm of Nicholson & Co., music
warehousemen, of George Street,
Sydney, and was born on July 29th,
1862. claiming New South Wales as
his native place, though only a por-
tion of his time has been spent in
the Slate. His education was com-
pleted sit Scotch College, Melbourne,
and from there he entered the office
of his father and became one of the
staff of the firm of Nicholson & Co.,
gaining his experience in each State
where the firm had a branch of
their business established. The
brightening of the prospects of
South Africa and the lifting of the
war cloud induced the firm to look
MR. L. NICHILSON.
in that direction for a suitable open-
ing in which to extend their busi-
ness, and for this purpose Mr. Louis
Nicholson was sent to make in-
quiries and open the way. Return-
ing to Sydney in 1904, he took up
the management of the business,
which position he held for seven
years, when he became the outdoor
representative of the firm.


Mr. JAMES THOMSON TUN-
NOCK, D.D.S., the eldest son of
the late John Garrick Moore Tun-
nock, advocate, Edinburgh, Scot-
land, nephew of Matthew Tunnock,
Esq., writer to the signet, Q.C.,
Edinburgh, and cousin to Sir Garrick
Moore, was born on the 10th Feb-
ruary, 1853,matriculated, and served
four years under articles of inden-
tures with Dr. J. Crozier-Durham of
Dublin, Ireland, subsequently gradu-
ated and obtained the degree of
Doctor of Dental Surgery at the
International University of Chicago,
U.S.A. Went to West Australia
and established in practice at the
corner of Wellington and Barrick
Streets, Perth, where for many years
he enjoyed a lucrative practice. He
subsequently opened in Collins St.,
Melbourne, but not being satisfied
with the quiet retiring style of Col-
lins Street, being used to an active
life where he could employ a number
of hands, the Doctor waited an
opportunity and purchased a practice
in the thickly-populated suburb of
Footscray, which has proven to be a
most profitable one. The Doctor
has an extensive practice at 14
Nicholson Street, East Melbourne,
known as “ Dr. Tunnock’s Dental
Parlors,” carried on under the able
management of Mr. E. W. Quinton,
R.D.S., New South Wales. In June
of 1904, the Doctor secured a long
lease of two double-fronted, attached
three-storey buildings, situated in
Oxford Street, Paddington, Sydney.
The two buildings have been practi-
cally converted into one, which con-
sists of upwards of twenty spacious
rooms, where he, in conjunction with
his wife (who is a duly qualified
dental practitioner, registered under
the name of C. A. Tunnock) has
established a large and profitable
practice. In January of 1905 the
Doctor opened the Interstate Den-
tal College which has proved a great
success. For the benefit of the poor
people of the district, and for the
clinical instruction and practice of
students, he throws a portion of his
premises open one day a week, as a
public dental hospital. The Doctor
took an active part in public life
during his sojourn in West Australia
occupying the office of councillor in
the municipal council of Leederville,
one of the principal suburbs of Perth,
for upwards of six years, was hon.
treasurer to the council, and on
several occasions held the position of
acting-Mayor ; he was also chairman
1 O J
ol the Board of Health and returning
officer to the Legislative Assembly.
For many years past he has taken
an active interest in dental laws in
various parts o( the Commonwealth.
He was a member of the first dental
association in Perth, West Australia,
and was elected president of the first
dental association formed in Kal-
goorlie, and took an active part in
bringing about the Dentists’ Amend-
ing Act of West Australia, 1899. In
1902 he opened a branch practice in
Mt. Gambier, of South Australia,
where he took an active part in try-
ing to stop certain measures in the
Dental Act of that State which was
then before Parliament; the Act
passed, but has since been amended
in a great part, in the direction he
indicated. Fatly in the same year
J. Hubert Newman . Sydney.
MR. J. T. TUNNOCK.
we find him using his influence
amongst the members of the profes-
sion in Victoria, in trying to bring
about the amalgamation of the Mel-
bourne College of Dentistry with the
Melbourne University, which end
has since been accomplished. On
the sth of February, 1906, in the
Queen’s Hall, Pitt Street, Sydney, at
a general meeting of dentists called
by newspaper advertisements, the
Doctor presided ; he, in the course of
a vigorous speech, denounced the
dental laws of the States of the
Commonwealth, and said, “ It is
monstrous to find in a civilised com-
munity, a free country, a federated
Australia, that the dentists are still
in bondage, that each dentist is a
prisoner in the Stale to which he
belongs, that the parochial dental
laws in the adjoining State will not
allow him to cross its border, and
call himself a dentist.” I he Doctor
had the good fortune to be able 1 »
practise where he chose, and he re-
gretted to find that his brother den-
tists could not do the same. He had
travelled the length and breadth of
the Commonwealth, and was satisfied
that there was nothing in the anat-
omy of tiie mouths of the people
which should prevent a dentist who
was qualified in one State of the Com-
mon wealth, from practising in another.
This meeting was the initiation of the
“ Commonwealth Dental Associa-
tion,” an association which bids fair
to become one of the largest and
most powerful dental associations
in the world. Dr. Tunnock has had
the honour of being its first president.
The Doctor is a Freemason and has
taken the mark degree of that dis-
tinguished order. He has contribu-
ted items to various dental journals
for many years past ; amongst those
may be mentioned, the “ Dental
Cosmos,” “ Items of Interest,” and
the “ Commonwealth Dental Re-
view,” under various now de plumes .
In September, 1904, we find an able
letter on dental degrees under now
de plume “ K.U.U.,” in the “ Com-
monweahh Dental Review,” which
he wrote in reply to some criticism
which appeared in that journal in
connection with the use of the R D.S.
as a degree. The Doctor is the
author of the “ Dental Students’
Technical Course in Rhyme,” the
inventor of the celebrated local
anaesthetic known by his name, and
is the principal of the Interstate
Dental College, Oxford St., Sydney,
N.S. W, The Doctor is married and
has three daughters, his wife Cicilia
Aldridge Tunnock (who, as has been
stated is a duly qualified dentist) is a
full partner in the Doctor’s practice,
in which she takes an active part,
and his two eldest daughters are pur-
suing the path of their parents.
Mr. ERNEST BOSCH, F.S.M.C.,
Consulting Optician, Mutual Life of
New York Buildings, Martin Place,
Sydney, is a native of Melbourne.
Arriving in Sydney with his parents
while still a boy, he acquired the
elementary portion of his education
in the latter city. Subsequently he
was taken by his parents to Europe,
and placed as a pupil in the Real
School, Hamburg. Having passed


the necessary examinations, he pro-
ceeded to Saxony and commenced
the study of electrical engineering.
After passing an examination, he
removed to London ; but, unfortu-
nately, while pursuing a course of
studies there, his health failed him,
compelling him to return to Sydney,
This was in 1897, and for a time he
engaged in electrical work. In the
following year, having recovered his
health, he again proceeded to Lon-
don in order to qualify himself as a
consulting and practical optician.
For two years he occupied posi-
tions in some of the leading optical
manufacturing establishments of the
British metropolis, while at the same
lime he attended the Northampton
Institute, the leading optical school
in Great Britain. It was during
J Hubert Newman Sydney.
MR. E BOSCH.
this period that Mr. Bosch qualified
himself for the Worshipful Company
of Spectacle Makers of London. This
he passed in igoo, the certificate of
which entitles the holder to the
freedom of the city of London. Mr.
Bosch is at present the only gentle-
man in New South Wales who holds
this honour by virtue of passing the
examination. Immediately upon
securing the foregoing qualification
Mr. Bosch went to New York and
entered upon a course of study with
Mr. Ferguson, who is associated with
the New York National Institution,
and a recognised leading authority
in theoretical and practical optics.
Subsequently Mr. Bosch, in order to
obtain the widest information in his
chosen profession, practised in rapid
succession in the following American
cities, New York, Washington,
Chicago, and San Francisco. While
in the first-named city lie was ad-
mitted a member of the New York
Optical Society. Upon his return to
Sydney in 1902, Mr. Bosch established
himself as a consulting and practical
optician at 83 King Street. Rapidly
ingratiating himself in public favour
he soon found it necessary to remove
to more suitable premises. These
were found at the Mutual Life
of New York Buildings of Australia,
at the corner of Pitt Street and
Martin Place, Sydney. Here Mr.
Bosch has fitted up the finest optical
parlours in Australia.
Mr. HENRY HALL, R.D.S., o f
Weston Road and Evans Street,
Rozelle, eldest son of the late
Henry Hall, of Lancashire, Eng-
land, is an Australian by birth,
having been born at Pyrmont in
August of the year 1881. Air. Hall
received the greater part of his
education at the Model Public
School at Fort Street. At the end
of his school career he chose den-
tistry as his profession, and had as his
MR. H. HALL.
initiator into that subject Mr. T. C.
Morrison, R.D.S., of Darling Street,
Rozelle, with whom he served
under articles for four years, this
being the full term of his indenture-
ship. After this period he accepted
an appointment with Mr. W. S.
Hinder, D.D.S. (Phila.), of Sydney,
honorary dental surgeon at the
University Dental Hospital, with
whom he was associated eighteen
months. Mr, Hall then became
associated with Mr. A. Bui no, D.D.S.
(Phila.), of Liverpool Street, Syd-
ney. His position with this gentle-
man lasted but a short period, he
being ambitious to establish himself
and won success on his own account .
The chosen field for his labours was
Balmain, to which more than or-
dinary prospects attracted him.
He commenced practice, in 1904, at
the corner of Weston Road and
Evans Street, and the success which
has there attended him has given
him every reason to be satisfied
with the choice made.
Mr. PAUL McNAMEE, R.D.S.,
is the youngest son of the late Mr.
Thomas McNamee, an ex-alderman
and builder, who devoted much
MR. P. McNAMEE.
time in his efforts to promote the
welfare of the Paddington district.
Young Paul, concerning whom this
sketch is written, was born at Moore
Park on October 22nd, 1879. After
spending six years of adolescence at
St. Joseph’s College. Hunter’s Hill,
equipping himself mentally and phy-
sically for the battle of life, he
served his articles with Mr. ]. R.
Marshall, the well-known dentists
of Wynyard Square. The necessary
examinations were passed with dis-
tinction, and, on being duly regis-
tered as a member of the Royal
Dental Society, Mr. McNamee
opened rooms on his own account
in Elizabeth Street. To increase
his knowledge and bring himself
into touch with the latest methods
of the profession adopted by the
670
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


most advanced of the world’s schools,
he crossed the Pacific and entered
as a student at the Philadelphia
College of Dentistry. There he re-
mained for a couple of years, and,
before bringing his up-to-date ac-
quirements to Australia, to be beaten
out on the anvil of practice, he added
lurther information to his mental
store in the course ol an extended
tour through the United States. On
leturning to the land of his birth he
soon commanded a satisfactory con-
nection ; but, upon the death of his
father, this had to give way for the
time being to other matters demand-
ing attention, and it was only in
1906 that he was able to start again.
As a winner of many trophies in
football and swimming competitions
Mr. McNamee has a sporting repu-
tation th ,t will stand wear and
tear, irrespective of the fact that for
a number of years he was one of the
prominent players of the crack
Warrigal Football Club.
Mr. FREDERICK COX, J.P.,
A.P.5.G.8., M-.P.S. New South Wales,
of 321 Glebe Point Road, w r as born at
Ossett, Yorkshire, in 1859. He
was educated in his native city, and
having served a five-years’ appren-
ticeship, he went to London in order
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. F. COX.
to gain wider experience and to
thoroughly qualify himself as a
chemist and druggist. He studied
for his final examination at the West-
minster College of Chemistry and
Pharmacy, and holds the diploma
ol the Pharmaceutical Society of
Great Britain. He filled the posi-
tion of assistant with several lirst-
class dispensing chemists in London,
eventually purchasing an old-estab-
lished pharmacy in Charles Street,
St. James’ Square. But, owing to
failing health, and in accordance
with the advice of several eminent
physicians, he disposed of his busi-
ness and came to Sydney in 1889,
and alter some few years in the city
he removed to Dulwich Hill, where
he has established an extensive
business, the character of which,
requiring, as it does, his personal
attention, prevents Mr. Cox taking
any prominent part in municipal or
political life. Upon the occasion of
the opening of the new post office in
Dulwich Hill by the Governor, liar!
Beauchamp, Mr. Cox acted as hon.
secretary for the celebration. In the
year 1900 he was honoured by the
Government by appointment to a
Commission of the Peace. The sub-
ject of this sketch is a member of
the Masonic Lodge, being initiated
in Lodge Corinthian, No. 100, in
which he attained to the position of
Senior Warden, but which office,
owing to business ties, he has very
reluctantly resigned. Mr. Cox has
a family of three children, one
daughter and two sons.
Mr. CHARLES HAROLD
WREN WEST, J.P., M.P.S.,
R.S.D., N.S.W., is a native of
Loudon, where he was born in the
year 1872, and is the eldest sou of
the Rev. C. T. Sackville West.
Strathfield, New South Wales. He
arrived in Brisbane with his parents
the same year, and received his
early education there, and later in
New .South Wales under private
tuition. Having completed his pri-
mary education, he studied chem-
istry, and was apprenticed to Mr.
J. W. Hosking, of Wollongong.
Upon completion of his term of
apprenticeship he became an assist-
ant to the late Mr. Senior and Mr.
McCarthy. For the purpose of
acquiring a knowledge of the whole-
sale business, he entered the ware-
house of Messrs. Elliott Bros.,
Sydney. He was registered under
the Pharmacy Board of New South
Wales in 1897. I” the following
year he first commenced business as
a chemist at 183 Glebe Road, Glebe,
where he has remained ever since.
The subject of this sketch takes a
great interest in ail local sports,
being vice-president of the local
cricket club, football club, and the
MR. C. H. W. WEST.
Toxteth Cycling Club. Mr. West
is an officer of the Masonic Lodge,
Glebe, No. 96. In 1902 he received
the honour of Commissioner of the
Peace. He married the third daugh-
ter of the late Mr. Chas. Morris, of
Wollongong, in 1896, and has two
daughters, and resides with his
family at “ Corunna,” Glebe Road.
Mr. GEORGE VERN BARNETT.
J.P., Consulting and Operating
Dental Surgeon, is a native of Mel-
bourne, Victoria, where he was born
in 1870. He was educated by Mons.
Laugier, Castlemaine, Victoria, and
at the age of fifteen entered upon
commercial pursuits, at the same
time studying especially foreign
languages, having as his object the
qualifying of himself for the Em-
bassy staff. He subsequently de-
cided to take up dentistry as a pro-
fession, and lor the purpose of
acquiring experience therein left
Australia for England, where he
gained extensive knowledge and ex-
perience prior to practising there.
He then journeyed to France and
America to prosecute the higher
study and to gain wider experience,
so essential to a successful prac-
titioner. In 1896 he went to India.


and for a short period practised at
Calcutta. A year later he came to
Sydney and established himself in
his profession at 355 King Street,
Newtown, where he has succeeded
in building up a connection second
to none in New South Wales. In
1900 he was appointed one of four
members who constituted the den-
tal section of the first appointed
Dental Board of New South Wales.
Sir James Graham being its first
president. This board was insti-
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. G. V. BARNETT.
tuted for the purpose of raising the
profession and for the protection of
the public against unqualified per-
sons. After the passing of the Den-
lists’ Act dentists were required to
register their qualification, which
has proved an essen rial benefit. The
necessity for some such authority
and reform has long been urged by
the leading press of the State. A
Dental Bill which had been in abey-
ance for very many years was,
through the personal advocacy and
exertions of Mr. Barnett, again in-
troduced to the Assembly, and
passed through its several stages.
As there appeared to be a danger ol
its being rejected by the Upper
House, the subject of this sketch
was deputed to interview and ex-
plain to members of the Council the
provisions of the measure and the
absolute necessity in the interest of
the public for protective legislation
as embodied in the bill. After a
long debate it was passed and made
law in its.entirety. ‘Mr. Barnett,
who is a consulting and operating-
dental surgeon, has obtained uni-
versal recognition throughout the
State as a specialist in his profes-
sion. The magnitude of his prac-
tice may be gauged by the fact that
his permanent staff consists of six
assistants. He is a recognised au-
thority upon all matters appertain-
ing to the science of dentistry, upon
which and other scientific subjects
he has written extensively. Mr.
Barnett is an accomplished linguist,
proficient in no less than twenty
European and Asiatic languages,
including Chinese. He is an elocu-
tionist of no mean order. He takes
a deep interest in political affairs, is
strongly democratic, and strenuous-
ly supports the platform of the
Labour party. At the general elec-
tion of 1902 he unsuccessfully con-
tested Phillip division for a seat in
the State legislature. In 1904 he
was again importuned to contest a
seat, but, on account of the expan-
sion of his practice, was reluctantly
compelled to decline. He takes a
deep interest in art, and his collec-
tion is both comprehensive and
rare, containing many valuable
specimens, viz., European, Indian
and Japanese.' His interest in sport
is equally active, and he is a mem-
ber of various clubs that have for
their object the encouragement of
wholesome and healthy amusement.
In fact, any institution worthy of
honourable membership may find
his name therein enrolled.
Mk. DONALD SMITH, Dental
Surgeon, of 293 Elizabeth Street,
Sydney, was born at Glasgow, Scot-
land, on 25th December, 1864.
Prior to taking up his practice in
Sydney, which he has carried on for
upwards of ten years, he was asso-
ciated with Dr. E. H. Magnus in
practice. The subject of this brief
sketch is honorary secretary and
executive member of the Odonto-
logical Society of New South Wales
since the foundation of the institu-
tion. He is honorary dental sur-
geon to the undermentioned insti-
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. D. SMITH.
tutions : The University Dental
Hospital, Dental Hospital of Syd-
ney, Women’s Hospital, Sydney,
the Benevolent Society of New
South Wales, and has held a similar
post to the Department of the
Insane since 1896. He is a mem-
ber of the council and associated
board of the Dental Hospitals of
Sydney. He is editor for Now
South Wales State of the Austra-
lian Journal of Dentistry, Mr. D.
Smith resides at cc Clutha,” Miller
Street, North Sydney.


Tub WINE AND SPIRIT MER-
CHANTS’ ASSOCIATION was
formed in this State on the 27th
June, 1904, with tho following
officers ;—President, F. Bligh ; vice"
presidents, T. H. Keigwin and E. H.
MR. R. FORBES.
Rogers ; and members of the com-
mittee : F. L> Partridge, J. L.
Souttar, R. Forbes, R. Sandeman
Collum, C. C. Tucker, C. D’Arcy
and A. Lubeck ; R. Forbes, hon.
treasurer : A. J. Ross, hon. sec-
MR. F. BLIGH.
retary. The first annual general
)neeting was held on the ] 9th
August, 1904, and the objective of
the association formulated in the
following general terms, namely, the
protection of the rights and interests
of the various branches of the
distributing and manufacturing
businesses connected with the wine
and spirit trade, and the promotion
of these rights and interests by
every honest and legitimate means.
Among other efforts, the association
includes the watching, with keenest
alertness, all 1 Ijo proceedings in
Parliament touching measures deal-
ing with the various commercial
energies aforesaid in any restrictive
character. In October, 1906, the
Liquor Trades Defence Union was
formed, to take over the political
portion of the work. This union,
which is of a most comprehensive
nature, comprises delegates from the
Wine and Spirit Association, the
Brewers’ Association, the New South
Wales Wine Association,the Licensed
Victuallers’ Association, the Mineral
Waters and Cordial Manufacturers’
Association, the Sydney Bonded and
Free Stores Association, the Master
Carriers’Association, and the Sydney
Bottle Merchants’ Association Ltd.,
besides many other associations,
MR. A. J. ROSS.
which have expressed themselves
favourable to the above views. Mr.
Francis Bligh was elected president
of this union, and Mr. Edwin Stooke
organising secretary. The Wine and
Spirit Merchants’ Association of New
South Wales deal only with the
detail work of the trade, and
generally look after the trade’s
interests. At the annual general
meeting held on the 30th August,
1906, Mr. R. Forbes was elected
president ; Mr. F. Bligh and Mr.
H- C. Mitchell, vice-presidents ; and
members of the committee as fol-
lows : F. L. Partridge, W. A.
Davis, A. A. Wall, G. H. Wyld, C.
D’Arcy, Geo. Wright, G. G. Tucker,
J. Raymond and G. 0. Harris ; hon.
treasurer, Mr. G. H. Wyld ; hon.
secretary, Mr. A. J. Ross.
J 7
Mr. V R E D E RIC K GENT Y
was born in Paris in 1867, and is a
son of the late Telephore Genty,
wine-grower, of Bordeaux, and a
captain in the Engineers. Mr. Genty
has a vivid recollection of being
carried by his mother to the win-
dow of their house to look at the
“ fireworks ” caused by the burst-
ing of the German shells in the siege
of Paris. He was educated in Paris,
and afterwards at the Paris Univer-
sity, where he studied for the medi-
cal profession, and gained B.S.C. in
1882. Shortly before completing
his studies he gave up the idea of
being a doctor, and joined his father,
who was then carrying on business
in Bond Street, London, as a wine
merchant. Among the agencies
Mr. Genty, senior, held was that of
the firm of Dubourg & Jaquet,
Frossac. In 1885 Mr. T. Genty
and his son decided to come to
Australia, and purchased Eschol
P.srk 5 ’ Vineyard, at Minto, chang-
ing the name to “ Eaglemont ”
Vineyard. The Eaalemont wines
attained a prominent position in
the trade- The Eaglemont wines
have been awarded prizes at the
Paris Exhibition in 1878, at Bor-
deaux, and Chicago, U.S.A. Mr.
Genty adjudicated at the last Sydney
Royal Agricultural Show, and acted
as judge at other shows- He is a
member of the committee of the
Wine-growers’ Association of New
South Wales, vice-president of the
Liquor Trades Defence Union of
J. Hubert Newman Ltd
MR. F. CENTY,
N.S.W., and chairman of the finance
committee of the United L.V.A.
Air. Genty was for some time in the
Mounted Infantry- He has also
%/
taken part in municipal matters,
and is an alderman of the muni-
cipal council of Campbelltown.
Since the death of his father, Mr.
F. Genty acquired and has con-
ducted; the business himself.


A great Industry whereby
constant and remunerative em-
ployment is provided for a large
number of citizens is an advantage
which no community can afford to
despise, and the individual who risks
his capital and devotes his time,
energy and best ability in the build-
ing up of a great industrial concern
is, without doubt, a benefactor to
his country. The manufacture of
fermented liquors in New South
Wales is an important one, furnish-
ing regular employment to no less
than two thousand hands directly—
probably to treble that number
indirectly. Among the great brew-
eries of the metropolis, and occupying
no minor position in regard not only
to completeness of plant and perfec-
tion of system of manufacture and
methods but to quantity and quality
of output, Resch’s Waverley Brewery
takes rank among the first in Aus-
tralasia. This great and important
brewing establishment is situated in
Dowling Street, overlooking Moore
Park, a position unexcelled in the
southern hemisphere. Although the
present extensive premises are of
recent erection, the Waverley Brew-
ery is an old-established institution
of the metropolis, long known for the
purity of its productions throughout
the length and breadth of New
South Wales, also to a greater or
less degree in the adjacent Austral-
asian States. Originally founded by
Messrs. Burrows & Gleeson, the
Waverley Brewery was subsequently
acquired by the Allt Brewery Co.
Under that company’s management
the business prospered, and opera-
tions were still carried on in the
old premises at Edgecliff Road.
In the year 1897 Mr. Edmund
Resch, who had established an
enviable reputation as a brewer at
Wilcannia, in the western portion of
the State, purchased the Waverley
Brewery. Shortly afterwards he
effected another important purchase,
when he bought out the plant, stock,
and goodwill of the New South
Wales Lager Beer Co. Thereupon
Mr. Resch wisely determined to
bring these two separated interests
under one roof, and commenced at
once the preparation of plans for the
erection of sufficiently commodious
premises on the more centrally
situated site in Dowling Street. The
premises are of a magnificently
imposing appearance, solidly con-
structed, the main portion compact
and lofty, the whole together covering
very nearly two acres of ground.
In the designing of this brewery
Mr. Resch was ably assisted by his
two sons, Messrs. Edmund Resch,
jun., and Arnold Resch, who had
acquired an intimate knowledge of
the latest methods in brewing during
an investigation made by them in
Great Britain, on the Continent of
Europe, also in several of the great
cities of the United States —notably
in New York, Boston, Chicago and
St. Louis. The amount expended
in the erection of the buildings and
in the purchase and laying down of
the plant reached the imposing total
°f The architectural
design of the brewery is unique,
J Hubeit Newman. Sydney.
MR. E. RESCH.
consistent throughout, and solidly
constructed of brick and iron. Every
floor is supplied with hydrant and
hose, and the latest and best approved
fire-extinguishing apparatus. The
main facade, which is in Dowling
Street, presents one of the most
striking illustrations of the castellated
style of architecture to be met with
in Australasia. The interior arrange-
ments approach absolute perfection,
a short description of which at this
juncture may not be out of place.
The establishment is divided into
two distinct sections—the first, the
brewery proper; the other, the storage
and business departments. Opposite
the main building are theWounting-
house and the offices of the proprietor
and the manager, all of which are
fitted up on the latest approved
system. Contiguous to this portion of
the establishment are the laboratory
and analytical departments. The
immense store —which consists of
two floors and a basement —is in its
arrangement a model of completeness.
The packing and forwarding depart-
ment occupies the whole of the first
floor of this wing, while the basement
is utilised for the storage of bulk
spirits, wines, liqueurs and cordials.
The brewery proper is again divided
into several sections; the first, the
manufacturing department, and the
other the stores containing the malt
and other materials used in the
manufacture of the beer, lager beer,
and stout, for which Resch’s brewery
is famed. At the lower end of this
building are the elevators which
convey the raw material to the
storage bins, which are constructed
on the upper floor. A fair conception
of the magnitude of the manufacturing
operations conducted at this brewery
may be formed from a knowledge of
the fact that these great receptacles
have a capacity for 15,000 bushels of
malt. The brew-house, which forms
the central building, has three floors.
Here the malt goes through the
refining process, which is performed
by means of an immense cylindrical
appliance, the latest and best device
conceived for thoroughly cleansing
the chief material required in the
manufacture of good liquor. The
purified malt is then transferred to
hoppers, automatically weighed, and
then conveyed to the crushing mills,
and thence transferred to the mash
tuns. The liquid from the mash tuns
is drawn off into the great copper
cauldrons, which are continuously
maintained at boiling point by means
of a steam jacket of the latest ap-
proved design. During the brewing
process the hops are added, after
which process by means of a
unique pumping apparatus the
liquid is transferred to the cooling
tower, a building of considerable
elevation adjacent to the brewing
department. After submission to
this process the rapidly developing
beer passes over the refrigerators and
ultimately finds its way by gravitation
to the fermenting vats. Here it re-
mains for a considerable time until
fermentation is completed. After
passing through the racking cellar
the manufactured liquor is run into
the hogsheads and barrels, ready for
distribution to the retailers and con-
sumers.
In the lager beer manufacturing
department the same high standard


of efficiency prevails. The plant is
said to be the most complete in the
southern hemisphere. The whole of
the machinery of the brewery is
driven by two engines, the most
powerful, of 120 h.p., being used in
connection with the process of brew-
ing, while the smaller, a go h.p.
engine, drives the refrigerating plant.
Of this great industry Mr. Edmund
Resch is sole proprietor. Associated
with him in its management, in
addition to his two sons, is Mr. J. H.
Alvarez. This gentleman is a native
of Tasmania, who came to Sydney in
1883 and entered the employ of this
brewery while under the control of
MR. E. RESCH, JUN.
Burrows & Gleestm. When the
establishment changed hands Mr.
Alvarez maintained his"connection
with the new firm. While under the
management of the Allt Brewery Co.
Mr, Alvarez made rapid progress.-
When Mr. Resch took over the
brewery, as already described,-Mr.
Alvarez accepted the position of
manager. His worth as a citizen
has been recognised by his ap-,
pointment to a Commission of the
Peace.
In addition to the manufacture of
high-class brands of ale, stout and
lager beer Mr. Resch holds a number
of very valuable agencies for wines,
spirits and liqueurs. Amongst other
great firms Mr. Resch represents
James Watson & Co., of Dundee,
Scotland; Sazerac de Forge et Fils,
Cognac manufacturers, of Agouleme,
France. . He also, holds the Newt
South Wales agency for Henrj
Goulet’s champagnes, and also for
MR. A. RESCH.
Jubilee Schnapps. A new and pro-
gressive country like Australia is
essentially a place where rapid ad-
vancements can be made. Mr. 1
MR. J. H. ALVAREZ.
Resch has seized his opportunities;
and by doing so has built up an
industry worthy of the State in
which it exists.
Mr. FRANCIS BLIGH, resident
partner of Harbottle, Alsop & Co.,
Wine and Spirit Merchants, 89 Pitt
Street, Sydne.y, ,is a member of the
Council of the Sydney Chamber of
Commerce, and was born at Mel-
bourne in 1868, is a son of the late
Francis John Bligh, of the old-
established firm of Bligh, Harbottle
and Co., wine and spirit merchants of
Sydney and Melbourne. Francis
Bligh was educated at Marlborough
College, Wiltshire, England. In the
year 1887 he returned to Melbourne
and became connected with the Mel-
bourne house of the firm of which
his father was principal. His natural
ability for acquiring knowledge and
J. Hubert Newman . Sydney.
MR. F. BLIGH.
commercial education was so marked
that in 1893 he was sent to take the
management of their Sydney es-
tablishment, which business is carried
on under the style of Harbottle,
Alsop & Co. Mr. Bligh is president
of the Wine and Spirit Association
of New South Wales. He has been
a .member—of the Chamber of Com-
merce for the past eleven years, and
was elected a member of the Council
in J 903, and again in 1904. The
firm of Bligh, Harbottle & Co. is
one of the oldest of its kind in the
southern hemisphere, having com-
menced business in Sydney and
Melbourne as far back as the year
1848. The style of this firm has
changed on two occasions—in 1872 to
Harbottle, Biddulph & Alsop, and
a decade later to Harbottle, Alsop
and Co,


Thf. firm of CHRCIER, ADET
AMD CO,, Wine, Spirit, Wool, Skin
and Hide Merchants and Importers,
of 105 Pitt Street, Sydney, is a
very old - established Australian
house. It was founded in 1851, and
from the first did a large business.
c •
1 oth in Sydney and Melbourne.
The firm had its origin in Bor-
deaux, the most important seaport
of France and the centre of a wine
industry which has its ramifications
throughout the world. From this
centre it has spread and increased
its operations, and in British colo-
nies they have planted branches,
which, under careful management,
have met with success. Messrs.
Currier, Adet & Co, are large ex-
porters to France of sheepskins, two
large and important houses being
their consignees. The splendid po-
sition attained by the woollen manu-
facturers, glove-makers and shoe
manufacturers of France creates a
great demand for material suitable
for their requirements ; as a result
Australian wool and felts are much
sought after. So varied, indeed,
are the operations of the firm that
they are agents for all kinds of
Australian produce. Their whole-
sale trade embraces all French
edibles and specialities. In French
wines almost every brand is dealt
%/
with. In clarets, the firm handle
Vergniaud ; N.D. 0, Mouton Roths-
child ; N.D. 1, Chateau Mont-
rose ; N.D. 2, Chateau Talbot;
N.D. 3, Larose ; N.D. 4, St. Julien
Adet. Wi b these, Krug champagne
and various brandies and Bur-
gundies; while one of their lead-
ing lines is their agency in James
Buchanan k Co.’s famous black
and white whisky. These, with
other lines held by the firm, has
enabled them to build up a lucra-
tive business.
Mr. COLMAN BURKE, resi-
dent partner in the firm of Curcier,
Adet k Co., is a typical Australian;
nephew of the late Gustave Curcier,
was horn at St. Kilda, Melbourne, in
the year 1865. His father, the late
James Louis Burke was formerly
a leading figure in Melbourne com-
mercial circles, where he was held
in the highest respect as a merchant
and shipowner. In view of the
position which in after years he
would he called upon to fill, the son
was fully equipped in educational
attainments, subsequently leaving
Australia for Bordeaux, the French
seaport, where he studied at the
historical seminary at Tivoli, and
from there he was sent to Old Hall
(Ware, Herts.). His next move was
to Ushaw College, in the hill coun-
try. Durham, After a scholastic
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR COLMAN BURKE.
training he returned to Bordeaux
and entered the office of Messrs.
Adet, Seward & Co., of which his
uncle, Mr. Harry Seward, is a part-
ner. Every branch of business re-
ceived his attention, and having
mastered all the details of office
routine, the course of trade, viti-
culture, wine-making, and the dis-
tillation of brandy, passed on to
other departments. Subsequently
Mr. Burke acquired a large know-
ledge of the wool trade ; and the
art of fellmongering received full
G O
attention. This large and varied
knowledge was of the greatest value
upon his return to Australia in 1888.
Two years after his arrival the young
merchant proceeded to Sydney and
took charge of the selling depart-
ment of the firm, afterwards return-
ing to Melbourne. In 1894 Mr.
Burke paid a visit to Europe,
another visit was made in 4899,
and again in 1907.
Mr. JOHN LAMB SHUTTER,
Australian General Manager for
John Walker & Sons Ltd., was
born in Edinburgh, Scotland, and
received the rudiments of his edu-
cation in his native town, finishing
in Germany. His first experience
of commercial life was in the grain
trade, and from this he removed to
the wine and spirit business. Emi-
grating to New Zealand, he carried
on business there for some years,
but finding it not sufficiently lucra-
tive he returned to England and
joined a firm of wine and spirit
merchants in London. This line he
followed for some years, when he
retired and returned to New Zea-
land. Seventeen years ago he came
over to Sydney to manage the busi-
ness of the late John Walker, and
for the last ten years has been the
Australian manager for John Walker
and Sons Ltd., distillers and spirit
merchants, of Kilmarnock, Scotland,
established in 1821. Mr. Soutter is
MR. J. L. SOUTTER.
a member of the Chamber of Com-
merce, and has been elected on the
Wine and Spirit Sectional Com-
mittee for the year lao7.
Mr. L. L E 0 N A R 1) IT I G G S.
Manager in Sydney for the New
o j . /
South Wales branch of the business
of Messrs. G. F. Morris & Soils,
Wine Growers, proprietors of Fair-
field Vineyard, Rutherglen, Vic-
toria, is a native of England, and
was born at Hornsey, Middlesex.
His father, the late W. A. Higgs,
was Sheriff of London and Middle-
sex in 1888. He was educated at
New College, Eastbourne, Sussex,
and gained his early commercial
experience with the firm of Apple-
ton, Machin & Smiles, tea dealers,


1 ondon with whom he remained
lor seven years. In 1896, his
health having broken down, Mr.
Higgs came to Australia, and found
employment with Mr. G. F. Morris
in Victoria. After another trip to
the old country he was obliged to
• c*'
return almost immediately to Vic-
toria in consequence of his wife’s
severe illness, which, unfortunately
caused her death. In August, 1899,
Mr. Higgs was with the firm of
Atcherley & Dawson as tea buyer,
leaving them in January, 1902, to
open business in Sydney for Messrs.
U. P. Morris & Co. Fairfield
is the largest vineyard in Australia,
and,the head of the firm, Mr. G. F.
Morris, is the pioneer vigneron of
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney .
NR. L. L. HIGGS.
the Murray Plains, having com-
menced operations in the year
1860. Year by year the business
lias steadily grown, and now the
total area of the Fairfield Estate is
over 2,000 acres, of which there arc
over 600 acres of bearing vines.
The advent of federation and the
removal of the prohibitive duties
enabled Mr. Morris to open a
branch in Sydnev and give the
/ •/ «/ c j
people of this State the advantage
of obtaining the Fairfield wines at
reasonable prices. Though only
opened in 1902, the N.S.W. branch,
under the able management of Mr.
Leonard Higgs (a son-in-law of Mr.
Morris), has been most successful,
and the Fairfield vintage is now as
popular in this State as in Victoria.
Hundreds of prizes obtained at
exhibitions all over the world bear
test i inouy to their excellent quality.
In addition to the ordinary red and
white wines, the proprietors of the
Fairfield vineyard have recently
placed on the market Australian-
made liqueurs, which experts have
declared to be equal to any of the
well-known imported brands, and
for which they obtained a first prize
at the last Sydney show. During
the year 1906 the Fairfield wines
obtained at shows in Victoria and
New South Wales 33 first prizes,
21 seconds, and 5 third prizes.
Mr. WILLIAM JOHN BART-
LETT, proprietor of the Goulburn
Brewery, one of the largest and best
known outside the metropolis, was
born in 1841, and is a native of
Durham, England. At the very
early age of fourteen years he joined
the merchant service, and for ten
years followed the roving life of a
sailor. Landing in New South Wales
in 1865, when the gold fever was at
its height, he left the sea and joined
in the rush for the goldfields. The
fascination and alluring prospects
of this occupation were such that
for a number of years he followed it,
not only in New South Wales, but
also in the neighbouring States of
Victoria, New Zealand and Queens-
land. When, at last, the gold yield
was less productive, he relinquished
the pursuit of mining and settled
down in Goulburn in the year 1874,
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney .
NR. W. J. BARTLETT.
where he established the brewing
business of Bartlett & Oddy, which
was carried on till 1878, when he
purchased Mr. Oddy’s interest, and
became sole proprietor. This en-
abled him to push the business with
greater vigour, and by steady, per-
sistent effort has succeeded in build-
ing up the trade, so the Goulburn
Brewery became one of the largest
and finest out of Sydney. Mr.
Bartlett has made stout brewing
a speciality, and his stout is recom-
mended by the medical faculty. He
is also a thorough maltster, and has
a mall -house in connection with the
brewery. Throughout a busy hfc
Mr. Bartlett has found time to
devote to political matters, in which
he has been prominent as a citizen,
having occupied the position of
president of the Freetrade and
Liberal Association for many years.
JOSEPH K.WIGHT SMITH,
late of the Prince of Wales Light
Horse, is the second son of the
late Mr. J. K. Smith, of Windsor,
New South Wales, and was born in
that historic township in 1868.
His childhood over, he came first to
Bathurst, and eventually to Sydney,
where lie developed into a popular
athlete, being well and widely
known in all classes of sports. Being
somewhat of an adventurous dis-
position, at the age of nineteen he
went to the goldfields of Northern
Queensland (Croydon). Then he
took up station life, artesian well-
boring, &c., for a period of three
y r ears. In 1892 he visited “ the
fields ” of Western Australia, and
being a companion of Bayley (of
Bay ley’s Reward), since dead, he
(Mr. Smith) received a tip in the
matter of prospecting, not to sink
shafts. The subject of this sketch
started out prospecting in iNorlh
Coolgardie, Murchison, and finally
settled down at “ Ninety Mile.”
Then he opened up the North Con-
suelo (long before the since famous
Menzies was discovered), became in-
terested in several properties, and,
like many others, missing the boom,
he sold out. Wanting a change, in
1897 he went to Klondyke (Alaska).
After various experiences and no end
of hardships, he opened up the first
claim at Bear Creek there, but with
little or no success. At the first
meeting of miners, from four to five
thousand miners being present, Mr.
Knight Smith was elected chairman.
A Miners’ Association was formed,
having for its object amendment of


the existing laws, which were of an
absolutely rotten character. He
helped to advise the lion. Mr.
Ogilvie, the High Commissioner,
and to revise the mining statutes.
Plis work was rewarded by his
being made hon. magistrate for the
wholeof the Yukon,the appointment
being made at a special meeting of
the Executive. Sir Wilfred Laurier
being his chief supporter. In 1899
he left for England with letters to
Lord Strathcona. with whom he had
MR. J. K. SMITH.
a personal interview re the mining
conditions of Yukon. Whilst in
England he formed tire Y.G.M.
Company, returning to Klondyke
as consulting engineer to the com-
pany. The trip through over the
ice (600 miles from hake Bennett
to Dawson City) was made with five
dogs. Plis experiences of snow,
blizzards, and the White Horse
rapids, where many poor fellows
were drowned and others lost their
outfits, are of a blood-curdling de-
scription. On Take Tagish no bet-
ter idea of how things were can be
given than the fact that it was 70
degrees below zero, and icicles hung
from the beards and moustaches of
the men. From Vancouver to Skag-
way was also a memorable trip, for
‘ ‘ Tees ’ ’ boat arrived with some-
thing like 200 tons of ice, and Cap-
tain Wheeler was frozen at his post.
Soon after this Mr. Smith again
returned to England, and, as the
spirit of adventure was still strong
within him, he was introduced to
Colonel Owen Thomas, then with
the permission of the Prince of Wales
(our present King) forming the
Prince of Wales’ Eight Horse.
Joining this noted cavalry corps in
Eondon, he went through the South
African war with it, receiving from
General Elliott, Colonel Bethune,
and other officers of high standing,
under whose command the regiment
served, many testimonials expres-
sive of admiration at his bravery
and the valuable services he found
opportunity to individually render.
Upon the Eight Horse being dis-
banded, Mr. Smith returned to his
native land, after an absence of
seven years, and settled down as
“mine host” of the Willoughby
Hotel, Willoughby, Besides being
a magistrate of the territory of
Canada, Mr. Smith also holds the
Commission of the Peace of
Western Australia.
At Mansfield, Notts, England,
and upon May 23, 1869, Mr.
THOMAS SANSOM first saw the
light of day. His father, Mr.
Thomas Sansom, sen., carried on
the business of a wholesale grocer
and provision merchant, a position
which enabled him to give his son
a first-class education at Notting-
MR. T. SANSOM.
ham High School. When young
Sansom’s studies were completed
he came out to Sydney and entered
the office of Mr. W. Wilce, cor-
dial manufacturer, Erskineville
Road, Newtown, where for fifteen
years he filled the post of manager.


The CANTERBURY PARK
RACECOURSE CO. LTD.,
the head office of which is at
198 Pitt Street, was founded in 1883.
The prime movers in its inception
were the late Mr. Fredk. Clissold,
Messrs. William LoVel Davis, J.
T. Nightingale and C. J. Foord.
In 1887 the affairs of the original
syndicate were transferred to a
company. The racecourse is situated
in the village of Canterbury, about
six miles from Sydney Post Office
upon the northern bank of Cook’s
River. It comprises fifty-three acres
of land and is tastefully laid out in
racing, training and trotting tracks.
The main course is about seven-and-
a-quarter furlongs in length. The
appointments of the course are fully
up to date in every respect. The
saddling paddock is artistically laid
J. Hubert Newman . Sydney
MR. W. L DAVIS.
out with natural and foreign trees,
shrubs, and flower borders. The
grand stand is one of the most
capacious and comfortable within
the State. The General Manager
and Secretary is Mr. William Lovel
Davis. He was born in Sussex,
England, in 1844, and came to
Sydney in 1868 where he has resided
ever since. He is a keen and ardent
sportsman, and takes a great interest
in all matters associated with the
advancement of his club. He has
also been largely identified with
mining interests and as an investor
has done much to encourage the
progress of many industries in New
South Wales. In 1885 Mr. Davis
was returned a member of the
Legislative Assembly for the elec-
torate of Canterbury which then
returned four members. He con-
tinued to represent the electorate
for some years.
The KENSINGTON RECRE-
ATION GROUNDS CO. LTD.,
the offices of which are at 159
Castlereagh Street, Sydney, was
established in 1890. In that year a
Crown lease of sixty acres was
granted to the late Mr. G. B.
Rowley, first general secretary of
the club. This area was subse-
quently transferred to the Rosehill
Racing Co. Ltd., and carried on by
them as a racecourse from June,
1893, until July, 1895. At this time
the Kensington Recreation Grounds
Co. was formed, and took over
control of the ground.
The Kensington Racing Club
conducts on the grounds pony and
galloway race meetings. There are
two handsome and capacious stands
erected in the Grand Stand and
Ledger reserves. The course proper
is seven furlongs in length. Two
training tracks in addition have been
formed, one on the outside of the
course proper and another on the
inside. Meetings are held every
Wednesday, the lowest prize money
granted for six events being £ 2OO.
Under the auspices of the Ken-
sington Recreation Grounds Co. the
Kensington Coursing Club was
formed, occupying the ground from
March to September of each year.
Kensington is admittedly one of
the most modern and best ap-
pointed coursing grounds in Aus-
tralia. Plumpton coursing is follow-
ed, and in the management of the
matches, the weighing of the dogs,
and timing of the courses, the
American system is adopted. The
coursing area is of a sandy nature,
which does not harden in hot weather
and is generally covered by a good
sward of grass. Nor is it affected by
the rain, heavy or otherwise. The
grounds contain a run of 550 yards
clear, with a twenty-four feet rise in
the last 200 yards.
The grounds are frequently utilised
for public demonstrations. At the
time of the formation of the first and
second contingents for the South
African war in 1899 and 1900 the
troops occupied the grounds. At the
same time concerts, marches past
and other displays took place, at
which collections were taken up and
by which the Patriotic and Bush-
men’s Contingent Funds were bene-
fited to the extent of Every
year amateur foot race meetings and
other sports are held.
The management of the company
is vested in a board of directors, of
which Hon. W. C. Hill, M.L.C., is
chairman, with Messrs. H. S. Levy,
Henry Harris, and R. T. Carter
members. The general secretary is
Mr. A. W. Henningham.
Mr. Patrick O’Mara, late general
secretary and manager of the Ken-
sington Recreation Grounds Co. Ltd.,
was born in Sydney in 1868. Upon
the completion of his school studies
he entered the service of Mr. G. R.
Clarke, Government land agent, as
a junior clerk. Mr. Clarke was
subsequently joined in partnership
by Mr. G. B. Rowley, the business
being carried on afterwards under
J. Hubert Newman . Sydney
NR. A. W. HENNINGHAM.
the title of Clarke & Rowley. Mr.
Rowley in 1886 accepted the man-
agement of the Rosehill Racing
Club, and Mr. O’Mara was associ-
ated with him in that position. In
1890 Mr. Rowley took over the
control of the Kensington Club.
Upon the demise of Mr. Rowley on
January 1, 1894, Mr. O’Mara was
appointed to the vacant position,
and continued the management of
the two clubs until 1898, and from
that date until his death he con-
trolled the affairs of the Kensing-
ton Co. solely.
Mr. O’Mara died on the 18th
February, 1904 and was succeeded
by Mr. A. W. Henningham, who had
been his assistant for over nine years.


The BELMORE COURSING
CLUB was formed in 1900. For-
merly a syndicate, through the exer-
tions of the Secretary, Mr. Johiy
Rowan, a membership of about one,
hundred and twenty was obtained
at its inception. Since then it has
grown rapidly in numbers and in-
fluence. About ten meetings are
11eld at Belmore annually at which
some ot the best dogs in the State
are entered. John Rowan, Secretary
to the Belmore Coursing Club, is a
native ot Gateshead, England, where
he was born in 1865, and arrived in
Sydney in 1885. Taking a deep
interest in athletics he entered for a
number of public contests. As a
pedestrian he was successful in
winning several important handicaps.
Amongst others he won the Carring-
ton Handicap and obtained second
in the 500 sovs. Sir Joseph Banks
Handicap. He also proved success-
ful at various contests throughout
the country until in 1896 lie com-
menced to take a practical interest in
coursing. He then acquired some
of the first greyhounds in the State,
as well as a number of the good
breeds of dogs. He embarked in
the tobacco business in Regent
Street over twenty years ago, and
was burned out in 1888. He re-built
the same year. His present hand-
some structure contains a stock equal
to anything in the city, and includes
everything appertaining to the trade.
Mr, Rowan isa member of Tattersall’s
Club, and has a large sporting
connection.
Mr, RICHARD COLIN
CAMPBELL HUNGERFORD,
J.P., Secretary of the New South
Wales Trotting Club, was born in
D unedin, New Zealand, and* was
educated at the Otago Boys’ High
School of that city. On leaving
school he served his time in learning
contracting with his father, Mr.
T. W. Hungerford, the well-known
contractor. . The subject of this
sketch became officially connected
with the sport of trotting when he
was appointed the first secretary of
ihe Greymouth Trotting Club, New
Zealand. During the period he was
connected with that club in New
Zealand he was instrumental in
bringing to justice several trotting
swindles, for which the- culprits
were severely punished. He also
took a very prominent part in fram-
ing the trotting rules in the 1896-7 8
New Zealand trotting conferences.
Mr. R. C Hungerford left New
Zealand in August, 1898, for Sydney
to join the partnership of Hunger-
ford & Sons, contractors, Sydney,
which firm has carried out extensive
contracts in this State, principally
in connection with harbour works.
Mr. R. C. Hunger ford was the
managing partner for the carrying
out of the Cape Hawke harbour
works, which took over three years
to complete. The firm of Hunger-
ford & Sons is still in existence, and
at the time of writing is carrying
out important works at the Big
Swamp, Coopernook, New South
Wales, and a harbour works at
Ulverstone, Tasmania. Prior to
his departure from New Zealand
Mr. Hungerford was presented by
the members of the Greymouth
Trotting Club with a handsome
illuminated address; by the mem-
bers of the Ahaura Trotting Club
with a gold sovereign-purse ; by the
West Coast Cricket Association
with a writing-case; by the Grey-
mouth Cricket Club with a silver
cigar case. Mr. R. C. Hungerford
took a very active interest in horse-
racing in New Zealand, being a
steward and a member of the com-
mittee of the Greymouth Jockey
Club. In 1894 * ie represented the
Greymouth Jockey Club at the New
Zealand racing conference. He also
took a prominent part in cricket,
football and athletics. /- Mr. R. C.
Hungerford was appointed secretary
J. Hubert Newman, Sydney ,
MR. R. C. C. HUNGERFORD.
of the New South Wales Trotting
Club in October, 1902, and since his
appointment the sport in Sydney has
been raised to a high standard. Mr.
R. C. Hungerford is a member of the
New South Wales Rugby Union
Council, and was recently appointed
aJP-
Mr. HERBERT FRANKLIN
EVISON, is a son of the late Mr.
Edward E vis on, a m:mber of the
English mercantile firm of Sir Regi-
nald Hunson, Evison & Barter.
Hi; father, who died on February 3,
1906, bequeathed to each of his six
children an independence fo ■ life.
Born at Blizewood Park, Caterham,
MR. H. F. EVISON.
Surrey, England, or September 27,
1870, Mr H. F. Evison was edu-
cated a Brighton College, Sussex,
opening his brief business career as
under-manager of the Natal Content
Sugar Co. He has travelled . ver
Norway, Holland, Belgium, Ger-
many, France, Switzerland, Italy,
Spain, all the Channel Islands,all the
Canary Islands,Gibraltar Road,Port
Said, semVesuvius in full swing, Co-
lombo, all over Australia, Tasmania,
South America, Africa, all over
Natal, Basutoland, and the Orange
Free State. Mr. Evison ha;three
times traversed the Rhine from end
to end; has ridden across the Ibar-
dardger glacier in a reindeer sledge.
Hunting is his favourite pastime,
though at the same time he can do a
quick thing on the turf. At home he
rode to the Surrey fox hounds and
the Surrey stag hounds ; in both
clubs his father and he being life
members. In Bloemfontein, in the
Ladybrand Amateur Steeplechase,
in which the Dutchman, Bushman,
rode against him, he won on Mr.
Newbury’s Ruby.


THE CIVIL SERVICE CO-OPE-
RATI YE SOCIETY’S STORES
constituteJa prominent institution
of the city of Sydney. Its head-
quarters are situated in the busiest
portion of Pitt Street. In 1871
representatives from the various
departments of the civil service in
Sydney met together to consider the
advisability of forming a co-opera-
tive society for the supply of house-
hold necessaries for any employed
in the public service who might
wish to join in the movement. The
following gentlemen formed the
first Provisional Committee :
Messrs. J. Barnet, Colonial Archi-
tect ; J. J. Calvert, Legislative
Council Chambers ; W. Coles,
Colonial Architect’s Department ;
MR. J. CHALMERS.
W. Crane, Water Police ; E. Du
Faur, Crown Lands Office ; R. L.
Fames, J. H. Haddocks, Customs ;
A. Johnson, R. D, Fitzgerald, Sur-
veyor-General 5 s Office ; E. Fosberv,
j * tj *
Superintendent of Police ; A. C.
Fraser, Clerk of the Peace ; W. 1).
Meares, Central Police Office ; E. 0.
Moriarty, Engineer-in-Chief, Har-
bours and Rivers ; J. W. Drewett,
C. A. Goodchap, H. A. Hall, W. H.
Quodling, W. Scott, Railway De-
partment ; C. H. Nightingale, Gene-
ral Post Office ; A. Oliver, Parlia-
mentary Draughtsman ; J. Thom-
son; Inspector of Public Accounts ;
R. C. Walker, Librarian, Public Li-
brary. Mr. Chas. A. Goodchap was
appointed honorary secretary and
Mr. W. H. Quodling honorary trea-
surer. The first directors were
Messrs. Du Faur, Quodling, Wil-
kins, Hall, Fraser, Goodchap,
Meares, (Jowlishaw, Fosbery and
Bryant. Operations were coni'
menced in a small way in York
Street. The first year’s turnover
totalled £25,000. It was dis-
covered, however, at the first gene-
ral stocktaking that the year’s
transactions had just paid expenses,
consequently there was nothing ton
Civil Service Stores, Pitt Street.
divide amongst its members. This
partial failure of a very wise move-
ment was disheartening. Four years
after the annual turnover reached
only £35,000 ; and ten years later it
had shrunk to £23,000. In 1886
there was a staff of sixteen em-
ployees all told ; in 1903 these had
increased to 153. In the former
year the wages paid amounted to
£1,924 ; in 1903 it had reached
£14,545 cartage in 1886 was
£6lO ; in 1903 it had advanced to
no less than £4,435. The total
turnover in 1886 was only £23,000;
in 1903 it had reached to nearly
£lBO,OOO. The half-yearly balance-
sheet, ending July, 1903, showed a
reserve fund of £ 14,500 to the credit
of the society. In 1891 bonuses for
the first time were announced.
From that year until 1903 £77,000
lias been distributed, and dividends
j also amounting to £13,000. There
pare over 4,000 members. In 1886
Ithere were only two departments ;
[■there are now twelve. Mr. T. G.
*
J. Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. T. G. KENNY.
Kenny is secretary and accountant.
With regard to the building itself,
the facade of the Civil Service
stores in Pitt Street is an imposing
one. The structure consists of six
storeys, and constitutes a graceful
addition to the architecture of that
portion of the city. The floor space
of the whole structure is 53,000
square feet, which is fully occupied.
Four hydraulic elevators are em-
ployed for passengers and goods ;
complete electric lighting and tele-
phone systems have been installed.
The present board o directors is
composed of the following gentle-
men : —Messrs. W. R. Beaver
(chairman), W. M. M. Arnold, J.
Dalgarno, B. Lee, W. Yero Read
and W. Sinclair. In 1906 Mr. J.
Chalmers severed his connection
with the Company, and Mr. T. G.
Kenny was appointed manager.


RYLANDS & SONS LTD.-
In 1821 the firm of John Rylands
and Sons was established. In 1824
two large estates near Wigan were
purchased, and large factories
erected. The purchase was a most
fortunate one, as a rich vein of coal
was found. In due time a shaft
was sunk, and so, in addition to
being manufacturers, the firm be-
came coal-owners In 1864 the
Gorton mills were bought, and in
the following year the Gidlow mills
o J
were erected. Other mills were
added in quick succession, until the
firm employed 12,000 persons, and
possessed an engine power equal to
7,250 horses.
branches are at Sydney, Melbourne,
Adelaide, Brisbane, Wellington,
Capetown, Bombay, &c., under effi-
cient management. In 1891 the
company bought the stock and
book debts of J. P. Westhead &
Co., of Manchester, paying a quar-
ter of a million pounds sterling.
The firm’s business from its initi-
ation has been wonderfully pro-
gressive, and amidst all the pressing
cares of such a huge concern in
these days of hustle, attention is
peid to the hours of relaxation, as
is testified by the various clubs
under the name of Longford, de-
rived from Longford Hall, the resi-
dence of the late Mr. Rylands.
•/
memory and presented to that city,
is one of its choicest monuments;
a handsome Gothic building, con-
taining some of the choicest and
heapey Bleach Works, Chorley, Lancashire.
rarest books in existence, rare old
tomes of unestimated value, old
monkish manuscripts, missals, &c.
Rylands & Sons' Warehouse, 55 Wood Street, London.
In 1873 the concern had deve-
loped to such an extent that Mr.
Rvlands was induced to turn his
•/ • t i • i •
business into a limited liability
company with a capital of
£3,200,000. The company has al-
ways taken a prominent part in the
ocean trade of the British Empire.
Its oversea trade is carried on by
a subsidiary company, under the
same name but with the addition of
the word “colonial,” and its
Cricket, rowing, swimming, chess,
and music each has its club ; these
are federated under the Recreation
Council, composed of the heads of
departments and with the counte-
nance and support of the directors.
The Thrift Society offers induce-
ments to the saving, and the library
to its readers.
In Manchester the Rylands
Library, founded and endowed by
the widow of Mr. Rylands in his
There are to be found the first two
boohs ever printed, i.e., Caxton’s
hihles. Absorbed in this unique
collection is the A 1 thorp Library of
H |e iMe Earl Spencer, purchased by
Mrs. Rylands.
To visit Manchester without seeing
this famous library is to miss
one of the choicest sights of that city,
It is essentially a students’ library,
and seekers after knowledge flock to
it from all parts of the globe.


Messrs. w. & a. McArthur
LTD., Warehousemen and General
Merchants, London, Sydney and Bris-
bane. The company was formed in
1898, to take over the old-estab-
lished business of A. McArthur and
Co., Sydney, which was founded in
1845, and is so well-known through-
out the State. The Sydney resident
directors are Sir William McMillan,
K.C.M.G., and Mr. J. P. McArthur ;
manager (with a seat on the local
board), Mr. W. M. Alderson; and
secretary, Mr. F. K. Middleton.
The company has made good pro-
gress, and stands in the front rank of
like Sydney concerns. The sketch
shown is that of the original warehouse
built to York Street, and does not
give a good idea of the company’s
large premises, which extend through
to Clarence Street at the rear, where
the building is of more recent con-
struction, and has a larger frontage,
being more than double that to York
Street. This gives a big florage,
but none too much for the extensive
requirements of the company’s busi-
ness, which is a growing one. Unlike
other Sydney soft goods firms the
company’s interests are not all
bound up in such trade, the business
done in outside affairs, such as ship-
ping, grain, engineering, insurance,
&c., being extensive. These inter-
ests are kept apart from the ware-
house, and are looked after from
special offices situated at 13 and 15
Macquarie Place. The large ad-
joining premises in King Street —at
one time used for a theatre known
as the Opera House —are held on a
long lease by the company. In
this building are located the shirt
and clothing factories, which make
up entirely for W. & A. McArthur
Ltd.’s requirements. In addition
extensive premises are owned by
the company at Forest Lodge, where
their straw hat factory—the most up-
to-date in this State —is situated,
the building being specially erected
for this purpose.
W. & A McArthur LTd’s Building, York Street, Sydney,


Messrs. PATERSON, LAING
and BRUCE LTD., W arehousemen
and Importers, Sydney, Melbourne,
Hobart and London, a prominent
and long-established Australian soft
goods firm, whose business ramifica-
tions extend to-day throughout the
length and breadth of Australasia,
was founded in a very small way in
Sons & Co. Ltd., together with its
stock and interests, were acquired by
purchase, and the career of Messrs.
Paterson, Laing & Bruce Ltd., as a
great New South Wales business
enterprise, was incepted. The pre-
mises of the firm in Sydney are
situated at the corner of Wynyard
and Carrington Streets, within a
by a tower of striking appearance.
The interior of the building is fitted
up with the most modern improve-
ments and appliances for carrying
on a large and increasing business.
Owing to the enormous purchasing
power of the company for their
several warehouses, the growth, pro-
gress and development of the Sydney
WAREHOUSE OF MESSRS. PATERSON, LAING & BRUCE LTD.,
CORNER OF WYNYARD AND CARRINGTON STREETS, SYDNEY.
Victoria so far back as 1850. For
many years a considerable business
was done throughout New South
Wales from Melbourne by the firm
through its Sydney agency; but con-
sequent upon the flotation of the
business into a limited liability com-
pany in 1897, in 1899 the great
Sydney warehouse of Messrs. Lark,
stone’s throw of the General Post
Office, in the very centre of the com-
mercial portion of the city. The
warehouse itself is, perhaps, the
most commodious in the southern
hemisphere, built solidly of stone and
brick with a handsome facade of
modern design to the two streets
already mentioned, and surmounted
business has been marvellous, as it
has already attained such magnitude
that it occupies the same position in
the commercial world in Sydney
that the Melbourne business does
in Melbourne. The Sydney direct-
ors of the company are Mr. A.
B. Templeman and Mr. T. J. A.
Clark.


of I-NOCH PAYLOR
ANI ? clalm to.be the oldest Boot
and Shoe house in Australia. The
business was founded by the late Mr.
noc ay or, at Melbourne in 1851,
anc it las a continuous and uninter-
rupted career of fifty-three years.
10 >a ) y no hi m in Australia is
belter known, from the fact that
late Mr. F. Wilson, under whose
management the business grew and
prospered. Mr. Wilson dying in
1887, it was found necessary to take
in other partners to conduct its
affairs, and Mr. Alfred Eee and Mr.
George Kibble became resident
partners in Australia, carrying on
a strictly importing business until
goods. The factory of Messrs.
Enoch Taylor & Co. is situated at
Botany, and some conception of its
magnitude may be gained from the
fact that the length of the main
building is 354 feet by a depth of 65
feet, but huge as this building is,
plans and specifications are being got
out for a wing 135 feet long, and 50 feet
Messrs Enoch Taylor & Co’s. Factory, Botany.
during the whole period of the firm’s
existence, it has traded in all the
Australian colonies. After a resi-
dence in Australia of twenty years,
Mr. Taylor returned to England,
where he established a London
house, which still exists. He was
hen joined in partnership by the
1893, when th e firm became manu-
facturers for the first time. Since
that date operations have widened
considerably, and the firm by plan-
ning their factory on the American
system, have succeeded so well in
that department, their products are
now often mistaken *or American
wide. The firm’s boast is that not any
single American factory has a finer
equipment of modern machines for
shoemaking. The Sydney warehouse
of Enoch Taylor & Co. is at 22 York
St., where they have been located for
over thirty years. Their Brisbane
warehouse is at 48-50 Elizabeth St.


I INTERNATIONAL CORRE-
SPONDENCE SCHOOLS.—
A Unique and Effective Sys-
tem of Education. The Austral-
asian Headquarters in Sydney.
The most striking characteristic
of the present age is the sys-
tematisation of effort in the education
of the masses. The foremost nations
to-day are realising to an intensity
of degree hitherto undreamt of that
if supremacy is to be attained, or if
any position already reached is to be
maintained, the units that compose
the State shall be mentally, and may
it be said scientifically, equipped for
the particular occupation each is to
the motherland that the supremacy
of the race is being challenged, and
that if even a respectable position
in the family of nations is to be main-
tained,national methods and ideas will
have to be altered, and that quickly.
But it is to the marvellously virile
people across the Atlantic that the
eyes of the civilised world turn in
this important matter of education.
The United States, with her eighty
millions of people, are running the
nations of Europe a swift race for the
world’s commercial and industrial
supremacy.
And since, in so many respects
do we of the new Australian Com-
the colleges, the universities and the
technical, professional and normal
schools. From these facts the start-
ling truth presents itself that in the
country where education is special-
ised, ninety-five persons out of every
hundred begin the work of life with
nothing better than the mere ele-
ments of an education. We will
now show what is now being done
in America to rectify this defect.
How the International Correspondence
Schools were Established.
In October, 1891, at Pittsburg
Home Office and International Correspondence Schools, Scranton, Pa., U.S.A.
engage in. Among the European
nations Germany has long since
shown what education in special
lines for a people as a whole can do.
The progress made by Germany is
due to the attention that nation has
paid to the technical and commercial
education of her young men. Com-
mercial and technical high schools
have been established in every
centre of populatipn throughout the
empire. Great Britain is awakening
too. Slow and perverse and con-
servative to a degree, the truth is at
last dawning on the public mind of
monwealth, in characteristics and
in conditions natural and artificial,
resemble America, we can with con-
fidence consider, and where necessary
adopt, some of the methods by which
she has become the great industrial
and commercial people that she
certainly is. Of the eighty millions
of people in the United Stales
seventeen millions of them are in
schools and college. Of each
thousand of these nine hundred and
forty-eight are attending the primary
schools, thirty-nine are students in
the high and preparatory schools,
(Pa.), the centre of the great iron
industry of America, President
Thomas J. Foster, then editor of a
journal entitled Mines and Minerals,
invented and introduced the Inter-
national Correspondence Schools
system, for teaching the theory of
the trades and engineering profes-
sions by means of improved text-
books for home study and guidance,
and to render assistance to the
student through the mails. The
first of these International Corre-
spondence Schools was organised as
the Correspondence School of Mines.


The instruction papers drawn up for
this course were prepared for work-
ing men, many of them probably
barely able to read and write. But
they inaugurated a new standard of
technical literature. The system was
then extended to the issue of elemen-
tary education papers for students
ignorant of the first processes of
arithmetic. These explained every-
thing necessary and nothing super-
fluous, because those that were to
use them had no time to spend for
anything but essentials. The success
of this first school showed that the
theory of other trades and engineer-
ing professions could be taught with
equal success by the same system.
From that date the history of
the International Correspondence
Schools is one of astonishing growth.
At the end of 1903 the system had
no less than twenty-seven schools
teaching nearly all applied sciences
and commercial and higher branches
of education. Over £200,000 has
been invested in the preparation of
courses, and £so,ooo is being added
to this amount yearly. Over/'goo, 000
has been expended upon the develop-
ment of the system, more than one-
fifth of which is invested in buildings
and printing plant. There have
been sold more than 675,000 courses
up to the end of 1903, which have
helped thousands oi persons to
better positions and better pay.
The text - books of the Inter-
national Schools are infinitely better
for home study than ordinary school
or college text-books simply because
they are specially prepared for the
system. They give only one method,
formula or process for accomplishing
any particular result, the one selected
being the best adapted for the pur-
pose, and they are prepared in
such a manner that they cannot
be misunderstood. A thorough
correction of the written work of
the student and exact written
explanations of all difficulties met
with in study is an essential part of
the system. No branch of education,
no trade or manufacture, no com-
mercial or official position exists in
which a student cannot be instructed
in and made fit for by this system.
Take, for instance, the study of
languages. In addition to the clearly
drawn-up course of papers which
contains explicit instructions for the
student as he progresses, a complete
phonograph and outfit is provided
for each course, the records of which
are from a perfect “master record.”
In every branch of study a similarly
complete system has been developed.
A student can be thoroughly trained
and educated for the very highest
branches of education. The school
teacher away in the interior can be
instructed in pedagogics and fitted
for the highest position in the various
educational systems of the State.
When the student has passed his
final examination he receives a di-
ploma certifying to his proficiency.
In the United States these are recog-
nised by the highest educational
authorities, and are accepted every-
where in professional, commercial
and manufacturing circles.
In the latter end of 1902 the home
management deputed Mr. Fritz
Frank to organise agencies through-
out the world, and he in turn
appointed Mr. E. F. Donkin, of 59
Pitt Street, Sydney, as the general
agent for Australia, Tasmania and
adjacent islands. Since the inaugu-
ration of the system in Australia
many hundreds have availed them-
selves of this opportunity to study
at home, and in every case it is
claimed that the highest success has
been achieved.
In the line of footwear the busi-
ness carried on by Mr. EDWARD
FAY, at the corner of Pitt and
Liverpool Streets, has a reputation
that might well be envied by many
establishments having a longer his-
tory. His phenomenal success in
attracting customers to a retail shop
situated apart from the recognised
business centres of the city is an
achievement that any merchant
might well be proud of. That this
has been accomplished by Mr. Fay
is only another way of stating that
the determination with which he
commenced business—viz., to stock
no goods but the best, and to be
content with a moderate profit—has
been consistently and rigorously
adhered to. So well is this recoe-
nised that it has become an axiom
of his patrons, “Once a customei
at Fay’s always a customer.” It
was as late as 1887 that the pre-
sent proprietor bought out Mr. W.
H. Wicks, in Pitt Street. There
Mr. Fay, who brought with him an
intimate and thorough knowledge of
the trade, carried on operations for
about eighteen months. Mr. Fay
recognised that to
keep pace with the
public demands he
must increase his
accommodation.
This was accom-
plished by taking
over and suitably
fitting up the ad-
joining premises.
Three years later
he absorbed the
shop next door in
Liverpool Street.
Remodelled and
furnished it formed
a welcome addition
to the ladies’ de-
partment. Mr. Fay’s
only reason for not
further extending
. O
his field of action is
that there is no
more space avail-
able. Mr. Fay im-
ports the bulk of
his goods and al-
ways carries a large
and varied stock.
He buys “ first
hand ’ 5 for cash
of the manufac-
turers.


riN DEMAN b “CAWARRA”
WINES. The firm of 11. J.
Lindeman & Co., one of the
leading houses in the Australian
wine trade both as producers and
merchants, has been in existence
since the later forties. Indeed it is
the oldest and to-day the most
extensive business of its kind in
Australasia. The wine industry of
Australia owes a great deal to the
foresight, courage, and ability of the
late Dr. H. ). Lindeman, the founder
of the firm. Before coming to
Australia this gentleman had had
no special connection with grape-
growing and wine-making, but had
travelled through the wine districts
of France and Germany, and had
otherwise become interested in the
industry. The knowledge gained by
him was speedily put to good use by
starting on the Paterson River at
the end of 1843, what was afterwards
to become the famous “ Cawarra ”
vineyard. Everything at that stage
was in the nature of experiment, and
so Dr. Lindeman planted a large
variety of vines. Gradually those
varieties found unsuitable to the soil
and climate were eliminated. With-
in a few years the “Cawarra” wines
began to acquire a reputation, and
presently the demand for them over-
ran the supply. Rather than sell
young and unmatured wines, as is
too often done to the detriment of
the repute of Australian wine, Dr.
Lindeman advertised that no more
“ Cawarra ” wines could be supplied
for a year or two. The policy thus
early initiated of selling nothing but
pure and matured wines has been
maintained ever since, and so the
reputation of the concern has been
built up. As experience was gained,
Dr. Lindeman became convinced
that while Cawarra was an ideal
place for the growth of dry wines,
the heavy sweet wines could best be
grown elsewhere, and so he bought
from a pioneer Riverina grower his
vineyard at Corowa. The heavier
soil and climate of this Murray-side
vineyard produced a distinct effect
upon the grapes. The varieties pro-
duced at Corowa are shiraz, muscat,
madeira, and sherry. Australian
taste, so far, is towards sweet wines,
even to a shade of sweetness in the
sherry, as opposed to European
liking for the dry. The differences
effected by soil and climate on the
same grapes have long been one of
the most interesting subjects of study
in connection with wine-growing.
In their northern vineyard on the
Paterson, and their southern on the
Riverina, the Messrs. Lindeman
have two interesting contrasts. The
shiraz grape that is grown at Corowa
makes a wine as heavy as a port ;
transplanted to Cawarra it makes
a delicate light claret. Verdillo
grapes grown in the south make a
heavy, sweet madeira ; in the north
they make a delicate hock. This,
Mr. C. F. Lindeman says, is chiefly
due to the climate, for in the Hunter
River district, and the Riverina they
have similar soils. The Sydney
cellars of Messrs. Lindeman & Co.
are at the Queen Victoria Markets,
George Street, and constitute the
most extensive cellars in Australia.
To those who have visited them
they must have been a revelation
and an education. If the Municipal
Council of Sydney had had it in
mind, they could not, when excavat-
ing for these underground markets,
have provided more suitably for the
conditions of one huge artificial cave
for the storage of wine. The
main cellar is 200 feet long by
90 feet broad and includes the
whole width of the space between
George and York Streets, giving a
total area of 468,000 cubic feet.
Being so well lighted and placed,
they are in some respects even
superior to the natural caves of the
champagne country. One of the
advantages of the cellar is that it
provides a most equable temperature,
there being rarely a greater differ-
ence than 8 deg. at any time of
the year. Usually the temperature
ranges from about 62 deg. to 70 deg.
Access is gained by way of an office
which faces York Street, and with
persons taking wine in or out, the
carts are driven on to a huge
hydraulic lift, which transports them
bodily to the floor below. This is*
probably, the most powerful lilt in
Sydney. In the cellar are rows 01
casks of 1,000 gallons capacity, but
these are dwarfed by the double
rows of many twice diis size. These
are all of solid oak imported for the
purpose, for the firm hold that to
properly mature wine, oak is the
most satisfactory wood, and all Ihe
firm’s casks are of this timber. The
big casks have man-holes, which en-
able them to be properly cleaned
out ; and this work is assisted by
steam, supplied by a high-pressure
engine erected in the cellars. The
cellars provide accommodation for
something over 300,000 gallons of
wine. In addition, over 10,000
dozen of bottled wine are slacked
away in bins, with a capacity of 200
dozen each. With regard to the
quality of “ Cawarra” wines, very little
need be said in this article. They
are already world-famed for their
purity, body, and flavour. To refer
to the prizes obtained by this firm in
London, Paris, Bordeaux, Calcutta,
and elsewhere, is to mention an
almost everyday occurrence. In an
analytical report of the chemist to
the Department of Agriculture, New
South Wales (signed by Mr. F. B.
Guthrie, F.C.S.), Lindernan’s wines
were shown to be absolutely pure.
There are twenty-three varieties
of red and white bottled wines to
which the firm of H. J. Lindeman
attach their well-known label. A
few years back the New South Wales
Government offered four national
prizes at Albury, for which the best
vineyards in Australia competed.
Mr. Lindeman secured all four for
the best collection of while dry wine,
red dry wine, white sweet wine, and
red sweet wine. Each succeeding
year at the Royal Agricultural So-
ciety’s Exhibition in Sydney, “Caw-
arra” wines secure the bulk of the
wine prizes. In 1901, forty-six prizes
were annexed, including nineteen
first and two special prizes. The
following year the number of prizes
annexed reached fifty-two, including
twenty-five firsts and a number of
specials.


NEWCASTLE
It is, perhaps, to repeat a trite and well-worn obser-
vation to say that the British Empire owes much,
if not most, of its present glory and grandeur and
material wealth to the splendid patriotism, courage,
enterprise and navigating skill of that magnificent
fighting force —the British navy.
The services rendered to the nation, and, it may
fairly be claimed, to humanity and civilisation the
world over, by the men who have commanded and
manned “Britain’s bulwarks,’’ whether “wooden
walls ’’ or steel-clad floating forts, are not to be mea-
sured by any known standard of value ; but they make
a page of history, the perusal of which must ever kindle
the eye and stir the blood of the least emotional of
the race, that has the proud privilege of kinship with
such heroes and devoted servants of their country.
The name of James Cook is, of course, indelibly
graven upon the historical records of the Empire, as
There has been much animated controversy as to
v
the precise date of Shortland’s discovery, some
authorities contending that it took place on 16th
September, 1797, others maintaining that the fateful
visit was made a week earlier, viz,, on 9th of the same
month. This latter view is, without doubt, the correct
one, for it is supported by no less an authority than
Shortland himself. A facsimile of the gallant officer’s
original chart of the harbour has the words, “ Dis-
covered this river, 9th September, 1797.” That
statement regarding the date may therefore be taken
as conclusive,
Leaving this phase of the subject, it will not be
out of place to give a brief review of the career of the
man who must of necessity figure most conspicuously
in any historical sketch of Newcastle.
In passing it may be mentioned that in certain
people’s minds confusion has arisen respecting the
Newcastle Harbour,
that of the man who added thereto this vast continent
of Australia.
There is another name which is worthy of a high
and lasting place upon the nation’s roll of explorers
and discoverers ; and. although the chief event of his
career (from an Australian point of view) bears no
comparison in importance with the achievement of
Cook, which was consummated when he hoisted the
Union Jack on the site that is now known to us
as Kurnell, on 28th April, 1770, still the name
of John Shortland. the younger, will always be
honoured for the skill, sagacity and seamanship dis-
played, when he quickly recognised the natural ad-
vantages of the hitherto undiscovered harbour, and,
boldly sailing his boat in over its uncharted waters,
past what was then a cone-shaped islet at the entrance
—the “ Nob,” —took the first step in the establish-
ment of the present second most populous city of
New South Wales, and the port of shipment for the
richest and most extensive coalfield south of the
equator.
actual discoverer of the waterway now called the
Hunter River and Newcastle Harbour, by reason of
the similarity in the name, rank and profession of
the two Shortlands—father and son, —and the fact
that both served in the navy at the headquarters of
the station, Port Jackson, though at different periods,
and by more than one writer the credit for the dis-
covery is wrongly awarded to John Shortland, senior,
instead of to his son.
Lieutenant (afterwards Captain) Shortland,
Discoverer of the Coal (now Hunter) River.
John Shortland, junior, was born on September
sth, 1769, and, following the example of his father,
and, indeed, many of his ancestors, early manifested
a bent for a sailor’s life. At twelve years of age he
entered the navy as a midshipman, and made his
first voyage under his father, who was in command
of some transports carrying troops to Quebec * He
subsequently served in the “Surprise ” frigate, under
Captain Ferguson, and on the West Indies station in the


‘‘ Latona” frigate. In 1787, when the first expedition
to New South Wales was being fitted out, in connec-
tion with which his father was appointed agent of
transports, young Shortland was posted to the brig
“ Sirius,” commanded by Commodore Phillip ; his bro-
ther, T. G. Shortland, also being a midshipman on
board. The small fleet having arrived in Port Jacksom
in January, 1788, and the prisoners forming the bulk
of the population of the newly formed settlement,
having been landed, the “ Sirius’ ’ proceeded to Norfolk
Island, where later on she was wrecked.
Young Shortland won great praise from his
superiors and the ship’s company generally by his
plucky efforts to save life and property in this disaster;
and his conduct on the occasion was a prime factor in
the formation of the-bond of true friendship which
tralian station that he (Shortland) discovered the
river, which he subsequently named after his old
commander, the then Governor of the settlement. In
1800 the ■■Reliance ” once more cast anchor in English
waters, and. having been strongly recommended for
advancement by Governor Hunter, Shortland was
promoted to the rank of commander, and commanded
in succession the ‘‘Pandora,’’ ‘‘Dolphin,’’ “ from-
pet.se,” and finally the ship “ Irmon,” which had
been captured from the French.
It was while captain of the latter that, in a
desperate fight against four French men-of war,
on December 13th, 1809, he was so severely wounded
that death ensued after five weeks of great suffering,
and he succumbed, a prisoner of war at Basse Terre,
on January 21st, 1810. He was buried with full
Nobbys, Newcastle, 1905.
continued throughout their lives between himself and
Captain Hunter, who had succeeded to the command
of the “ Sirius ’’when Cr.pta n Phillip became Governor
of the infant colony of New South Wales. Upon his
return to England Shortland was, with his captain
and the other offices of the “ Sirius,” tried by court
martial for having lost the vessel, but all were acquitted
of blame and had their swords restored to them.
He was shortly afterwards promoted to the rank
of lieutenant and posted to the u Arrogant.” Early in
1795 his friend,, Captain Hunter, was appointed
Governor of New South Wales, and at once selected
Shortland as first lieutenant of the ‘ Reliance,” the ship
in which he was to make the voyage from England ;
and it was while serving in this capacity on the Aus-
naval and military honours from his gallant foes as
well as his own countrymen.
In the limited space available here it is impos-
sible to do full justice to the life’s worth of this
capable and courageous officer ; but enough has surely
been set down to entitle his memory to the gratitude
and admiration of Britons everywhere, and especially
of the people of Newcastle and New South Wales as
a whole, who have profited so largely by his devotion
to duty, enterprise, and keen foresight, all of which
qualities be it noted, were exercised without any
selfish motives of personal benefit or aggrandisement,
but with duty as his sole guiding principle. In
his chart of the harbour and river, already referred to,
the various points and heads are named by him after


notabilities of the period ; but he modestly refrained
trom any obtrusion of his own name, and, except for
the \ ery belated action taken by the Newcastle Muni-
cipal Council during the centerary celebrations, in
18.,7, in naming an insignificant strip of land adjoining
the sea-beach ” Shortland Park,” there is to this day
in the entire port and district nothing to indicate an
acknowledgment by the community of its debt to
J ohn Shortland, the younger.
The Discovery.
The circumstances leading to the discovery of the
Coal River ’ ’ had their origin in one of the out-
breaks of mutiny and insubordination, which were of
frequent occurrence among the convicts at Port
J ackson under the atrocious rule of what is known as
the system ” ; and as the story is well told in
Collins’ account of the English colony of New South
Wales from the first settlement, 1788 to 1801, vol. 2,
ceeded with the other, a whaleboat as far as Port
Stephens, where he thought it probable they might
have taken shelter, but on the 19th he returned, having
been absent thirteen days, without having discovered
the smallest traces of them or the boat. His pursuit,
however, had not been without its advantages, for on
his return he entered a river, which he named Hunter
River, about ten leagues to the southward of Port
Stephens, into which he carried three fathoms water
in the shoalest part of its entrance, finding deep water
and good anchorage within. The entrance to this
river was but narrow, and covered by a high, rocky
island, lying right off it, so as to leave a good passage
round the north end of the island between that and
the shore. A reef connects the south part of the
island with the south shore of the entrance of the
river. In this harbour was found a very considerable
quantity of coal of a very good sort, and lying so near
the waterside as to be conveniently shipped, which
Fort Scratchley (formerly Lighthouse Hill).
page 48, it may be reproduced as follows:— ‘' Sep-
tember, 1797- —This month began with a very vexa-
tious circumstance. A boat named the ‘ Cumber-
land,’ the largest and best in the colony belonging
to the Government, was on her passage to the
Hawkesbury. whither she was carrying a few stores,
when she was taken possession of by a part of the
boat’s crew, being at the same time boarded by a
small boat from the shore, the people in which seized
her and put off to sea, first landing the coxswain and
three others who were unwilling to accompany them,
at Pittwater, in Broken Bay. Those men proceeded
overland to Port Jackson, where they gave the first
information of this daring and piratical transaction.
Two boats, well manned and armed, were immediately
despatched after them under the command of Lieu-
tenant Shortland, of the ‘ Reliance.’ One of these
boats returned in a few days without having seen
anything of them, but Lieutenant Shortland pro-
gave it in this particular a manifest advantage over
that discovered to the southward. Some specimens
of this coal were brought up in the boat.”
In a letter to his father, of which the following is
a copy, Shortland furnishes a few additional particulars
of the new-found river :
“ H.M.S. ‘Reliance,’
“Sydney Cove, Port Jackson,
loth Sept., 1798.
My Dear Father, —About a twelve month since
I went on an expedition in the Governor’s whaleboat
as far as Port Stephens, which lies 100 miles northward
of this place, In my passage down I discovered a very
fine river, which I named after Governor Hunter.
The enclosed I send being an eye-sketch which I took
the little time I was there.
“ Vessels from 50 to 250 tons may load there
with ease, and completely landlocked.
“ - T dare say in a little time this river will be a


great acquisition to this settlement, the short time
1 remained at this river we had rain, which prevented
my doing so much as I otherwise should.
“J. Shortland.”
These two short excerpts give in condensed form
the account of the birth of a great commercial and
industrial centre, and if the spirit of the hardy young
lieutenant of the “ Reliance ” could now revisit the
scene what, a marvellous change he would behold in
the Newcastle of to-day, contrasted with the sylvan
solitudes and panorama of almost untrodden bush
lands which met his gaze as he steered his whaleboat
At Newcastle Wharf.
past the “Nob” on that day of early Australian
spring 109 years ago !
Coal Production.
The fact that Newcastle owes its present position
as a prosperous city and port mainly, if not entirely,
to the rich carboniferous measures that underlie both
should be an all-sufficing reason for allotting to coal
pride of place in an article of this nature, As will
have been seen in the extract from Collins’ history,
Mr. Shortland was quick to detect the existence of this
mineral in considerable quantities when he landed at
the port, and evidence of the light in which he viewed
the place is afforded by the names given by him
(at the first) to the waterway —“ Coal River ”
and of “Coal Island” to the “Nob” islet (now
known as “ Nobbys ”) at the mouth of the harbour.
The christening of the “ Coal River ” as Hunter’s or
Hunter River as a tribute of respect to his former
captain, and then Governor, was evidently an after-
thought. The mineral riches disclosed to the keen
eyes of Shortland were made little use of until several
years later, and the first vessel to carry away a small
cargo of the coal to Sydney was the brig “ Anna
Josepha.” It was apparently the intention of
Governor Hunter to send Lieutenant Shortland on a
surveying tour along the northern coast with instruc-
tions to pay special attention to the Coal or Hunter
River ; but this was abandoned, and nothing of moment
occurred until 1801, when in June of that year,
Governor King instructed Lieutenant Grant, RN., to
fit up the brig “ Lady Nelson,” 60 tons, for a survey-
ing cruise, and proceed to survey the Hunter and
its tributaries.
Accompanying Grant in the “Lady Nelson”
were Lieutenant-Colonel Paterson. Ensign Barrallier,
Surgeon Harris, six soldiers, a miner named Platt, two
surveyors, a pilot named Reid (who was previously
master of the schooner “ Martha.” and while trading
in this vessel mistook the entrance to Lake Macquarie
for that of Newcastle, a blunder that is still comm mo-
rated by the name “Reid’s Mistake,” borne by a
point at the Lake Macquarie Heads), and an aboriginal
native named Bungarey. Leaving Port Jackson on
10th June, the “ Lady Nelson.” accompanied by the
colonial schooner “ Francis,” took four days on the
trip; and when the little expedition arrived off the port
the two vessels, owing to the wind failing, had to be
towed in by their boats, and anchor was dropped
under the lee of the “ Nob,” or “ Coal Island,” until
the following day, when they were towed up the har-
bour and made fast to a tree on the bank near a sawpit.
which was dug by the crew of the brig “ Anna
Josepha,” the pioneer of traders to Newcastle. The
leaders of the party carried out their instructions
faithfully, and after a stay of six weeks—during which
the harbour and river were thoroughly surveyed, and,
in addition, a long journey was made up the latter
to where Singleton now stands, and the subsequently
named Paterson and Williams Rivers, tributaries
of the Hunter, were explored for a considerable dis-
tance —the “Lady Nelson” returned to Port Jackson,
While these surveying operations were proceeding
the schooner “ Francis ” loaded a cargo of the coal,
which outcropped in abundance along the foreshores
of the harbour on the south side ; and on reaching
Port Jackson it was sold and transhipped to a vessel
engaged in the Indian trade Prior to this, as some
accounts show, but as others would indicate just about
the same time or later, the brig “ Anna Josepha ”
brought a cargo of the mineral to Sydney, which being
sold into a vessel bound for Capetown realised the
substantial price of £6 per ton on delivery there-
The credit for inaugurating Newcastle’s present exten-
sive oversea coal trade may therefore be divided


between these two vessels—the schooner “ Francis ”
and the brig Anna Josepha.” Shortland’s report
upon the existence of good coal had, however, not
been entirely ignored, though the information might
have been used to better advantage.
From about the end of 1797 small quantities
of the coal were carried away to Port Jackson in craft
of various sizes. The first serious conflict with the
blacks took place in connection with the visit of a
couple of these miniature colliers towards the end
of 1799. The crews, while at work digging and trans-
ferring; the coal to the boats, were attacked by the
aborigines, who succeeded in capturing one of them
—that is to say, the boat and the men belonging to
it. The other escaped, and on its arrival in Sydney
the occurrence was reported to Governor Hunter,
who sent a party under Mr. A. Hacking to succour
the men and recover the boat. Hacking found the
latter minus its sails and contents, but failed to see
any trace of the crew. Meeting a large body of
armed natives he questioned them, and being dis-
satisfied with their statement that 1 he men had gone
to Sydney, he, after using threats without avail,
attacked them, and a fight ensued, wherein several of
the natives were wounded Mr. Hacking then returned
to Port Jackson in the belief that the sailors had been
killed, but this was not so. for the aborigines were
proved to have spoken truthfully, and the missing men
soon put in an appearance at Port Jackson, having
journeyed overland.
During these last three years of the eighteenth
and the first few years of the nineteenth, century no
attempt to regularly mine the coal was made ; and the
most rough and ready means only were used to secure
cargoes for the small coasters that called at intervals
to take not only coal, but cedar also, which grew
somewhat abundantly along the banks of the upper
part of the river.
The first measure towards establishing a settle-
ment at the port and working the coal with local
prison labour was taken by Governor King, acting on
the advice of Lieutenant-Colonel Paterson, who, upon
the return of the surveying party in the “ Lady
Nelson,’’ of which he was a prominent member, took
pains to impress upon the Governor the great import-
ance of the northern port and the advisability of
turning to good account the mineral riches abounding
there. A party of five soldiers and twelve convicts,
under the command of a corporal named Wixtead,
was sent up to the Hunter River, and the camp was
pitched under the hill upon which Fort Scratchley
now stands, then called Colliers’ Point. The pri-
soners were at once set to work to get out the coal,
and although the methods and appliances employed
were of the most primitive kind, they appear to have
had no difficulty in maintaining a fair output. The
coal was got from seams under the hill, and was what
would now be termed a good second-class article.
After remaining in charge for about two months
Corporal Wixtead was relieved by Assistant-Surgeon
Mason, a man of no little energy, who was appointed
the first regular superintendent of the settlement.
Of the twelve prisoners sent to the Hunter three were
1 ractical miners, and these were assisted by six others,
who acted as do the wheelers and other workmen of
the present day, in bringing the mineral to the surface
and conveying it to the point of loading. The remain-
ing three of the gang were the cooks and camp-minders
of the party.
When Dr. Mason assumed duty the output of coal
was three tons per day, but he procured some im-
proved appliances from headquarters and soon showed
a better result. Among the stores sent to him at his
request were a number of wheelbarrows, in which the
coal was conveyed from the mine, over planks laid
on the sand, to the place of storage on the beach in
the harbour. In a letter dated November 21st, 1801,
addressed to Governor King, Dr. Mason wrote ;
“ I have 3,200 baskets of coal at hand, or 190 tons,
if the baskets weigh one hundredweight each. With
three miners and three carriers or wheelers I can raise
180 baskets, or nine tons, per day. One mine is 34
yards underground, one 31 yards, and another 10
yards. I can set nine mi'.ers to work immediately,
and, with one drawer for each, can raise ibo tons per
week. The stratum of coal we are now working is
Newcastle Cranes.
three feet thick, out of which there is 14 inches of
clay and other rubbish, so we have but 22 inches of
neat coal ; over this there is a stratum of 18 inches of
good coal. In Freshwater Bay I can open a mine
where there is a stratum of three feet of neat coal under-
neath the above two strata, where the coals are of
superior quality. I can open mines to set 20 men to
work in Freshwater Bay, and if there are not miners
in the country, then many ruffians may be made good
miners and a wharf run out to reduce labour, so that
the schooner may be laden in 12 hours.”
The pious suggestion of the worthy doctor for
converting a number of the “ ruffians ” into good,
practical miners, with liberal help, no doubt
from “ the cat ” appears to have been disregarded ;
for no great advance was achieved in respect to the
quantity of coal produced for several years afterwards-
The mining was in the hands of the Government,
and private individuals were debarred from procuring
coal with their own or with hired labour, unless that
of the convicts; but, before this latter labour could be
engaged, the employers were compelled to provide


themselves with a permit in accordance with the fol-
lowing general order, issued by Governor King in 1804 :
“General Order, 1804, The Governor having been
informed that the coalmines at Newcastle have been
dug in a most shameful manner, without leaving
props, which has occasioned much labour, to remedy
the mischief caused by these defects, the commandant
at Newcastle is directed not to allow individuals to
work the coal, as the prisoners will be employed at
that labour under professional miners, and in getting
cedars from the upper part of the river and bringing
it to Newcastle ready to embark for Government
purposes, as well as to supply individuals (having the
Governor’s permission) with cedar at the rate of i|d.
per superficial foot in the log and 10s. per ton for
coal. And should any individual require the labour
of such prisoners as the commandant may allow, they
are to pay at the rate of 3s 6d. for each man’s rations
and labour per diem and 6d. for the use of barrows,
baskets, &c. The payment for the coals and cedar
thus furnished or the hire of labour is to be made in
receive a certificate from the person in charge previous
to leaving the river, and, on arrival in Sydney, to
declare on oath the quality of coals, timber, &c., on
board. Security to be given for the payment of the
King’s dues as follows :—-
Dues and Fees.
£ s - d -
License from the Governor’s Secretary to go for
Coals .. .. .. .. .. ..050
Entrance in the River to person in command
there .. .. .. .. .. ..026
Clearance Certificate .. .. .. ..026
King’s Dues.
For each ton of Coals for house consumption, to
be paid to the Naval Officer .. .. .. 026
For each ton exported from the River to Sydney 050
For every 1,000 feet square of timber for house
consumption .. .. .. .. ..100
For every 1,000 feet square of timber for
exportation .. .. .. ..200
Metage per ton on Coal ~ .. .. ..010
Measurement of Timber, per 1,000 feet .. 020
Additional regulations forbade vessels to enter or leave
the harbour between sunset and sunrise ; and the
Leaving for Sydney.
wheat or live stock, paid into his Majesty’s stores at
Sydney. — Philip Gidley King.”
This order was the corollary of another ordinance,
in which his Excellency formally proclaimed all coal,
timber, and other natural products at the Hunter
River to be the property of the Crown. Moreover,
no vessel was allowed to even proceed there from
Sydney without a special license or permit from the
Governor, upon which was specified the purpose of
the trip ; and the holder thereof was called upon to
enter into a bond to the amount of £SO, with two
sureties of £25 each, for the due performance of the
conditions of the license and the observance of the
following regulations : To use only one kind of
basket, weighing one hundredweight ; to measure the
coals into and out of the vessel ; to take a regular
clearance from the’naval officer ; to enter the vessel
with the person in command at the river and to give
him a daily account of coals taken on board; to
masters thereof were prohibited from employing pri-
soners without the commandant’s permission, and
from supplying them with liquor. In order to guard
against the escape of prisoners masters of vessels
were notified that they would be held liable if any of
these men swam off to the vessel from the shore, or
were found to have secreted themselves on board.
It was also ordered that no person should be taken to
or from the settlement, unless with the permission of
the Governor or commandant.
A stimulus was given to the production of coal by
the decision of the Governor (King) to establish
Newcastle as a penal settlement for the reception
of men convicted at the Supreme Court in Sydney ;
and in April, 1804, the new penal settlement
was formed, and Mr. Charles Throsby was ap-
pointed its commandant. His command consisted
of twenty soldiers and twenty convicts, and the
latter were first employed in clearing the land


right up to what is now the Upper Reserve of the
timber and scrub that encumbered it. A number of
wooden huts were then erected, and with the making
of roads in various directions, and the marking out
of the land in blocks the place began to assume some
semblance of a township. When in 1813 Mr. Throsby
was succeeded by Lieutenant Skottowe, the little
garrison was increased to two sergeants and forty-
three rank and file, with Surgeon William Evans and
Storekeeper John Tucker, and there were 290 convicts
at the settlement. A year later Lieutenant Thompson
had under his charge 704 convicts, of whom 121 were
women, and in 1816, when Captain Wallis was ap-
pointed commandant, the total was raised to 1,000,
of both sexes. Considerable progress was made at
burning of sea-shells for lime. Stern as had been the
regime of Cap ain Wallis and his predecessors, their
methods were comparatively mild when contrasted
with those of Major Morrisett, who became com-
mandant in 1821, and from the day he took over con-
trol the whistle of the lash was heard incessantly.
Small wonder that King’s Town, the name given to
the settlement by Governor Sir Thomas Brisbane, was
abhorred by the convicts, and transference thereto
was almost as much dreaded by them as was removal
to Norfolk Island.
Captain Currie, of H.M.S. “ Satellite,” the first
man-of-war to enter the harbour, wrote a graphic
description of life at the King’s Town post, in which
the following passage occurs : —‘ ‘ King Lash is master
The Dyke, Newcastle
this time, and. among other works accomplished, was
the building of the breakwater, still extant, running
from the reef on the south side of Nobbys to the
mainland at Collier’s Point, and the construction of
a wharf for coal vessels at the bottom of High Street,
now known as Watt Street. Prior to the erection of
this wharf vessels were moored to trees on the harbour
foreshores, and the work of loading them was a slow,
as well as a dangerous, process. About this time a
branch settlement was formed at Limeburners’ Bay,
up the river, where the worst of the prisoners were
located and where the discipline was of the harshest.
These poor wretches were not only ruled with savage
severity, but their labour was very hard and ex-
hausting, their occupation being the gathering and
in the penal settlement, at the mouth of the Coal
River. I am glad the Government are removing the
convicts to Port Macquarie, but I suppose the same
thing will prevail there. The commandant argues
that the men have to be flogged when they become
unruly, or they would rise and cut the throats of every
free man in the place. There are over 1.000 convicts
there and of them 250 are women. Some of them are
the mod degraded creatures on God’s earth. What-
ever goodness there was in them when they veie
sentenced in England was lost in the voyage out, as
a rule ; and I do say that not more than 10 per cent
ever reform. One morning I saw 32 men tied to the
triangles and flogged. One of them got 50 lashes, and
the others received from 20 upwards. The floggers


are all convicts who have got their tickets, and some
of them appeared to be worse ruffians than the poor
brutes they flogged. ‘ This is a light morning,’ the
commandant said. ‘ Three months ago we would
have the cat going all day, but the brutes are getting
quietened.’ He is a great believer in the lash, this
burly major, and he says that if there is more flogging
in his settlement than at Parramatta, there is less
hanging, as he has only executed seven men in three
years.”
Mr. John Bingle—who was instructed by Governor
Brisbane to proceed, in command of HM. colonial
sloop ‘ ‘ Sally,” on a voyage to examine and complete
the survey of the coast between Sydney and Torres
Straits, with especial directions to report upon
martial law reig> ed over all, including the seafaring
men visiting the port. Under this law any person
not provided with a written pass from the commandant
found out of doors after dark was arrested and con-
fined in the stockade, which was situated where the
Custom House now stands.
Every commandant found the most trying and
difficult task required of him was that of preserving
order among and managing the women convicts.
Captain Wallis, in the year 1816 —with the object of
freeing the better class women from the contamination
of the hopelessly vicious and disorderly among these
to-be-pitied victims of criminal surroundings in their
youth and the workings of a penal code, brutal and
vengeful rather than humane and reformative estab-
Newcastle Terminus.
Moreton Bay —also called at the King’s Town settle
ment ; and he, too, was deeply impressed by the
severity of the measures adopted by the commandant
to enforce discipline.
At this time—lB2l—most of the dwellings out-
side the stockade were huts occupied by men who had
completed their sentences, and by ticket-of-leave men
who had earned their partial liberty by good conduct.
Permission was given to these persons to engage in
business or other lawful pursuits, and many of them
opened small shops or worked at various trades.
Though enjoying a measure of freedom, the inhabit-
ants, free as well as ticket-of-leave, were subjected to
strict control by the authorities, and until 1822
lished on Nobbys a separate stockade for the
treatment of the refractory ones. The inmates of
this prison within a prison numbered at times nearly
a fourth of the women convicts of the settlement.
Here it may be mentioned that Nobbys, which
was thus used as an island penitentiary for poor
degraded womanhood, but is now rendering, through
the fine lighthouse on its crest, noble service to the
‘ ‘ men who go down to the sea in ships ” had at one
time a narrow escape from total destruction. In the
year 1854 a wiseacre, named Colonel Barney. R.E.,
conceived the idea that the width of the channel at
the entrance to the harbour could be increased, and
the safety of shipping trading to the port promoted,


by the removal of Newcastle’s most distinctive natural
feature. His proposals were viewed favourably by
Sydney officialdom, and the vandalistic colonel went
enthusiastically about the work of blowing Nobbys
into the sea. Tunnels were driven in the hill and
between two and three tons of gunpowder were
placed where it was thought likely to do most good—
or harm. The people of Newcastle held indignation
meetings and sent petitions to the Governor, protesting
against this fatuous scheme of destruction ; but to no
purpose, and the fate of Nobbys seemed to be
sealed, when Mr. Thorn, of Sydney, a man of high
social standing, and an intimate friend of the
Governor’s, whose influence was enlisted by the New-
castleites, intervened, and by earnest representations
colonel, for, probably as a consolation to him in his
disappointment at being robbed of the pleasure of
blowing it up, he was allowed to cut away about thirty
feet of the cone and to flatten the top to the shape
it still retains. Though this took away from the
picturesque appearance of the hill, it enhanced its
utility; for, as stated, a lighthouse —well staffed and
equipped—now stands guard on the top, and on many
a wild, tempestuous night the rays from its lantern
shine out across the angry waters —a guide and a
warning to the storm-tossed mariner.
The “Coal Island’’ of the early days lost its
geographical title by being connected with the main-
land by the breakwater. This was constructed, by
convict labour, between the southern side of Nobbys
Coal Pit, Newcastle.
to the Governor, succeeded in inducing him to stay
Colonel Barney’s destructive course, and Nobbys
was reprieved. It is a matter for regret and surprise
that the citizens did not display their gratitude in
some lasting way to Mr. Thorn for having preserved to
them this grand old landmark, which must be known
now in every corner of the globe where a mercantile
flag flies. There does exist in Newcastle a small side
thoroughfare named “ Thorn Street’’; but it takes its
title from a worthy though undistinguished ex-alder-
man, and not from the man who saved Nobbys
from such a doom. Nobbys did not altogether
escape the iconoclastic attentions of the engineer-
and the old Beacon Hill (whereon Fort Scratchley and
the Signal Station now stand), so called because of
the beacon fires lighted on its summit to warn
shipping. The last fi;e was lighted on the last day
of the year 1857, when the present lighthouse came
into operation.
End of the Penal Settlement.
The view that Newcastle was not a suitable place
for a convict settlement was held for some little time
by the authorities in Sydney. To them it became
patent that, with its great mineral riches and other
obvious natural advantages, Newcastle was destined to


be a great centre of commerce and industry. Governor
Sir Thomas Brisbane gave effect to this view in 1822,
when a number of free men of good stamp had ex-
pressed their desire to take up land in the neighbour-
hood if the convicts were removed ; and, after a life
of about eighteen years, the removal of the settlement
to Port Macquarie was commenced. By February,
1823, the work was completed, and very soon after-
wards Newcastle was proclaimed a free settlement.
Although the convict station was thus broken up, the
town was not entirely freed of the prisoner element.
Some of the worst class convicts were retained, and,
being housed in the gaol that stood on the site of the
present tram terminus, they were employed in
reclamation works in the harbour, and a little coal-
mining also was carried on by them. In 1855 these
Newcastle Bowling Club’s well-kept green. In 1823
there was a good demand for coal, and the price was
1 os- per ton. The Government thus derived a con-
siderable profit on the coal won by convict labour,
seeing that no wages had to be paid for hewing and
placing it on shipboard.
In 1826 the Government decided to abandon coal-
mining, and the following year leased the mines to the
Australian Agricultural Company. Three years later
the company, at the instance of the Government, took
over control of coalmining at Newcastle, with which
was given the sole right to produce the mineral, and
a grant of 2,000 acres in the vicinity of the town, and
all mineral rights belonging thereto. The conditions
attaching to these valuable concessions were:—“ One-
twentieth of the coal raised to be allotted to the Crown.;
Coke Works.
prisoners were removed, the gaol was abandoned, and
the last trace of convict ism vanished from Port
Hunter.
Growth of the Coal Trade.
The first mines worked were either adits driven
into the seams that outcropped in the vicinity of the
harbour or mere ‘ ‘ pot-holes ’ ’ sunk on the same
seams. Manned by unskilled and careless convict
workmen, loss of life and injury to limb were of fre-
quent occurrence. Not until 1817 were any regular
mining shafts put down. Then one was sunk where
the Borough Markets stand and another in the Upper
Reserve, the mouth of which latter was filled in about
eighteen years ago, and now forms the bed of the
the company to purchase the coal or any part of it
at the pit’s mouth at the market price, provided the
Crown deemed it advisable to sell the same to them.”
The company’s monopoly was claimed by them to
hold good for thirty-one years, viz., until iB6O, but in
the early forties the Rev. Mr. Threlkeld and Messrs.
J. and A. Brown, Nott, Bales, Donaldson, and others
began to work seams in various parts of the district,
in defiance of the Australian Agricultural Company, or
rather of the Government. Ultimately the Attorney-
General in 18q6, on behalf of the Crown and inciden-
tally of the company, took legal proceedings to asseit
what was deemed to be the right of the Government
to grant and the company to enjoy the monopoly,
and a case was commenced in the Supreme Court in


Sydney against the Messrs. Brown for entering upon
certain lands, the property of the Queen and obtaining,
without authority, coal from such lands. The jury
returned a verdict for the plaintiff for one shilling-
damages, each side to pay its own costs. On appeal
the verdict was upheld by the Full Court. The fol-
lowing year the Australian Agricultural Company
arranged with the Government to forego their mono-
poly, and thereby the way was opened up for the
enormous expansion in the trade that has since taken
place. In 1831 the company were getting the coal
from two shafts, sunk in the hill on the western side
of Brown Street and overlooking the harbour, to which
the coal was conveyed for shipment at the staith at
the foot of that street, along a huge wooden staging,
in small waggons or skips. About 120 convicts were
engaged in the work, and these were guarded by a
couple of dozen warders, Later, skilled free miners
were brought out from England by the company, and
reached, for the year ending 31st December 1905, the
enormous quantity of 4,645,742 tons, of the value of
£1,473,995, produced by 28 collieries, employing
10,015 persons. In addition, there was produced in
the district 3,715 tons of coke.
As stated, the foreign trade began to assume
definite shape soon after the Australian Agricul-
tural Company commenced operations, and by 1847
the total sent away oversea was 3,100 tons. The
en ranee into the field of enterprising and energetic
rivals le 1 to a speedy enlargement of the foreign
market, so that a decade afterwards the quantity
exported in a year was 84,553 tons. The founding of
the other colonies opened up fresh avenues of trade,
and in 1867 the total despatched to intercolonial and
foreign ports was 358,022 tons. Truly “by leaps and
bounds ’ ’ has the export trade advanced, and for the
twelve months ending on 31st December last it at-
tained to 3,461,438 tons. This was despatched to
S S. " Namoi " at Wharf.
they gradually supplanted the, in every respect, less
satisfactory convict workmen.
From 1797 to 1829, the period within which the
coal was worked by the Government, the total output
was not more than 50.000 tons, and the value might
be set down at, roughly, £25,000; while in the year
1830, the first of the Australian Agricultural Company’s
life as a coal-owning and working corporation, their
output was 4,000 tons. Most of this was consumed in
the colony, but there was also springing up a demand
for the coal for foreign markets, and especially those
of India and other parts of the East. The Aus-
tralian Agricultural Company’s output rose rapidly,
and in 1840 it reached a total of 34,841 tons, of the
value of £20,905. Seven years subsequently, when the
barrier against other coal-producing proprietaries and
companies was removed, a big impetus was given to
the output ; and, with hardly a check, this has risen
year by year since in remarkable fashion, until it has
buyers in almost every part of the world, but chiefly
to Victoria, South Australia, Chili, New Zealand, Philip-
pine Islands, Sandwich Islands, United States, Tas-
mania, Western Australia, Hongkong and Peru.
Large contributors to the great output for 1905
were the collieries that have been opened up in recent
years in the wonderfully rich coalfield lying to the
southward of Maitland, where seams of coal thirty feet
in thickness, and remarkably free from impurities,
are being worked. The discovery of these new sources
of mineral wealth has been a fortunate happening for
Newcastle ; for the mines in the vicinity of the harbour
are giving out, and without these additional sources of
employment to her people, and attraction to shipping,
Newcastle would soon lose much of her present prestige
and prosperity.
From time to time during the past half-century
the colliery proprietors have combined to regulate
the price of the coal and take other measures to protect


their common interests, but the associations formed
with this object have as a rule, been short lived.
Another effort is now being made to establish among
the proprietors an organisation styled a Vend,
for the purpose of securing, if possible, better prices,
and placing a check on unduly keen competition for
trade, by the various collieries. The preliminary
arrangements to set the movement going have been
made, and there is a good prospect of the successful
launching of the Vend, most, if not all, of the
leading companies having joined. The price obtained
for the coal—naturally a principal factor in the pros-
perity of the district—has fluctuated considerably
since 1829, when the industry passed from the hands
of the Government into those of the Australian Agri-
cultural Company. In that year coal sold at 10s. per
the collieries of the Newcastle and Maitland districts
are trades unionists and belong to the Colliery Em-
ployees’ Federation, which has a membership of about
6,000. The wheelers and some other underground
workers, and many of the top men, screen hands, &c.,
are not enrolled with the coal hewers ; but the majority
of the surface men, engine drivers, &c., have separate
unions, and, as may be supposed, these are in sym-
pathy with the main organisation. The Colliery
Employees’ Federation is ruled by a board composed
of delegates from the colliery lodges throughout the
northern district, with an executive consisting of
Mr. P. Bowling (president), Mr. A. Lewis (treasurer),
and Mr. J. Curley (secretary), a position held by the
latter for many years.
Disputes between the colliery proprietors and
Loading Sleepers.
ton, but for the next ten years it rose and fell between
gs. gd. and 7s. The lowest price recorded was touched
in iß4g, when it fell to 6s. per ton, while no less than
20s. 3d. was received for it in 1854. The present rate
is gs. per ton, and notice has been given by the pro-
prietors of their intention to raise it to 10s.
The miners are paid a mining rate of 3s. 6d. per
ton for clean, round coal, when the selling price is as
it is at present ; and for every shilling of rise or fall in
the price the hewing rate is increased or decreased by
fourpence.
Trades Unionism in the District.
Practically the whole of the miners employed in
the miners on the questions of wages and working
conditions, and leading to strikes and lockouts, have
been of frequent occurrence ; and in some instances
serious disorder prevailed and intense bitterness ol
feeling between the parties was engendered. Happily
in recent years a better spirit has existed on both
sides, and no serious interruption of work has taken
place because of a capital versus labour conflict.
Mining Disasters.
The working of the mines by convict labour in the
infancy of Newcastle was attended by numerous
accidents, a large percentage of which were fatal; but


I he death or maiming of a prisoner was a matter of
small concern to the authorities, and little attention
was paid to ‘ 1 trivial ’ ’ incidents of this kind.
With the improvements in the methods of mining
that have been made in late years accidents, to the
workers underground have been materially lessened,
though, unfortunately, they are still of regrettable
frequency. Compared with mining centres in other
parts of the world, however, that of Newcastle stand?
in a favourable light in this respect. Nevertheless
the community has on several occasions been shocked
by the occurrence in its midst of grave mining dis-
asters, entailing serious loss of life. The first of
these was due to an extensive fall of the roof of the
1898, when fifteen men were killed. This last and
worst event of the kind was followed by a lengthy
and exhaustive inquiry, instituted by the Govern-
ment, one result of which was the introduction for
general use of the miners of this colliery of safety
lamps, instead of the naked lights hitherto carried.
With greater care and the more scientific and up-to-
date principles of working which now prevail, the
prediction may be hazarded that in the future these
disasters from foul gases or falls of roof will be
very seldom heard of.
Shipping.
When the first small but stoutly built brigs and
Loading Coal.
A. A Company’s Borehole Pit, at Hamilton, in 1889,
when eleven men lost their lives. The pit was closed
immediately'after the bodies were recovered. Shortly
afterwards four men were killed by the overwinding
of the cage in which they were being brought to the
surface, at the South Burwood mine. The next
disaster happened in iS'qb, at the Stockton colliery,
when, owing to foul air in the old workings, two firemen
and four members of a party appointed to explore
them (the workings) succumbed to suffocation, and
five men sacrificed their lives in a brave attempt
to rescue their comrades. Another saddening event
of the same nature was the explosion of gas which
took place in the Dudley colliery on 21st March,
schooners began to visit the “ Coal River ” in quest
of cargoes of coal and cedar, their skippers little thought
that they were laying the foundation of a trade that
has made Newcastle, in point of inward and outward
tonnage, excluding mail steamers, the leading port of
Australia and one of the half-dozen most important
ports of the empire.
For the first fifty years of its existence as a coal
producing port Newcastle’s foreign trade was of small
dimensions, the bulk of the coal mined going into
home consumption ; but the attention of the world
being drawn to Australia by the discovery of gold,
ships bringing gold-seekers and cargoes to supply their
wants, required return loading, and were glad to take


coal for such ports as furnished a market for it, and
in this way the oversea trade received a big fillip.
The rush to the goldfields in New South Wales and
Victoria also stimulated the colonial demand, and a
large fleet of sailing colliers quickly sprang into
existence ; those trading between Newcastle and
Sydney bearing the title “ sixty-milers ” —that being
the distance, roughly, between the two ports.
The growth of population, not only in and near
Newcastle, but in the Maitland and Singleton and
other districts of the Hunter River, following upon
the removal of the penal settlement, created a demand
for a line of vessels to carry passengers and cargo
other than coal and timber between Sydney and the
Hunter; and up to 1831 the cutter “ Lord Liverpool,”
commanded by Captain Livingstone, was one of the
vessels that performed this service. Steam was
brought into the traffic in the year mentioned, when
therefore, be credited with having been the pioneer
of the trade to countries outside the British dominions.
The arrivals and departures of vessels of all kinds in
that year probably did net xceed by many one
hundred inwards nd the same number outwards.
The extraordinary progress in the interval is evi-
denced by the Shipping Master’s returns for iqos,
w iich show th t, inclusive of coa-ters, 4,582 vessels
arrived an 1 4,583 sailed between Ist January and
31st December of that year ; and while in the
twenties the capacity of the vessels visiting New-
castle was not more than 250 tons, steamers of over
6,000 tons and sailers of up to nearly 5,000 tons
capacity are now common visitors to the port.
The entrance to the harbour is not an easy one
for ships, especially in rough easterly or southerly
weather ; and a dangerous patch of rock and sand
a little to the northward of the channel, called the
A Forest of Masts.
the paddle-wheelers “Tamar,” “ Sophia Jane” and
“William the Fourth” commenced running. Other
steamers joined in the trade, and in 1835 the Hunter
River Packet Association was formed, to be followed,
five years later, by the Hunter River Steam Navi-
gation Company. A marked improvement in the
service was soon observed ; and, when in 1892, the
last-named company amalgamated with the Newcastle
Steamship Company, which had been running in oppo-
sition for a number of years, there was established
the excellent line of steam communication which
now connects Newcastle with Sydney.
Reverting to the subject of oversea shipping, the
fact is worth noting that the first direct shipment
of coal to a foreign port was made in the year 1824.
The American schooner “War Hawk” then sailed
with 250 tons for Rio de Janeiro, and this vessel may,
Oyster Bank, has proved to be the grave of a
number of fine vessels, and the place of doom to many
human beings. The most disastrous of the wrecks
was that of the steamer “ Cawarra,” in July, 1866,
when the captain and passengers and crew, numbering
in all nearly one hundred souls, were drowned—only
one man escaping.
The Harbour.
Although the entrance to the port is not by any
means what it should be, there are not many harbours
where vessels may lie more s .ugly and safely, once at
their moorings, than in Newcastle; and with a more
liberal expenditure of money by the Government, and
more continuity and regularity in the pushing forward
of improvements, the harbour might be made one of
the most commodious and one of the safest to be found


anywhere. Undoubtedly there has been great pro-
gress made, especially within the last twenty years,
but much remains to be done before the port can be
said to be in a thoroughly efficient condition. The
construction of the stone causeway connecting Nobbys
with the mainland, at what has been variously named
Collier’s Point, Beacon Hill and Allan’s Hill, and
the formation of the southern breakwater running
seaward from Nobbys, were the principal harbour
improvements of the first half-century of the life of
Newcastle. Prior to 1850 the only wharves that had
been built were the one at the foot of Watt .Street
(already mentioned) and that upon which stood the
staiths or shoots of the A.A. Co., in the vicinity of
Brown Street. Scott Street was in those days the
harbour beach or foreshore; and when the railway
between Newcastle and Maitland was about to be
built and the railway station buildings erected where
they now stand, a big scheme of reclamation works
was entered upon, whereby the land was raised and
bit by bit, the “ Dyke,” which is now one of the
finest wharves in the world. The Government also
erected hydraulic cranes, and these are worked from
the power house, adjacent to the Dyke, a large and
well-equipped building, which was opened in 1877.
Thereafter the loading of coal at the Queen’s Wharf
soon ceased, and since 1885 no coal has been shipped
in Newcastle proper except at the A.A. Co.’s shoots.
For many years the Dyke has been lighted by elec-
tricity, and the system is so extensive and effective
that the work of shipping the coal is with ease carried
on by night as well as by day. There are now in use
at the Dyke two hydraulic cranes of a lifting capacity
of 25 tons each, six of 15 tons, and four of g tons. In
the inner basin there are six travelling cranes, capable
of lifting 12 tons each.
The Inner Basin.
Certainly the most useful work performed by the
Government in late years in the direction of improving
S.S. "Newcastle” and “Namoi” in Cowan Bay.
brought into use from Scott Street down to the present
water frontage. Gradually the Queen’s Wharf was
constructed, and coal-loading appliances were installed
thereon. At the Perkin Street portion of the middle,
or Sydney steamers’, wharf staiths were put up, but
eastward the loading of coal was conducted by means
of steam cranes. For about twenty years the bulk
of the coal shipments were made from these cranes
and the staiths ; but the trade advanced so rapidly
that it became necessary for the Government to
increase the shipping facilities, and in 1874 the authori-
ties decided to make Bullock Island the main coal-
loading depot of the port. This island’s principal
geographical features were swamps and mud flats ;
but the stone ballast that had been discharged there
for years, by vessels coming to Newcastle for coal,
enabled the Works Department to reclaim a consider-
able area, and upon a portion of this has been built,
the harbour, has been the reclamation of a large area
to the southward of the Dyke by means of ships’ bal-
last and silt dredged from the harbour bed and pumped
on to the low-lying land, which has been made to serve
as the foundation of the wharves in the new harbour,
or Inner Basin This latter is a highly important ad-
dition to the shipping conveniences of Newcastle, and
is largely availed of by steamers, and to a lesser extent
by sailers, of the greatest tonnage visiting the port.
At the south-eastern corner of this inner harbour
a site has been selected for a graving dock, an adjunct
to the port which, being almost indispensable to such
a place as Newcastle, should have been built years ago.
It is to be hoped that the Government, the members
of which admit the necessity of the dock, will very
shortly free the port of the reproach attaching to the
non-existence of what nearly every shipping centre of
any pretensions in the world possesses.


Railways.
Among the first lines of railway to be laid down
in New South Wales, after the Sydney-Parramatta
railway, was the line from Newcastle to Maitland.
A private company to build and conduct this railway
was formed in Sydney in 1853, with a capital of
£IOO,OOO, in 20,000 shares of £5 each, under the name
of the Hunter River Railway Company. The pro-
visional committee of the company included among
its members Mr. W. C. Wentworth, Sir Charles Nichol-
son, Messrs. T. S. Mort, J. B. Darvall, and Dr. Mitchell.
Having constructed the greater portion of the line,
the company collapsed, and, the Government taking
over the project, the work was completed by the State.
The line became the first link in the Great Northern
section of the present railway system, which runs to
Wallangarra, on the northern border. The official
opening was performed, on March 30th, 1857, by
Governor Sir William Denison, amid the usual
rejoicing and feasting.
Up to 1864 only passenger trains were run between
Newcastle and Singleton, and but one daily each way;
but in this year goods trains were instituted, and,
needless to say, both kinds of traffic have increased
er.or monsly since then, the goods especially, as the
following figures will show :
Wool shipped at Newcastle dur-
ing 1905 .. . . . . bales 14,439
Timber shipped .. .. ft. 2,048,107
Railway sleepers .. .. 3 i 6 j 334
Hay and chaff.. . . . . cwt. 2,980
Manures .. .. .. ~ 1,690
Frozen mutton . . .. .. ~ 51,981
Meats, preserved .. .. ~ 37ffi 2 9
Copper ingots .. .. .. ~ 25122
Silver lead .. .. .. „ 2,2,317
Horses . . . . . . .. 670
Cattle 5 00
Sheep . . .. .. .. 4T9^
All the above were brought to Newcastle by rail, but
the statement does not comprise the whole of the
goods which passed over the up ” line of the Great
Northern line for the year, for great quantities of
wool and the whole of the wheat which was produced
in the north and north-west were hauled past New-
castle, its natural outlet, to be shipped in Sydney.
A vast quantity of goods is also carried from Sydney
and Newcastle northward ; and, altogether between
the haulage of coal, wool, wheat and other pastoral
and agricultural products, live stock and general goods,
and the carriage of passengers, the Great Northern
railway, which had so modest a beginning in 1853, is
about the busiest and most remunerative section of
the entire system of the State.
Political.
Newcastle and the county of Northumberland
have always been noted for the keen interest taken
in the political affairs of the country by the residents ;
and in the days anterior to the granting to New South
Wales of responsible Government, when the partially
elective and partly nominee Legislative Council was
the only parliamentary chamber the people had to
look to, this portion of the colony was represented
therein by W. Foster and D’Arcy Wentworth, from
1843 to 1845 and 1845 to 1848 respectively. The
first representatives of the Newcastle district under
the existing political system were Messrs. N. Hely,
W. H. Piddington and A. W. Scott. In July, 1891,
the Political Labour League candidates captured five
of the six seats of the district, and since then labour,
under somewhat different conditions —single electo-
rates and a reduction in the numerical strength of the
Legislative Assembly—has held a similarly prepon-
derating sway. The present members for the district
are:—Federal: Mr. David Watkins, M.H.R. State;
Newcastle City, Hon. W. T. Dick (Minister without
portfolio); Wickham, Mr. J. L. Fegan ; Kahibah, Mr.
A. Edden ; Waratah, Mr. John Estell ; Northumber-
land, Mr. M. Charlton. The Hons. A. Brown and
G. F. Earp have seats in the Legislative Council.
Municipal.
The incorporation of Newcastle was effected in
185,9. Mr. James Hannell was elected first mayor,
and occupied the chair for the three succeeding years
and again in fB6B and 1869. The municipality is in
the fortunate position of owning much valuable house
and shop property in the city, and on the whole may
be said to be in a financially sound state.
The streets are lighted by electricity, and arrange-
ments are now on foot to supply the light to business
and residential premises throughout the city. An
excellent, though costly, scheme of water supply from
the Hunter River, above Maitland, has been provided,
and a complete system of sewerage for the city is now
in course of construction. Within the next year or
so Newcastle will be one of the best watered, drained
and lighted, and consequently one of the healthiest,
cities in the Commonwealth—or outside of it for that
matter.
The Borough Council for 1906-7 consists of: Aider-
men Arthur H. James (Mayor), M. J. Moroney, D.
Miller, M. A, Fraser, W. Cann, W. J. Ellis, John Gil-
bert, W. M. Levey, M. Light, A. Cook, J. C. Reid and
A. F. Hall ; town clerk, Mr. E. Scott Holland ; as-
sistant town clerk, Mr. Chas. Donaldson; sanitary-
inspector, Mr. Thos. Lloyd ; city engineer, Mr. T. T
Birrell ; city electrician, Mr. Jas. Hus'- ; health officer
Dr. R. Dick.
Mercantile.
There is probably little need to emphasise the
fact that Newcastle is essentially a place of exceeding
mercantile activity. Therefore, most appropriately,
it has an energetic and zealous Chamber of Commerce,
whose aim it is to impress upon the Government de-
partments the many needs of the port and district,
and to secure the freest possible play for the trade and
industry which support them. The original Chamber
of Commerce was founded in 1856, and its first presi-
dent was Mr. John Single, who helped materially to
bring it into existence. This body worked well for
the town, and among the important benefits it brought
to Newcastle was the obtaining for the people in per-
petuity of the picturesque and healthful Upper Reserve
—the city ’s chief park ; but after a fitful life of twenty
years the Chamber disappeared. In 1885 a number
of the leading business men of the city decided to


establish a new Chamber, and the existing one wa
then brought into being. Mr. R. B. Wallace, who
had taken a prominent part in the movement, was
appointed president, Mr. John Wood, vice-president,
Mr. H. J. Corden, honorary treasurer, and Messrs.
Alexander Brown, John Brown, H. R. Cross, M. J.
Dawson, Stewart Keightley, W. B. Sharp and H. E.
Stokes, committee, with Mr. R. Guy as secretary.
From its inception the new Chamber has done
good service for Newcastle, and for the past year or
so has been well to the fore in urging the claims of
the port for a larger measure than it has obtained
latterly of practical aid and attention from the Gov-
ernment and the railway authorities. The council
of the Chamber finds that its hardest and most dis-
heartening task consists in exacting fair and reasonable
treatment for Newcastle from the railway officials,
who apparently are obstinately determined upon
regarding the port as one for the shipment of coal
alone ; ignoring its indisputable right to be the outlet
for the export of all the wool, wheat, and other pro-
matters has been the growth in religious, educa-
tional and philanthropic bodies and institutions. The
earliest place of Divine worship was the Anglican
Church, on the hill overlooking the harbour, a beautiful
and commanding situation. Christ Church, as it was
named, was commenced with prison labour in 1817,
and was completed four years later, and when opened
for service it would have done credit to a much more
pretentious town. The Rev. G. A. Middleton was the
first incumbent. The fine old church weathered the
storms for about sixty years. It was then closed
and the church authorities erected a brick building on
the opposite side of the street, in which service was
conducted until the cathedral, which now stands on
the site of the old church, was built.
For nearly twenty years the Church of England
denomination was the only one rejoicing in the pos-
session of a place of worship, but in 1838 the Roman
Catholic portion of.the community hired a room in
Newcomen Street, which was made to serve the pur-
pose, and for seven years Mass was celebrated and
Excursion to Cowan Bay
ducts of the north and north-west of the State, as well
as the coal from the immediate vicinity. The Chamber
is fighting hard to end the present absurd and unprofit-
able system, and is hopeful of an alteration coming with
the early anticipated change in the railway adminis-
tration.
Another reform being striven for is the creation
of a harbour board for the local management of the
port, instead of the existing method of administering
its affairs by three Government departments.
The present council is composed as follows :
President, Mr. J. M. Hyde; vice-president, Mr. C. S.
Mclntyre ; hon. treasurer, Mr. T. M. O’Neill ; mem-
bers, Messrs. H. Berkeley, J. Campbell Wood, W.
Sparke, S. J. Mitchell, Chas. A. Earp, W. F. Morrow
and M. A. MacDermott ; secretary, Mr. E. Flynn.
Ecclesiastical and Educational.
Commensurate with the progress made in mundane
the other services of the church were held in this room
by the Rev. Father Dowling. In 1845 the priest
became the occupant of a house on the old Gaol Hill,
near where the tram sheds stand, and one of the'
largest of the rooms was used as a chapel until 1852,
when a temporary church was erected in Perkin Street,
which was supplanted ten years later by the brick
edifice bearing the title “ St. Mary’s Star of the Sea,”
that occupies the same site. The Wesleyans built
their first church in Newcomen Street in 1844, with
Rev. Mr. Lewis as the clergyman ; and in 1850 St.
Andrew’s Church, in Watt Street, was erected by the
Presbyterians. Both have long since disappeared,
and the latter body now worships in the handsome
Church of St. Andrew, in Laman Street, while the
Wesleyans and Primitive Methodists hold their
services in the Central Mission Hall, which was
opened by Governor Sir H. H. Rawson in January,
1904.


The Rev. G. A. Middleton, the incumbent of
Christ Church, established the first school in 1823,
and for many years this was the only one ; but in 1859
the Grammar School was opened, and at this scholastic
establishment most of the men of Newcastle who after-
wards achieved success in various walks of life received
the education which fitted them for their careers. Of
the masters who ruled at the Grammar School the
late Rev. H. S. Millard was notably successful. As
denominational education is deemed by Catholics to be
second only to the observance of religion, no surprise
will be felt at the statement that Rev. Father Dowling
established a school in conjunction with his little
chapel in Newcomen Street as far back as 1841, which
is to-day being continued in the basement of the
Perkin Street church by the Marist Brothers.
skilful medical and nursing attention given to them.
The name of Hannell will always be honoured in con-
nection with the hospital. Mr. James Hannell, the
one-time member of Parliament for Newcastle and
mayor of the city, was the prime mover in establishing
the instit tion, and his son, Mr. Clarence H. Hannell,
the shipping master, who has just retired frrm that
office after a service of forty-three years, has for more
than a generatio i been its most whole-hearted friend
and supporter Mr. C. H. Han ell, as he has been for
many years, is the president ; Mr. Joseph Wood, another
enthusiastic worker for the institution, is vice-presi-
dent ; Dr. Harrison is medical superintendent, Mrs.
McAllister, matron, Mr. S. L. Laing, secretary, and
Mr. W. E. Cook, dispenser. The honorary medical
staff are ; Drs. John Harris, J. L. Beeston, R. H. Tre-
Queen’s Wharf, Newcastle.
The first Government school was opened in 1862,
in a wooden building in Tyrrell Street, and now the
entire district is studded with State schools ; some
of the latest and most improved design, but all fully
staffed and well found in educational essentials.
Charitable Institutions.
Founded in 1845, the Newcastle General Hospital
has had a particularly useful existence, for it not only
opens its doors freely to the numerous cases of sickness
and accident that may be looked for in a busy mining
district, but it is also called upon to receive large num-
bers of seafaring men as patients ; and in a very con-
siderable percentage of the cases treated the patients
are unable to make any monetary return for the
loar, W. L’E. Eames, W. Nickson, A. H. Horsfall, N. J.
Dunlop and J. Douglas. Mr. T. M. O’Neill is honorary
treasurer, and the committee of management consists
of twenty residents of the city and suburbs.
In a populous centre like Newcastle there are
always, it need hardly be said, very many cases of
daily occurrence of genuine and frequently unavoid-
able distress. The Newcastle and Northumberland
Benevolent Society, which was founded in 1884, has,
as its self-imposed mission, the work of affording
relief in such cases, and it must be conceded that the
society has very worthily fulfilled that mission. The
operations of the society extend over an area of twenty
miles ; and on an average, over 250 families, repre-
ing 700 persons, are relieved and assisted by the


committee of ladies, who have Mr. J. L. Fegan, M.L.A.,
as their president, Mr. W. F. Gale as hon. treasurer,
Mr. R. P. Wells secretary, and Miss E. Arthur, matron.
Naval and Military.
Action was first taken in the formation of local
branches of the defence force in 1855, when a company
of volunteer infantry, one hundred strong, was formed,
under the command of the late Major (then Captain)
Charles Bolton, who had as officers Lieutenants H. J.
Brown and J. D. Langley That company has now
grown to a regiment, styled the 4th Australian Infantry
Regiment, with headquarters in Newcastle, and com-
panies in different towns of the northern district as
far up the railway line as Armidale, and a total strength
of all ranks of about 600. Lieut.-Col. C. M. Randaud,
V.D., commands this first-class regiment, and he is
also commandant of the district The second in
command is Major G. J. Burnage, V.D., and Captain
J. Pat on is adjutant.
The creation of the volunteer infantry in 1855 was
followed in the same year by the formation of a battery
of volunteer artillery, of which Captain Holt was appoin-
ted commander and Lieut. Kirkaldy next in rank. The
battery, which was a few years ago changed to the
No. 3 Company of Australian Garrison Artillery, is
now commanded by its former subaltern, Lieut.-Col.
Kirkaldy, V.D., and numbers one hundred of the
most efficient gunners in the Commonwealth forces.
Captain J. Stark is the second in command.
Another highly efficient body of men is the Naval
Brigade, under Commander Gardner, V.D., who has
with him Lieut. G. A. Dick and Sub.-Lieut. O. W.
Gillam. The brigade came into existence in 1865,
the commanding officer at the outset being Captain
Allen, and the second in command Captain H. R. Cross.
Cavalry appeared in Newcastle in 1886, when a
troop of the Maitland Light Horse was formed under
the captaincy of Dr. W. Ashe. The late W. H. Shaw
was appointed lieutenant, and succeeded to the com-
mand when Captain Ashe resigned, and Dr. John
Harris, who, with Lieut. Shaw, had served as a sergeant,
was appointed honorary surgeon. The troop was
disbanded in 1888, but in 1900 a half-squadron of
lancers was formed, of which Dr. Harris was appointed
lieutenant in command. Subsequently Lieut. Harris
retired, and after several changes in the position of
officer in command, Lieut. Croudace obtained and still
holds it. Lieut. J. T. Smith is second in rank.
Very smart and soldier like are the two com-
panies of Irish Rifles, commanded by Major T. M.
O’Neill, who was mainly instrumental in their for-
mation, and has been their commanding officer through-
out. The Scottish Rifles Regiment counts among its
most efficient companies the two stationed in New-
castle, which were first officered by Captain Grant
and Lieut. J. A. Newton, and are now commanded by
Lieut. Wallace.
An exceedingly well-trained unit is the Newcastle
company of the Australian Army Medical Corps, which
has for officers Lieut.-Col. W. L’Estrange Lames, C. 8.,
in command, Major J. L. Beeston, Captains H. K.
Bean, A. H. Horsfall, D. 5.0., R. U. Russell and
R. Dick.
Miscellaneous.
Newcastle has also an excellent school of arts,
two missions to seamen, a sailors’ home, many pros-
perous friendly societies, a well-managed jockey club,
a flourishing agricultural society, an institution for
the care and education of deaf mutes (conducted by
the Dominican nuns) a kindergarten (established by
Mr. J. R. Wood), a spacious theatre, numerous musical,
cricket, football, and other sporting clubs, and, in fine,
all the accessories common to life in a large and pro-
gressive community.
Newcastle’s Future.
The city at the Hunter’s mouth has been enor-
mously extended and improved since that September
morning nearly a century and a decade ago when
Shortland threaded his way through the shoals and
sandbanks and dropped his anchor in the river
outlet, which now, despite certain deficiencies, is a
safe and commodious harbour, and, at the moment
of writing, shelters nearly seventy vessels, some of
them among the best examples of mercantile marine
architecture that plough the seas. This great fleet is
undergoing change daily, as some of the ships sail with
their cargoes of splendid coal for distant ports, and new
arrivals take their places ; but except during occasional
periods of disruption in the trade, the harbour is always
well filled with vessels loading or waiting their turn to
load, and thus providing, directly or indirectly, main-
tenance for the 80,000 souls which the city and
district now contain. Great as has been the
advancement made up to the present, it probably
will not be comparable to the progress that
will take place in the century now passing. The mani-
fold advantages that Newcastle possesses as a location
for ironworks, factories, and industrial enterprises of
every kind must surely be recognised ere long by those
who seek avenues for the employment of their capital
and energies ; and only when that time comes, and she
takes her place as the chief manufacturing centre of
Australasia, will Newcastle have attained to the des-
tiny marked out for her by Providence


THE A. A. COMPANY.
vr-
‘HE history of the Australian
|(X\ Agricultural Company is so
completely bound up with
that of Newcastle that one
can hardly refer to the town
without at the same time speaking
of the company. In 1824, when
the colony was still only sparsely
populated—and that almost entirely
along its seaboard—the company
was formed in London with the
object of developing the resources
of the colony and of sending out
suitable immigrants. A charter was >
granted by the Government of the
day, under which the company was
granted 1,000,000 acres in any suit-
able situation, on certain conditions,
foremost amongst them being one
that a large sum of money be spent
in developing the lands. The com-
pany at once took the scheme up
with energy. It can be well under-
stood that it was a difficult task to
choose such a large area of land in a
colony where only the fringe was
partially explored, and when nothing
was known of the now fertile tracts
of country beyond the coast range.
The first superintendent, Mr. Daw-
son, chose a block of comparatively
poor soil lying on the coast to the
north of Port Stephens harbour,
and at once the directors sent out
shiploads of skilled mechanics and
farm labourers, besides large quanti-
ties of high-class stock, sheep, cattle
and horses.
At this time coal had been found
at the mouth of the Hunter River,
or the Coal River, as it was then
known. Some attempt had been
made to work this coal with convict
labour, but with very little success,
the output at the time being about
40 tons per day. The A. A. Company
were then approached to see if they
would take over the working of the
mines, and in consideration of their
doing this they were granted 2,000
acres of coal land adjoining the town
of Newcastle, which then consisted
of a few houses only. The company
immediately engaged the best man
they could find, and sent him out
General View A. A. Company’s Sea Pit Colliery —Pit-top.
A. A. Company’s Sea Pit Colliery.
contracted to undertake, and always
using the best brains and most up-
to-date machinery in developing a
trade which has since become one
of the staple trades of the country,
Other coalfields have been opened
with a staff of trained assistants and
miners, together with the necessary
plant and machinery, and from that
day until now they have worked
these coal lands, never sparing money
in pushing on the work they had


up since, but the A. A. Company
will always be associated with the
first successful effort of developing
the coal-mines of Australia.
The company is now working the
coal under the lull at Newcastle, and
also partly under the ocean, but, as
years go on, the beautiful seam of
coal will become exhausted, and the
supply will be at an end. This
colliery is known as the Sea Pit,
some 450 men being employed there,
the output being some 1,300 tons
per day. bor the purpose of carry-
ing on the trade which they have
built up, and which has provided
employment for so many thousands
of men during the last 80 years', the
company recently purchased another
colliery in the very centre of the now
well-known South Maitland field.
The new property is known as
“ Hebburn,” and consists of 1,320
acres of freehold land and 3,131 acres
of mineral leases, held direct from
the Crown. \ ast sums of money
have been expended in opening up
this property and equipping it with
the most modern machinery and
appliances, and it may now be said
to be one of the most up-to-date
collieries in the world. Electric coal-
cutters are in use, the ventilation of
the mine is second to none, and the
work is supervised by officials of the
highest capacity. The coal is every-
where most favourably received, and
its qualities as a household coal and
as a gas-producing coal are undis-
puted, while as a steam coal it is
second only to the best Welsh coal.
Over 500 men are employed at
Hebburn, and the output at present
is 1,600 tons a day, but the mine can
produce 3,000 tons if necessary.
1 he seams are what are known as
the Greta. The illustrations give a
good idea of the complete arrange-
ments made for the handling of
coal.
Attached to the mine is a complete
engineering shop, capable of making
a locomotive if necessary. It is
equipped with all the necessary ap-
pliances, such as planing, cutting,
and screwing machines, forges with
force draught, steam hammers, and
oil engines and fan engines, chiefly
of the Roby make. It is the only
colliery using its own water, and
independent of outside supplies. A
huge dam has been made which has
a great capacity for storing water.
The water is backed a mile and a
quarter, and a large bywash is pro-
vided. The dam is 30 feet deep in
some places. During the recent
colliery affairs. Resides its Port
Stephens property, which is now
nearly all sold, and its colliery pro-
perties, the company owns a large
pastoral property, called Warrah, on
the Liverpool Plains.
The general supervision of the
whole of their interests was until
recently and during the last thirty
General View of A. A. Company’s Hebburn Colliery.
Entrance to Hebburn Colliery.
years exercised by Mr. Jesse Greg-
son, whose name will always be
honoured and respected by all with
whom he came in contact. The
position is now held by Mr. F. L.
Learmonth, who hitherto has been
occupied in pastoral pursuits in
Riverina.
dry spell, some of the other collieries
had to use pit water for their boilers,
but owing to the enterprise of the
Australian Agricultural Company,
this was not necessary at Hebburn.
The company’s wharf at Newcastle
provides excellent accommodation
for shipping, and the facilities for
coaling are very good.
One has only to mention the names
of the most recent colliery managers,
Mr. William Turnbull, the late
manager, and Mr. Robert A. Hade,
the present manager, to know that
the company has fulfilled its early
traditions by sending out only the
very best men to look after its


Mr. FREDERICK LIVING-
STONE LEARMONTH, General
Superintendent, Australian Agricul-
tural Company, Newcastle, was
born in 1862, in Ercildonne, near
Ballarat, in Victoria. He is the
third son of the late Thomas Living-
stone Learmonth, of Ercildoune and
Bringagee, N.S.W., and also of
Parkhall, Stirlingshire, Scotland.
Going home in 1868, he was edu-
cated at Westminster School and
Pembroke College, Cambridge, and
also spent two years on the Con-
tinent, where he became a proficient
linguist in both French and Ger-
man. In 1883 he returned to
Australia, and gained colonial ex-
perience at Bringagee, on the Mur-
rumbidgee. For many years he had
control of his father’s varied interests
in New South Wales, Victoria, and
H. Charleston. Newcastle
MR. F. L. LEARMONTH,
General Superintendent A. A. Company.
also in New Zealand. In 1897,
during the Greco-Turkish war, he
went to Greece, where he acted as
correspondent to the Times for a
short period, until the armistice at
Lamia put an end to active opera-
tions. He then made an extended
lour through Greece, Turkey, and
Russia. When the South African
war broke out, he at once volun-
teered for active service, and left
Sydney as a trooper with the first
contingent of the New South Wales
Mounted Infantry, in January, igoo,
but gained his commission as lieu-
tenant, in the field, during the
month’s halt of Lord Roberts’ field
army, at Bloemfontein, in April of
the same year. He took part in all
the operations of the march to Pre-
toria, and also at Diamond Hill,
and for nearly a year afterwards was
engaged under Colonel De Lisle in
his arduous operations in pursuit of
De Wet in the Orange River Colony
and Cape Colony, and returned to
Sydney with his regiment in May,
igoi. He was twice mentioned in
despatches, and was awarded the
cross of the distinguished service
order, and Queen’s medal and five
7
clasps. In 1902, while in London,
he was offered the position of
general superintendent of the Aus-
tralian Agricultural Company, in sue-
cession to Mr. Jesse Gregson, and
came to Newcastle early in 1903,
where he acted as assistant-general
superintendent until Mr. Gregson’s
retirement, when he took over the
full charge of the Australian Agri-
cultural Company’s business. Mr,
Learmonth’s military and com-
mercial experience has eminently
qualified him for his present posi-
tion, the control of such a large
number of men as are employed by
the Australian Agricultural Com-
pany requiring considerable tact
Pit-top, Hebhurn Colliery.
Another View of the Hebburn Colliery Pit-top.
and management, and, though he
has not been long in Newcastle, he
has gained the respect of the em-
ployees, as well as all classes of the
community. In igoi, he married
the only daughter of the late
Rev. Joseph Carlisle, Rector of
St. Mary’s, North Melbourne, and
Canon of Melbourne Cathedral.


THE SCOTTISH-AUSTRALIAN MINING COM-
PANY LTD an English company, formed in 1860,
controls the Lambton and Burwood collieries, in the
Newcastle district,New South Wales, and has always oc-
cupied a prominent position in the coal trade of that
State. The output during the past two years was: 1905.
280,023 tons, 1906, 327,046 tons ; and vessels loading
the company’s coal are assured of receiving quick
despatch. The product of these two mines has been
well known in the East for years past, and shipments
have been made to all the principal ports, such as
Bombay, Calcutta, Singapore, Hongkong, Manila,
Batavia and other ports in Java. Most of the railways
of the Commonwealth of Australia are large consumers
of the company’s coal, and there is also a large demand
for it by householders. The coal taken from both
these pits is from the famous Borehole seam, the
quality being of the highest class for steam, household
and gas purposes, a practical test for gas going as high
which was added to by the securing of a further 4,000
acres to the dip of the same seam, and this is now
being energetically worked by the B pit. The A pit
practically worked this seam on the outcrop, which
had a thickness of 10 feet of the best bituminous coal,
analysing
Hygroscopic Moisture 2*32 Sulphur .. • • '329
Volatile Hydro carbons 34*21 Specific Gravity .. 1*33
Fixed Carbons .. 56.84 Coke .. .. .. 63 47
Ash .. .. .. 663 Calorific Power .. 13 3
and as the workings got further to the dip it was found
advisable to work the seam from the B pit, where the
seam was tapped at a depth of 435 feet, giving a thick-
ness of 5 feet of coal of the same bituminous quality,
analysing
Hygroscopic Moisture 180 Sulphur .. • • '4B
Volatile Hydro-carbons 32*75 Specific Gravity .. 1*34
Fixed Carbons .. 56*20 Coke .. .. • • 65*45
Ash .. .. .. 9.25 Calorific Power .. 12*8
Scottish-Australian Co.’s Lambton B Colliery.
as 11'200 cubic feet from one ton of coal. The London
office of the Scottish-Australian Mining Company Ltd.
is at 50 Old Broad Street, Mr. F. W. Turner being the
secretary. The colonial offices are at 72 Phillip Street,
Sydney, where Mr. H. F. Chilcott (whose portrait we
give) is the general manager. The Newcastle office is
in Scott Street where all shipping matters are attended
to by Mr. Thomas Muncaster. The Lambton colliery,
which now comprises A and B pits, was opened in 1861
by the late Mr. Thomas Croudace, who was sent out
from England by the company for that purpose. He
opened out, by adit, the original holding of 2,000 acres,
The workshops and offices for these two collieries are
situated at the A pit, from which the output of recent
years has been reduced The coal won from the B pit
shaft is increasing. The B pit, which was developed
more recently has a thoroughly up-to-date plant for
producing and screening the coal. Two shafts tapped
the* seam, the downcast being 16 feet diameter and the
upcast 14 feet ; both these were sunk through 100 feet
of quicksand, necessitating cast-iron cylinders being
used. The seam was struck at 435 feet, being 5 feet
thick. The main winding shaft is fitted with buntons
and wooden slides, in which run single-deck cages


carrying two tubs, each one ton capacity. The wind-
ing ropes are of the best plough steel, 3| inches circum-
ference. The main winding engines are of the direct-
acting type (manufactured by the Grange Iron Co.),
having cylinders 21 inches diameter, 5 feet stroke,
fitted with Cornish valve gear. The drum is 12 leet
in diameter, and is fitted with hand and steam brakes,
having also a steam automatic cut-off gear to prevent
over winding. The pit-head pulleys are of the same
diameter as the drum, set at a height of 55 feet on a
steel lattice frame. The whole of the pit-top and
screening arrangements are built solidly of best steel
girders and plates, carried on substantial cast-iron
columns. The banking-out arrangements are prac-
tically automatic, being capable of passing a thousand
tons a day with a minimum amount of handling. The
cylinders 12 inches diameter by 21 inches stroke. The
main boilers consist of a range of five Lancashire boilers
(Adamson’s), 80 feet long by 7 feet diameter, with all
the latest fittings. Green’s economiser is attached to
this part of the plant for heating the leed water.
Extensive siding accommodation is provided on both
sides of the pit for standing full ami empty waggons.
The whole of this plant, with the exception of small
coal storage, was supplied by the Grange Iron Co.,
of Durham, England, to plans, specially prepared to
suit the seam of coal by the late Thomas Croudace.
The ventilating appliances at the upcast shaft consist
of a Waddle fan, 42 feet diameter, with a 16 feet inlet
having a capacity of 250,000 cubic feet per minute,
and driven by compound engines with high pressure,
cylinder, 22 inches diameter, 82 inches diameter low
Scottish-Australian Co.’s Burwood Colliery.
full tubs, after leaving the cages, run on to creepers,
where they are taken up, and over self-acting points,
into Wood and Burnett tiplers, where the coal is auto-
matically tipped on to shaking screens, 12 feet long
hy 4 feet G inches wide, the bars being fixed at f-inch
mesh. The round coal is distributed from the screens
on to travelling belts, 60 feet long, 4 feet wide, and
where any impurities are picked out. The coal passes
from the belts into waggons, where it is weighed by a
15-ton Pooley weighing machine, and is then ready for
market. The small coal that passes through the screens
is weighed by the “ Billy Fairplay.” It then falls
into a receiver, from whence it is elevated by buckets
on to a central travelling belt, where it again goes
through the process of cleaning, after which it is de-
posited into waggons. The whole of the screening
plant is worked from counter shafting, driven by belt-
ing from a pair of centrally-situated engines, having
pressure, both 3 feet 9 inches stroke. There is also a
28-inch auxiliary engine kept in readiness, which may
be coupled up at a moment’s notice. Steam is pro-
vided by two Lancashire boilers (Walker’s), each 80
feet long by 8 feet diameter. The feed water for these
boilers passes through a Berryman heater, the heat
being derived from the exhaust steam of the fan engine.
The upcast shaft is also fitted with slides and cages,
providing a second outlet. The winding plant consists
of a pair of Tangye engines, having cylinders 14 inches
diameter, 2 feet 6 inches stroke. This shaft is also used
for pumping, steam being taken down from the same
boilers to the pumps. The small coal storage has a
capacity of 2,000 tons, and is situated opposite the
main screening plant, from which small coal is con-
veyed to the storage by means of an endless chain
scraper conveyer, at the rate of 50 tons per hour. It
is then emptied on to an all-round bucket conveyer,


which deposits the small into the storage, from which
it may again be delivered into waggons by the same
conveyer at the rate of 100 tons an hour ; this being
the first ot its kind in the colonies. Underground.--
The workings are laid out on the panel system and
worked by bord and pillar, the bords being 6 yards
wide. The pillars. 16 by 40 yards, are extracted im-
mediately behind the whole” workings. Coal-
cutting machines of the Ingersoll-Sargent type are
used at this mine, the power for driving them being
obtained from an air compressor situated on the sur-
face. The air compressor is of the twin tandem type,
having two steam cylinders, each 20 inches diameter,
and two air cylinders, each 21 inches diameter, all with
a stroke of 3 feet. The haulage will be by endless
rope system, which is now being laid down. Safety
lamps of the Cambrian type are used throughout this
mine, except at the shaft bottom. These lamps are
supplied by the company, who also do the cleaning
by machinery, the cabin being fixed with four revolv-
ing stands for expeditious delivery. About 30 horses
MR. H. F. CHILCOTT.
are employed, being brought to the surface and stabled
every night. The engine-houses at B pit are imposing
structures, substantially built of brick. Mr. Sydney
Croudace is the manager in charge, having Mr. Bennett
Williams as under-manager.
BUR WOOD COLLIERY". —This is a leasehold area
of about 1 200 acres, with the light to work the adjoining
ocean coal. This property was purchased in 189-i
from the Burwood Coal Company. It is situated about
six miles due south of Newcastle. The shaft. 600 feet
deep, is 15 feet in diameter, and is fitted with wire-
rope conductors suspended from the pulley framing,,
which is 51 feet high. The cages are single deck,
carrying two tubs, each with a capacity of 15 cwt.
Each winding takes 10 seconds, including the changing
of the tubs. The winding ropes are of the best plough
steel, 31 inches circumference. The winding engines,
built by the Grange Iron Co., are of the direct-acting
type, having cylinders 24 inches diameter, by a 4 feet
stroke', with a drum 10 feet in diameter, the head-gear
pulleys being the same size. The coal, when brought to
the surface, is tipped over Tate’s Water Balance Tiplers
on to travelling belts, 100 feet long and 5 feet wide,
where the coal is thoroughly cleaned. From these it
passes on to two shaking screens, each 21 feet long by
6 feet 6 inches wide, with bars |-inch apart, from which
the round coal passes into waggons, w r here it is weighed
on 15-ton Pooley’s weighbridges. The small coal that
passes through the screens is weighed by the “ Billy
Fairplay ” and then put into waggons. The main
range of boilyrs consists of five, of the Cornish and
Lancashire type, which supply steam to the winding,
screen and hauling engines. The ventilating shaft is
situated about 50 yards from the main downcast of
the same depth and diameter. The fan used is a
alker patent indestructible type with anti-vibration
shutter. Its diameter is 20 feet and the width 7 feet,
capable of producing 300,000 cubic feet of air per
minute. The engines, by the same maker, are of the
horizontal compound type, having high pressure 18
inches diameter, low pressure 32 inches diameter, both
3 feet stroke. The driving wheel on the crank shaft is 16
feet diameter, and the driven wheel on the fan shaft
is 8 feet diameter the number of cotton driving ropes
being 8. Steam for the. e engines is supplied from two
Lancashire boilers (Adamson’s), each 30 feet long by
8 feet diameter, the working pressuie being 120 lbs.
per square inch. The feed water for these boilers is
heated by the exhaust steam from the engines in a
Berryman heater. The small coal storage consists of
a timber structure capable of holding 1,000 tons. The
haulage is done by an endless rope, driven by a pair
of engines on the surface, having cylinders 14 inches
diameter, 2 feet 6 inches stroke driving, through 9 to 1
gear, a third motion shaft on which are two endless
rope-driven wheels, each 6 feet diameter, fitted with
friction clutches. The speed of the hauling ropes,
which are 2f inches circumference, is about two miles
per hour. The ropes extend under ground on the
north side 30 chains, and on the south 70 chains from
the shaft. The clips used for attaching the tubs to
the ropes are of the screw type, tubs running in sets of
from 6to 8. This mine employs about 400 men, pro-
ducing 1,000 tons per day. Safety lamps (Cambrian
type), which are supplied and cleaned by the company,
are used through the pit, except on the main intake
air-currents. The lamp cabin is fitted with four re-
volving lamp stands, also the latest method for clean-
ing same. The seam averages 6 feet thick throughout
the colliery, and has the following analysis :
Hygroscopic Moisture 165 Sulphur .. .. -39
Volatile Hydro-carbons ?5'85 Specific Gravity .. 130
Fixed Carbons .. 56-10 Coke .. .. .. 62-50
Ash .. .. .. 6-40 Calorific Power .. 13 2
The system of working is the bord and pillar—bords
8 yards wide, pillars 12 by 35 yards, the latter being
extracted as soon as possible after the “ whole”
working, \bout 40 horses, employed at this mine,
are brought up daily and stabled on the surface. Other
erections on the surface consist of office, store, and
mechanics’ workshops. The second outlet is situated
about a mile away, and acts as a downcast shaft, also
for pumping. Machinery and appliances are kept here
ready for use. The company’s rolling stock consists of
650 hopper waggons, 7to 10 tons capacity Mr. Frank
Croudace is colliery manager, with Mr. John Brock
as under-manager. Mr. J. L. C. Rae is the mechanical
engineer for the company.


The WALLARAH COLLIERY, the property of
the Wallarah Coal Company Limited, situated at
Catherine Hill Bay, about twenty miles south of New-
castle and ten-and-a-half miles from the Northern
Railway, with which it is in touch by road, is unique
among northern collieries, and most interesting to visit,
as it has a district and shipping port all to itself. The
company secured about 3,500 acres of freehold and
erected a township of its own. providing cottages for
their employees and their families and dependants, a
population of about 1,200 souls. Everyone is depen-
dent on the colliery, as there is no other industry and
no agriculture. There are three churches, an hotel,
public school, court-house, stores and workshops.
The splendid pier (shown in the illustration) is the
property of the company, and vessels of 4,500 tons’
capacity can load there. All the company’s coal is
shipped over this pier, and, besides the oversea ships
which are there for coal, the company’s own steam
colliers, the “Wallarah,” 750 tons, and “ Illaroo,”
550 tons, trade regularly. The company has a fully
paid-up capital of £BO,OOO in £1 shares, and the exten-
was shipped in 30 working hours. Ihe seam consists
of about 13 feet of good steam coal, and the lower
portion of about six feet is at present being worked.
A recent analysis of this company’s coal shows it to
be of a very good quality, the component parts making
it an easy burning coal and, at the same time, an eco-
nomical coal for steam production. The company has
developed the property and provided the plant neces-
sary to obtain an output of 1,250 tons per day. The
sales from this colliery exceed 200,000 tons per
annum, and are principally for steam purposes, for
delivery in Sydney ex the company’s steam colliers.
Coal is also shipped direct to Victoria and South Aus-
tralia for use on the railways, &c., and there is a grow-
ing demand for the coal for household purposes. The
present directors of the company, which is a London
one, with registered offices in East India Avenue,
Leadenhall Street, London, are Messrs. Chas. Parbury
(chairman), Wm. Lund (managing director), W. O.
Gilchrist, E. R. Moon, Alf. Howell, W. R. Mewburn,
and the secretary, Mr. R. G. Baillie. Mr. E. A. Norton,
of Hoskins’ Buildings, Spring Street, Sydney, is the
Wallarah Coal Company.
sive plant and machinery is thoroughly up to date.
The mine is worked by tunnels down the outcrop,
and is stated by the Mine’s report to be the only col-
liery working the upper seam Newcastle measures.
The workings are in about 84 chains with some 200
feet cover. Electric coal-cutting machines are used.
The plant includes three powerful haulage engines,
one working an endless rope, an efficient Walker Bros.’
ventilating fan, capable of supplying 250,000 cubic feet
of air per minute to the workings, an electric generator
of 100 kilowatts, and shortly a second and more power-
ful generator will be erected, and steam oil pumps for
disposing of the water from the workings. I here is
an up-to-date workshop, with modern labour-saving
machinery, which enables the company to do all its
own repairs, in addition to manufacturing many things
required for its own use, including skips and waggons,
The company also own two steam locomotives and
2,000 tons of trucks, which carry the coal over the
railway to the jetty. The facilities for rapid loading
are excellent, and coal is frequently loaded at the
rate of 250 tons per hour, and recently over 5,000 tons
managing agent in Australia. Mr. Joseph Sperring is
manager at the colliery, and Mr. Richard Marks under-
manager.
The SEAHAM COLLIERY COMPANY has two
collieries situated 15 miles west of Newcastle, on a
freehold property of over 4,000 acres, all coal-hearing,
adjoining the West Wallsend and Duckenfield pro-
perties. The coal is the noted Borehole seam, ami is got
from shafts of 450 feet and 700 feet. Large shipments
of coal are sent to Chili, Peru, Hawaii, Um Lrancisco,
the Philippines,&c.,and an extensivetrade isdone with the
railways. No. 1 Colliery.—The main winding engines,
situated in close proximity to the main shaft, have 26-in.
cylinders, 5-ft. stroke, with 13-ft. drums, and sheaves
of 15 ft. diameter. They perform the winding of the
whole of the output of the colliery—about 1,100 tons
in eight hours —the distance from the bottom to the
surface being 450 feet. The engines are capable of
handling 1,400 tons in eight hours. A pair of clutch-
geared engines, with 16-in. cylinders, geared 2 to 1,
with drums 5 feet in diameter, works the haulage sys-
tem of the colliery, which is of the main and tail type,


and brings the coal from the miner to the pit bottom
in readiness for winding to the surface. The set lifted
by the haulage engines contains 40 skips, each laden
with about 1 ton of coal, and travels a distance of
miles. The travelling tables are 75 ft- long and 4 ft.
- in - wide, one being driven by a pair of 10-in. and the
other by a pair of 9-in. coupled engines. A pump,
18-in. cylinder, 7-in. bucket and 3-ft stroke, is at the
bottom of the main winding shaft and pumps the
water to the surface three times a week. The motive
to drive the engines and pump referred to above is
steam, and is generated from six Cornish boilers, each
26 ft. by 6 ft., carrying a head of steam 60 lbs. to the
square inch. Two plunger pumps feed these boilers.
The ventilation of the colliery is obtained bv means of
a Waddle fan, stationed at the mouth of the up-
cast shaft, and has a diameter of 30 feet, and, travelling
at a speed of 60 revolutions per minute, produces
about 250,000 cubic feet per minute. This fan is
driven by a pair of engines, 20-in. cylinders, 3-ft.
stroke, and the steam is generated from three
Cornish boilers, each 26 ft. bv 6 ft. At the No. 2
downcast shaft, about lj miles from the main
shaft, an air-compressing plant has recentlv been
installed, four little Hardy coal-cutters producing
about 1.000 tons per fortnight when working full, and
two pumps receiving their power from this source
The compressor, however, is capable of supplving
power for several more machines. It is of the Norwalk
manufacture, one Lancashire boiler 30 ft. bv 8 ft., and
two Cornish boilers 26 ft. by 5 ft- 6 in., with a pres-
sure of 70 lbs. to the square inch, supplying it with
steam. No. 2 Colliery.—The main winding engines have
cylinders of 28 in. diameter, with 5-ft- stroke and 14-ft.
drums, and the sheaves are 14 ft. 6 in. in diameter.
The air-compressing plant is the same as that at No. 1
Colliery, being of the Norwalk make, and provides
power for the coal-cutters and drills, as well as a large
pump of 20-in. cylinder, 7-in. ram, capable of dealing
with 10,000 gallons per hour, with a pressure of 60 lbs.
to the square inch, to the height of 650 feet. The
travelling tables are 80 ft. long and 4 ft. 4 in. wide,
and are made of steel- They are driven by a pair of
engines, 12in. cylinders and 2 ft. 6 in. stroke, which also
drives the shakers for the screening of the coal. The elec-
tric plant is capable of giving power for 90 lights. Three
Lancashire boilers, each 30 ft. by 8 ft., carrying a head
of steam of 90 lbs-, generates the steam for the winding
engines, air-compressor, bandscreen engines and dy-
namo, and two Cornish boilers, 26 ft. by 6 ft., with a
pressure of 60 lbs. to the square inch, supplies the fan
with steam. The appliances at No. 2 Colliery are of
the most modern type, and are capable of dealing with
1,500 tons of coal in eight hours.
The ABERMAIN COLLIERY, situated between
the Hebburn and Aberdare Collieries, in the Maitland
district, comprises an estate of 4.134 acres, all of which
is coal-bearing- The seam is the same as generally
worked in this district, and Abermain has been proved
to be one of the best of the Maitland coals. It is of a
hard character, and contains very little small, and its
sterling qualities for gas-making, steaming and house-
hold purposes are everywhere recognised. It is very
suitable for export purposes, as it does not readily
break up in transit, and this feature is of importance
to both wholesale and retail buyers- Up to the end of
1906 the output was 1,300 tons of coal per day, and a
special feature of this colliery was the regularity in
which the mine worked, holding a record for the num-
ber of days worked for the years ended December, 1904,
1905, 1906. The number of men employed when the col-
liery is in full swing is 420- The coal-cutting plant is
second to none in New South Wales. There are at work
seven large coal-cuttig machines, six Jeffrey and one
Sullivan type, and one Jeffrey boring machine, all of
which are driven by electricity. The power is generated
by two 100 k.w. dynamos, and is conveyed to the under-
ground machinery by means of a cable splendidly
insulated. In addition to the coal-cutting machines,
there are three large pumps of the latest pattern, driven
electrically, and numerous lights about the surface
and underground, the power for which is all generated
by the dynamos above referred to- Towards the end
of last year a large ventilating plant was erected at the
mine, consisting of a 30 ft- Waddle fan, driven by a
pair of horizontal engines of the most approved pattern
for this work. The steam is generated by two Cornish
boilers, and the whole structure is substantially built
with brickwork. After the coal is brought from the
working face to the various flats by the horses, it is
removed to the surface by means of a powerful hauling
engine, which, owing to the entrance to this mine being
by tunnel, is capable of bringing to the surface 20 to 22
skips containing over 20 tons of coal in one set- Dur-
ing the past few months another large hauling engine
has been erected to work a main and tail haulage sys-
tem in the western side of the mine- Working both
engines, it is possible to deal with an output of 3,000
tons of coal per day. The steam for the hauling en-
gines, dynamos, workshops, screens, <kc., is generated by
a range of four Cornish and Lancashire boilers, and the
water supply is obtained from a large dam on the com-
pany’s property, about half a mile from the pit, and
also from the Hunter River Water and Sewerage
Board’s main, which is also connected to the stables-
In 1906 the colliery company increased their screen
accommodation to cope with the extra quantity of coal
handled and with a view to greatly increasing their
output in the near future- The improvements con-
sisted of building two complete screens, making a total
of five screens, each capable of efficiently screening 200
tons of coal in eight hours, and making alteration in pit-
top. substituting fiat sheets instead of rails on which
to wheel the skips to the tipplers. Immediately below
the screens a large Poolev weighbridge has been erected
C • C C 7
to enable the company to determine the weight of all
coal shipped. A small coal storage capable of holding
1,200 tons is another of the colliery's conveniences, and
this, together with their 360 coal hopper waggons, is
sufficient to store coal during any difficulty experienced
in shipping. In the repairing shops there are two
complete blacksmiths’ outfits, together with a lathe,
drilling machines, and every convenience necessary for
making the numerous colliery repairs and replace-
ments- Tho offices of the company are at 55 Pitt
Street, Sydney Mr- Isaac Chapman, general manager ;
Mr. E- H- Adams is the secretary of the company ;
Mr. James Fletcher, a well-known mine manager, is
colliery manager : Mr. W. McDonald, under-manager ;
Mr. H C- Langwill is shipping director at Newcastle.


Messrs. DAVID COHEN & CO. is one of the few,
if not the only business firm of the early days which
retains its original trading name, and has, as present
partners and active managers, sons of its founders. In
1836, when Maitland was a thriving town, and the com-
mercial centre of the north, Messrs. Samuel Cohen, David
Cohen, and Lewis Wolfe Levy, formed a partnership
under the present trading name, establishing themselves
there as distributors of general merchandise. The open-
ing of the railway to Sydney deprived Maitland of its
prestige, and the firm removed to Newcastle from which
city they have continued to conduct their business.
From the formation of this long-established house of
business, when clients were chiefly squatters, and bullock
teams were almost the only means of carriage to con-
stituents, its trade extended from the Queensland border
on the north, to Bourke in the far west. The historv of
the firm may be described in one word, “ Progress,” and
it would be difficult to find a place in Australia to which
its operations do not extend; in fact it is represented
in every important city in the world. The confidence of
the firm in the nor’-west territory, throughout which
David Cohen & Co. is a household word, has been shown
by the magnificent buildings erected in Maitland and
Newcastle. In 1865, the premises then occupied in
Maitland were burnt to the ground, and the buildings
subsequently constructed were partially submerged in
the disastrous flood in 1893. As the firm’s stocks em-
brace almost every known commodity, the enormous
output adds very considerably to the revenues of the
port of Newcastle and the Commonwealth generally.
The northern business is operated conjointly with the
Sydney and London offices, presided over by the various
partners. Messrs. Samuel S. Cohen and Septimus R.
Levy control the Newcastle business, which ranks
foremost in the commercial enterprises of the north.
THE NORTHUMBERLAND PERMANENT
BUILDING, INVESTMENT, LAND AND LOAN
SOCIETY, Hunter Street West, Newcastle, was es-
tablished in the year 1876, to meet the requirements
of persons who have capital which they are willing
to invest in the investing shares of the society;
to afford facilities to those desirous of purchasing, by
easy periodical payments, land or houses, and to assist
them in building ; to raise a fund to be applied to the
purposes aforesaid; to purchase land in eligible posi-
tions, and thereon to build cottages; and to purchase
cottages already built, and to sell the same in such
manner, and on such terms as may be considered advisable
by the board of management. The society commenced
operations at Waratah, a suburban township, situated
about five miles from Newcastle. The first directors
were: Messrs. R. Turton, chairman, W. Whiteman,
D. McMichael, J. Handerton, Isaac Amos, W. T. Dent;
Trustees: Messrs. J. H. Hubbard and G. E. Redman;
John Wood, secretary. The latter gentleman only
held office until February, 1877, when the late Mr.
W. T. Dent, was elected secretary, and continued in
office until February, 1899, having to retire owing to
failing health. Under this gentleman’s supervision the
society made such rapid strides, that it was deemed
expedient to transfer the business to Newcastle, and the
present commodious premises were erected in 1886, at a
cost of £7,000. As an evidence of the growth of the
society, it may be mentioned that in 1891, the redeeming
value of advanced shares was £278, 000, the value of in-
vesting shares, {go,ooo and the amount at fixed deposit
There can be no doubt the society has been
one of the principal factors in the advancement of the
district of Newcastle, and thousands of workmen have
now comfortable freehold properties that, but for the
facilities afforded in the way of easy monthly payments,
would never have acquired any property. As a further
inducement to those requiring a home for themselves and
families, the society has since its inauguration invested
largely in the purchase of suitable building land through-
out the district, which has been subdivided and sold, and
liberal assistance given to purchasers to enable them to
The Northumberland Permanent Building, Investment, Land
and Loan Society,
erect houses. The present secretary, Mr. W. T. Dent,
was trained to the business under his late father, and on
the retirement of that gentleman, was at once elected
secretary. The present directors are : Messrs. Thomas
Abel, chairman ; a director for 21 years (of which term
he has been chairman 13 years) ; W. Arnold, a director
for 27 years; ). H. Gamack, director for 25 years (4
yearn chairman); IT. Winchester, director for ig years ;
G. E. Bell, director for 14 years ; D. McMichael, one of
the original directors, and lately director for the past
g years; M. O’Hara, trustee for 15 years; John Estell,
M.P , trustee for 6 years; T. S Jones, auditor for 12
years ; J. W. Greaves, auditor for 10 years.


MR. JOSEPH WOOD is one of
the best known, public-spirited and
highly respected citizens of New-
castle. Born at Newcastle-on-Tyne,
England, he came to Australia as a
boy in 1856. In conjunction with
his brother, the late Mr. J ohn Wood,
he, in 1865, established the business
which is now carried on under the
title of the Castlemaine Brewery
and Wood Bros. & Co. Ltd. Com-
mencing in a small way, the Messrs.
Wood, by sheer hard work and per-
severance. combined with ability
H. Charleston. Newcastle.
Mr. J. Wood.
and methods of the strictest integ-
rity, built up the business and made
it one of the foremost of the State.
His long and wide business experi-
ence, shrewdness and acumen have
been gladly availed of by the pro-
moters of a number of mercantile
concerns in and near Newcastle with
marked advantage to tho=e inter-
ested ; and the appearance of Mr.
Wood’s name, as director or even
shareholder in any company or
syndicate, is accepted as a guarantee
that the affairs of such company cr
syndicate will be managed w’th
skill, care and prudence. In addi-
tion to being the chairman of direc-
tors of the Castlemaine Brewery
and Wood Bros. & Co. Ltd., he is
chairman of the Aberdare Collieries
Companv of New South V\ ales Ltd.,
and of the Victoria Theatre Com-
pany Ltd., a director of the City of
Newcastle Gas and Coke Company
Ltd., Newcastle Building and In-
vestment Company Ltd., and New-
castle Jockey Club, and a liberal
supporter of numerous cricket, foot-
ball, tennis, golf and other sporting
clubs and associations. Musical
societies of the city have also at all
times found in Mr. Wood a firm
friend and active participant. Dur-
ing the period of its hey-day the
Newcastle Liedertafel had for presi-
dent the subject of this sketch, and
the Philharmonic Society and Musi-
cal Union owed much to his kindly
interest in their welfare. On the
numerous occasions when Governors
of the State or Commonwealth, and
other distinguished personages have
visited Newcastle, he has always been
to the fore in maintaining the repu-
tation of the city for loyalty and
hospitality, and no appeal that is
made to him in any case of genuine
need or distress is ever unsuccessful,
Mr. Joseph Wood stands in the very
front rank of Newcastle’s most
honoured and trusted citizens.
castle and Hunter River Steam-
ship Company Ltd., and is a member
of the Newcastle Chamber of Com-
merce. Mr. Wood’s commercial
operations are not confined within
the limits of the Newcastle district,
for among other outside enterprises
with which he is connected is the
firm of Wood Bros. & Boyd, sugar
planters, of the Herbert River,
Queensland, of which he is the
senior partner, the property being
known as the Ripple Creek Sugar
Plantation. Despite the many calls
made upon his time and attention
by business exigencies, Mr. Wood
takes an active interest in the
various charitable, sporting and
other organisations of the district.
He is, and has been for many years,
the vice-president of the Newcastle
Hospital, patron since its formation
of the Newcastle Agricultural and
Horticultural Society, and was for
years an active member of the New-
Office of Mr. Joseph Wood, Scott Street, Newcastle.


Among the mercantile houses closely and honour-
ably identihed with the progress and development of
the city and port of Newcastle that of R. HALL AND
SON Ltd., occupies a very prominent and highly impor-
tant position. The business was founded in 1856 by
the late Mr. Richard Hall, who, soon after his arrival
from England, saw in the then comparatively unde-
veloped port of the Hunter River commercial possi-
bilities of a very extensive kind —a forecast amply
justified by results. The business, commenced on a
comparatively small scale, was conducted on part of
the site in Scott Street now occupied by the spacious
and commodious buildings, the erection of which has
been necessitated by the steadily growing requirements
of mercantile progress. In 1899, a portion of the
warehouse having been destroyed by fire, the con-
struction of another and more modern building was
determined on, the result being the addition to New-
castle of premises of their kind unrivalled in Australia;
neither thought nor expense being spared in
designing and constructing premises suitable to the
requirements of a large and flourishing business,
The death, after a long and honourable business and
civic career, of the senior partner, combined with the
constantly increasing extent and turnover of the busi-
ness, led to the formation of the firm into a limited
company. Mr. John R. Hall, the present managing
director, has been manager for over twenty years, and
the other directors, Mr. George H. Hall and Mr. John
Paton, have for many years taken active part, the
former in the outside portion and the latter in the
counting-house department of the business. The
operations of the company are very extensive, having
branches in Sydney and Orange, in this State, Queens-
land and South and West Australia, with represen-
tatives in Victoria and Tasmania, and in each State
they hold many important agencies. R. Hall & Son
Ltd. hold and maintain an excellent position among
the large mercantile institutions of our southern con-
tinent, with a reputation second to none.
The NEWCASTLE ICE AND REFRIGERAT-
ING COMPANY’S WORKS, whose premises are
situated adjoining the railway station, Honeysuckle
Point, is one of the important industries of that port.
Established some years ago, such steady progress has
been made that their business now extends to all
parts of New South Wales, and is the largest of its
kind in the northern districts. This has been accom-
machines being constantly in use, capable of turning
out over fifty tons of ice per week, while the cooling
chambers have a capacity of about 30,000 cubic feet for
the storage of meat, fish, rabbits, fruits, eggs, &c. In
conjunction with the business, a large fishing industry
is carried on, in which eighteen fishing boats are
constantly engaged in fishing, and two steamers in
carrying the fish to Newcastle, in addition to consign-
Ice Chambers.
plished under the able management of Mr. H. J. Chard,
whose experience and business methods have secured
these satisfactory results. One factor that has made
distribution easy is the excellent facilities for the receipt
and despatch of goods, the premises being alongside the
railway, and the company have their own siding into
the works. The plant is up to date, two large Hercules
ments received by mail from Lake Macquarie, a large
part undergoing a curing and smoking process, and
distributed throughout the Commonwealth. This
enterprising firm has also made arrangements for the
direct importation of English and Scotch fish, of various
kinds, from leading Aberdeen merchants.


Mr. JOHN R. HALL, J.P.,
Consul at Newcastle tor the United
States of Mexico, and managing
director of R. Hal! & Son Ltd., ol
Newcastle and Sydney, has always
taken an active part in the commer-
cial and social life of the former
city. For the past 20 years he has
practically managed the business of
R. Hall & Son (now formed into a
limited company), which has become
a recognised commercial factor in
Newcastle and district, and is well
and favourably known throughout
Australasia- Notwithstanding that
the urgent claims of business gave
him but little leisure, Mr. Hall has
always found time to manifest an
active and successful interest in
every movement for the advance-
ment and betterment of the New-
castle community. For many vears
MR. J. R. HALL.
he has been a member of the
Chamber of Commerce, and in 1893
he succeeded the Hon. Alexander
Brown, M.L.C., as president of that
influential body. Needless to sav
the duties of this important office
were discharged to the satisfaction
of the chamber and credit to him-
self. Mr. Hall is chairman of the
board of directors of the Newcastle
and Hunter River Steam Naviga-
tion Company, also a director of
the City of Newcastle Gas and Coke
Company Ltd., and of the South
British Insurance Company. He
has on various occasions held office
in masonic, hospital, and othei pub-
lie bodies. From his youth he has
been a wielder of the willow, and
still loves “ good old cricket,” al-
though the royal and ancient game
of golf now exerts over him its
healthful influence in the odd ,urs
which business demands leave him
for outdoor recreation.
Mr. SAMUEL S. COHEN is a
native of the State, in the commerce
of which he occupies such a promi-
nent position. Born at West Mait-
land in 1869, his boyhood days were
spent in the then metropolis of the
north and its environs. His primary
education, which was obiained in his
native city, completed by a
college course at Sydney, he was, at
an early age, admitted to the office
of Messrs. David Cohen & Co., at
that time presided over by his
father, Mr. George J. Cohen (whose
biography appears elsewhere in this
volume). Subsequently Mr. Cohen
became a partner in the historic firm,
and later on visited China, japan,
MR. S COHEN.
Canada, the United States, England,
and the Continent of Europe as its
representative. Since his return to
Australia, with the exception of a
short period spent in Sydney, he has
been connected with the active man-
agement of the Newcastle branch
of the firm’s extensive business.
Recently he was appointed Vice-
Consul for Greece at the northern
port, a position which, consequent
on the enormous shipping trade, is
anything but a sinecure. In all
movements for the welfare of
Newcastle Mr. Cohen *akes an en-
thusiastic part, whilst his acts of
private benevolence equal in number
the multitude of calls daily made
upon him. Mr. Cohen is a typical
Australian, and takes a keen interest
in all branches of healthy sport.
He is a member of the committee of
the Newcastle Jockey Club, and
patron of innumerable cricket and
football clubs. Deservedly popular
with ali classes of the community,
Mr. Cohen might easily have ac-
quired parliamentary honours, and
thereby followed in the footsteps of
his grandfathers i the late Hon. L. W.
Levy, M.L.C., and the late Mr.
Samuel Cohen), but so far he has
declined all requisitions, being of
opinion that the time at his disposal
would not permit him to do justice
to the position. If on some future
occasion he would see fit to vary his
present decision, the political arena
will be benefited by the entrance
therein of a patriotic citizen, world-
wide traveller, and keen man of
business.
Mr CHARLESSHELLEY
McINTYRE, Vice-President of the
Chamber of Commerce, the scle
proprietor of the flour-milling
business carried on under the
trading name of “ P. Mclntosh
and Co.” at Hamilton, is a native
of the State, and was born at
Inverell in 1877. He was edu-
cated at the public school in that
town receiving the gold medal for
the junior University examination
presented by the board Qn leav-
ing school he entered his father’s
business in Inverell. one of the first
up-to-date flour mills erected in
the north on the roller system.
After four years’ training under
his father the subject of this sketch
left for Sydney, completing his
studies at Randwick and the Syd-
ney Technical College, thereafter
taking positions m leading Svdney
and country mills, in which he
gained a large experience of their
requirements and the wheat pro-
duction of the State, more especially
the north north-west and west.
In 1900 Mr. C. S. Mclntyre entered
into partnership with Mr. P Mcln-
tosh (at that time a partner with
Mr. C. S Mclntyre’s father in the
flour-milling business of Mclntyre
and Mclntosh at Quirindi) to found
the now carried on at
Hamilton, Newcastle, under the


trading name of P. Mclntosh & Co.
In 1901 Mr. P. Mclntosh retired
from active interest in the busi-
ness, his partner taking full control
of the concern up to the expiration
of their partnership, at the end of
1905 when Mr. C. S. Mclntyre
purchased the full interest of the
business, which, as sole proprietor,
he carries on under the old style
and name. The flour-mill, ware-
house, grain stores and offices,
which ate imilt of brie and cover
MR. C. S. McINTYRE.
about one-and-a-half acres, are situ-
ated at Hamilton, with extensive
frontages. Double sidings run in
from Woodville Junction, which
command the railway system of
the whole State. The whole of the
milling plant is of the most im-
proved type, the power being pro-
vided by a 300 h.p, condensing
engine, and the whole premises are
lighted by electricity. In every
respect the mill is thoroughly up to
date, and, in addition to the large
local trade, the business of the
firm extends to the northern river
ports and as far as Brisbane. A
product of the mill that has met
with great success is their cereal
breakfast food, Semolinas, for
which the local consumption is
very large. Mr. Mclntyre is an
active citizen, taking great interest
in all commercial matters affecting
Newcastle and district. For the
last two years he has held the office
of vice-president of the Chamber of
Commerce, where the knowledge
and experience he has acquired in
the various parts of the State have
been of great assistance to that
particularly active and important
body of commercial men. Mr
Mclntyre is an energetic cyclist
and fond of all outdoor exercise,
and in matters affecting the inter-
ests of the district or promoting its
social and commercial life he is
always ready to take part
Mr. JOHN CAMPION Proprie-
tor of the Jesmond Soap and
Tallow Works, Jesmond is a native
of Staffordshire England and came
out to Australia twenty-six years
ago. After working as a miner at
the Wallsend mine for six years he
started soap works on the present
site in a small wa-' by refining
tallow for the miners. As trade
increased and his means permitted,
he gradually extended his premises
and added plant for manufacturing
soap until he has built up a large
business. About five years ago a
portion of the building was de-
stroyed by fire but Mr. Campion
lost no time in having new pre-
mises erected. In addition to the
tallow refinery, Mr. Campion has a
wide demand for his carbolic pumice
sand soap the registered trade
mark. “ Cat Brand,” being well
known on the Northern line and in
MR. J. CAMPION.
the southern markets. The works
are situated within easy distance of
the municipality of Newcastle, con-
venient for distribution of the pro-
ducts by rail or sea, and a latge
dumber of hands are constantly
employed.
Mr. ANDREW COOK Timber
Merchant and Contractor, Lower
Church Street. Newcastle, started
in business as a contractor in 1896.
In 1904 he added to his plant the
latest up-to-date wood-working
machinery, and commenced the
saw-milling planing and joinery
business. In 1905 the mill was
totally destroyed by fire, but in
one month Mr, Cook had com-
menced the erection of a new mill
SA W PLANING & MOULDING MILLS
A.COOK
JOINERY WORKS.
on the present site, and now has
one of the most thoroughly equipped
saw-milling and joinery plants out
of Sydney. Amongst some of the
many fine buildings erected by
Mr. Cook may be mentioned the
two splendid public schools at
Cook’s Hill for the boys and the
girls and infants, the first large
tramway carriage-shed, Messrs.
Gibbs, Bright & Co.’s wool store,
Messrs. P. Mclntosh & Co.’s grain
stores at Hamilton, Mr. W, Arnott’s
bakery, also at Hamilton, the Citi-
zen’s Life offices, in Hunter Street
West, and many other stores and
warehouses, besides a large number
of private residences all over the
district.
Mr. Cook has been able to devote
some of his time to municipal mat-
ters, having been for several years
an alderman of the borough council.
In the preservation to the people of
the reserves in the district he has
always taken an active interest, and
given his support to every proposal
for the improvement of the city, his
sound judgment and experience
lending weight to the views which
he has advocated.


Dr. FREDERIC WEBSTER
CODING, M.D , Diplomat and In-
ventor, United States Consul for
Newcastle and the northern part of
New South Wales, and the State of
Queensland; also Consul for Cuba
and Panama for the same district,
was born at Hyde Paik, Mass.,
U S A., on the 91 h May, 1858. Origi-
nally the name was spelt Godin, and
the first representative of the family
recorded in history went over to Eng-
land from Normandy with William
the Conqueror as one of his generals.
In 1637 Capt. Henry Coding, an an-
cestor of the Doctor's, emigrated to
America. Histories of the Eastern
DR. F W. GODING.
States show that from the earliest
times whenever the country was in-
volved in war the Codings were
always on hand. Dr. F. W. Coding
has evidently inherited the more
peaceful talents of his ancestors, as
he comes of a long line of cele-
brated physicians, clergymen, and
men distinguished in the history of
the States. Dr. Alva Coding of New
Hampshire, Dr. W. W. Coding,
Government expert at the trial of
Guiteau, President Garfield’s assas-
sin, Captain John Chandler, one
of the organisers of government
in New Hampshire, Abiel Chandler,
founder of Dartmouth College, and
the Hon. Zecharial Chandler, Sec-
retary of the Interior in Grant’s
Cabinet, and U.S. Senator from
Michigan, are names to be found in
the roll of his progenitors. When
the future Coding was about five
years old his father Alphonso
Landon Coding settled in Chicago.
Having previously taught in the
public’schools of Illinois, in 1882 his
son earned his M.D. degree in the
Medical Department of the North-
western University and practised his
profession until 1898, during that
period holding many important posi-
tions. He was assistant to the State
Entomologist of Illinois in 1884-5.
In 1885-6 he filled the chair of
Natural Science in London College.
Tennessee, and while connected with
that college was assistant to the
Tennessee State Entomologist. He
was delegate to the Republican
State Conventions of Illinois in 1886
and 1896, and Mayor of Rutland
Illinois, for nearly ten years, 1887 to
1897, then in 1898 received his Con-
sular appointment for Australia.
Since coming to Australia he has
written many valuable reports on
its commerce and industry, which
have been largely instrumental in
increasing trade between the two
countries, whilst both before and
since his arrival his reputation has
been enhanced by other well-known
publications. He is the author of
“ Corporation Ordinances of Rutland,
Illinois, 1887,” “ A Descriptive Cata-
logue of the Membracidae of North
America,” which was published by
the Stale Laboratory of Natural
History, Illinois, in 1894, “A Mono-
graph on the Membracidae of Aus-
tralia, 1903,” and “ A Monograph of
the Cicadidae of Australia, 1904.”
He is also a recognised authority on
o
the difficult family membracidae. In
1896 he discovered the secret of tem-
pering copper, and in the course of
his experiments became satisfied as
to its being identical with the
methods used by the ancients. In
1897 he devised a means for we’ding
copper to iron or steel, and experi-
ments are now being carried on in
this direction by the U.S.A. Govern-
ment. Dr. Coding having domesti-
cated, has two children, and as one of
them —a son —has already shown a
disposition to follow his father’s re-
searches no doubt he will in due
course extend the long line of dis-
tinguished Codings. Having regard
to the heavy trade with the port, and
that over 100 American vessels enter
the river annually, the work of the
j'
Consulate of U.S.A. is important and
the States can be congratulated on
having a representative so efficient
as Dr. Coding and so competent to
maintain the dignity of the office.
Mr. OTTO JOHANSEN, of New-
castle, Vice-Consul for Germany at
that port, is a native of Schleswig,
Schleswig-Holstein, Germany, where
the early years of his life were spent
irTsecuring a liberal education. As
his ambitious purposes prompted
him to look beyond his native pro-
vince, he studied English, and, after
making himself proficient in the
language, he turned his attention
to London. Leaving his native land
in 1897, he became a unit in the
great population of London, and
for the first four years was con-
nected with the leading firms in the
export shipping trade of that vast
port. Australia, however, offered
inducements that could not be
secured in the British metropolis :
H. Charleston Newcastle-
Mr. MR JOHANSEN.
so. with a view of entering commer-
cial life in the antipodes, he left the
old country in 1900 for Melbourne.
While spending a short time in that
city he was appointed to the Con-
sular service at Brisbane, and stayed
twelve months in the northern capi-
tal. Then, at the request of the
authorities, he was transferred to
the service of the Consul-General
in Sydney, remaining eighteen
months in his office. After this
period he removed to Newcastle to
engage in business, with the ulti-
mate object of endeavouring to
take charge of the Consular duties
of that busy port, which up to then
had been managed from Sydney.
A change was made and Mr. Johan-
sen took over the important duties
appertaining to the office on the Ist
July, 1904. He is a strong advo-
cate of the scheme whereby it is
intended to make Newcastle a ter-
minal port.


Mr. MANUEL GUNDELACH,
M. Consul for Chili and Ecuador at
Newcastle, is of Chilian nationality
and was born in Santiago in 18S2.
He received his early education at
the French Fathers’ and National
College at Valparaiso, later on being
prepared for his final examinations
by a University teacher. In the
year 1899 he left Chili for Australia
with his father, Dr. Gundelach,
as Chancellor of the Chilian Con-
sulate. In 1900 he took temporary
MR. M. GUNDELACH.
charge of the Consulate, and in
November of the same year his
appointment was confirmed. There
is an international rule that before
anyone enters the diplomatic service
of any nation he must be at least
twenty-one years of age. But Mr.
Gundelach was only eighteen years
at the time of taking charge of this
onerous position and is still the
youngest Consul in the British
dominions. These facts speak
volumes for his natural and educa-
tional abilities ; especially when it
is borne in mind that Chili—an
independent State since 1818, and
one of the most advanced of the
South American republics—is in-
creasing its commercial relations
with Newcastle yearly. As it is,
Hunter district coal finds a
larger market in Chili than in
any other foreign country or
colonial possession, 180 vessels
sailing annually from Newcastle
with cargoes aggregating 600,000
tons or thereabouts, and represent-
ing five-and-a-cuarter millions ster-
ling. Being convinced that the
commercial preponderance and na-
tional expansion of a country essen-
tially depend on the efforts made
by consular functionaries for the
advantage of the country they
represent, Mr. Gundelach’s time is
entirely occupied with Chilian af-
fairs. And exercising his official
duties as an independent person,
neither actively connected with nor
interested in the business of the
city, the mercantile community re-
pose in the confidence of having a
foreign representative who works
lor the increment of trade in its best
sense, and gives full satisfaction to
all parties concerned. But he has
a stake in the country and the port
he resides in nevertheless. He is
married to Miss Cecily Smith, eldest
daughter of Mr. H. R. Smith, of
Newcastle.
Mr VICTOR GONZALEZ
MANTILLA,® Consul for Peru at
Newcastle, New South Wales, was
J Hubert Newman. Sydney.
MR. V. G. MANTILLA.
born in Tacna, Pern, in 1869. Fie
graduated M.A. in 1886, and after-
wards started on a tour around the
world, which lasted two years; he
passed most of liis time in England
and France perfecting his knowledge
of the English and French lan-
guages. On his return to Peru he
entered the Lima University and
studied philosophy, law and finances,
and was able to enter the diplomatic
service as Attache of Legation, a
position which he filled during three
years to the complete satisfaction of
his Government, and was promoted
to second-class secretary of Lega-
tion in Bolivia, and afterwards to
first secretary, on account of Ids
good training and undisputed diplo-
matic accomplishments. Mr. Man-
tilla is a poet (he writes in Spanish,
his native language), and is con-
sidered one of the leading bards of
his generation. He has also pub-
lished a volume of short stories, of
which no less than five thousand
copies were sold in 1903. His literary
works have also reached the stage,
and two of his dramas have been
successfully played. Mr. Mantilla
is therefore a thorough diplomat, a
good scholar and successful author,
who might in time be called to high
official positions in his native land,
Progressive Peru, one of the South
American republics advancing on
“Yankee” notions towards the de-
velopment of her immense natural re-
sources. In 1902 Mr. Mantilla, after
a few years’ service at the Foreign
Office of Lima, was appointed Consul
for Peru at Newcastle, New South
Wales.
Mr. MICHAEL MORONEY,
Mayor of Newcastle, is a typical
Australian in almost every respect
except, perhaps, the accident of
birth. Born in the city of Cork,
Ireland, while very young he came
to the Maitland district with his
parents. The greater part of his
life has been spent in the busy city
of Newcastle, and he can point with
some pride to an unblemished record
extending over forty-five years,
many of which have been devoted
to public duties as well as to private
enterprises. Beginning his com-
mercial career as a farrier, he aban-
doned this occupation after some
years to open an hotel known as the
Hunt Club, afterwards transferring
to the hostelry so favourably re-
membered by old-time residents as
the Rouse Hotel. Of an active
temperament, Mr. Moroney has at
all times manifested the greatest
interest in sport, and was instru-
mental in forming the Newcastle
TattersalTs Club, over which he
presided for three years. But manly
sport of all kinds has ever found ii\


him a stanch patron, ready to
promote and carry through any
programme, however extensive, cal-
culated to benefit the district. Mr.
Moroney gave up the business of
hotelkeeper to become the repre-
sentative of Messrs. Tooth & Co., for
whom, by his geniality, suavity and
energy, he has built up an extensive
connection in the Newcastle and
laitland districts. Being returned
to the municipal council in 1887,
for eighteen years he has faithfully
represented the City ward, being
elected Mayor of Newcastle in 1905,
an honour which he had previously
steadily and persistently refused,
owing to the heavy demands made
upon the time of an active and busy
man. Much beneficial work was
accomplished during his term of
MR. M. MORONEY,
Mayor of Newcastle.
mayoral office ; amongst other acts
in the direction of advancement
being the extension of electric light-
ing to the homes of the citizens.
This involved an expense to the
Council of over £lO,OOO. To his
untiring efforts as an alderman it is
not too much to say the city of
Newcastle owes much of its progress
in the past two decades. Mainly
through his instrumentality, and in
the teeth of the fierce opposition of
vested interests, the Council was
induced in 1900 to substitute elec-
tricity for gas, and thus greatly
reduce the cost of lighting to the
citizens. Amongst other projects
of a distinctly beneficial nature
standing to the credit of Mr.
Moroney’s aldermanic career may
be mentioned the establishment
of Courts of Quarter Sessions,
the opening of Supreme Circuit
Courts, and the budding of the
present court-house. Twice mar-
ried. Mr. Moroney is the father of
a large family. His father and
mother were residents of Newcastle
for a long term of their lives, the old
gentleman but recently passing on
to the higher life, having exceeded
the allotted span of life by nineteen
years.
Alderman WALTER M. LEVEY,
of Newcastle, who has held the
position cf Secretary to the United
Friendly Societies of the district for
ten vears, is an Australian by birth-
He was born in Pitt Street, Sydney,
in the year iB6O, and is the son
of W. Levey, and a grandson of the
late Benjamin Levey, of Wynyard
Square, so long and well known in
the city. Mr. W. M. Levey, having
spent his boyhood in Sydney,
sought other fields, and at the age
of 17 vears arrived in Newcastle,
where he at once settled down to
work at his trade of bootmaker.
Two years later, having made many
friends among the members, he
threw himself into the work of
friendly societies 63* drawing his
clearance from Sydney and con-
necting himself with the L .0.0. F.
In that order he has established a
unique record, having been instru-
mental in introducing about 500
members, and discharging the
duties of secretary for twenty years.
In 1887 Mr. Levey succeeded in
founding the Newcastle Fiiendly
Societies’ Association on similar
lines to that founded in the city of
Sydney. This association, while
proving a boon to the societies con-
nected therewith, has made large
demands on the time of Mr. Le\ e\ ,
as for the past ten years he has
filled the position of secretary, and
won the respect of members of
the institution by his industry and
tact in management. In February,
1905, Mr. Levey, at the request of
a large number of ratepayers, offered
himself for election as an alderman
of Macquarie Ward, and won the
seat. Entering the Council new to
municipal work, he soon proved his
capability as a representative and
his grasp of the requirements of the
citizens of the second city in the
State. The splendid service of elec-
tric light on the bench was installed
on his initiative, and is destined to
prove a boon to the thousands of
the population during the summer
months ; enabling them to enjoy the
cooling and healthful breezes from
the ocean while promenading free
from the dangers which would
MR. W. M. LEVEY.
interfere with their pleasuie with-
out the brilliant illumination of this
modem light. Mr. Levey has been a
member of the Hospital committee
for seventeen years, and has ever
been eager for the welfare of the
deserving poor. He has always
been connected with the Eight-hour
Movement and is a prominent mem-
ber of the Protectionist Union.
Mr. GEORGE HENRY VARLEY,
Coppersmith. Brassfounder. and
Plumber, King Street. Newcastle, is
a native of Svdnev, being born there
in November, 1854. He was edu-
cated at the Fort Street Public
School, and at an early age
apprenticed to the Mort’s Dock
Engineering Co. Having served his
apprenticeship with that well-known
company, and after gaining further
experience, first with the Atlas
Engineering Co., and then with
the A.S.N. Co. (now the A.U.S.N.
Co.). Mr. Varley «.ame to Newcastle,
27 vears ago. under engagement to
the engineering department of the


railway works ; but after six-and-
a-half years’ connection therewith,
notwithstanding his having attained
a responsible and lucrative position,
the subject of our sketch decided to
start in business for himself, and
acquired the site he now occupies
H. Charleston Newcastle
MR. H. VARLEY.
in King Street. Starting in a small
way, Mr. Varley, to use his own
expression, “has since that time
never looked back,’’ but has grad-
ually increased his stock and plant
until his business is now one of the
foremost of its kind in the northern
district. At the same time his
reputation for good work is by no
means limited to the city, as he is
often employed in carrying out
works on ships in port as in build-
ings on land. Like many other
prominent citizens, not only of
Newcastle, but, in fact, throughout
the world, Mr. Varley owes his
success in business to h's deter-
mination in early life to thoroughly
master all branches of the trade ;
so that, though employing a num-
ber of men, he not only supervises,
personally, all work entrusted to
him, but is able to take his part in
any portion of it. Outside of his
business, Mr. Varley is well known
in Newcastle for the active part he
has taken in connection with the
4th Regimental Band and the New-
castle City Band. In his youth Mr.
Varley showed a decided talent for
music, and was one of the first to
join the Naval Brigade Band in
Sydney on its formation as a brass
band. On taking up his residence
in Newcastle he joined the ranks of
the 4th Infantry Regiment, and was
one of the first members of the regi-
mental band, which rapidly reached
a very high standard and became
not merely the pride of the
officers, men and citizens, but the
envy of other less favoured regi-
ments. About seven years ago Mr.
Varley and other members trans-
ferred their musical talents to the
then newly formed Newcastle City
Band, which has become celebrated
throughout Australia from the num-
ber of times they have carried off
the first prize at band contests.
Three years in succession the New-
castle City Band carried off first
prize at the annual musical festival
at Ballarat ; and they have also
taken first prize at Bathurst, at the
Druids’ Gala contest, Melbourne,
and at Armidale. Mr. Varley, who
plays the trombone, took part in all
the performances, and is naturally
very proud of the band’s reputa-
tion, especially from the fact that
the members are all miners or other
working-men, who devote much of
their spare time to keeping up their
practice or playing for the many
charitable objects for which the
services of the band are constantly
asked, and cheerfully given. The
earnestness and hard work which
characterise Mr. Varley’s business
habits have largely assisted to keep
the City Band together, as, notwith-
standing their grand record, it has
taken all Mr. Varley’s personal
efforts, and the assistance he could
obtain from friends and sympa-
thisers, to provide the funds for
defraying the necessary expenses.
The I.iedertafel. Musical Union and
other musical societies have on
many occasions had the assistance
of the City Band ; and Mr. Varley is
always one of the foremost in offer-
ing his services when the help of
the band is asked for any charitable
object. Some time ago Mr. Varley
acquired another block of land in
Darby Street, so that, if required
by the necessities of his business, he
can erect other and more extensive
premises.
To graduate from the occupation
of a coalminer to the position of
Acting Examiner of Coalfields is
an achievement which only few
men attain. The qualities neces-
sary are not possessed by many and
the opportunity conies but seldom.
The late Mr. JOHN DIXON,
F.G.S., however, possessed the quali-
fication and seized the opportunity
when it presented itself, and through
his official career retained the good-
will of both employers and em-
ployees. His first experience was
gained in the Haswell Colliery,
Durham, England, where he com-
menced the life of a miner at the
early age of n years. Arriving in
the colonies in 1857, he and his
father commenced boring for coal in
the neighbourhood of Upper Hex-
ham, subsequently spending a few
years goldmining at Ballarat. He
returned to Newcastle in the begin-
ning of 1862 to work in the A.A.
Company’s pit, near Broadmeadow.
In 1863 he was engaged (with his
father) by the late Agent-General,
Sir Saul Samuel, to bore for coal on
the Stockton Peninsula, thus being
the first to discover the splendid
seam of coal at Stockton. He next
was engaged ;;by Sir Saul Samuel
and Mr. R. Want to search for kero-
sene shale in Hartley Vale, Blue
Mountains, and succeeded in dis-
covering a splendid seam. Following
00. this came an engagement to put
MR. J. DIXON, F.G.S.,
Late Acting Examiner of Coalfields.
down an artesian bore at Rock-
hampton, which was successfully
accomplished. The year 1869 found
Mr. Dixon again working in the
A.A. Company’s pit, and from this
period his position improved and
his influence grew. The need of


union amongst the miners led him
to take active steps towards forming
the Miners’ Union and agitate for
a Coal Mines Regulation Act. From
1876 to 1880 he held the position of
miners’ general secretary, and short-
ly after vacating that position he
was appointed Inspector of Collieries,
and for the first year had the whole
of the miners in the colony under
his supervision. On the retirement
of Mr. John Mackenzie, Mr. Dixon
was appointed by the Public Service
Board as Acting Examiner of Coal-
fields, which position he held until
the appointment of Mr. Atkinson,
Chief Inspector. The deceased
1
gentleman was a Fellow of the Geo-
logical Society, London, and a de-
voted student of physical science.
Alderman JONATHAN DIXON,
Mayor of Merewether, Newcastle
district, is the only son of the late
John Dixon, F.G.S., Chief Inspector
of Collieries, and was born on the
Ist March. 1872. His education
was received in his native district,
where the greater part of his life has
H. Charleston Newcastle
MR. J. DIXON, JUN.
Mayor of Merewether.
been spent. His father’s blameless
life and sterling worth have left
their impress on the son, who reveres
his memory and is proud of the
family name. Mr. Dixon, jun. has
been employed by the Newcastle
Coal Company for twenty years,
through wffiich he has gained a
thorough knowledge of a coalmin-
ing office. From the position of
clerk to that of head clerk and
mining surveyor Mr. Dixon has
been promoted by the directors of
the company. Outside his ordinary
duties, Mr. Dixon has served as
alderman to the borough of Mere-
wether for six years, being in Feb-
ruary, 1905, elected Mayor. While
the residents of the borough are
mainly dependent upon the mines
for employment, yet the work of
the borough must be carried out,
and in discharging his mayoral
duties Mr. Dixon is happy in his
relations with both his brother
aldermen and also ratepayers. He
is a stanch member of the Lo\ al
Orange Lodge, having held the office
of secretary to No. 151 for some
years. In 1004 he filled the posi-
tion of District Master of the Order.
The late Mr. WILLIAM WALKER
JOHNSON, for many years a resi-
dent of Wallsend, was one of the
most prominent and best known
men throughout the Northern coal-
mining townships, his name having
been associated with many of the
largest undertakings in that district,
and important works that will re-
main as a monument of his enterprise
are found in and around Newcastle.
Mr. Johnson was born at Shincliffe,
in the county of Durham in England
in the year 1840, and was the
eldest son of the late Mr. Thomas
Johnson, one of the oldest pioneers
of the district, who arrived in Aus-
tralia under engagement with the
Australian Agricultural Company at
a time when the Newcastle coal-
works were in their infancy. Im-
pressed with the prospects in a
district where immense beds of coal
awaited the enterprise of man,
Mr. Johnson soon arranged to bring
his family to the new land; and this
reunion was accomplished when the
son was about twelve years of age.
Their first home was at the Glebe,
near Newcastle —the house being the
fiist erected in that part. On the
opening of coalmines at Wallsend
Mr. Johnson, sen., removed his
family to that neighbourhood, and
Wallsend has been the home of the
Johnsons from that time to the
present, opening a store in that
town, to which was shortly after-
wards added the proprietorship of
an hotel. At his father’s death
Mr. W. W. Johnson acquired both
of these properties and materially
extended the business. Not content
to confine his activities to Wallsend
alone, he entered upon a large timber
trade and also engaged in railway
contracting, carrying out many laige
undertakings, both in New South
Wales and Victoria. The tramway
from Newcastle to Wallsend was one
of the works undertaken by him.
He was also largely interested in
mining pursuits, having at various
times secured the leasehold of several
Talma
LATE MR. W. W. JOHNSON.
collieries, including that of Cardiff,
which he held at the time of his
death. He had also several pastoral
holdings in the Scone and Singleton
o o
districts. The steamer traffic on
Lake Macquarie was practically
initiated by him. and he did much
to advance the interests of the
various settlements on the long
chain of lakes. Nor were his ener-
gies confined to this class of under-
taking. For sixteen years he was
a member of the proprietary of the
Newcastle Morning Herald. Mr. John-
son was of a personally retiring
character, which operated against
him taking an active interest in
public or political questions, but for
twenty-seven years he was a paro-
chial councillor of the local Church
of England, while the Wallsend
School of Arts found in him a
generous patron, and the local
jockey club numbered him among
its most consistent supporters. An
active part was taken by him in
establishing the local gasworks, and
for many years the management had
the benefit of his counsels as a
director.


MAITLAND
The Valley of the Hunter has long been regarded
as “the Garden of New South Wales,” because
of the wealth of its agricultural resources and of
the beauty of its river scenery. It now claims to be
“the Rhonnda Valley” of Australia, and none will
dispute the claim who have a fair knowledge of the
boundless wealth of the South Maitland coalfield.
In the heart of this fertile valley lie the towns of Mait-
land (East and West), which are separated by Wallis
Creek at a point about twenty miles from Newcastle.
The history of the two Maitlands may be briefly told.
The first authentic record of the presence of white men
Morgan, had settled on the east, or Newcastle, side of
Wallis Creek, and was probably the first settler. In 1820
the site of West Maitland was known as Wallis Plain,
or Molly Morgan’s Plains, and Molly was then living in
a hut, built on the site of the Congregational Church. In
1825 a large number of land grants were issued in the
district,ranging from five acres to 600 acres, but within
a few years many of the grants were bartered away
for kegs of rum. In 1823 the road from Richmond to
Wallis Plains was opened, and one year later a carriage
road was opened between Newcastle and the plains.
In 1831 the present site of East Maitland was laid out
Waterworks, West Maitland.
in the district dates back to July, 1801, when an ex-
ploration party, which included Lieutenant Grant and
Ensign Barrallier, rowed up from Newcastle and noted
the existence of a creek on the right bank of the Hunter
with swamps in its vicinity. In 1812 Governor Mac-
quarie authorised officials at Newcastle to test the
fertility of the soil at the first branch off the river on
the left side fifty miles from Newcastle. This branch
is now known as Wallis Creek, and a primitive farm in
its vicinity produced maize, wheat and potatoes, which
were taken to Newcastle in boats. In 1818 Command-
ant Wallis, of Newcastle, paid a visit of inspection to
the district, and named that part lying south of the
Hunter and west of Wallis Creek, Wallis Plains. In
the same year Governor Macquarie authorised the
establishment of a penal settlement. The officials
were accompanied to the new settlement by seven free
settlers, including John Smith, John Eckford and
William O’Donnell. A few months previously a well-
known identity in those days, Mary Hunt or Molly
for township purposes, and the new town derived its
name from James Maitland, Earl of Lauderdale. In
1827 efforts were made to have the site at Green Hills
(Morpeth), but the negotiations between Governor
Darling and Mr. E. C. Close, the owner of the grant,
were fruitless. The delay was annoying to some
settlers, who decided to cross the creek and settle down
on the “ Plains,’’ where Molly Morgan, and a few
other pioneers were already in possession of small
areas. Thus it will be seen that, while East Maitland
was the Governor’s selection, West Maitland owes its
origin to a few dissatisfied pioneers. The two settle-
ments prospered, but West Maitland quickly sprang
into prominence, and in 1845 was regarded as the
second town of New South Wales.
The story of the commercial progress of Maitland
needs no retelling. The sixties and seventies found it
the emporium of the north and north-west. Its his-
tory from 1818 to 1893 was one of progress, hampered,
however, by disastrous floods, which year after year,


swept all before them. The residents, at huge cost,
erected great earthwork embankments to protect the
town and the farm lands. Flood gates were placed in
Wallis Creek to keep the river in flood from backing
up the creek and inundating the agricultural areas.
Residents of the valley agitated for years for the estab-
lishment of some scheme of flood mitigation, but no
effective scheme has yet been adopted. The total cost
of protecting the district from the ravaged of floods
exceeds £40,000. Despite the fear of floods, the value
of farm land on the flats about Maitland is very high,
averaging from £25 to £lO5 per acre. In High Street,
West Maitland, the best sites could not be bought at
£4O per foot, while land in the other streets, especially
above flood levels is correspondingly high. During
the past twenty years the town has extended on all
sides. Across the river the fine suburb of Lorn is
regarded as a model residential area, while Telareh,
Homeville, Mayfield and Rutherford are developing
into fine suburbs.
H. A. Fitz-Patiick and F. W. Bloore. The principal
buildings are the gaol, convent courthouse, lands
office, boys’ high school, public school and Mechanics’
Institute, while amongst the churches it would not be
invidious to single out St. Peter’s, which is admittedly
one of the handsomest in the State..
Although Maitland’s stability has depended in
the past on the agricultural and pastoral wealth of the
Hunter, there is another powerful factor which enables
Maitland people to claim that the town is the centre
of one of the greatest coalfields in the world. The
field extends from South Greta, via East Greta, Heddon
Greta, Stanford Merthyr, Richmond Vale, Hebburn.
Abermain, Neath, Aberdare, and Aberdare Extended
collieries, to the Cessnock district, and covers an area
of about 30,000 acres. As Professor David estimates
the coal wealth at about 23,000 tons per acre it is easy
to form an estimate of the great wealth of the field.
The details relative to the different collieries are re-
served for special articles.
Lands Office, East Maitland.
East Maitland was proclaimed a municipality in
1862, and in that year the following gentlemen were
elected to the first council :—Messrs. J. N. Drunker,
E. Cobcroft, A. Dodds, J. Borthwick, F. Nainby, J.
McLoughlin, S. Scholey, A. Dickson, T. M. Mount.
The first mayor was Mr. S. Scholey. Alderman
J. H. F. Waller is the present mayor; his colleagues
being Aldermen W. H. Foster, G. T. Chambers, R.
Partridge-Wall, A. Burg, T. Price, G. P. Masterman,
W. M. Porter and G. F. \ernon. Mr. P. Bowles has
occupied the office of council clerk for nearly thirty
years. The Council has a valuable asset in the muni-
cipal gasworks; but there is no town hall, the council
chambers being located in the Mechanics’ Institute.
Associated with the Mechanics’ Institute, and under
the management of the council, is the Free Public
Library, which was established through the energy of
a few residents, particularly Messrs. J. H. F. Mailer,
W est Maitland was proclaimed a municipality in
1863, and the first aldermen were : Messrs. W. Wade.
W. T. Mitchell, W. H. Mullen, J. W’olstenholme, John
Lee, A. Liddell, J. Pender, Isaac Gorrick, and W. H.
Smith. Mr. Mullen was the first mayor of the town.
Others who have filled the mavoral chair are : Messrs.
John Lee, W. H. Smith, H. S. Badgery, J. Fullford,
J- J- Riley, R. Hrndes, J. Wolstenholme, J. Pritchard,
R. J. Pierce, J. Gillies, R. A. Young, H. Crothers,
A. Wilkinson, T. J. Ribee, F. Liddell, W. McLauchlin
and W. J. Enright. West Maitland Council; —W. J.
Enright, Mayor; Aldermen T. J. Ribee, G. A.
Little, W. McLauchlin, Walter Cracknell, L.
Morris, W. Taylor, A. Cobb, R. Wood. F. W.
Thursby, Geo. Russell, J. J. Eason, Mr. Timothy
Foley was first council clerk. Then came Mr.
James Fullford, who retired thirty years ago in favour
of the present clerk, Mr. Thomas Hughes. The other


officers of the council are:—Mr. Cecil Hughes, assistant
council clerk; Mr. Samuel Wall, general oversefer of
works; Mr. John Comergood, saleyards inspector; Mr.
T. A. McClelland, sanitary inspector. The assessment
returns per annum are :—General rates, £"2,884 ; lighting
rates, £"827; street-watering rates, £"238. The capital
value of ratable property in the borough is estimated at
£" 1,03 1,693- The number of dwellings, shops, &c., in
the borough is 1,651; properties, 2,084; an< l there
are 1,838 names on the electoral roll. There are
38 miles of streets,' all of which are in fair order. The
municipal assets, other than rates, are the town hall,
erected at a cost of £IO,OOO ; the saleyards at Camp-
bell’s Hill, which are regarded as one of the leading
G. A. Little.
Kerrs, Penders, Cohens, Harts, Wolfes, Brunkers,
Dimmocks, Sparkes, Young, Sawyers, Cracknells,
Lipscombs and Rourkes, while there are others who
have come from other districts to cast in their lot with
the people of the Hunter.
The Maitland and District Chamber of Commerce
was established in 1905, with Mr. Harry H. Capper as
president; Mr. J. H. F. Waller, vice-president; and
Mr. T. C- Shaw, secretary. The existing officers and
members are :—Mr, J. H. F. Waller, president : Mr. J.
W. Birkenhead, vice-president; Mr. P. M. Waddy,
hon. treasurer; Mr. F. G. Compton, secretary; Messrs.
O. K. Young, J. E. Chant, John Lavis, T. Dimmock,
H. IT. Capper, F. P. Carr, W. J. Enright. The cham-
J. J. Eason.
West Maitland Municipal Council.
Standing:—L. Morris, R. Wood, W. Cracknell, Geo. Russell, A. Cobb, T. Hughes (Council Clerk).
Sitting:—T. W. Thursby (Treasurer), T. J. Ribee (ex-Mayor), W. J. Enright (Mayor).
W. McLauchlin (ex-Mayor), W. Taylor.
cattle markets of the State ; and the Maitland park, o f
54 acres.
There are a number of handsome public buildings,
and warehouses, including the Commercial Bank, erected
at a cost of nearly £20,000 ; David Cohen & Co. ’s stores,
£20,000 ; Courthouse, £II,OOO ; hospital £B,OOO ; Bene-
volent Home, £4,000 ; Dominican Convent, schools and
chapel, about £20,000 ; the Bank of Australasia,
A.J'.S. Bank, Union Bank, Messrs. J. Chant & Co.’s
warehouse, E. P. Capper & Sons, the Glebe Arcade,
the Bank Arcade, &c. Some of the business houses of
Maitland are conducted by gentlemen whose fathers
were pioneers in the history of Maitland, and amongst,
others, may be mentioned the Cappers, Wolstenholmes,
ber is fairly representative of the whole district, but a
movement has been initiated with a view of giving re-
presentation to the various Progress Associations of the
district and it will probably succeed. The chamber has
a splendid field for operations, and should do much to
advance the interests of the district.
Among the public buildings which are worthy of
note are the School of Arts, Girls’ High School, three
public schools, and the various churches. All of the
industrial trades have prospered, but the largest in-
dustry is that controlled by the Maitland Brewing
Company, which has established a huge trade through-
out the State. Others deserving of note are Mr.
Thomas Brown’s monumental works and his quarries.


Messrs. Sawyer Bros.’ tanneries and boot factory ;
Mr. A. Marshall’s boot factory ; Messrs. W. R. Norman
and Sons, G. W. Norman & Co and Fry Bros., who
divide the furniture trade of the north ; Messrs. Pender
Bros.; Forest Hill Butter Factory; R. F. Marsh’s
washing machine factory.
The hospital, benevolent home, and school of arts
have already been noted ; but there are other insti-
tutions deserving of notice. The West Maitland
Volunteer Water Brigade and the West Maitland Fire
Brigade have done good service for many years, and
the headquarters of each is a substantial structure.
The Maitland Bowling Club has been established for
about two years, and boasts of one of the best greens
in the north. The Hunter District Rugby Union and
the Hunter District Cricket Association have their
headquarters in West Maitland, and have made their
mark in their respective spheres of sport. The Hunter
River Agricultural and Horticultural Association has a
record of about 46 years of good work. Its show-
Two mains carry the water to Buttai reservoir, which
is 5 miles 983 yards distant, and has a capacity of
1,051,010 gallons. By gravitation the district reser-
voirs at Minmi, Hamilton, Wallsend, Newcastle, Lamb-
ton and Obelisk Hill are supplied from Buttai, and the
mining townships of the South Maitland coalfields are
supplied by direct gravitation. The work was come
menced in 1879, and in November, 1885, water was first
sent through the mains to Newcastle. In July, 1892,
the Hunter District Water Supply and Sewerage Board
assumed control of the service. The board comprises
seven members, including the president and two other
official members who are appointed by the Governor-in-
Council, and four municipal members, one of whom
represents the Newcastle city council ; two representing
Newcastle suburban councils; and one representing
East and West Maitland and Morpeth councils. The
personnel of the board is as follows:—Mr. \V. J. Milner,
M.1.C.E., president ; Mr. G. Errington, vice-president;
and Messrs. J. W. Birkenhead, O. G. Steel, A. Asher,
Hospital, West Maitland.
ground, which is one of the most complete in the State
has an area of about 35 acres The entries at each show
exceed 4,000, and the attendance on the principal day
each year averages 12,000. Mr. Samuel Clift is presi-
dent of the Association, Messrs. R. Scobie, H. Croaker
and R. F. Graham, vice-presidents: Mr. John Rourke,
treasurer; and Mr. C. J. H. King, secretary.
The water supply for the Newcastle and Maitland
districts is pumped from the Hunter River at a point
about twelve furlongs above the Belmore Bridge, West
Maitland, into a settling tank, which has a capacity of
1, 390,5 0 0 gallon . There are four filter beds, 100 feet
square, which receive the water from the settling tank.
The filtered water is collected in a covered clear water
tank of 589,500 gallons capacity, and is pumped into
two reservoirs, at East Maitland and Buttai. The
water-main to East Maitland reservoir is 4 miles
310 yards long, and the reservoir has a capacity of
463,430 gallons for the supply of the Maitland district.
O Gilbert and G. W. Webb ; Mr. A. E. Fry, secretary
and accountant; engineer, Mr. j. B. Henson; Maitland
district inspector, Mr. Edward Nash.
The fertility of the farm lands of the Lower Hunter
needs no booming. In fair seasons the farms of Bol-
warra, Phoenix Park, Woodville, Largs, Glenarvon.
Wallalong, Dagworth, Lochend, Oakhampton and
other centres will produce five or six crops of lucerne,
which sells at from /i ss. to £y per ton. No district
in the State recovers so quickly from the disastrous
effects of a drought. With one day’s rainfall the
fields are clothed with verdure. While almost bound-
less in its agricultural resources, the district may well
claim to be in the front rank as a wine-producing area.
Dotted along the Hunter valley there are many famous
vineyards, including those of the Pokolbus district the
output of which is over 300,000 gallons per year. The
names of such vineyards as Cawarra, KaJuda, Dal-
wood, Porphyry and Coolalta are household words in


Australia. The wealth of the wine industry of the
district requires so much to do it justice that the
limited space available in this article must fail to
give any idea of its extent.
s The growth of the agricultural industry may be
gleaned on a visit of inspection to any of the bee farms
of the Hunter. The industry is steadily growing, and
among the leading agriculturists of the Maitland dis-
Space will not permit ol a complete review of the
stud-masters ot the Lower Hunter, but the accom-
panying illustrations will serve to give a fair idea of
the enterprise of the men who have not hesitated to
spend large sums in securing the best strains in the
particular breeds which are their hobbies.
Messrs. Frank Reynolds, of Local, and Sid. Rey-
nolds, of Duninauld, with their father, the late Mr.
J. G. Markham’s “Guy Fawkes,” “Andrew Mack,” and “Ernie.”
W. G. Welch’s Cob Stallion, “Keera.”
trict may be mentioned J. W. Pender, J. F. Monday,
A. Vollmer, C. R. Garnham, G. Paine, E. Tipper,
Bartlett & Vercoe, R. W. Vickery, whose hives continue
to increase.
The people of the Maitland district boast of their
farm and dairy produce and of their great coalfields, but
they may be reasonably proud of the splendid stamp
of horses and cattle bred on the Hunter River flats.
R. F. Graham’s Draught Stallion
Charles Reynolds, led the van for many years in blood
stock w'ith such well-known stallions as ‘ ‘ Cossack 5 ’
“Kelpie,” “New Warrior,” “The Barb,” “ The
Drummer,” “ Goldsborough,” “Splendour,” and
Sweet William,” whose descendants are to be met
with throughout the Commonwealth. The sons are
continuing the work of the father. Mr. Frank Rey-
nolds has an imported stallion, “ Sir Tristram,” who
is by “ Bend ’Or ” from “Angola,” whose dam is full sister
to the famous “ St. Simon.” Mr. Sid. Reynolds has im-
ported the stallion “ Prudent King,” who was bred
by Sir Ernest Cassell, and is by “ Love Wisely ” from


“ St. Reine,” by “ St. Simon Ulster Queen.”
Both horses spring from the best families in the
stud book, and are an acquisition, not only to the
district, but to the Commonwealth. Other horses
S. Reynold’s Champion Hereford Bull “Sir Rupert.”
E. W. Sparke’s Welsh Pony “Romulus."
“Dover,” imported by Mr. Scott, Glenwood, 1834.
are: —Mr. P. McCarthy’s blood stallion “America,”
Mr, J. S. O’Donnell’s blood stallion “ Demallion,”
Mr. PL W. Sparke’s Welsh pony stallion “ Romulus,”
Mr. J. G. Markham’s trotting pony stallion “ Guy
Fawkes,” Mr. W. G. Welch’s coaching stallion
Keera,” Mr. R. F. Graham’s Suffolk punch stallion
“ Wellington ” and draught stallion “ Top King.”
In the cattle-breeding the district has a large
measure of success, especially with Herefords, Alder-
neys, Jerseys, Durhams and Ayrshires. The Herefords
of Tocal and Duninauld are known throughout
the eastern States. Mr. Sid. Reynolds’ prize
hull “Sir Rupert” appears among the illus-
J. S. O’Donnell’s Chestnut Horse “Demallion.”
P. McCarthy’s Champion Trotting Horse “America.”
Rations. “Sir Rupert” was first in the yearling and
first prize in reserve champion class in the Sydney
Shows of 1905 and 1906. He is by ‘ ‘ Minerva ’ ’
from ‘‘ Princess of Wales,” both noted prize-winners.
‘ ‘ Lord Horace ” is an imported bull, bred by Mr. Hall
Ashton, of Herefordshire, one of the best known
English breeders. The Jersey cow, ‘‘Noreen,” the
property of Mr. J. J. Pearse, of Tressingfield, is a good
example of the Jersey cows of the Hunter.


Mr. JAMES H. F. WALLER,
President of the Maitland and
District Chamber of Commerce
and Mayor of East Maitland for
1905-6, is a son of Mr. G. S.
Waller, of Wallarobba, Dungog
(chairman of the Maitland Pastures
Protection Board), and was born
at the Allyn River, New South
Wales, in 1865. His early life was
spent on his father’s estate. At the
age of fourteen he attended a local
public school, where he received his
primary education. He afterwards
had the benefit of a tutor for a short
period, and then rode to Dungog
every Saturday and received in-
struction from Mr. F. W. Bloore,
now headmaster of the East Mait-
Yedwell
MR. J. H. F. WALLER.
land Superior Public School. In
1885 he entered the East Maitland
Grammar School, and in the follow-
ing year matriculated at the Sydney
University. He was then articled
to Mr. G. T. Chambers, solicitor, of
East Maitland, with whom he re-
mained for four years, when he was
Sydney. He was admitted as a
solicitor in 1892 ; he now controls
an extensive practice. In the Dun-
gog district he has for a local partner
Mr. H. E. Ellicott, and in West
Maitland, Mr. W. A. Howell. Mr.
Waller has always taken a keen
interest in municipal affairs. He
has been an alderman of East Mait-
land since 1895, and mayor of that
town for eight terms, while for four
years he has been a member of the
Council of the Municipal Associa-
tion of New South Wales. He
played an activejpart in the estab-
lishment of the Maitland and dis-
trict Chamber of Commerce, and is
now president. In the Mechanics’
Institute, at East Maitland, he mani-
fests a lively interest, and has
occupied the offices of secretary,
treasurer and president, the last of
which he has held for three years.
He is also president of the Maitland
Hospital Committee. In Church
of England circles he is also a pro-
minent figure. He represents the
parish of Mount Vincent in the
Newcastle Diocesan Synod, in which
s
he is chairman of committees. He
is a lay representative of the
Newcastle diocese in the Provincial
Synod of New South Wales, and
also in the General Synod of Aus-
tralia and Tasmania. At Mr. B. R.
W ise’s Local Government Conven-
tion, while representing East Mait-
land, he was appointed one of the
deputy-chairmen. In March, 1906,
at the North Coast Railway Con-
vention held in Grafton, he repre-
sented the Chamber of Commerce,
the borough councils of East Mait-
land and Dungog, and the Hinton
and Largs Progress Associations.
Mr. Waller was associated with D
Company Fourth Infantry Regi-
ment, but retired to the reserve of
officers as first lieutenant in 1898.
He is president of the Tenambit
Progress Association and of the
East Maitland Volunteer Water
Brigade, a magistrate of the ter-
ritory, and a commissioner for affi-
davits. In the Federal election of
1903 he was unsuccessful in his
contest for the Hunter division.
In 1896 he married Miss Fanny
Cobcroft, daughter of Mr. A. L
Cobcroft, of East Maitland.
Mr. FREDERICK W. THURSBY,
Accountant, Valuator and Estate
Agent, of West Maitland, was born
at Crewe, Cheshire, England, in
1857, ar *d came with his parents to
West Maitland in 1864. He was
educated at Sauchie House School
by Dr. John Frazer, and served an
apprenticeship in drapery with
Messrs. Woife, Gorrick & Co. For
a period of five years he was engaged
in the warehouse of Messrs. Prince,
Ogg & Co., Sydney, after which he
returned to Maitland. He started
business as an accountant, valuator
and estate agent, and has succeeded
in working up a profitable business.
For eighteen years he has been
secretary of the Maitland Per-
manent Building Investment and
Loan Society Ltd. Seven years ago
he was elected to the West Maitland
borough council, and having been
elected a member of the finance
committee, he successfully intro-
duced a system of collecting arrears
of rates which proved satisfactory
the arrears being reduced to a
minimum. He has for the past six
years been treasurer of the council,
and is chairman of the Town Hall,
Parks and Reserves Committee. In
1904 he represented West Mait-
land in the Hon. B. R. Wise’s Local
Government Convention and took
an active part in the proceedings.
He has been a member of St. Marys
Parochial Council for twenty years
and churchwarden for three years,
Cameron
MR. F. W. THURSBY.
while he is also a member of the
Presentation Board, treasurer of the
church and a representative of St.
Marys parish in the Newcastle
Diocesan Synod. For six years he
has been one of the directors of the
Maitland Co-operative Baking So-
ciety, and was chairman of directors
in 1905. In the Maitland Hospital
Saturday movement he has taken
a prominent part as organising
secretary, and he is also one of
the secretaries of the Maitland
Citizens’ Sports Committee. He
takes a keen interest in the wel-
fare of the district, and devotes
much of his time in supporting pub-
ic movements. Mr. Thursby, like
other inlanders, has a hobby, and
is very proud of the fact that his
handsome pony, “ Tommy,” has
never been, beaten at any show in
his class.


Mr. JOHN EDWARD CHANT,
Managing Director of Chant & Co!
Ltd., General Merchants, High
Street, West Maitland, is a native
of New South Wales, having been
born in Sydney in 1858. He re-
ceived his early education at the
Fort Street Model School, Sydney,
the leading public school in New
South Wales, and afterwards en-
tered a sharebroker’s office in Syd-
ney, where he remained for nearly
four years,leaving to join the staff of
Messrs. Wm. Perry & Co., wholesale
Cameron
MR. J. E. CHANT.
warehousemen. After a short ser-
vice with that firm Mr. Chant entered
the employ of the well-known mer-
chants, Messrs. Prince, Ogg and
Co., continuing with them for over
fifteen years, during the last seven
years of that period occupying the
responsible position of manager of
the Manchester department. On
the retirement from business of
Messrs. Prince, Ogg & Co. (owing to
the resumption of their property by
the State Government for the pur-
pose of carrying out the extensive
alterations and improvements to
the city of Sydney and opening up
of the fine thoroughfare in front of
the General Post Office, known as
Martin Place), the subject of our
sketch was employed by different
firms as manager of various busi-
nesses. In 1904, on the formation
into a limited company of the
business in Maitland which was
originally founded in the early
forties by Messrs. Wolfe & Gorrick,
Mr. J. E. Chant became managing
director. Under his able manage-
ment the firm of Chant & Co. has
rapidly increased its trade, which
now extends not only to the Queens-
land border, on the northern railway
line, but throughout the whole of
the State. Mr. Chant has also
borne his part in municipal life, as
in 1887, on the incorporation of the
suburb of Botany as a borough, he
was elected an alderman, heading
the poll, and in 1889, on the elec-
tion of a second mayor, Mr. Chant
was unanimously voted to the chair.
Though not long a resident of Mait-
land Mr. Chant’s position in the
mercantile community is among the
foremost, while he has shown him-
self at all times ready to assist in
any movement to advance the
interests of the district, and is a
valued member of the committee
of the recently-formed Maitland
Chamber of Commerce, and is also
a member of the committee of the
Country Storekeepers’ Association.
Like all true Australians Mr. Chant
is a lover of sport, and conse-
quently his services and experience
are eagerly sought for by the com
mittees of the numerous clubs in
the district, He is vice-president
of the Hunter River and District
Cricket Association, vice-president
of the Western Rugby Football
Club, a member of the committee of
I he Maitland Race Club, and a mem-
ber of the Maitland Bowling Club and
of the N. R. A and H. Association.
Mr. E. W. SPARKE, of West
Maitland, is one of the leading
auctioneers and commission agents
in the State. He was born at
Hexham, where his grandfather
received a large grant from the
Crown in 1825. He was educated
at Sanchie House and at East Mait-
land Grammar School. For two
years he served as a clerk in the
Bank of Australasia, after which he
entered the auctioneering business
which was controlled by his father,
J J
the late Mr. Edward Sparke, and
Mr. J. Clift, where he remained for
fifteen years. In 1892 he launched
out in business on his own account,
and very soon commanded the
largest auctioneering trade in the
Northern district. Among many
large sales in which he has been
directly interested as an auctioneer
may be mentioned Eelah, Maison
Dieu, Nelson’s Plains, Eales, Glou-
cester, Tocal and Duninauld es-
tates. He takes no practicaal interest
in public affairs, but as a hobby
takes a large interest in improving
the breed of ponies in the district.
He possesses a matchless pony stal-
lion in “ Romulus,” who is by
Roman Warrior ” from ” Miss
Johnson,” and was bred by Mr.
Cameron
MR. E. W. SPARKE.
Philip Charley, of Nerrang Station,
Adelaide. Mr. Sparke is a good
judge of horseflesh and an experi-
enced land valuator. In private
life he is held in esteem by a legion
of friends. In his auctioneering
business Mr. Sparke controls a trade
which covers the Hunter, Northern,
North-western and South Coast dis-
tricts. His special horse and cattle
sales attract sellers and buyers from
all parts of the State and from
Queensland.
Mr. I. S. O’DONNELL, of West
Maitland, is one of the largest
stock-buyers in the northern dis-
trict. He was born in Melbourne,
but came to Maitland with his*
parents as a child, and was educated
at St. John’s School, West Maitland.
He started stock-buying in a small
way on leaving school, and as years
passed by his transactions increased
to such an extent that in 1895 he
ventured into the export trade.
For a number of years he was re-
garded as one of the largest buyers
in the north, but more recently he


has been devoting all his energies to
horses and cattle. He represents a
number of Queensland agents in
the New South Wales market and
sends regularly drafts of dairy cattle
to the northern State. He has ex-
ported selected dairy cows and
heifers and Durham and Hereford
hulls to Java, China, and other
Eastern parts. In the horse trade
he is a prominent figure, having
during the last ten years exported
to India, Java, and other Eastern
parts large drafts, including cavalry
and artillery horses for the British
troops in the Transvaal and the
Japanese army in Manchuria. He
has also for a number of years
introduced draughts and hacks from
Queensland into New South Wales.
His well-known horse, ‘ ‘ Demal-
lion,” by “Medallion” from
‘ ‘ Equation,’ ’ by “ Grand Flaneur ’ ’
from “ Grand Duchess,” was pur-
chased for 1,500 guineas by the
Japanese Government, whose ex-
perts placed the horse first in the
total list of 303 stallions bought in
Australia, and “ Demallion’s ” name
was changed to “Maitland” by
the Japanese Government. Mr.
MR. I. S. O’DONNELL.
O’Donnell is a well-known en-
thusiast at amateur race meetings
and has frequently carried his
colours to victory on ‘ ‘ Demallion,
“ Prince Lyon,’’ “ Bulli ” and
othep horses. Trotting is another
of his hobbies, and amongst his
prize-winners in this branch of
sport may be mentioned “ Memie
L.,” “ Childes,” ‘ ‘ Sneaker, ”
“ Maisie ” and “ Stewart.”
Mr. JAMES G. MARKHAM,
Auctioneer and Stock Dealer, of
West Maitland, is a native of that
town, where his people have resided
for over fifty years. He was reared
among stock, and commenced to
speculate when very young. He
has been dealing in the local and
metropolitan markets lor a number
of years, and has sent large consign-
ments of draught horses to New
Zealand, Victoria and West Aus-
MR. J. G. MARKHAM.
tralia, selected from all parts of the
Hunter Valley and northern dis-
trict. During the South African
and Japanese wars he sent hundreds
ot suitable animals through agents
to the field of battle. He has taken
a great interest in trotting, which
he has follwed as a hobby. Among
his trotters may be mentioned
“Andrew Mack,” who has never
b< en beaten on any show ground ;
‘‘Ernie M.,” 13J hands high, who
has never been beaten, and “ Guy
Fawkes,” a splendid stamp of pony
stallion, who is an acquisition to the
Hunter district. Mr. Markham is
regarded as the largest dealer in
draught horses in the northern dis-
trict, and has been for some years
the largest exhibitor of horses at the
Maitland shows. In the 1906 show
at Maitland he won seven first prizes
and four seconds in eleven entries.
He is also engaged in the cattle
trade, and during the last few years
has sent large drafts of dairy cattle
to the northern districts and Queens-
land.
Mr. RICHARD MARSH, Engi’
neer, of Maitland, was born at
Nottingham, England, in 1853, and
at the age of sixteen yeais left his
parents to seek his fortune in New
Zealand. He arrived in Dunedin
in iB6q, and within a day was on
his way, tramping to the Hokitika
gold diggings, where he did fairly
well. He next tried his fortune on
the Dunstan diggings, and made
enough to enable him to return to
his English home. He purchased
his ticket, but, changing his mind,
decided to apprentice himself to
Messrs. Kingcaid & McQueen, engi-
neers, of Dunedin, with whom he
remained until 1882. He erected
the first locomotive used in New
Zealand ; assisted to build the
95-ton crane for Oamaru break-
water ; built the first gold dredge
for the west coast of New Zealand,
the first submarine boat to be used
for gold-seeking purposes, and the
first iron steamboat built in New
Zealand. This record, combined
with a large experience in boiler-
making, battery work, dredges and
engineering in general, gave him an
MR. R. F. MARSH.
experience that seldom fails to the
lot of any man. In 1882 he severed
his connection with the firm and
proceeded to Newcastle, where for
a time he was engaged at the
Government railway works, under
Mr. Boag. He subsequently took
charge of the hydraulic and steam


cranes and shipping appliances at
the Carrington Dyke, where he re-
mained lor a number of years. In
1898 he founded one of the largest
engineering works in the north,
where all his energies are now
devoted, to supply the market with
his washing machines. Being of an
inventive disposition he was con-
tinually engaged in improving
machinery, and his name is well
known in all the patent offices in
R. F. Marsh’s “Lily White” Washer.
Marsh’s Motor, coupled direct with Dynamo.
the world. Among the most sue-
cessful of his inventions are—a feed
water-heater, a heater for domestic
purposes, a trigger bar for coal
hopper waggons, a steam motor or
turbine, a hydraulic hay-press, the
colonial-type boiler now in common
use, and the famous “ Lilywhite ’’
washing machine, which has proved
a perfect success. He was the first
to introduce the Lancashire boiler
into New South Wales and make it
a success. He was obliged to
weld the flues himself. Mr.
Marsh has also built a motor
launch which he is able to
use either for business or plea-
sure, and is among the first of
its kind, to be seen on the
Hunter. A life as strenuous and
full of stirring events might well
point to the need for a long holi-
day. This was sought, and the
occasion turned into a means of
acquiring fresh knowledge and
new ideas, that on his return
could be made to add to the
business that had steadily followed
his efforts. After over thirty
years’ residence in the colonies, he
toured the world, travelling through
America twice, and visiting Eng-
land, Ireland and Scotland. In all
his travels he found no place like
his adopted homes, New Zealand
and New South Wales.
Mr. LEWIS MORRIS’ large
Aerated Water and Cordial Factory,
between Elgin and Bulwer Streets,
with entrance from the last-named
street, forms a conspicuous land-
mark in West Maitland, as it can
be seen from all parts of the town,
while his carts bearing the aerated
waters and cordials are to be met
daily on the roads leading to
Cessnock, Mount Vincent, Kurri
Kurri, Branxton and other out-
lying places within a radius of
thirty miles of Maitland. Mr. Morris
was born at sea on the 22nd April,
1856, and the following month, on
the completion of their voyage from
the old country, his parents came
up to the Maitland district, so that
he is almost a native of the Hunter.
After some years in the building
and contracting trade, Mr. Morris
purchased the present business over
seventeen years, which in his hands
has steadily increased ; but now
that his son, who has been assisting
his father for over six years, is able
to assume control of the manage-
ment, Mr. Morris, sen., can devote
more time to municipal and other
local matters in which he is inter-
ested. Like many of the old resi-
dents, Mr. Morris has always
taken an active part in any move-
ment for furthering the interests of
the district or the assistance of some
deserving institution or other charit-
able object. For three years past
he has been an alderman of West
Maitland Municipal Council, but it
is in connection with the work of the
Volunteer Water Brigade during the
disastrous floods in 1893 that Mr.
Morris’ name will always be re-
membered. The brigade comprised
over 150 men, of which Mr. Morris
was captain, with nine boats, and
it was due to the pluck of this grand
body of men that so many lives were
saved that, but for their exertions,
would have been lost. Sir George
Dibbs, then Premier of the State,
with a Ministerial party, returning
from a northern trip, were flood
bound at Farley, where they were
met by Captain Morris with his
brigade and conveyed, first to West
Maitland, and then throughout the
district, so that for the time being it
was in Mr. Morris’ power to com-
pletely “wreck the Ministry.’’
Athletics and sport of all descrip-
tions have always found a warm
supporter in Mr. Morris, and he is


very proud of the fact that even now he enjoys the dis-
tinction of having for two years in succession won the
aldermen’s footrace at the local Empire Day sports.
Mr. I Morris, junior, is a well-known athlete
and a prominent member of numerous local clubs, so
that the services of both father and son in their respec-
tive characters of supporter and performer are eagerly
sought after. Genial in manner, honest and straight-
forward in business, Mr. Morris enjoys the friendship
and respect of all classes of the community.
Messrs. CHANT & CO. LTD., General Merchants,
carry on the business which was originally founded,
in the early forties, by Messrs. Wolfe & Gorrick.
The premises are prominently situated in High Street,
the main business thoroughfare of Maitland, and the
many departments of the firm comprise all the re-
quirements for the extensive district for which they
cater. Though the formation of the business into a
limited company under its present trading name was
only effected in 1904, under the able management of
Mr. J. E. Chant, the managing director, trade increased
so much that additional space became necessary.
The company have now in course of erection larger
premises close to their present site, which, when com
pleted, will rank among the first of the many fine
buildings to be seen in Maitland. The new premises
will be ready for occupation in time for the Christmas
trade. Messrs. Chant & Co. are direct importers,
purchasing through their home buyers, consequently
their stock is always up to date in every department.
Mr, F. W. Thursby’s Pony, "Tommy."


Foremost among the business men of Maitland is
Mr. JAMES WOLSTENHOLME, who controls the
management of the large sawmills and ice-works
canied on under his name. Ihe sawmills were estab-
lished in 1842 by the late Mr. James Wolstenholme
(father of the present proprietor), on a portion of the
present site, commencing in a small way. By the
judicious and careful management of the founder,
continued by the present owner, the mills have been
enlarged and extended and the plant added to, in
order to cope with the ever-increasing trade, until now
" W olstenholme’s Sawmilling and Joinery Works ” are
among the most completely equipped and up to date
out of Sydney. The area of land occupied is nearly
one-and-a-half acres ; the office being in High Street,
and entrance to the works in the rear from St. Andrew’s
Street. As feeders to the mill Mr. Wolstenholme has
three smaller ones, two situated in the Cooranbong
district and the other in the St. Vincent’s district, the
Wolstenholme’s Joiners’ Shop.
local demand for all descriptions of timber having
increased so rapidly th?t a very large number of hands
are constantly employed. In conjunction with the
works, Mr. Wolstenholme has a large store in Elgin
Street, close to the West Maitland railway station.
The ice-works were established by Mr. James Wol-
stenholme on a site adjoining the sawmills, and, like
their neighbour, have prospered under Mr. Wolsten-
holme’s careful management. The refrigerating ma-
chinery is thoroughly up to date ; two large machines,
each capable of turning out six tons, are constantly
in use.
Wolstenholme’s Breaking-down Frame and Large Saw Bench.
Wolstenholme's Sawmills.


Previous to the year 1892 the
foundation of the bee-keeping in-
dustry of Australia was being laid
by the Hunter River Bee-keepers’
Association, in which one of the
proprietors took a leading part, and
secured, in the year 1891, the
National first prize for the best
apiary in New South Wales. This
apiary (the “ Urumfin Apiary”)
may be said to be the foundation of
the business of PENDER BROS.,
at West Maitland, New South
in a small way. In the year 1896
sufficient business loomed ahead to
induce a brother, Mr. G. T. Pender,
to throw his energies into the busi-
ness, after which rapid develop-
ments took place ; when, in the year
1898, another brother, Mr. W. S.
Pender, a bee-keeping expert and
enthusiast, was induced to join the
business, and was immediately sent
to the United States of America to
purchase the most modern ma-
chinery to replace much of that in
purpose an extensive sheet metal
department is kept busy in the
manufacture of all kinds of
builders’ sheet metal work and
corrugated iron tanks, dairy uten-
sils. bee-keepers’ tinware and
honey-tins, and a department has
lately been added for general can-
ister work. The wax-working de-
partment, where the wax sheets are
prepared as the foundation of the
new combs in the bee-hives, is
right up to date. The floor space
Wales. The many instances of
where a budding tyro begged to be
sold a hive induced Mr. R. L. Pen-
der to take over the small steam
joinery premises which a few years
previously had become the posses-
sion of his father, in which a small
start was made in the building sup-
ply trade and the manufacture of
bee-hives and other bee-keepers’
requisites, including what is known
as comb-foundation. For a few
years the business was kept going
use. By 4 the united effort of the
three brothers the business has
grown to fairly large proportions,
employing now up to fifty em-
ployees. The main wood-working
building has a'floor space of 90 feet
by 56 feet, is lofty and well lighted,
and equipped with the most up-to-
date machines, some of which are
automatic. The manufacture of
bee-keepers’requisites covers many
trades, including the manufacture
of tinware and honey-tins. For this
of the various buildings used in
the business totals nearly an acre,
and storage is found in the sheds
and yards for a million feet of
seasoning timber. The glass store
contains all kinds of plain, coloured,
figured and rolled window glass, of
whicha large stock is kept, mostly to
be used in the manufacture of glass
doors, windows, &c. Two apiaries
are kept for the breeding of pure-
bred Italian queens and bees, which
are sent to all parts of Australasia.


Messrs. BARDEN & RIBEE, Saddlers, High
Street, West Maitland, are a practical illustration of
the old adage that a man is known by his works,’ 5
as an inspection of their premises amply justifies the
high reputation of the firm for first-class workmanship.
Established in a small way nearly half a century ago,
their trade grew rapidly, and now extends throughout
the Commonwealth. The old premises proving quite
insufficient for their growing trade, Messrs. Barden
and Ribee purchased the present site, and in 1888 the
extensive building they now occupy was erected to
their order. The shop, show-rooms and stock-shops
arejarge and lofty, well lighted, with ample accom-
In the accompanying illustration are Mr. J. W. Barden,
the senior partner, a brother of his and two sons, Mr.
T. J. Ribee, the other partner, and his son, and as the
sons have all served their apprenticeship, and they
number between the two families a skilled workman
in every branch of the trade, so that if from any un-
foreseen cause all their other employees left, the firm
could carry on business. Mr. J. W. Barden was born
in Maitland in 1842, served his apprenticeship with the
late Henry Rourke, the well-known saddler, in whose
employ he remained until, in conjunction with Mr.
T. J. Ribe°, he started business in 1872. Mr. T. J.
Ribee was born in Botany, New South Wales, in 1841,
Barden & Ribee’s Offices and Showrooms.
modation for the workmen. The firm manufacture
every description of harness, saddles, &c., and import
direct all materials. In addition, oils, rugs, ropes and
horse medicines are stocked, everything being tho-
roughly up to date. The firm possess the secret of
a preparation for preserving, softening and making
leather waterproof. It is known as Barden & Ribee’s
Dip, and its fame has -pread throughout the Common-
wealth, exceptionally large quantities being sent to
Queensland. They also supply a fat black for renew-
ing the colour of and preserving old harness, and are
agents for George Elands, the champion whipmaker.
served his apprenticeship with a saddler in Raymond
Terrace, and entered the employ of Mr. Rourke in
1862, so that both parties are old identities of Mait-
land. Mr. Barden has never taken any active part in
municipal matters, but Mr. Ribee has been an alderman
of West Maitland for over fourteen years, and twice
served as mayor. The progress of the firm is a proof of
what can be done by honest hard work and perse-
verance, combined with methods of the strictest
integrity, and as business men, workmen or towns-
men they enjoy the confidence and respect of the
social and mercantile community.


Mr. ARTHUR GRAINGER , one
of the managing directors of
Grainger & Falkiner Limited, Mer-
chants and Storekeepers, Auc-
tioneers, Stock and Produce Sales-
men, Singleton, was born at Pater-
son in 1861, educated at the Single-
ton Public School, and, at the age
of 16, entered the present business,
J. Hubert Newman Ltd.
MR. A. GRAINGER.
then carried on by his father,
becoming a partner in 1884. On
the retirement of Mr John Grainger
in 1895, Mr. J. Falkiner joined the
firm, which became Grainger and
Falkiner, the present limited com-
pany being formed in 1903. From
its inception the business has
steadily progressed. The addition of
the auctioneering, stock and station
branch, controlled by Mr. Falkiner,
has justly entitled the firm to be
called “ the universal providers of
the north.” In local matters
Mr. Grainger takes great interest.
Twelve years ago he was elected a
member of the municipal council by
a large majority, and returned un-
opposed at the two following elec-
tions, but, though repeatedly asked
he has always declined to allow him-
self to be nominated for the mayoral
chair. For three years he was presi-
dent of the Mechanics’ Institute, and
is now vice-president ; he is also a
member of the local School Board,
the Northern Agricultural Asso-
ciation, president of the Singleton
Progress Association, Deputy-sheriff
of the district, and a Justice of the
Peace. For twenty-four years he
has been a trustee of the Methodist
Church. The hospital has always
found a warm supporter in Mr.
Grainger, who has been vice-presi-
dent for many years, and on the
retirement of Mr. A. A Dangar last
year from the position of president,
Mr. Grainger was unanimously
elected to fill the chair. He is a
trustee and life member of the new
cottage hospital, recently erected on
ground generously given by Mr.
A. A. Dangar. In his home life,
Mr. Grainger takes a great interest
in floriculture, and his beautifully
laid out grounds at “ Wonona,”
have on many occasions been used
for garden fetes for church or
charitable purposes. Married in
1884 to a daughter of the late Mr.
James Burns, one of the earliest
railway officials, who was present
at the turning of the first sod of the
railway at Newcastle. Mrs. Grain-
ger is almost as well known in public
affairs as her husband. For a
number of years Mrs. Grainger acted
as hon. secretary of the Hospital
Ladies’ Committee. Mr. Grainger
is the beau ideal of a good towns-
man, and has done much for the
town with which the name of
Grainger is so closely identified.
Mr. JOHN FALKINER, one of
the managing directors of Grainger
and Falkiner Limited, Merchants,
Storekeepers, Auctioneers, Stock
and Produce Salesmen, Singleton; is
a Queenslander by birth, having
been born in Toowoomba in 1868,
his father, who had retired from the
service of the A.J.S. Bank, having
purchased a place called Mount
Irvine, near Toowoomba where the
subject of our sketch spent most of
his boyhood He was educated at
the Toowoomba Grammar School
and Horton College, Tasmania,
After some years in the auctioneer-
ing business, he came to Singleton
in 1890 to act as auctioneer and
produce salesman for Messrs. John
Grainger & Son. On the retirement
Saunders
MR. J. FALKINER.
of Mr. Grainger, sen., in 1895, Mr.
Falkiner joined Mr. Arthur Grainger,
the present limited company being
formed in 1903. The auctioneer-
ing, stock and produce branch of
the firm’s business is such an im-
portant one that Mr. Jack Falkiner
is a familiar figure to all produce
and cattle men. Regular sales of
stock are held weekly, the Singleton
sales attracting buyers from all
parts. Some years ago he took in
hand the establishment of a butter


factory on the co-operative prin-
ciple, and the Singleton Farmers’
Central Co-operative Dairy Com-
pany Limited stands to-day as a
monument to his industry and
practical interest in the producers
of the district; and in any move-
ment for the benefit of the town he
is always ready to assist. He is an
active member of the Northern
Agricultural Association, and was
for some time on the hospital com-
mittee. He is, like his co-director,
a trustee and life member of the
new cottage hospital. At almost
every shooting party Mr. Falkiner
is to be found, as it is not con-
sidered complete unless he is pre-
sent. He is a prominent and active
member of the Singleton Gun Club.
In 1894 he married Miss Blair, a
daughter of the late Mr. Robert
Blair, of West Maitland, and Mrs.
Falkiner takes a warm interest in
all church and charitable affairs.
Her annual gathering at Christmas
for the poor children of the town is
always eagerly looked forward to
by the little ones.
Mr. AUDREY H. WILKINSON
is a member of a family well known
in Pokolbin, in the Maitland district.
His mother was the only daughter of
Mr. George Milner Stephen, brother
of the late Sir Alfred Stephen, Chief
Justice; her grandfather being Sir
John Hindmarsh, first Governor of
South Australia, and afterwards Go-
vernor 0 t Heligoland. His father was
the sou of Lieutenant Wilkinson and
Cameron.
MR. A. H. WILKINSON.
was tho pioneer of the wine-growing
industry in Pokolbin, having arrived
in the district on the 22nd March,
1806. Before coming to Australia he
had been through France and Ger-
many, and gained his wine-making
experience from the late Baron Liebig.
In his search for land suitable for the
industry, he explored with mattock in
hand, and eventually chose the rich
district of Pokolbin as specially
adapted for the purpose of wine-
growing. In this favoured spot, but
then little known, he planted his
vineyard, and in course of time the
rich soil on the slopes and hillsides
gave back a return, and proved bis
judgment had not been at fault.
Mr. Audrey Wilkinson grew up amid
these surroundings, but was educated
at the Maitland Public School. Tbe
loss of his father at an early age,
rendered it necessary for him to enter
upon the business in connection with
Cameron.
MR. G. M. WILKINSON.
liis brother, Mr. Garth M. Wilkinson.
They have now 30 acres under vines,
and witli a family experience covering
more than 40 years, claim that no
district is better adapted for the pur-
pose of wine-growing than that of
Pokolbin. Mr. Audrey Wilkinson is
the secretary of the Pokolbin Wine-
growers’ Association, which was
formed in 1901, the objects being to
consult, and adopt such measures as
may best promote the progress of
viticulture and wine-making. The
brothers are enthusiastic tennis
players, their tennis court overlooking
the fertile district in which their lot
is cast.
Mr. THOMAS HENRY PEARSE,
Inspector of Excise, Customs Depart-
ment, in charge of the Hunter River
district, was born at Hinton, on the
Paterson River, in the year 1857. He
was educated at the Sauchie House
seminary, the principal, the Rev.
•John Eraser, M.A., West Maitland,
having had under his care a number
of the leading men of the States ;
among the number we may mention
Sir Samuel Griffiths. Chief Justice of
the High Court of Australia, For
some time after leaving this school
Mr. Pearse held positions in country
districts till 1882, when an opportunity
offered to join the Customs Depart-
ment, and for a number of years he
was stationed in Sydney. On the
accomplishment of federation Mr.
Pearse was appointed to his present
position, as inspector of excise for the
Hunter River district. This necessi-
tates constant travel through the
district for the purpose of testing the
strength of the wines and spirits pro-
duced. Mr. Pearse is an enthusiast
in sport of all kinds, but takes the
greatest interest in aquatic contests,
specially those for the championship,
which under favourable circumstances
he makes a point of witnessing.
In a district so highly favoured
in the richness of the land and
wonderful recuperative powers, it is
difficult to select one property as
more worthy of mention than an-
other, but “ Montrose ’ ’ is note-
worthy, not only on account of its
admirable situation, but from the
fact that its owner, Mr. J. H.
DECENT, has by his own energy
and perseverance made it the most
successful dairy farm in the district.
Nestling among the hills, with ex-
tensive river frontage, fertile flats
and rich slopes, it is an ideal place
for fattening cattle. Mr. Decent,
who is an excellent judge of dairy
cattle and well-known prize-winner
at shows, is not wedded to any class
of stock, as he has found all breeds
thrive equally well in this district.
Believing that the test of a dairy
cow is the yield of milk, Mr. Decent
keeps a very complete set of books,
in which the returns' for each cow
are recorded —the daily yield of
milk and returns from factory in
cream and butter. As every cow' is
numbered, anyone whose yield is
not up to the average is promptly
discarded and replaced by another.


By this means, and careful selection
of his cattle, Mr. Decent has proved
by results that, under careful man-
agement, dairying can be made very
profitable. For one month (and
that J uly) 62 cows at one of his
dairies returned their owner £ll2,
and one Jersey cow for one week
"Montrose," residence J. H. Decent, Esq., Singleton.
returned 22 \ lbs. ot butter. The
buildings, milking sheds and dairies
are thoroughly up to date. Con-
crete floors, thoroughly drained and
lighted, and well ventilated, it would
be hard to find any place more
worthy of inspection. Always ready
to test any modern innovation well
recommended, and likely, if success-
ful, to save time and labour, Mr.
Decent has recently adopted the use
of Lawrence-Kennedy’s latest milk-
ing machines, with excellent results.
The view from the house is charm-
ing, and one that would have
delighted the landscape painter,
Turner, while the fact that
“Montrose” is only fifteen miles
from Singleton affords every facility
for obtaining supplies or a trip to
the metropolis at any time.
Raymond Terrace —on the Hunter River.


LISMORE.
THE CYCLOPEDIA OE NEW SOUTH WALES.


LISMORE
|T takes but a slight acquaintance with the North
Coast districts of New South Wales to make one aware
that two somewhat dissimilar facts in connection
therewith have ranged up alongside of each other
and stand out in strong relief, viz., no portion of the
State is so little known to-day, and no other part of
the parent colony has gone ahead since the beginning
of the seventies, more rapidly and at the same time
more solidly. To further elaborate the second of
these incontrovertible statements. Of all the hives of
industry that have been built up in this area of great
agricultural and pastoral possibilities no municipal
district can point to such satisfactory development
and such substantial progress, intellectually and com-
mercially, as Lismore. It has been said that figures
can be made to prove anything, and to a certain extent
Woodlark Street.
that is true. But facts also arc stubborn things ;
those lending themselves least to conversion being
reliable returns ; and it is upon a foundation of the
latter statistics that Lismore can claim at the present
time to be the premier township of the North, not
only in point of importance, but in point of progress.
This is the story told to us by simple figures of what
was and what now is. In 1870 Grafton, the capital of
the Clarence district, and first proclaimed a township
in the year 1850, had an estimated population of 2,100,
and with this it ranked as the tenth incorporated
borough in the colony. The total population of the
valley of the Richmond then was about 4,000 souls.
Of this total Casino, the principal township, had an
estimated population of three hundred ; Ballina, the
shipping port, was about the same size, numerically ;
and Lismore, the centre of the timber industry, came
third with no more than 275 inhabitants. In the last
census, taken 31st March, 1901, the respective returns
of each of these four boroughs is given as follows ;
Ifismore, 4,378 ; Grafton, 4,171 ; Casino, 1,926 ; and
Ballina, 1,819. That was only tour-and-a-half years
ago, and as the population has increased a little
over 25 per cent, in the intervening period, it is only
fair to assume that on the Richmond, and possibly
on the Clarence also, Lismore is forging still further
ahead of her competitors in the race for position and
wealth.
The story of Lismore has to be punctuated by
three colons, or well-sustained periods. First the
timber and oast oral age of pioneering and small begin-
ings fills in the canvas of the historical representation.
Following on this comes the epoch of sugar-cane, and
the throwing open of the rich Crown
lands to the small selector ; whilst,
next in succession, the existing era
is dominated by dairying and a
healthful expansion of settlement,
which bids fair to rival the pro-
verbial mustard tree in the out-
growth of its branches. Early in
the year 1837 cedar-cutters, hewing
their tracks along the coast-line as
they pushed further north from the
Bellinger and the Nambucca, came
upon the Clarence River ; and in
the following year, still drawn to
higher latitudes by the magnificent
forests ever facing them, the peace-
ful waters of the Richmond and its
entrancing scenery opened to their
admiring view. But the eye of the
white man had dwelt on this won-
derful panorama of Nature’s beauty
even earlier than this. A man with
a history, Richard Craig, was one
of the first confinees at the Moreton
Bay penal settlement, then in the days of its infancy.
In 1827 he escaped from the settlement along with
five other prisoners and wandered amongst the blacks
for seven years, his one aim during this period being
to work down to Sydney. Crossing the various water-
ways as he gradually made his way southwards, he
discovered the Clarence in or about the year 1833, and
not long afterwards, falling into the hands of the
officials at Port Macquarie, he informed them of the
whereabouts of this “big river,’’ and also of some
missing Government working bullocks he had stumbled
across in the bush. The last piece of information
secured him his pardon, intelligence about the “ big
river ’’ leading to its being officially located by the
revenue cutter “ Prince Arthur ’ ’ in the middle of the
following year. Unfortunately, the discovery of the
larger stream entirely eclipsed for the time being the
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


lesser finds, and nothing was done to establish the
whereabouts of the Richmond, or the Tweed rivers,
until the timber-getters appeared on the scene and
pitched their first camp in the neighbourhood between
Alstonville and Ballina. Continuing their course up
stream, they left the credit of discovering the Richmond
Heads to Captain Rous, of the Royal Navy, whose
name has appropriately enough been given to the
present county, extending along the coast-line to the
Queensland border, and to the Lismore district elec-
torate. The glowing reports of the hewers of timber
concerning the fabulous wealth of wood lining both
banks of the Richmond in due course of time travelled
south, and to unexplored regions, far beyond the track
of the woodman’s axe, was settlement encouraged. A
steady stream of people poured in from most of the
southern districts, the first to “ squat ” on an extended
scale being Messrs. Clay and Stapleton, who took up a
station in 1839 and started clearing, on the site where
the township of Tomki now stands.
With an immense area of cedar
brush-land of the richest descrip-
tion to be tapped, forming, in fact,
the most magnificently timbered
portion of the colony, it was not
long before an important com-
mercial centre sprang up at the
mouth of the river, and the founda-
tion of Ballina was permanently
laid. In fact this modest nucleus
of the future township was regularly
visited for trade as far back as
1840 by Mr. J. H. Grose’s notorious
paddle steamer “ King William
“ Old Billy ” she was more com-
monly known as —and two other
steamboats. The pioneers, how-
ever, had one supreme difficulty to
face which for a while seriously
hampered their movements. There
were the giants of the forest felled
by keen and deftly-handled axes ;
there flowed the deep waters of the
river running down swiftly to the ocean beyond ; but,
like other northern streams, unfortunately, the Rich-
mond had not an uninterrupted passage to Father Nep-
tune’s lap. The mouth of the river was blocked by a bar
stretching right across, which for several years resisted
all efforts at navigation. Thousands of pounds’ worth
of timber felled by settlers lay cumbering the ground
prior to the advent of carriage and saw-mills. At last,
in 1843, a pioneer steamer successfully got over the
sand-swept rocks at the mouth and was taken up
stream to the head of the river, opposite modern Lis-
more ; and from this remote period, nearly sixty-five
years ago, when commerce was wrapped in swaddling
clothes, and steam but a circumstance of yesterday,
the doody doings of the township which was to be
were inaugurated ; and Prosperity started on a course
which it may be said, without foolish vaunting, has
never been seriously checked.
Once water carriage was assured the timber in-
dustry went ahead with great rapidity, notwithstanding
serious drawbacks yet to be overcome, and it induced
a great influx of people, some of whom still survive.
The boats used in those days were so diminutive in
size that the timber had to be sawn by hand at the
pits in convenient sizes to fit the hold. Worse than
this, there was an utter absence of hauling contriv-
ances, and the logs had to be rolled to the spot to be
cut. Sawyers frequently had to work on trees of the
largest girth single handed with the crosscut-saw,
weighting one end by attaching a large stone. As the
space between the timber belt and the river was gradu-
ally increased many took up selections and went in
for farming on Emigrant Creek, their descendants at
the present day evidencing in their successful dairying
much of the perseverance and adaptability of their
progenitors. .Settlement was also initiated in the Big
.Scrub, that valuable, rich, volcano tableland to the
eastward of Lismore. The first selector here was
Mr. Andrew Freeborn, who came to the district from
Public School.
Kiama, like so many of his successors. In 1851 the
geld fever swept over the Richmond with the same
torrent of force as it affected other portions of the
colony, and all classes, succumbing to the allurements
of a royal road to fortune, forsook their callings in
pursuit of the new attraction. Native gold, in easily
worked alluvial deposits, was found between the north-
ern head waters of the Clarence and Richmond rivers,
and rushes to Tinbarra, Miller a, Drake, Tooloom and
other fields almost entirely suspended business for the
time being. But the course of events proved that the
real gold-fields were not to be found hidden in the
bowels of the earth, but lay on the surface, in very
tangible form to the eye keen enough to recognise
the fact. Cattle at this time could be bought on the
stations at ios. and 12s. per head. Supplies soon,
however, fell off, and in 1852 cattle went up to £8 a
head, tallow was worth £3O a ton, and cedar sold readily
at 80s. per hundred feet. A ton of flour on the river
could command £BO, and bread would sometimes jump
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


to 2s. a quartern loaf. This was the commencement of
the “good old times ” for the agricultural and pas-
toral community, old identities never tire of sighing for
and chattering about. Money was plentiful with all
sections of the community, and to meet the scarcity
of white labour the almond-eyed Chinaman was im-
ported in considerable numbers. After a few years
one by one the fields were deserted for more valuable
finds, and “John ” trekked from the district afoot, to
fossick and accumulate the precious metal on the ground
forsaken by his more impatient predecessors. Until
the end of the fifties the settlers had very hard times
to encoimter in their everyday life and no end of dis-
comforts to endure owing to the exceedingly limited
means of communication with the metropolis. No
school existed in the neighbourhood cf Lismore prior
to 1858, and the one erected during that year was
simply matchless in the direction of what such an
institution ought not to be. Children at a distance
Post and Telegraph Office.
had to find their war through the under scrub as best
they were able, for in those days there were but very
few bridle tracks, and roads had not come into fashion.
Under such circumstances it is not surprising to learn
that no pretensions were made at this period to a mail
service of any description. When the postman did
happen along he was an identity quite outside
officialism. The squatters for several years under-
took to convey the mails from Casino to Grafton,
after which the Government relieved them of the
duty by establishing a post between Casino and Coraki.
Churches, as we know them to-day, magistrates, and
even policemen were no more likely to be encountered
than were roadways. Yet the spiritual wants of the
community were not entirely neglected, a. Dr. Lang,
the Rev. j. Thorn, and other peripatetic ministers of
the Gospel made it a practice to administer their office
to their respective adherents at least twice a year, if not
with greater frequency. The wrong-doer was dealt with
summarily when detected in the pursuit of evil courses,
the most popular form of punishment being chaining
him to a tree for a period to be decided by a majority
of those sitting in judgment on him.
With the passing of the Robertson Free Selection
Act in 1861 agriculture in the valley of the Richmond
speedily extended, and, notwithstanding the fact that
the rich alluvial soil on the immediate banks of the
Richmond has a very impervious clay subsoil, backed
by large clayey plains, which renders it less suitable for
farming operations, the cultivation of maize, sugar-
cane, bananas, vines, and other similar semi-tropical
productions was introduced on either side of the river,
and nroceeded to gradually absorb the areas of cleared
• # - . . . -j
ground until the general adoption of dairying in 1895
put an end to further expansion. At the outset maize
claimed much attention, sugar-growing having to
overcome no little indifference and even prejudice. It
was not until 1867 that a marked change in public
opinion began to manifest itself.
In that year the Rev. J. Thorn
introduced sugar cultivation into
the Richmond district, his canes
being brought from plantations on
the Hunter River. How soon the
saccharine plants became success-
fully acclimatised will be gathered
from two facts. In 1869 Lismore
sugar commanded £36 per ton in
the open market, and at the Inter-
colonial Exhibition of 1870 John
Sharpe, of Richmond River Heads,
exhibited specimens of sugar from
Violet Ribbon plants, realising
£3B per ton. To many growers
enjoying these high rates it was
found there were counter-balancing
disadvantages. While the growing
proved profitable crushing could
not be successfully worked at
private mills unless these were on
a very large scale. One by one
mJ O
the small isolated mills shut down,
and a serious position arose
throughout the district. This
was only relieved when the Colonial Sugar Refining
Company stepped into the breach and erected mills
in the various centres, involving machinery to the
extent of (750,000, the Broadwater mill, on the
Richmond, being the largest and best equipped of
any sugar mill in the world. Notwithstanding dairy-
ing having largely replaced sugar-growing around
Lismore, the industry is still of some importance to
the district, and new varieties of cane are frequently
being introduced, owing to the efforts of the Depart-
ment of Agriculture, which has established at Wollong-
bar, on the Richmond, an important experimental
farm. In the county of Rous there are at the present
time 595 holdings, covering 13,559 areas, devoted to
the product of sugar—an area comprising about three-
fifths of the total acreage of the State under cane crops.
The yield obtained from 6,392 acres of productive cane
amounted to 119,398 tons, showing an average of 18.7
tons per acre. These figures, the latest published in
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


“The Wealth and Progress of New .South Wales,”
show there has been a great decrease in the acreage
under cultivation since 1897 ; due, in a large measure,
to many of the growers abandoning cane-growing in
favour ef dairy farming, an all-your-eggs-in-one-
basket policy not a few are now inclined to regret.
In the earliest days of the butter industry
the pioneers were Messrs. William Crawford, Michael
O’Connell and John Robertson, of Alstonville, with
Mr. Newton, or Wollongbar, and Mr. 1,. Heydon, of Gool-
mangah. The latter, it is said, was the first to try a ship-
ment of butter to Sydney. The local price of butter
then was from is. to is. 3d. per lb., the city market
averaging from 2s. to 3s. in winter, but as low as 2d.
and 3d. in the summer. In 1886 Mr. William Walmsley,
of F.ltham. introduced the cream separator as a private
concern ; and the first co-operative venture was estab-
lished by Mr. John Seccombe, under the name of the
Spring Hill Dairy Limited. The Byron Bay factory
opened business in June, 1895,
with thirty-five cans of cream a
day ; at the end of 1904 the
average weekly output of the
Lismore branch of this largest
butter factory in the southern
hemisphere was over twenty-six
tons about the limit of the
machinery. But new plant has
been put in capable of dealing
with twice that quantity. The
Lismore Co-operative Factory is
now served by four hundred
private separators and Byron Bay
by over six hundred. These
figrrres show the advances made
during the last few years and the
rapid development of the in-
dustry— the outskirts of which
have only been touched so far—
is reflected by the new and vigor-
ous life infused into the town of
Lismore, as well as all the
other towns in the valley of the
Richmond.
If Grafton can make good her claim to being
designated the Queen City of the North Coast, Lismore
assuredly is the Hive. Not even excepting Newcastle,
outside the capital there is no better controlled or
business-like centre in the State. Lacking the pic-
turesque attractiveness of other northern cities ; being,
in fact, at somewhat of a disadvantage in its low-lying
position, surrounded by lofty hills, it has enjoyed for
many years an ever-increasing prosperity, which other
places, more favourably situated, envy. As the town-
ship is approached on the river, saw-mills, creameries
and butter factories serve to remind one of the busy
scenes to be encountered in its leading thoroughfares.
On Saturday nights its streets are thronged with well-
to-do country people, spending their cash with a free-
dom which tells its own story of successful dairying.
Lismore is the dairyman’s market-place par excellence.
He commands the lion’s share of the trade, so that its
stability rests upon the most desirable of all commercial
foundations— i.e., a cash basis. All the principal
buildings are of brick and stone, and to the stranger
their predominating practical character immediately
asserts itself. Evidently a strong vein of common
sense attaches to those entrusted with the destinies of
the municipality. Ornamental art, always in evidence,
is judiciously subordinated to the useful. The hand-
some memorial erected in Molesworth .Street to com-
nmmorate the return of the Light Horse Contingent
from South Africa loses none of its shapliness by being
made to augment the street illuminations. To mark
the record reign ot Queen Victoria a drinking fountain
of high artistic merit adorns the leading thoroughfare,
Similarly this characteristic is noticeable in most of
the principal public and private buildings. When the
city fathers have expended {lO,OOO to secure the rate-
payers a perfect system of water supply and sewage ;
when another {7,000 has been expended in gasworks;
Molesworth Street.
when an excellent telephone service—perhaps in more
constant use than even the one in .Sydney—places
inhabitants within hearing of all the chief centres in
the Richmond district; it is only in harmony with these
undoubted evidences of enterprise to find new and
more costly churches intended to replace other edifices
either discarded or destroved ; to find land realising:
7 o
£7O a foot, and commercial emporiums, such as that
shown in the accompanying sketch, covering half an
acre of ground ; to find fourteen hotels, all above the
average country hostelry, and one —the Hotel Ryan—-
second to none outside Sydney ; to find, in short, tes-
timony of earnest go-aheadism in every direction.
The illustrations of Woodlark and Molesworth Streets
give a good idea of the compactness of the township
and the care exercised in preserving its uniform ap-
pearance. Included amongst the many prominent
and attractive public buildings are the Post Office and
the Superior Public School—the representations of
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


which in this article speak for themselves —and the
Hospital. The latter, on Postman’s Ridge, is as ade-
quately designed and equipped as any similar insti-
tution beyond the limits of the metropolis. It is the
outcome ot a modest movement, when the present
site was dense scrub and the total available accommo-
dation one ward and three other rooms. Now the
annual expenditure runs into £1,600, with no fewer
than 300 cases and 100 operations. Among other
structures tending to augment the architectural pre-
tensions of the borough are the Lands Office, the Court
House, the Technological Museum, the Council Cham-
bers, the School of Arts—-with 1,500 volumes, —the
Free Public Library, with 400 volumes ; the Joint
Stock, English and Scottish, New South Wales, and
A.M.P. Society’s Buildings.
Commercial Banks ; the Church of England place of
worship, lately put up at considerable expense and
opened in November, 1905. The Roman Catholics are
building a cathedral to replace the one burnt down last
New Year’s Day ; and the Presbyterians have accepted
plans for a new and more commodious edifice.
Lis mo re was proclaimed, a municipality on March
4, 18-79, Mr. Stocks being the first mayor. Situated
at the head of the northern arm of the Richmond
River, the town proper is connected with South Lismore
by a fine iron bridge, which spans Wilson and Leycester
creeks. It has 54 miles of roads and streets, with an
annual income of £26,500. In 1901 the ratable pro-
perty represented £458,600, and the liabilities of the
corporation amounted to £12,000. Since then building
has gone on continuously, no less than 62 houses being
erected in 1905 ; and so constant is the demand for
accommodation that it rarely happens either shop or
dwelling is available. The town is systematically and
compactly laid out, and from the numerous up-to-date
stores the inhabitants can be supplied with every com-
modity equal in variety and price to those in Sydney.
The principal streets, in which most of the business
premises are centred, are Molesworth and Woodlark
streets —both busy thoroughfares. Hansom cabs and
four-wheelers ply for hire ; bootblacks are in attendance
on the footpaths, and the municipal authorities and
police enforce restrictions to safeguard the travelling
public far more stringently than many cf the busy
suburbs around the metropolis. The Fire Brigade, an
efficiently equipped and smart
body, has two engines, two reels,
a hose cart and 1,500 feet of hose.
It seems almost superfluous to add
that the members of the Council
arc men of proven ability, most of
them with experience acquired in
other parts, and all possessing a
big stake in the district. Quarter
vSessions, District Courts, Courts
of Petty Sessions and the Small
Debts Court are held here. The
military are ably represented by
the Light Horse, with their
veterans seasoned on the veldt,
and the Scottish Rifles—as fine a
body of men as any in the service
of the Commonwealth. To the
energy of the Chamber of Com-
merce in the past the town owes
much of its present prosperity.
The Caledonian Society has also
contributed its quota to advance
the general interests of the com-
munity. Butter, cheese, eggs, poul-
try, pigs, bacon, and hard wood
of every description represent the main exports of the
district. A coach service links Tenterfield; river
steamers connect all the towns on the Richmond and
Lismore daily. The railway running from Casino,
through Lismore, to the Tweed River is of great
benefit to the district ; but it gives greater advantages
to Brisbane than to Sydney. The people of the dis-
trict look forward to the time when the great North
Coast railway shall connect their present system with
Sydney. Meanwhile the commodious and swift
steamers of the North Coast Shipping Company cater
for the wants of ocean travellers to their entire satis-
faction ; whilst this powerful company does everything
possible to make so important a town ai.d district
accessible to the people.
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


The North Coast Steam Navigation
Company Limited.
IN the development of the Northern coastal dis-
tricts of New South Wales there has been no
greater factor than that perfect system of water
carriage gradually built up during the past half-century
and upwards by the various shipping com-
panies now merged into the North Coast
Steam Navigation Company Limited.
Imbued with the belief that a proper con-
ception of the beauties and resources of this
portion of the State is the one thing lacking,
it has ever been the aim of the Company to
bring the sea-girt areas of the North to the
people, in the hope that the
dissemination of this know-
ledge may conduce to the
greater prosperity of those
already settled there.
lake many other parts of
the State which appear on
first thoughts to lie in
the dim and distant
beyond, this is really y
ridiculously easy of
access. It is possible, ,
for instance, to leave
Sydney late on Satur-
day night and wake up
on Monday morning
well within the Clarence
River Heads. One may
easily lunch in Grafton
that forenoon. Further-
more, it will be possible
to reach the same spot
by rail from Brisbane
in a very few hours, as
soon as the line between
Grafton and Casino is
completed. The district
is so well served in the
matter of water car-
riage, it is so fortunate
in its soil, its climate
and its rainfall, that it
The S.S. “Kyogle.”
marches ahead despite obstructions, and still there is
room there for a population ten times as great as it now
carries, without overcrowding and without undue com-
petition. For there is every variety of soil within this
vast coastal belt, everything from poor grazing country
to the richest of basaltic ; there are magnificent water-
ways second to none in Austrabisia ; and practically
the whole of the softwood and hardwood timbers
which have made the name of this State in other parts
of the world are drawn from the forests that lie
between the tableland
and the coast. It is a
land overflowing with
milk and honey, and
requiring only a much
larger population. The
number of residents at
the last census was re-
turned at 80,499, a mere
handful for such a vast
area of country. There
is, therefore, elbow
room on the coastal
belt, endless variety of
soil and climate, and
enough of natural
beauty to satisfy the
most fastidious. In the
admirable guide - book
issued by the North
Coast vShipping Com-
pany Limited official
returns are given show-
ing the areas under cul-
tivation and their yield,
the operations of the
grazier and dairyman,
and the industrial occu-
pations of the popula-
tion. The intending
settler will further find
therein valuable data
as to the chemical nature and quality of
the soil on the different rivers, together
with the average annual rainfall over
each district, based on all the observa-
tions made at the Government Observa-
tory. Also, on reference to the maps,
he may see at a glance the principal
areas of Crown, and private land avail-
able for settlement at the present time ;
special attention being devoted to the
rich reserves now being and lately
thrown open —such as the Dorrigo, the
Comboyne, Dunoon, &c. Finally, the North Coast
resident will have in this booklet in handy form
all the information he needs in regard to communica-
tion with market, either by sea or by road.
The North Coast Steam Navigation Company
limited is one of the oldest, and at the same time it
is the largest, steamship company owned in this State.
For upwards of half a century it has contributed in
no small measure to the rapid advancement of the
North Coast, and very often under the most trying
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


conditions. This is the inevitable lot of all pioneering
companies. But throughout its whole career, and
particularly during its modern operations, it has been
steered by keen, level-headed, business men to its
present proud position in the mercantile shipping of
the State. The history of the Company, which was
originally known as the 11 Grafton Steam Navigation
Company,” has been further dealt with —more par-
ticularly in respect to early days—in the article on
“ Shipping and the Making of Ships,” at the com-
mencement of the maritime sections of this work.
It begins with the pioneer settlement on the Clarence
River, the Company being formed largely through the
efforts of gentlemen who had acquired interests in. the
district in the early fifties. The discovery of the
Clarence River dates beyond that period, but up to
xSs7_the year in which the articles <>f association of
this Company
were signed -
the rivet was
served almost
entirely by sail-
ing vessels.
The original
share capital of
the Company
was £13,500, in
£lO shares ; the
original direc-
t ors were Mr.
Francis Mitch-
ell, Mr. Clarke
Irving of the
Colonial Sugar
Company (who
was the leading
spirit in the
movement and
the first Parlia-
mentary repre-
sentative for
the district
under respon-
sible govern-
ment), and Mr.
Robert Waterston. The first auditors were : Mr.
David Jones, who started the present firm of
that name, and Mr. James Grant Tindall, known
throughout the North Coast district as the owner
of the Ramornie station and the founder of the
extensive Ramornie Meat Works, on the Clarence
River. The steamer ‘‘William 1V.,” familiarly
known in those days as ‘‘Old Billy,” ran for the
Company to the Clarence, between the years 1857 and
iB6O. The ‘‘ Phoenix,” a paddle steamer which was
bought by the Company, also appears as a pioneer of
the Northern River trade, but the steamer by which
the Company is better known during its infancy is the
“ Grafton,” built by Laird, of Birkenhead, and iden-
tified with the trade for a great number of years.
Early settlers on the Clarence will remember that she
carried what are known as ‘‘ steeple engines.” The
vessel was eventually sold by the Company to Mr.
Manning, the son of the gentleman who originated
tlie Illawarra Steam Navigation Company. She car-
ried thirty passengers and about one hundred tons of
cargo, and it is interesting to note in this connection,
since this was practically the pioneer paddle steamer
in the trade, that the passage from Grafton to Sydney
in those days was as high as £y and f reight on maize
as high as 4s. a bag. The contrast with the present
rates for passengers and cargo speaks for itself.
Another vessel associated with the pioneering days is
the “ Fend la,” also a paddle steamer, with accom-
modation for about twenty passengers and 150 tons
of cargo. She ran in the Company’s interest for three
or four years.
The second stage in the Company’s career com-
mences with the opening up of the Richmond River
trade. Originally the whole of its attention was
devoted to the Clarence. It was in iB6O that the
shareholders
decided to re-
construct the
Company with
an increased
capital of
£50,000 in £lO
shares, and
alter the name
to the ‘ ‘ Clar-
ence and Rich-
mond Steam
N avigation
Company.”
One somewhat
unusual feature
in the original
articles of asso-
ciation still sur-
vived, viz., that
while the share-
holders were en-
titled to receive
any dividend,
they were
equahy liable
to pay their
share of any
loss and to contribute their proportion of any extra-
ordinary repairs.
The first boat in the new trade was the “Waimea,’'
another screw boat, carrying about forty passengers
and 150 tons cargo. She was in charge of Captain
Turner, late manager of the Illawarra Company, and
was wrecked, after less than two years in the Company’s
service, on the Richmond River bar. The boat was
originally bought from the Illawarra Company, and
she was the only screw boat in the service. The
“ Orara,” a boat specially built in England for the
Company and brought out by Captain Wiseman,
shared a similar fate with the “ Waimea,” but on the
Clarence River bar. The “Duncan Hoyle’’ is
another boat identified with this era of the Company’s
career. The “ Platypus,’’ brought out originally by
the Queensland Government, was purchased by the
Company, with the express object of re-opening the
Richmond River trade, which had been abandoned
Bangalow Cattle Show
THE CYCLOPEDIA OE NEW SOUTH WALES.


for some time owing to the loss of the “ Waiinea.”
There remain also to be mentioned in connection with
this epoch the “ Agnes Irving ” and the “ Ballina.”
The “Agnes” and the “Florence Irving,” two
sister ships, were built in England to the order of the
late Mr. Clarke Irving. The Company purchased the
“Agnes,” which developed into one of the most
successful boats ever run in the northern trade, carry-
ing sixty passengers and over 300 tons of cargo. She
had a good turn of speed and an excellent master in
Captain Henry Creer, who enjoyed the reputation—
and deservedly so—oi
being one of the finest
seamen in Australia. The
Agnes Irving ’ ’ ran for
a great many years in
the trade, but was eventu-
ally lost on the Macleay
River. In the course of
time, as the Company’s
fleet increased, attention
was directed to the lower
coastal rivers, but especi-
ally, in the first instance,
to the Manning and the
Macleay. At that time the
i ( t - ' * Tr * y )
Fire King
had been built
and run on the
Macleay by Mr.
William Marsh-
all, who in those
days acted as
his own engin-
eer. The Clar-
ence and Rich-
mond Company
purchased the
“ Fire King,”
but ran it in the
Manning River
trade. The
‘ ‘ Queen of the
South ’ ’ and the
“ Woodburn
were also identi-
fied with the
lower rivers. The
“ Woodburn
is now known
From Scrub to Saw-mill.
as the “ Macleay.” The “ Diamantina,’ ’ another
vessel tunning to the Manning, was purchased from
the Company by a syndicate of Manning River
residents, who appeared to be dissatisfied with the
existing service; and with the “ Diamantina
went the Chrence and Richmond River Company’s
interest in the Manning River trade, but after a short
and painful career the local company went into liqui-
dation, as so many other local companies entering
into competition with pioneering steamship under-
takings eventually did.
About the year 1880 Mr. T. R. Allt, who had
been associated with the Company’s career since
1861, took practical control of the operations on the
coast. Largely through his efforts quicker services
were established with the different rivers, and con-
currently with this improved means of communication
commenced the more prosperous and sound financial
phase of the Company’s career. Several competing
interests were acquired. For some fifteen years a
company formed on the Clarence River, and known as
the “Clarence and New England Steam Navigation
Company,” had competed successfully with the old
Company in the north. But about 1881 the local
company got into financial difficulties through launching out too
deeply, and their new steamer, the “ Clarence,” became the
property of the Clarence and Richmond River Company, hence-
forth being known as the “ Currajong.” Sir John See (then Mr.
See) held a scat on. the board of the parent Company at this time,
but, having resigned, he bought the “ Rubra ” and took up the
Clarence River trade in. conjunction with Mr. Nipper, under the
style of “Nipper & See.” Their trade rapidly spread from
the Clarence to t. e Bellinger, the Nambucca, the Hastings and
the Manning. Mr. Nipper retired from the partnership,
which was then run as ‘‘ John See & Company,” the
new and the old companies practically working in con-
junction on the Clarence River. The old Company by
this time had largely increased its fleet and its hold
on the rivers. The “ City of Grafton ” had been
built by the
Clarence and
Richmond Com-
pany, under the
supervision of
Captain Creer,
especially for the
Clarence River
trade. The
“ Electra,” de-
signed for the
same river, and
the first vessel fitted with a refrigera-
tor and electric light apparatus,
followed, while the “ Coraki and
the ‘ ‘ Tomki ’ ’ were put into the
Richmond River trade. The ex-
cellence of the service at this period,
as compared with the original once-
every-ten-days trips, had its effect
on the Northern River trade, which
was rapidly falling into the hands
of the parent Company. In De-
cember, 1888, it was again re-formed,
under the style of the ‘ ‘ Clarence, Richmond, and
Macleay Rivers Steam Navigation. Company Limited,”
with a capital of £150,000 in £1 shares, and with ex-
tended powers. The Company purchased splendid
water frontage accommodation for its fleet and for
the storage of produce at a very large cost, and
made every possible effort to ensure the successful
and expeditious handling of the rapidly growing traffic.
As a result produce is now conveyed from the farm to
the market without any trouble to the producer. The
Company’s store in Sussex Street is practically the
maize centre of the metropolis.
Itwa' 1 in the year 1891 the firm of Messrs. John
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


See & Company was merged into the parent Company,
the latter in their purchase acquiring such steamers as
the” Helen Nicoll,” the” Rosedale,” and the” Aus-
tralian.” With this absorption occurred a recon-
struction of the old Company, which was now regis-
tered under the title of the ‘ ‘ North Coast Steam
Navigation Company Limited,” with a capital of
£250,000. In accordance with a previous agreement
the head of the then defunct firm of John See & Co.
became managing director of the new company, in
conjunction with the Chairman, Mr. T. R. Allt, who, by
the way, had remained in the chair since 1880, and still
remains in charge after twenty-six years of unbroken
service. The object of the purchase just referred to
was to economise management, to give reduced rates
to the producer, and to encourage further settlement
on the coast ; and anyone who has a knowledge of the
development of the North Coast will realise what an
important factor in that equation this policy has been.
Following closely on the reconstruction came the
purchase of Mr. Bruce Nicoll’s steamers the ” Wy-
ralla ” and the “Emma Pyers,” together with his
S.S. “Ramornie” on the River.
interest in the Richmond River trade. The Byron
Bay trade was opened up largely with the object of
conveying material for railway contracts in the north.
Another Richmond River competitor sold out to the
North Coast Company soon after. This was Mr.
W. G. Yeager, who, for the convenience of his saw-mill,
had built the “Wyoming” and the “Oakland,”
and who at a later stage had entered into competition
with the North Coast Company with these steamers,
together with the “ St. George.” He disposed of all
his steamers and his interest to the Company.
Details of the Company’s career during the nine-
ties are too recent to require setting out. One may
mention, however, that although in 1901 the Govern-
ment resumed the Company’s wharf property at No. 3
Sussex Street, together with all the Darling Harbour
water frontages, a long lease was secured of the pre-
mises, thus affording continued assurance to shippers
of existing facilities. Further, that the “ Kyogle,”
the “ Ramornie,” the “ Myee ” and the “ Nerong ”
were added to the Company’s already extensive fleet.
Then in 1904 came the acquisition of Messrs. Allen
Taylor & Co.’s vessels trading to the Manning, Port
Macquarie and the Bellinger. The opposition busi-
ness was taken over entirely by the Company with
two steamers—the “ Pyrmont and Coopernook.”
During 1905 another progressive step was taken when
the purchase of W. G. Nicoll’s fleet, trading to Byron
Bay, the Tweed, Coff’s Harbour, and Woolgoolga,
was completed. The vessels included the fine steamers
“ Noorebar ” and “ Cavanba,” also the “ Wollum-
bin ” and “ Dorrigo,” together with the latest arrival,
the ‘ ‘ Duranbah. ’ ’ The last purchase of the Com-
pany was Captain Tulloch’s steamer “ Augusta,” to-
gether with all his plant and interest in the Tweed River
trade. These large additions to the fleet have neces-
sitated the issue of an additional 50,000 shares, making
a total now of 200,000 shares.
In brief this is the history of the Company which
has identified itself so closely with the progress of the
Northern coastal districts. Its management has been
conducted from time to time by such sound business
men as the Hon. J. B. Watt, M.L.C., Mr. W. O. Gil-
christ, Mr. John Alger, the Hon. E. D. Ogilvie, the
Hon. Henry C. Dangar, M.L.C.,
and Mr. Arnold (a late Speaker of
the New South Wales Legislative
Assembly). The present director-
ate comprises : —Mr. T. R. Allt,
chairman and managing director ;
Sir John See, managing director ;
Mr. John H. Storey, Mr. Walter
C. Watt, Mr. George C. Elliott,
and Mr. William Rigg, directors ;
with Mr. Robert A. Bell, manager,
and Mr. Albert Allen, secretary.
The Company’s fleet consists of the following
vessels ;
Richmond River. —Steamers: “Ramornie,”
546 tons; “ Tomki,” 590 tons; “City of
Grafton,” 825 tons; “ St. George,” 515 tons;
“ Wyoming,” 258 tons. Droghers ; “ Osprey,”
“Irvington,” “Casino” and “Pelican.”
Clarence River. —Steamers: “ Kyogle,” 702
tons; “ Kallatina,” 646 tons; “ Nymboida,” 563
tons. Droghers: “Perseverance,” “ Ramornie,” and
((t > y
lyoxna.
Tweed River. —Steamer ; “ Augusta,” 205
tons. Droghers ; “ Dolphin. ” and “ Sabrina.”
Byron Bay. —Steamers : “ Noorebah,” 670 tons,
and “ Cavanba,” 573 tons.
Clarence and Richmond. —Steamer: ‘ ‘ Macleay,”
398 tons.
Coff’s Harbour and WoolgoolGA. —Steamer :
“ Dorrigo,” 302 tons.
Brisbane and Northern. — Steamer ; ‘ ‘ Pyr-
mont,” 215 tons.
Bellinger River. —Steamer ; “ Rosedale,” 274
tons.
Nambucca River. —Steamer: “ Nerong,” 145
tons. Droghers; “ Macksville,” “Keystone,” “Set-
ters’ Friend ” and “ Farmers’ Friend.”
Macleay River. —Steamer: “ Burrawong,” 391
tons. Droghers : “ Terara ” “ Cornstalk,” “ Uloom ”
and ‘ ‘ Cooper no ok. ’ ’
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


Port Macquarie. —Steamers; “ Rosedale,” 274
tons; “ Myee,” 145 tons; Droghers; “Samson ’’
and ‘ ‘ Bowra. ’ ’
Manning River. —Steamer ; “ Electra,’’ 395 tons.
Droghers: “Manning” and “Hastings.”
Cargo Steamers. —“ Duranbah,” tons, and
Euroka,” 170 tons.
Of the fleet the “ Kyogle,” “ Tomki,” “ Burra-
wong,” “Electra,” “Myee,” and “ Nerong ” are
all twin-screw steamers. The whole of the vessels are
of exceptionally light draught, specially adapted to
bar harbour work. The “ Macleay ” is fitted with
special tanks for carrying molasses in bulk, while the
majority of the above steamers carry the latest and
most up-to-date refrigerating plants and cool
chambers.
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


It is almost unnecessary to men-
tion that Mr. ALEXANDER GIL-
MORE ROBERTSON, the subject
of this brief sketch, hails from that
side of the Tweed where so many
men are grounded in sound com-
mercial principles and then go forth
to America, Australia, Argentina, or
to just wherever the prospects look
most promising ; bent upon laying
out their acquired fund of know-
ledge to the personal advantage of
became an assistant in a Tenter-
field store and remained there for
five years, when he acquired the
Red Flag Store in Lismore of Mr.
George Larkin. This was carried
on by the new proprietors under
the style of Messrs. Woodward and
Robertson. At the expiration of a
five years' partnership Mr. Robert-
son took over the business, which
at that time had a turnover of
£6,000 a year. This was in 1896,
worth Street, but to erect a fully-
equipped furniture factory at the
rear of the principal shop. # Even
then, with the accommodation at
his disposal, he was unable to cope
with the requirements of an ever-
expanding trade ; so, acquiring a
site in Molesworth Street, for which
he had to pay £6O per foot, Mr.
Robertson accepted the tender of
Messrs. Jewell & Long and has
recently erected, from the designs
themselves and in the best interests
of the'community they have pitched
their lot amongst. Born at Irvine,
Ayrshire, Scotland, on December
30th, 1861, young Robertson left
home at the age of twelve to com-
plete his studies at the Glasgow
High School. Then followed a tho-
rough commercial training in the
firm of Messrs. Alex. Hogg & Co.,
of Glasgow, and a transfer to this
colony. On June Ist, 1886, he
Interior of Robertson’s Sto r e.
and in the years intervening be-
tween then and now this annual
volume of trade has increased to
ten times £6,000, the working stock
representing about £15,000. So
rapidly did the Red Flag Store
advance in popular favour after
Mr. Robertson assumed supreme
control, that he found it not only
necessary to display his enormous
assortment of goods in capacious
warehouses on both sides of Moles-
of Messrs. Spain & Cosh, the well-
known Sydney architects, his pre-
sent palatial premises, where the
hundreds of customers dealing with
the Red Flag Store find their wants
so excellently served. The building
as designed shows what will be one
of the most completely appointed
and up-to-date structures of its
kind outside of the metropolis,
The floor space is about 21,000
square feet in area and is divided
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES


up into several different depart-
ments, such as drapery, clothing,
boots, ironmongery, produce, con-
fectionery, grocery, and furniture.
In addition to these there are three
offices for the business manage-
ment, also a bulk store. The build-
ing is constructed with Sydney
bricks, roofed with galvanised iron,
and the supporting girders and
stanchions are all in Siemen’s Mar-
tin steel. The staircases and joinery
are finished in cedar. The style
which has been adopted is a simple
treatment of Italian architecture
the main facade being crowned with
a rich entablature and central pedi-
ment. To many persons it will
seem marvellous that in a single
decade Mr. Robertson, without the
co-operation of partners, should be
able to multiply his turnover ten-
fold. The explanation is easy, and
lies in the fact that, so firmly has a
mutual feeling of confidence been
established between his patrons and
he, that they take their orders to
no other firm, being fully assured of
this ; whether they select prior to
purchase, or whether ordering their
requirements five hundred miles
away, it makes absolutely no dif-
ference. They will unfailingly get
what they want, not what is re-
quired to be sold ; they will secure
their requirements at the lowest
possible figure and of a quality
which is not to be obtained any-
where else. Thus business mul-
tiplies with wonderful rapidity
and .causes Mr. Robertson to be
proclaimed by unanimous accla-
mation the universal provider of
the North Coast District. Notwith-
standing his hands being so well
filled in. the care and attention his
own affairs demand, being a tho-
rough master of his business, he
still commands the leisure to pay
some attention to the affairs of the
public. He is a member of the
School Board, takes an active in-
terest in the Caledonian Society, and
presides over the direction of the
Lismore town band. Twice every
month he organises river excursions
for all who care to avail of his hos-
pitality. A free steamer runs to
Ballina and back, calling at all
intermediate towns on the river ;
lunch is provided for the guests, and
a band is also in attendance.
the cyclopedia oe new south wales.


Timpber Resources of the Richmond.
IT will be apparent to any person
* touring the Richmond River dis-
trict that at one time red cedar
must have there been exceedingly
plentiful, and used, not only for
dwelling-houses, but even in the
erection of the most ordinary out-
buildings in connection with home-
steads. Tomki, Runnymedc, and
other station buildings exemplify
this, and the durability of the wood
of which they were constructed half
a century ago is evidenced by the
fact that to this day it has resisted
and others, plied between the Rich-
mond and the metropolis of the
State. Unfortunately, no attempt
was made at scientific conservation,
so that what promised to become a
permanent industry has practically
died out, and red cedars of any size
can now only be obtained a long
way back and in almost inac-
cessible places. Despite of this de-
spoilment, the district still possesses
enormous forest resources in this
direction, and with modern methods
of treatment and a rapidly-growing
trade has developed in this connec-
tion. At present, however, the
most plentiful timber in the district
is the valuable Richmond River
pine, which grows to an enormous
height, and. has for many years been
held in high appreciation, both for
durability and soundness. Under
favourable conditions the trees
frequently reach to a height of
eighty feet in the barrel before a
sinale branch is encountered, and
their girth is proportionate to their
height. The principal supply of this
antagonistic climatic conditions and
the "ravages of insects. Cedar-
getting may be said to have been
the pioneer industry of the Rich-
mond River district. In the old
days where the progressive and
important town of Lismore now
stands was surrounded by thick
scrub, in which, as at other points
along' both branches of the Rich-
mond, massive red cedars grew in
abundance, and a number of
schooners, among which may be
mentioned the “Schoolboy,” the
“Lismore,” the “Saucy Jack,”
Dorrough Saw Mills.
appreciation, both Australian and
foreign, the Richmond River district
as a timber-producing country still
occupies a foremost place. This has
largely been attributable, so far as
the foreign market is concerned, to
the energy and resourcefulness of
Me. CHARLES DORROUGH. of
the Pioneer Canadian Timber Mill
of Lismore, who brought the value
of the district timbers—particularly
the fancy woods - prominently and
persistently before the English and
Continental markets, with the result
that an important and increasing
timber for export from, and treat-
ment in the mills at Lismore, is, at
present, from the timber reserves in
the vicinity of Jiggi and Nimbin
Hanging Rocks, a little over twenty
miles distant. A few years ago the
hills surrounding Lismore were
covered with dense masses of this
timber ; now they are bared. How-
ever, on the Richmond Range, some
forty miles westward, and on the
north-west spurs of the McPherson
Range there are practically inex-
haustible virgin supplies. It is not,
however, solely because of its pine
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


forests that the Richmond River
district possesses so valuable an
asset. it is also rich in hard
woods, such as ironbark, blackbutt,
red gum, and different varieties of
stringy bark; at the same time
possessing numerous woods whose
value for furniture and ornamental
purposes has only recently been
fully realised. Among the latter
may be mentioned rosewood, largely
used in the manufacture of pianos,
the red, the black bean, and white
or golden cedar. Black bean,
when polished, closely resembles
English walnut, and is recognised
particularly as valuable for fine
cabinet-making work. Another dis-
trict timber of value is the teak, a
totally distinct variety to the Indian
tree. This wood is much used for
weatherboarding and flooring, being
largely exported to Germany, Eng-
laud and America, where it now is
principally used for the purposes for
which Indian teak was formerly
utilised. The soft woods of the
district that can only be referred to
are the she beech, white beech, blue
fig, and cudgery, all of which are
well and favourably known. Any
reference to the timber trade of the
Richmond River would be incom-
plete without mention of the leading
timber mill, the Pioneer Canadian,
owned by Mr. Charles Dorrough, a
gentleman' who in the past has done
and is still doing much to bring
prominently under public notice the
value of the woods indigenous to
the district. The old gentleman has
imported a hundred horse power
Waterous engine and hose, the first
of its kind in Australia, and dealt
with both hard and soft woods, the
former being principally obtained
from Bringawalbyn and Sandy
Creeks, at the same time shipping
large quantities ol “junk” timber to
Sydney. It should be mentioned that
Mr. Dorrough, jun., though still a
young man (having only been born
in 1871) is of the stamp of men who
rise superior to misfortune. Only a
few months ago his fine premises,
replete with the latest improved
machinery, and carrying a large
slock, were, in the course of a few
hours, totally destroyed by fiie;
the uncovered loss amounting to
many thousands of pounds. In
two days, however, he resumed
operations in temporary premises,
and almost before the ground was
cool he began to re-erect the build-
ings, and soon had everything in full
swing again. The new works will
constitute the largest timber mill
on the Richmond River. All lining
and flooring is kiln dried by steam
plant, with a capacity covering
20,000 superficial feet. This pro-
cess was originally introduced by
Mr. Dorrough, sen., and is now in
course of duplication by the spirited
proprietor in his flourishing business,
Mr. Dorrough is a native of Berrima,
where his father for many years
carried on timber-milling. Mr. Dor-
rough, sen., and his son. then a
lad, went to Lismore, then a com-
paratively unimportant place, in
1882, and there erected the first
complete Canadian saw-milling plant
in the State. The operations at the
mill were at first somewhat limited,
the turnover some years after the
mill started being about 4,00 j feet
per day, while shortly before the late
disastious fire the daily output had
reached as high as 23,000 feet. Mr.
Charles Dorrough took over control
of the big Lismore mill in 1896, and
his policy has been cons sternly one
of progress, having, as machinery
improved, discarded that of ohffr
pattern and adopted the newer and
improved types. Among the ma-
chinery in the Pioneer Mill is a
Canadian travelling bench, stated
by experts to be the finest in Aus-
tralasia. This magnificent piece of
mechanism cost nearly £\ ,loo, and
is used specially for the breaking
down and running off of hard w oods,
its capacity, with the aid of three
men, being approximately 12,000 feet
a day—the equivalent of three ordi-
nary benches each employing three
men. The motive power for the
general machinery is derived from
a patent Canadian engine, the
patent consisting of its ability to
develop large horse power on a
small cylinder, and this is served
by a patent American boiler with
specially constructed furnaces for
the use of sawdust as fuel. Other
up-to-date mechanism, in addition
to the ordinary mill appliances, con-
sistsofplaningandmouldingandturn-
ing machines, Mr. Dorrough making
a speciality of this class of work.
Lunch on the Farm.
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


It sometimes happens that the
man who commands and deserves
the greatest success in his business
connections, is sufficiently fertile in
ability to attend to matters of public
moment, with equal facility and the
same happy results. This is clearly
demonstrated in the instance of
Mr. JOSEPH QUILTY, Merchant
Tailor, of Molesworth Street, Lis-
more. Since 1899, as alderman of
the borough, hospital committee-
man, president and treasurer of the
Agricultural Society, an Odd Fellow,
Hibernian, a Caledonian, an office-
bearer in other institutions and
societies : he has held during the
one period public positions, and
accepted on behalf of the community
generally responsibilities and trusts,
sufficient to teen an ordinary man
going all the time. Yet, over and
above all this, he has found time
and opportunity to establish his
tailoring business firmly, in the
teeth of much opposition, and to
forge ever and ever a little further
ahead, until now, to-day, the con-
tinued patronage of his constituents
assures him that as a practical tailor
and outfitter undeniably his position
is dux —the Poole of Lismore,—a
square peg in a square hole, filling
the bill as perfectly as his garments
MR. J. QUILTY.
fit and embellish his fortunate pa-
trons. There are not many country
tailoring establishments—if any—
able to employ more than the thirty
odd hands his skilful brain finds a
good living for ; and wide as the
district unquestionably is, it is safe
to aver few households in it have
not good reason to hold his profes-
sional ability in high repute. An
Australian-lrishman by birth, he
came to Lismore in 1899, after a
long experience with his brother-
in-law at Nowra. It is not often in
but half a dozen years a man can
seize so many opportunities to render
generous assistance to his fellow-
citizens as Mr. Guilty has. lismore
honours his presence accordingly,
and it is to be hoped will also re-
spond through her sons and daugh-
ters by mixing many grains of gold
in the sands of his existence.
To Mr. ROBERT BREWSTER
is due the credit of erecting the
first steam laundry on the Northern
rivers and thus establishing his
claim, not only to being one of the
pioneers of the district, but a public
benefactor to boot. Six years ago
he personally erected his building
and plant, and earned the gratitude
of many a worried wife when he
announced to the public that he
was ready to commence operations.
Needless to say, the venture from
the jump proved a complete suc-
cess, not so much from the perfec-
tion of the mechanical appliances,
as from the personal supervision he
exercised with his customary en-
ergy over the operations. At the
outset his laundry was composed of
a washing room, boiler and engine
room, ironing and polishing room,
sorting room, and office. In these
various compartments were fitted
up the following mechanical aids
and accessories : a two-horse power
boiler, six-horse power engine, a
steam washing machine, strictly
limited to the use of liquid soap and
steam ; a hydro extract, saving by
dispensing with the wringing pro-
cess the wear and tear of clothes ;
and two shirt-ironing and one
polishing machine, heated by gas
and moving by steam. With
charges limited to Sydney rates and
ten thoroughly competent hands, it
is little wonder he was so rushed
with work that after three years he
was compelled to materially enlarge
the premises. People soon realised
the advantages to themselves of the
steam laundry over the hand pro-
cess, and gave him a support which
has never since been withdrawn.
Quite recently Mr. Brewster added
to his stock a large-sized new
MR. R. BREWSTER.
mangle to save dependence on out-
side drying.
Mr. J. B. KELLY, Surveyor.
A.M.P. Chambers, Lismore, is a
native of the Hawkesbury River, his
people being amongst the earliest
settlers and still living there. He
was educated at the Model Public
School, Fort Street, the late Mr.
Bridges being the headmaster, and
in 1873 passed the competitive
examination entitling him to enter
as a cadet the survey branch of the
Lands Department, the late P. F.
Adams being then Surveyor-General.
After graduating through all the
branches of the survey department,
he was appointed assistant to the
late F. Fisher, District Surveyor of
Orange, being the successor to F.
Macfarlane, the present Under-Sec-
retary for Lands. His fellow-cadets
in the Lands Department were
T. T. Fwing, Vice-President Execu-
tive Council, Commonwealth Minis-
try ; C. Saunders, Under-Secretary,
Treasury, Sydney ; J. Burt, now
Chief Clerk, Treasury, Sydney.
Having passed his L.S. exami-
nation with distinction, Mr.
Kelly accepted work as a licensed
surveyor in the Lismore district,
and has since been intimately con-
nected with the development and
progress of the Richmond, Tweed
and Brunswick rivers. He prac-
tised as licensed surveyor under the
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


Government for many years, and at
length resigned a staff appointment,
owing to delicate health, and turned
his attention to cane and dairy
farming in the Byron Bay district,
where his name was associated with
everything conducive to the ad-
• o
vancement of the district. He was
among the first to largely import
dairy stock from the South Coast,
and who recognised that without
refrigeration the district could not
compete in the butter industry with
cooler climates. He was one of the
originators of the Byron Bay Cream-
ery, and became its first chairman
of directors. Soon after, however,
he contested the Tweed Parliamen-
tary election, and retained his seat
till the general election of 1898, when
he was defeated. Early in 1899
Mr. Kelly commenced the private
practice of his profession at Lismore,
and has continued as licensed sur-
veyor and adviser in all land and
departmental matters. Mr. J. B.
Kellv is also chairman of directors
MR. J. B. KELLY.
of the North Coast Daily News, a
co-operative newspaper company
just launched in the interests of the
North Coast district.
Dr. CARLO FRANCESCHI, of
Lismore, holds a foremost place
among the members of the medical
profession. He is a son of Dr.
Cosimo Franceschi, who was prin-
cipal superintendent of the leading
hospitals in Florence, Italy, for
nearly 40 years. Dr. Carlo Fran-
ceschi obtained his degree of M.D.,
Ch.D. at Florence University in
1888, at the age of 23 years, after-
wards entering the army as medical
lieutenant for the space of two
years, when he became resident
surgeon of the General Hospital—
which is the largest in Florence —
where he practised for some years,
acquiring an extensive surgical ex-
perience in the general, children’s
and maternity wards, and holding
in the latter the Government ap-
pointment of assistant to the ob-
stetrical and gynecological clinic.
Vacating this position, he was
elected chief surgeon in the surgery
for outdoor patients in Santa Maria
W omen’s Hospital, where a daily
average of two hundred patients
were treated. This post he held for
about twelve months. He then be-
came house surgeon of the Santa
Sofia Hospital for some years, but,
being desirous of visiting Australia,
he left Italy and accepted an ap-
pointment as medical officer to the
Walgett Hospital, and the records
of that institution bear eloquent
testimony to his skill and attention.
Ur. Franceschi has for the past
three years been practising at Lis-
more, where he has a large clientele.
He is one of the medical officers to
the local hospital, and bids fair to
become as distinguished in his pro-
fession in this'eountry as he was in
his own native land.
Mr. JAMES F. O’FLYNN has
been identified with the public life
of Lismore for about twenty years,
and has proved a valuable man to
the ratepayers generally. He was
first elected to the Council in Feb-
ruary, 1888, and of the four who
contested that election, he and Dr.
Bernstein are the survivors. Mr.
O’Flynn’s municipal career ex-
tended from February, 1888, to
February, 1906, when he resigned,
and during that time he was elected
Mayor seven times. Being an ex-
pert engineer, his advice has at all
times been looked for by his fellow-
councillors and has invariably been
of great practical value to the muni-
cipality. The ratepayers have to
thank him for his untiring efforts in
securing an up-to-date sewerage
system which is not excelled in any
country town in the Common-
wealth. In Mr. O’Flynn’s first
year (1888) the gas manufactured
in the municipal work 5 was 220,0)0
cubic feet, and at the time of his re-
tirement it reached 1 600,000 cubic
feet. He introduced the stone-
crushing machinery, which has been
in continuous use and has reduced
the cost of breaking metal from Bs.
to 4s. per yard, thus effecting a
MR. J. F. O’ FLYNN.
saving of some thousands. Mr.
O’Flynn is a native of Erin’s Isle
and an engineer and brassfounder
by profession, having one of the
best businesses of tire kind on the
rivers. He has been presented by
the citizens, with a purse of sove-
reigns to mark their appreciation on
his retirement from the Council.
Mr. R. WHITE, manager of
the Co-operative Bakery, Lismore,
is a native of that town, and has
witnessed the growth and develop-
ment of the district, now proved to
be one of the richest and most pros-
perous in the State. From the
earliest years of manhood Mr. White
has been closely identified with the
movements for the welfare of the
town. A life spent' amid the quiet
surroundings of a country town is
usually devoid of items of stirring
interest, and Mr. White has used
the best means of making up for
this, by throwing himself into every
movement that promised to improve
the condition of the townspeople.
The local lodge of the Manchester
Unity Order of Odd Fellows ha.s
had in him an indefatigable worker
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


for a period covering 24 years, and
all the offices in the branch have been
held by him. Much of the progress
made has been due to his efforts.
For two years in succession he has
won a trophy, presented to the
member who succeeded in obtaining
the greatest number of members,
and principally through his instru-
mentality the North Coast District
Lodge of the order was formed, of
which he is one of the trustees. As
a collector for the funds of the
district hospital he has proved him-
self a past master, and that insti-
tution, with 30 beds, has never
suffered from “ tightness in the
money chest,’ ’ for the hon. secretary
Mr. White, has been an expert in
preventing this. For six years he
has been an alderman, and part of
the time has been chairman of the
Council’s Improvement Committee.
The business carried on by
Messrs. PAGE & MALONEY,
Auctioneers, Stock and Station
Agents, of Walker Street, Casino,
was commenced by them about four
years back; and since then they
have worked it up to one of the
leading auctioneering businesses in
the Casino district. They are regu-
larly placing large orders for live
stock throughout Queensland, the
demand in that direction being very
great at all times. And they are
also invariably in a position to
attend to the requirements of local
buyers, having always on hand a
large number of stock of all descrip-
tions. Intending purchasers receive
every attention and every facility
for the inspection of all live stock
and properties which they hold for
sale. “ Prompt personal attention to
their clients ” is their motto. In land
business they do a large turnover,
and this particular line they make
a speciality of. They have sold
farms and grazing properties all
over the river, and in the New Eng-
land district and Queensland, and
still have any amount for sale, both
in the Kyogle and Wooroowoolgen
Estates and on the Clarence, Rich-
mond and Tweed Rivers, also in
New England and in the northern
colony. They are always in a posi-
tion to give intending purchasers
full and accurate particulars with
regard to properties in their hands
for sale, which is a prominent fea-
ture in the conduct of their busi-
ness. Those who are in search of
a farm, or a station, or even a
milking cow will do well to com-
municate with them ; also persons
having stock or properties for sale
cannot do better than send them
particulars, as they always have
inquiries for such like, and can
always find sellers a buyer. They
have corresponding agents through-
out New South Wales, Queensland,
and Victoria. The senior partner
of the firm is Mr. James Maloney.
A Forest Scene.
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.








