

THE RIVAL FAIRIES
OR,
Little Mamie's Troubles,
AN AUSTRALIAN STORY FOR CHILDREN
BY
DESDA.


THE RIVAL FAIRIES;
OR,
LITTLE MAMIE’S TROUBLES,
AN AUSTRALIAN STORY FOR CHILDREN:
BY
DESDA.
SYDNEY:
EDWARD TURNER. PUBLISHER,
HUNTER STREET.


PREFACE.
The folio-wing little story was written for the amusement of
my own children. At the suggestion of several friends, I have
ventured to publish it, not without sundry misgivings as to the
result of my temerity. I cannot he blind to its many imper-
fections, nor do I expect the public to he. I only appeal to
their kindly hearts, and (as it is a first attempt) beg them not
to criticise it too severely.
DESDA.
St. Leonard’s, North Shore, October, 1871.


THE RIVAL FAIRIES;
OR,
LITTLE MAMIE’S TROUBLES.
CHAPTER I.
My dear little children, I am going to tell you a
Fairy Tale.
I dare say you will think there are no Fairies
now. Quite true; but, we all have feelings dif-
ferent at times, urging us to good or evil, and the
more we yield to or encourage these feelings the more
are we influenced by them, and they sometimes work
wonderful transformations, quite as marvellous as
when the Queen of the Fairies and all her elves
sported with magic wands
The story I am about to tell is of a little girl I knew,
rather a pretty little girl, with soft brown eyes and
flowing curls. Her name is Mary; but her baby-sister,
who could not speak plainly, gave her the name of
Mamie, and so we all began to call her by that name.
She had two brothers, one older and one younger
than herself, named Conrad and Herbert, and two
little sisters, Katie and Annie. They lived in a
pretty part of St. Leonards, not very far from the
Willoughby Falls. It was a pleasant spot for the
children, and many a merry pic-nic they enjoyed,
when their little town friends came to visit them.
It was pleasant, on a bright warm day in spring, to
play under the shady trees, and hear the birds chirp-
ing and twittering in every direction. Bush flowers
and the sarsaparilla vine grew so plentifully that they
could gather a large bunch of either in a few minutes.
Sometimes, too, they would go in search of wild
fruits, such as native-currants and five-corners. The
former, I dare say you know, makes a nice preserve;


but the latter is a very useless berry, and very indi-
gestible I would not advise any of my young friends
to eat of it. But Ido not suppose you wish to hear
any more about bush productions, so we will go on at
once to the story.
Two Fairies, called Drowst-Wing and Fairt-
Brisk, haunted this happy home. They were rivals,
each striving to influence Mamie. Fairy-Brisk had
an attendant named Happt-Heart, and Drowsy-
Wing a follower called Discontent. You might
always know which Fairy ruled the day, though she
herself would not be visible; for Fairy-Brisk, who
had beautiful rose-colored wings, would throw a bright
reflection from them over Mamie’s cheeks, and Happy-
Heart carried a brilliant lamp which lit up her eyes
with a beaming gladsome ray. Drowsy-Wing was a
dull, heavy, kind of Fairy, with wings the colour of
lead; and she flapped them slowly, as though they
were too weighty to fly with. But these wings were
charmed; and if once they were stretched over
Mamie, it was the hardest work for her to escape
from their sleepy influence. As I said before, Dis-
content always followed, and her presence was known
by the gloomy shade which darkened Mamie’s face.
CHAPTER II.
The sun shone so brightly on Mamie’s pretty green
bedstead, and sent his warm rays so roguishly round
the white curtains, that she suddenly woke and sat
up in bed Through one of the windows she could
see down the orchard; and the trees looked beautiful,
covered with the blushing peach blossom, or the
snowy flowers of the pear. Mamie admired them very
much, and thought of all her Mamma had told her—of
the kind and good Creator who had made this world
so lovely with trees and flowers and the delicious


fruits which she knew would, some day, follow the
blossoms. She said to herself, “ I will try and be a
good child, and do all I can to please God; and if I
do what pleases Him, I shall he sure to please Papa
and Mamma too.” Just then a little bird hopped on a
willow tree, which waved its branches near to a side
window in Mamie’s room. It seemed to say, “ Get up,
Mamie—quick, quick, quick ! ” Mamie was very
fond of birds, and often fancied that they spoke to
her. Once, when she was quite a little thing, she
came running to her Mamma, and said, “ Mamma, I was
looking under the mulberry trees for some mul-
berries, but I could not find any; and a little bird
said, “Wait a bit, wait a bit,” and then flew away;
so, I suppose, he has gone to fetch me some. Is he
not a dear little bird, Mamma ?” Her Mamma laughed
at her; and lam afraid the little bird must have for-
gotten her, for he never came back with the mul-
berries, though she looked for him many a time.
When Mamie heard the bird call her to get up, she
quickly jumped out of bed. “ Thank you little bird,
for calling me,” she said, “ I will get up ; for Mamma
has no servant, and, I daresay, I can help her.” So
she made haste with her bath, and was partly dressed
when Mamma came to call her. “Up already, Mamie?”
said Mrs. Evans —“ You are a good girl to rise so
early. I have a bad head-ache this morning, and I
shall be so glad for you to help me. Will you dress
Katie and Annie for me, while I get the breakfast ?”
“ Oh yes, Mamma, and I will try and be out in time to
help with the breakfast too,” said Mamie, who felt
quite proud to help her Mamma, and was very glad the
bird had called her. Fairy-Brisk was there, though
she did not know it; and Happy-Heart was nestling
in Mamie’s bosom. She knelt down and prayed to
God to bless her parents ; to take care of her all the
day, and to make her a good and loving child, for the
Saviour's sake; and rose, with her heart filled with


His Holy Spirit, making every object sweet and
pleasant to look upon. “ I will soon dress you, Katie
dear,” she said to her little sister, who lay quietly in
bed sucking her thumb, and watching the process of
Mamie’s toilet. Katie was a funny little creature,
not quite five years old. She was generally pretty
good, but had a will of her own and was very easily
offended. Ido not know what she would have done
without her thumb; it was a certain cure for all her
ailments, and from it she found solace for all her
troubles. Did she happen to fall and graze her little
chubby knees or elbows, she would cry for awhile,
then finding that did her no good, she would pop her
thumb into her mouth as though it were sugar-candy
and soon forget her pain. And sometimes her brother
Herbert (who was a sad little turk) would run away
with her toys, or knock down her “ pretty play.”
She would rush after him in a great passion for a
moment, then suddenly stop, find a resting place, look
composedly after the offender, and refresh herself with
thumb. It was a very good plan too, for Herbert
finding she did not run after the toys would cease to
value it, and would restore it, or volunteer his services
in making the “ play” again. Oh ! it was a great
institution, this thumb of Katie’s.
But to return to Mamie. As soon as she had finished
dressing herself, she set about the task of dressing Katie ;
and, Fairy-Brisk waving her magic wand, this was soon
accomplished. Katie always had her bath at bed time,
so Mamie had only to wash the child’s face and hands in
the morning ; but this was no easy matter, though it
sounds simple enough. Katie had a very great
objection to having her face washed, and no sooner
did she see Mamie pour the water into the basin, than
she scrambled under the bed, and her sister’s most
persuasive tones could not coax her out. “ Ah, ha !
Miss Mamie, you can’t wash me now,” said saucy
little Katie, peering from under the valance, her


tangled curls falling over her bright eyes and making
her look for all the world like a little lioness. “ You
can’t catch me now!” Mamie stooped and caught
hold of one of her feet, and tried to drag her out; but
all in vain, Katie was very heavy, and seemed to
cling to the floor like a periwinkle to a rock, for
Mamie could not move her. Then she tried coaxing
again; but no, the lady lion was not to be coaxed.
Mamie could hear her baby-sister calling to be taken
out of her cot, and thought of her Mamma’s head-ache,
till she very nearly lost her patience; but Happy-
Heart cheered her, and she suddenly popped under the
bed too, Katie as quickly scrambling out on the other
side. The victory was, however, achieved, and the
lioness conquered; for Katie was so surprised, and
was so fat, and laughed so heartily, that she fairly
rolled on the carpet, and Mamie seizing the oppor-
tunity, and the sponge at the same moment, washed
her face triumphantly before she had time to get up.
Katie was very indignant at first, but she could not
help laughing nevertheless; so Mamie, with a little
coaxing, managed to brush her hair a “ little bit,”
till the child trotted off sucking her thumb con-
tentedly.
Mamie went next for baby Annie. “ Oh, you
little dear,” said she, giving her a loving squeeze
as she lifted her out of her tiny bed. This was a
favourite expression of Mamie’s when addressing
Annie, for she was very fond of her, as indeed every
one was who knew her—she was such a loving little
creature, and had such pretty winning ways. Her
eyes were the bluest I ever saw, and she had pale
yellow hair, much like the silk that Conrad’s silk-
worms spun. There never was such a sweet child
before; so, at least, thought Mamie, and she embraced
her at all times and seasons with the exclamation of,
“ Oh, you little dear.” She was not in such a
mischievous mood as Katie, so Mamie soon managed


to dress her, and led her proudly to the breakfast
room.
Mrs. Evans was busy helping the children to their
breakfast; she was very pale, and Mamie could see
that she was sulfering : so she moved with careful step
and lifted baby Annie into her high chair, that she
might not trouble her Mamma to do so. She wished
she could do something to relieve her. “I am so
sorry your head-ache is so bad, Mamma dear. Let me
make you a little toast. I will be careful not to burn
it; and lam sure it will do you good.” Mamma rather
doubted this; but she was grateful for her little girl’s
kindness, and knowing it would give her pleasure to
make the toast, she cut a slice of bread. Mamie
tripped lightly to the kitchen fire; Fairy-Brisk watch-
ing her all the way, and Happy-Heart’s lamp burning
brightly. Carefully she moved the fire-sticks that
they might not smoke the bread, and drew all the
bright pieces of coal together to make the toast
quickly and well, and, then, when it was done so
nicely, so brown and crisp, she cut it carefully in two,
and placed it in the toast-rack. How proud and
happy she looked, as she carried it into the dining-
room. And well she might, for she was doing her lest
to he hind and useful to others ; and that is the surest
way of being happy ourselves. When Kate and Annie
saw the toast, they both wanted it; so Mamie said,
“ Don’t ask for Mamma’s, Katie, I will make a piece
for you; and don’t you cry, Annie dear, I will get
you some too.” So they sat very quietly at the table
till she came back with the toast —Katie finding con-
solation in her thumb, whilst Annie played “Bo peep”
round the coifee pot with her Papa. “ You are my
pet now, Mamie,” said Katie, as her sister gave her
the toast, “ I won’t go under the bed any more.” And
baby Annie said, “ You my pet too, Mamie—good
Mamie.” So Mamie hugged her, and said “Oh you
ittle dear;” then sat down to her own breakfast, one


of the happiest little girls in Australia. Fairy-Rnss;
did not desert her, and she helped her Mamma to get
Katie and Herbert ready for school.
They started early, and got to Miss Keiby’s in good time.
And Slamie was praised for her lessons that day; and
Miss Heiby said her copy was very neatly written, and
her sewing was so well done that she gave her a piece of
canvass and some pretty coloured wools to make a mat
for her Mamma. You may fancy how her eyes sparkled
then; for Miss Reiby never praised her pupils unless
they deserved it, and Mamie knew that. On her
return from school, she found her Mamma much better,
and able to go round the garden with her, and to
listen to all the news Mamie had to tell her, for she
was a chatterbox you must know ; and the better she
was pleased, the more she chatted. She helped her
Mamma to get tea ready, and to put the children to
bed; and when all was finished, she sat down with
her canvass and wools, as happy and busy as a little
bee
When Mr. Evans came home, he was told what
a good child she had been, and how much she had
done to assist and comfort her Mamma. So he took
her on his knee and kissed her; then searched in his
pockets and, at last, found a bright new threepenny
bit. “ There, Mamie,” said he, “ I put this in my
pocket to-day, because it was so pretty and bright. 1
thought it would be a nice present for some good
child, and I think you deserve it.”
Then Mamie threw her arms round his neck, and
kissed him again; and her brown curls fell over
his face,and tickled him, so he returned “tit for
tat” with his whiskers, till at last they were
fairly engaged in a game of romps, in which
they were soon joined by Conrad and Herbert;
and you never heard such a noise in’ all your life as
they made. It was a wonder they did not wake Katie
and Annie ; and I think, too, it was a fortunate thing


Mrs. Evans’s'* head did not ache now, though, of
course, they would not have played so noisily had she
been ill.
Well, at last they were tired, and wishing their
Papa and Mamma “ good night,” they went to
their own rooms. Fairy-Brisk stayed with Mamie,
while she folded her clothes neatly and put them in
their proper place. Then she knelt down and thanked
her Heavenly Father for keeping her safe and well all
day, and for making her Mamma better. Oh! happy
little Mamie ! what pleasant thoughts were her’s, as
she laid her head gently on her pillow, after having
kissed little Katie (who was sucking her thumb as
usual, although she was asleep); and, though Drowsy-
Wing fluttered into the room soon after, Happy-Heart
did not give place to Discontent, but slept all night in
Mamie’s bosom, and smiled on all her dreams.
CHAPTER III.
Mamie did not rise so early the next morning,
though the sun shone out as clearly, and the orchard
looked as bright and blooming as it did the day
before The birds, too, were twittering merrily; but
perhaps Mamie thought they said “ wait a bit—wait a
bit,” for she certainly seemed in no hurry to get up.
It was full ten minutes since her Mamma had called
her, yet there she lay, listening to the birds, and
dreamily planning what she should do with her three-
penny bit. Drowsy-Wing hung over her, slyly spread-
ing out her leaden wings and striving to overwhelm
the little maid; but Fairy-Brisk, seizing.a happy
moment, thrust her rival aside and tried to rouse
Mamie with a touch of her rosy wing. “ Wake
Mamie,” she sang, “ you gained the threepenny bit
for being a good girl; get up and help Mamma again.”
“ There is no hurry at all, Mamie,” said Drowsy-
Wing floating back, “ it is quite early, and the morn


ingis very chilly; besides, Mamma is well this morning,
and will not want you so much.” “ Then,” said
Fairy-Brisk, “ you will have time to gather a hunch
of native roses and ferns for Miss lloiby, or run down
the orchard with your hoop, besides, there are your
little sisters to dr but, before the good Fairy
could finish her sentence, Drowsy-Wing swept sud-
denly down, and Mamie fell asleep.
Little Katie was wide awake, amusing herself
for a while by twitching bits of wool out of the
blanket with one hand, while she sucked the
thumb of the other; but, by and bye, she grew
tired of this, and wanted to run out to her
brother Herbert whom she could hear playing out-
side. So she tried to awaken Mamie by pulling open
her eye. “ Don’t Katie,” said Mamie sharply (for
Happy-Heart had fled, and the shadow of Discontent
had fallen on her), “ leave me alone, you naughty
girl.” “ I want to be dressed,” said Katie; “ wake
up,” and she poked a bit of wool in Mamie’s ear.
“ You nasty little thing ; I just will not dress you at
all for that; there now Miss;” and Mamie drew the
bed-clothes over her ears, and went to sleep again.
Katie took a little more thumb, considering what she
should do next. Suddenly she was inspired with the
bright idea that she would dress herself; so she rolled
out of bed, and not knowing her own clothes from
Mamie’s, as their dresses were alike, she took down
both, and very soon had them all mixed, as you may
suppose. The next thing was to get her night-gown
off; it was fastened at the back, and puzzled dear
little fat Katie a good deal; but she twisted and
tugged and strained, till, at last, off flew the button,
and she was free. Her first garment was a simple
affair, and she managed it easily enough ; but the
next was far more intricate, and tried her patience
sorely, but Katie was very persevering. She, first of
all, put her arms in the shoulder-straps, but, finding


she could not then get her foot in, she sat down on
the floor and tried, but could not manage it; so she
put her thumb in her mouth, and considered the
matter. At last, she discovered the right way, and
joyfully pulling her arms out of the armholes, she
popped one of her little fat legs into the place meant
to receive it; but, alas, poor Katie, in twisting and
turning her clothes so often, had turned one portion
of this garment, and she could not find her way into
it at all.
In vain she propped herself up with the bed-
post, and lifted her foot never so high, and her
laboured breathing told what hard work it was. In
vain she sucked her thumb and contemplated; it was
a complete puzzle to her, and she finally did what a
less persevering child would have done long before;
she gave it up, and put on the rest of her clothes,
leaving the turned part hanging much after the style
of some poor old French soldier who had left his leg
at Sedan.
By and bye, Herbert came rushing into the room
—“ Mamie, breakfast is ready, and Mamma says,
make haste.” Mamie jumped up quite bewildered,
when she heard breakfast was ready. She knew
her Papa would not be pleased, for he always
liked to see her bright and cheerful at table. More-
over, Katie, taking advantage of the open door, ran
out, with all her clothes unfastened; and she could
hear her sister’s little bare feet pattering along the
hall. She knew her Mamma would he very vexed at
that; so she slid hastily from the bed, as though
trying to overtake the time which had gone, and saw
her clothes lying in the greatest confusion all over
the room, and one of her boots in the bath. “Oh
dear,” she said, “ just look what that horrid little
Katie has done. lam sure she is a great deal more
troublesome than she is worth. She is always doing
something naughty; Mamma will be so angry about my


boot. Oh dear ! what shall Ido ?” and Mamie began
to cry.
“I think you had better take it out of the water,
and put it in the sun to dry,” said Bertie
practically; “ here, give it to me, and I’ll put it in a
sunny place. Don’t cry, Mamie, it will soon be dry.”
And off the little fellow ran with the boot; for,
though he liked to tease his sisters, he was very fond
of them, and never liked to see them in distress. In
the meantime, Katie had found her way to the dining-
room, and Mrs. Evans had to pour out the coffee and
then leave Mr. Evans to take care of himself, while
she went to dress the little runaway; for ho could not
wait, or he would have missed the steam-boat, and
have been late for business. So you see what dis-
comfort this Drowsy-Wing caused.
“Mamie dear,’’said her Mamma, “how is it you are
so idle this morning; your breakfast will be quite cold,
and you willbe late for school, if you donot makehaste.”
“I don’t want any breakfast,” said Mamie sulkily;
“ and I don't think I can go to school at all to-day; that
nasty, disagreeable, little Katie threw my boot in the
bath, and it’s all wet, and look how she has tossed my
clothes about. I don’t believe I can find half of
them—mischievous little thing she is.”
“Do not call your sister unpleasant names, Main) o; had
you been up in proper time, she would not have touched
your clothes. Make haste and dress now, and put on
another pair of boots; you must not stay away from
school. I hope you will try and finish the day better
than you have commenced it;” saying which, Mrs.
Evans left the room, taking Katie with her.
“ Good bye, Mamie,” said Mr. Evans, tapping at her
door ; “ I am sorry to go without a kiss. Mind you have
a nice one for me when I come home to night.” Mamie
did not answer; burning tears filled her eyes; but
she was too proud to let them fall. She bridled her
head and pouted, and, doubtless, considered herself a


Very ill-used little person. Still slie did not summon
her good Fairy to her aid, but leaned against the bed
and pushed the carpet into a lot of ugly wrinkles with
her feet.
But everything must come to an end sometime or
other; and, at last, Mamie's toilet was finished, and
she was about to leave the room when she suddenly
remembered she had not said her prayers. She hesi-
tated; “it is no use saying my prayers this morning,”
said she; “ I am too cross, and I don’t feel good
enough.”
Poor foolish little Mamie, as though she could
ever be good enough to speak with God; but bigger
children than Mamie have made that mistake.
We are all too apt to forget, that could we be good
enough in ourselves to approach the throne of grace,
we should need no Intercessor at all. Mamie did not
think of “ that sweet story of old,” which tells how
Jesus called little children to Him, and took them in
His arms and blessed them. I do not suppose children
were a bit better then than they are now; no, depend
on it, they were just as tiresome, and had quite as
many little wilful ways. Our Saviour knew it too;
but he did not stop to examine, and say “ I will not
love that boy —he quarrels with his brothers, and
calls them names; or take that little girl away, she
tells falsehoods.” No, He knew they were all naughty
sometimes; but He loved them all, and pardoned and
blessed them for the sake of that love. And He loves
us still, and is ever ready to forgive our greatest
faults, if we are truly sorry for them; and our
smallest grievance is not beneath His notice. He
will always comfort us, if we will but go to Him. Yet
Mamie did not go to Him ; but set out to school with
a troubled heart, and the shadow of Discontent grow-
ing darker on her face. Poor little Mamie!


CHAPTER IV.
Four o’clock came, and soon after it came the chil-
dren from school. Mamie’s eyes were red, as though
she had been crying. She flung herself wearily on
the door-step, and let her hat fall purposely on the
floor. “ You do not seem very happy, Mamie,” said
her Mamma; “ are you tired, dear ?” “ No, 31 a—not
tired, but I am very unhappy.” “ Poor little girl.
Well, run and put your hat away, then come and tell
me all your troubles.”
Mamie picked up her hat, and hung it in its
proper place, then returned slowly to her Mamma.
“ Now tell me dear,” said Mrs. Evans, “ why it
is you are not happy. I think you have every-
thing to make you so. Kind friends, a pleasant
home, good clothes to keep you comfortable, plenty
of room and fresh air to play about in, besides many
nice hooks and playthings to amuse you.” “ What is
the use of playthings, Mamma, when I have no time to
play?” “No time to play, Mamie! How do you
make that out ?” “ Why, Mamma, as soon as breakfast
is over we have to go to school; then, when we come
home, it is soon teatime, and then it is bedtime in a
minute.” “We always have tea at half-past five,
Mamie, and your bedtime is eight o’clock; that is
rather a long minute. And have you not an Four’s
play in school time ?” “ Yes, Mamma, when lam not
kept in.” “Were you kept in to-day?” Mamie
nodded her head. “ I had such a horrid old sum, it
would not come right; and such a hard lesson, I
could not learn it. I think Miss Reiby always gives
me harder lessons when lam cross.” “ Oh, Mamie,
do not say that. It was only yesterday you were say-
ing how kind Miss Reiby is to you. You must not be
unjust, dear; but tell me, what lesson was it you
found so difficult ?” “It was ‘ Child’s Guide.’ ”
“ Why, I thought that was your favourite lesson, and


• one that you always learned quickly and well.” “So
I do, Mamma, when I am in the humour.”
“ Ah ! there’s the secret, Mamie—when you are in
the humour. And you were not in the humour to learn
to-day; nor in the humour to play either; in fact,
you have been in a very bad humour all day, hav’nt
you dear ?” Mamie nodded again. She could not
speak; she felt a great lump in her throat, and her
eyes were dim with tears. “ Try and shake this ill
humour off, Mamie, and be your own cheerful little
self again. Think how many blessings you enjoy,
that many poor little girls have not. Think how good
and kind God is to us, and try to remember that we
are ungrateful to Him when we make troubles, and
render ourselves unhappy. Pray to Him, dear child,
to bless you with a humble and thankful heart, and
you will always have a cheerful mind.” “ I think
that is one reason why I am not happy, Mamma.”
“What is one reason dear?” “T did not say my
prayers this morning.” Poor Mamie cast down her
tearful eyes. “ How came you to forget them ?” “I
did not forget them, Mamma; but I was very cross, and
I felt so naughty I did not like to say them.” “ That
was all the more reason why you should have prayed,
my pet. Tt is when we feel most wicked that we need
most, help. If you were ill, I should not wait till you
got well, and then take you to the doctor and say,
my little girl has been ill, Mr. Drew; but she is well
now, so I have come to tell you about it. You smile
at that, Mamie ; and so would the doctor, I think—
don’t you ?” " You could not see him, if he did
Mamma, for whiskers,” said Mamie playfully, for her
heart was already lighter for having confessed her
fault.
“ Come to my room, Mamie dear. Let us go to
God and tell Him all your troubles, and no doubt you
will soon feel happier.”
And they went in, hand in hand—the mother and


her little child—and knelt down together, and prayed,
a simple earnest prayer, that God would pardon His-
little one, would send His Holy Spirit to guide her in.
the right way, and bless her with a thankful heart
And the little prayer went up to the throne of God,
and was heard and answered; for, when Mamie rose,
though her tears fell fast, they were happy grateful
tears, because she felt her heart was at peace, and knew
that she was forgiven, for His sake who took little-
children in His arms and blessed them.
CHAPTER V.
“Are you not in the humour to play now, Mamie
said Mrs. Evans about half an hour afterwards, for
Mamie still kept beside her; “ why don’t you run out
with the other children ?” “I would rather help you,
Mamma, if you will let me. May I make you some
toast” (Mamie was a great believer in toast; it
seemed to possess as many virtues as Katie’s thumb).
“ Yes, dear, you may, and I am sure I shall enjoy it
very much so Mamie was soon busy making toast,
chatting merrily all the time. Well, at last the toast
was done, and the tea made, and Mamie skipped out
to call her brothers and sisters.
But what a change had come over the little girl!
You would scarcely have believed it was the same
child. The shadow of Discontent had passed away,
and the rosy wings of Fairy-Brisk had tinted up her
cheeks, while her eyes were beaming with the light of
Happy-Heart. She seemed as though she could not
do enough forher Mamma, and was so kind and pleasant
to the other children that they were as merry as
grigs. She choose a very nice piece of toast and
buttered it for Katie, who, looking up with a funny
little twinkle in her eye, said, “T am good now,
Mamie ; I won’t run away any more.”
Then Mamie told the troubles she had on her way to


school. They were late, and Katie would not walk fast,
and the more she was hurried the more she lagged be-
hind. “At last,” said Mamie, “ I got very cross, and
gave her a slap, and then she set olf towards home as fast
as she could run. So I had to leave Herbert with the
luncheon hag, while I ran after her; and as soon as I
was gone, he must needs open the bag to see what you
had given us for luncheon, and let all the bread and
jam fall into the road Oh, I was so cross, Mamma.”
There was a hearty laugh at Bertie’s mishap; and
Conrad said it was a lucky job there were no goats
about, “ for the North Shore goats are very fond of
bread and jam, I can tell you. I put a slice on a
stump one day while I fastened my hoot lace, and if a
big brown and white goat did’nt come and march it
right off. I never heard of such a piece of impudence
in my life; but it will teach me not to leave my
luncheon on a stump any more.” Then there was
another laugh at Conrad’s expense; hut he joined in
it, and enjoyed the joke as much as any of them, and
so the meal was finished as merrily as it began
CHAPTER VI.
The lamp was lighted in the sitting room, and the
•curtains drawn, and very snug and cozy it appeared, I
can assure you. The three little ones had gone to
bed, so the house was very quiet. Conrad was pre-
paring his lessons for the next day; Mamie and her
Mamma were cutting out and planning some new
clothes for Florence (Mamie’s doll).
A terrible accident had befallen poor Florence; she
was suffering from a compound fracture of the left leg,
.and her head was so badly injured that it had to be
plastered with tape and glue. Mamie had said, “We
had better dress her like a baby, Mamma, because a
cap will cover her broken head, and no one will know
when she has long clothes on that she has but one leg.


So the plan was put into execution, and they were
both very busy.
Mamie had drawn her Papa’s easy chair to his
favourite spot, had placed his slippers near him, and
had found the book that he was reading Wonder-
fully attentive was she that night, and eagerly she
listened for the creaking of the gate that would tell
when Papa came home At length she heard the
well-known sound, and pushing back her chair she
flew on the wings of Fairy-Brisk to give him a kiss of
welcome. And oh! what a happy greeting it was.
There never could have been such another Papa, to
judge from the reception he met with. Mr. Evans
was very tired, for he had been all day in the hot and
dusty town; but the cheerful smiles that welcomed
him and the loving kiss he got made him forget his
weariness, he said.
How glad little Mamie felt, that her troubles were
over, and her ill-temper cured ; and she quietly resolved
to ask God to help her to get up early the next morn-
ing, that she might begin the day well and not he cross
again. By and bye, Papa was told of Bertie’s misfor-
tune with the luncheon ; and Conrad repeated his ad-
venture with the goat; hut not a word was said about
Mamie’s ill humour and cure; that was left for
Mamma to relate in private.
When bedtime came, and Mamie lifted her loving
face to give the good night kiss, the gentle light of
Happy-Heart shone softly in her eyes. She felt so
happy, she could hardly go to sleep ; hut a little star
twinkled round the corner of the blind, and she gazed
at it till her eyes twinkled too, and then having
finished her little thanksgiving she was soon asleep.
CHAPTER VII.
Now, it strikes me that these Fairies visit many
other homes besides Mamie’s; and I hope, dear little


reader, if they should come to you, you will try your
very best to drive away that good-for-nothing Fairy,
Drowsy-Wing, and encourage the good, bright little
Fairy-J3risk. The early morning is the time they
have their greatest battle; and if you yield then to
Drowsy-Wing’s influence, she will hang about you all
day, as sure as my name is Desda. lam sorry to say
she overwhelms me sometimes (but I don't tell every
body, you know), and makes me feel cross and snap-
pish all day. Moreover, Discontent visits me at
breakfast time, and spoils the flavour of every thing.
It is so unpleasant, because I generally enjoy lhat
meal so much, especially when Mamie makes toast for
me.
The best way to drive oif the evil Fairy when
she is trying to lull you to sleep in the morning, is to
spring quickly out of bed and into your bath, or
plunge your face into a basin of cold water.. You
would hardly believe how quickly she flies then. She
can’t bear cold water. When you leave your room (if
the morning be fine, and you are not wanted in the
house), go for a nice walk or run. Fairy-Brisk will
discover many pretty places to visit. If, like little
Mamie, you are fortunate enough to live in the
country, you will be rewarded by seeing the pretty
flowers and the tall trees all decked with diamond
dewdrops, and the spiders weaving their fairy webs to
catch them as they fall. And the birds sing so
merrily early in the morning, it is quite delightful to
listen to them. Oh, I love the bush!
But, even if you livein Sydney, there are many plea-
sant places you may visit; the Park, or the Domain,
or the beautiful Botanical Gardens. The birds there
are always up early, ready to receive visitors; it is
pleasant to watch them hopping about their cages;
but it seems sad they cannot fly about among the
flowers and sunshine, like the wild birds in the bush.
I wonder if they think so. Then those funny fellows.


the monkeys; don’t they make one laugh -with their
antics ? Then, there are the pretty water fowls ; you
may watch them take their morning bath, and plume
out their dainty feathers. You can stroll through the
lower gardens, and see the golden sunbeams dancing
on the hay; and, oh, the delicious flowers, how they
scent the morning breeze, and, though you may not
gather a bunch as Mamie can in the bush, Fairy-Brisk
will generally manage to steal some roses and plant
them on .your cheeks, and there they stay bright and
fragrant all the day.
There, you see, I have written poetry without in-
tending it; and that reminds me of the songs of the
Fairies, which I will write out for you, and you may
sing them if you can find suitable airs.
FAIRY-BEISK’S SONG.
Walfb, little Mamie ! the sun shines bright,
And the bees are abroad in its golden light;
The birds are beginning to build in their bowers,
And the breath of the morning is scented with flowers.
Wake ! for the voice of the rivulet calls.
As it wendeth its way to the waterfalls.
We’ll gather the ferns from its moss-covered sides,
And drink a cool draught as onward it glides.
Wake! for there’s joy in the brisk morning air,
Brightness and gladness and love everywhere;
In the song of the birds, in the sun’s cheerful beam,
In the sigh of the breeze, in the murmuring stream.
We’ll seek the lone haunts where the Waratah grows,
And the woodlands are gay with the bright native rose;
All nature is stirring with life and with glee,
Then wake, little Mamie, and wander with me.


DROWSY-WING’S LULLABY.
Sleep, Mamie, sleep!
While softly I sing to thee.
Sleep, and bright fairyland visions
I’ll bring to thee.
Day hath scarce shaken the dew from her wing;
Sleep, till she’s rosy and bright,
Till the sun hath crept up from behind the tall trees.
And the orchard grows warm in his light.
Sleep, Mamie, sleep.
Sleep, Mamie, sleep I
Naught shall molest thee, love ;
Sweet be thy slumber, and safe
Thou shall rest thee, love.
Wet hangs the dew on the bushes and ferns,
And coldly the morning wind blows.
Sleep till the birds and the bees are about,
And the butterfly kisses the rose.
Sleep, Mamie, sleep.
And now, dear little children, good bye. Mamie is
asleep, and Droway-Wing’s lullaby is sounding in my
ears, and lam sleepy too. But I may yield to her
now, for it is time for all good people to be in bed, if
they mean to be up with Fairy-Brisk in the morning.
I have only stayed so long to say a few parting words
to you.
Never forget God. Never leave your room in the
morning without asking His blessing. If ever you
feel troubled, like dear little Mamie, go to Jesus and
ask Him to help you. Eemember how much He loves
you, and do not be afraid. He knows we can never
be good enough to go to Him ; but he loves us all the
more, because He is grieved for us, and He is ever
ready to pardon and to bless us. If we take our cares
to Him, and tell Him all our troubles, He will lift
the sorrow from our hearts, and send His peace
instead.
Good bye, little children.
DESDA.
