





Printed for private circulation.
THE
BURNEY PAPERS
Vol. 11.
PART I.
(January to June, 1825)
Printed by order ot the \ ajirandna National Library.
BANGKO k
1 !)1 1 .




FORT WILLIAM 6th Jany. 1826.
Bangkok 14 Jany. 1825.
To J. Crawford Esqr,
Resident &c. &c.
My Dear Sir,
I beg leave to acquaint you, that on my Arrival
here the 12th Novr. 1 have conformably to your
directions delivered into the hands of the Phra Klang
the several letters you were pleased to entrust to my
care as well as the various presents sent by the Ship
Caroline as follows :
1000 Muskets
a Gold Watch
a Parcel of Coral Beads
a fowling Piece and an Emerald Ring—all in
good Condition. The Coral turned out short of
weight, weighing only G4 Catties instead of 15
Catties as stated in your letter. I regret this circum-
stance the more, as these suspicious people may
think that it was plundered in my possession. I
therefore beg to request that you will have the
goodness to put me right in their Opinion in one of
your early Communications to the Phra Klano
o *
That personage appeared much pleased with' all
the presents except the Ring which, as well as the
one you formerly sent him, are condemned as mere
imitations, and he hinted as much as if he intended to
return them. I said as much as I could in support of
their genuineness but without any effect.
I have not received any intimation what the
return presents are to consist of, but this I shall most
likely hear very soon, and shall have the pleasure to
acquaint you of it in my next.


On the Subject of the Barman War I have had
frequent Conversations with the • Phra Klang, and
others of the officers of Government, but seldom
amounted to more than mere enquiry on their part,
generally to the following import. What are the
names of the Generals Commanding the English Army ?
the number of Troops engaged, how many, and what
are the places taken b} 7 the English ? These questions
I answered as far as I was acquainted with the facts,
and on all occasions I endeavoured to satisfy them as
to the friendly disposition of the English towards them.
On one occasion the Phra Klang informed me
that they were about to dispatch a large Army (as
was their annual Custom) to the frontiers, under the
Command of the 2d. Phra Klang, Phya Phiphu,
who was then present to observe the motions of the
Burmese, and to seize any of them who might pass the
boundaries to bring them into slavery. 1 here recom-
mended to him to address a letter to any of the
English Generals who might be in the direction he
went, to inform of bis intention, who I was persuaded
would enter into some arrangements with him as
it would be advantageous to both parties for the
prosecution of the War. To this recommendation
no answer was returned, had they pursued the
subject a little further, I would have offered them an
introduction, b} 7 means of one or both of the letters
you were kind enough to have favored me with, but as
they did not appear to wish for such, I did not
consider myself authorized to offer it.
The Phra Klang informed me very lately that the
King has in consequence of your representations,
ordered several large Armies to the frontiers, to assist
the English—and that he has also given directions to
the Rajah of Ligore, to render them every assistance
they required, in providing Beats or otherwise —and
that another is about to be dispatched from hence for
the same purpose.


This show of preparation sounds well, if its sin-
cerity could be depended upon. My own .opinion
however is, were I allowed to offer one, that it is
entirely forced, and that if they could conveniently
consult their own disposition, they would willingly
assist the Burmans ; this feeling • they cannot conceal
when they hear of any advantage having been gained
by the English. I have heard it mentioned that,
when the present King was first informed of the War,
he observed “it would only increase the number of
Slaves (English ?) to cut grass for the King’s
Elephants.”
I have also been informed lately that not long
since he received a letter from the King of Ava,
inviting him to send him an Army to his Assistance
against the English and that he would for'ever forget
all past differences ; and was very anxious to be pre-
sent at the Ceremony of burning the body of the late
King. This compliment it is said much perplexed
the Councils of the King, and consequently they were
a long time before they could decide upon any Mea-
sures—and now when they have decided in favor of
the English their professions are without sincerity and
they will be ready to embrace the first favorable
opportunity to join the Burmans. What truth there
may be in these statements and reports I cannot say
but from what I observed of them myself now, and
formerly, I should certainly say that their fears of the
English is such that they will never enter into any
Cordial Alliance or Co-operation with them. They
are now busily employed constructing Forts —but so
flimsy are these Airy buildings that they will not
long stand the shock of their own Guns, much less
that of an Enemy’s—they are preparing Beams to lay
across the river to obstruct the Navigation.
I have seen a Burman Soldier here a short time
since with a small English flag in his possession—his
story was that he and several others were left by the


English to guard a small fort somewhere near the
frontiers of Siam with ihstructions to guard it and that
in case they might be seen by the Siamese to shew
the flag and that they would not molest them, A
party of the Siamese, however, having discovered them
they seized this man with the flag (the others made
their escape) and brought him up here and examined
him before the King who was so satisfied with his
Account that he ordered him presents in Money and
Cloth and to be sent back immediately and delivered
to the English, Like a true Soldier this man would
never part with the flag on any Account—he reported
also that the English did not hurt the people, that
they were all returning to their houses and were very
happy. I believe this Account more than anything
else induced the Siamese to declare in favor of the
English.
I shall again do myself the pleasure of addressing
you Per Caroline to sail in all February—when I shall
acquaint you of any fresh occurrence which may come
to my knowledge.
I have not yet obtained permission to Build a
House here nor even to remain on Shore—the former
has been totally refused. Whether they will persist
in this or not I cannot at present say —much 1 think
will depend upon the result of the War. In the event
of your concluding any arrangements with this
Government of a Commercial Nature, I hope you will
not forget to put in a clause for our benefit.
I shall be most happy if any information I can
from time to time give you without interfering with
any other views, be of any Service.
I have &c.
{ Sd.) JOHN GILLIES
A True Cop3 r
(Sd.) J. CKAWFUED Resident.


FORT CORN WALLIS— The 3. February 1825.
AGENT to the SIAMESE STATES.
To
W. S. CRACRAFT Esqr.
Acting Secretary to Government
Sir,
Having visited Kedah under the instructions
conveyed to me in your letters under date the Bth and
17th instant, and having obtained a promise from the
young Chief there to despatch as soon as the Elephants
and Attendants can be made ready, a Confidential
Agent from me to his father at Ligore. and to provide
me in three or four days with two of his own Servants
and letters of introduction addressed to the Siamese
Chiefs to the Northward ; I have deemed it advisable
to return to Penang, in order to give the young Chief
time to fulfil his promise, as well as to enable the
H. 0. Brig Jessy to have some trifling repairs exe-
cuted ; and I now beg to detail my proceedings at
Kedah for the information of the Honble. the Governor
in Council.
I left Penang on the 20th and arrived at Kedah
in the evening of the 22d. A few days previous to my
departure, I had despatched a Chinese, Achong the
son of Low Ammee, to Kedah, with directions to
proceed to Singora and Ligor in the character of a
Merchant, and to meet me at Trang with intelligence ;
but on my arrival at Kedah I was sorry to learn that
he had been stopped in consequence of some very per-
emptory orders which the Governor of Ligore had
recently issued, against allowing any British Subject
to cross the Country.


At noon on the 23d. 1 had my first Audience with
the young Chief of Ligore, and it lasted upwards
of five hours. After some general conversation I
prevailed upon him, and not without some difficulty, to
grant me a private audience, in which manner I saw
him again on the 21th 25th and 26th during the two
last of which days he admitted me at night, and on
the 25th detained me until past 10 o’clock in the
morning. The young Chief and some of his Servants
immediate!} 7 recognized me as the person who had
twice visited his father in 1822, and after the first
da} 7 , I think I succeeded in removing all distrust and
suspicion on their part. A small Schooner, which the
very crowded state of the Jess} 7 had obliged me to hire,
and which I have found truly serviceable, was allowed
to enter the River and anchor close to the Fort and
Palace, nearly five Miles distant from the spot where
the Jessy was obliged to anchor. No opposition w ? as
made to my visiting every part of the Fort and Tow r n,
and rowing up the River as far nearly as A lister,
while the Sepoys and my Attendants were allowed to
go on shore from the Schooner as much as they pleased,
and to mix with the people ; and I was not only suffer-
ed to sleep in the Town of Kedah during the nights of
the 24th 25th and 26th but to converse, and without
any appearance of being watched, with every class of
the inhabitants. I did not affect any show 7 or state, and
had thus very favorable opportunities of gathering
intelligence.
With respect to the ostensible object of my visit,
namely “ to effect some arrangement for suppressing
the Robberies and Piracies which have been com-
“ mitted of late on our frontiers ” I found the young
Chief extremely ready to give orders for apprehending
md punishing offenders, but I could not persuade him
to give me a written engagement for a mutual sur-
render of Criminals between Penang and Kedah,
although he admitted the advantage of such an


arrangement. He observed that he was always an-
xious to apprehend and punish offenders, and to
comply with any requisitions on this head from the
Governor of Penang, and in proof thereof lie stated,
that he has at the present moment several Pirates, and
among others a noted character named Che Beintan,
in chains—that he had apprehended and delivered
several Convicts who had fled to Kedah from Penang,
and that he had kept Tucang Chukoor, the Chinese
Farmer at Qualla Muda, and against whom the Gover-
nor of Penang had preferred a Complaint, confined in
a Cangue or moveable Pillory during several weeks.
()n the second day when the young Chief shewed me
the Draft of a letter which he was about to address on
this subject to the Honorable the Governor, in reply
to the letter I delivered to him from the Malay
Translator, I found it contained only general and
unmeaning expressions of friendship. I pointed out
to him the inutility of any such letter, and prevailed
upon him to order another Draft. When this second
Draft was shewn to me on the following day, I re-
marked in it a phrase against which I immediately
objected, and the pertinacious manner in which the
young Chief and his principal Officer Chiom Pyabau
insisted on the word being used, convinced me that I
was right in suspecting the interpretation, which they
meant hereafter to apply to it. I had heard from
several respectable persons at Kedah, that tlie Gover-
nor of Ligore was fitting out the twelve or fourteen
large Boats which I saw at Kedah, as well as a great
many others at Settool and Trang, in order to take
•' o'
possession of Perak, and to attack the Raja of Salan-
goiv, with whom he was stated to be much offended,
■ I I suspected therefore, that the design of the young
' oiiT in proposing to acquaint the Honble. the
Governor that “he would apprehend and punish
Robbers and Pirates to the Southward of Penang,”
vas to pave the way for his father’s invasion of Perak
and Salangore. Conceiving that we had never admitted


the Governor of Ligore’s right of jurisdiction to the
Southward of Penang, and that it would be impolitic
to admit it now, I opposed the introduction of that
phrase ; and after much discussion succeeded in per-
suading the young Chief to order a third Draft to
be prepared, in which the word “ Northward ” was
substituted.
Although the third letter was not satisfactory on
the subject of a mutual restitution of Criminals, I did
not think it prudent to importune the Chief any
further for the present, and particularly as he told me
that the letter from the Malay Translator did not
mention this point, and assured mo that he would be
always ready to apprehend and deliver any Criminals
for whom the Honble. the Governor might apply.
It is inconceivable how averse the Siamese are to
commit themselves on Paper. But should the Honble.
the Governor still consider it advisable to persuade the
the young Chief at Kedah to enter into an engagement
for the mutual surrender of Pirates and Robbers, 1
am inclined to think that a proposition to this effect
and an offer on our part to agree to such an
arrangement, would be successful.
The day after my arrival at Kedah, I learnt that
Tucang Chukoor had been released and sent to Qualla
Muda. On my remonstrating with the Chief against
his permitting such a character to return thither, he
assured me that he had only been sent with 30 men,
in order to point out the haunts of several Pirates,
who infest that River, and that he hoped by this
means to apprehend them.
Kedah is at present in a very wretched condition—
most of the Houses are in in ruins, and the appearance
of the Inhabitants denotes poverty and disease. The
smallpox is raging in the Fort, and almost every
person whom I saw is afflicted with some cutaneous


disorder. The young Chief himself, although attired
in fine Silk, and with handsome Jewels, has his Arms
and Legs covered with Itch. Poultry is cheap—from
five to seven Dollars per hundred, but the exportation
of Grain is prohibited, and the trade between that
place and Trang is almost entirely.at an end. I learnt,
and pointed out to the young Chief that some of his
Chinese and Chulia Servants make exactions on all
Boats visiting the Port, and he observed that as such
a practice was unauthorized, he would direct his
Officers to put a stop to it, I pointed out to him also
the impolitic and unfriendly procedure of suppressing
the intercourse and trade which formerly subsisted
overland between Kedah and Ligore, and I beg to
submit, that if on this head, as well as on that re-
garding the extortion of his Chinese and Chulia Ser-
vants, a letter were addressed to the young Chief by
the Honorable the Governor, the measure would most
probably obtain some advantage in favour of our
Native traders.
The Fort of Kedah is truly contemptible. On the
works, which are in many places in ruins, are
mounted about 30 or 40 old and homyy-combed pieces
of Ordnance, generally with broken Carriages. The
residence of the Chief, a brick and tiled Building, the
Audience Hall of Attap, and the Houses of his
Officers and Suite of the same Material, are within the
Fort. I found the Court very thinly attended, and
with scarcely a twentieth part of the Guard of Soldiers
which surrounded the Governor of Ligore in 1822.
The present Chief is an illegitimate Son and
about 25 years of age^ —his name is Loosing but his
Father has directed him to be always named by the
Malay title of Bujinda Muda or Young Prince. He
possesses rather pleasing manners, and displayed more
intelligence in his Enquiries regarding the Burmese
War than I should have expected. The principal


officer under him, and without whose advice indeed
his father has forbidden him to undertake any mea-
sure, is a tall and athletic man, called Chioni Pya ban.
This is the person who first entered Kedah, and
killed the Laxamana. He boasted to me that he had
attacked Kedah with only 300 Soldiers, and had
driven several thousand Malays before him. He has
repeatedly served against the Burmese and particu-
larly in the direction of Mergui. Among numerous
questions regarding the present War, he shrewdly
asked me, whether the English had yet succeeded in
prevailing on any of the Burmese to accept Pay and
Service under them and fight against their own
Countrymen —and I obtained from him, after taking
some trouble to conciliate him, the information upon
which the accompanying sketch of the Siamese
States between Bangkok and Kedah is formed.* I
compared his information however with that which
I elicited from the principal Suammee or Siamese
Priest, named Sichoom, with whom I formed an
acquaintance at Kedah. Both Chiora Pya ban and
Sichoom are Natives of Ligore, and have repeatedly
visited Bangkok. With respect to the places lying
between Mergui and Junkceylon towards the Bay of
Bengal, I obtained additional information from some
respectable Malays, who had often visited that
Coast.
Throughout the Kingdom of Kedah there are not
at present more that 6 or 700 Siamese or Ligorians.
Of these there are 300 at Kedah, 150 under a Chioni
or Luang at Purlis, 50 more under two other of the
Governor of Ligore’s illegitimate sons at Settool, and
the remainder scattered about the interior. The
above intelligence is the result of much enquiry
among the different Classes of Inhabitants at Kedah.
With respect to the alleged rising influence of
the Chief of Singora under the new King of Siam’s


favor, I found it extremely difficult to collect any
positive information. Several Malays and Chinese at
Kedah assured me, that after the remains of the late
King of Siam are burnt, ( and the Governor of every
Province has been summoned to assist at the Ceremony
which is to take place in about two months from this
date ) the Chief of Singora is to be appointed to take
charge of the Territory of Kedah, and to replace the
Ex-King. The Siamese however ridiculed this report,
and informed me, that it originated in the circumstance
of the Chief of Singora having been released from
Chains upon the death of the late King of Siam>
when, according to the Laws of Siam, every Prisoner’s
confinement was remitted. This intelligence was
confirmed by the Siamese Priest. The Chief of Singora
is stated to be an old friend and playfellow of the
present King of Siam. An intelligent Chinese
declared to me, that altho’ the Chief of Ligore is at
present under some disgrace at Siam, yet as he had
despatched his wife thither with valuable presents,
and is preparing to follow her with still richer pre-
sents, and as he possesses much greater means than the
Chief of Singora for conciliating the corrupt Court of
Siam, it is most probable that ho will retain his credit
and influence. He is at present much vexed at the
death of a Daughter, whom he had intended as a Bride
for the present King of Siam. There is no doubt
that a very strong personal enmity exists between the-
two Chiefs ; and the Chief of Merdeelong or Kotelon
as well as the Chief of Singora, is now entirely cut off
from all communication with the Western Sea. Until
very lately, thej- were each allowed a Port in the
Kedah territory by the Chief of Ligore.
During the long conferences which I had with the
young chief at Kedah, I informed him very fully as to
every circumstance relating to the present War. I pre-
sented him with a Copy of HorsburglTs Chart, in which
1 filled up the direction of the Irrawaddy, Saluen or


Thaluan and Menam Rivers, and assisted him to write
down in the Siamese character, the names of the
principal Places.
The Chief questioned me very minutely as to the
number of places captured by the British forces, their
strength and the names of the principal officers. He
took notes of my replies, for the purpose he said ot
communicating the information to his father ; and this
gave me an opportunity of offering to go myself and
see his father at Ligore. I then dwelt much upon the
many important points regarding the present War,
which I could relate to his father, and which it would
be highly creditable to his father, to communicate as
soon as possible to the Court of Siam. I shewed the
direction in which the Siamese troops might move
against the Capital of Ava, and probably seize the
person of the King of Ava at Moneh, to which place,
it is stated, that Monarch would fly the moment our
Troops approached. But I now discovered that the
Siamese at Kedah, and probably at Ligore, do not
entirely credit the intelligence of our War with Ava.
They suspect that our object in spreading such a
report, is in view only to be allowed to penetrate
across the Country towards Ligore and Siam, and I
afterwards learnt from several intelligent persons who
have lately arrived from the Eastern Shores, that the
Court of Siam is full of doubt and suspicion as to our
views, and is hardly yet convinced that we are really
engaged in hostilities against Ava.
To ray proposition to visit his father at Ligore,
the young Chief replied, that he regretted his orders
were peremptory against permitting any British
subject to cross the Country. He said however that
he would write minutely to his father every thing 1
should communicate to him. Accordingly I took
great pains to let him understand the cause, nature
and progress of the present War and shew T ed him on


the Map the great advantage of the Siamese immedi-
ately moving a force from Cheung-mai or Zemee, and
possessing themselves of a portion of the valuable
tract of Country, lying between their boundary and
the Saluen or Thaluan River, and into which they had
so often of late years been making incursions.
Fortunately on the 26th a Native Boat belonging
to the Chief of Phoonga arrived at Kedah from that
place, and brought intelligence that the British Troops
had taken Mergui, and were actually in Garrison:
there. After this I succeeded in persuading the Chief
to allow Achong to proceed to his father at Ligore
with the letter from the Rouble, the Governor, as well
one from myself, urging that Chief to give me an
interview as soon as possible, either by meeting me at
Trang or allowing me to join him at Ligore. In
consequence of Achong having accompanied Mr. Craw-
furd to Siam, he is much distrusted, and as the Chief
told me that it would take four or five days to have
the Elephants and Attendants ready for conveying
him to Ligore, 1 took the precaution of having it
mentioned in the letter to the Rouble, the Governor
th.at Achong was to be allowed to pass. I have every
reason therefore to hope that the young Chief will
fulfil his promise, and that Achong in the course of five
and twenty or thirty days will be able to meet me at
Trang with some correct intelligence, not only regard-
ing the present condition of the Chiefs of Ligore and
Singora, but regarding the views and feelings of the
Court of Siam. He has been instructed to use every
means in his power to allure the Chief of Ligore to
give me an interview.
On the young Chief hearing that I would probably
visit Mergui, and expressing a desire of obtaining
more information regarding the progress of the War,
1 proposed to him to dispatch some of his most trust-
worthy Servants to accompany me to the Northward,


and promised to bring them back to Kedah in safety.
He acceded to this proposal, and further consented to
give me letters of introduction to the Chiefs of Phoonga,
Chimpohun and fuccopa, as I observed that I was
anxious to explain to them, as fully as I had done to
him, the circumstances of the present War. If the
young Chief do not disappoint me on this last head, I
shall certainly secure very important facilitation in
communicating with the Ports to the Northward ; and
it was principally to inspire him with additional con-
fidence in my professions, that L resolved to return to
Penang, and convey to him other letters, and some
trifling Articles which he expressed his desire to
possess.
I deem it duty, however, to state candidly, for
the information of the Honble. the Governor in Coun-
cil, that from this Coast, it will be impossible, in my
opinion, to communicate with the Chief of Singora—
that I am by no means sanguine of being now allowed
to pass across the Country” to Ligore—and that while
I hope Achong will be able to avail himself of the
talent which he possesses to collect some positive in-
telligence regarding Siam, Ligore and Singora, I think
my only chance of being useful, will be to explain the
circumstances of the present War to the Chiefs of
Phoonga and Tuccopa, and to endeavour by means of
the Rinnong Hirer, to perform the same duty with
respect to the Chief of Chimpohun, who appears to be
the proper person through whom communications
regarding our occupation of Tavoy and Mergui can
be made to the Court of Siam. From all that I could
collect at Kedah, I am convinced that no impression
either with respect to the affairs of that Kingdom, or
concerning our objects in the territory of Tenasserim
can be made on the Court of Siam by negociation, but
by means of the Chiefs on the Eastern shore, and if
therefore, I fail in persuading the Chow-p3 T a of Ligoro
to meet me at Trang, or in reaching Chimpohun,


through the Rinnong River, I would beg to suggest
that 1 be authorized to go round at once to Singora,
Ligore, and Chimpohun, and to wait at the last men-
tioned place for such instructions as the Supreme
Government may be pleased to transmit through
Mergui, the passage from which place I am assured
is of three days onty, and my presence at Chimpohun
would perhaps lead to its being immediately laid open
by the Siamese.
1 have, &c., &c.
(Signed) H. BURNEY,
Political Agent to the
Siamese States.
H. (/. Brig Jessy
Port Cornwallis
28 January 1825.


TRANSLATION
of a letter from the Sou of the Rajah of Ligore at
Quedah to the Honorable Robert Fullerton, Governor
of Prince of Wales Island.
( After the usual Compliments.)
I have to acquaint my friend with respect to his
having sent Captain Burney with a letter to me at
Quedah, concerning the Pirates and Robbers who have
been committing depredations to the Northward of
Pulo Penang, that I understood all the contents and
purport of that letter. I have given strict orders to
search for and seize these Pirates, in order that they
may be punished and be made an example of, to deter
others from the commission of such offences.
I have communicated with Captain Burney on
the subject of these Pirates and bad people. My friend
requested I would receive Captain Burney with hos-
pitality and friendship. 1 have done so agreeably to
the desire expressed in my friend’s letter.
Captain Burney was anxious to send China
Achong with a letter from my friend and himself to
the Rajah of Ligore, and I will order Elephants to be
prepared to convey him across, and people to accom-
pany him, from a regard for my friend and Captain
Burney. Captain Burney will acquaint my friend with
all the communications which have passed between
us.
DATED at Quedah Thursday 27 : January 1825.
A True Translation
(Signed) JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Transr. to Govt.
FORT CORNWALLIS—The 3 February 1825.


REMARKS.
The present King of Siam or Khun Luang is not
an Usurper as reported from Singapore but'the eldest
Son of the Jate King. The Uncle of the present King
of Siam is Nephew to the Governor of Ligore, and he
has been appointed Khun Luang Wang-na, or Rajah
Muda, literally Heir Apparent, an Officer of much
authority in the Eastern States.
This is the same who was before called Krooni
Sat. The report of his decease, and of the Siamese at
Kedah having shaved their heads in mourning of this
event is void of foundation.
None of the Chiefs between Kedah and Banedcok
are independent Sovereigns or feudatories, but Ser-
vants implicitly bound and actually obeying the dic-
tates of the King of Siam.
Although some of these Chiefs, and particularly
those styled Chow Pya, Governor General, or as
Loubere translates it, Viceroy, exercise some degree of
Sovereign power over their own Countrymen, yet with
respect to Europeans not one of them dares engage in
any negociation with them, but under the direct
Authority of the Court of Siam.
The gradation among the Chiefs of Provinces and
Towns, or Chow Mvang, is as follows :
Chow Pya, Governor General.
Pya, Governor.
Prah, answering to our Lieutenant Governor.
Luang or Chiom, answering to our Resident—the
latter title is more honorable, and is never used
in the presence of a Superior.
Khoon or Mome, a grade lower.
Meun, a grade still lower.
FORT CORNWALLIS—The 3 February 1825.


The Pya or Governor of Chimpohun was always
entrusted by the Court of Siam with the duty of
watching the Burmese on the Coast ot Tenasserim,
and all communications regarding that Coast should be
addressed to him. The shortest, and alleged only
route from the Gulf of Siam to Tavoy and Mergui is
from Chimpohun, where the Siamese forces destined to
attack those places always assembled.
Rinnong or Rindong was within a few years back
governed by a Malay Chief, but when the Burmese
attacked and laid it waste, the Inhabitants fled and
settled near the East Coast at a place called Lang-
sewun. The shortest space between the Eastern and
Western Seas appears to be at Rinnong. Some-
persons who have often gone the passage declare, that
in one tide tip the Rinnong River ( which is of soma
size ) you arrive at a road that leads to the Chimpohun
River, and may be passed in 4 hours, and that thence
down the Chimpohun River you may arrive at the
Seat of the Pya or Governor of Chimpohun in 8 hours.
The Pya or Governor of Poongha has much in-
fluence at Siam, as well as the Chore Pya, of Ligore.
The Chow Pya of Ligore is of Chinese extraction,
.and not only the father of the Pya of Singora was a
Chinese, but his Mother was of Chinese extraction.
The late Pya of Merdelong or Bondelon of
Kotelon was a Mahometan, but the present Pya is a
Siamese sent from Bangkok to succeed.
An illegitimate son of the Governor of Ligore
governs at Kedah, two others reside at Settool, while
the favorite and legitimate Son who was at Trang for
some mouths has just returned to Ligore.
All the Coast between Puhlas in Lat: 8 and
Kedah is occupied by the Troops of the Governor of


Ligore, wlio lias put a stop to all communication with
Singora and Merdelong.
The Siamese at Kedah state tliat Ligore was at
one time an independent Kingdom, including a
great portion of the Coast of Tenasserim, but that the
Chow Pya of Ligore has at present no authority or
control whatever over the intermediate Siamese States
of Chimpohun, Chenga. Tuccopa or Poongha. They
also state that there are few Siamese settled at Mergui,
and a great many in Tavoy, that within the last three
the Siamese made an incursion close to the
Oates of Mergui, and took the Burmese second in
Command, who is at present a Prisoner in Bangkok.
They also pretend that the Court of Bangkok is
quite indifferent regarding the possession of any
portion of the Coast of Tenasserim, and had only been,
making incursions into tliat territory for many years
past because it belonged to their inveterate Enemies
the Burmese.
The present Rajah of Perak is a weak Prince, and
Ins Bindahara applied to the Chow Pya of Ligore for
assistance against Salangore, a relative of the Rajah of
which place, Tuanko Hussein, has established himself
in the territory of Perak at the mouth of the principal
River. The Detachment which was sent two years
ago from Kedah was defeated by the Rajah of
Salangore, who came up from Salangore and attacked
the Troops of Ligore. Another application lias been
•lately made to Ligore by the Bindahara of Perak,
who has offered to send a Dunya Mas to Siam, and
the Chow Pya is now fitting out a large fleet cf Boats
to attack the Rajah of Salangore, as well as to occupy
the Country of Perak. Ligore has not at present
more than 6 or 700 Siamese Troops, throughout the
territory of Kedah.


The Siamese Dominions on the Eastern Shores
between Li go re and Pachpuri, are remarkably thinly
peopled, and Ligore itself has but a scanty population.
The Pya of Chimpohun is not allowed to trade, and
that place since the conquest by the Burmese of
Mergui and Tavoy appears to have been converted into
a purely Military Post or Garrison. This accounts for
the' entire cessation of that valuable trade which
formerly passed between Mergui and the Gulf of Siam.
Krah is a small town inland between Rinnong
and Chanya under a Luang of Chinese extraction, and
although not set down in any Chart or Map that I
have ever seen, the name of Isthmus of Kraw appears
to have been taken from it.
There has arisen a violent personal enmity be-
tween the Chow Pya of Ligore, and the Pya of
Singora, and the former had placed the latter in chains,
which were lately taken off in consequence of the
death of the King of Siam, upon which event according
to the established custom of the State, every prisoner
was released. From this circumstance the Siamese at
Kedah state the report of the rising influence of the
Pya of Singora at Siam has originated. There is no
doubt however that the Pya of Singora is an old
friend and playfellow of the present King of Siam ;
nevertheless it is believed that as the Chow Pya is
much more wealthy then the Pya of Singora, and has
deputed his wife to Siam with very rich presents, and
is preparing to follow her with still more valuable
presents, he will succeed in retaining his influence
and credit at that corrupt Court.
All the Chiefs of the Siamese States have been
summoned to attend Bangkok within two months for
the purpose of assisting at the Ceremony of burning
the remains of the late King of Siam.


Since writing the above, I have met with Luang
Took Krat, a Minister belonging to the Chief of
Tuccopa, who lias confirmed all that I had collected at
Kedah, and has further told me that although his
Master is styled by many people Pya. he is in fact a
Prah only, and is unwilling to be called by the other
title, from an apprehension that it will excite jealousy
and envy among the other Chiefs. This Luang has
undertaken to convey letters and presents from me to
his Master immediately, and to prepare him for my visit.
The Choir Pya of Ligore does not give entire
credit to the English having captured so many Burmese
places, and in fact suspects, that the report of our War
with Ava is spread in view only that an Officer from
Penang may be able to cross and see the Country
between Ligore and Kedah.
(Signed) H. BURNEY
Political Agent to the Siamese States.


THE following Minute by the President with
Letters to the Siamese Chiefs is recorded.
MINUTE BY THE PRESIDENT.
As it appeared to me, after the perusal and consi-
deration of Captain Burney’s report, that the letters
addressed to the neighbouring Chiefs should be some-
what more full and explanatory as [ to ] the objects of
his Mission, and the general subjects connected there-
with, the War with the Burmese, and the occupation
of Tavoy and Mergui. I directed accordingly the
letters, of which the translations are now laid before
the Board, to be prepared.
( Signed ) R. FULLERTON
31 January 1825.
FORT CORNWALLIS—The 3 February 1825.


TO THE SON OF THE RAJAH OF LIGORE.
To
. The Sou of the Rajah of Ligore at
KEDAH.
The Governor of Penang lias received the letter
which the Buginda Muda residing at Kedah has sent
him by Captain Burney, and he has to thank the
Buginda Muda for the determination which he ex-
presses to apprehend and punish the Robbers and
Pirates that infest the Seas and Countries to the
Northward of Penang. The Governor also thanks the
Buginda Muda for the civility and attention which he
has shewn to Captain Burney, and regrets that that
Officer was not allowed to go across the Country to
Ligore to communicate with the Chow Pi a upon many
important particulars regarding the War in which the
English are at present engaged against Ava. He
hopes however that the Chow Pia will hear from
Achong such intelligence as will induce him im-
mediately to give Captain Burney a meeting. The
British Government is very anxious of explaining
every particular regarding the Burmese to the Siam-
ese, with whom it has so long been on the most
friendly terms; and now that it is engaged in hos-
tilities against their mutual enemies the Burmese, the
Governor of Penang is confident that the King of Siam
will be most happy to receive authentic intelligence as
the views and proceedings of the British forces which
have occupied Cheduba, Negrais, Rangoon, Dalla,
Pegu, Martaban. Yek, Tavoy, Mergui, and Tenasserim,
and he has commissioned Captain Burney to communi-
cate very fully all such particulars to every Siamese
Chief in the neighbourhood of Penang, in order that*
there may arise no doubt or suspicion of any kind in
the minds of the Siamese, and that the long subsisting
harmony between the Siamese and English may become


more firm and permanent. It is the duty therefore of
every Siamese Chief to hear all that Captain Burney
lias been ordered to communicate and to report it
as soon as possible to the King of Siam.
The Governor of Penang is happy to hear from
Captain Burney that the Briginda Muda is willing to
put a stop to the sale of stolen property at Kedah, and
to seize and deliver up to the Governor ot Penang
all Pirates and Robbers that may fly to the territory
of Kedah’from Penang, and the Governor engages to
issue the same orders as the Briginda Muda may
issue at Kedah, with respect to Robbers and Pirates
taking shelter at Penang or the Honble. Company’s
territory from Kedah, and with respect to persons
selling property stolen from Kedah.
But the Governor of Penang is sorry to hear from
Captain Burney that the Native Trade between Kedah
and Penang is much oppressed by the exactions of
some Chulia and Chinese Servants of the Briginda
Muda at Kedah, and that the valuable trade which
formerly passed overland between Kedah and Ligore
from Penang, is now entirely stopped, in consequence
of all persons being prohibited to cross the Country
without the previous permission of the Chow Pia of
.Ligore. The Governor hopes that the Briginda Muda
will encourage and promote Commerce at Kedah, in
the same manner as it [ is ] encouraged and promoted
at Penang', by fixing a regular Schedule of Unties,
punishing all persons who may extort unauthorized
fees, and permitting every Trader to go and come
whenever and wherever he pleases without any
trouble or hindrance,
Lastly, the Governor of Penang trusts, that from
the confidence and good terms that now subsist be-
tween Kedah and Penang, and from Captain Burney’s
being an old friend of the Chow Pia of Ligore, that


the Briginda Muda will give letters of introduction to
the Chiefs of Phoonga, Tacowpa and Chimpohun, in
order that they also may become acquainted as friends
with every particular regarding the Burmese War, and
regarding the occupation of Tavoy and Mergui by the
British Troops ; and he is happy to learn that the
Briginda Muda has resolved upon ordering two of his
servants to accompany Captain Burney towards
Mergui, for the purpose of acquiring full and complete
intelligence as to the War carrying on between the
English and the Burmese, the ancient and bitter
Enemies of the Siamese.
(Signed) U. FULLERTON
Governor.
Translated by
. (Sd.) JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Transr. to Govt.


TO THE PI A of CHIMPOHUN and other CHIEFS.
Pia of' Chimpohun, Pia of Tacoopa, Pia of Tucatoon
tlie Aluang of Kraw, and Chow Pia of Ligore.
The Governor of Penang has thouglit it proper to
depute Captain Burney to the Pia of Chimpohun, in or-
der to communicate to the Pia important information
regarding the War in which the English are at present-
engaged against Ava, and lie hopes the Pia will receive
Captain Burney with the same hospitality and good
will which every Siamese visiting Penang, or any
other British Port, has always experienced, and may be
certain of experiencing from the English,
The British Government is very desirous of ex-
plaining every particular regarding the Burmese War to
the Siamese, with whom it has so long been on the most
friendly terms, and now that it is engaged in hostilities
against their mutual enemies the Burmese, the Gover-
nor of Penang is confident that the King of Siam will
be most happy to receive authentic intelligence as to
the views and proceedings of the British forces which
have occupied Cheduba, Negrais, Rangoon, Balia,
Pegue, Martaban, Yek, Tavo}”, Mergui and Tenasserim,
and he has commissioned Captain Burney to com-
municate very fully all such particulars to every
Siamese Chief in the neighbourhood of Penang, in
order that there may arise no doubt or suspicion of any
kind in the minds of the Siamese, and that the long
subsisting friendship and harmony between the Siamese
and English, may become more firm and permanent.
It is the duty therefore, of every Siamese Chief, to
hear all that Captain Burney has been ordered to com-
municate, and to report it as soon as possible to the
King of Siam ; and the Governor of Penang trusts that
Pya Phoonga will not only note down and report to


Bangkok all that Captain Barney may relate, but assist
Captain Burney to give the same important information
to all the Siamese Chief’s between Mergui and Phoonga,
in order that the English on the Coast of Tenasserim
may be considered as friends to the Siamese, and that
the Siamese may know that if they move their forces in
the direction of Aungwa and Moneh from Bangkok and
Cheung-mai, they will have an opportunity of securing
great advantage for themselves over their ancient and
bitter enemies the Burmese.
Captain Barney will deliver some tokens of friend-
ship and good will from the Governor of Penang to the
Pia of Poongha, and communicate either to the Govern-
ment of Bengal, or to the Governor of Penang, any
thing that the Pia will have to communicate.
( Signed ) R. FULLERTON
Governor.
Translated by
(Sd.) JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Transr. to Govt.


TO THE PIA OF POONGHA.
Pi a of Poongha.
The Governor of Penang takes the earliest
opportunity of thanking the Pi a of Poongha tor the
civility and politeness with which he received some
months ago, tlie Governor’s Agent Captain Low ; and
he now deputes Captain Burney to Poongha, in order
to communicate to the Pia important information
regarding the War in which the English are at
present engaged against Ava, and to hope the Pia will
receive Captain Burney with his usual kindness and
attention. The British Government is very desirous
of explaining every particular regarding the Burmese
War to the Siamese, with whom it has so long been
on the most friendly terms, and now that it is engaged
in hostilities against their mutual enemies the Burmese.
[ From this point to the end, the document is a
copy of the letter addressed to the Pia of Chimpohun.j


FORT CORNWALLIS- The 3 February 1825.
The following Minute by Mr. Clubley, proposing
the discontinuance of any further Proceedings on the
subject is recorded,
MINUTE BY MR. CLUBLEY.
When the Mission of Captn. Burney to the
Siamese States was proposed by the President, I
certainly declined recording my dissent, to the mea-
sure, from respect to the high authority of the Supreme.
Government, under whose recommendation that officer
was appointed to the trust, and under a hope that the
important interests which were supposed to be involved
in the Mission, would justify its adoption. The
return of that Officer, and his Report of Proceedings
at Kedah, oblige me however now to say, that 1
I look upon the continuance of such a Mission
not only as impolitic, but as improper. It is impo-
litic because it appears to me that no ultimate
good can result from it, while the Deputation of a
British Officer, for purposes which are unattainable
with the petty States on this Coast, can only lead
them to unreasonable expectations, and perhaps in-
volve us in a way which may be ultimately incon-
venient. It has the appearance also of a solicitude
for assistance, which none of these States can afford,,
and even it ultimately given, will prove too late to
be of any avail. It is quite quite unreasonable
to suppose that the Siamese Court and its de-
pendent Governments have not been fully aware
of our hostilities with Ava, as well as with the
progress of our Arms, and it they had been dis-
posed to take advantage of the opportunity, there
lias been ample time to enable them to do so in a way
that might have been useful to us, and advantageous


to themselves. The Mission is improper on these
grounds, and also because the expense of it is certain,
without any probability of a proportionate advantage.
We have before us in Captain Burney’s report 8
Sheets of Paper full of that sort of information which
has been given in every preceding Mission to Kedah,
with particulars regarding the Country, which could
have been easily gleaned from the Ist Volume of the
Penang Records, from the more voluminous reports of
Mr. Crawfurd of his Mission to Siam in 1822, and
from the practical result of Lieutt. Low’s Mission of
last year, the Report of which is on record. Besides
which the opportunities afforded to Lieutt. Low in his
last, and in his present visits to the Northward will
have placed the Siamese in full possession of our views
and objects in the ’ War with Ava, as he circulated
Translations in the Siamese Language of the Pro-
clamation of War, and actually invited their assistance.
I think it will be time enough when Lieutenant Low
returns from Mergui to judge whether another Mission
for the same purpose is now expedient, after Govern-
ment shall have received his Reports of the feelings
and sentiments of the different Siamese Chieftains
with whom he may have had intercourse.
We have received also from Captain Burney a
Sketch of the Siamese Empire, derived as usual from
Native information, and therefore likely to mislead
from its vagueness and uncertainty.
The names of Native Authorities and Potentates,
under the Siamese Government, may be correctly
described, as may perhaps also Captain Burney’s cor-
rection of Mr. Crawfur l’s report regarding the present
King of Siam.
The personal character of the young Chief at
Kedah, and of his Ministers may also be satisfac-
torily described by Captain Burney, as well as the


state of the Country, and the price of poultry *
but I cannot think that such objects so frequently
before descanted on, can be of sufficient consideration
for an expensive Mission, not even if the Private
Lives and Adventures of all the Chiefs and Ministem
between this and Mergui were added to the Report.
I decidedly object to the measure adopted by Captain
Burney of sending an unaccredited Chinese Person to
Ligore upon a Mission, which required all the delicacy
he himself could have bestowed upon it.
Captain Burney has moreover “ candidly acknow-
ledged ” in his Report an opinion that “ from this
“ Coast it will be impossible to communicate with the
“ Chief of Singora, and that it is not likely he will
be allowed to pass across the Country to Ligore.”
For all practical purposes, therefore, of utility and of
general policy, the present Mission might terminate.
The problematical result of any endeavour to penetrate
across the Country from the “ Rinnong River ” to
“ Chimpohun ” can be of no public benefit as respects
the objects of Government referable to the present
Burman War. Far better would it have been if
Colonel Snow had been allowed to carry into effect the
objects of this Government with the Siamese States,
and eventually with Siam itself, against which the
Supreme Government so decidedly objected.
The conduct and proceedings of the young
Prince at Kedah, as well as of all the petty States
to the Northward, will be entirely regulated by the
orders of the Rajah of Ligore, and it is quite certain
that that haughty Chief is equally bound by the in-
structions of the Court of Siam. We' may receive
from the Rajah of Ligore, and from the tributary
Siamese Chieftains abundant expressions of good will
and professions of regard which are quite unmeaning,
and in no case to be relied upon, without the authori-
tative orders of their Lord and Master at Siam, who
can only be courted at his Capital. His dependent.


Ministers will of course receive with avidity all com-
plimentary Embassies, but the substantial advantage
to ourselves is not obtainable from such a mode of
Intercourse.
( Signed ) W. A. CLUB LEY
THE BOARD resolves that the subject lie over
until Reports of his further proceedings are received
from the-Political Agent.


AGENT to the SIAMESE STATES.
To
W. S. CRACROFT Esquire
Acting Secretary to Government.
Sir,
I beg leave to apprize you for the information of
the Honorable the Governor in Council, that on my
late visit to Kedah, I engaged a small schooner of 12
or 14 Tons burthen, to accompany me—that, in view
to incur as little expense as possible, three of the Crew
belonging to the Honorable Company’s Brig Jessy
were put into her to man her, and that I derived
important assistance from this Vessel. I was in hopes
of again being able to avail myself of such a benefit
without any immediate outlay, but the Commander of
the Jessy being unwilling to spare any of his crew, 1
have to solicit the Honble. the Governor in Council
will authorize me to entertain an intelligent Seacunny
and four Lascars, for the purpose of manning the
Schooner above referred to and to incur an expense
not exceedin'? 100 Drs. per month on account of her.
Referring to the frail condition of the H. 0. Brig
Jessy, and to the necessity which will exist for my
keeping close to the shore, and entering some distance
into Rivers wherever the Seat of a Siamese Chief is in
the interior, I submit the presence of such a Schooner,
or other decked Boat is indispensable for the due
execution of my Mission, Perhaps the Honorable the
Governor in Council may, in lieu of authorizing the
expense which I propose, direct the Gun Boat lately
FORT CORNWALLIS—The 3 February 1825.


built for the Honble. Company to accompany me.
I have &c.
( Signed ) H. BURNEY
Poll. Agent to the Siamese
c 5
P. W. Island States
2d Feby. 1825.
RESOLVED that the authority solicited be
granted, instructions being given against exceeding the
above expense, and for limiting the charge incurred
to as economical a scale as possible.


FORT CORNWALLIS The 17 February 1825.
RAJAH of LIGORE.
Translation
of a letter from the Rajah of Li gore to the Honble.
the Governor of Prince of Wales Island,
( After Compliments. )
The reply to my letter which my friend returned
by Alnang Ram Dicho, Kon Aksoon and Nei Neem,
expressive of his desire to promote a friendly under-
standing with me has been duly received, and the
contents fully understood.
The successes of the English in their hostilities
against the Kingdom of Ava, 1 am extremely rejoiced
to learn ; for Ava and Siam can never be at peace, or
preserve a good understanding.
I am anxious to know what is the cause of the
English having quarrelled with Ava, and I am also
desirous to learn how many of the Burman Countries,
have been already taken by the English. I should
like to be informed also, as to the nature of the in-
tended attack, and the preparations which have been
made by the English for the capture of the capital of
Ava. I request, therefore, that my friend will inform
me of these particulars by letter, for the Siamese will
be happy to hear that Ava has been overcome by the
English.
When the Kingdom of Ava has been completely
subdued by the English, the Siamese will be very
happy and be enabled to trade with greater facility. 1
am anxious to establish friendship and cordiality with
my friend, more close and intimate than formerly.


Aluang Ram Dicho, Kon Aksoon, and Nai Neem,
who conveyed my last letter, mentioned to me that
my friend wanted some small Prows to send up and
co-operate in the Ava River, and that he also required
some elephants at Penang. If my friend wishes to
have Prows to the number of ten, twenty, or thirty,
and elephants for amusement at Pulo Penang, he will
be pleased to send me a letter, and I will send them,
in order to adhere to, and promote friendship and
good will.
I herewith send a Knndi ( a Silver Water Pot
inlaid with thin Gold ) of the manufacture of Siam,
which I beg to present like a flower to my friend, and
beg he will accept, using it as he pleases, as a token
of regard.
Further, it is mentioned in my friend’s letter
that there have been a great number of Pirates and
Robbers, who have been committing depredations, anti
taken refuge in Kedah. 1 have sent a letter there,
directing search to be made for them, and the seizure
of their persons —if discovered they shall be punished
according to custom.
There is a person of the name of To Jahan, a
Native of Purlis, also a Panglima Saib and a Panglima
Bahar, from a place called Temblang (Dependencies
of the Kedah Country ) who were under my orders
and control ( formerly—they have fled and taken refuge
in the territory attached to Pulo Penang, together
with Che Allang. Che Akeel, Che Musa, and Che Jay a,
Inhabitants of the Kangkawi Islands —these people
have concerted together to commit piracies, and to
attack trading Prows, robbing and plundering the
Birds Nests at the Islands from which I derive a
Revenue.
Moreover, with respect to Rajah Antah, Rajah
Oosman, Rajah Kahar, Fakir Saib and Nga Manid


alluded to in my friend’s letter —I have sent a letter
to Kedah directing that they shall be watched and
seized —but they dare not continue long in the Kedah
territory —they make piratical and plundering incur-
sions and then fly.
All these people have conveyed their wives and
families to reside at Frye, Teluk Ayer Tawar, Tanjong
Tokong, Teluk Jelutang, Sungei Glugore, and Sungei
Kluang, under the Government of Pulo Penang, and
my friend having but lately arrived may not perhaps
be aware of this.
The person who is charged with this letter is well
acquainted however with the resort of these people,
and I request my friend will enquire of him. If my
friend wishes to seize these people without difficulty,
it may certainly be accomplished.
I therefore beg my friend who governs Pulo Pen-
ang, to seize all these pirates and robbers and send
them to Kedah, according to long established custom.
When these evil disposed people are removed, the
Commercial intercourse between Pulo Penang and
Kedah will be improved and easy. All that is herein
stated, I submit for the consideration of my friend,
in order that he may decide upon promoting entire
friendship.
There is another point. So long as the Rajah of
Kedah has been residing at Pulo Penang, all these
wicked people who have fled, take a pleasure in
conveying false reports to Pulo Penang, in oraer to
create a bad feeling and enmity between the English
and Siamese. What I now profess I assert with real
sincerity and a friendly disposition —that from this
time should any person bring any intelligence ot such
a nature, and endeavour to promote discord and div ; son
between the English and Siamese, I request my friend


will seize the person bringing such reports, confining
him and sending me intimation in order that I may be
enabled to point out satisfactorily to my friend, the
falsity of any such reports of my evil designs. I
again repeat that what I now declare, is with the
utmost sincerity, as a token of truth, and in order
that friendship and good will may be promoted and
continued from this time forward.
Dated 20th Jemadilaw al in this year 1240—20 th
Jr. ninny 1825.
Malay Translator’s Office
Penang
dhe 11th I\bruiry 1825.
A True Translation
(Signed) JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Transr. to Govt.
Note —This letter was received yesterday at noon.
It is a reply to the Honorable the Governor’s dated
13th December last. The Original is in Malay. The
llajah of L'gore has sent a complimentary present ot
a Silver Cup inlaid with Gold by the Messengers to
the Malay Translator.
(Signed) J. A.


1 SON ot the RAJAH of LIGORE.
Translation
of a letter from the Son of the Rajah of Ligore at
Kedah to the Honorable Robert Fullerton Esquire
Governor of Pulo Penang.
(After Compliments.)
I have received my friend’s letter brought by
Captain Rurney, and understand fully all its contents.
With respect to the Pirate Prows which have been
attacking trading Vessels, and committing depreda-
tions to the Northward of Pulo Penang, 1 have sent
my friend’s letter to the Chow Pia of Ligore, and
whatever reply he may return upon that subject, shall
be communicated to my friend.
Farther, my friend mentions that the Chinese and
Chooliahs commit extortions at Kedah on traders ; I
had not formerly heard of this, nor had any repre-
sentations been made to me upon the subject; but now
that I am informed of such being the case, I shall give
orders tor preventing their being guilty of suck
practices in future. Do not let my friend be
suspicious.
•With respect to my friend’s request, that 1 should
write letters to the Pia of Poongha, and the Draws of
Tacoopa and Tuccatoon, and send them by Captain
Rurney, I will do as ray friend requires. With respect
to Captn. Burney whom my friend mentions as
desirous of proceeding immediately to wait on the
King of Ligore, I consulted with him to send over
China Achong with some of my people, to inform
FORT CORNWALLIS The 17 February 1825.


the Chow Pia of Ligore, and I have since dispatched
other Messengers to convey the information to
the Rajah of Ligore. If he sends a reply I will
conform to whatever directions it may contain, and
will inform my friend accordingly, for it is the Rajah
of Ligore’s order that previous intimation shall be
sent him of the intentions of any person wishing
to proceed to meet him.
Dated Friday 11th February 1825.
A True Translation
( Signed ) JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Transr. to Govt.
Penang
15 Feby. 1825.
THE HONORABLE THE GOVERNOR ac-
quaints the Board, that the Bearers of the Letter from
Ligore have requested an interview with him, when
he will prepare a lettter to the Chow Pia and acquaint
them that unless Captain Burney is received and
admitted to a conference, this Government will decline
granting a similar reception to any more Envoys from
that State.


SUPT. of POINT WELLESLEY.
To W. S. CRACROFT Esq.
Acting Secretary to Government.
Sir,
I deem it my duty to report, for the information
to the Honorable the Governor in Council, that during
the past week, upwards of fifty of the former in-
habitants of Pulai have entered Wellesley Province,
having fled from their homes to prevent being forcibly
carried away by the Forces under the authority of the
Rajah of Ligore, and that at least two hundred more
may be shortly expected.
It appears that the Siamese authorities at Kedah
have sent orders to the Shabundar of Pulai to collect
200 men, and place them under the orders of the
Siamese Authorities in the neighbourhood of Perak.
No immediate object is avowed for demanding this
force, but the prevailing opinion is, that it is intended
to assist in the long threatened attack on Salangore.
I have &c. &c.
(Signed) A. D. MAINGY
Supt. of Point Wellesley.
Point Wellesley
the 15 February 1825.
FORT CORNWALLIS The 17 February 1825.


THE OBJECT now in view by the Siamese Au-
thorities, appearing to the Board to be fraught with
injury to the British Interests, and to be nearly tire
final step to the complete subjugation of the Malay
Peninsula —■
IT IS AGREED, that a Special Report of the
progress of the Siamese Conquests be again made to
the Right Honorable the Governor General in Council,
more particularly with reference to the- approaching
transfer of Malacca, and the Treaties and relations
subsisting between that Settlement and the States of
Salangore and Rumbow.


FORT CORNWALLIS The 28 February 1825.
To the Rajah of LIGORE.
Letter
from the Honble. Robert Fullerton Esq. Governor of
Prince of Wales Island to the Rajah of Ligore.
The Governor of Pulo Penang has received the
letter from the Rajah of Ligore brought by his Messen-
ger Kon Aksoon and the Governor regrets that Hik
Highness did not permit Captain Low to proceed
across to meet him and communicate with him upon
the subject of Boats which were required some months
ago. These Boats would have been of much use at,
that time in co-operating against the Burmahs at
Rangoon. The time is now passed however. Tim
British troops have been very successful and a great
number of Boats have been obtained. The elephants
which His Highness offers also are not at present
required, but if the public Service should render it
necessary, the Governor will avail himself of His
Highness’s offer.
With respect to His Highness’s enquiries relative
to the Burmah War, and other matters alluded to in
his letter, Captain Burney has been deputed to him
for the express purpose of entering fully into the
detail of all matters connected with the war, as well as
the explanation of the mutual advantages that may
result, not less to the Siamese than the British
Government by its successful termination.
The Governor of Pulo Penang therefore trusts that
the Rajah of Ligore will receive Captain Burney as
an accredited Agent of the British Government, and


communicate fully and confidentially witli him upon all
the present subjects of discussion, and the Governor
thinks it proper to add, that unless His Highness
receives Captain Burney, it will be inconsistent with
the Governor’s duty to receive any Envoys from
His Highness in future.
( Bigned ) 11. FULLERTON
Governor.
.1 ’enang
18 Febry. 1825.


THE HONORABLE THE GOVERNOR sub-
mits the following Memorandum of a Conversation
between him and the Envoys from Ligore.
MEMO : of CONVERSATION with
LIGORE ENVOYS.
Memorandum
of a Conversation between the Honble. the Governor
of Penang, and the Envoys from the Rajah of Ligore,
on Friday the 18th February 1825.
The Honorable the Governor mentioned that he
had perused the letter from His Highness of Lisrore
o o
brought by the Envoys, and that the Boats which
were now offered would have been very acceptable
some months ago, when Captain Low proceeded to
Trang for the purpose of procuring them. Since that
period however, the British Army had been very
successful against the Burmahs and we had captured
many of their principal Seaport Towns. The Govern-
ment would therefore decline the offer of Prows or
Elephants at present, but should they be required
hereafter, he would acquaint His Highness.
The Envoys replied that in consequence of the
Honble. the Governor’s enquiries when they were last
here, they had mentioned the object of Captain Low’s
Mission, which he had declined to communicate fully,
and hence the disappointment in procuring Prows,
which the Rajah of Ligore expressed a desire to supply
the moment he was informed by them that they were
wanted, and they added that there was a ship at Trang
and a schooner at Quedah, which the Governor might
also have, if he wished.
FORT CORNWALLIS The 28 February 1825.


The Governor stated that he had sent Captain
Burney to communicate fully and confidentially with
the Baja of Ligore upon the subject of the Burmah
War, the King of Quedah, Pirates and other matters
alluded to in His Highness’s letter and he therefore
recommended the Envoys to return without delay and
make this known to His Highness, so that he might
receive Captain Burney. The Governor added, that if
Captain Burney was not received as he expected, he
could not receive any more Siamese Envoys, but he
had no doubt that if the Rajah of Ligore gave him a
meeting every thing would be satisfactorily explained.
The Envoys assured the Governor that His High-
ness had a great respect for the Governor, and was
desirous of conforming to his wishes. His Highness
was also acquainted with Captain Burney, and they
had little doubt the Rajah would permit that officer to
jgo across.
The Governor next enquired for what purpose so
many Boats were fitted out at Trang, Quedah, Lingow,
Sitool and Purlis. The Envoys replied they had been
fitted out in expectation of an attack from the
0
Burmahs.
The Governor expressed a suspicion that they
were destined to attack Salangore, and reminded the
Envoys that Malacca was about to be occupied by the
English ; that Treaties existed between that Settlement
and Salangore and Perak, and that any hostilities by
the Rajah of Ligore against these States would not
be regarded with indifference by the British Govern-
ment. He therefore requested the Envoys to caution
the Rajah of Ligore against sending any force to the
Southward of Penang.
The Envoys replied that Perak was already in
possession of the Siamese, and that the Rajah of
Ligore would of course acquaint the Governor of his
intention of proceeding further before he did so.


The Envoys after repeatedly expressing the
friendly feelings entertained by the Ligore Rajah
towards the Governor, his anxiety to conciliate his
favor, and requesting him not to credit any reports at
variance with His Highness’s professions, and to
seize any Natives who brought reports unfavorable to
him, adverted to the Piracies committed by the
Malays in this quarter, and expressed an anxiety that
the Chiefs should be seized.
The Governor informed them that he was using
his utmost endeavours to suppress Piracy, and that
additional Vessels had been, and would be employed
for that purpose.
The Governor again repeated that his Agent
Captain Burney would explain everything, and the
head Envoy promised to return in four days to expedite
the reception of Captain Burney by the Rajah of
Ligore.
(Signed) JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Transr. to Govt.
Penang
18 Febry. 182b.


THE EIGHT HONORABLE
William Pitt Lord Amherst
Governor General in Council
FORT WILLIAM.
My Lord,
We have the honor to transmit for the informa-
tion of your Lordship in Council the annexed Copy of
a letter * from the Superintendant of Point Wellesley
Province, reporting that an attack which has been for
some time meditated by the Rajah of Ligore is now
likely’ to be put in execution against the State of
Salangore. Whether the Siamese being aware of the
approaching transfer of Malacca are tempted to pre-
sume that the Netherlands Government of that place
will not deem it worth while to support the interests
of its ally by active measures in his behalf, or whether
they are anxious to reduce that State to subjection
previous to our taking possession of the neighbouring
Territory, their success cannot fail to be productive
of effects extremely detrimental to the British
interests, and calculated indeed to nullify all the
advantages Political and Commercial which it has
been the object of the Framers of the new Treaty to
obtain for us with those Countries.
2. In the Dispatch of your Lordship in
Council dated the 19 November last, it is justly
regretted that circumstances should have brought
ns in immediate contact with the Siamese power at-
one point of our Possessions. If (as is almost
certain) from the weakness of the Rajah of
Salangore, they succeed in establishing themselves
there, we shall be also in contact with them
FORT CORNWALLIS The 28 February 1825.


at our Settlement next to the Eastward, Malacca, not
only so but Salangore having fallen, Rumbow and
Johore will it is feared fall an easy prey. The
Siamese Government will border on and be only
divided by a shallow and inconsiderable channel from
the island of Singapore, and our three Settlements
become as it were insulated by that jealous and
haughty race of people. The rich productions of the
interior of the Peninsula will be intercepted by that
monopolizing spirit which has always characterized
that Nation, and we shall become dependent on them
for every Article of Commerce or Supply which they
enjoy by any other conveyance than that of a long Sea
voyage.
3. On the renewal of the Alliance between the
Netherlands Government and Salangore in the year
1819, an Agent was deputed from hence at the request
of His Highness the Rajah. Copies of the correspon-
dence which took place on that occasion between the
Governor of this Presidency and that Chief—the
Proceedings of the Agent and the Treaties between
Salangore and Malacca form enclosures * in this dis-
patch, and will serve to shew the intimate connection
subsisting between those two Governments.
4. The Correspondence which took place between
Major Farquhar and the Rajah of Rumbow ( a Country
to the Southward of Salangore but inland from Malacca)
in the years 181(3 and 1817 shew a more immediate
connection and dependence on the paid of that weak
Malayan State on its more powerful European neigh-
bour. Copies of this Correspondence are likewise
enclosed * for the information of your Lordship in
Council.
5. From the letter which we had the honor to
address to your Lordship in Council under date 18th
January, it will be seen that we entertained hopes


that the early occupation of Malacca by British
Authority would have prevented the Siamese Chief of
Li gore from attempting the subjugation of that State,
and extending the Siamese Dominions in that direc-
tion ; from the nature of the intimation now received,
fears may be entertained that the event may precede
our taking possession of Malacca, and considering that
the relations to be observed in respect to the Malayan
States in that neighbourhood will probabty become
the first question for the consideration of the person
to whom the charge of that new Settlement may be
entrusted by your Lordship in Council, it seems
advisable that no time should be lost in submitting
the information and the Documents on our Records
connected with this question. In respect to any
measure to be pursued by us pending reference to the
Supreme Government relating to Siamese encroach-
ments on the Peninsula, it may be observed, that
although, as already stated by us, we do not consider
the Government of Siam to have held over the King
of Kedah at the time of the cession of this Island such
a degree of legitimate authority or Supremacy as to
have barred the right of the King of Kedah to make
the cession, or to have authorized the subsequent
expulsion of the King, yet as all those proceedings
have been virtually assented to by us, the restoration,
of that Kingdom to its ancient, and to us most desir-
able state, can onty now be the subject of negotiation :
how far the same argument applies to the next
Southerly State of Perak is not certainly clear. Ifc
appears that the Rajah of Ligore sent about 20 prows
there in February and March 1822. The Siamese and
some Malays remained there a few months. The
Rajah of Salangore was requested by the King to
come up and assist him. He did so, and the
few Siamese who were at Perak and the renegade
Malays from Kedah were completely expelled in
November or December 1822. Since that time no
further attempts have been made by the Siamese to


possess themselves of Perak till about 3 months ago,
when, at the very time the Li gore Kajah was sending
Envoys here ostensibly to negociate for the restoration
of Kedah, he sent down 40 Siamese and about 300
Malays clandestinely overland to Perak, and occupying
a Military Post thence infer actual possession of the
Country. It is understood that the form of renewing
the Treaty was gone through by the Dutch on their
return to Malacca, but it does not appear that they
took any measures to defend the Country against the
Siamese. The State of Perak certain!}’ was in alliance
with the Dutch at Malacca, and as such may be con-
sidered within the scope of Political arrangements
connected with that Settlement, it cannot even now be
said to be in possession of the Kajah of Ligore, and its
subjugation has certainly not been recognized by the
British Government.
(3. As regards Salangore, the course is still more
clear. The subject is still open for consideration, and
it seemed advisable therefore that a cautionary com-
munication should be made to the Chief of Ligore on
that point. It will be seen by the enclosed copy of a
Memorandum of a Conversation between our President
and the Envoys sent here from Ligore, that they have
been distinctly informed that any hostile attempt on
Salangore under existing circumstances might possibly
be seriously noticed by the Supreme British Authority,
and we propose that a similar communication should
be made direct to the Rajah by Captain Burney. It
may be right to observe that the communication in
question has not been made with a view to any im-
mediate proceeding on our part, but merely to bar
, any supposed recognition of the right of Conquest
which might hereafter interfere with the ulterior
arrangements directed by your Lordship in Council.


We have the honor to be
My Lord
Your Lordship’s most obedient
humble servants.
(Signed) R. FULLERTON.
W. A. CLUBLEY.
Fort Cornwallis
The 28 February 1825.


FORT CORNWALLIS The 11th March 1825.
RESIDENT at SINGAPORE.
To
W. CRACROFT Esquire
Secretary to the Government
Prince of Wales Island,
Sir,
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of
your Letter of the 28th Ultimo intimating the ap-
pointment of Captain Burney and transmitting the
instructions given to that Officer, together with the
Despatch of the Honble. the Governor in Council to
the Supreme Government touching the objects con-
nected with the nomination in question. I request
you will be pleased to submit my acknowledgements
to the Honble. the Governor in Council for the
valuable and instructive documents which he has been
pleased to transmit for my perusal, and that you will
lay before him the inclosed Extract of a Despatch *
to the Supreme Government, bearing upon the quest-
ion of Siamese Politics.
I have &c. &c.
(Signed) J. CRAWFURD
Resident.
Singapore
23rd February 1825.


To
G. SWINTON, Esquire
Secretary to the Government
FORT WILLIAM
Sir,
I have the honor to report for the information of
the Right Honorable the Governor General in Council
that the English Vessel Shannon arrived last night
O O
from Siam, bringing a letter to my address from the
Siamese Minister of which a translation is herewith
annexed, as well as a letter from Mr. * of
which a copy is also transmitted. The Right Honble.
the Governor General in Council will have the goodness
to observe that the sentiments and conduct evinced by
the Siamese Court as portrayed in the present cor-
respondence are such as were looked for at an early
period. I have reason now to hope that as the Siamese
become more assured of our success, and when the
results of the war shall appear no longer dubious, they
will proceed to render us useful assistance, such as
may be of material service in harassing and distract-
ing the Enemy, and expediting the termination of
the contest.
1 have thought the present communication of
sufficient importance to warrant me in taking up a
Despatch Boat to forward it to P. W. Island with the
view of overtaking a Ship bound for Bengal which
sailed from this Place on the 28th Ultimo, and which
was to have touched at that Place.
FORT CORNWALLIS, The 11th March 1825.


Copy of this Despatch and of its Enclosures has
been transmitted to the Rouble, the Governor of
Prince of Wales Island.
1 have &c. &c.
(Signed) J. CRAWFURD
Resident.
Singapore 3d March 1825.
(.1 True Copy)
(Signed) J. CRAWFURD Resident.


The Letter of Chao-Pia-Prah Klang first Minister
to His Majesty the King of Siam to John Crawfard
Esquire Resident of Singapore.
Your Letter informs me that your Nation is at
war with the Burmans, that the English have captured
Rangoon, that the Barmans joined their forces to take
the place in question, but found that the English had
abandoned it, and had marched towards Oheduba,
Ramree and Negrais, that the British Army left those
places, and proceeded towards Martaban, Mergui and
Tavoy, tliat the British Commander is well aware that
the Burmans are great enemies to the Siamese, and
that if we assisted the English, they should feel ex-
tremely obliged to us, and report the same to the
Governor General of Bengal.
I have stated to His Majesty the contents of your
letter who said that he is glad that the English are at
war with the Burmans because they are our enemies,
while at the same time he remarked that as yet our
nation and the English are on good terms, and that
commerce between them was daily increasing.
Your Letter states that the English would be very
glad if we assisted them against the Burmans. This
has been done, and accordingly our Troops are ready
on the Western Frontier to attack the Burmans.
Formerly it was the custom to send Chao Phaia Maha
Jotha the Peguan General with his Troops towards
the Northern Frontier to harass the Burmans
and to seize their encampments, houses &c. at
Martaban, Mergui, Tavoy and Tanao (Tenasserim)
and to learn from them the movements of the Burmans,
but now as His Majesty has heard that the English
are at Rangoon, he has therefore ordered Chao Phaia
FORT CORNWALLIS, The lltli March 1825.


Maha Jotha to proceed towards Martaban, who on his
arrival found that the Siamese Troops were not there,
but had gone to Pegue and Tavoy.
Some persons arrived here lately from Martaban,
Mergui and Tavoy who informed us that the English
had taken those Places, some have also come from
Pegue and Tavoy with our scouts to see their friends
and relations, and to remain as resident inhabitants.
The people of Pegue and Tavoy very often remove to
Siam on account of the tyranny of the Burmans.
Lately vast numbers have flocked here from the places
in question, altho’ many have left their friends and
relations behind, but having heard that the English
had captured those places, they are now returning fast.
Chao Phaia Maha Jotha on his way to Martaban
met the English General, and asked him if he had
heard any thing regarding the Burmans, but could get
no news.
I send this letter in order to enable you to
inform the British General that we have sent an Army
into the Burman territory to help the English.
Si Yuthia
17th January 1825.
( A True Translation )
(Signed) J. CRAWFURD.
( A true Copy )
(Signed) J. CRAWFURD.
Resident.


LIEUTENANT LOW at TAYOY.
To
The Secretary to Government
Prince of Wales Island.
Sir,
******
The Siamese seem quite averse * to any inter-
ference with the Countries in this direction which
conquest has placed under British rule, and have
made friendly advances to the Officer in Command at
Martaban by sending in several Chiefs, two of whom
have gone on to Rangoon.
With reference therefore to the Siamese merely,
it may perhaps be deemed a superfluous measure to
detain me longer on this Coast than will be barely
sufficient to enable me to obtain information respecting
it and for this purpose it seems to me that six weeks
more will prove quite sufficient, fifteen days of which
period may be passed at Merghi.
******
I have &c. &c,
(Signed) JAMES LOW Lt.
Acting under the orders of the
Honble. the Governor in Council
of Prince of Wales Island.
TAVAI
10th February 1825.
FORT CORNWALLIS, The 11th March 1825.


FORT CORNWALLIS, The 17 March 1825,
RAJAH of LIGORE.
Translation
of a letter from the Rajah of Ligore to the Honble.
Robert Fullerton Esquire Governor of Palo Penang.
( After Compliments)
I have to acquaint my friend that Captain Burney
sent China Achong with a letter from the Governor of
Pulo Penang and one from Captain Burney himself,
overland from Quedah to Ligore. These 1 received
with satisfaction agreeably to the rules of friendship
with the English, which may be prolonged. I under-
stand the contents of the letters.
It is mentioned in the letter of my friend the
Governor of Pulo Penang, that the English have been
successful against Ava and taken many Countries, and
that Captain Burney was sent as an Agent to repre-
sent the person of ray friend the Governor of Pulo
Penang, to concert with me and consult about Coun-
tries, and Capt. Burney mentions that the General
of Bengal ordered him to come and consult about
establishing friendship. Captain Burney wanted to
meet m© at Trang which I should be happy to do, so
that the English and Siamese might continue on terms
of friendship, and that the two Countries might remain
like one.
I have considered however, that if I went to Trang
just now, it would be too distant for my friend the
Governor of Pulo Penang, and it would be difficult to
transact any business. I shall come to Quedah to be
near my friend the Raja of Pulo Penang, in order that


business may be easily transacted, and that friendship
may be increased more than formerly.
Mv mind is very sincerely disposed to promote
friendship and intercourse between the Siamese and
English, 1 intend, therefore, to proceed to Quedah
in 30 or 40 days, therefore let my friend wait for the
present. When 1 arrive at Quedah, I will consider
how I may conform to the wishes of the Governor of
Pulo Penang,
Farther, the Articles which China Achong brought
with him are a Neck lace and two Arm Bangles and a
Shawl, which I have received and kept as a token of
friendship. I cannot prepare any thing at present to
send in return, but shall do so when I go to Quedah.
Date 14 : February 1825.
( A True Translation )
( Signed ) JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Transr. to Govt.
Penang
12 : March 1825.
The style of the letter is very vague and less
courteous than formerly. It is besides extremely ill
written which is considered rather disrespectful.
( Signed ) J. A,
Transr.
THE BOARD concurring in opinion, that no
advantage is likely to be obtained, by further attempts
at communication and negociation with the Rajah ol
Ligore
ORDERED that the following letter be dispatched
to Captain Burney, with as little delay as possible.


To
CAPTAIN BURNEY
Political Agent to the Siamese States.
Sir,
e I am directed to enclose copy of a letter received
from the Rajah of Ligore and addressed to the Honor-
able the Governor. This letter was received by
Achong the person deputed by you to Ligore, and a
letter addressed to yourself by the Son of the Rajah
was at the same time received and forwarded to you
along with a public letter of the 4th Instant.
From the tenor of the letter addressed to the
Honorable the Governor by the Rajah, very serious
doubts may be entertained whether it is the intention
of that Chief to admit you to any personal communica-
tion, the notification of an intended visit to Quedah
forty days hence seeming indeed to put off any im-
mediate meeting. Under these circumstances, there
appears no reasonable prospect of any * opening a
communication of * the various points which formed
the object of your Mission being effected through the
medium of the Rajah of Ligore. There seems little doubt
that the Rajah is now making extensive preparations
for the attack of Salangore and the strong expression
of friendship conveyed in terms so evasive, lead the
Honorable the Governor in Council to believe them
as intended merely to cover measures, which the
Chief is fully aware may not meet the ultimate appro-
bation of the British Authorities.
The Honorable the Governor in Council is of
opinion that no advantage is likely to attend the con-
tinuance of any intercourse with the Rajah of Ligore,
and unless before the receipt of the letter, circums-
tances should have occurred to afford a better prospect


of an early and candid communication, it is the
desire of the Honorable the Governor in Council that
you should by letter take leave of that Chief, intinuv-
ting to him the anxious desire that has always been
entertained by this Government to maintain with
him constant and friendly communication, and more
particularly at present on points in which the mutual
interests of the British and Siamese are concerned in
this neighbourhood, and the corresponding regret felt
by the Honorable the Governor in Council that the
disinclination evinced by him to meet you personally,
has precluded the possibility of such communication.
As to the intention expressed by the Rajah of
proceeding in forty days to Quedah, it may bo enough
to observe to him generally, that this Government will
at all times be happy to meet any serious disposition
shewn by him to open a communication, and keep
alive the friendly relations now subsisting. As regards
your ulterior proceedings in respect to any of the
other Chiefs in the neighbourhood, you will be guided
by the opinion you may entertain how far your com-
municating with them will promote, in any degree,
the success of the .ultimate measure of an Embassy to
the Capital, which will probably be resolved on by the
Right Honorable the Governor General.
1 am &c. &c.
( Signed ) E. A, BLUNDELL
Acting Secry. to Govt.
Fort Cornwallis
the 17 March 1825.


FORT CORNWALLIS, The 24 March 1825.
MINUTE by the PRESIDENT.
The Armed Schooner Commerce being ready for
Sea, I propose that she be dispatched with the letter
lately addressed to Captain Burney, call first at Quedah,
proceeding if necessary to Traang and Phoonga, or
even to Mergui, should it be found that Captain
Burney has proceeded in that direction. On delivering
the letter Captain Poynton will wait a sufficient time
to enable Captain Burney to reply, which it may
be expected will contain report of his proceedings.
Should it be found that Captain Burney has proceeded
up the Country, the letter may be delivered to Mr.
Cuthbertson in the Jessy, as it is probable instructions
will have been left by him as to the manner of forward-
ing his letters ; —having fulfilled these instructions as
the case may require, Captain Poynton should be
directed to return to this Port, making report of his
Proceedings.
( Signed ) 11. FULLERTON
21; March 1825.
THE SECRETARY reports, that the Master
Attendant was directed to dispatch the Commerce,
without loss of time, with the letters for Captain
Burney.


FORT CORNWALLIS, The 7 April 1825.
HEAD the following Reports with a Geographical
Sketch from Captain Burney Political Agent to the
Siamese States, containing the Proceedings ot his
Mission. *
MINUTE by the PRESIDENT.
After an attentive perusal of Captain Burney’s
Report, I arrive at the following conclusions : that
although the influence of the Chiefs of Ligore and
Phungah is considerable, and might have great weight
in determining points connected with the interests of
this Government yet from the relation in which thev
stand, they cannot be made the medium of negotiating
the final adjustment of the various points in discussion
with the Kingdom of Siam : That for the above
purpose an Embassy to Siam is indispensable: That
such can only be effected under direct powers from the
Supreme Government : That a previous communica-
tion with the Supreme Government is absolutely
necessary : the more especially as in the couxse of tlu
War, other points may arise of a more general nature,
and not exclusively connected with the affairs ot this
Presidency: That from the various communications
held with Captain Burney, that Officer is fully
acquainted with the general motives and views of this
Government in respect to them : I hat the Memo-
randum of Mr. Crawfurd may be taken as the basis of
negotiation with the exception of Article 7—that
Article seems to abandon the interests ot the King ot
Kedah, and to stipulate instead of them an increase of
territory for ourselves.


It appears to me that our true polic} T is. Ist to
keep up the petty States now standing between us and
the Siamese Territory; 2nd to endeavour to restore
those which have been subverted, so as to prevent
our coming in contact with that power in this
neighbourhood. The restoration of the King of Kedah
is a point I consider no less consistent with true
policy, than essential to the credit and reputation of
Government as far as Political considerations are
concerned. The same arguments apply to Perak, it
being understood that the Siamese from Ligore are
actually in possession. Should the restoration of the
King of Kedah prove impracticable, then I am willing
to admit that a cession of the Territory stated by Mr.
Crawfurd might be advantageous, by interposing a
greater portion of Forest between us. The object of
holding Territory on the Continent opposite the Island,
was that we might command’ the Straits between the
Main land and the Island, and counteract the tendency
to plunder and piracy otherwise open from the
proximity to an unsettled Country. I admit fully that
the belt of Land so occupied is too narrow, being
comprised within 3 Miles of the shore, and therefore
terminating just as the land emerges from Mangroves
and Swamps and becomes fit for cultivation ; great,
no doubt, would be the advantage of some extension,
but certainly not of such consideration as to be an
argument against the more essential object of re-
establishing, if possible, the Malay Chiefships on
defined terms, that is to say, subject to the payment
of a fixed sum, to be guaranteed by us, and no other
mark of homage or subjection.
In respect to Kedah, it may be observed that we
have pursued towards it rather a middle course, we have
not supported the King in possession of his Countiy, but
we have afforded to him protection and support by a
residence on the Island. The proximity to his King-
dom, the hopes still entertained by all the Malay


Inhabitants of his ultimate restoration, tend to keep
up constant feelings of animosity, encourage partial
and unavailing opposition to the existing Government,
and bring upon us as the protectors of the exiled King,
the odium of encouraging them ; there can hardly
be a question that the feelings so generated have led
to the distrust evinced by the Rajah of Ligore in his
communications. We are bound to do our utmost for
the restoration of the King, but if we fail, it may
remain for consideration, whether the residence of the
King should not be fixed at a great distance from hi 8
ancient dominions.
Perak being South of Kedah, the removal of the
Siamese is alike important. With Kedah between
them it is not likely the Siamese could maintain them-
selves at Perak, their withdrawal may therefore be
also a subject of negociation. In respect to Salangore,
as the Siamese of Ligore are not in possession, it may
be enough for us to act at once, and by a Treaty with
the Rajah debar the Siamese from any attempt on that
State. 1 concur in opinion with Captain Burney, that
the Conquest of Kedah, and the extension of Conquest
to the South are rather objects of the Rajah than ot
the Court of Siam, and that the general advantages
to be derived by that State in other quarters, may l>e
made to outweigh the more immediate views of the
subordinate Chief. Jt is not likely that under existing
circumstances, the opposition of the Authorities at
Malacca to the views of Ligore would be noticed by
the Court of Siam. It must be our endeavour,
however, to keep on friendly terms with Ligore, so as
to avoid the alternative of making him our Enemy,
and raising an influence against us, pending the
negociation.
The deputation of our accredited Agent to Siam
being determined on, the only question which remains
for consideration is the most convenient route. Unless


it be deemed advisable with reference to other general
objects, that the deputation should proceed from the
immediate Seat of War, it appears to me that the offer
and services ot the Chief of Phuugah should be-
made use of. The Chief of Phuugah, or properly
speaking of Salang (Junk Ceylon) has a great interest
at stake in the success of the British Arms. That Island
and all the neighbouring Continent has long been kept
in a state of constant alarm from the Burmahs, so as
to have entirely prevented the settling of Inhabitants
there, and no advantage has hitherto resulted from its
occupation. The successes of the British Arms on the
Coast of Tenasscrim, and the interposition of a British
Force at Mergui afford him a degree of security never
before en joyed. As regards the occupation of Mergui
and Tavoy by the British as Military Posts, with a
sufficient boundary, we have already stated our opinion
of the advantages, Political and Commercial, to l>e
derived from such occupation. The cession of the
rest of the Coast to the Siamese may be tendered as
the equivalent for the attainment of the main object
in this quarter. As a communication must be re-
ceived from Bengal before further steps can be taken ;
it appears to me most advisable that Captain Burney
should proceed thither himself, to lay before the
Supreme Government the valuable information he has
■procured, and be guided by the further Instructions
he may receive.
(Signed) R. FULLERTON.
7: April 1825.


MINUTE by MR. CLUBLEY.
I quite agree with the Honorable the President,
that nothing further which this Government can
attempt, in the way of negociation with the Siamese
Chieftains, can be effectual to the attainment of any
public objects which we may desire to promote, and
that a direct communication with the Court of Siam,
offers the only prospect of successful realization. The
President in his present and former Minutes has very
justly viewed the interests which this Government
must be desirous of establishing. The restoration of
the Malay Government appears to be a matter of
primary importance, and a guarantee for their future
support must be equally essential.
Such objects can only now, I fear, be realized
through negociation with Siam, and political circums-
tances at present connected with our occupation of the
former Possessions of Siam on the Coast of Tenasserim,
seem to promise the best means of realizing them.
1 am disposed however to think that a great deal too
much stress is laid on the supposed influence of the
Chief of Poongah, at his Master’s Court. He may
vaunt, as all these petty Chiefs will do, the conse-
quence they are inclined to assume, and exaggerated
representations and fallacious promises may only lead
to ultimate delusion, and to the defeat perhaps of the
best and most reasonable expectations.
(Signed) W. A. CLUBLEY.
7 April 1825.
ORDERED that Copies of the above Minutes
be forwarded to the Right Honorable the Governor
General in Council, with the following letter, enclosing
Captain Burney’s former and present Reports, and
that Captain Burney be directed to proceed to
Bengal to receive further instructions from the
Supreme Government.


TO THE GOVERNOR GENERAL IN COUNCIL.
No. f359. ,
To
The Right Honorable
William Pitt Lord Amherst
Governor General in Council
Fort William.
My Lord,
Adverting to our Dispatch to your Lordship in
Council under date the 18 January last, * we have
now the honor to forward for your information,
the Reports that our Political Agent, Captain Burney,
has laid before us, both on his first Mission to Kedah
and those he has drawn up after visiting the Coast
between this Island and Poongah, and communicating
with the Son and officers of the Chief of Li gore, and
with the Chief of Salatig and other Siamese Officers
on the Isthmus of Kraw.
We have also the honor to forward a Minute that
our President has this day recorded in Council, detail-
ing the conclusions to which he has arrived after an
attentive perusal of Captain Burney’s Reports.
Concurring with our President that no further
measures can be adopted by this Government until
apprized of the views and sentiments to which the
present state of the War, and the additional facts
brought before you, may incline your Lordship in
Council, we have deemed it advisable to direct Captn.
Burney to proceed himself to Bengal by the present
opportunity, in order to receive such immediate
instructions as the valuable information which he has
procured, and his perfect acquaintance with the general
motives and views of this Government may induce
your Lordship in Council to give to that Officer.
We have &c. &c.
(Signed) R. FULLERTON
W. A. OLUBLEY
R. IBBETSON
Fort Cornwallis
The 7 April 1825.


LIEUTENANT LOW at TAVOY.
To
The Secretary to Government
Prince of Wales Island.
Sir,
I have the honor to report for the information of
the Honorable the Governor in Council, that since my
last letter to your address, which was dispatched by
the Brig Minerva, Captain Wyatt, Commander, 1 have
succeeded in penetrating to the Siamese frontier.
When sufficient leisure admits, I will have the
pleasure of transmitting to the Government a Plan and
detail of the route pursued by me. It is that one
which has been marked out in my Map of Siam as the
most eligible in proceeding from Tavoy to Bankok.
It has been termed a Military Hoad, but its present
impracticability to Troops, requiring a train of artillery
and numerous Stores may be judged of from the cir-
cumstance that although provided with an Elephant
and a Horse, I was forced to send both back to Tavoy
when only five miles distant from it, and to perform
the rest of the journey of twelve days * entirely on foot,
while Men carried the Camp Equipage and Baggage.
The route beyond the above distance lies across a
rugged and mountainous Country, covered in most
parts with a dense forest. From the end of the first
stage to the frontier, there is not a village or the least
sign of population, and from the path having been
little frequented for several years, the natural obstacles
to a traveller’s progress have been increased.
The Pass into the Siamese Dominions lies on the
summit of a Mountain called Naye daung which 1
FORT CORNWALLIS. The 7: April 1825.


calculated to be about 3000 feet at least above the
level of the Sea—from this commanding spot I was
gratified by an extensive view of the surrounding
Country,
Here the mutual Boundary of the Siamese and
Tavoyan Territories is marked by two loose piles of
Stones, sixty yards asunder. Betwixt these I had the
honor to plant the British Flag, and to salute it with
three Yollies of Musketry from a Party of one Havildar,
one Naick, and seven Sepoys of the Prince of Wales
Island Local Corps who escorted me. The Flag was
then hauled down, and a common one substituted.
Having been disappointed in not meeting with
any Siamese either on the route or at this place, and
considering that it would be imprudent to gratify
further curiosity at the risk of exciting the watchful
jealousy and suspicious temper of that people, I
abstained from advancing into their Country. That
they might, however, know that a British Officer had
been there, and had ascertained the line of their
frontier, 1 wrote a short Memorandum in the Siamese
language to that effect. This was left sealed up in a
bottle, and I learned after my return that it had been
found and carried off by some Siamese scouts. The
letters B. E. I. 0. were also engraved in the best
manner that the rude implements at hand would admit
of upon a stone which was buried on the Tavoy side.
A Copy of the Memorandum is herewith enclosed.
The Siamese have not any Military Post of im-
portance within thirty Miles of the Naye Danny Pass.
Their nearest stations to it are therefore nearly one
hundred Miles from Tavoy, It appears to to me that
they will not advance a Post nearer to, or infringe the
boundary. Their present conduct is certainly of
a friendly complexion, although backed by no direct
acts in favor of our arms against Ava.


During my journey I discovered a copious foun
tain of Mineral Water, having a temperature of 144 c
Fahrenheit. It is my intention to send some of this
water, together with specimens of the strata through
which it flows, to the Asiatic Society of Calcutta.
1 had an opportunity of visting the Tin Mines
lying four Miles off the direct Road, in the midst of
a deep Forest. These will be described hereafter.
Several days after my return to Tavoy I made
another journey on foot to the Southward and Fast-
ward. Lieutenant Sherman of the 3d. M. N. Infantry
at my request, favored me with his Company. Having
reached a point about- forty Miles south from Tavoy,
and about thirty inland, we dropped down a river to
the Sea, and sailed up to Tavoy. The greatest part of
the route lies through a diversified and hilly, but
cultivated Country. The Villages are beginning to be
repeopled, and the effects of British Government,
although that has not as yet be enfully secured to
them, are apparent in the daily influx of Cultivators,
and the cheerfulness expressed in their countenances.
The Tavoyers seem to me to be a people who might be
moulded with ease to the best purposes of Society.
I have just received a confidential communication
from Colonel Smith, soliciting and urging me if
possible to meet him speedily at Martaban, where the
proximity of a Siamese Army (avowedly by them
stationed there to be ready in case their aid shall
be required against the Burmans) induces him to
suppose that he will, in his Situation as Commanding
the Southern Provinces have important conferences
with its Chiefs.
* « # * * *
I have Ac. &c.
(Signed) JAMES LOW—-Lieut.
Agent for P. W r . Island GovL
TAYOY
IG March 1825.


COPY of a PAPER left on NAYE DAUNG
MOUNTAIN.
Be it known that Lieutenant Low, a British
Officer, having reached this place Naye Dating, regrets
that he has not met with any Officer of the Siamese
Government with whom he might have had an amicable
conference.
Lieutenant Low has happily ascertained this long
acknowledged mutual boundary between the Siamese
and Tavoyers, which latter people are now British
Subjects. The boundary being thus so distinctly de-
fined and known, mutual misunderstandings will be
obviated, and the terms of amity hitherto happily
existing betwixt the British and Siamese will be pre-
served unbroken.
Lieutt. Low has this day hoisted the British Flag
on Naye Daung on the Tavoy side, and has saluted it
with Musketry. The Siamese already know that Tavoy
has become a British Possession.
( Signed ) JAMES LOW—Lieutt.
( Dated ) NAY E DAUNG
20 .February 1825.
A True Copy
( Signed ) JAMES LOW—Lieutt.
FORT CORNWALLIS The 7 April 1825.


FORT CORNWALLIS—The 21 April 1825.
DRAFT, by Captain H. Burney, Political Agent to the
Siamese States
of a letter from the Honorable the Governor of Prince
of Wales Island to the Pya of Salang.
The Governor of Prince of Wales Island has re-
ceived the letter which the Pya of Salang transmitted
to him by Captain Burney, and he is most happy to
find that the Pya of Salang and the Prahs of Tuccotong
and Tuccopa have fully understood the satisfactory
information which Captain Burney was deputed to
communicate to them. The Governor of Prince of
Wales Island returns the Pya of Salang his cordial
acknowledgements for the kind and truly hospitable
manner in which he received and treated Captain
Burney, who has returned full of the praises of the Pya
of Salang and all his Officers.
As the letter from the Right Honorable the
Governor General, respecting a Mission to Siam has
not yet arrived, the Governor of Prince of Wales
Island has sent Captain Burney himself to Bengal, for
the purpose of fully detailing there the friendly con-
duct of the Pya of Salang, and of receiving without
any delay, such further orders, as the Right Honorable
the Governor General may give Captain Burney, after
hearing the pleasing accounts which that Officer will
communicate to His Lordship respecting Pungah, and
everybody under the Pya of Salang’s authority.
It is evident to the Governor of Prince of Wales
Island, that the Pya of Salang is a wise and liberal
Chief, worthy of the high situation which he fills under
the great King of Siam, and the Governor of Prince
of Wales Island requests to transmit to the Pya of


Salang, by the present opportunity, as tokens of the
friendship with which the Pya has inspired the
Governor 2 large Sugar Jars, 2 Pair large Chrystal
Decanters, 2 do. small Decanters, 2 Water Crofts, 6
Chrystal Cups, and 1 Gold Chain.
If there is any matter in which the Governor of
Prince of Wales Island can render himself serviceable
to the Pya of Salang, now or hereafter, the Governor
trusts the Pya will not omit to apprize him thereof
without hesitation.
The Governor of Prince of Wales Island hopes
that Pungah and Penang will now be much better
known to each other, and that a lasting friendship and
profitable trade will now be continued between them.
Every person coming to Penang from Salang, Pungah,
Tuccatong and Tuccopa, as well as every other subject
of Siam, may be henceforth always confident of receiv-
ing every assistance and protection from the Governor
of Prince of Wales Island.
(Signed) R. FULLERTON.
Penang, 9th April 1825.
Translated by
(Sd.) JOHN ANDERSON"
Malay Transr. to Govt.


DRAFT
of a letter to the King of Salangore from the Malay
Translator to Government,
[ am directed by the Honble. the Governor of
Pulo Penang to acquaint my friend in reply to his
letter requesting some Pice, to inform him that at
present that Coin is very scarce at this Island; and 1
am desired to assure my friend, at the same time, that
the Honorable the Governor would have had much
satisfaction in complying with my triend’s wishes in
this respect, had it been in his power.
(Signed) JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Transr. to Govt.
Penang
the 13 April 1825.


To the RAJAH of RIGOR’S SON at QUEDAH.
Draft
of a letter from the Malay Translator to Government
to the Son of the Rajah of Ligore at Qnedah.
1 am directed by the Honble. the Governor of
Pulo Penang to acquaint your Highness, that it is
currently reported at this Settlement, an Order has
lately been issued at Qnedah, strictly prohibiting the
Export of Grain. The Honorable the Governor has
been much astonished to hear this report, and consi-
dering the friendly relations subsisting between Pulo
Penang and Qnedah, together with the amicable pro-
fessions of your Highness, and the Chow Pya of Ligore,
of a desire to cultivate the good will of the British
Government, the Honorable the Governor is rather
disposed to discredit the report.
He directs me, however, to inform your High-
ness, that if such be the case he expects that the
restriction will be immediately withdrawn, and that
your Highness will permit the free export of Grain
and other Provisions from the several Ports of Qnedah,
as heretofore, by which you will evince the sincerity
of your professed friendly disposition towards this
Government, and give an earnest of your desire to
cultivate a good understanding and promote the Com-
mercial intercourse between Qnedah and Pulo Penang.
In communicating the report which prevails here,
and requiring from your Highness an explanation of a
proceeding apparently so inconsistent with the exist-
ing relations between the two States, I am desired to
remind your Highness of the frequent complaints of
acts of Piracy which yon have preferred, in the sup-
pression of which this Government has always testified
the most prompt and anxious desire to co-operate, at the
same time to point out to your Highness, that any


restrictions, such as those now adverted to, must tend
to encourage Piracy, by throwing the numerous small
traders out of employ, and preventing them obtaining
an honest livelihood, by bringing Grain to this
Island.
(Signed) JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Transr. to Govt.
Penang
the 20 April 1825.


FORT CORNWALLIS The 26 April 1825.
* To the Son of the RAJAH of LIGORE at KEDAH
Draft
of a letter from the Malay Translator to Government
to the Son of the Rajah of Ligore at Kedah.
1 am directed by the Honorable the Governor of
Pulo Penang to address your Highness upon the sub-
ject of a recent attack upon some trading Prows from
this place by a fleet of Siamese Boats, and to request
that you will take measures for repressing such dis-
turbances in future, and the prevention of simila 1 *
hostile proceedings. The circumstances are as follow ;
about 3 months ago two Prows, the one having a crew
of 10 and the othei of 7 men, belonging to Malayan
Inhabitants of this Island, proceeded on a voyage to
the Islands to the Northward, to collect Birds nests.
Having collected a small quantity, they went into a
small Bay on the main called Teluk Bugis, near Junk
Ceylon for water about 20 days ago, when they were
attacked by five Siamese Prows, which without
hailing, or making any enquiries commenced firing
upon them ; they fled and were pursued—the small
Malay Prow was sunk, the two Nakodas and one of
the Crew were killed and two more of the Crew
wounded in the action. The largest Prow has returned
into this harbour, and Depositions have, been made to
the above effect by the Crew.
The Honorable the Governor of Pulo Penang
trusts that your Highness will cause some enquiries to
be instituted into this affair, and that there will be no
recuri’ence of such an act of hostility against subjects


of this Island, seeking a livelihood by trade amongst
the Islands to the Northward.
(Signed) JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Transr. to Govt
Penang
the 22ncl April 1825.
A similar Letter addressed to
THE PYA OF PUNGAH.


FORT CORNWALLIS The 3 May 1825.
AT A SPECIAL COUNCIL-Present
THE HONORABLE ROBERT FULLERTON
Governor President
WILLIAM ARMSTRONG CLUBLEY Esquire
and
ROBERT IBBETSON Esquire.
APPROVED THE PROCEEDINGS of the 26th Ultimo.
PUBLIC.
IN CONSEQUENCE of the intelligence which
has been received at this Settlement within the last few
days of the advanced state of preparation of an exten-
sive Armament by the Rajah of Ligore at Traang and
the Ports to the Northward, this special Council was
called, for the purpose of considering the expediency
of adopting further measures of precaution for guard-
ing against sudden attack, and for tranquillizing
the alarms of the Native Community of the Island.
THE following Minute by the Honorable the
President with Drafts of two letters to the Rajah of
'Ligore is recorded.
MINUTE BY THE PRESIDENT.
Mr. Maiugy is already acquainted with the various
rumours prevailing respecting the outfit of an arma-
ment at Traang, Setool, Quedah &c. by the Rajah of
Ligore, these rumours have now attained such a
degree of credit as to require immediate precautionary
measures. The object of the armament is understood


to be an attack on Perak and Salengore. Our inha-
bitants are not without some degree of alarm in
respect to their own safety particularly those
in Wellesley Province. In respect to Perak and
Salengore we stand thus. We have now taken
possession of Malacca —both these States were in
alliance with the Dutch of Malacca, in fact consi-
dered as Dependencies. The Dutch had a factory at
Perak previous to the late negotiations. The Dutch
had intimated the intention of renewing the ancient
connections with those Scates. Anticipating probably
that the cession of Malacca would be the result of the
negotiations, they have abstained from the express
renewal of the Treaties, one of which stipulates for
the defence of the Countries ; so long as these Treaties
were in force, they formed a barrier against the exten-
sion of Siamese conquests to the Southern parts
the Peninsula. ,The Dutch having now withdrawn
and the British taken their place—it becomes a ques-
tion how far it may be deemed good policy to renew
with the States of Perak and Salengoi’e those relations
in which they formerly stood with the Dutch as the
means of preventing the Siamese authorities of Ligore
from extending their dominions in that direction,
placing themselves in contact with us down even to
-Johore and Singapore and entirely shutting us out
from the valuable Tin Trade of the Interior which
might otherwise flow entirely into our Eastern Settle-
ments of Penang, Malacca and Singapore. The Ques-
tion has been submitted to the Supreme Government
and it is highly necessary to prevent, if possible, but
without actual hostilities, the subjugation of those
States by the Rajah of Ligore before we know the deter-
mination of the Supreme Government. Captain Burney
having proceeded to Bengal to communicate to the
Supreme Government the result of the late Mission
and receive final instructions, it becomes necessary
that some other person should be deputed to make the


communications now required, and Air. Alaingy has
been, selected for that purpose. The first object must
be to ascertain, whether the Armament alluded to is
in that stage of preparation represented. If it should
be found not to be so, the visit to the Rajah must be
entirely complimentary. It must be represented that
Air. Maingy has come to meet the Rajah, in consequence
of the intimation given, and the absence of Captain
Burney preventing his attendance. Air. Maingy will
in that case confine himself to general professions, tn
a repetition of all that has been urged by Captain
Burney, the necessity of avoiding every measure
calculated to disturb the harmony subsisting fbetweenj
the two States, and repeating that an attack on
Salangore would probably produce that effect. Should
Air. Maingy however find that an immediate expedi-
tion against Salangore is in process, he will then
deliver the letter No. 2 and intimate that the Armament-
will not be allowed to pass near or within the Island,
and it will become necessary to guard ourselves and
save our population [from] the terror and alarm and
consequent confusion which must result from so
near an approach of such an Armament to this Island
or Province Wellesley.
The Brig Jessy will be placed under the orders of
Air, Alaingy, also the Armed Boat and the Commerce,
if she should return in time. These Vessels should
continue to cruize off Tradng &c. It may be hoped
that their appearance will prevent the Armament from
sailing, but if such should not be the case, these vessels
must accompany the armament and keep between them
and the Island, not allowing them to come near the
channel between us and the Alain land, or approaching
within ten Miles of any part of the Island. Although
I consider it advisable to discourage by every possible
means the projected attack on Salangore and to retard
its completion by every means short of actual hostilities


pending reference to Bengal, yet however its success
may be regretted, it does not appear to me that
Ave are authorized to oppose actual force against
its execution.
(Signed) K. FULLERTON
29th April 1825.


To the RAJAH of LIGORE.
Draft
of a letter from the Honorable the Governor of Pulo
Penang to the Rajah of Ligore.
I duly received your Highness’s letter of the 3d
Rajop, brought by Captain Burney’s Messenger, China
Achong, and as the period fixed for your Highness’s
coming down to Kedah, has now elapsed, I have de-
puted Mr. Maingy, of the Honorable Company’s Civil
Service on this Establishment, as my Confidential
Envoy to communicate fully with your Highness and
to consult with you on several important subjects, for
which purpose Captain Burney was lately sent to
Kedah and Traang. That officer having however,
proceeded to Bengal, for a short time, for the purpose
of receiving instructions from the Right Honorable
the Governor General, renders it necessary for me
to depute another Agent, lest your Highness should
be disappointed in the expected Meeting, to which
you have professed so ready an inclination. lam the
more induced to expedite Mr. Maingy’s departure as
I have heard that your Highness has come across and
been for some weeks past in the neighbourhood of
Traang, at which place it will be equally convenient
to Mr. Maingy to meet you as at Kedah, and he has
been accordingly directed to proceed direct to that
port.
Having long evinced a disposition to cultivate a
cordial understanding with your Highness and to pre-
serve those relations of friendship now happily subsist-
ing between the Siamese and English unimpaired, by
the frequent deputation of confidential Officers of this
Government as a return for your Highness’s frequent
deputations of confidential Officers to myself and my
predecessor in this Government, I have only to request
that your Highness will receive Mr. Maingy with


respect and confidence as an accredited British Agent
with full powers.
Mr. Maingy will deliver some presents to Your
Highness as a mark of my regard.
(Signed) R. FULLERTON
Governor.
The 29 April 1825.
(Signed) J. ANDERSON
Malay Transr. to Govt.


To the RAJAH of LIGORE.
Letter
from the Honorable Robert Fullerton Esquire Gov-
ernor of Pulo Penang to the Rajah of Ligore.
It is my duty to acquaint your Highness that the
report of your Hostile intentions against the indepen-
dent Malayan State ot Salengore and your extensive
armaments equipping at Traang, Sitool and other
places to the Northward are daily becoming more
notorious, and there seems to be now no room left to
question the truth of them, notwithstanding your
frequent professions of pacific intentions and oft
repeated expressions of your anxiety that I should not
give credence to any rumours at variance with such
professions.
I have already more than once addressed your
Highness upon this subject but have not lately
received replies to my communications, nor did my
Agent, Captain Burney, succeed in obtaining an in-
terview with you, by which means you would have
gained a complete knowledge of the intentions ot the
British Government in several important matters.
It now becomes my duty to remind you Highness
that the Settlement of Malacca has been taken pos-
session of by virtue of a treaty with the Dutch Govern-
ment, by which that Nation ceded all its possessions
and privileges acquired by Treaty with Native States
on the Peninsula of Malacca. The Dutch Government
as well as the British have long been on friendly
terms with the States of Perak and Salengore, espe-
cially the close vicinity of Salengore to our present
Settlement of Malacca and long intimate connexion
with that State naturally disposed the Government
to prevent any hostile attempts against it by any
other power, and as there is every reason to infer


that the Supreme British Authorities in Bengal will
uphold the existing treaties with the Malayan States
to the Southward, I am bound once more to caution
your Highness against proceeding to carry your threats
into effect, of subjugating Salengore.
That State is not, nor has ever been in the remotest
degree, connected with the Siamese Dominions, and I
am in daily expectation of important intelligence
from Bengal upon the subject.
Should your Highness disregard this caution and
remonstrance, the result may possibly be a very serious
misunderstanding between the Siamese and English.
I therefore with an anxious desire to preserve a good
understanding with the Siamese Nation, and yourself,
consistently with the dignity of the high power of
which I am here a local representative, call upon your
Highness to abstain from the prosecution of such
hostile measures, which cannot reflect any credit upon
yourself or the power you represent and may and most
probably will involve you in much trouble and
difficulty.
The bearer of this letter is Mr. Maingy, a Senior
Civil Servant on this Establishment, to whom I have
fully explained my wishes. If your Highness will
grant that Gentleman an interview I have no doubt
he will be able to dissuade your Highness from an
enterprise so obnoxious to the British Government and
likely to prove so injurious to yourself. I trust
therefore, that Mr. Maingy may be received with
respect and confidence as the Agent of the British
Government and my confidential Envoy.
(Signed) R. FULLERTON
Governor.
Penang 28 April 1825.
(Signed) J. ANDERSON
Malay Transr. to Govt.


THE SECRETARY reports that in conformity
to the above Minute, the following Instructions were
circulated for the approval of the Members of the
Board, and addressed to the Superintendent of Point
Wellesley.
To •
A. D. MAINGY Esquire
Superintendent of Point Wellesley.
Sir,
I am directed by the Honorable the Governor in
Council to acquaint you that relying upon your expe-
rience, ability and discretion, he has been pleased to
entrust to your management a service of a peculiar
delicate and important nature.
2. You are already fully acquainted with the
various rumours prevailing respecting the outfit of an
extensive Armament at Traang, Setool, Kedah and
other ports to the Northward, by the Rajah of Ligore.
These rumours have now attained such a degree of
credit as to require immediate precautionary measures.
3. The object of these extensive preparations,
as you are also aware, is understood to be an attack on
Perak and Salangore, and the inhabitants of this
island, as well as those on Wellesley Province,
particularly the last, are in a considerable degree of
alarm in respect to their own safety.
4. In respect to Perak and Salangore I am
directed to submit for your guidance the view which
this Government has taken of the policy which ought
to be pursued at the present crisis, and pending
further instructions from the Right Honorable the
Governor General in Council.
5. The British Government has now taken
possession of Malacca, with which Settlement, during


the Dutch Administiation, the States of Perak and
Salengore were in close Alliance, in tact they were
considered as dependencies of Malacca. The Dutch
formerly had a factory at Perak, and intimated their
intention of renewing the ancient connexions with
both the States in question ; anticipating however,
most probably the cession of Malacca, they abstained
from the express renewal of the treaties, one of which
stipulated for the defence of these Countries.
6. So long as these treaties were in force, they
formed a barrier against the extension of Siamese con-
quests to the Southern parts of the Peninsula. The
Dutch having now withdrawn and the British taken
their place, it becomes necessary to consider how far it
may be deemed good policy to renew, with the States
of Perak and Salengore, those relations in which they
formerly stood with the Dutch, as the means ot
preventing the Siamese Authorities of Ligore from
extending their dominions in that direction, placing
themselves in contact with us down even to Johor and
Singapore and entirely shutting us out from the
valuable Tin trade of the interior, which might other-
wise flow entirely into our Eastern Settlements ot
Penang, Malacca and Singapore.
7. This important question has been submitted to
the Supreme Government and it is highly necessary
to prevent, if possible, but without actual hostilities ,
the subjugation of these States by the Rajah of Ligore,
before the determination of the Supreme Government
is known. Captain Burney having proceeded to Bengal
to communicate to the Supreme Government the result
of the late Mission, and to receive final instructions,
it becomes necessary to depute another confidential
Officer to communicate with the Rajah ot Ligore at
Kedah or Traang, if he has arrived at either ot these
places.
8. Your first object will be to ascertain by the


most accurate and careful enquiries (avoiding as much
as possible the excitement of any alarm or suspicions)
whether the armament reported to be nearly equipped
and ready for departure, is in that stage of preparation
represented. If it should be found not to be so, iyour
visit to the Rajah of Ligore must be understood as
merely complimentary. You will then deliver to him
the letter marked No. 1. You will represent to his
confidential Officers and to himself, if he gives you
an interview, that in consequence of the intimation of
his intention to come to Kedah and the absence of
Captain Burney on duty in Bengal preventing his
attendance, you have been deputed to make his
Highness acquainted with the progress of the War
against the Burmahs, to represent the necessity of his
Highness’s avoiding every measure calculated to
disturb the harmony subsisting between the two
States, and particularly remind him that an attack on
Salengore would probably produce that effect.
9. Should you however find that an immediate
expedition against Salengore is in progress, you will
then deliver the letter No. 2, and intimate that the
Armament will not be allowed to pass near or within
this Island, and that precautions have been taken to
secure the tranquillity of this Settlement and allay the
apprehensions of the inhabitants in Province Wellesley.
10. To enable you to proceed on the immediate
execution of this duty, orders have been issued to the
Master Attendant to prepare the Houble. Company’s
Brig Jessy for your accommodation. The hired
Schooners Commerce and John de Brlas will also be
placed under your orders. You will make such arran-
gements relative to the disposal of the vessels in
keeping a vigilant watch over the movements of the
Siamese fleet, in the neighbourhood of Traang and
Setool, as you may consider best.
11. It may be expected that these demonstra


tions will prevent the Armament from sailing, but
should such not be the case, it will be your duty to
issue directions to the Commanders of the Vessels
under your orders to accompany the Siamese Arma-
ment and keep between them and this Island, not per-
mitting them to come near the channel between this
Island and the main land or to approach within ten
miles of any part of this Island.
12. Although it is considered by Government to
be extremely advisable to discourage by every possible
means, the projected attack upon Salengore, and to re-
tard its completion by every means short of actual
hostilities, pending reference to Bengal, yet it is not
intended that actual force should at present be opposed
against its execution.
13. You will put yourself in communication
with the Malay Translator who will furnish you with
the necessary letters and credentials and consult with
him generally upon the objects of your Mission. The
Honorable the Governor in Council is pleased also to
direct that you shall have free access to the documents
in the Secretary’s Office, bearing upon this question,
and I am particularly desired to refer you to the in-
structions to Captain Burney, and his late reports.
14. I am desired to add, that oi’ders will be
issued to the Storekeeper to furnish the necessary
provisions and supplies upon your Indent and to the
Master Attendant to afford you every assistance in
equipping the vessel.
15. You will submit a Bill for such advance of
Money as may be necessary and prepare Indents for
such Military Stores as may, in your judgment, be
essential for the protection of the A essel.
16. As there is a scarcity of disposable Troops
for foreign service, the Honorable the Governor in
Council would prefer that you engage a small party of


able bodied Malays from Province Wellesley, for whom
you may cause an uniform to be made up for the occa-
sion and they will be provided with Musquets from
the Arsenal upon your Indent. The Honorable the
Governor in Council is of opinion that a party of 12
or 15 such Men would suffice for the present duty.
17. You are authorized also to engage such Inter-
preters and other Attendants as may be necessary and
you will purchase some Articles of British Manufacture,
as presents to the Chiefs, in the event of circumstances
admitting of the delivery of letter No. 1.
18. In conclusion lam directed to impress upon
you the necessity of the greatest circumspection in
the conduct of this Mission, which, if executed as the
Honorable the Governor in Council has every just
reason to expect it will be, cannot fail to be beneficial
to the interests of this Settlement and gain you the
approbation of your employers.
I am &c.
(Signed) J. ANDERSON
Actg. Secry. to Govt.
Fort Cornwallis
The 29 April 1825.
The necessary Orders for giving effect to these
arrangements were also issued to the several Depart-
ments, and the following letter addressed to the
Master Attendant.


To
C. W. H. WRIGHT Esquire
Master Attendant.
Sir,
I am directed by the Honorable the Governor in
Council to desire that you will prepare the Honorable
Company’s Brig’ Jessy, without delay, to convey Mr.
Maingy upon a special Mission to the Northward, and
to desire that you will afford that Gentleman every
possible assistance from your Department, in order*
that he may quit the harbour, if possible, on Thursday
Morning the sth Instant.
I am &ca.
(Signed) J. ANDERSON.
Actg. Secry. to Govt.
Fort Cornwallis
The 2: May 1825.


To,
THE HONORABLE
ROBERT FULLERTON Esquire
Governor &c. &c. &c.
Honorable Sir,
1 deem it my duty to acquaint you that the reports
of the extensive armaments by the Siamese at Trating,
Setool, Lingou, Kedah and the other ports to the
Northward, are daily becoming more numerous, and
the alarms of the Native population of this Island
greatly increasing.
2. 1 have examined several persons who have
arrived here during the few last days, from some of
these places, and have particularly interrogated them.
Their statements appear very consistent and circum-
stantial in several particulars.
3. One Man, the Commander of a small prow,
who arrived here on the 30 : Ultimo stated that he
left Purl is on the 28th and that then? was there lying
near the village of Kangar, 30 Prows ot the burthen ot
from 3to 0 Coyans. They were iitted with strong
breastwork for the reception of Guns and were to pro-
ceed in a few days for Kontanni some distance up the
Traang river, which is the general rendezvous of the
Siamese fleet and wherb these boats were to take in
their guns,
4. My informant mentions that the Siamese
were pressing all the adult Malays into their Service,
and that each boat was to be manned with an equal
proportion of Siamese and Malays. He reports that
there are (30 similar prahus at Setool and upwards
of 100 still larger at Kontanni, that they will mount
FORT CORNWALLIS The 3 May 1825


from 2 to 4 guns each and that most of the boats
have a double set of oars. The largest will contain
from 40 to 50 men each.
5. The same person reports that the Rajah of
Ligore has lately arrived at Tra&ng (this however
he only heard mentioned) that it is publicly given
out —the Armament is destined for Salengore ; that it
is intended to quit upon the change of the Moon,
that they have fixed upon a lucky day for their
departure, that he has heard from the Women living
under the protection of the Siamese, that the Rajah of
Ligore is determined to have the Rajah of Kedah dead
or alive, that they have often demanded him and this
Government has refused to give him up, that the
Armament is destined to attack Penang in a dark
night, that the intended landing place is Pulo Teccoos
bay, that the houses are to be set on fire and the white
population put to death ; that there are many Chinese
on the Island in league with them and expected to
join them ; that the Rajah of Ligore has Agents in
disguise here, who give him regular information, (the
name of one principal Agent he mentioned ) that the
Siamese have plans of the Town and know the exact
strength of our force, that the Rajah of Ligore, in fact
possesses the best intelligence of all that is going on.
6. He states also, that he is confident if due
precautions are taken, [and] the Rajah of Ligore hears
that we are upon our guard he will hesitate in making
an attack, that he is only looking out for a favorable
opportunity, when he thinks we have no apprehensions
and are not upon the alert.
• i
7. This man states that he is in no way connected
with the Rajah of Kedah, that he has not seen him
since his arrival here nor had any communication with
any of his people. He professed a readiness to depose
to the truth of the above statement, upon oath.


8. Several other persons corroborate this state-
ment in several particulars, and all agree that there
is a very large assemblage of vessels and men in many
of the rivers to the Northward, that it is contrary to
the practice of the Siamese to give out publicly their
intention of attacking any particular place.
9. So many reports have been received upon this
subject and so much already recorded that I was
reluctant to submit the substance of two letters which
were put into my hands some days ago. One is from
the brother of a Malay man residing on the opposite
shore. The writer of the letter is in the employ of the
Siamese, in rather a confidential situation in Setool.
The person from whom I procured these letters, with
some reluctance, made a stipulation that they should
not go out of my hands, as his relatives would instantly
be put to death, if it were known that he had com-
municated their contents to me. The substance of
of these, I have already had the honor of communicat-
ing verbally to you.
10. The first is as follows : The writer was at
Setool. He states that the Malays old and young
were forced into the Siamese Service, that all was
confusion, he urges his relative to prepare his prow
and launch her, in order that the females of his family
and children might escape in case of need ; he recom-
mends him to move over to George Town during the
present month, to take care of his property and provide
himself with everything necessary. He says “ You
must not go anywhere who knows if the Siamese may
not come.” He adds that there are at Setool and
Lingaes a hundred prahus in the water, and he con-
cludes, “ I cannot go to my house day or night; lam
“ constantly employed upon the Siamese Boats ; they
“ give out that they are going to Salengore, and are
“ using great expedition.”


11. The other letter is from another person whose
name I possess. He says that when lie arrived at
Setool, the Siamese were very busy preparing their
prows, that they put many questions to him relative
to Penang. He states that he had been ordered to
Li gore and adds “ be upon your guard ; better get your
“ boat ready ; if trouble comes, then is no time to
“ consider; do you, my father and Brother invoke the
“ Almighty. I shall return to you soon.” He requests
some cloathes to be sent to him. The other parts ot
of the letters relate to family matters. The originals
are in ray possession, and bear all the marks oi
authenticity and of not being fabricated for the
purpose of deception.
12. While submitting this information for your
consideration and expressing my conviction, from a
very deliberate consideration of all the rumours now
afloat and a careful enquiry into all the reports in
circulation, it is proper at the same time to remark that
many exaggerated and sometimes unfounded reports
have been propagated here, there is reason to believe,
by the friends and adherents of the Rajah of Kedah.
13. It must be recollected, however, that the
Armament reported to be in such an advanced state of
preparation has been equipping during the last 3 years
and it has been clearly ascertained by the Envoys sent
from hence and other good sources of information,
that thei’e is a large assemblage of prows and men.
14. The Siamese have lately made no secret of
their intentions of attacking Salengore. The warnings
of this Government to the Rajah of Ligore seem to have
had the effect only of causing him to redouble his
exertions to carry his schemes into effect. While he
was professing the most pacific intentions ; while his
Envoys were here, pretending to negociate for the
return of the Rajah of Kedah, a force was marching
across to attack Perak, which is now in their possession.


15. The Rajah of Ligore is not ignorant that a
much smaller force than he has equipped would fully
suffice to capture Salengore. The expedition which
he sent 3 years ago against Perak consisted only of 15
or 20 prahus of a Middling size. It is pretty well
ascertained that his present fleet consists of not less
than 300 prahus, large and small.
16. Many respectable natives here firmly believe
that the expedition is destined for this place, and that
a desperate attempt will be made to seize and carry off
the Rajah of Kedah. A general alarm in fact prevails
throughout the Island, amongst the Native community.
17. Under all these circumstances, and consi-
dering the very small force at present on this Island,
1 feel it to be my duty, holding the situation which
I do, in the intelligence department, respectfully
to lay all these particulars before you, in order that
3 r ou may take into consideration the expediency of
adopting every available means of precaution, to
obtain more precise information and to guard against
any possible attack. The knowledge of such precau-
tions being taken will tend very much to allay the
apprehensions of the Native population and may and
I do think will deter the Rajah of Ligore from any
hostile aggression against this place for the present;
tho’ there is very little doubt he will endeavour to
subjugate the Malay States to the Southward forth-
with.
I have &c.
( Signed ) JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Transr. to Govt.
Malay Transrs. Office
P. W. Island
The 1 May 1825.


SUPTDT. POINT WELLESLEY.
To,
JOHN ANDERSON Esquire
Acting Secretary to Government.
Sir,
1 deem it my duty to report for the information
of the Honorable the Governor in Council, that the
rumours which have so long prevailed in Penang, and
on this shore, respecting the outfit ct a formidable
armament at the different Ports to the Northward, by
the Rajah of Ligore, are entirely confirmed by informa-
tion I have lately obtained from persons employed by
me for the purpose of ascertaining this point. My
Informants are Men of respectability, and I firmly
believe their communication viz. that 70 large Prahus
carrying each from 2 to 4 Guns, with a Complement
of 40 to 50 Men are collected at Khuntannee, and that
more are daily arriving from Setool and Kedah to
complete this force. There are also a considerable
number of smaller prahus which are merely intended
to convey the Siamese Troops, without being armed.
The attack of Salengore is the ostensible object of
these preparations, but the Siamese have so confidently
proclaimed their intention of proceeding to Salengore,
a measure so contrary to the caution and cunning
followed by them in conducting their mode of warfare,
that it becomes a question whether some other attempt
besides the conquest of that place may not be con-
templated by them. The Malays firmly believe that
their intention is to seize and carry away, if possible,
the Rajah of Kedah.
I have &c.
(Signed) A. I). MAIN GY
Supt. of Point Wellesley.
Wellesley Province
The 1 May 1825.


THE BOARD entirely concurring in the ex-
pediency and propriety of the measures which have
been adopted, and those now proposed by the
President
RESOLVED that the Malay Translator be au-
thorized to engage 150 Malays under respectable
Native Pungalus, to be posted in different parts of the
Island, particularly the Beach between George Town
and Pulo Teecoos, Teluk Kumbo, and the Western
side of the Island, to keep a strict guard at night and
to convey the earliest information of the approach of
any assemblage of Prows to meet also at the appointed
place of Rendezvous in case of alarm being given,
where they will receive Arms and assist in the
defence of the place.


FORT CORNWALLIS THE 12 May 1825.
MINUTE by the PRESIDENT.
I beg to lay before the Board all the information
received relative to the Siamese Armament since our
last meeting ; from which it does not appear advisable
to relax any of the precautionary measures already
taken. The hired Schooner has been dispatched to
Trang and the Neighbouring Ports to watch and report
preparations of the Siamese. The enquiry as to the
supposed communication between the Siamese Chief
of Ligore and certain of the Chinese inhabitants of this
Island has been made over to the Police Department
to which it properly belongs. I propose that all the
information received bo sent for the perusal of the
Officer Commanding the Troops.
(Signed) R. FULLERTON
]2 May 1825.


To
The Honorable ROBERT FULLERTON Esquire
Governor &ca. &ca. &ca.
Honorable Sir,
I have the honor to acquaint you that a Malay
man, named Haji, whom I dispatched in a small prow,
agreeabty to your orders about 8 days ago to the
Northward, for the purpose of collecting intelligence,
returned this morning and reports as follows.
The first place he touched at was Jerloon, a small
river a little to the Northward of Quedah, where he
was informed that the Rajah of Ligore was preparing
to cross over land from Tradng to Quedah and was
expected to arrive on the Ist of Shawal (9 days hence).
At Jerl'ion, the Siamese were collecting the Malays,
to convey them to Traang to assist in manning the
boats.
From Jerloon, where he remained only few hours,
lie proceeded to Kwala Puju, another small river to
the Northward of Pur Us, and the above intelligence was
confirmed. There also the Siamese were pressing the
Malays. He saw 15 prows at Kangar which were
loading rice for Tradng, to sail in a day or two. He
was informed that 15 or 16 had sailed shortly before
for that place.
Haji learnt from a Malay Man at Purlis, named
Lebby Nga, that a small boat with 4 Malays and a
Siamese, were dispatched about the time he arrived at
Purlis with a letter from the Chom Rat Minta or
Chief Siamese there for some Siamese man at this
Island.
From Kwala Puju he proceeded to Setool, where
the preceding intelligence of the Rajah of Ligore’s
being at Tradng and expected at Quedah was con-
firmed. As he was entering Setool river, he met 7
large prows with Malay crews proceeding to Tradng.


He observed only one prow remaining at Pangkalan
Batu, the ghaut near which the prows usually anchor.
He was told that all the other prows had proceeded
to Tradng ten days before, about from 20 to 30
in mimber.
He then went to Lingow, where he also learnt
that the Rajah of Ligore was expected to cross over
from Tracing, there also the Malays were collecting.
Ho saw only two prows at Lingow, of small size, lie was
informed that a considerable number from that place
had gone to Trading.
Haji next went to Tanjong Sittar some distance on
this side of Tracing river. He there met with 3
Malays, who advised him not to enter the Tracing as
lie would get into difficulty if he did, they told him
that many Malay prows had been seized, they reported
that there were between 4 and 500 prows of all sizes
at Khontanni, but Haji thinks this is an exaggeration.
He was afraid to proceed on and therefore determined
on returning.
The people he met at Tracing Sittar acquainted
him that on the Ist of Shawal ( i. e. five days hence)
the Commander in Chief of the fleet, Nai Tap, the
Jiajah of Mardelong, who is also at Tradng, with
Tantaiong, the brother of the Rajah of Ligore, were to
■sail with the whole fleet collected, for Queclah. The
Rajah of Ligore was to cross over with Elephants.
The Messenger heard that there was a very large
force at Tracing, a great number of Siamese had come
across with the Rajah of Ligore.
Of the fact of the Rajah of Ligore being at
Tradng, there appears now to be no doubt and that a
large fleet of boats is collected for some immediate
hostile enterprize equally certain. Haji reports that
Saleugore is their avowed destination.
I have &c.
Pinang
The 10 May 1825.
(Signed) J. ANDERSON
Malay Transr. to Govt.


To
THE HONORABLE
ROBERT i ULLERTON Esquire
Governor &ca. &ca. &ca.
Honorable Sir,
Since writing my report of intelligence brought
by the Malay man Haji, this morning, I have met with
a Chooliah Bumboatman of this place, who left Quedah
yesterday evening at 5 o’clock. He was interrogated
by the Master Attendant and myself on landing and
reports as follows. Two large prows (about 10 or 12
Coyans) well armed and mounting several guns had
left the Quedah river for Traang. There were 10 or 12
more up the river coming down. A large Siamese prow
or Junk arrived yesterday from Traang at Quedah and
was to sail for this Island immediately. He has reason
to think there are Envoys and letters. The John de
Brias was seen at or near Traanef.
This person also reports that the Rajah of Ligore
was at Traang and was expected at Quedah shortly,
that he had heard there were upwards of 300 prows at
Traang all new. Salengore was stated to be their
destination. The Siamese were desirous that the fleet
should pass through the channel here.
It will be in your recollection, Honorable Sir, that
I some time ago mentioned that a letter might be ex-
pected from the Rajah of Ligore, couched in very civil
terms, requesting permission for his fleet to pass the
island and mentioning his intention of attacking
Salengore. This information was obtained from the
man named Che Etam, of whose proceedings I have
already made you acquainted. If such a letter is in
charge of the persons now expected, it may argue well
for the correctness of the information derived from
that person. I have &ca.
( Signed)
Pinang
The 10 May 1825.
JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Transr. to Govt.


CHE TOAH
the principal Chinese Merchant of Pinang, examined
before the Honorable the Governor, at the Secretary’s
Office, on Thursday, the 5 May 1825.
He stated that he rents the farms at Purlis and
other places from the Rajah of Li gore. A Junk be-
longing to him arrived from thence a few days ago.
His Agent wrote to him that the Rajah of Ligore was
at Traang and was expected in a few days at Purlis on
his way to Kedah. There was a large force at Traang,
he was informed by his people who lately arrived,
upwards of 800 boats, some of them larger than our 8
Oruizers now here. The Siamese not to be trusted,
the Rajah of Ligore very ambitious—Siamese always
commit hostilities by stealth—thinks they have some
designs upon Pinang, but there is even more danger
from the low Macao Chinese here, they have had
meetings near the Rice bazar, as many as 500 to 1000
at a time. Achong is the head of a tribe and attends
their meetings. The people he suspects are the
Chinese Gardeners, brickmakers &c,
Che Toah is acquainted with Boomi—that man
has been often at his Godowns. He is a Siamese, nok
a Malajr. He firmly believes him to be a spy and is
certainly an Agent of the Rajah of Ligore. The
Rajah of Ligore has been enticing China Men, the
Chinamen have knives.
Che Toah expressed his opinion that it was very
necessary to take precautions just now, the Siamese
were very treacherous.


LBBBY ABDUL KARIM
a very old Malay man, who has part of his family at
Quedah and part here, examined by the Translator,
Friday the G May 1825.
States that he is the Nackoda of a small prow,
arrived three days ago from Quedah, brought 300
Gantons of rice for sale. There are 15 or 1G Siamese
prows at Quedah preparing to start for Trang ; 3 of
the prows were quite ready. They are of a large size.
AII the Male population were collecting to go to Trang.
Great many women collected to beat Paddy—a large
supply of Grain sent to Trang. It is reported the
Rajah of Sangora is at Trang. The Rajah of Li gore
certainly there. The Siamese say they are coming to
Pinang in all the month of Ramellow (this is the 17th)
They say if they do not come now they cannot come
for a long time as the wind will be foul. The Chom
or Prime Minister boasts a great deal, how easy it
would be. Does not exactly know the object the
Siamese have in view in desiring to come to Penang.
He is ready to attend farther examination.
Ex-Rajah of Kedah
communicated with the Translator to Government
sth May 1825.
The Rajah had previously mentioned the reports
he had received of Achong’s proceedings at Ligore.
He repeated them. He said a Chinaman known by
the name of Baba Malacca told him Achong had been
treated with great distinction at Ligore after being
threatened; that he had been acting improperly, that
the Rajah of Ligore promised to make him Rajah of
Quedah, Purlis or any place he chose to select after lie
took Penang, that he was to get some Macao China-


men to create a disturbance at the same time. The
Eajali said the number of Chinese so engaged were
said to be about 1,500.
The Rajah gave me a letter which 1 retain. It is
very long and relates to many matters foreign to the
present enquiry. The writer in one part says “ Any
“ person who is found sending letters or intelligence to
“ Pinang before the Rajah of Ligore arrives at Quedah
“ will be put to death by his orders.”
The Rajah stated that a prow arrived to-day
["which | brought him a report of the Rajahs of Sangora
and Mardelong having also come down.
About an hour after I returned home the Rajah
sent a confidential Messenger to me to say that the
celebrated China farmer of the Kwala Muda known by
the name of Takong Chukur (who was sent from hence
in irons to Quedah with a requiring him
to be severely punished —being concerned in piracy and
robber}’) had been with him two hours before, that he
was then at the house of the head Chinese Merchant
and was going to sail the same evening or yesterday
morning,
CHE ALLANCr
a Malay Nackoda, whose boat was observed standing
into the harbour, yesterday morning, the 5 Instant,
was met on landing by the Translatoyand interrogated.
He was quite ignorant of the reports that had been
circulated here and had no communication with any
person from shore. He reported that he had been on
a voyage to the Northward, near Junk Ceylon collect-
ing Birds nests. On his way back a few days ago he
went close to the mouth of the Trang river, he met
with an old acquaintance of his, a Malay, who told him
there were upwards of 300 prows in the water at


Kontanni and that preparations were going on rapidly.
He did not hear whether the Rajah of Ligore was there
or not. That was all he knew ; he appeared very in-
different upon the subject.
ABDUL HAMID. Native Writer, who has been
7 years the Translator in the Malay Translator’s Office,
examined before Council, 4 May 1825.
He states that Boomi is well known to be a
Siamese disguised in Malay clothes, that all Siamese
arriving at this place are received and entertained by
him at his house, that he knows a Malay who was the
bearer of a letter about 8 days ago, given to him bv
Boomi for some person at Purlis in authority there.
The letter was addressed in the Siamese language.
o o
There are many other persons who have carried letters
for him. Boomi is not married, he merely retains a
prostitute. The house does not belong to Boomi, but
is the property of that woman. It is very generally
believed here that Boomi is a sp} 7 - of the Siamese, in the
Employ of the Rajah of Ligore.
HAJI, an inhabitant of Purlis, who was inter-
rogated in the presence of the Honble. the Governor
on the 3rd May, at the Secretary’s Office, confirmed all
that is stated in the report of the Malay Translator, as
being derived from him.
Haji was the first person who informed against
Boomi, and first communicated the intelligence to the
Honorable the Governor,


ABDULRAHMAN
Head Shroff in the Treasury, whose family has long-
resided here, he has been about 8 or 10 years in the
service of Government, has 3 brothers also in the
Public Offices, examined by the Honble, the Governor
5 May 1825.
He is acquainted with Che Etam, one of the four-
persons who lately came from Ligore and who remained
behind ; recollects the Malay Translator telling him it
was supposed Che Etam was a spy and left behind for
no good purpose. He prevailed on Che Etam to
disclose to him the designs of the Rajah of Ligore, he
held out to him a promise of good employ here and
reward if he would divulge all he knows. He did so
and as a pledge of his intention of returning here or
of sending further intelligence if he is detained on
duty by the Rajah of Ligore, he left in Abdulraman’s
hands 200 Dollars. Che Etam stated to him as
follows—he was present at Ligore about three months
ago, when the Rajah, late at night, gave his final
instructions to his Envoys who were last here, he
heard him say he was determined to have the Rajah ot
Quedah, that he would never feel secure of possessing
Quedah till he was removed from Penang; that all
the friendly overtures, complimentary letters, presents
of rice &c. were mere stratagems to get him into their
possession, that the Rajah of Ligore saw it was in
vain negotiating further in that way, that he had often
demanded him and been refused, that he was now
resolved to take him by force. A clandestine attempt
was to be made. 30 prows well armed—full of men
with a double set of oars to make a dash at night,
seize the King and make off. The boats were filled
with large Bamboos inside to prevent sinking, if hit
by shot. If attacked 25 or 26 of the prows would
engage in action, the prow with the King on board
and 3 or 4 more would pull off with all speed, towards


Quedah ; the others would maintain a running fight;
when the prow with the Rajah had got well out the
others were to fly also and escape as well as they
could. They calculated however upon losing a con-
siderable number of men in the action. There was
a large piece of iron like a crow bar or hammer
( he represented it by shewing the thickness of his arm)
with which the Rajah of Quedalvs doors were to be
wrenched open.
Abdulrahman stated that the rice vendors in the
Bazaar told him Achong was concerting with Macao
Chinese, about 2000 said to be ready to revolt in the
event of the Siamese coming.
Che Etam told Abdulrahman that the Rajah of
Ligore had 15 Children, one of his daughters was
married to the young Chief of Poongha, another to the
Mardelong Chief. His sons were destined to be Rajahs
of Quedah, Perak, Salengore, Purlis, Trang, &ca. and
he would thus have the greater part of the Peninsula
under the control of his family.
The informant was ready to depose on oath to
what he stated. Begged that his name might not
appear, people might injure him ; Any person visiting
Quedah sure to be put to death if suspected of having
given information.
Substance of Enquhy—s May 1825.
The Master Attendant reports that the Master of
the Brig Sophia had informed him that a great
of Prows Junks &c. were collected at Junk Ceylon.
That the Siamese had taken possession of Tenasserim
and carried off a number of the Inhabitants—heard
this at Mergui,
States only what heard at Mergui—That numerous
Siamese Prows were at Sea plundering every Vessel,


that they belonged to a Siamese Chief Southward of
Mergui—That the Siamese had attacked Tenasserira —
Carried off a number of Inhabitants—That the Com-
mander at Mergui had caused them to refund 300 ot
them—That the conduct of the Siamese was hostile
and that a reinforcement had been sent for—that the
Shabunder at Mergui informed him that the Siamese
were arming many boats ostensibly for Salengore but
in reality to attack Penang. That while at Quedali
many boats were building. This in January last.
Saturday Bth May 1825.
A Junk belonging to Che Toah arrived from Purlis,
confirms the report of 30 Prows being equipped, going
to Traang. The Rajah of Ligore certainly there. It is
given out that the fleet is going to Salengore. One of
the Chinamen of the Junk, brother to Kong Shura,
wood merchant here, reported that 2 Bengalis named
Jungley and Noora had been seized by the Siamese and
plundered of all their property. They had gone to
purchase buffaloes. The Siamese said they were spies.
The informant saw a letter which was received from
the Rajah of Ligore to the Chom. Immediately on
reading it, orders were given to collect all the Malays.
A second letter also arrived the day before he left.
Saturday Bth May 1825.
Three prows with men, women and children
arrived at the Master Attendant’s Office in the
afternoon. They left Purlis the day before, fled in
consequence of the Siamese forcing all the people into,
the Service, all the women to beat paddy, the men to
serve in the boats ; four boats more behind, confirm the
report of 30 prows being ready there, going to Traang.
REPORT of Mr. Roberts, Commander of the
hired Schooner John de Brias, arrived Wednesday
afternoon 11 May 1825, to the Master Attendant and
Acting Secretary.


Touched at Quedah and delivered the letter. Was
informed by the Chooliahs and others there that the
exportation of rice was prohibited. The young Chief
told him it was not, and to prove it several prows were
allowed to take in rice for this place. There is no
doubt however that it was permitted to be exported
only in a very small quantity. He next went to
Poongah. Did not touch at any of the intermediate
ports except Purlis where he saw 12 or 15 prows.
Did not go near the Traang river’s mouth.
Arrived at Quedah yesterday afternoon remained
hour. Sailed again at SP. M. Saw the Young Chief
and the Chom, was informed that the Rajah of Li gore
was expected in a few days. The Chom of his own
accord said “ We have no intention of attacking Pulo
Penang, if any person tells you so, shew him to me
“ and I will let you see what 1 will do. We are
“ great friends with the English.”
Captain 11. was told about 8 da\ r s ago, when at
Quedah that they were going to attack Salengore when
the Rajah of Ligore arrived. Heard at the same
time from the Chooliahs at Quedah that there were
400 prows at Traang ; it was believed by these people
that the armament was destined for Penang. The
Chooliahs expected the English would attack Quedah.
All apparently quiet at Quedah, the young Chief
in fact remarked “Observe we are quite quiet here.”
Captain R. met with no prows and gained no
other intelligence. The Pya of Poongha and the other
Chiefs had gone to Siam. He did not see the Siamese
boat with Envoys from Traang mentioned by Ismael
Lebby, as having arrived there.
He does not think the Siamese would attack this
place, but he has never been at Traang, Setool or
Lungow, or seen any of the War prows said to be
prepared.


He says the young Chief told him the object of
the Rajah’s coming over was to see him and enquired
if Captain Burney was not Governor of Malacca.
Captain R. delivered to me two letters, one from
the Chief of Quedah and the other from the son of the
Pya of Poongha. He made no particular enquiries
respecting the prows at Traang &ca., as he had no
orders to that effect, being merely sent to deliver two
letters.
(Signed) JOHN ANDERSON
The 11th May 1825.
THE BOARD entirely concur in the recom-
mendation of the President, that the precautionary
measures should not be relaxed.
ORDERED that the Papers containing the in-
formation lately received relative to the preparations
of the Rajah of Ligore, be sent to the Commanding
Officer of the Troops for his perusal.
THE SECRETARY reports, that the following
letter having passed in circulation and been approved,
was addressed to the Superintendant of Point Welles-
ley, directing him to dispatch the hired Schooner
Commerce to the Northward, for the purpose of
collecting intelligence.
To,
A. D. MAINGY Esquire
Suptdt. of Point Wellesley
In charge of the fleet of observation.
Sir,
It being considered by the Honble. the Governor
in Council a very desirable object to ascertain, with as
little delay as possible, the exact nature, extent and
probable or avowed destination of the armament stated


to be collected by the Rajah of Ligore at Traang,
Setool, Lingow, Meraket, Purlis and Quedah, I am
directed by His Honor in Council to desire, that you
will dispatch the hired Schooner Commerce to the.
Northward, with all haste, to collect information upon
these important points.
2. \ou will give such instructions to the Com-
mander, as you may consider necessary and proper,
with advertence to the line of policy and caution
prescribed to you in your orders.
3. It seems to the Honorable the Governor in
Council expedient that the Commerce should be
dispatched in the evening, and that her destination
should not be made known. The Commander should
be directed to proceed direct to Traang and ascertain
if the Rajah of Ligore is at Khontanni as reported.
4. 1 am desired therefore to urge the necessity
of your impressing him with the particular anxiety of
Government that he should effect this object by a
discreet and conciliatory line of conduct.
5. He should be directed to state at Traang that
this Government having heard a report of the Rajah of
Ligore being there, is anxious to ascertain the fact in
order that an Envoy may be sent to him, as agreed upon.
0. Upon his return, it will be the Commander’s
duty to make enquiries at Setool, Purlis, Quedah and
the other places where prows are said to be equipped,
relative to their number and states of preparation.
7. You will furnish him with an experienced
Native pilot if procurable, and attach one of the
Malay prows lately engaged to the Commerce for the
purpose of entering the shallow rivers and obtaining
intelligence.


8. It is expected that this duty may be accom-,
plished within the present week, and I am desired to
communicate to you the expectation of Government
that the utmost expedition may be used on the occasion.
9. Should the Commander of the Commerce fall
in with a Meet of prows exceeding 30 in number
steering to the Northward in his progress to Traang,
he should return immediately and report to you.
J am Ac.
(Signed) JOHN ANDERSON
Aetg. Secry. to Govt.
Fort Cornwallis
The 9 Mav 1825.


THE SECRETARY having taken Notes of the
Examination before Council on the 4 Instant of"
ACHONG and BOOMI two suspected persons.
EXAMINATION of ACHONG and BOOMI.
Examination of Achong Son of Low Ammee before Council on
Wednesday 4 May 1825.
Q. How many boats did you
understand were prepared at the
Northward ports of Quedah ?
Q. What did you understand
to be the object of their equip-
ment ?
Q. Who gave you this in-
formation ?
Q. Did you enquire of the
Rajah of Ligore himself?
Q. How many men fit to bear
Arms did you see at Ligore ?
Q. How are they generally
armed ?
Q. Did you see'armed men at
Quedah ?
Q. You saw the prows at
Purl is. Describe them.
Q. When was that ?
Q. In what way did the Rajah
of Ligore prevent your going to
Traang, by force or persuasion?
Q. What was tlie Rajah’s mo-
tive for preventing your going ?
Q. Did you hear the object of
lus going to Traang then ?
A. About 300, all new, viz
at Purlis 120, at Traang a little
more than 100, at Quedah 80.
A. To go to Salengore.
A. The King of Ligore’s Min-
ister Choo Lee, a Chinaman.
A. Yes, at first he said no,
then he acknowledged he did
intend doing so.
c 5
A. About 15,000 Siamese be-
sides about 1000 Chinese and 8000
Malays.
A. With Musquets without
bayonets.
A. No, nor at Purlis.
A. They were about 3 or 4
Coyans burthen each.
A. In the middle of Febry.
last.
A. I asked permission to go,
but he said no, no you had better
go the way you came.
A. Because 1 was informed
that he was going there himself
and was sending rice across.
A. No, I did not hear what
was his object in going to Traang.


Q. Did you hear that besides
the quantity of rice said to be
coming over, troops were also
coming ?
A. No, no. I heard that
there was 1000 Men coming from
Sangora to Purl is to assist i n
finishing prows there. W hen I
enquired the motive for sending
down to Traang rice, I was informed by some of the Rajah of Ligore s
people that there was a famine there.
Q. Did you see any guns any-
where ?
Q, Did you hear any other
reports about these boats going
anywhere else except to Saleng-
ore ?
A. I saw none at Purlis ex-
cept one Wooden one, and only
two Guns opposite the palace at
Ligore.
A. Yes, going to Bangkok
afterwards. There is something
about that business. The King
of Ligore is a relation to the old
royal family of Bangkok. The
old King was killed by the present King. The present Rajah ot Li gore
fled from Bangkok on the Massacre of his relative.
Wishing to revenge himself the Rajah is endeavouring to collect
a large force of Chinese, Siamese, Malays, Bengalis and all sorts
of people to be in his service but he has got no money ; how can he
get money enough to supply these people? He has taken Quedah
and now he wishes to take Salengore, hearing that there is a great
deal of money there ; He prepared so many boats, not to take
Salengore but to go against Bangkok. This is the information 1 heard.
Q. Who gave you this in-
formation ?
Q. What force can he collect,
do you think ?
Q. How many men could lie
collect altogether to go to Bang-
kok? ‘
Q, What would be the object
of going to Bangkok ?
Q. Do you think he is going
to Salengore ?
A. Choo Lee.
A. 1 do not know whether
they will join or not.
A. 1 do not think lie could
do so for a l&jgth of time, five or
six years.
A. To take his revenge for
the murder of his relation.
A. He is certainly going
there.


Q. Did lie 'give out that he
was going there ?
A. No.
Q. Did you hear it from his
Minister ?
A. Not from his Siamese
Minister, they would be afraid
to mention it to me, but I heard
so from his Chinese Minister
Choo Lee.
Here the Translator reminded Achong of what he had told him
on his arrival, that he had been told the Rajah of Ligore, he was
about to attack Salengore, and he himself said “ more better, they are
only a set of pirates. ’ Achong did not deny this, nor did he deny
having said. Captain Burney’s coming was all a trick, that upon his
suggesting to the Rajah of Ligore the probable transfer of Tavoy and
Mergui, he said I want no stolen goods.
Q. Do you know the man
who accompanied you here is in
waiting ?
Q.* Did he interpret for you
at Purlis ?
Q. How long were you at
Purlis ?
Q. And you did not ascertain
his name ?
Q What language does he
interpret in ?
Q- Is he in the service of the
Chom of Purlis ?
A. 1 have seen that man be-
fore at Purl is he was acting a»
Interpreter to Chom the Siamese
Chief. I think he is a spy.
A. Yes, he interpreted for-
me.
A. Three days.
A. No.
A. Malay and Siamese.
A. - I do not exactly know but
1 suppose he is.
Achong ordered to return in charge of the Constable to town.
Examination of Boomi, a Siamese, before Council on Wednesday
the 4 May 1825.
Q. What is your name ?
A. Boomi.


Q. Is that your Siamese or
Malay name ?.
Q. What is your nation ?
Q. Where were you born ?
Q, Are you in the service of
any Chief?
Q. When did you marry ?
Q. How do you gain a live-
lihood ?
Q. Are you in the habit of
going to Purlis and Quedah ?
Q. What do you go there for ?
Q. Where have you been re-
siding here ?
Q. With whom residing ?
Q. Are you acquainted with
the Chinaman you have just seen ?
Q. What was he doing there ?
Q. Were you acquainted at
Purlis ?
Q, Where did you reside
formerly ?
Q. State the place ?
Q, When did you leave
ilpungah ?
A. When I was at Telibon
formerly my name was Amin,
now the Malays call me Susa,
and the Siamese Boomi.
A. Malay.
A. At Teliban (opposite
Trang ).
A. No, 1 have lived here two
years and 1 have got a Wife.
A. About 2 years ago.
A. I have a small prow which
I send to Purlis to trade.
A. It is a long time since I
was there. It is upwards of 6
months since I went to Purlis.
A. To purchase rice to eat
and sell.
A. In Huttons lane.
A. With the Quedah people
who fled.
A. Not acquainted with him,
but I have seen him at Purlis
before.
A. I acted as interpreter with
China Achong & the Chom.
A. No.
A. At Junk Ceylon.
A. At Pungah (Pungah is on
the main).
A. About 1G years ago.
This person was reconducted to the police by the Constable,


FORT CORNWALLIS The 19th May 1825.
THE PRESIDENT records the following Minut e
and enclosures containing farther information relative
to the Armament preparing by the Rajah of Ligor at
the Northern Ports of Quedah.
THE PRESIDENT.
I now lay before the Board the Substance of fur-
ther information received relative to the Armament
preparing at Trang and Quedah. The person who
gave it has been on several occasions in attendance on
the Envoys who came here some time ago, and has
been induced to come forward by the persuasion of
some of his friends here. The letter is one delivered
to him for the two Envoys who were lately here, and
was opened by my direction in hopes of some infor-
mation being obtained relative to the meditated attack
on this Island. Altho’ the information contains little
more than we already possess, as to the immediate
objects of the armament it serves to shew in a clear
light the long entertained projects of the Rajah of
Ligor against this Island and may be depended on so
tar as to prove the expediency of our being at all times
on our guard. It moreover shews the necessity of a
vigilant Police in preventing and cautioning their
intrigues, to which the open and unrestricted in-
tercourse with every part of the opposite Coast has
given rise and to which a certain portion of our
Population seem to be unhappily addicted.
The plans said to be in view by the Rajah of
Ligor are such as would naturally enough present
themselves under present circumstances. The Siamese
Chiefs on this part of the Peninsula have for the last
fifty years been constantly menaced by the Burmese
and in continual alarm of attack, their whole time,
Troops and attention have been engaged in means of


resistance. The occupation of Tavoy and Mergui by a
British force has released them from their fear on that
score. It is evident that they consider our troops
fully engaged by the War and the present period
appears to them an opportunity not to be lost for
extending their conquest over the Peninsula. It
seems necessary therefore that some decided line of
policy should be determined on, and as bearing on the
question a brief reference to past transactions becomes
necessary.
This Island was transferred to us by the King ot
Quedah, the King was at that period subject to the
alternate annoyance from Ava and Siam then sti ug-
gling for superiority. It is clear that one of his
objects in giving us the Island, I may rather say,
the sole one was to procure for himself a Powerful
Ally and Protector in the English Government to
defend him against both ; a defensive alliance forms
one of the Articles of Cession delivered by the King
of Quedah to Captain Light. Under those Articles
the British occupied the Island. After obtaining it
indeed the defensive Article was disallowed on the
ground that we ought not to entangle ourselves with the
Court of Siam, but a large Annual Sum was offered
and 10,000 Dollars Per Annum alternately accepted.
No great cordiality seems to have subsisted be-
tween Quedah and this Island. The King who ceded
the Island and his Son and Successor continued to
labor under the exactions of his neighbour the Siamese
Chief of Ligor. The cession of the Island to the British
seems indeed to have brought upon him the increased
ill will of the Siamese, the more pressed the more
anxiously he looked tor our aid, and the more he felt
the complete disappointment, for we allowed him to
be gradually overpowered. He was compelled to
attack Perak in order to enforce the tender of the
Boongah Mass by that State, a mark of homage never


NOTE. For the question of right
of Siam over Quedah see Min-
utes noted hereunder.
Mr. Clubley’s Minute 28 August
1823. Cons. - - - 4 Sept.
* Mr. Philips Minute no date Do.
Mr. Clubley’s Minute 16 Scptr.
Cons. 2 Octr. 1823.
[l7] Mr. Philip’s Minute + 27
Septr. Do.
It will be seen from the tenor of
this Minute that I concur with Mr.
Clubley both as to tho right and
policy of supporting the King.
* These Minutes
will be copied
with the Records
for 1823.
before paid and having weakened himself by that
attack and incapacitated himself for insistence was in
his turn attacked by the Rajah of Ligor and driven
out of his Kingdom. He found refuge in this Islands
ucstion of right Most of his family were taken and are
ucdah see Min- • , „ , . .
eundop. now prisoners and many of Jus ad-
note 28 August herents were put to death.
- - - 4 Sept,
ute no date Do.
inute ie scptr. We have allowed the Rajah of
, 2 oc * r ' * 823, Ligor to assume the Government of
I’S Minute + 27
Quedah. His power, his influence
om the tenor of b| s ambition and arrogance are now
concur with Mr. 8
> tho right and much increased, he has at this mo-
ng the Kmg. meiit collected a large force professed-
ly to attack Salengore, but it is believed also if a
favorable opportunity offers to attack this Island.
Altho’ we allowed the King of Quedah to be driven
out of his Kingdom we have still sheltered him here.
By protecting the King after abandoning his kingdom
we have ensured the lasting animosity of the Rajah of
Ligor and by leaving the resources of his Kingdom at
his disposal we have promoted his views of gratifying
it. tf the King of Quedah really was a fugitive vassal
who had failed in his his allegiance, who without
authority had given away an Island belonging to tho
superior .State, it may be questioned whether we had
a right to protect him or to hold the Island except
on the same feudal tenure from the Siamese Empire.
There are two modes of proceeding—one to consider
the King as an independent Sovereign and the
grant of the Island legitimate and to have supported
that position, the ether to have refused protection
to the King as a feudal dependent, to have left him
to seek a residence elsewhere, and to have settled the
terms with the King of Siam, in that case the Lord
Paramount, on which we were to hold the Island,
fine or other of the two, it seems to me, we must now
pursue. We must either consider the Siamese Chiefs
as undue occupants of Quedah, or acknowledging the


right, endeavour to make them our friends, and
that we cannot do while the King of Quedah is
established here. The King’s presence here keeps up
unceasing feelings of hostility, and it is naturally his
object, as that of his family, to keep us on bad terras
with the Siamese Authorities. They can never place
unlimited confidence in us while we protect the King
within a few Miles of his ancient Kingdom, keeping-
up a constant intrigue and communication with his
Malayan Subjects. To have maintained the King as
an Ally would it appears to me have been the right
course, supported by every principle of Justice and
good Policy, but after abandoning that course to keep
him here with rank and pension attached, is only to
keep alive animosity and dispute, and to hold out an
unceasing provocative to attack. In the event of the
second mode being pursued, that is, in the event of its
being determined to relinquish all attempts at his
restoration by Treaty or otherwise a more distant place
must be found for him.
The interposition of the Netherlands Government
of Malacca and the Treaty made by their Government
with Perak and Salengore served as a barrier against
the encroachments of the Siamese on this side of the
Peninsula. If the Ligor Chief succeeds in subjugating
those States completely, over which Siam possesses not
a vestige of legitimate supremacy we shall have a
long line of Coast filled with hostile Prows, always
on the Watch to take us by Surprize. A very
great increase of our defensive means will be required.
If the} r subdue Perak and Salengore they border on
Malacca, and there is nothing to stop them down to
Johor. Both Malacca and Singapore will then bo
placed in the state we are in now. Any Commercial
advantages to be expected from the Peninsula will bo
quite out of the question, the whole access to the
interior will be shut up and the valuable productions
of the Peninsula intercepted.


The nature and description of our population is
another source of embarrassment to us and of support
to our hostile Neighbours. The Chinese are generally
connected with the Siamese Chiefs. They farm their
revenue as they do ours, the Rajah of Ligor is himself
the Son of a China Man. The Chinese are treated
there with more favor than other Nation; they
pay only half of the established duty at the Siamese
Ports ; they are no doubt an active and industrious
race, the most useful settlers we have, but they are
the most cunning and intriguing. They are here
under British Administration, let loose from the severe
laws and control of their own Government, and out of
nine thousand on this Island, three thousand at least
are of a very dubious character. They have often been
suspected, and on a late occasion have been directly
accused of entering into a league with the Rajah of
Ligor to rise in case of an attack on the Island. Altho
managed with a degree of caution that eludes what
may be termed Judicial Proof, enough has transpired
to convince me that an understanding subsists between
the Rajah of Ligor and some of our principal Chinese
Inhabitants. That they did actually connect themselves
with Ligor on a former occasion appears clear from
the Note of the Superintendant of Police attached to
the Deposition of Shim Yep in the following words :
“ When the Rajah of Ligor was at Quedah 2 or 3 years
ago he carried on a good deal of secret correspondence
with the Canton or Macao Chinese of the place, got
numbers of them to go in some Junks he equipped and
sent them to cruize to the Northward of and about
Junk Oejdon, where they were reported, and I believe
with some truth to have committed atrocious Acts
of Piracy.” Siamese are known to be a most treacher-
ous and deceitful race; all that we have ever heard
or read of the cunning and duplicity of the Natives of
the Continent of India falls far short of the Character
of the Siamese. Friendly professions form a part
of their system of warfare,, a common preparatory step


to throw their victim off his guard, and while unaware
to destroy him, nor do I entertain the slightest doubt
that any accidental diminution of our force, or even
its continuance on the same reduced scale on which
it is at present will ultimately produce an attack fror»
the Rajah of Ligor.
The establishment, now composed of less than 800
men, was adapted to a state of things widely different
from the present. We had then a friendly Malay State
on our frontier which rather looked to us for protection
than contemplated aggression; while we have now, I
need not say, a State growing in power which owes its
growth to our forbearance, and looks on this Island as
the only bar to boundless dominion over the whole Pen-
insula, and we may be assured will never cease, unless
repressed by strong measures, to look upon our destruc-
tion as essential to its own objects of aggrandizement.
Our population is now much increased, but a certain,
portion of it not of a description calculated to add to our
security, but rather to require encreased vigilance,
and means of control. When we consider the nature
of that portion of our population already described,
mere fugitives from China, of unsettled habits, with-
out families in any way to attach them to the Island,
connected with the most dangerous of our Neighbours,
I cannot but view our tenure of this Island as much
more insecure than has been hitherto supposed. It
has been the policy of every one of our Indian States-
men to keep up between them and the more powerful,
the petty independent States found in existence.
The Malay States stood to our Settlements in the
Straits exactly in that relation between us and Siam,
and I am convinced it will be a subject of regret
every day the more manifest that we allowed the safe
principle to be laid aside in the case of Quedah.
Erroneous steps should if possible be retraced and the
restoration of the King of Quedah by Treaty or
on the first aggression of Ligore on justifiable grounds.


should be the course pursued. It is true that temporary
measures must now for a time be pursued. We are
at War with the Burmans, and the Neutrality at least
ot the Siamese is desirable. Excepting in self defence
it would not be advisable at present to incur the
risk ot rupture by any Act of our own. We should
assume therefore, such a defensive position as will
intimidate from attack and be prepared hereafter
on due provocation to adopt the line of conduct cal-
culated to place our political interests on a sure
footing. The whole Malay race are averse to the
Dominion of the Siamese and every open and avowed
support offered by the British Government. The
setting up of a Malay Government at Quedah for
example would ensure the support and co-operation of
the whole of that Population on the Peninsula.
The most advisable line of Policy to be observed
generally in the Malay Peninsula seems to me to be
that which should have been pursued at Quedah.
Treaties offensive and defensive should be made with
the whole of the Petty States of Perak, Salengore,
J chore, Pahang, Tranganu and Kelantan. Their
independence should be maintained so as to exclude
the Siamese entirely from our proximity. The forma-
tion of such Treaties cannot justly be considered as
any interference with the Siamese Government which
holds over them no legitimate right of superiority.
Had a Treaty offensive and defensive been made with
the King of Quedah it is clear to me, the Siamese
would not have ventured to attack him, and such
Treaties with the other States on the Peninsula would
1 am confident have the effect of preventing aggression;
there seems indeed to be no other certain mode of
preventing our coming in contact with the Siamese at
our three Settlements in the Straits. To my judgment
nothingTmt the interference of the British Government
in their behalf can save these States from complete
subjugation by the Siamese.


The supposed advantage of acquiring additional
Territory on the opposite shore, has it appears on the
records been often suggested, and such indeed forms
one of the Articles of Treaty proposed by Mr. Crawfurd.
It does not appear to me that such would be desirable
in Comparison with the restoration of the Malay
Government; as a secondary measure indeed, in the
event of the first Arrangement not being carried into
effect, it might certainly be highly beneficial in
keeping the Siamese at a greater distance and pre-
venting the formation of a large force too near the
Island. Extension of Territory is certainly not desirable
in this quarter the | ? much ] less to us [ as] the com-
pletion of Treaties of the nature described would estab-
lish with the Malay States such a degree of influence
as would ensure all the advantages that would result
from actual possessions if freedom of Trade and unres-
tricted intercourse are indeed all that can be required.
The establishment and discreet exercise of British
influence over those States must tend materially to the
amelioration of this Government, the reformation of
the People, and the repression of those piratical
proceedings which arose from the unsettled and lax
state of administration. The invasion of Quedah by the
Siamese expelled from their country and converted
many of the Chiefs of that State into Pirates, and the
same cause will produce the same effect on every part
of the Peninsula. In a political and commercial point
of view, the support of these in independence of Siam
seems a measure of unquestionable policy; Considera-
tions of humanity no less point out the propriety of
affording our protection to the numberless Inhabitants
of those extensive Countries rather than submitting
them for War to the merciless domination of ruthless
barbarians.
The Settlements in the Straits were established for
purposes purely commercial, and political arrangements
were not probably intended to be carried on thro’ their


medium, but it must be recollected, that if they
commercially prosper a great accumulation of valuable
property must be the result, affording always strong-
temptation for plunder. Our security hitherto has
mainly consisted in the divided condition of Neigh-
bouring Governments, no one of which could ever
hazard an Attack on a British Settlement, but if a
more powerful State be allowed to overwhelm them
and concentrate their resources our security must be
in a great measure destroyed.
The disposition already evinced by the Siamese
and at so early a period, to take advantage of their
relief from Burman Aggression, bears distinctly on the
question of contemplated cession to that Government
on the Coast of Tenasserim, and points out the ex-
pediency of making the restoration of the Malay
Government at Quedah, the independence of the Malay
Peninsula, and the Establishment of a strong Military
Post at Mergui, indispensable accompaniments to such
cession. Without such it may be a question for con-
sideration, whether it would not bo more advisable to
reduce the power of the Burmese in other Quarters
than where it has proved so useful a Counterpoise to
the encroaching spirit of the Siamese. The Views of
that Nation in respect to the Peninsula are too obvious
to be mistaken, and being satisfied that the question
must sooner or later come into discussion, I have
thought it better to submit at once the observations
that have occurred to me. I wish it however to be
understood, that I do so. only for the consideration of
Superior Authorities: the course of policy recom-
piended is one of too much importance to be under-
taken without their deliberation and ultimate sanction.
On perusing the letters noted in the margin it
appears that the extent of the Military Establishment
of this Island has already come under discussion ;
reduction has been contemplated even when the
number of Troops was less than at present. Consider-
ing however the nature of our situation, a sense of


♦ These docu-
ments have not
been copied as
they are imma-
terial to Siam
NOTE. See also Extract from the
Town Major’s letter to the
Commanding Officer with reply
Nos. 2 and 3. Not copied, im-
material to Siam.
NOTE. Less only by the dispatch
of a Garrison for Malacca and
the deficiency of 50 Men of the
Local Corps. The letter from
Lieut. Coll. O’Halloran of 18
March 1323. The total con-
sidered sufficient by the Pre-
sident is stated at 892. Pri-
vates, sick included.
The total of our last return is
.Privates - • ■ - 912
Deduct at Malacca 92
At Rangoon - - 27
119
On the Island ... 793
duty compels me to record my conscientious opinion
that such a force is, under change of circumstances*
quite inadequate to ensure us against hostile attempts,
or to command the requisite degree of influence and
respect with the neighbouring States.
Extract from the Bv the Memorandum of the Com-
ffico^with o rep h |y sanding Officer delivered on a late
Not copied, im- occasion (No. 1), it does not appear
m ’ that our present disposable force could
in his opinion do more than defend the Town, leaving
all the rest of the property of the Island at the Mercy
of an Enemy.
by the dispatch Altho’ the force on the Island is
° # C Q f lht n °t much less than what has hitherto
of 50 Men or the
The letter from been considered sufficient, 1 confess
The°total°con* the scale is far too low to meet the
lent by the Pre- circumstances of the time. In dis-
TudtTd 892 ' Pr ' cussing the question of the Military
r last return is Establishment of this Island it must
012 be always held in mind, First, That
ca 92 J
- 27 we are far removed from the other
1,9 Presidencies from whence alone rein-
• 793
forcements could be drawn. If such
were required, however imperiously, it is not within
the verge of possibility that they could reach us within
three Months of the dispatch of the Application.
Second, That we cannot here as may be done at the
other Presidencies on emergencies derive any Military
aid from our own population. Thirdly, it must be
recollected that tho’ not so frequent, this Island is
liable to the same mortal and destructive diseases
which prevail in the other parts of India; if the
number of troops were reduced below the scale barely
necessary for the relief of the Guards the occurrence of
the epidemic Cholera for a Week would be fatal to the
security of the Island. It must be recollected also
that a Military force barely adequate to defence in
case of attack can never ensure and command that
respect indispensable for the maintenance of tho


British interests in this quarter, and it will not escape
the observation of those conversant with India Affairs,
how far a respectable position by preventing attack
is calculated to save the expence and inconvenience of
actual hostility.
Under all these circumstances the Annexed Me-
morandum seems to me to contain the scale at which
the regular Military Establishment for the general
defence of the Island should be maintained, so as to
admit of a disposable force of Six hundred Men ; any
immediate addition to the regular troops of the Island
cannot at present be expected, but I propose that
application be made to the Supreme Government for
two hundred and fifty recruits to encrease the strength
of the Local Corps to that contemplated in the
Memorandum.
Situated as we are the Marine Establishment
must be reckoned as a material part of our defence. I
find that establishment before the dispatch of the
Vessels to Rangoon consisted of the local Brig Jessy 6
Guns, the Bombay Cruizer “Prince of Wales” 12
Guns. On my arrival here the only Armed Vessel
was the Schooner used as a Police Vessel with 2 Guns.
The Jessy has since returned, but in a disabled
state. It is only a more attentive consideration of all
the circumstances of our situation, that has led me to
regret the absence of the Bombay Cruizer, as our
bareness in this respect may have given encouragement
to these extensive preparations of which we hear so
much. It is desirable therefore that the original state
of Marine defence should be restored without loss of
time, according to the Memorandum annexed
A Bombay Cruizer of 18 Gunsl One of these in the
A Brig of 14 Guns -roads the other cruiz-
-4 Gun Boats of 4 Guns each ) ing off the Island.
One at the North end, one at the South, one at the
West side of the Island, the other in the Harbour.
( Signed ) K. FULLERTON
18th May 1825.


PROPOSED FORCE for the Security of the
ISLAND.
7 Companies of regular of 120 each ...840
5 Companies of Local of 100 each ...500
1 Company of Golandauze 100
European Artillery 00
1500 Men
DISTRIBUTION
Town Lines-Regulars-2 Companies ...240
Golandauze ... 50
In the Fort European Artillery 60
<350
DETACHMENTS
Burmah Town-Locals 50
James Town-Ditto 50
Western side of the Island Ditto 50
Wellesley Province Ditto 100
Employed in Armed Vessels 4 40
290
CANTONMENT.
Regulars-5 Companies 000
Locals 210
Golandauze 00
860
1500
18th May 1825.


SUBSTANCE of information derived from Che
Etam on Sunday the 15 May 1825.
States that Kombeng a Chencheu Chinaman who
came here with Boome on his .last return fled im-
mediately on that person’s apprehension. He was an
intelligencer of the Rajah of Ligor. Informant knows
the shop where he used to stay at in Town, near Sheak
Hussain’s in Beach Street, does not know the Name
of the Shopkeeper. Kombeng has been long in the
Rajah of Ligor’s Service.
Boomi has been employed upwards of two years
by the Rajah of Ligor. Boomi enticed a Chinaman to
go to Quedah about 8 Months ago. That man has
lately arrived from Rangoon. He was sent on to Ligor,
to give News ot the War, from thence forwarded to
Bangkok. The Rajah gave Boomi a Pending and 3
Coyans of Rice for this Service. The Rajah of Ligor
gave the Chinaman fine Cloth and sent a present
ot Coyan of Rice to his father who resides here
by Kon Aksoon and Naei Neem.
Not long since Boomi also enticed two Burraahs
to go to Quedah, who were in like manner forwarded
to Ligor and the Capital. Informant says he
understands some Complaints have been made at the
Police by the relations of these Men.
When Informant was here some months ago with
Kon Aksoon and others they endeavoured to entice
away two of the Crew of the Cochin China Junk
[which] had arrived a short time previously from
Tavoy—they gave him Opium and spent about 40
Hollars in presents to them. The Men engaged to go
with them, but disappointed them.
Boomi corresponds with some people in Authority
at Purlis. His Prow arrived here 4 or 5 days ago
from thence loaded with rice.
Rajah of Ligor thinks the English cannot conquer


Ava, considers all our reports of conquests false,
abused Informant because he stated what he heard
here, sent his people here to enquire particularly.
The observation to one of his Envoys who told him of
bur Conquests was “ tis false, what Conquer a Country
so populous that their in the Morning
would form a mountain and their a
River.” The Rajah was rather surprized however to
hear of our Men of War, our Numbers were much
exaggerated to him.
Informant was present when the Rajah of Ligor
directed Boomi to go to Pinang and entice 2 Burmahs.
This was about 5 months ago, the Rajah gave Boomi
200 Dollars for the purpose.
Informant was on his way here in the suite of the
Envoys, Kon Aksoon and Nai Neem, when Achong
went across to Ligor. He heard that his proceedings
were very extraordinary. He told the Rajah that the
objections of taking Salengore did not arise from any
orders from Europe or Bengal, they were the mere
wishes of the Government here, which had no authority
of consequence. He advised him to take Salengoie by
all means; he said the Penang Government only
wished to frighten him, the objections here were
nothing. Achong told him he would not take Penang
openly by any attack, but by stealth it might be done.
The Rajah was rather distrustful of Achong, and
reserved for some time, on one occasion he said “ We
« have not got orders to take Penang, we are to take
“ Salengore first.”
The Rajah enquired how many Chinamen there
were at Penang. Achong said about 7,000, he asked
how many of them were wealthy, Achong replied about
50—there were about 200 more who were each posses-
sed of small capitals from 200 to 300 Dollars, the rest
were all poor labourers and Mechanics. Achong said he
could get a great number to assist and join the Rajah


of Ligor. The Rajah was silent for a time and then
replied “ this is an after business.” Achong informed
him we had very few troops here, having sent some
away with a Cruizer to assist at Rangoon.
The following is a list of the Prows built and
equipped at Khintauni. There were built 120 large
Prows from 4 to 6 Coyans besides a few of a different
Construction. At Setool 50, at Ligor 19, Purlis 21,
Quedah 11, all large. Of small Boats there were
equipped at Setool IS, Lingow 10, Mauket 20, Kubong
Boyce 20, Purlis 12, Kedah 5, making in all somewhat
more than 200 of a large size and 100 small.
Of the above number 50 are filled with 2 sets of
Oars (24 Oars on a side) to carry from 50 to 80 men
each. They have 2 Guns at the Bow, each 6 Cubits long
and 8 long Rantackas and Lelas brass. 150 and
upwards have one large Gun each, with from 4 to 6
Rantackas and Lelas (Swivels). The small boats have
swivels and carry about 20 men each.
In all the Prows there are Bamboos inside to
make them buoyant and they carry their water in long
joints of Bamboos.
The Troops assembled at Traang are as nearly as
Informant can recollect 1,500 Ligoreans, 2000 from
Mardelong, 1,000 from Tuccatong, 1000 from Singora,
1000 Siamese and Malays of the Traang district, 100
Chinese, besides the people from Purlis, Quedah and
other places. About 7000 men will accompany the
Rajah of Ligor to Quedah, the ryots will increase the
number very considerably. 8 Coyans of Rice are
daily beat and prepared at Quedah for the Armament.
The Rajah has 100 Elephants with him.
At Purlis there are two large sheds filled with
sharp pointed sticks of hard wood to put in the paths,
they are of this shape * or some thing like it.
The Rajah has about 4,000 Muskets at Traang,


The Rajah has about 4,000 Muskets at Traang,
part of his men will be armed with them, the rest with
long swords and Knives, each Man has a Sword and
a Knife. They have no Spears or Pikes with them.
The principal Chiefs at Traang are the Son of the
Murdelong Rajah ( the father is old and infirm ) 4
Chiefs from Singora, the Brother of the Rajah of Ligor
called Pounun or Tounun by others Tautaiong Nai Tap,
Commander in Chief in conjunction with Chou Pia-
ban, who is at Quedah and who led on the attack at
that place. The other Chiefs are Chom Rong and
Aluang Tewang of Ligor, also Pakdi Song Kram.
Before Informant left Quedah the Son of the
Rajah had received two letters from his father, one
stating that he would arrive on the 27th Ramdlam, this
day, and the other that he would reach [there] on the
7th Shawal, 10 days hence. He directed his Agents who
were here, a few days ago to remain 4 days and see what
preparations had been made and going on, also to
sound the disposition respecting Salengore—desired
them not to allude to it however publicly, to return to
Traang with the information, although they said they
were to wait his arrival at Quedah. Informant has
been directed to do the same, to ascertain also, if any
correspondence had passed between the Governor and
the Rajah of Salengore upon the subject of the
meditated attack and if Government had supplied the
Chief of Salengore with Arms and Ammunition.
The Chow Piaban, the Minister at Quedah by
way of inducing the Malays to exert themselves in
the Attack upon Salengore, says “ if you want hand-
some Wives, now is your time.”
The Tukang Chukur or Parmer of Kwala
Mooda who has been arrested here, was sent to
purchase 10 Coyans of Sait for the use of the troops
and collected news. He sent his Prow on and re-
mained at the House of the head China Merchant here.


The Rajah heard of Boomi’s seizure; the son of
the Rajah said to Informant a few days ago “ Boomi
is seized, perhaps you will be seized too if you go to
Pulo Penang, if you think you can go, but you must
judge whether it will be advisable.” The Rajah
directed him to lay out 100 Dollars or so in trying to
get Boomi out. Informant said the white people do
not require gold and he did not think he would
succeed. The Chief said “ but you will be able to
get some of the Native Servants to assist you, do
the best you can.” The Chief is much perplexed
by this business, but Informant says the Rajah is
very cunning and has great command of himself.
He will not appear to notice it, nor will he
appear to observe the preparations here, he will
write very civilly.
Orders were sent to prepare everything at Quedah,
the Armament would remain only 6 or 7 days it was
intended as the Rajah was afraid his people would be
dispersing and that it would be difficult to keep the
the Malays together.
It was the Rajah’s intention to have sent, and
Informant thinks he will still send a letter requesting
permission for the fleet to pass through this Harbour
on their way to Salengore. If refused he will go
outside. When he was told it was likely the Penang
Government would object to his going to Salengore,
he said “ what, do they command the sea, the Vessels
can go outside.”
The invitation to the Rajah of Quedah is only a
continuation of the stratagems which he'has been
employing to get that Chief into his possession. He
has tried these overtures some time and his patience
is now nearly exhausted. There is an order from
the Emperor to bring him to the Capital and he has
given the Ligor Chief full power over Kedah and all
the States on this side the Peninsula. If the Rajah


of Kedah is got hold of, he will be put in irons and
kept for life at the Capital. There are now there and
have been for some years, 3 or 4 Native Chiets in irons.
Informant heard the Rajah of Ligor planning an
attack upon Penang. This was about a year ago.
There was to be a land and Sea force ; 200 Prows were
the number collected ; they were to attack at several
points simultaneously. The largest squadron was to
land near at Tanjong Tokong (Pulo Teecoos), others
were to advance to Teluk Ayer Rajah, that is the
North Beach, a few to the back of the Island and some
to Soonghi Cluan. There were to be 4000 Men in
the Prows. At the same time 4000 Men were to
pass over from Kwala Mooda outside the Honble.
Company’s Boundary and come down suddenly upon
Prye, burn that place, seize all the Boats and come over
in the confusion by night. All the Attap Houses
were to be set fire to. The Chinese were expected to
join, for the sake of plunder.
It was supposed the Europeans would escape partly
on board ship and part would take to the Hills, the
Ships were not intended to be attacked. The Detach-
ment from the opposite shore were to take the Fort,
the Rajah had been informed the Seapoys resided at
a great distance. Parties were therefore to prevent
their coming into Town while the force from Prye took
the Fort and other parties were engaged setting fir©
to the Houses and plundering.
It was thought that if the Seapoys did get into
Town they would not be able to distinguish the Siamese
from other people and would therefore hesitate to attack
them. This plan was mentioned and deliberated upon
about the time the Burmah War commenced. The
Rajah was aware that he could not hold possession
above 10 or 12 days, as ships would arrive. They were
however to stay in the Port and collect the booty and
ship it on board the Prows. Informant has not heard


the Rajah talking of this latety, lie lias not seen His
Highness for several months. He has been under his
Son’s orders at Quedah.
Some Months ago when Informant was at Ligor
he heard the Rajah say to the Envoys who were sent
here at that time, in whose hut he was, that if he could
not get the Rajah of Quedah by fair persuasion and
stratagem, he would send a few Prows at night, when
very dark. They were to carry a large Party of Select
Men, armed with rnusquets. They were to land at the
Cocoanut Tope opposite the Church Yard, as there
were no Houses close to the Beach and the Trees
favoured concealment. It was not intended to put the
Seapoys guard to Death ; but to rush upon them sud-
denly and tie their hands ; parties were to guard the
Boats while a select few dashed up, broke open the
Rajah’s doors with a hammer prepared for the purpose
and ran off with him and as many of his Women and
Valuables as they could seize.
One plan was, to have Boats intended for the
Service out about the Boontings under pretence of
looking for Pirates to be close at hand to dart in.
This scheme was one of the first in contemplation, and
that was the object of the Rajah’s signifying to Gover-
nor Phillips that he intended to send down Prows to
Cruize near this Island. Mr. P. told him, if more were
sent at a time than 10 near the Island they would be
treated as Enemies.
It was then determined to select a dark night
when the wind was favourable to dispatch the Prows
from Quedah at 6 o’clock in the evening, and they were
expected to reach by 2 o’clock in the morning. The
Rajah has had several Plans, some times to send many,
sometimes a few Boats.
Informant is not certain, but he thinks that if the
Rajah observes we are not on our guard, he will
attack this Island. He has a very imperfect and


unfavorable idea of our power, lie thinks Siam all
powerful. The Rajah’s idea is that if he attacks
Salengore now, even against our will, and takes the
King of Quedah by force, it will be overlooked, as we
are too busy at present with Ava, and our Ships
&ca. are employed,
The Rajah has never had the least expectation of
the English attacking him. His Correspondents here
have kept him well informed. Besides Achong told
him we could not do so without orders from Bengal or
Europe. He thinks too, we have not the means of
following him.
The Rajah intends remaining at Quedah till
Salengore is taken. He is going to send the Perak
Chiefs to Salengore and remove the Salengore Chiefs
to Perak, when he conquers that place, by which he
thinks his own Chiefs will be better able to preserve
peace. There will be two Principal Siamese Chiefs at
each place for a time. If the King of Salengore is
seized, he will be conveyed to the Capital and put
in irons.
The Chow Pya of Ligcr has' two legitimate sons
and six natural sons, besides several daughters, in all
a family of 15 or 16. One of his legitimate sons is
Rajah of Traang, another is at Bangkok, two natural
sons at Quedah, one at Setool, and the others destined
to be eventually Rajahs of Perak and Salengore, One
of the Sons is going to marry the Daughter of the
Pya of Poongha, and another, the daughter of the
Mardelong Rajah (on these two last points my formei
information was accidentally misstated a little ).
His Highness was well aware that the Governor
would not accept his invitation to go to Quedah ; if an
Agent is sent he wishes to ask permission to pass
through the Harbour to Salengore; he will even to
gain his point offer to send his Son or some of his
Chiefs here as a pledge of his good intentions.


There is a man named Doolien, alias Wan Abdul-
rahim, a half cast Hindoo, who went to Quedah a con-
siderable time ago, when the Ilajah was there. This
Man agreed to seize the King and assist in getting him
into the Boats, he said he had 40 or 50 Men to assist.
He received Two hundred Dollars as an Advance, was
promised a handsome reward. Doolien came here with
the money. The Rajah offered 100 Dollars to any
person who would bring him to Quedah, and vowed he
would put him to death for betraying him.
Nai Sampau, who was lately here, is another
Collector of intelligence for the Rajah.
Informant in conclusion states that he does not
know what the Rajah of Ligor’s present plans are, that
the Arrangements are to be made and the orders issued
upon the arrival of the armament at Quedah, that the
orders will be confided principally to Nai Tap and
Chora Peaban,
Informant has part of his family still at Quedah
which has induced him to remain in the employ of the
Rajah of Ligor. He has endeavoured to get his wife
away, but cannot. He has been alarmed too at the
apprehension of Boomi and being now looked upon as
a suspected person himself and knowing that he cannot
continue his avocations of Intelligence for the Rajah,
he has resolved to declare all he knows, of which the
foregoing is the substance. He introduced many
anecdotes in his Narrative, tending to shew the
ambitious and intriguing character of the Ligor Rajah
These I have not deemed it necessary to insert here.
Informant proposes returning to Quedah in a few
days as directed. He has brought a small quantity
of Rice for Sale, thinks his apprehension by the Police
likely to be beneficial and it will avert suspicion of his


having given the information, hopes to be able to
return here shortly with further intelligence. He
states that he would be put to death instantly, if
he were suspected of having given this information.
He concluded “ my life is in your hands.”
The above information was given with great
clearness in the presence of two Confidential Malay
Writers. Informant several times hesitated and re-
minded me that he had a Wife and Child at Quedah
and that his life was at stake.
( Signed ) JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Tr. to Govt.
PENANG
15 May 1825.


MINUTE by MR. CLUBLEY.
1 have read the Honorable the President’s Minute
with much attention and have again considered the
Malay Translator’s Intelligence, as well as the informa-
tion he has recently collected from a Malay man named
Che Etam.
Whatever doubts there may however be regarding
the authenticity of Che Etam’s information on many
points, it is certain that there are great preparations
making by the Rajah of Ligor both by Sea and Land,
that his Boats have been preparing in the different
Rivers for the last 3 years not only without our
knowledge, but with studious precautions against our
becoming acquainted with their extent, and that they
are now launched forth, manned and equipped, and
are to start on some hostile project.
Looking therefore to the certainty of these equip-
ments, to the intelligence received on the one hand
that this Island is to be the destination of the
Armament, and the Rajah of Kedah the object of
it—and on the other, which I think the more correct,
that Salengore is the object, I think they cannot
be viewed with indifference, or without impressing on
us the conviction that such floating expeditions ought
not to be permitted to assemble exciting not only
alarm at this Settlement for the moment, but rendering
us continually liable to the same result.
In a Minute which I recorded under date the
16th September 1823 * I deprecated the Siamese
ascendancy on the Western side of the Malay Peninsula,
in the expectation that they would thus be enabled to
establish as they have now done a Naval Force. I
calculated then on the Employment of such Force
"FORT CORNWALLIS The 19th May 1825..


against their Birman Enemies; but the Effect is the
same if it is to be directed against British Interests,
which any invasion of Salengore or other States in the
Straits of Malacca must necessarily be considered.
Regarding the general objects of policy which the
President has discussed at length in his Minute, I beg
to express my entire concurrence in their justice and
propriety, and with reference to the Miniutes which I
had the honor to record on this Question two years
ago, I take this opportunity of repeating my decided
conviction that nothing short of the actual restoration
of the Malay Government to Kedah, guaranteed by our
protection, will ever be effectual to secure the tran-
quillity and prosperity of that Country.
(Signed ) W. A. CLUBLEY
19th May 1825.
THE BOARD unanimously concurs in the neces-
sity and propriety of continuing a vigilant superinten-
dence over the movements of the Rajah of Ligores
Armament and of continuing unrelaxed the precau-
tionary measures already adopted tor the safety of this
Settlement, for the purpose of allaying the apprehen-
sions of the Native Inhabitants.


THE PRESIDENT lays before the Board the
following Documents—Nos. 1 to 5.
RAJAH of LIGOR.
No. 1.
0 Translation
of a letter from the Rajah of Ligore to the Rouble.
Robert Fullerton Esquire, Governor of Pulo Penang.
( After Compliments. )
May my friend know that with respect to Captain
Burney’s being sent to consider upon all business, X
was excessively delighted, for I am very desirous to
prolong and encrease friendship: I sent a letter by
China Achong stating that I was coming to Quedah to
be near my friend, in order that intercourse may be
easy, and that business may be conducted with facility.
The cause of my delay has been an attack of
fever and ague, but I am now arrived at Traang and
am coming to Quedah agreeably to the letter sent by
China Achong.
I have heard that some Malays and Chinese have
been carrying various false intelligence in order to
excite suspicion in my friend. The Country of Siam
has long been on friendly terms with the English and
Commerce has been conducted. The Siamese will buy
many sorts of English Goods and consider how friend-
ship may be prolonged and extended, and trade and
intercourse continue.
When I sent people before, my friend received
them with pleasure, and furnished them with a place
to reside in. I was very happy. If my friend sends
any person here, he will be received in a proper
manner agreeably to the rules of friendship.
When I arrive at Quedah, I will send a letter to
give notice, and any business that may be wished to,


be discussed will be finally settled, that a better and
more friendly understanding than formerly may be
promoted. My friend and I have been conducting a
correspondence, but we have not been personally
acquainted or conversed together. If we could meet
and converse, it would be much better, in older that
friendship and regard might be established, that theie
might be mutual confidence for the time to come.
If consistent with the customs of the English, to
come and meet me at Quedah, do my friend come and
meet me, and form a durable friendship, as herein
mentioned. If not agreeable to the English customs to
come, my friend may send a confidential person, in
order that we may consider the road of friendship and
amicable intercourse.
I send my friend a piece of wearing cloth as a
specimen of Siamese Manufacture, and as a token of
friendship.
With respect to this letter which I send and is
written in Malay as those in future will be, if tho
Malay Writer commits a mistake or writes contrary to
the customs of the English, or in any other way errs,
do not let my friend be suspicious. If my friend has
any doubts upon any parts of ray letters, will he send
me a letter and acquaint me.
When Koon Aksorn and Solyman have arrived at
Pulo Penang and delivered this letter, let my friend
reply to the letter agreeably to the rules of friendship.
Dated Wednesday 11th Day of the 6th Month
Year Fowl.
A true Translation
( Signed ) JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Transr. to Govt.
Penang
13 May 1825.


MEMORANDUM.
»
The following remarks on the above letter are
necessary. Ist. It is written in a particularly con.-
dilatory style. 2d. From the remarks of the Malay
Writer, probably making mistakes or writing impro-
perly* Ik appears to me pretty certain that His Highness
has been informed of the impression excited by a
former letter. It is not difficult to conjecture who his
Correspondent is, doubtless a Chinese; 3rd. The
Envoys when last here, hinted at the probability of the
Governor’s going to Kedah to meet the Rajah. They
were plainly and decidedly told that was quite out of
the question ; the present invitation is therefore given
without any expectation of its being accepted. A
letter has also been received from the Eon of the Rajah
addressed to Captain Burney. It is very civil; but
His Highness had been some time since advised that
Captain Burney had proceeded to Bengal.
The intelligence of the confinement of Achong
and Boomi had reached His Highness’s ears although his
Agents did not allude to it. This no doubt prevented
the letter requesting permission for the fleet to pass
through this Harbour to attack Salengore from being
sent at present.
The Rajah takes no notice of the Honorable the
Governor’s letter of the 18 February or of the com-
munications made to the same Envoys who brought
the present letter, for the purpose of being stated to
the Rajah.
The Envoys brought a piece of Silk Cloth with
Compliments from the Rajah to the Malay Translator
to Government, and he desired them to say he was
very anxious to see him, enquired about his famil} 1- &ca.
His Highness has, of late been profuse in his Compli-
ments and presents to the Translator.
(Signed)
JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Transr. to Govt.
The 13 May 1825.


RAJAH of LIGORE.
No. 2.
Translation
of a letter from the Rajah of Ligore to the Honourable
Robert Fullerton, Governor of Pulo Penang.
(After Compliments.)
With respect to the English going to attack Ava,
there has never existed a good understanding between
Ava and Siam. The Siamese are very glad that the En-
glish have got hold of the Burmah Countries adjoining
the Siamese territorj*, because, as it has become an En-
glish Country, it will be very convenient to trade with
facility. I am very anxious to be on very intimate
terms of friendship with the English, wherefore I am
about to consider of preparing some things to send to
the English Chief who is in charge of Changong
(Rangoon). I therefore enquire of my friend, whether
my friend thinks this would be advisable. If my
friend is willing I will send, if not I will wait. If
he is pleased that I should send there, I request
he will inform me how many great men are at
Rangoon, and their names. I beg he will write to
me and let me know, and send me also a Certificate
which I may forward with ray Prow, Every thing
relating to this I have mentioned to Koon Aksorn and
Che Solyman —every circumstance connected there-
with, and I request my friend will give them a meeting-
two or three times, in order that they may give certain
intelligence, so that friendship may be prolonged.
Dated Wednesday 11th of the 6th Month Year Fowl.
A True Translation
(Signed) JOHN ANDERSON,
Malay Transr. to Govt.
Penang
the 13 May 1825.


RAJAH of LIGORE to the RAJAH of QUEDAH.
No. 3.
Translation
of a letter from the Rajah of Ligore to the Rajah of
Quedah.
The Rajah of Quedah sent us a letter requesting
us to intercede with the Emperor for his return to
Quedah. and reassume his Government. We some
time ago sent a reply to say we would solicit the
Emperor to that effect, and whatever reply we should
receive would be communicated, in order that the
Rajah of Quedah might be made fully acquainted with
all circumstances. In consequence of the death of
my Child the reply has been delayed; but now the
Emperor of his favor, has ordered his Minister to direct
us to come down to Quedah for the purpose of con-
sulting upon the business of the Rajah of Quedah, and
settling it; and if the Rajah of Quedah is disposed to
place confidence in the Emperor of Siam to make
arrangements for his returning to Quedah to reside
there.
Formerly the Rajah of Quedah said he would wait
for a reply from the Capital, wherefore we send notice
to him previously, and when we reach Quedah, we
will take the subject into consideration. We will
also consider any wishes expressed by the Rajah of
Quedah, in order to give effect to the orders which the
Emperor has of his favor been pleased to send to us,
to enable the Rajah of Quedah to return to his Country,
and continue on a friendly footing as formerly.
Wednesday 11th of the Month Year Fowl.
3rd. of May 1825.
A true Translation
Penang
the 13 : May 1825.
(Signed) JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Transr. to Govt.


There are two Arabic words added at the end of"
the letter signifying “ Attend to or hear these words.
My writer gives it as his opinion that this is a caution,
as he knows the writer of the letter to have been in
the Rajah’s employ, and friendly to him.
(Signed) J. A.


TO THE RAJAH OF LIGORE.
No. 4.
Letter
from the Honorable the Governor to the Rajah of Ligore.
I have received my friend’s letters brought by his
Envoys Kun Aksorn and Solyman. As my friend s
Envoys ha% T e nothing particular besides to communicate,
I have directed them to return forthwith (as they
represent that my friend was to leave Traang to-day)
in order that they may convey to me the intelligence
of my friend’s arrival at Quedah.
It is very true that reports have been brought to
me, and apparently not without foundation, that my
friend has been some time at Traang, equipping au
Armament, and as he did not send me any communi-
cation of such being in progress, or of the object and
destination of it, nor even alludes to it in the letter now
sent, it is natural that I should regard such prepara-
tions with suspicion, it being eontrary to custom for
States professing amity to make such preparations
in the immediate vicinity of a British Port, without
giving due notice thereof.
When intelligence reaches me of my friend’s
arrival at Quedah, I will consider about sending an
Agent to meet him.
o
( Signed ) R. FULLERTON
Governor.
The 12 May 1825.
( A True Copy )
l
( Signed ) -JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Transr. to Govt.


THE SON of the RAJAH of LIGORE at QUEDAH.
>
No. 5.
Translation
of a letter from the Baginda Muda, Son of the Rajah
of Ligore at Quedah, to the Malay Translator to
Government.
(After Compliments.)
The two letters which my friend sent by the
Commander of the Cruizer have reached me, and I
understand their contents. I was about to reply to
the letters more particularly, but the Rajah of Ligore
is expected here immediately. When he arrives, I
will lay these two letters before him, and whatever
directions he may give on the subject, I will com-
municate to my friend accordingly, and settle de-
finitely afterwards. Thursday of the 6th Month, 11th
Day in the Year Fowl.
A True Translation
(Signed) JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Transr. to Govt.
The 13 May 1825.
Note. The letters to which the above is a repfy.
related to the prohibition at Quedah against the
Export of Grain, and an attack upon some Malay
Prows by Siamese Boats to the Northward.


THE SECRETARY reports that the following
letter having been circulated and approved by the
Members of the Board, was addressed to the Right
Honorable the Governor General in Council, and
Copies of the above Papers, and the several reports
and informations relative to the Armament prepared
by the Rajah of Ligore at Traang and other places,
were at the same time transmitted to the Supreme
Government.
TO THE GOVR. GENERAL IN COUNCIL.
No. 523.
To THE RIGHT HONORABLE
WILLIAM PITT LORD AMHERST
Governor General in Council
PORT WILLIAM.
My Lord,
la our address of the 28 February last, we in-
formed your Lordship in Council of the preparations
making at Traang and other Ports by the Rajah of
Ligore, avowedly for the purpose of attacking Perak
and Salengore. These preparations have proceeded
rapidly, and have been carried on to an extent
apparently beyond their avowed object, and various
reports having reached us thro’ the Nakodahs of Prows
and other persons arriving from those Ports, that this
Island was the real object of the Armament, we
deemed it necessary to institute an enquiry on the
subject. The result of the information is contained
in the annexed documents. The substance corresponds
exactly with that submitted by the Resident of Singa-
pore in November 1823 in respect to a then con-
templated attack, namely that it was projected in
communication with certain Chinese Inhabitants of


this place, and principally on the present occasion
with a person of the name of Achong, who was
employed by Captain Burney on a Message to Ligore.
The information bearing upon that part of the subject
will be found in the Enclosures No. 3A. The matter
has been submitted for the investigation of the
Magistrates, and would appear to be considered un-
founded.
2. Under existing circumstances, it certainly
appears improbable that a Siamese Authority would
meditate an attack on a British Settlement, yet when
we consider the daring and intriguing character of the
Rajah of Ligore, the anxiety evinced to get possession
of the person of the King of Quedah, added to the
certainty that a very large fleet and force have been
prepared; we have not considered it prudent entirely
to disregard these rumours, and have accordingly
made the best precautionary arrangements in our
power by detaining the Felicitas until the return of
the Hired Brig Minerva, which with the Hired Vessels
named in the margin, establishes a line of communica-
tion from this Island to Quedah. These precautions we
have deemed the more necessary from the absence of
any regular Marine force, and considering that the
Troops on the Island are, by the detachment of 100
men to Malacca, and the incomplete state of the Local
Corps, considerably under the usual complement.
3. We are perfectly aware of the policy of main-
taining amicable relations with our Siamese neighbours
as far as possible, but the establishment by a Siamese
State of a fleet of 300 Prows capable of carrying from
20 to 50 men each on this side of the Malay Peninsula,
must place the whole of our Settlements in the Straits
in some degree of danger ; and we, therefore, submit
the expediency of materially strengthening the Military
and Marine Establishments of this Presidency, in
order that means may eventually be taken in case of
actual or menaced aggression, to remove the danger


inseparable from such a force being at large in the
Straits.
4. We have the honor to enclose copies of letters
received from the Rajah of Ligore sent by two Envoys
on the 12 Instant, but as it did not appear they had
any thing particular to communicate, they were
dispatched the following day with the reply, A letter
was also brought to the Ex-King of Quedah,
inviting him to return to his Government, to which
under apprehended treachery it does not appear to be
His Majesty’s intention to accede. On the arrival of
the Ligore Rajah at Quedah, it is our intention to
depute an Agent to communicate with him, and to
require explanation as to the object and intention ot
the Armament prepared.
We have &c.
(Signed) R. FULLERTON
„ W. A. CLUBLEY
„ R. IBBETSON
Fort Cornwallis
the 14 May 1825.


To
G. SWINTON Esquire
Secry. to the Govt.
FORT WILLIAM.
Sir,
I have the honor to annex for the information of
the Right Honorable the Governor General in Council
copy of a letter which I have this clay addressed to the
Siamese Minister. I have endeavoured to suit the
language of this communication to the actual cir-
cumstances of our situation, and trust that in the state-
ments which I have made, I shall not be considered to
have overstept the limits of my Authority. With
respect to the present of the brass ordnance in particu-
lar, I have been induced to transmit these from being
confidentially informed that the King of Siam was
particularly anxious to possess them —that we had
including those lately brought from Bencoolen a num-
ber of spare brass cannon at the Settlement, but still
more from a desire of following up the policy of
supplying the Siamese with fire-arms, and which seems
to have been attended with favorable consequences in
assuring their confidence and exciting them to take
an active share in the war.
I have &c. &c. &c.
(Signed) J. CRAWFORD
Resident.
Singapore
30 April 1825.
True Copies
(Signed) J. CRAWFORD
Resident.
FORT CORNWALLIS The 19 May 1825.


THE LETTER of J. CRAWFURD Esquire
Resident, of Singapore to His the Chao
Pya Prah-Klang Chao Kun Kosa.
Your Excellency’s letters, one of which is dated the
17th of January, and the other the 18th of February,
have both reached me in safety. The assurances of
support and assistance to our Nation in the conduct of
the war against our common enemy the Furmans,
which His Majesty has been pleased to make in these
communications, have been received with the most
lively satisfaction and I have communicated to the
Right Honorable the Governor General without loss of
time, the friendly intentions of His Majesty, The
Siamese and the English are now acting as one people.
Their interests are the same, and they will be equal
gainers by the subjugation of the Burmans. I read
with pleasure in your Excellency’s letter that you
are in communication with the Commander in Chief
of the Rangoon Army who is in the entire confidence
of the Governor General and who will not fail to
explain to }*ou all the views and sentiments of His
Excellency. I beg you to assist him with Elephants,
with Oxen and other Cattle for Carriage, as well as
with provisions ; for it is these we chiefly require to
transport our Army to Ummerapoora. Whatever is
supplied will be paid for according to our custom, and
any receipt for the same which shall be furnished by
the Commander in Chief of the Rangoon Army or other
British Officer under his command will if not sooner
paid be discharged by me either at this place or at
Bangkok as may be most agreeable to Your Excellency
and in Spanish Dollars.
Besides the Army of Rangoon two other Armies
have invaded the Burman territories; one through
Arracan and the other through Assam, and by accounts
received from Calcutta, the latter had captured Rung-
pore, the Chief City of the Country of Assam on the
17 February.


By the last accounts from Rangoon 1 hear with
pleasure that the deputies of the Mon nation living
under the protection of Siam had waited upon the
General commanding the Rangoon Army, offering-
assistance and stating that they did so by command of
the King, and in token of his friendship.
1 have received 1,080 Piculs of Sugar as a pre-
sent, and beg now to forward to His Majesty two brass
cannon being 12 pounder pieces, such as the English
use in the field, with a pair of Mirrors. These -are
presents from the Governor General to his Majesty.
I beg also to send for yourself a pair of Mirrors, a
Cashmere shawl and 31 strings of coral as a mark of
friendship.
(Signed) J. CRAWFURD,
Resident,
Singapore
30th April 1825.


To GEORGE SW INTON Esquire
Secry. to the Government
FORT WILLIAM.
Sir,
I have the honor to transmit for the information
of the Right Honorable the Governor General in
Council translation of a letter received from the
Siamese Minister on the 10 Instant by the Ship
Caroline and along with it copy of a letter from
Mr. Gillies. In reference to these documents, Ido not
hesitate to submit to the Right Honorable the
Governor General in Council that under all the cir-
cumstances of our present situation in relation to the
Court of Siam, I am disposed entirely to rely on the
assurances now given of co-operation and assistance.
1 propose in a few days to address the Siamese
Minister and to take additional measures for confirming
and strengthening the confidence and good disposition
at present evinced by the Government of Siam.
The three English vessels which lately visited
Bangkok have all quitted the place, leaving, however,
Mr. Gillies and another English Merchant there with
a large stock of goods. This step which has been
taken with the entire assent of the Siamese Govern-
ment appears to me to be well calculated to inspire
the Siamese with just views of the friendly senti-
ments which we entertain in regard to them.
It will be perceived by the letter of Mr. Gillies
that a considerable present has been made on the part
of the King of Siam in return for the fire-arms pre-
sented in the name of the Right Honorable the Gov-
ernor General in Council in the Month of October last.
FORT CORNWALLIS The 19 May 1825.


These presents have been sold and the proceeds, about
0000 Spanish Dollars, carried to the public account r
so that the whole charge to the Government will not
exceed 3,500 Spanish Dollars.
I have &c., &c., &c.
(Signed) J. CRAWFURD,
Resident.
Singapore
20 April 1825.


THE LETTER of CHAO PIA PRAH-KLANG
first Minister to HIS MAJESTY the KING of SIAM to
JOHN CRAWFURD Esquire, Resident of Singapore.
Your letter has been received wherein you mention
that the English are at War with the Barmans, that
Rangoon is captured, that the Burmans attacked the
English at Rangoon but were defeated, that the Eng-
lish had taken Cheduba, Ramree, and Negrais, that
Troops were sent to Martaban, Mergui and Tavoy, that
the English Commanders are well aware that we
intend to aid the English, and that the Governor
General having sent to you 1,000 Muskets for His
Majesty, you have sent them by Mr. Gillies, along*
with a gold watch and six Catties of Coral.
One of your letters states that if we would help
your nation against the Barmans, they would be
obliged to us, and I have written to you before on the
subject.
The Siamese and English have been for a long
time great friends with each other and Commerce
seems to increase daily, but the Burmans are, and
always have been our great enemies. Formerly we
used to send Chao Pia Maha Yotha the Peguan General
with Troops to the northern provinces to be on the
look out, and to seize all the Burmans that might fall
into his hand. But as we now know that the English
are at war with them, we have sent him with a larger
force to protect our northern frontier. His Majesty
lias further commanded to be levied more Troops and
to send them towards the upper provinces. When
Chao Pia Maha Yotha reached Martaban he found the
place was conquered by the English, so he remains
there. I have sent a person to Chao Pia Maha Yotha
with a letter to the British Commander at Rangoon
but have not received an answer. The people of Pegue
and Tavoy that were here, have all gone back to those
places as they heard that they were under the English.


Our scouts are all on the alert and they are trying to
get every information in order to distract the Burmans.
All those that wish to go back the King permits to do
so, and provides them with money, clothes &c., as well
as with an escort that they might reach their Country-
in safety.
I beg to acknowledge a gold watch and six catties
of coral, and 1000 Muskets from the Governor General
to His Majesty. In return we send you by the
Caroline 1000 piculs of Sugar for the Governor General,
and 80 piculs to yourself as a token of friendship.
Si-Y uthia
18 Feby. 1825.
A True translation
( Signed ) J. CRAWFURD
Resident.


Bang-kok, Siam, March 1825.
JOHN CRAWFURD, Esquire.
My dear Sir, ,
I had the pleasure to address you the 16th
January per Shannon, acquainting you of the safe
arrival and due delivery of all your presents for the
King of Siam and Prah-Klang brought by [ the ]
Caroline to which I beg to refer j^ou.
I now beg leave to wait upon you with Bill of
Lading of 1088 Bags of Sugar received from the said
King in return for j'Our presents and shipped per
Caroline, [Capt.] Johnson, to your address, weighing
1080 Piculs as per particulars herewith, 1000 of which
for account of the muskets and 80 for the coral and
Gold watch, all valued at 11£ Ticals per pecul.
I beg also to enclose an account of the expenses
on the same, amounting to 423 Tcs. for which I have
taken the liberty to value on you in favor of Messrs.
Morgan Hunter & Co. in $260 —say two hundred sixty
Spanish Dollars exchange at cents per tical which
please honor. The same pains having been taken to
select this sugar of good quality, as with that more
immediately under my charge, I hope it will give
satisfaction, an average muster of which herewith.
Of the progress of the war we hear nothing which
can be relied upon. On this subject there are occa-
sional reports, and genei’ally to the disadvantage of
the English, such as the Army being blown up, part
of it taken prisoners, and sent back dreadfully dis-
figured, and others burnt to death, and of its being
completely surrounded in Rangoon without any chance
of escaping; all which are firmly believed here, and
are considered conclusive of the result of the war.
On the Ist February there were two letters
received here dated Tavoy 16 December and 18
January, signed Alexander Balmain, the first addressed


to the Government of Siam apprising them that
certain districts which were lately taken from the
Burmans are now under the protection of the English
and desiring them not to take any more Prisoners
from these places, and requesting the immediate
release of 107 persons already taken under the pro-
tection of the British flag, and in violation of the
friendship existing between the two Countries ; the
latter acknowledging the receipt of one man with
a flag from a party of Siamese. These letters not
being correctly translated at first put the great people
here in some fear but soon recovered on the contents
of them being correctly stated to them. The Prah-
Klang after communicating the above intelligence to
me, said, that these prisoners were taken by mistake
not knowing that the place was in possession of the
English, which would be avoided in future. He said
o 7
that the King had given express directions to the
King of Ligore and others, to furnish the English with
Boats and every other necessary they might require to
prosecute the war up the country, and asked me if
they would accept of them. I answered that I thought
they would, and be much obliged to the King fbr
them. He also asked me if they, the Government of
Siam, could send a letter to the General Commanding
the Army at Rangoon. I answered in the affirmative,
and offered to give them a letter of introduction to
him if they would inform me of the nature of their
dispatch, but to this no answer was returned.
I am told that a letter to the following import has
been written by His Majesty to Burma. “It is true
we have long been at variance, but let us now forget
all past injuries and join to oppose the great enemy:
he is already in your Country, and we know that if he
overcomes you, he will next take care of us, whether
we remain his friends or not. ’ It is also said that
they have written a similar letter to the Commander in
Chief of the English against the Burmans. These


reports I give you as I hear them but what credit
may be due to them, I leave it to your Judgment.
Within the last few days I have been informed
that an expedition was sent from hence lately for the
purpose of attacking Salengore and Pera, in conjunc-
tion with the King of Ligore.
We are very anxious here to know something of
what is going on at the seat of war and not less so for
its speedy and favorable termination. Any inaccuracies
which may be found in this epistle I beg you will have
the goodness to excuse.
I am with much respect
My Dear Sir &c.
( Signed ) JOHN GILLIES
P.S. Since writing the preceding I have seen a pass
given by Colonel Waterman to a Burman Family to
protect them, but have notwithstanding been made
prisoners and brought here.
( Signed ) JOHN GILLIES
March 1 7tli 1825.
I have heard it reported that accounts are this
instant received of the Capture of Araarapura, which I
hope will turn out true and upon which I beg to con-
gratulate you. Remaining always
My Dear Sir &c.
( Signed ) JOHN GILLIES.
(True Copies)
( Signed ) J. CRAWFURD Resident.


FORT CORNWALLIS The 24 May 1825.
AT A SPECIAL COUNClL—Present
THE HONORABLE ROBERT FULLERTON
Governor —President
WILLIAM ARMSTRONNG CLUBLEY Esquire
and
ROBERT IBBETSON Esquire.
Approved the Proceedings of the 19th Instant.
PUBLIC.
IN CONSEQUENCE of the receipt of reports
from the Superintendant of Point Wellesley, in charge
of the Squadron of Observation to the northward ; and
of the Arrival of Envoys with letters from the Rajah ot
Ligore, this SPECIAL COUNCIL was called for the
purpose of deliberating upon the further measures
necessary to be adopted.
READ the following letter from the Superinten-
dant of Point Wellesley, transmitting a report from the
Commander of the Hired Schooner Commerce.


SUPT. OF POINT WELLESLEY
To
JOHN ANDERSON Esquire
Acting Secretary to Government.
Sir,
I lost no time in transmitting for the information
of the Honorable the Governor in Council, the accom-
panying letter from Captain Roberts, of the Hired
Schooner Commerce. The 100 Prahus alluded to in
his letter are said to be at a short distance to the
Northward of Purlis: I am now proceeding towards
that quarter, and it shall be my duty to see them into
Quedah River.
1 have &c. &c.
( Signed ) A. D. MAINGY
Supt. of Point Wellesley
H. G. Brig Jessy
May the 22d
3 A.M.


To A. D. MAINGY Esquire
Superintendant of Point Wellesley
&c. &c. &c.
Sir,
I have the honor to inform you that we anchored
off Trang River late last evening after a tedious
passage of 6 days, occasioned from our experiencing
nothing but light airs and calms the whole time, and
at day light this morning perceived about two hundred
Siamese Boats, capable of containing from 80 to 90
men each at an anchor in a direct line off the Mouth
of the River. At 9 A.M. three Guns were fired
successively from one of the Boats, upon which the
whole of them made sail to the Southward.
Supposing the object on which I was sent fully
accomplished, weighed and made sail, with an inten-
tion of returning to you, to report the same with all
possible dispatch.
At 11 A.M. we were boarded by a Siamese Boat
having 5 head men on board who were very friendly,
and wished me to write and mention that the Rajah of
Ligore had been down at Trang about 10 days, but
that he this morning had embarked for Quedah, hav-
ing with him, as stated by them, only one hundred
Prows, large and small. They expressed themselves
as coming from the Rajah, and the great friendship
entertained by His Highness for the English, and
not to credit a report which had come to their know-
ledge of their intending an attack upon Penang ; they
also mentioned the Rajah’s intention of touching at all
the Ports between this and Quedah. They mentioned
as a great wish of the Rajah’s that the Honorable the
Governor should be made acquainted of His Highness
being at Quedah.


I send this by the Prow attached to the Schooner
for greater dispatch, being confident of her reaching
you some days previous to us, should we experience
the same weather as we have hitherto.
lam & c. &c.
(Signed) H. H. ROBERTS
Commander of H. 0. Hired
Schooner Commerce.
H. C. Schooner Commerce
Pulo Telibon E. \ N.
Wednesday 18th May 1825.
UPON WHICH The Honble. the President re*
cords the following Memorandum.


MEMORANDUM by the PRESIDENT.
Having received a report from the Commander of
the Schooner Commerce, announcing that he had seen
200 Prows coming out of Trang River, and that he
had ascertained that 100 more had accompanied the
Rajah of Ligore from that place for Quedah, 1 now
submit to the Board the outline of the measures I
propose to pursue. Mr. Maingy will proceed to
Quedah and deliver the letter already prepared, re-
monstrating in the first instance, against the attack on
Salengore ; demanding explanation in respect to the
Armament prepared ; and distinctly announcing that
it cannot be allowed to approach this Island. On Mr.
Maingy leaving Quedah, he will give the requisite
instructions to the persons Commanding the Armed
Vessels. The Minerva having arrived will be added
to the number, and every means taken to make them
as strong as possible. Should the tieet remain at
Quedah it must be obvious the constant danger ot
attack will prove harrassing to our Troops, and may at
last affect the security of the Island.
Should the Rajah delay the distinct manifestation
of his object, it will be necessary as a measure of sell
defence to concert with the Commanding Officer the
best mode of attacking the Prows, and if possible,
disabling them, for the present at least, from the
power of doing further mischief.
(Signed) R. FULLERTON
23d May 1825.
THE SECRETARY reports that the necessary
orders were issued in conformity to the above Memo-
randum ; to the Master Attendant to prepare and
dispatch the H. C. Hired Brig Minerva to the entrance
of the Harbour, and to the Storekeeper to ship 10
days Provisions and Water on board that Vessel for
210 Native Soldiers, half Musselmans and half Hindoos;
also for 10 European Artillery men, to be hereafter
distributed amongst the several Vessels if required.


SUPT. of POINT WELLESLEY.
To,
JOHN ANDERSON Esquire
Acting Secretary to Government.
Sir,
1 had this morning the honor to transmit to you,
for the information of the Honorable the Governor in
Council, a dispatch from Captain Roberts, the Com-
mander of the Hired Schooner Commerce, dated off
Trang, the 18th instant. The Commerce lias just
joined the Honble. Company’s Brig Jessy, and I now
forward a copy of Captain Roberts’s letter, lest any
accident or detention should have attended the Prow
by which the original was sent.
I have not been able to collect any additional in-
formation from Captain Roberts ; lie, however, assures
me, that the number of Prows seen by him off Trang
must have amounted to two hundred, that they all
appeared large, many of them about the size of the
Commerce.
The Rajah of Ligore’s object for touching at the
different places between Trang and Quedah, is, to
collect such Prows as are already equipped at these
Ports.
Under the uncertainty, therefore, of what the
Rajah’s intentions may be, and the strong Armament lie
is bringing with him, I have deemed it most, advisable
to stand to the Southward with the Honble. Company’s
Brig Jessy, the two Hired Schooners and Row Boat.
It is not my intention to proceed beyond Purlis, but
to cruize in that quarter until we fall in with the
Siamese fleet, which we are very certain of doing ;
it shall then be my object to attend to all their


movements and in the event of their proceeding
further to the Southward than Quedah, 1 shall not fail
to afford the Honorable the Governor in Council
the earliest information of such being the case,
but strictly attend to the orders conveyed in your
letter of the 3d. May.
I have &c. &c. Arc.
(Signed) A. D. MAINGTY
Supt. of Point Wellesley.
H. G. Brig Jessy
May the 22d 1825.


SUPT. of POINT WELLESLEY.
To,
JOHN ANDERSON Esquire
Acting Secretary to Government.
Sir,
My letters of yesterday will have made the Honor-
able the Governor in Council acquainted with the
departure of the Siamese Fleet from Trang, and of its
approach towards Quedah. I have now the honor to
report, that at least 100 Prows belonging to the Rajah
of Ligore yesterday entered Quedah River, 79 of them
were seen by the Commander of the Hired Schooner
“ John de Brias ” —and we reckoned fourteen more of
them. The size of those we had an opportunity of
judging of might be from 15 to 20 Tons, and I
am given to understand they are mostly about this
measurement.
Having stood close towards the Town of Quedah,
and the wind becoming light, the Squadron came to
an anchor, and shortly afterwards we were boarded by
a large Siamese Boat containing some principal
Siamese : One of them Chum Cha Pulo Pak stated
that he had been sent by the Rajah of Ligore, who had
that morning arrived at Quedah, to ascertain the
cause of our visit, and whether we had been sent by
the Governor of Penang. Captain Poynton in reply,
informed them that he was cruizing in search of
Pi rates, and that having heard of the Rajah’s arrival at
Quedah, he was anxious to pay him a visit.
A great deal of general conversation took place,
which principally had reference to the progress of the
War against the Burmahs. The Siamese enquired very
minutely of Captain Poynton respecting what he had
seen and done when at Rangoon. They were also
anxious to know what had taken Captain Burney to
Calcutta, and mentioned that the Rajah regretted his
absence.


We now alluded to the object of the Rajah’s visit
to Quedah, and of his bringing so large a force with
him , to this Chum Cha Pulo Pak replied that it
was usual for such great men as the Rajah of Li gore
to be attended with many followers, and that he and
every one else were ignorant what might be the
Rajah’s future intentions, as they were as yet un-
known. After having made this remark, he im-
mediately observed that there were a number of wicked
and bad people who spread false reports regarding the
Rajah of Ligore, and that the Rajah’s object for coming
to Quedah was to obtain, if possible, a meeting with
the Governor of Penang, or with one of the Governor’s
Confidential Agents, in order to arrange some matters
regarding the trade between Penang and Quedah, and
to assure the Governor of his great esteem and regard
for him, and that after having done this, the Rajah
would return to Ligore.
Captain Poynton then stated that he would wait
upon the Rajah the following morning and that Mr-
Maingy who was on board the vessel in search of health
and amusement, would accompany him. A wish was
expressed by the Siamese that the Commanders of the
different Vessels should attend, but this invitation was
politely declined.
I trust that my landing at Quedah will meet with
the approval of the Honorable the Governor in Council,
my visit will most probably be attended with some
advantage t I shall at least be able to form a correct
idea of the strength of the Armament now in Quedah
River, and possibly discover its future destination.
I have &c. Ac. &c.
(Signed) A. D. MAINGY
Supt. of Point Wellesley
H. C. Brig Jessy
Quedah Roads
May the 23d, 7 A.M.


sura, of POINT WELLESLEY.
To
JOHN ANDERSON Esquire
Acting Secretary to Government
Sir,
With reference to my letter of yesterday I have
now the honor to report for the information of the
Honorable the Governor in Council that Captain
Poynton and myself landed at Quedah yesterday
morning at about 9 o’clock, and that we were received
on quitting oar Boat with much apparent ceremony
and attention by several of the principal Siamese, with
a large retinue of followers all dressed in Red Jackets,
who escorted us into the Port, where we found the
Rajah of Ligore prepared to meet us. His Highnesa
at once recognized Captain Poynton and expressed great
satisfaction at his having come on shore to visit him.
The conversation was at first very much con-
strained and confined to some commonplace observa-
tions, but upon the Rajah perceiving that we were
quite disposed to converse as friends, that we had not
come to him as Agents from the Governor of Penang,
but merely with an intention of paying him a com-
plimentary visit, he laid aside all his reserve, and
requested us to seat ourselves close to him. His
enquiries were most particular respecting the progress
of the War against the Burmahs, and he took particu-
lar pains to assure us that it was a source of the
greatest satisfaction to the Siamese that the British
Government had been able to punish so insolent and
arrogant a Monarch as the King of Ava, who had al-
ways been an Enemy of the Siamese, and with whom
it was impossible to live on friendly terms.
The Rajah made Captain Poynton describe to him
a great many times, the mode of attack adopted by
the British Army in taking the Burmah Forts, and


evinced not only some surprize, but something almost
amounting to mortification, that Captain Poynton
should express himself with so much contempt' re-
garding a Nation, that had so frequently overcome the
Siamese Armies.
The llajah was most anxious to know what had
become of Captain Burney, and expressed great regret
that he had not had an opportunity of seeing him,
as he entertained the greatest esteem for that officer;
but he stated that when he received Captain Burney’s
letter from Traang, he was in the deepest distress
on account of the loss of one of his Children, and
that had Captain Burney called at Traang on his
return from Pungah, he would have found Elephants
and an Escort waiting to convey him to Ligore.
I then acquainted His Highness that I was a very
intimate friend of Captain Burney’s, that I had always
understood His Highness had been unwilling to allow
that Officer to proceed to Ligore, and that the letters
His Highness had addressed to the Honorable the
Governor stated that he would give Captain Burney a
meeting at Quedah only. His Highness said this was
very true, but that he had nevertheless sent Elephants
and an Escort to Traang for Captain Burney, and
further stated that when that Gentleman returned
from Calcutta, if the Governor should be desirous of
sending him to Bangkok, he would be most happy
to get him conveyed there, which would be attended
with no difficulty.
His Highness expressed great apprehension that
the false and idle reports which he well knew were
circulated in Penang by his enemies, and by" the timid
Chuliahs and Malays might tend to prevent the Honor-
able the Governor from considering him as his friend,
and from placing confidence in his assurances ; he also
added he was aware it was supposed he intended to
attack Penang ; that such an idea was absurd. In the
first place, he had no force equal to make such an,


attempt, and he was not so ignorant as to be unac-
quainted with our great superiority, an observation
Captain Poynton confirmed by describing how easily
the largest Birmah War Boats were destroyed at
Rangoon, and which were in every respect better
manned and equipped than the Prows belonging to
His Highness : besides, His Highness stated that he
had received from the King of Siam, who had sent one
of his principal men to accompany him, and who was
then seated on the Rajah’s left hand, the most positive
and strict orders to be most guarded in his conduct
towards the British Government, and to avoid by
every means in his power giving the Government of
Penang any cause for complaint, lest it should tend to
interrupt the friendship and good understanding that
now so happily subsisted between the British and
Siamese. His Highness particularly requested me to
assure the Governor that he should ever find his con-
duct towards him most friendly and sincere ; and on
my assuring His Highness that I would do so,
1 remarked that the Governor of Penang would most
probably ask me several questions which as yet I was
unable to answer, and would therefore take the liberty
of putting them to him. The first was the object of
his visit to Quedah. In repty to this, he declared,
that his only motive for coming there was in the
hopes of seeing the Governor, but, as he found this,
from what 1 had mentioned to him to be impracticable,
he would hereafter ask the Governor to send a con-
fidential Agent to meet him, but that, at present, he
was not anxious that one should be sent, as he was
likely to make some stay at Quedah, and that when he
conveyed such a request, he was desirous that I
should be employed on the occasion, and that no one
else should be deputed. My second question was the
cause of His Highness bringing so great a number
of Prows with him. In repty, His Highness stated,
that he required a large fleet to protect his line of
Coast, and that many of the Prows were constructed


before the English went to war with the Birmahs,
when a strong force was required to guard Junk Ceylon.
I observed, that these precautions were no longer
necessary, which he admitted, but replied that it was
an established custom with great Chiefs, not to move
without a large retinue. I however remarked that so
large an assemblage of Prows in the immediate
neighbourhood of a British Settlement would most
probably call for explanation, that unless the explana-
tion given proved satisfactory that cordiality which
His Highness professed himself so desirous of main-
taining with the English might be interrupted. Upon
this His Highness renewed his former protestations
and declared that I was at perfect liberty to inspect his
Fort, and examine his Fleet, and several times repeated
that I might assure the Governor of Penang, so
desirous was His Highness of continuing on the most
friendly terms with him, that none of his Prows should
ever proceed to the Southward of Quedah, without his
previously apprizing the Governor of the number that
were about to be sent, and of the purport of their
voyage : His Highness also added, that whenever he
might have occasion to dispatch two or three Prows
to purchase Merchandize at Penang, he would even
then not fail to communicate his intention. As this
declaration appeared to me to be of considerable
importance, 1 repeated his own words and requested
His Highness to state whether I understood him
correctly ; he replied that I did, and that such a line of
conduct was the strongest proof he could evince of his
friendly disposition towards the Government of Penang.
I took an opportunity of informing His Highness
that the British Government had taken possession of
Malacca and its Dependencies, and that amongst other
reports that had reached Penang, it was said that the
Armament His Highness had lately collected was
destined to attack Salengore: this observation was
purposely allowed to pass unnoticed and as my visit
■ was merely complimentary, I was unwilling to repeat it.


Having now been with the Rajah of Ligore up-
wards of four hours, we took our departure, and
availed ourselves of the permission he had granted
us to visit his fleet; we rowed upwards of a mile up the
River and reckoned no less than 106 large Armed
Prows afloat, besides 12 of a smaller size, and there
were 8 hauled on shore, but not ready for Sea. The
Prows are mostly about 20 Tons burthen, have a
strong stockade built in their Bows and all carry a
long nine or twelve pounder, and some feu were
provided with Rantackers, but not above eight of them,
and these had a double tier of oars. I should suppose
that the Crew of each Boat must amount to about
forty men, and I particularly observed that all the
Prows were well found in muskets, which appeared to
be of English manufacture.
I do not imagine that we saw above a thousand or
1200 Siamese on shore, and many of these composed
a part of the Crews of the Prows. In conclusion, 1
do not consider that my visit afforded me much addi-
tional information regarding the destination of the
Armament; but my opinion most unquestionably is*,
that it is intended to assist in the attack on Salengore,
and that the conduct of the Rajah of Ligore towards
me, was principally influenced by a desire to prevent
my discovering the real object of his intentions, and
also that the appearance of the Squadron anchored off
the Mouth of the River, consisting of the vessels named
in the Margin, tended to ensure attention and civility.
I have &c. &c.
(Signed) A. D. MAINGY
Supt. of Point Wellesley
In charge of the Squadron
of Observation.
H. 0. Brig Jessy
May the 24: 1825.
off Port Cornwallis.


THE PRESIDENT lays before the Board the
following translation of a letter received this morning
from the Rajah of Ligore.
RAJAH OF LIGORE.
Translation
of a letter from the Chow Pya of Ligore to the
Honorable Robert Fullerton Governor of Pulo Penang.
( After Compliments.)
May my friend be informed that 1 received the
reply which he sent me by Koon Aksorn and Che
Solyman, who returned and met me at Ivwala Traang.
I received the letter agreeably to the rules of friend-
ship. It is mentioned in my friend’s letter that when
I arrive at Quedah, I am desired to acquaint my
friend. All the other points referred to in that letter
I fully comprehend.
At the time I descended the River and was about
to make sail, I observed the Cruizer which was at
anchor near Tanjong Puh, Pulo Tellibong, and I sent
some Chiefs to wait upon the Commander and request
him to come and meet me; but the Captain of the
vessel said he was going on a cruize. I should be
concerned if people convey any intelligence calculated
to excite suspicion in the mind of my friend.
The cause of my being rather long on my journey
is, that 1 am not accustomed to sailing in Prows, and I.
wish to see all the places as I pass. I therefore send
Koon Aksorn and Che Solyman with a letter to my
friend to let him know. I request that they may be
permitted to have an interview with my friend.
FORT CORNWALLIS The 24 May 1825.


If my friend could meet me, I should be extremely
happy, and I am sure my friend has a favorable dis-
position towards me.
I beg that the letter which Koou Aksorn and Che
Solyman now convey, may be replied to with dispatch,
that they may return to Quedah and I will send the
news again to my friend when they come back.
I am exceedingly desirous of meeting my friend,
and to establish friendship much more than formerly ;
also, to take into consideration the welfare of both
States, which may extend to Bengal and to form a
permanent friendship between the Siamese and English
Nation.
Dated Wednesday, 7th Month, Year Fowl, or 18th
May 1825.
A true Translation
( Signed ) JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Transr. to Govt.
Penang
the 23d May 1825.


HEAD the following letter from the Malay Trans-
lator submitting Translation of a letter received this
morning from the Rajah of Ligore to his address.
MALAY TRANSLATOR.
To
The Acting Secretary to Government.
Sir,
In submitting for the perusal of the Honorable
the Governor in Council, the accompanying Transla-
tion of a complimentary letter received this afternoon
from the Chow Pya of Ligore to 1113' address, and
delivered to me by the Envoys Koon Aksorn and Che
Solyman, I beg to remark that His Highness has never
before condescended to address me or my predecessor,
and even his Son has usually replied to my letters
addressed to him by orders of Government through
his Prime Minister. All letters from the Embassadors
from this Government, vizt. Captains Lowe, Burney,
&c. to His Highness have been replied to through his
Sons. I have|never addressed the Chow Pya.
His Highness has of late evinced a very marked
inclination to pay me Compliments, by sending pre-
sents and desiring his Envoys to convey his good
wishes to me, and desire to see me. It has been my
anxious endeavour, during all the negotiations to mani-
fest personally a conciliatory disposition, to receive his
Envoys with respect and courtesy, and to encourage
confidence and good will towards the British Govern-
ment, notwithstanding my persuasion of the in-
sincerity of His Highness, and my private opinions
of his views and policy, which I have never failed to
state to Government.
Of this course of procedure towards his Envoys I
have found the advantage, in acquiring their con-
fidence in some degree, and thereby gaining a clearer
insight into their motives and actions ; while by as


cautious and circumspect a line of conduct as my
humble judgment has enabled me to observe towards
them, 1 have, during the warm discussions which took
place in the late Governor’s time, in conveying his
remonstrances and demands for redress, in refusing
interviews, and in dismissing the Envoys as directed,
1 have endeavoured to convey the orders with firmness,
unaccompanied by harshness, and left an opening
for amicable negotiation.
Under these circumstances whatever may be my
impression of the views of His Highness, I should not
feel any apprehension in accepting His Highness’s
invitation, either attended or unattended b} r an Escort:
from the consideration of Mr Maingy’s deputation
however ( who will no doubt attain every object that
is attainable) the tender of my gratuitous services on
this occasion (if my public duties here could even
admit of my absence) is unnecessary ; although, at the
same time, 1 trust, that should Government consider
my services likely to be useful, 1 shall always be
prepared at the shortest notice, to obey any commands
that may be given to me.
I have &c.
(Signed) JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Translator to Govt.
PENANG
23d. May 1825.


Translation
of a letter from the Chow Pya of Ligore to John
Anderson Esquire, Translator to Government.
( After Compliments.)
May my friend be informed that I am on my way
to Quedah, and I dispatch this letter to acquaint him
that I am coming to Quedah, where I expect to arrive
certainly on the sth day of the 7th Month. I am
extremely anxious to meet the Governor of Pulo
Penang, if he cannot come to meet me, let Anderson
come and meet me by all means.
As to any person being sent, I should not like to
see any others, because they are not accustomed to
going and coming. Let Anderson come if possible,
and we will consult upon business, which will fend to
promote the welfare of the English and Siamese
Countries, and establish friendship greater than
formerly.
Dated Wednesday, 7th Month-the 18th May 1825.
A True Translation
(Signed) JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Transr. to Govt.
THE TWO ENVOYS from the Rajah of Ligore
being in attendance, were called into the Council Room
and interrogated. They said they had nothing to
communicate further than to repeat the anxiety of the
Rajah to see the Honble. the Governor at Quedah,
and to enquire whether there were any objections to
His Highness sending people to purchase Goods at
Bengal, with a letter to the Governor General, and
also to his sending a letter to the Commander in
Chief at Rangoon.
UPON the Envoys retiring, The President laid
before the Board the following proposed reply * the
letter just received from the Rajah of Ligore,


TO THE RAJAH OF LIGORE.
Letter from
the Honorable the Governor to the Rajah of Ligore.
I have received your Highness’s letter brought by
Koon Aksorn and Che Solyman, and they have had an
interview with me; but they had nothing to com-
municate further than that your Highness wished to
send a letter to Bengal and Rangoon. I informed
them that your Highness was at perfect liberty to send
letters to Bengal or Rangoon, and to purchase Goods
there as you please.
I enquired if the Messengers had any thing more
to communicate, and they replied no : and as your
Highness requests they may return to Quedah, I have
directed Koon Aksorn and Solyman to return with all
haste, to convey to your Highness the intelligence of
my being about to dispatch a confidential Agent, with
full powers, vizt. Mr. Maingy, and he will reach
Quedah to-morrow or next day. I therefore request
your Highness to receive this my Agent with respect
and friendship.
( Signed ) R. FULLERTON,
Governor.
Penang Governor.
24 May 1825.
ON an attentive consideration of the reports and
correspondence above referred to, and all the proceed-
ings between this Government and the Rajah of Ligore,
THE BOARD unanimously resolved that the
following letters should be substituted for those pro-
posed to be addressed to the Rajah of Ligore and
alluded to in the Instructions to the Superintendant
of Point Wellesley, under date the 29th April, and
that the following additional orders be addressed to
the Superintendant of Point Wellesley, who was ver-
bally directed to hold himself in readiness to proceed
to Kedah to-morrow evening.
THE SECRETARY is directed to furnish Mr.
Maingy with Copies of such Documents as he may
require for his guidance.


TO THE RAJAH OF LIGORB.
No. 1.
DRAFT
of a letter from the Honorable the Governor ot Pula
Penang to the Rajah of Ligore.
I duly received your Highness’s letter at the od.
Rajap, brought by Captain Burney’s messenger China
Achong, and as the period fixed for your Highness’s
coming down to Kedah has now elapsed, I have
deputed Mr. Maingy of the Honorable Company’s
Civil Service on this Establishment, as my confidential
Envoy to communicate fully with your Highness, and
to consult with you on several important subjects, for
which purpose Captain Burney was lately sent to
Kedah and Traang. That Officer having however pro-
ceeded to Bengal for a short time, for the purpose of
receiving instructions from the Right Honorable the
Governor General, renders it necessary for me to
depute another Agent, lest your Highness should be
disappointed in the expected meeting, to wiiich yon
have professed so ready an inclination.
Having long evinced a disposition to cultivate a
cordial understanding with your Highness, and to
preserve those relations of friendship now happily
subsisting between the Siamese and English unimpair-
ed by the frequent deputation of confidential Officers
of this Government as a return for your Highness’s
frequent deputation of confidential Officers to myself
and my predecessor in this Government, I have only
to request that your Highness will receive Mr. Maingy
with respect and confidence as an accredited British
Agent with full powers.
Mr. Maingy will deliver some presents to your
Highness.
The 29 April 1825.
( Signed ) R. FULLERTON
(Sd.) JOHN ANDERSON Governor.
Malay Transr. to Govt.


TO THE RAJAH OF LIGORE.
No. 2.
Letter from the Honorable Robert Fullerton Esquire
Governor of Pnlo Penang to the Rajah of Ligore.
It is my duty to acquaint your Highness that the
reports of your hostile intentions against the indepen-
dent Malayan State of Salengore, and your extensive
Armaments equipping at Traang, Setool and other
places to the Northward, are daily becoming more
notorious, and there seems to be now no room left to
question the truth of them, notwithstanding your fre-
quent professions of pacific intentions, and oft repeated
expressions of your anxiety that I should not give
credence to any rumours at variance with your letters.
I am bound to remind your Highness that the
Settlement of Malacca has been taken possession of by
virtue of a Treaty with the Hutch Government, by
which that Nation ceded all its possessions and pri-
vileges acquired by Treaty with Malay States near
Malacca. The Hutch Government as well as the
British have long been on friendly terms with the
States of Perak, and sepecially with Salengore. lam
forced once more to caution your Highness not to
attack Salengore.
That State is not, nor has ever been in the re-
motest degree, connected with the Siamese Dominions,
and I am in daily expectation of important intelligence
from Bengal upon the subject.
Should your Highness disregard this caution,
possibly a very serious misunderstanding between the
Siamese and English may take place. I therefore,
with an anxious desire to preserve a good understanding
with the Siamese Nation, consistently with what is


due to the English Government, call' upon your
Highness to abstain from such hostile measures, which
most probably will involve you in much trouble and
difficulty.
In conclusion, it is my duty to warn your
Highness that this Government cannot permit a fleet,
such as your Highness’s is reported to be, to approach
this Island, or pass through the Straits, and after this
notification, any attempt on your part will be con-
sidered as a direct act of hostility. Wherefore do your
Highness deliberate well.
(Signed) R. FULLERTON
Governor.
PENANG
28 April 1825.
(Sd.) JOHN ANERSON
Malay Transr, to Govt.


TO THE SUPT. OE POINT WELLESLEY.
«t . -
To A. D, MAiNGY Esquire
Superiutendant of Point Wellesley
In charge of the Squadron of Observation.
Sir,
I an directed by the Honorable the Governor in
Council to acknowledge your several letters of the 22d-
Instant, transmitting the report of Captain Roberts
Commander of the Honble. Company’s Hired Scho-
oner Commerce, relative to the Armament of the Rajah
of Ligore. I am also desired to acknowledge the
receipt of your letter of yesterday, reporting your pro-
ceedings at Quedah, and the result of an interview
with the Chow Pya of Ligore.
2. The Honorable the Governor in Council gives
you due credit for the efficacy and prudence of your
arrangements, and entirely approves of the proceedings
which you have reported.
3. Although there appears some difference in
the number of Prows stated to be observed off the
Mouth of the Traang River by Captain Roberts, and
those which were seen by you and Mr. Poynton in the
Quedah river, and although there is much reason ta
infer, that part of the Armament still remains at
Traang, Purlis, and other Rivers to the Northward,
still the nature and extent of the Armament inspected
by you and the Commander of the H. C. Brio-
-Jessy is sufficiently formidable to require the con-
tinuance of the utmost vigilance on the part of the
Commanders under your orders, in watching the
movements of so large a force.
4. The time has now arrived when it would i
seem to be absolutely indispensable that the views and
intentions of the Ligore Chief should be explicitly and
fully made known to this Government. The collection
of so large a force in the immediate vicinity of this


Settlement, the length of time engaged in its pre-
paration, the secrecy with which the equipment lias
been effected, the opposition on all occasions to the
admission of Envoys or Commanders of Cmizers to
the place where the Armament was equipping, and
the general belief at this Settlement amongst some
classes of the inhabitants here, that hostilities ai’e
meditated against this Island; require that no delay
should take place in making the Rajah fully acquainted
with the determination of this Government.
5. In addition to and in modification of the
instructions contained in my letter of the 20 Lltimo,
you will be guided by the following orders. The
first and main object is to demand from the Rajah of
Li gore, an explicit avowal of his motives for having
equipped so large a force, which must be regarded as
destined for some hostile enterprise. You will in-
timate, that the plea of his having equipped them, for
the purpose of protecting the Coast against a few
small Pirate Boats, or • for defending his Country
against the Burmahs, cannot be admitted by this Gov-
ernment. You will therefore, if in your judgment
necessary, deliver to him the letter No. 2, and acquaint
His Highness in addition to what is therein stated, that
any attempt to move his force Southward of where
it now is, will be regarded as a direct defiance, and
an act of hostility. You will explain to him the
circumstances under which the British Government has
resumed Malacca, disavow the right of Siam to attack
Salengore, and represent the long amicable connexion
which has subsisted between the respective European
Governments and that State.
G. It is not probable, under present circum-
stances, that the Rajah of Li gore will be disposed to
enter with any sincerity, upon the negociations, or
engage in the Treaty proposed to him by Governor
Phillips, to which communication he has never made
any reply.


7. You are however furnished herewith with a
Copy of the instructions to Captain Burney, and the
Draft of the Treaty. These instructions will put you
in full possession of the views of this Government, and
you will be guided by your own discretion in all points
not provided for in these instructions.
8. It is the wish of the Honorable the Governor
in Council, that you should proceed without delay,
direct to Quedah, and you will remain there as long as
you may deem it expedient for the public service.
You should, however, endeavour to forward a daily
report of your proceedings, by an Express Prow, of
which you may engage such number as may be
necessary,
I am &c. &c.
( Signed ) JOHN ANDERSON
Acting Secrety, to Govt.
Fort Cornwallis
the 25 May 1825.
RESOLVED further, that in consequence of the
Hired Brig Minerva being reported fully equipped and
ready for service, the longer detention of the Hired
Ship Felicitas may be dispensed with.
ORDERED accordingly, that directions be given
to the Master Attendant to station the Minerva at the
Northern entrance of the Harbour, in lieu of the
Felicitas.
RESOLVED that the Residents of Singapore and
Malacca be advised of the hostile preparations of the
Rajah of Ligore, and that the following' letter be
addressed to them.


t To
J. CRAWFURD Esquire
Resident at
SINGAPORE.
Sir.
I am directed by the Honorable the Governor in
Council to transmit, for your information, Copy of a
letter addressed to the Right Honorable the Governor
General in Council dated 14th Instant, together with
Copies of the following reports and instructions.
1. Letter from the Malay Translator to Govern-
ment the Ist May 1825.
2. Report of Captain Roberts Commander of the
Honorable Company’s Hired Schooner Commerce dated
the 18th May 1825.
3. Report from the Superintendant of Point
Wellesley, in charge of the Squadron of Observation,
of the result of an unofficial visit to the Rajah of
Ligore at Quedah dated the 24 May 1825.
4. Instructions to Mr. Maingy, 25 May 1825.
I am desired at the same time to acquaint you
that no intimation has yet been received by this
Government from the Rajah of Ligore, who has lately
arrived at Quedah, of the object and destination of the
large Armament which is equipped; but Mr. Maingy
was dispatched yesterday to Quedah for the purpose of
requiring an explanation upon these points ; the result
will be communicated to you by an early opportunity.
Copies of the various reports received by this
Government relative to the preparations and hostile
intentions of the Rajah of Ligore, alluded to in the
dispatch to the Supreme Government, will be here-
after forwarded to you.
I have Ac. &c. &c.
(Signed) JOHN ANDERSON
Acting Seciy. to Govt.
Fort Cornwallis
The 24 May 1825.


The same letter addressed TO THE ACTING
RESIDENT at MALACCA.
ADJOURNED.
R. FULLERTON
W. A. CLUBLEY
R. IBBETSON
FORT CORNWALLIS
The 24 May 1825.
JOHN ANDERSON
Actg-. Secy, to Govt.


FORT WILLIAM 3d June 1825.
To A. Stirling Esqr.
Secretary to the Govt, in the Persian Dept.
Sir,
Conformably with a communication received from
the Secretary to Govt, in the Secret and Political
Department 1 do myself the honor to enclose a List of
the Presents which I would beg to suggest may be
sent to Prince of Wales’s Island on account of the
proposed Mission to the Court of Siam.
When submitting this List to the Right Honble.
the Governor General in Council 1 request you will
have the goodness to state at the same time that my
conviction that by means ot presents only the Siamese
Ministers can be persuaded to hear rational counsels,
added to my knowledge that Mr. Crawfurd experienced
many mortifications whilst at Bangkok in 1822 from
his store of gifts being soon exhausted has concurred
in making me draw up an extensive List, 1 have not
however been unmindful that my deputation to Siam
is eventual only as will be seen on reference to the
accompanying Letter from Messrs. Twenty man A Co.
who engage to receive back at any time hereafter the
whole or portion of the Jewellery, the most expen-
sive Articles in the List of Presents and to refund the
Purchase Money with a deduction of 1.0 Per Cent on
the prime cost. Of the remaining articles if the Mis-
sion do not take place many could be brought to use
by the Govt, of Prince of Wales’s Island as Presents to
be sent to the Native Chiefs with whom it corresponds
whilst the remainder' could I hope be sold at that
Island for whatever may be here paid—at all events it
would not be my policy at Bangkok to produce the
whole of these Presents at once but to distribute them
gradually and according as I saw success opening in
favour of my negociations,


1 beg leave to add it is my intention to quit
Calcutta on the Ist Proximo on the Ship Stanmore
and to leave the heavier Articles of Presents to follow
me on the Sherburne or such other Vessel as His Lord-
ship in Council may be pleased to direct.
I have Ac.
( Signed ) H. Burney Captn.
Poll. Agent to the Siamese States.
Port William
26th May 1825.
True Copy
( Signed ) A. Stirling
Per. Secy, to Govt.


The Honble. E. I. Company
by order of Captn. H. Burney
Bt. of Twentyman & Co.
Gold Smiths & Jewellers
Calcutta.
No. 1 One Handsome Diamond and Emerald
Broach with a pair of Earrings to
match ... ... ... ... ••• 1,350
2 One handsome very large single Stone
Diamond Ring with Embossed Shank 2,000
3 One Do. Do. 1,300
4 One Do. Do. 650
5 One handsome cluster Diamond Ring GOO
6 One Do. Butterfly Ring Set with
Diamond Emerald Rubies &c. ... 350
7 One handsome Diamond and Emerald
cluster Ring ... ... ... ... 235
8 One Do. Do. 260
9 One Do. Diamond and Ruby Do. 220
10 One Handsome Diamond Ring set in
fine Gold with an Emerald in centre 800
11 One pair of handsome large Emerald
and Pearl lop and drop Earrings with
a Broach to match ... ... ... 700
12 One set of handsome Pink Topaz Orna-
ments consisting of a Necklace Brace-
lets Earrings cross Broach and Ring 800
13 One Set of handsome Pink Topaz and
Pearl Do. consisting of a Necklace
Bracelets Earrings and Broach ... 1,000
14 One set of Do. Emerald and Ruby and
Pearl Do. consisting of a Necklace
Bracelets Earrings and Broach ... 1,300
15 One handsome filigree Gold Head Orna-
ment set with Amethyst Turquois Pink
Topaz &c. &c. ... ... ••• ••• 300'
FORT WILLIAM 3d June 1835.


16 One handsome thick Cable Pattern
Cold Chain with Turquois clasp ... 390
17 One handsome two yard frosted link
chain with Turquois clasp ... ... 360
18 One Do. one yard Do. with Bracelets 300
19 One Do. fancy worked French curb
chain ... ... ... ... ... 200
20 One Do. one yard cable pattern chain 130
21 One Do. Do. 85
22 One Do. frosted Link chain ... 145
23 Six Pair of handsome Gold Spectacles
with double white Classes ... ... 510
24 Six Pair of Do. with double Green
Classes ... ... ... ... 510
Sa. Rupees 14,495


To Captn. H. Burney
<kc. «kc.
Sir,
I am directed to acknowledge the receipt of your
Letter dated 26th Instant submitting a List of Presents
which you recommended should be provided for
eventual use on account of the proposed Mission to
the Court of Siam and in reply to inform you that the
Statement has been approved and sanctioned by the
Bight Honble. the Governor -General in Council.
The Broad Cloth will be furnished to you from the
Import Warehouse and you are authorized to incur au
outlay not exceeding Sicca Bupees 27,501 in the
purchase of the other articles, transmitting the Bills
countersigned by yourself, to this office, to be included
in the Durbar account.
The Governor General in Council approves the
Engagement entered into by 7 Messrs, Twentyman & Co.
to receive back the Jewellery in the event of the
articles not being made use of for a consideration of
ten Per cent on the prices charged in their Bill and
with respect to the remainder of the Presents if the
Mission should not eventually take place you will be
pleased either to dispose of them to the best advantage
at Prince of Wales’s Island or to make them over to
the Govt, of that Settlement on the public account.
1 have &c.
(Signed) A. STIRLING.
Persian Secy, to Govt.
Fort William
27th May 1825.
FORT WILLIAM 3d June 1825.


FORT CORNWALLIS the 2d June 1825.
To
JOHN ANDERSON Esquire
Acting Secretary to Government.
Sir,
In pursuance of directions conveyed in your letter
oftlie 25th Inst. J have the honor to report for the
information of the Honorable the Governor in Council
that I returned to the H. C. B rig Jessy with the least
practicable delay which vessel with those named in the
margin anchored in Kedda Roads on the evening of
the 26th and shortly after our arrival there a Siamese
Boat, came alongside with Chun Chee Pulo Pak.
His questions principally related to the object of our
visit which I explained to him and stated that I should
land the next morning. 1 also sent a messenger to
announce my arrival and at about 9 ©’Clock on the
morning of the 27th .1 left the H. C. Brig Jessy and
was received on reaching the shore with every mark
of respect and attention. A sort of palankeen was
in waiting for me and about one hundred men were
drawn up to escort me into the Fort.
The letter from the Honorable the Governor was
received with great form and during the time a
translation of it was preparing the Rajah of Li gore did
little else than repeat his former professions of friend-
ship.
His Highness enquired most particularly whether
L had made the Honorable the Governor acquainted
with all that had occurred during ray former visit at
Kedda and especially whether L had communicated his
determination of not proceeding south of Kedda river
without informing the Honorable the Governor of the
number of the prahus that he was about to dispatch
and the object of their voyage.


A considerable time elapsed before a translation
of llie letter from the Honorable the Governor was
ready and when it was produced the Rajah pretended
that one or two passages were rather ambiguous and
in spite of the immediate explanation I afforded His
Highness, some time was necessary before he would
comprehend the real meaning intended to be conveyed
and L must confess I began to suspect His Highness
was desirous of postponing the discussion and thereby
gaining time of any subject I might wish to introduce.
As the main and first object ot my mission was to
obtain an explicit avowal of the Rajah's motives for
having equipped so large a force ; I reminded His
Highness ot his former conversation with me regarding
the equipment of so great a number of prahus and ex-
pressed a hope that he would candidly explain his
reason for bringing so large a fleet with him, as 1 was
apprehensive the plea he had formerly assigned to me
would not be admitted by the Government of Penang
more particularly as it was known that not more than
one half of his force had reached Kedah. This last
remark surprized His Highness a good deal and he
immediately enquired from whom I had obtained my
information. This question L did not reply to, but
merely observed that if I were incorrect in my state-
ment His Highness would deny the fact which would
be quite sufficient. An immediate reply was not re-
turned and His Highness after some consideration
confessed that there were 60 large prahus at Purlis
besides some smaller ones at Prahus Kumbar and that
these were bringing rice.
Every endeavour was made by the Rajah to avoid
giving an unequivocal answer to my question, but
finding that some further explanation could not be
withheld His Highness adverted to his former plea that
a large retinue was necessary and that no Rajah ot
any consequence ever moved from one Country to


another without being accompanied with a considerable
and commanding 1 force.
I now considered it my duty to assure His
Highness that such a reply would be considered
evasive and entreated him to be more explicit on so
important a question lest his reserve should occasion
an interruption of that friendship His Highness had
expressed himself so desirous of cultivating and his
want of confidence allow the Governor of Penang no
other alternative than to conclude that the Armament
he had brought with him and which was every day
increasing was destined for some hostile enterprize.
I regret to add that all my endeavours to get the
Rajah of Ligore to assign any other cause for collecting
so large a force at Kedda than that I have already
mentioned were unavailing ; excepting that he
somewhat pettishly observed that it was a Siamese
custom with which the English wore not perhaps
acquainted.
His Highness now adverted to the many absurd
and idle reports circulated at Penang to his prejudice
and stated that he was willing to give the Governor
any pledge that an attack on Penang was never
intended by him and never would be attempted.
His Highness also stated it was a source of much
regret to learn that the Honorable the Governor had
considered it necessary to employ upwards of a hun-
dred Malays to watch the approach of any Siamese
prahus ; such a measure involved considerable ex-
pence and would occasion an unfavorable impression
being entertained both in Calcutta and England of
the sincerity of those feelings of friendship His High-
ness has professed towards the English,
The Rajah of Ligore is so fully informed of every
occurrence that takes place in the Island that I con-
sidered it right to admit that a few of the more timid
Malays Chuliahs and Chinese might have entertained


sucli an idea but that the better informed natives were
under no apprehension of this kind, on the contrary
they were too well acquainted with the resources and
strength of the English not to be satisfied that an
attack made by any Native power would with facility
be repulsed.
I now observed that it was universally reported;
and generally believed that His Highness meditated
an attack on Salengore and that 1 had been directed
by the Honorable the Governor to ascertain whether
such was the case. This question was of course
conveyed in the most mild and conciliatory manner
and 1 fully explained to His Highness the motive for
making the enquiry. That it emanated from the
long amicable connexion which has subsisted between
the respective European Governments and that State ;
the Commercial Treaties which have been entered
into between the English and the Rajah of Salengore ;
and the circumstance of the British Government
having lately taken possession of Malacca and its
dependencies. His Highness’s reply on this subject
was so evasive that I was obliged to repeat the question,
which only produced an answer equally unsatisfactory.
His Highness was uncertain whether he would attack
Salengore, it would depend upon circumstances, and
stated that it was unnecessary to discuss this subject.
He had already assured the Governor through me
that his fleet should not proceed to the southward of
Kedda without his reporting the circumstance and
that this information must be sufficient, but that
if any further pledge was required, he would at
once place at the disposal of the Governor 50 of
his largest prahus, which might be sent to Rangoon.
1 informed His Highness that the time was past for
making this offer and that it was to be regretted that
they had not been furnished when Captain Low applied
to him for them. I attempted to renew the former
subject of conversation but was prevented by th*}
rapidity with which His Highness put several questions


to me. One had reference to the power vested in the
Governor of Penang which I made him fully acquainted
with, whicli appeared greatly to surprize him, as lie
several times renewed his enquiry if the Governor of
Penang could carry any measure of importance into
effect without reference to the Supreme Government.
As a more direct answer was desirable to the last
and more especially to the foregoing question 1 remind-
e< 1 His Highness that he had obtained from me un-
qualified replies to all his interrogations and that if lie
were desirous of establishing the sincerity of-his pro-
fessions he should at least evince the same degree of
candour on his part. I would therefore again repeat
my enquiry and ask His Highness for the last time his
intentions for bringing so extensive an armament to
Kedda and whether he meditated and attack on Salen-
gore. I remarked that the first question was of much
importance and J was bound to state unless 1 obtained
an answer more conclusive than that already alforded
me 1 should be obliged to return to Penang and ac-
quaint the Governor that His Highness had refused to
afford the information lie required and that I was ap-
prehensive such conduct would be viewed as almost
equivalent to an act of defiance. With respect to the
second question, the attack of Salengore, I warned His
Highness that after the explanation I had afforded him
regarding that independent State any attack would most
probably involve him in much trouble and difficulty.
After an elapse of 10 minutes His Highness stated
that he had already assigned a sufficient reason for
bringing so great a number of prahus with him, and
with regard to the attack of Salengore he observed
that the King of Siam had directed him to punish the
people of that Country for having attacked some of his
prows three years since. Upon my questioning the
Rajah however more closely regarding the orders he had
received from the Court of Siam he disavowed having
been furnished with any that had particular reference


to Salengore, but that he was vested with unlimited
discretion to punish any of the neighbouring Malayan
States and particularly Salengore that had given'so
much cause for complaint, having most unprovokedly
attacked and plundered at Perak upwards of 40 of his
largest prahus.
As I was now fully convinced the Rajah of Ligore
was determined to conceal his future intentions from
me and that any further delay at Kedda was not likely
to be attended with advantage, the whole tenor ot the
Rajah’s conduct having in my opinion been such as to
render it unavoidable that I should present the second
letter from the Honorable the Governor to him, I
produced the letter in question (on the receipt of which
he seemed much agitated ) and i expressed the deep
regret the Honorable the Governor would feel when
informed that the Rajah’s unwillingness to afford any
explanation as to the object of His Highness’s visit
to Kedda and the cause of his bringing so large an
armament with him had rendered this measure
absolutely necessary.
I now wished to take my departure but was
prevailed upon to lengthen my stay with His High-
ness, and also to promise that I would land the follow-
ing morning and take charge of the letters intended to
be sent to the Honorable the Governor. Our conver-
sation during the time I continued with the Rajah had
reference to our success against the Burmahs and he
certainly seemed to entertain an idea that our reports
respecting the conquest of Ava had been much ex-
aggerated.
I again landed on the morning of the 28th and
must confess that I fully anticipated the perusal of
Letter No. 2 would have induced His Highness to have
been more communicative regarding his future plans
but I regret to state such was not the case. Professions
of friendship were tendered in abundance but no addi-
tional explanation afforded excepting that His High-
ness said that he should be most happy if the Governor


of Penang would undertake to settle the quarrel
between the Rajah of Salengore and himself. I
informed him that I was certain the Governor of
of Penang would willingly listen to any such proposal
and expressed a hope that he had alluded to this
subject in the letters he was about to deliver to me
and I was a good deal surprised on being informed
that no reply could be given to Letter No. 2 owing to
Pya Chy Song Kraam (the person sent by the King of
Siam to attend the Rajah of Ligore) having been
taken unwell and that it was absolutely necessary to
consult him before any reply could be forwarded or
anj* proposal made to the Honorable the Governor to
adjust the quarrel between the Rajahs of Salengore
and Perak. The Rajah however assured me that the
Honorable the Governor might expect an answer to-
Letter No. 2 in the course of four or five days though,
as his prows did not sail very fast, it might happen
that the letter would not reach the Honorable the
Governor quite so soon as he could wish.
His Highness apologized for not sending any
presents in return for those I had delivered but said
that they should be forwarded in a few days,
I now returned to the H. C. Brig Jessy and arrived
off Port Cornwallis early this morning and transmitted
without delay to the Malay Translator to Government
the letter from the Rajah of Ligore addressed to the
Honorable the Governor.
I found that the number of the prahus in Kedda
river had increased from 106 to 126. The 60 large
War prahus acknowledged by the Rajah to be at
Purlis are shortly expected to arrive there. I consider
the forces of the Rajah of Ligore now collected
at Kedda to amount to about Pour thousand
men, of these 1200 are from Sunggora, 700 from
Merdilon, 1000 from Chya, 500 from Settool, Purlis


and Traang, and the remainder from Ligore. I hey
are all supplied with English muskets, the most of
which have been obtained from Bangkok.
I have no hesitation in stating that the Rajah ot
Ligore is fully determined to attack Salengore. On
this subject I had the means ot obtaining very correct
information and 1 know that each Prahu in Kedda
river was receiving rice during the night, about •>
Coyans to each vessel.
An idea prevails at Kedda that the Rajah ot
Lisrore is in disgrace with the Court ot Siam and that
o “
he is likely to settle on this side of the peninsula
unless he conquers Salengore, and obliges the Rajah
of that State to present the Boonga Mas to the King
of Siam.
1 have &c.
( Sd. ) A. D. MAINGY
Supt. of Point Wellesley
in charge of the Squadron
of observation.
Port Cornwallis
the 29th May 1825,


Translation
of a Letter from Chow Piya of Ligore to the Honble.
Robert Fullerton Esq. Governor of Pulo Penang.
( After the usual Compliments. )
sfay ray friend be informed that Mr, Maingy who
was sent as the Agent and representative of 1113’ friend’s
person and who brought letters from my friend arrived
at Quedah and I received him agreeably to the rules of
friendship and conversed with Mr. Maingy conformably
to the custom of real Amity.
Now the most gracious King of Siam has been
pleased to send down Piya Pichi Songkram a Siamese
from the Capital to accompany me. On the day that
Mr. Maingy arrived he was sick and could not come
and sit down with us. If it had been desired that Mr.
Maingy should remain all the business would have been
delayed, and 1 wish to consider and consult with Piya
Pichi Songkram the Siamese who has come down from
the Capital, afterwards I will prepare a letter and send
it by Koon Aksorn which will follow after and which
will make known all circumstances agreeable to the
wish of my friend which may be conformable to the
rules of peace or propriety not to excite any difference
and to follow the road of permanent friendship. This
letter written on Saturday 10th of the Month Shawal,
year Jim and in the year of the Hegira 1240 or 28
May 1825,
A true Translation
( Signed ) JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Transr. to Govt.
Penang
the 29 May 1825.
RESOLVED unanimously that pending the receipt
of the promised Letter from the Rajah of Ligore, the
precautionary measures adopted be continued unrelaxed,
and the Superintendent of Point Wellesley be directed
to keep a strict and vigilant watch to the Northward
with the armed vessels under his orders.


FORT CORNWALLIS —The 10 June 1825.
SUPERINTENDENT of POINT WELLESLEY.
To
JOHN ANDERSON Esquire
Acting Secretary to Government,
o •>
Sir,
I deem it my duty to transmit without delay, for
the information of the Honorable the Governor in
Council, the enclosed letter in the Malay language,
received yesterday by one of the most respectable
Inhabitants of Wellesley Province, from his brother,
a Native Chief, in the Service of the Rajah of Ligore,
Syed Jaffar from whom I obtained it, has for some
time past been in my Pay, and has frequently afforded
me information I have afterwards found to be correct;
and I have reason to -know that the writer of the
letter in question possesses some influence with the
Rajah of Ligore, and had succeeded in securing for
his brother, Syed Jaffar, the promise of becoming
the Renter of the Farm in the Muda River, and
had not Syed Jaffar been suspected of being friendly
disposed towards the English, he would at this moment
have been holding that situation. I have forwarded a
translation of the letter, but as this has been done
in a great hurry, I would respectfully recommend that
another should be furnished by the Malay Translator
to Government.
I have &c, &c. &c.
(Signed)'A. D, MAINGY
Supt. of Point Wellesley.
Point Wellesley
the 6th June 1825.


LETTER from CHOU TEANG, a Native Chief
in the Service of the Rajah of Ligore, to his brother
Syed Jaffar, one of the most respectable Inhabitants in
Wellesley Province, dated the 24th Ramlan 1240.*
( After Compliments. )
Respecting’ your letter sent by Lahim, regarding"
the business of Qualla Mooda, which was granted to
you by the Sou of the Rajah of Ligore when you came
here, .1 have shewn the letter now sent by you respec-
ting the Farm to the young King, but he declares
that you shall not have the Farm on account of some
Chinese having informed him that you have combined
with the English who live at Qualla Buka ; in con-
sequence of this the young King says that he must
wait a little and ascertain whether this is true or false.
Moreover as you reside at Qualla Muda be on your
guard respecting the Siamese, for they to a certainty,
and bey on 1 all doubt will attack Pulo Penang, they
are now preparing, and only waiting until the (white
men) English, are off their guard, so that they may
attack them by stealth ; also, the}' are now preparing
to march to Pulie, and will pretend that they are
going to Perak. They are not going there, but will
descend the Kreean, they are now endeavouring to
hire 200 men in Penang in order to set it on fire, so
that when the forces have arrived at Kreean, then,
these 200 men who have been hired in Penang will be
ordered to set it on fire in about 20 places, so that
when all is confusion they may attack the place.
At present they are waiting until the English are off
their guard. This I have to communicate respecting
the Rajah of Ligore, as soon as ray brother has read
this letter, let him destroy, and not retain it.
( True Translation )
(Signed) A. D. MAINGY
Supt. of Point Wellesley.


1 have agreeably to Mr. Maingy’s
perused the original letter transmitted by him, and
find the Translation perfectly correct.
(Signed') -JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Transr. to Govt.
THE PRESIDENT records the following Minute,
with Translations of letters from the Rajah of Ligore,
and Draft of Reply, together with a Conversation held,
with the Principal Merchants.


MINUTE BY THE PRESIDENT.
I now lay before the Board a Paper of Information
received from Mr. Maingy. I beg leave at the same
time to submit copies of letters received from the
Rajah of Ligore, with Draft of my Reply thereto.
These letters were delivered by four Envoys, with
whom I have had a conversation, the substance of
which corresponded entirely with the letters and
reply.
The Board will perceive a striking coincidence
between the Information of Mr, Maingy, and the
subject of the letters. The Information states it to be
the intention to sent Troops on pretence of going to
Perak, to halt on the Kreean River, and wait a favorable
opportunity for attacking the Island. The main
drift of these letters goes to shew the necessity of
sending Troops to Perak, a fabricated letter said to
be from Perak requiring assistance is produced, the
object is evidently to blind us as to the true object
of sending Troops to the Kreean. I trust that the
Board will be satisfied that the hostile intention
of the Rajah towards this Island is now sufficiently
manifest to authorize our acting against him, should
a favorable occasion present itself for the destruction
of his means of aggression.
The Board will perceive the employment of per-
sons to set fire to the town again alluded to ; on this
point I confess I am not so well informed as on
external proceedings, having relied principally on the
Police for discovery of internal enemies. From a
conversation held by me with the principal Chinese
Inhabitants, substance of which I annex hereto, there
seems not a vestige of doubt, notwithstanding the
depositions of the asserted heads of the Kongsee, or
Clubs, that Low Achong is at the head of one
of them, the “ Hysan Kongsee; ” the information


may, if necessary, be supported on oath. His
being so is indeed as notorious as the sun at noon
day, and I have obtained the same information from a
variety of channels. If any persons are engaged to aid
tlie views of the Rajah on the Island, we may be assured
the Members of these Kongsees are they and it would
be most desirable to obtain, if possible, by a seizure of
Papers or otherwise, the names of those belonging to
it. I must at the same time confess my firm belief
that had an immediate search taken place at the House
where they are known to assemble, instead of trusting
to the asseveration of the reported heads, we should
have got at the names as well as the object of these
meetings. Having furnished the Superintendent of
Police with the late information from Mr. Maingy, I
still hope he will succeed in obtaining a clue to the
discovery of those employed on account of the Rajah.
In the mean time a due regard to the preservation of
order requires that Achong should be kept for the
present in close custody, and not allowed to hold
communication vith any person whatever.
The great object and purpose of Police is to watch
and discover such machinations of the evil disposed,,
and it is impossible for me to conceal my regret that on
the present occasion the Police has shewn itself to be so
deficient; as to those Clubs, I can only express my
surprize that they have ever been allowed to exist,
composed of the very lowest and most worthless of our
population, a class of people without tie or connexion
on the Island, ready for any mischief, holding such meet-
ings with closed doors, administering Oaths of Secrecy.
I can hardly conceive an Instrument better fitted for
the subversion of any regular Government; and I am
only withheld from submitting a Proclamation for
their immediate suppression, in the hopes that the
important object of the discovery of persons may still
be attainable.
Connected with this, there is another subject on
which it seems desirable that information should be


obtained and recorded. 1 allude to the manner in
which the Macao Chinese obtain footing on the Island*
.1 have been informed, and by respectable authority,
that they are brought here from China on speculation
by Captains of Ships, and sold as Slave Debtors to the
highest bidders, the purchase money being repayable
to the purchasers by a given portion of their labour.
This practice seems to me to have rather close affinity
to actual Slave Trade, and I propose that a full and
complete Statement of the mode and manner of carry-
ing on the transaction be obtained from the best
authority, in order that we may judge of the ex-
pediency of allowing or preventing the continuance of
the practice.
( Signed) l i. TULLERTON.
10 June 1825.


Translation
of a letter from the Chow Pya of Li gore to the
Honorable the (Governor of Pulo Penang.
(After Compliments.)
May my friend be informed that the letter which
he sent me b} r Mr. Maingy respecting Salengore,
reached me. I replied to it and gave a letter to Mr.
Maingy to convey to my friend. I therein mentioned
that the great King of Siam has been pleased to send
a Chief Pia Pichie Sungkram from the Capital to
assist me in conducting business, and that on the day
Mr. Maingy was here, that person was sick, and
could not come and sit down with us. 1 wished to
consult with Pia Pichie Songkram, the person who lias
been sent from the Capital upon all the business and.
promised to reply according to the letter which Mr.
Maingy brought.
Formerly the Rajah of Perak, Rajah Mooda and
Rajah Bindahara, the Chiefs of Perak sent a letter
to Perak and represented that the Rajah of Salengore
had come and excited a disturbance in Perak, and
several times requested a force to be sent. Again on
the 29 Day of the sth Month, the Rajah of Perak,
Rajah Mooda, and the Rajah Bindahara sent the Rajah
Kechil Mooda, the Orang Kaya besar, Sri Bela Paduka,
Maharajah Sitea and Paduka Sri Nara with a letter to
Ligore, entreating assistance against the Rajah of
Salengore, who had created a commotion in Perak.
I accordingly consulted with the Pya Pichie
Songkram, the abovementioned Chief, who came from
the Capital, and I now send Aluang Wat Akaui, a
Chief from the Capital, Aluang Pechie Peluppo, Koon
Aksorn, Che Hat, and Che Sotyman to convej 7 the
letters from the Rajah of Perak and the representations
from the Chiefs of Perak, relative to the proceedings
of the Rajah of Salengore, which the Rajah Kechil
Mooda, the Orang Kaya besar and the other Chiefs


from Perak brought to Ligore, in order that my
friend may be fully acquainted.
The Country of Perak lias become tributary to
Siam, and sends a Flower of Gold and Silver ( Boouga
Mas dan Perak) to the most exalted King of Siam.
The Rajah of Salengore went with a force and
committed hostilities against Perak, he seized and
plundered the Prows with Guns large and small, which
1 sent with Che Hat to Quedah, and the Tin and
Presents which the Rajah of Perak was transmitting
to me also fell into his possession. All these things
are stated in the letter from the Rajah of Perak, and
in the other letter which are now sent for my friend’s
inspection.
With respect to my intention of sending an
Armament, according to the request expressed in the
letter from the Rajah of Perak, if it can be settled that
Salengore is not to meddle with Perak, and the
Rajah of Salengore will not commit hostilities against
Perak, or excite a disturbance there, I will stop the
Armament, and will not send it at present, agreeably to
what was communicated to me by Mr. Maingy, by my
friend’s directions, and what was settled between us.
With respect to my friend’s desire to stop the
Armament, and not to permit it to proceed, as there is
fighting and quarrelling between Perak and Salengore,
and the Ryots of the Perak Country are in great
difficulty and the Country in commotion as mentioned
in this letter, how does my friend intend to consider
or settle ? I am anxious to know, and I request he will
send a letter to inform me.
Moreover, in the letter from the Rajah ot Perak,
which the Rajah Kechil Mooda, the Orang Kaya besar,
and the other Chiefs of Perak brought, it is stated that
this year the time has arrived when they intend send-
ing the Boongah Mas dan Perak to Siam, but they are
much in want of Prows to bring it, and requesting that


when the five above mentioned Chiefs return to. Perak,
some Prows may be sent to receive the Boonga Mas
dan Perak, and the other offerings and presents for the
great King, to be brought to Quedah, and they have
solicited me to forward the same to the Capital.
When 1 formerly sent Che Hat and many Pangulus
with 40 Prows to return the Rajah Bindahara to
Quedah, 1 requested permission to pass through the
Straits of Pulo Penang, and the former Governor of
Pulo Penang let my vessels pass through as every
body knows.
On this occasion, I wish to request that 40 or 50
Prows may be permitted to pass to convey the Rajah
Kechil Mooda to Perak as before, and they will after-
wards receive the Boonga Mas Perak, and the other
offerings and presents for the great King of Siam, and
will return, conducting the business properly according
to the custom of Countries that are tributary.
If a few Prows were to be sent, perhaps the Rajah
of Salengore would attack and plunder them as he did
with Che Hat before, if people do not believe, send
Cruisers to follow and look out.
Relative to these two matters, I send Aluang Wat
Akani, a person from the Capital, Aluang Pechie
Peluppo, Koon Aksorn, Che Hat and Che Sob-man to
consult with my friend. The Siamese and English
Countries have been on friendly terms from the most
remote times, and my friend should settle how
the friendship with Siam may not be destroyed
and how a good understanding may be promoted.
Whatever may be my friend’s determination, he
will send a letter to inform me.
Moreover, if there are any evil disposed Malays
who bring false intelligence, in order to create distrust
on the part of the English against the Siamese (the
Siamese and English have been long on friendly


terms, and trade has been conducted between them,,
and the Siamese use many Goods of the English, and
1 am desirous to promote greater friendship even than
formerly), the Siamese have no bad intentions towards
the English, and if any Malays come and give reports
tending to excite suspicion, will my friend inform me
by letter, in order that i may point out the proper
road and let may friend know.
Dated Thursday 17th of 7th Month Year Fowl,
or 2d June.
A true Translation
(Signed) JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Transr. to Govt
Penang
Ctli June 1825,
NOTE. In the first part of the last paragraph, there-
is evidently a word or two omitted. The translation
is as literal as possible.
( 8(1.) J. A.


Translation
of a letter from the Rajah of Perak to Aluang Packdi
Juta Minister of the Chow Pya of Ligore.
(After many Compliments.)
With respect to the Country of Perak which has,
for many years past, been tributary to Siam, and has
sent the Boonga Mas dan Perak (Gold and Silver
Flower) the great King of Siam has been pleased, of his
favor, to place it under the superintendence of the Chow
Pya of Ligore, and myself, the Rajah Mooda, Rajah
Bandahara and all the Ministers in Perak are very
happy that the Country is under the control of the
Chow Pya of Ligore, we retaining the executive
administration of the Country.
Perak is quite unconnected with Salengore, but
when the Chow Pya of Ligore sent Che Hat with prows
to return the Rajah Bandahara, and to convey the Tin
which accompanied the Boonga Mas, and some other
Tin as an offering from us all, which was to be for-
warded to the Chow Pya of Ligore, together with a
small quantity of Tin belonging to the different
Pangulus of* Prows, which they had themselves pur-
chased, as my brother the Rajah Kechil Mooda and
the Orang Kaya besar well knows;just as Che Hat
was about to quit Perak, and retuuj, to Quedah, the
Rajah of Salengore arrived, accompanied by the Rajah
Mooda and Rajah Hussein, with a force of Armed
Prows, and attacked the Prows belonging to Che Hat
and the other Pangulus who were on the point pf
returning to Quedah.
I and all my family and attendants fled and went to
reside up the River, and Che Hat with all his people also
fled and escaped across the Country to Quedah. After-
wards the Rajah of Salengore by force established Rajah
Hassan at Kwala Bedor, and the Perak people who
wished to go and purchase Salt and other Articles, ho
would not permit to pass.


Rajah Hassan has committed many acts of op-
pression upon the Ryots of the Perak Country who are
in very great distress. I have frequently entreated an
Armament, but it has not yet pleased the Chow
Pya to send it. 1 now send my Brother the Rajah
Kechil Mooda, the Orang Ivaya besar, Sri Paduka and
Maharajah Selea to present themselves before the
Chow Pya of Ligore, for the purpose of,communicating
to him every thing relating to the Government of the
Perak Country, to explain all circumstances, and
also to request a Siamese Armament to be sent here for
the purpose of settling every thing decidedly in order
that the Ryots may enjoy tranquillity and comfort.
Further, this year, at the proper season, the
Boonga Mas dan Perak must be sent to the Capital;
but there is a great want of Prows to convey it.
When my brother Rajah Mooda Kechil and the Orang
Kaya besar are about to return, 1 request that Prows
may be sent to receive the Boonga Mas dan Perak,
and the offerings to be sent to the Capital.
Dated 27th of Jemad-ul-awal (Janry.) Monday 12JO.
A True Translation
(Signed) JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Transr. to Govt.
Penang
the h June 1825.


Translation
of a Statement purporting to be from the Rajah Ivechil
Mooda, Orang Kaya besar, Sri Lela Paduka. Maharaja
Seiia and Paduka Sri Kara, Chiefs of the Perak Coun-
try, to Aluang Packdi Juta, Minister of the Chow Pya
of Li gore.
\Ve the Rajah Kechii Mooda, Orang Kaya besar,
Sri Lela Paduka, Maharajah Seiia, and Paduka Sri
Nara, Chiefs of Perak, beg to acquaint Aluang Packdi
Juta, and respectfully request him to inform the Chow
Pya of Ligore, that we have been directed to present
ourselves before the Chow Pya, for the purpose of
communicating all circumstances respecting Perak and
Salengore, and the former differences.
The boundary between Perak and Salengore is the
River Burnam. In the time of # Morhum Bongsu , the
Grandfather of the King who now governs the Perak
Country, the place called Rantan Panjang (Long reach)
was established. When the present Rajah of Salengore
came and attacked the Country formerly, the Morhum
P>ongsu and all the Chiefs fled, and took up their re-
sidence further up the River, establishing themselves
at Kwala Trus, a little beyond Rantan Panjang.
The Salengore Armament attempted to push up,
but was prevented, and the Rajah of Salengore was not
permitted to have an interview with the King of Perak
and Chiefs of the Country. The Rajah of Salengore re-
turned to his own Country. About a year after this.
Morhum Bongsu died, and all the Chiefs assembled and
raised his Son to the throne. This was f Morhum
Jemalula ; aboiit 3 months after his accession, a letter
was received from the Rajah of Salengore, requesting
gome territory in Perak, from Kwala Trus as far as
the River Perak, saying it belonged to him, and that
he had taken it by force of arms.
° This was Sultan Mahomed Tawse Udeen or Tujudin.
Morhum Bongsu is his designation after death,
t This was Sultan Mansur Shah.


The Morhnm Jemalula replied to the letter that
nobody had given that territory to the Rajah of
Salengore, nor had the Rajah of Salengore met and
consulted with the Chiefs of Perak upon the subject.
The Rajah of Salengore was very angry, and prepared
an armament to attack Perak again. Morhnm Jema-
lula fortified at Kota Lumut, and when the Salengore
fleet arrived and attacked Kota Lumut, they did not
gain any advantage.
The Salengore armament having been beaten off
for a time, retreated to Kwala Bidor, and they several
times returned and renewed the attack on Kota Lumut,
but never succeeded in their attempts. While these
proceedings were going on, the Rajah of Salengore
made overtures of settling the matter by negociation.
At last he said “ do not let us fight any more, the
territory from Kwala Bidor. to Kwala Perak is enough
for me.” Morhum Jemalula replied that the Ministers
of Perak were not even disposed to give him the
limited territory requested by the Rajah of Salengore,
who again replied to the Rajah of Perak, “ if you are
“ not satisfied, let us enquire the custom amongst the
Chiefs of some other Countries, and how matters of
“ this sort are adjusted, in order that we may conform
“to the same usage : " They accordingly exchanged
Engagements to this effect, and promised that in the
course of 3 months they would ascertain from some
other Rajahs the custom as before noticed. The
Salengore Armament then quitted the Perak Country.
Two (bins were given to the Rajah of Perak at the
same time.
Many years afterwards, orders were received from
the great King of Siam, directing the Rajah of Quedah
to prepare an armament and attack Perak, and Perak
was conquered. After this, the Rajah of Salengore
sent a demand to the Rajah of Perak for the price of
the two Guns ( 500 Dollars ) and His Majesty paid the
sum in question, and settled the price in the pres unco


of the Datu Bandahara, the Datu Laxamana. and the
Chiefs of the Quedah Country who were there at
the time; the discussion relative to the territory
was dropped.
Not long 1 after this Morhum Jeraalula died, and
Rajah Abdullah his Son ascended the throne and took
charge of the affairs of Government. About a year
O *
after his accession, the Rajah Mooda Son of the Rajah
of Salengore entered Perak, and had a meeting with
Rajah Abdullah, who had become King of Perak, He
had nothing to communicate, but remained about a
month at Perak, when there arrived four Chiefs from
Salengore, named To Aran, To Pcngawa, To Jerani
and Panglima Burnam, bringing a letter demanding
the territory as before mentioned.
The Rajah of Perak replied “ when the Quedah
“ armament was formerly here, why did you not claim
“ the territory then ; now the Perak Country has be-
“ come tributary to the great King of Siam, and if you
have any claims, let us go to Siam and refer it.”
The four Chiefs of Salengore above named replied
“ the Rajahs of Perak and Salengore are like brothers,
“ if we proceed to Siam, it will look as if they were
“ disputing, and such a Mission would be attended
“ with much difficulty and loss ; it would also tend to
* l destroy confidence and excite jealousy between the
“ Rajahs of Perak and Salengore. If the Rajah of
“ Perak is disposed to listen to our advice, let him
pay 30 Bahars of Tin.” The Rajah Mooda of
Salengore sanctioned this proposal. Upon considera-
tion, the Rajah of Perak also consented to it ; because
it was not worth while to excite a difference between
Brothers for a little. He accordingly paid 30 Bahars
of Tin, which was received by the Rajah Mooda of
Salengore and the 4 Chiefs above named, and the
matter was settled ; upon which the Rajah Mooda and
the 4 Chiefs returned to Salengore.
It was not long subsequent to this, that accounts*


were received of the Chow Pya's armament having*
come to Quedah, and of the Rajah of Quedah’s having
fled to Pido Penang, to reside there. At tlie same
time the Rajah of Perak received a letter from the
Chow Pya of Ligore, directing the transmission of the
Boonga Mas dan Perak. The Rajah of Perak prepared
it, and ordered the Rajah Bandahara, Tuanko Ja-hiya,
Sri Adeku Rajah To Peggah, Maharaja Addenda, and
Rajah Ahmut to convey it across the Country to
embark in prows at Trong, and from thence to Quedah
to the Chow Pya of Ligore. The Chow Pya of I ugore
received the Boonga Mas dan Perak, but the presents
and offerings which should have accompanied it. could
not be brought.
The Chow Pya of Ligore prepared the Boonga
Mas dan Perak with suitable accompaniments of
presents instead of those which should have been
brought from Perak, and transmitted them to the
Capital. When the Rajah Bandahara and the Pat us
and Chiefs of Perak, who conveyed the Boonga Mas
dan Perak, were ready to return from Quedah, the
Chow Pya of Ligore sent 40 Prows with Arms large
and small, and otherwise properly equipped, in order
to convey the Rajah Bandahara to Perak, and he re-
quested permission to pass through the Straits of Pulo
Penang ; the former Governor of Pulo Penang granted
permission and sent two Cruizers to the Kwala Mooda
to receive the Prows, and accompany them as far as
Pulo Kra.
When the Rajah Bandahara and all the Chiefs in
Perak prepared Tin as an offering to the extent of 52
Bahars ; a further quantity of 75 Bahars in lieuof the
presents which should have accompanied the Boonga
Mas, (and which were supplied by the Rajah of Ligore,)
also a quantity of Tin belonging to the Nack ahs of the
vessels, which they had purchased at Perak, to the
extent of 78' Bahars—in all 205 Bahars, and the Prows
were about to returji to Quedah, the Rajah of Salengore,


[Rajah Mooda, and Rajah Hassan with a fleet of Prows
came and attacked and plundered the Prows brought
by Che Hat. and the Panglimas of distinction, who
were sent to accompany the Rajah Bandahara on his
return, without any cause, and all the Prows, &c. fell
into the hands of the Rajah of Salengore.
The Rajah of Perak and the Rajah Bandahara
ascended the River, and all the people who accompanied
the Rajah Bandahara returned across the Country to
(juedali. The Rajah of Salengore then stationed his
Nephew Rajah Hassan at Kwala Bidor in the Perak
Country who exacts all the duties by force, for his
own benefit, and prohibits trading vessels and the
people of the Country from passing up and down to
buy and sell at the Town where the Rajah of Perak
resides, by which all the Ryots are involved in much
distress.
Wherefore the Rajah of Perak
lias sent us the Rajah Xechil
Mooda, Orang Kara besar, Sri
Lela Pacluka, Maharaja Sella, and
Paduka Sri Nara. Chiefs of Perak
to represent to the Chow Pya of
Ligore, the distresses of the Perak
Country, and to request a Siamese
Armament to be sent to settle
everything at Perak, according to
the custom of countries that are
tributary, so that we and all the
Ryots of the Perak Country may
live with ease and tranquillity.
Such is our representation. Dated
29 Shaban, April.
A True Translation
< Chop \
of
Rajah Kecbil
Mooda. /
Chop
of
( )rang Ivaya
besar. /
\ /
( Signed ) JOHN ANDERSON.
Malay Transr. to Govt,
The (J June 1825,


NOTE.
The Paper, of which the foregoing is a translation,
bears the Chops of only two of the 5 Perak Chiefs
named. It is evidently fabricated by the Siamese,
with the aid ot some of the Perak Chiefs mentioned,
who are still at Quedah. There are several words in
the letter which are scarcely known to the generality
of Malays, and if is easy to discover from the style
altogether that the Paper is not the genuine production
of the Perak Chiefs. The hand writing is familiar to
me, and my Native Writer says it is that of Che Hat,
the person alluded to in this paper, and who is one of
the Envoys now here. In the course of conversation
at (Government House yesterday, he admitted that the
representation had been written by the Perak Chiefs
at Li gore.
( Signed ) J. A.


Translation
of a letter from Chow Pya of Li gore to the Honorable
the Governor of Pulo Penang.
( After Compliments.)
With respect to the English having attacked
Ava, the great King of Siam is extremely delighted, for
there has never, from the remotest times, been a good
understanding between Ava and Siam ; he is anxious
to hear the news, and to be informed of all particulars
with respect to the War, how matters stand, how
many Towns in Ava have been taken &c. 1 there-
fore request my friend to write and inform me of
these particulars, in order that 1 may forward the
intelligence to the Capital.
Further, 1 send Aluang Wat Akani, a Siamese
from the Capital, Aluang Pichei Peluppo, Koon Aksorn,
Che Hat, and Che Solyman, to look for muskets for
my children to play with. 1 spoke to Mr. Maingy
about these Muskets. They also wish to purchase
some other goods which are required to some extent.
1 therefore request that my friend will permit them to
make purchases agreeably to what is mentioned in
this letter ; do not let them experience any difficulty.
Further. 1 wish the people who are now sent to
be acquainted with my friend ; 1 therefore request
that Aluang Wat Akani, Aiming Pichei Peluppo, Koon
Aksorn, Che Hat and Che Solyman may have an
interview with my friend, in order that intercourse
may be easy, and that friendship may be maintained.
Dated Thursday 14th Shawal 1210 or 2d. June
1825.
A True Translation
( Signet! ) J< )HN AN DKRSON
Malay Transr. to Govt.
Penang
6th June 1825.


Translation
of a letter from the Chow TVa of Ligore to the Malay
Translator to Government.
(After Compliments.)
(This letter is practically a duplicate of Enclosure
No. 4, addressed to the Governor of Pulo Penang*. It.
is therefore not copied here.)


To THE RAJAH OF LIGORE.
I have received your Highness’s letter dated 17th
of 7th Month Year Fowl sent by the hands of your
Envoys Aluang Wat Akani, Aluang Pichei Peluppo,
Ebon Aksorn, Che Hat and Che Solyman, and it be-
comes my duty to reply to these letters in the plain and
simple language of truth, rather than of useless courtesy
and idle compliment.
For the last four years, ever since you took posses-
sion of Quedah, your professions of friendship to Mr.
Phillips my Predecessor and myself have been un-
bounded. Those professions have been met by us both
•with sincerity. The War between the British and the
Burmese, the natural and long continued enemies of the
Siamese, led me to cultivate with redoubled anxiety
the friendship of the Siamese Chiefs in this neighbour-
hood, and of whom your Highness is the principal.
It was my desire to open with you such an intercourse
as would enable me to communicate occasionally the
progress of the War and to explain all matters con-
nected with the mutual interests of the British and
Siamese on this side of the Peninsula, and to obtain
from you such assistance in respect to Boats and
Carriage as your Highness might be disposed to give
in prosecution of the War.
It was with this view that Lieutt. Low was sent to
you by my predecessor, and Captain Burney by myself,
instead of receiving those Gentlemen, as your Envoys
were received here, you refused them permission to
cross the Country to Ligore. You promised indeed
to meet the latter Gentleman at Quedah, and sure
enough you have arrived there, but in what a guise,
not as a Chief come on friendly terms with a re-
tinue only adequate to your rank and station, but
accompanied by 300 Prows, the most of them armed
with Guns, by many thousand men accompanied


by Chiefs from Mardelong Sangora and other places
each with their quota of Troops. You are come at
the head of an Armament which can leave no doubt on
the minds of any reasonable man that some hostile
Enterprize is in your view. You have professed your
readiness and desire to cooperate with the British
against the Burmahs ; the Emperor of Siam has made
the same professions. The Prah Klang has stated
that an Army has been sent to aid the British force.
AVe must judge of men’s minds by their actions, and
not by their words, and how am I to reconcile your
actions and professions? The Burmahs have been in
possession of the Coast of Tenasserim for fifty years,
they plundered Junk Ceylon only in 1810, they carried
on their plunder and devastation down to the neigh-
bourhood of Poongah. The British Troops have taken
Mergui, Tavoy and Tenasserim, they have placed
themselves between you and the Burmahs, relieved the
States of Rindong Poongah and your own from all
alarm, and instead of assisting the British according
to your professions, your first act is to collect the
Military resources of those very States, and come
down in hostile array against a British Settlement, to
the Governor of which you are making daily protesta-
tions of friendship and regard. What has my friend
to answer to this ?
In respect to what your Highness writes of the
affairs of Perak and Salengore, it is necessary to bring
past circumstances to the recollection of your
Highness. The British Government occupied this
Island for the purposes of trade, extension of their
territory has never been their object, nor have they
wished or desired to intermeddle with the disputes of
their neighbours. It is not their wish to do so now,
further than indispensably necessary for their own
security. Following this forbearing course, you have
been allowed to expel the King of Quedah, an old friend
of the English, and to occupy his country. You have


been allowed to impose upon Perak feudatory vassa-
lage and to cause them to transmit the Boonga Mas
which was never done before. Those were not
►Siamese but ancient independent Malay States, and
now you intimate a desire to send Prows to Salengore.
My friend where is this to end ? The British Govern-
ment have Settlements South of Salengore, and it is
not considered consistent with their security to allow
an Armed force to possess themselves of that Country
and therefore I must caution you against any attempt
of that kind, because it may probably create dissention
between the British and the Siamese Government.
As to my allowing any Armed Prows to pass between
this Island and the main land, the thing cannot be
done. If one State allows a free passage of hostile
Armaments through its Territory to attack a third
State it is always considered an act of hostility. We
are on friendly terms with the Rajah of Salengore. I
cannot grant a passage and facilitate an attack upon
a friend. With respect to all disputes, I will write to
the Rajah of Salengore and obtain his explanation on
the subject, and let you know the result. When
disputes arise between neighbouring States, they are
best settled by the mediation of a common friend.
Your Highness writes me not to attend to the
reports brought by Malays, Chinese and other ill dis-
posed persons. I tell your Highness in reply, as I
have said already, that I judge not from words which
are deceitful things, but from facts known to myself.
I know very well you have at least 300 Armed Prows
at Quedah. I know also that Prows with Guns and
Armed men in them are not required for the peaceable
purposes of trade ; it is only for that purpose that your
Prows can have any business here, and if any suck
come towards this Island armed as above, I must con-
sider they come with hostile intent, and shall treat
them accordingly.
Your Highness says you will send no Prows South


of Quedah without informing me, so far your promise
is satisfactory ; but I expect also that you will send no
Troops near the Company’s Territory, where they have
never been posted before, they cannot be wanted there,
as you know very well we have never had any inten-
tion of attacking you, and if Tx-oops appear in that
direction, I conclude they come with hostile intent
and shall act accordingly.
1 beg your Highness to recollect that the first
aafa’ressor is not he that strikes in his own defence,
Ou
but he that comes to make the attack, and your High-
ness will keep in mind, that it is you that have fitted
out and armed 300 Prows, and brought them near us
we did not come to you. This is but a small Island
but it is a part of a great Empire, and Ligore belongs
to the Emperor of Siam. It is not here therefore, it is
not between the Governor of Penang and the Eajah of
Ligore, but in another place that the battle must be
fought. As Dependents of great Kingdoms, it is your
duty, as well as mine, to avoid giving just cause of
hostility.
Your professions of peace and friendship are
strong, if you wish them to be believed, your mode of
proceeding is very plain ; it is as clear as the sun at
noon day—send away your Boats, dismiss the Malays
whom you have pressed, dismiss the Troops you have
collected, let your actions be in conformity with your
words, and when you have done all this, but not before,
I will believe your professions ; until that is done no
faith can be reposed in any protestation, and the
sending of Envoys to repeat them will be in vain.
This letter contains many things which will not
be pleasing to your Highness. It is not such a letter
as I have been accustomed to write to you, but in
serious affairs it is our custom to write seriously and
with sincerity and truth. In writing this letter 1 have
performed a painful duty and I conclude by assuring


you, that there is nothing I so earnestly desire as to
remain at peace with your Highness, and that nothing
hut necessity will induce me to act with hostility, and
if by persevering in your present line of conduct you
render such inevitable, I have done my duty, and be
the consequences on your own head.
Respecting the war with the Burmahs, 1 have to
acquaint your Highness that General Campbell has
marched from Rangoon to Prome witth 8,000 men;
that the Country of Bassein has been taken possession
of; that General Morrison having subdued Arracan
has proceeded with his Army of 12,000 men to join
General Campbell at Prome. Ten thousand men
( European Soldiers ) are arrived at Rangoon, and will
join the rest to go against Ummerapoora, and the
great Powers in England having heard of the War
with the Burmahs, has directed 20,000 select European
Troops to be sent out, which may be expected by the
Ships which arrive from England at this season of the
year at Bengal Madras and Bombay. Other minor
particulars relative to the War have been made known
to your Envoys.
(Signed) R. FULLERTON
Governor.
Oth June 1825.


READ the following Information of a Malay man,
relative to the Proceedings of the Siamese at Quedah,
submitted by the Malay Translator to Government.
INFORMATION of SANTU, a Malay lad. inha-
bitant of Province Wellesley, his family residing at
Sungei Tumbus.
i
Went to Quedah about two months ago to pur-
chase Rice ; on the arrival of the Rajah of Ligore he/
was forced to enter into His Highness’s service as a
Soldier. He was afraid, and not liking the duty, he
got a small Canoe from a friend of his, and escaped at
night. On his way here he fell in with one of Mr.
Maingy’s row boats, which brought him up to Town
this morning to the Malay Translator.
Santu reports that there were about 140 Prows in
the Quedah River, on Friday night last he saw a great
number more Prows enter the River, at least 200 in
his opinion. These Prows proceeded at once up the
River to Allustar. He understood that 300 Elephants
had arrived from Ligore, and remained some distance
above Quedah. The Siamese were daily collecting all
the Malays from all parts of the Country.
The Siamese are constructing a very large Stock-
ade at a place called Guroon, at the source of the small
river Jau on the Northern side of the Mountain
Jerei, or nearly half distance between Quedah and
Penang. There are 800 men busily employed on this
stockade.
They are constructing another Stockade up the
Ivwala Mooda about a day’s journey from the Mouth of
the River. Here there are only about 200 men
employed.
(Signed) JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Translator,
4th June 1825,
FORT CORNWALLIS The 10 June 1825


RAJAH of PERAK.
Translation
of a Letter from the King of Perak to the Honble.
Robert Fullerton Governor of Pulo Penang.
( After Compliments.)
I duly received the letter which my friend sent,
by Sovelin, with great respect and pleasure. I
perused it and fully comprehend the contents. My
friend acquaints me of his having assumed charge
of the Government of Pulo Penang and its Depen-
dencies. This is extremely satisfactory.
My friend expresses his desire to preserve a good
understanding between the two Countries, and to
continue the friendly intercourse which has long
subsisted. lam very much pleased with this ; formerly
it was as stated by my friend, but at present Perak
is under the Government of the Siamese which
prevents me daring to express any wish ot my heart
to tny friend, for it might possibly give offence to
the King of Siam.
I am therefore afraid to propose anything upon
any subject at present, for I am a poor man ; my
friend’s better understanding will enable him to con-
sider how a friendly intercourse between Perak and
Pulo Penang may best be promoted, and how friend-
ship may be increased. Dated 11th Rajap.
A True Translation
(Signed) JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Transr. to Govt.
Penang
Ist June 1825.
NOTE. The letter to which this is a reply was
a Circular from the Honble. the Governor announcing
his arrival.
FORT CORNWALLIS The 10 June 1825.


To the Resident at Singapore.
To J. CRAWFURD Esqr.
Resident at Singapore.
Sir,
I am directed to acknowledge the receipt of your
letters dated 20th and 30th April, forwarding Copies
of your correspondence with the Siamese Minister on
the subject of the promised co-operation of that nation
with the British Government in the war against the
state of Ava.
2. The Governor General in Council desires me
to state that experience has shewn the Siamese pro-
mises of co-operation, to be wholly delusive. The only
Armaments which they have prepared have acted in an
unfriendly manner and proved a source of embarrass-
ment to us, as the accompanying Copies of dispatches *
from the Officers commanding at Mergui and Tavoy
will fully apprize you. An Army made its appearance
for a short time in the Martaban district ( after it had
been conquered by our Arms ) commanded by some of
the Talien Chiefs ; but events clearly evinced that
those Chiefs were intent only on the prosecution of
their own personal views, and finding these were not
likely to be gained through our interposition, they
suddenly retired in March last.
3. His Lordship in Council farther observes that
the time has long passed when Siamese co-operation
could have been of any value to us, even had that
Government been disposed to exert itself cordially
against the common Enemy, It is desirable, therefore.,
that all solicitations for the assistance of the Court of
Siam in the Burman Wav, should cease, but Govern-
ment of course sanctions the steps which you have
FORT WILLIAM 10th June 1825,


already taken for that purpose, under your former
instructions including the present of brass Ordnance
now reported.
4. I am directed to take this opportunity ot
transmitting to you, Copy of an important dispatch from
the Governor General in Council, to the Government of
Prince of Wales Island, dated 13th May * and of the
provisional instructions* and letters* furnished to
Captain Burney, in contemplation of his proceeding as
an Envoy from the Right Honorable the Governor
General to His Majesty the King of Siam.
1 have Ac
(Signed) G. SWINTON
Secretary to Govt,
FORT WILLIAM
lOth June 1825.


FORT WILLIAM 17th June 1825.
Information of Shimyep or Sihirnyen a Chinese
man of the Tribe Chouk, Prisoner in the House of
Correction.
/ *
Informant is by Trade a Goldsmith, and has been
for some time employed of a master Goldsmith, a
Macao Chinese named Hinneoo of the Tribe Cheong,
who lives near the market place in George Town.
Whilst in this man’s employ about eight (8) months
ago, Informant was invited to join a Hungsee or Club
to which his Master belonged, the head man or
manager of which is the Chinese Watchmaker Appoo.
All persons joining the Club were obliged to do so
under an oath that they would when required, or in
any public commotion join the members thereof. This
Club is termed the Ghe chin, and is very numerous.
Informant understood that they had stores of spears
and other Weapons which were deposited in different
places—some he heard were kept in the House or
Premises of the Arrack Farmer. On joining each
member pays five (5) Dollars entrance money, and
takes the aforesaid oath.
. ’ (
Not having the means of paying the entrance
Money, and not wishing to take the oath prescribed
Informant never joined the Club.
The Macao Chinese have two (2) other Clubs of
this kind in George Town, one of which is called the
Hoo Sing, and the other the Hy San—and held one
near Ujong Passir, and the other in the Prangin
(loads. Following is a List of the Head men, or
managers of these Clubs and places they are held in.


Ghe chin
Places
Church )
Managers
Boon )
Occupation.
Watch .]
Street )
Appoo j
Maker j
Hoo )
Ujong ]
Hoh ]
Shop ]
Sing f
Passer j
Hew ]
Keeper j
Hy )
Prangin ]
Loh )
Shop )
San ]
Roads [
Allak f
Keeper j
Informant has heard that Achong Lowe Ammee’s
Son is a member of both the Hy Sing and Hy San
Clubs, and that when he lately went from here to
Ligore, he was desired to communicate to the Siamese,
that there were but few People now at Penang, and
that it was a good opportunity for attacking it if the
Siamese were inclined to do so—upon being asked
who informed this ? he gives no direct answer and
only says he heard so.
( Signed ) R. GAUNTER.
There are seven (7 ) or eight (8) Chinese
Clubs (or Hooeys )in this Island, some of which
have been established several years. The avowed
object of these institutions is the relief of indigent
Brethren, and particularly to defray in a decent man-
ner the funeral expences of members dying without
that means. Owing to the propensity of the Chinese
to conspiracies, these Hooeys are I understand strictly
forbidden in China. Here they are formed chiefly, if
not solely, among what are termed the Canton or
Macao Chinese, of whom there may be about three
thousand (3,000) in this Island. The Chinchoo
Chinese may, if they please, become members of these
associations, and some of the Chinchoos are said to
belong to them, but they are chiefly composed of the
Canton Chinese, between whom and the Chinchoos
great jealousy and often hostility prevails.


When the Rajah of Ligore was at Kedah about
Two and a half (2|) or three (3) years ago, he carried
on a good deal of secret correspondence with the
Canton or Macao Chinese of this Place, got numbers
of them to go in some Junks he equipped, and sent
them to cruize to the Northward of and about Junk
Ceylon where they were reported, and I believe with
some truth, to have committed atrocious acts of
Piracy.
The Informant Choah Shimyep is a Chinchoo
Chinese.
(Signed) R. CAUNTKIi.




Printed for 'private circulation.
THE
BURNEY PAPERS
Vol. 11.
PART 11.
(May 1824 to July 182 G.)
Printed by order of the Vajiraiiana National Library.
BANG KOK
1911.




( Copy )
TO THE HONORABLE
W. E, PHILLIPS, Esq.
Governor in Council
Prince of Wales island.
Honorable Sir,
* # * * #
5. Should the difficulty of procuring boats in
sufficient number for the conveyance of the troops to
the capital prove insurmountable, it will be left to the
discretion of the officer commanding the expedition,
and the Political Agent to determine in what manner
we may best distress the Enemy by the capture of his
maritime possessions on the coast of Tenasserim and
Martaban. It is not unlikely therefore, that we may
take Tavoy, Merghui, and Junk Ceylon, In such an
event it has occurred to us, that the occupation of
these places may afford an opportunity of making a
%
desirable arrangement with the Government of Siam,
by our offering to give His Siamese Majesty posses-
sion of one or more of them, on the condition of his
restoring to the Rajah of Queda his Country, and
relinquishing for ever, all claims of supremacy over
that petty State. We should of course stipulate at the
same time with the Rajah that in return for our good
offices, he relinquishes all claim to the annual quit rent
for Prince of Wales’ Island. We shall be happy to be
favored with a communication of your sentiments on
these points.
6. We desire also to leave to your discretio 11
the time and mode of communicating to the Govern-
ment of Siam, the fact of our being actually at war
with the Burmese, and the extent of encouragement to
be held out to the former, to avail themselves of this
opportunity, of recovering the possessions;which have


been wrested from them. We shall direct a copy ot
this letter to be transmitted to the Resident at Sing-
apore, who will also be instructed to make such com-
munication to the Siamese, as may appear expedient,
regulating his conduct in that respect by the views
and sentiments which you may entertain on this point,
and which we request you will be pleased to intimate
to him as soon as may be convenient.
We have &ca.
{ Signed) AMHERST
( „ )J. FENDALL
Fort William
12th March 1824.
A true Copy
Geo. Swinton
Secy, to the Govt.


FORT WILLIAM 21st May 1824.
(Extracts)
To G. Swinton Esq.
Secy, to the Govt. FORT WILLIAM
Sir,
O * -m
The objects of tlie Burman Embassy to the Court
of Cocliin China, was to form an Offensive Alliance for
the Conquest and entire subjugation of the kingdom
of Siam which is called by the Burman Court without
hesitation a rebel Province. In this View a total
failure has attended the Mission, The Members of it
were not permitted to come to the Court at all and
never proceeded further than Saigon where they
appear to have been detained above nine months.
The Court of Cochin China on this occasion, not
only declined to enter into an offensive Alliance
against the Siamese, but shewed a strong reluctance
to maintain any close intercourse whatever with the
Burman nation deeming the connexion to be one which
promised no benefit to either party.
***»«•
The English Vessel Marianna returned from Siam
on the 81st of last month making a successful adven-
ture and receiving on the part of the Siamese Govern-
ment a treatment more fair and liberal than had
hitherto been experienced by an European or
American vessel. The adventurers are in consequence
of this favorable disposition now preparing for a
second voyage.


By this opportunity, I have had the honor to
receive favorable replies to the letters addressed to his
Highness the Prince Krom Chiat, and the Siamese
Minister on the 9th of Septr. last. No observation
has been made upon the letter of Govt, transmitted
at the same time, but its receipt is acknowledged b} T a
present of Eagle Wood for the Right Honble. the
Govr. Genl. in return for the gifts which were trans-
mitted from this place. And the silence of the
Siamese Court may fairly be viewed as an acquiescence
in the remonstrance which it contained.
I have &ca.
( Signed ) -i, CRAWFURD
Rest.
Singapore
22d April 1824


An Account of the late Mission from the Court of
Ava to that of Cochin China. Extracted from the
Notes of One of the Members of the Mission. 22
April 1824.
« * V* *
They (the Ambassadors ) observed that they did
not consider the intercourse between the Burmans
and Cochin Chinese a matter of any difficulty since
the one was in possession of the Northern and the
other of the Southern extremity of the great River of
Cambpja and if the Siamese who occupied the centre,
were conquered every difficulty would be removed and
an easy intercourse carried on
The Ambassadors insisted that the Siamese were
rebels, having been frequently conquered by the
Burmans and that their subjugation was a point on
which His present Burman’s Majesty was resolved.
■;> # ?> *
June 20th [1823]. The Cambojians on this
occasion expressed much dislike ot the Siamese, but
the Burman Ambassadors tho’ thro’ dislike feigned to
please the Cochin Chinese as he was convinced that
the Cambojians are at present much more oppressed
than they were under the Siamese Govt.
June 30th The Govr. Genl. asked the Burmans
whether they were in earnest when they said they
intended to make war on the Siamese and he added
that in his opinion there must also be a war between
the English and Siamese on account of the Raja of
Qaeda and the Seizure of his Country. The first Member
of the Mission replied that he had heard nothing of a
FORT WILLIAM 21st May 1824.


war between the Siamese ami English during his
residence at Prince Wales Island.
July 10th The ambassadors also dwelt on the
circumstance of having the King of Queda as an
ally and the facilities which the King of Ava had for
raising a Naval force for the purpose of laying waste
the Sea Coast of the Siamese Territory on account of
the number of Seafaring Strangers residing in his
Territories. The Secretary replied with Candour. He
said that His Excellency the Govr. Genl. was
well acquainted with the Members of the Siamese
forces, their discipline and the Siamese mode of con-
ducting. war but he was perfectly ignorant of the nature
of the Burman Army and their habits of warfare.
v- # *
His Excellency asked whether it was probable
there would be war between the English and Siamese
on account of the protection which the former gave to
the King of Queda under pretence that he was their
ally, while in fact lie was a Subject and Tributary of
Siam. The Ist Minister replied that the English were
too powerful a people for the Siamese to attempt any
tiling against. His Excellency said that he supposed
the English had an eye on Junk Ceylon, Pulo Sada,
Queda, and Perak, which would render Penang the
centre of a large trade and that the Malay Peninsula
was now necessary to support Penang as she had lost
the trade of the Eastern Countries thro’ the means of
Singapore. The Ist Member of the Mission answered
that thro’* might probably be the case for that the
English were great Politicians that they did nothing
without a reason and would never make war on the
Siamese unless the latter were aggressors but that
they never put up with insults . . . Today they were
informed of the arrival of the Aunt of the King of
Camboja. This Lady was the wife of a Siamese Prince


who after his death and having no Children by hint
retired to her own Country.
She expressed a wish to have some conversation,
with the Siamese Interpreter to the Barman Mission
and lie went accordingly ; this affair was misrepresented
to the Govr. and in consequence Ong Bok the
Guardian ot the Mission was severely reprimanded.
An old Mandarin of inferior rank attached to the
Mission was punished by the Wooden Collar, and
Antonio the Portuguese Interpreter received blows.
* «- ?{ - «
Octr. 31st - - - The Mission about this time
received Intelligence that the Siamese Govt, having
come to the knowledge of the Correspondence which
is carrying on between Ava and Cochin China had
begun to fortify the City of Bangkok and had doubled
the chain or bomb which crosses the river Menam.
Even the Chinese inhabitants who are not usually
called upon on such occasions were employed upon
this work.


Notes respecting the Conquest of the Burmau
Province of Tavoy and Mergui. 19 April 1824.
« # » # *
The Provinces of Tavoy and Mergui formed a
portion of the Siamese Territory until conquered
between 40 or 50 years ago by the Burmans. The in-
habitants are however neither Burmans nor Siamese
but a peculiar race with a language of their own.
They are called by the Siamese Meng
It is with much difficulty that the Burmans are
able to maintain these 2 Provinces, even against
the feeble attacks of the Siamese. In fact they are
removed from the strength and resources of both
Nations. They could only be easily conquered, or
effectually protected by a Maritime force which
neither nation can sdpply. Ou the land side they
are everywhere rendered difficult to approach by
ranges of mountains and extensive forests thro’
which a Burmau or Siamese Army cannot be led to
any effectual purpose owing to the difficulty or
impossibility of provisioning and keeping them
together which is incident to their barbarous modes
of warfare.
FORT WILLIAM 21st May 1824.


FORT WILLIAM 11th June 1824.
TO THE RIGHT HONBLE. LORD AMHERST
Governor General in Council
FORT WILLIAM
My Lord,
We have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of
the several Dispatches of Your Lordship in Council
dated 27th Jany. and 12th March* and we lose no time
'in reporting the proceedings which we have adopted
and are about to adopt thereupon.
Previous to the receipt of the first of these Dis-
patches, our President had opened a Negotiation with
the Rajah of Ligor under the following Circumstances.
The Court of Ava having deputed some Envoys with
letters and presents to the King of Kedda at this
Settlement, in return for an application which His
Highness had secretly, and very imprudently made for
assistance against the Siamese Govt., The Governor
took advantage of the presence of these Envoys to
work on the fear of the Rajah of Ligore by forwarding
a letter to him notifying their arrival and object here,
and offering his mediation towards removing the
existing differences between Siam and the King of
Kedda.
The Rajah of Ligore fulfilled the expectations of
our President by an immediate reply to his letter,
expressing his readiness to acquiesce in an adjustment
of the Affairs of Kedda, and unable himself to repair
to Kedda he deputed two Messengers to this Settle-
ment for the purpose of receiving and discussing our
President’s propositions. After several conferences,
therefore, with these Messengers and the King of
Kedda The Honble. the Governor drew up the terms


of an Agreement upon which he proposed the latter
should be reinstated in his Kingdom, and a Copy of
these terms the Messengers engaged to convey without
to their Master at Ligore.
In this stage of the Negotiations Your Lord-
O o
ship’s Dispatch of the 27th of Jany, and a copy of
the declaration of Hostilities against the Burmese
Govt, reached us whereupon our President, with the
assistance of Lieutt. Low, an Officer who has ac-
quired a thorough knowledge of the Siamese langu-
age, explained fully to the Rajah of Ligore’s Mes-
sengers the Causes of our rupture with Ava, and its
probable effects on our relations with Siam, and
furnished them with a Correct Siamese Translation
of your Lordship’s Proclamation of the 6th of March,
with which these people hurried back to Ligore,
In the Enclosure marked A * we beg to submit
for the further information of Your Lordship in
Council, Copies of the different Letters and Minutes
that our President has recorded, fully detailing the
nature and progress of his Negotiations with the-
Rajah of Ligore, which he lias endeavoured strictly
to regulate according to the equitable and moderate
line marked out in the different instructions received
from the Supreme Govt.
We now beg to reply to your Lordship’s im-
portant dispatch of the 12th ulto.
* # » *
( Here follow particulars of measures proposed
to be adopted for aiding the attack on Ava.)
The observations of your Lordship in Council
with respect to the Rajah of Ligore have further
induced us to determine on deputing Lieutt. Lovr
immediately to His Highness at Ligore, for the


purpose of enabling him more effectually to compre-
hend the nature of our intended operation against
Ava, of inviting him to afford us his aid and co-
operation. so far as to dispatch forthwith to Rangoon,
either on his own account or on some fixed rate of
hire to this Govt, all the Boats and small Vessels
which he can Command at Trang and the different
Ports of Kedda.
We feel considerable hesitation in holding out
any encouragement to His Highness of Ligore to
attack the Southern Possessions of Ava, until we
ascertain the progress of the British Troops at
Rangoon. Should these immediately obtain all the
objects of the war, we might be embarrassed by the
situation into which the Rajah of Ligore would find
himself under an implied pledge of support or pro-
tection from us. In Knclosure B. are Copies of a
letter from our Marine Department and of the
instructions with which we propose to furnish Lieutt.
Low,* and we here only beg to add, that Junk
’ Ceylon according to our latest advices, is in the
possession of the Siamese.
We shall take an immediate opportunity of
transmitting to the Resident at Singapore a copy of
the present letter, as containing our views and
sentiments on the subject of your Lordship’s
Dispatch, and we shall leave to his judgement and
discretion what direct communication shall be made
on this occasion to the Court of Siam. We shall
only desire Lieutt. Low to request the Rajah of
Ligore to transmit to that Court immediately from
Ligore a Copy of the Correct Siamese Translation of
your Lordship’s Declaration of Hostilities; . . .
We have &c.
(Sd.) W. E. PHILLIPS
J. MACALISTER.
W. A. CLUBLEY.
Fort Cornwallis
the 26th April 1524.


Bengal Secret
and Political
Consultations*
Vol. 323.
No. 2.
* No. I Letter from the
WSinister of the King of Ava
to the King of Kedda.
No. 2 Letter from the
Rajah Tavoy to the King of
Kedda.
No. 3 Letter from the
Rajah of Tavoy to the Govr.
of Prince of Wales’ Island.
These letters Fl’Ol
follow this Guesfc of
document.
The President.
My Colleagues are of course aware of the arrival
at the settlement of some Messengers of rank from the
Birman Dominions; and I have now the honor to lay
from the before them translations of letters'"' which
ng of Ava 1 1
!da . they have brought for the King ot Ivedda
from the a nd myself, accompanied by several Presents
ie King of , ■ 1 TT .
from the King ot Ava, as well as tor His
from the Majesty of Kedda as for the Chiefs of
the Govr.
r island. Perak Salangore and Patani.
Prom these Documents we may learn that our
Guest of Kedda has, notwithstanding our repeated and
positive injunctions to the contrary, opened a cor-
respondence with the Court of Ava, which has received
most favorably his Application for aid and support
against the Siamese, evincing in its reply, not only a
willingness to interfere on his behalf, but an anxiety to
render His Highness tributary to itself in future.
However displeased we may be with the Conduct
of the King of Kedda for invoking the assistance of
Ava without our knowledge and contrary to our desire,
the mischief is now done; and as we cannot dismiss
His Highness without throwing him into the Arms
of Ava, it becomes our duty to consider what line of
policy is most expedient for this Govt, to adopt on
the present conjuncture.
The extension of the Bi rman power to this vicinity
appears to me much more undesirable than that of the
►Siamese, in as much as the Court of Ava, with an
equal portion of jealousy and prejudice towards the
European character, possesses greater power and from
its contact with our Eastern Continental Frontiers, is
much more like to come into collision with the British
FORT WILLIAM lltli June 1821.


Govt. - It is our first duty however, and we owe it
ourselves, and to our repeated earnest declarations of
preserving a strict neutrality between the Siamese and
the King of Kedda, to apprize the Rajah of Li gore of
the arrival of these Ambassadors from the King of
Ava and of the specific object for which they have been
deputed without our concurrence or previous knowledge.
Such a course of action is the more expedient because
in making the communication to the Chief of Ligor
we may peihaps render his fear of the Birmans
subservient to the accomplishment of our great object
of restoring the King of Kedda to his ancient
dominions, and securing again the interposition of a
friendly Malay Chief and State between us and the
neighbouring haughty and barbarous Govt.
Referring therefore to the sentiments expressed
in the Dispatches of the Supreme Govt, under date
the 25th Feby. 1821, 11th Jany. 1822 and the 20th
Feby. 1823,* wherein under certain circumstances
this Govt, is authorized to offer its mediation for the
adjustment of all disputes between Siam and Kedda,
on the basis of the Rajah’s holding his territory either
on the Conditions which it may be shown by the
Siamese heris bound to perform, regulated on principles
of equity with reference to the resources of his state, or
if more agreeable to the Siamese, under an engagement
to pay a tribute in money in commutation of all other
demands, for the punctual discharge of which we will
be answerable : I beg to acquaint the Board that I
have transmitted a Secret and Confidential Letter,*"
of which the enclosed is a Copy, to the Rajah of Ligor,
inviting him to repair to Kedda. and offering on his
arrival there, to depute an Agent to him for the
purpose of negotiating a fair and equitable adjustment
of the subsisting differences between him and His
Highness of Kedda.
My Colleagues will I hope, observe in my letter,
that at the same time that 1 have endeavoured to alarm


the Rajah of Ligor into an acceptance of my preferred
mediation by holding out to him the prospect of an
interference on the part of Ava, 1 have taken especial
care to prevent any discredit resulting to the British
Govt, from a refusal on his part, by distinctly
marking that my offer proceeds solelj’ from sentiments
of general good will to neighbouring and friendly
states. Should His Highness accept my communica-
tion in the spirit in which it has been made and repair
to Kedda, 1 shall lose no time in soliciting the aid of
the Board towards enabling me to open and conclude
with him such a negotiation as may be conformable
to the instructions of our Superiors, beneficial to our
Ally of Kedda, and permanently advantageous to the
Interests of our Houble. Employers.
(Signed) W. E. PHILLIPS.


No. 1.
TRANSLATION of a letter from the Ministers ot the
King of Ava to the Rajah of Quedah.
After much praise of the Power, greatness and
exalted Character of the mighty King of Ava, they
proceed.—
“The King of Quedah sent Che Lunang and
Mahomed Ally with a letter and presents which were
brought to one of the southern Ports of the Kingdom,
and the Rajah of Tawei forwards them to Changong.
Intelligence having reached Pegue, measures were taken
for forwarding the letter and Messengers to the Golden
Palace. The race of the present mighty King were
the first of mankind who arose after the formation ot
the world, and the Titles of His Majesty are Maha Sem-
d »,k and S3.nl Senak. Whoever requires assistance this
mighty King lends his support to, for it is his custom
to render aid. The Rajah of Quedah solicits assistance
and lie will assuredly obtain it, in reference to the
communications of Che Lanang and Mahomed Ally.
These Messengers reported that Quedah, Purl is,
Perak, Salangore and Patani, five States were
concerting to send a Complimentary offering hither.
The King of Quedah being thoughtless or off his
guard, the Siamese came suddenly upon him and
secured his Country, and he removed to Pulo Penang*
where he at present resides. They also reported that
there are three States who were concerting to attack
the Siamese at Quedah and expel them from the
Country. It was also mentioned by the messengers
that they were ordered to present themselves before
the King without delay, and that, they were expected
to go and come in four months ; and finally, that it
they did not return in four months, the people of
FORT WILLIAM 11th June 1824.


these three Countries before alluded to would proceed
to attack the Siamese at Quedali.
The great King enquired whether there were any
other States besides these interested, and the Envoys
replied there was Rumbow, Rhio, Dungon, Marong,
Pahang, Callantan and Tringano. The King then
demanded if, in the event of the five States before
mentioned being united and determined to attack the
Siamese, how would the Kings of the seven last men-
tioned Countries be disposed to act. Would they join
also? He further enquired if there were any more
Countries, besides those already enumerated, and the
Messengers replied that there was a King at Acheen,
and that if all the other States were unanimous, he
would Join also.
Che Lanang and Mahomed Ally came here at the
unfavorable Monsoon, and when they arrived on the
Coast, the weather was very boisterous. The}’ did not
therefore reach the Golden Palace till the Month of
Shaban, and in the month of Jamidalawal ten months
will have expired. The King of Quedah has Solicited
assistance ; so has the King of Cochin China ( Cochee )
begged aid. To Cochin-China people have already
been sent, for the application from that Country was
made first ; the King of Quedah’s subsequently, and
besides the intelligence regarding the King of Quedah
is not precise. When positive and circumstantial ac-
counts are received, he certainly shall be assisted and
an armament shall be sent fully prepared and equipped
to attack the Siamese ; and the King of Quedah shall
be restored to his Country ; the five States will then
become like Ornaments of the Golden Palace.
Titles of distinction have been conferred upon the
■Chiefs of the five States ; a Golden Umbrella and a
complete equipment for a horse has also been sent for
each. The King of Quedah is requested to enquire it
the Rumbow, Rhio, Dungon, Marang, Callantan,
Pahang, and Tringano and the seven states of Acheen


will join or not. The King of Quedah will sent In-
telligence of such as refuse to join to the Golden Palace,
and return the people who convey this without any
long delay.
The presents have bqen given in Charge to Che
Lanang and Mahomed Ally to be carried to the King of
Kedda, and the great King has ordered people to be sent
in Company to prevent the Messengers suffering any
trouble in the way. When the}" arrive he will receive
them and obtain intelligence from Cochin China. As
the King of Quedah has begged assistance from the
King of the Golden Palace, let him not be mistrustful or
suspicious. As to the Titles and the Horse Equipment
the King orders them to to be preserved and taken
care of or respected, for according to the Custom of
the great King of the Golden Palace, is the greatest
favour that can be bestowed.
Th King of Quedah will make known all circum-
stances that may have transpired since the Dispatch of
his Envoys Che Lanang and Mahomed Ally - to Ava.
that every thing may be known, as well as all intelli-
gence relating to the King of the Seven States —and he
will address his communications to the llajah of Tawei.
No date.
( The letter written in the Burmah character was
rendered into Malays of which the above is
A true Translation.)
{ Sd.) JOHN ANDERSON,
Malay Translr. to Govt.
Penang 22d. Jany. 1824.


No. 2.
Translation of a letter from the Rajah of Tawei or
Tavoy to the Honble. William Edward Phillips
Governor of Prince of Wales Island.
The King of Ava is Supreme over all the Burmaii
Countries, and of the ten different Species of Elephants
in his possession the white one is the largest and
most powerful. He has also the Supernatural Horse
and Carriage and the Spear and the Sword, these five
things appertain to the great and Mighty King. His
gracious Majesty was pleased to confer on me the
Govt, of Tawei with 80 Towns or Provinces under it
and all its Dependencies, Coasts, Bays and Creeks.
This I make known that in the same manner as the
King of Europe has exalted the Governor of Penang so
have I received authority and rank from the King of
Ava. Like the first men who were created after the
formation of the world, the great King of Ava is just
and equitable, and the ancestors of the present King
from former generations have preserved friendly re-
lations with the King of Europe, so has the present
King maintained a friendly understanding and Traders
have gone and come, both Countries have become one
and are reciprocally friendly.
The Siamese have come and created a disturbance
in the Quedah Country and destroyed it, and the King
of Quedah went to reside at Penang. The King of
Quedah sent people to represent this to the great
King, who felt compassion or kindness towards him,
and gave him a Supply of Rice and complete equip-
ment of Royal Clothing. The Mighty King sent
a letter to me desiring me to take care of the
King of Quedah's Envoys, and give them safe Convoy
FORT WILLIAM, 11th June 1824.


with 5 Prows and upwards of 100 Men, that they might*
return to their Master in safety. The names of the
Chiefs who accompany this letter are Sikie Dogi Net
Mir /e Jaksa, Sejee Jagoom Surakin, Jagoom Zb-
Yakin-da Jak Kin Soo, and Nei Mion Si Siouk Noita.
Of tliese five Chiefs the first named is the highest in
rank. When he arrives at Penang, I beg lie may be
allowed to return with ease. Pulo Penang is an
extremity of the King of Europe’s DominionAand
Tawai is an extremity of the King of Ava’s Empire.
These two Countries are like one. If the Govr. ot
Pulo Penang requires any thing, he will be pleased t<>
let me know, and if we want any thing, we will
acquaint him.
Dated in the year 1185. loth of the Month
corresponding with the 18th of Deer. 1823.
( A True Translation )
(Sd.) JOHN ANDERSON,
Malay Translr. of Govt.
Pulo Penang
the loth Janry. 1824.


No. 3.
TRANSLATION of a, letter from the Rajah of Tavvei
or Tavoy to the Rajah of Quedah at Pulo Penang.—
After a lengthened panegyric of the King of the
Golden Palace ( Ava ) he proceeds,—
“The Rajah of Quedah who governs 118 Towns
is informed that the Rajah ot Tawei received intelli-
gence that the Siamese had oppressed Quedah, and
the Rajah of Tawei assisted in communicating the
same to the King of the Golden Palace, forwarding at
the same time Che Lanang and Mahomed Ally with
the presents to the mighty King. The King of the
Golden Palace on hearing this was impressed with
feelings of compassion for the Rajah of Quedah, for
it is the peculiar Character of the King that when he
hears of the distress of any one he instantly feels a
disposition to relieve.
Che Lanang and Mahomed AIL 7- came and pre-
sented themselves before the great King and represented
the circumstances of the King of Quedah, Purlis,
Patani, Perak and Sal ingore, but he is anxious to hear
again all particulars of the present state of Affairs in
these Countries and when these five states have finally
settled and their fidelity is assured an Armament will
be prepared and sent to attack and retake the Country
of Quedah and restore it to the King of Quedah, As
to the four Countries they will never be exposed to
difficulty for the time to come, nor will the Siamese
be able to disturb them again. As tile great King-
protects the States dependent upon him, so will he
guard the King of Quedah and the four other States
above mentioned ; wherefore, of his favor, he has been
FORT WILLIAM 11th June 1824.


pleased to confer Titles with a magnificent equipment*
to each.
Che Lanang, Mahomed Ally, Chang Buk, Buan
and Jehnan have also been invested with titles and a
dress. the King showed them the same attention and
kindness that he would to his own subjects. The
Chiefs of Quedah, Purlis, Perak, Salingore and Patani
have now been invested with titles of distinction and
have had each a splendid present granted to them.
The K ing requests that enquiries may be made relative
to the other States, and that such information as may
be obtained may be sent according to the desire ex-
pressed in the large letter from the great King, which
accompanies this.
Che Lanang and Mahomed Ally returned to Tawei
on the 12th da}’ of the Month Neon in the year 1185,
and the ship with Pungulee Seree and Noquedah
Senahuang arrived about a month after. Inquiries
were made of the two messengers relative to the King
of Quedah. how he was situated at present, and the
purport of their deputation, and they replied that they
had been sent by the Rajah of Quedah with a com-
plimentary present of a Clock which was received at
Tawei; a letter explanatory of all the circumstances
relating to the King of Quedah was prepared by the
Rajah of Tawei, and forwarded with the Clock to the
King of the Golden Palace. Noquedah Limbuang
remained at Tawei to await the orders that might be
received in reply, by the persons who were deputed to
wait on the great King.
The Messengers Pangula Seree Che Lanang and
Mahomed Ally with the letter, titles of distinction and
presents are now returning, and in order that they
may meet with no interruption in the way the accom-
panying five chiefs of consequence of Tawei vizt.
* Literally a magnificent dress; and the present
consists of a long gilt umbrella, a set of furniture for a
Horse, and lackered Stand for Dinner Service.


Sehei Dqje Nei Mia /e Jaksa Sejee Jagoom Surakefi,
Jagoom Ze Yakeri, Jo Jak Kire Soo and Hei Meoie
8i Seouk Naita were directed to escort them in safety
to Palo Penang. When they arrive the Rajah of
Quedah will acquaint them with all circumstances
which may have transpired since the dispatch of his
Envoys Che Lanang and Mahomed Ally, and also
communicate the same by letter, which may be given
in Charge to these five persons.
As to the Rice and Paddy which the Rajah of
Quedah requested, it has been given according to his
desire, and permission was given also to load the ship
according to the pleasure of the persons in Charge.
The quantity is 44 Coyans.
The King of the Golden Palace requires some Tin
for the Roof of the Palace and sends 30 Coyans of
Rice which he begs may be sold, and the proceeds
invested in Tin, which may be delivered to the five
Chiefs. The whole quantitjr of Rice shipped therefore
is 74 Coyans. Now the King of Quedah with a candid
heart wishes to become tributary to the Golden Palace,
and the great King will protect him and Cherish his
Children and Children's Children, even his remotest
descendants and promote their prosperity and welfare.
It is requested the Rajah of Quedah will assist in
selling the Rice according to the Market Price of
Penang, and Purchase the Tin at the value of the.
day, sending a letter also containing all particulars.
No date.
This letter was rendered from Burmahs into the
Malayan language of which this is -
( A true Translation )
( Bd. ) JOHN ANDERSON,
Malay Translr. to Govt.
Penang
23rd. Jany 1824.


No. 4.
To the Rajah of Ligore. [? Jan. 1824.|
1 lose no time in making to the Rajah of Ligore
an important communication which I desire he will
for the present consider Secret and Confidential. An
Ambassador has been deputed by the Emperor of Ava
to the King of Kedda at Penang, and it is known to-
me that not only the Birman but several other states
in the neighbourhood have made overtures to the
Rajah of Kedda to restore him to the throne. True
however to the principles of neutrality which the
British Giovt. has ever declared it would preserve
between Siam and Kedda, and willing to convince
you of my sincere desire of always maintaining
towards your Highness a friendly and candid line of
Conduct, I now write to communicate the above
important intelligence to you, and further to acquaint
you, that if you will immediately repair to Kedda,
I shall have no objection to depute a confidential
agent to your Highness for the purpose of making
some fair and equitable arrangements towards restor-
ing the Rajah of Kedda to his ancient Dominions, and
precluding the interference of other States. The
British Government offers this mediation between
Siam and the Rajah of Kedda from the most disin-
terested and benevolent Motives, and my friend must
have too much wisdom and good sense not to discover
that an immediate acceptance of this mediation on his
part may relieve him from a load of anxiety and
difficulty, and save his Imperial Master much, eventual
expense and embarrassment. It is absolutely neces-
sary that my friend should not delay an hour in
coming to Kedda and the moment he apprizes me ot
his arrival there my Agent shall be dispatched to him.
(Signed) W. E. PHILLIPS—Governor. ,
FORT WILLIAM 11th June 1824.


THE PRESIDENT.
In requesting the Board to refer to the Proceed-
ings recorded in my Minute of the sth of Feby. I
have now great pleasure in notifying that the Rajah of
Ligor lias realized my expectations and although
unable to come down to Kedah himself, has lost no
time in deputing two Envoys with the annexed satis-
factory reply (No. I j and with expressions of hhi
readiness to accept the mediation which I had offered
between him and the King of Kedah,
After several interviews A. & B, with these
Envoi’s in order to ascertain the Elijah of Ligore’s
views, and with the King of Kedah, in view to learn
what sacrifice he was prepared to make, I have
drawn out the accompanying Letter ( No. 2 ) for
the Rajah of Ligor, with the terms of an Agreement
( No. 3 ) proposed to be concluded between him and
the King of Kedah. The Envoys not possessing full
powers to form a conclusive engagement with the
King of Kedah they propose to depart in a day or
two with my propositions, and to return with the
Rajah of Ligor’s Answer as soon as possible.
In the first instance they entirely and readily
admitted the propriety and fairness of every article
of my proposed agreement, but at the last interview
they began to express some dcubts whether their
Master would be satisfied with the equivalent which
I offer for the Boongha Mas and former services of
Vassalage required from Kedah. On the other hand,
the King of Kedah is so pleased and delighted with
the whole of my proposed arrangement, that should
tire Rajah of Ligor require a larger Sura of Money
than what 1 now offer, I am convinced he will
willingly agree to yield annually to Siam a greater
portion of the stipend he receives from us; in order
FORT WILLIAM 11th June 1824.


to obtain so satisfactory an adjustment of the
differences and future relations between Siam and
Kedah. In the whole of my correspondence and
discussions with the Ligore Envoys, I have received
the greatest Assistance from Lieutt. Low, whose
complete knowledge of the Siamese language enabled
him to interpret freely between us and to translate
directly' into that tongue my proposed letter and
terms of agreement, so that the Envoys immediately
understood their whole spirit and tenor.
These Envoys brought to me also another letter
(No. 4) from the Rajah of Ligor in reply to my
repeated Communications respecting the Murder of
Libby Ghaney at Kedah in the month of June last.
It states, and the Envoys have solemnly confirmed
the truth of his statement, that the Rajah has made
great exertion to discover the perpetrators of that
atrocious murder, and that he has seized and put
to the torture several suspected persons whom he
has still in confinement. I hope therefore my
Colleague Mr. Clubley will be perfectly satisfied
with this information, and will not think that the
accompanying reply (No. 5) which I propose to
send to the Rajah of Ligor, expressing myself per-
fectly satisfied with the Conduct of His Highness
and requesting him to release the suspected persons,
should their guilt not be substantiated by the
Evidence of two or more witnesses, and to bury in
oblivion the discussion relative to Libby Ghaney, is
dictated in too forbearing and moderate a tone.
Since adopting the measures above reported, I
have received the accompanying dispatch from the
Supreme Govt, of 29th Jany. replying to our letter
of the 25 October, and to various other communica-
tions respecting the affairs of Kedah. Whilst I
rejoice at obtaining the Concurrence of His Lordship
in Council to the views and sentiments which I
expressed on this important subject, I do not think


the Dispatch now received requires any alteration in
the line of conduct which I have pursued towards
the Rajah of Ligor’s Envoys, except that 1 should
add a paragraph in my Letter to His Highness,
notifying the important intelligence which has been
just received at this settlement, of the Supreme
Govt, of Ava.
( Signed ) W. E. PHILLIPS,
15th April 1824.


No. 1.
f j RANSL AT lON of a letter from the Rajah of
Ligore to the Honble. W. E. Phillips Governor of
Pulo Penang.
After Compliments.
I have to acquaint my friend that the letter
which he sent to Quedah was forwarded to me at
Ligore, and I received it on Friday the sixth day of
the Moon’s descent in the third Month. It was
translated info Siamese and I fully understood the
contents. It is said the Ava people have brought a
letter to the Rajah of Quedah, who is residing at
Pulo Penang; that the Burmahs have concerted
with two or three Malayan Countries and that they
intend to restore the Quedah Country to the King.
Now T wish to communicate with my friend
with real sincerity that he may not entertain any
suspicion, in order that every thing may be con-
ducted with propriety and friendship and good
understanding established. As the Ryots and War-
riors of the King of Siam are extremely numerous
we are not afraid of being much perplexed by the
attempts of Ava which wishes to join the Malayan
Countries and take by force the Quedah Country
which has long been a state tributary to Siam;
there will not many Burmahs and Malays come and
a Siamese Armament shall be sent which will reduce
them to Atoms. Ava and Siam have long been
accustomed to fight.
When the Burmahs formerly came to attack
Salang ( Junk Ceylon ) and they wished to settle
there, they were unable to do so and the number of
Burmahs who died was immense, which was a good
FORT WILLIAM 11th Jane 1824.


sample to them for once. Quedah is far from Ava r
hut near to Siam ; the Burmahs and Malays wish
to take Quedah by force and to reside there ; but
the Siamese will not permit them and speedily
expel them; if Ava wishes to send assistance, he
cannot, for that Country is distant.
If the Rajah of Quedah thinks to effect this by
force, he is mistaken, and a Siamese armament shall
be sent to reduce him and he shall not be permitted
to remain there, but if he is disposed to adopt a
conciliatory course or pursue a good road and solicit
my assistance, I will use my influence with the
King of Siam to effect his return to his former
Kampong in his own Country.
My friend who lives under the Govt, of the
English says he is of sincere heart and as his heart
is upright such is ours, he says he will not interfere
on either side, but preserve neutrality and for his
letter to this effect which lu has sent me I return
many thanks.
As to Avhat is said respecting my coming to
Quedah with my force to consult and settle respect-
ing the Bajah of Quedah ; if I were to proceed there
at present there would be some difficulty in procur-
ing Paddy, my people would not only be in distress
but the Ryots of the Country would also suffer. If
however there are any hostilities, I shall come with,
a large armament at once.
With respect to the desire to consult relative to
returning the King of Quedah to his Country to
govern according to former Custom, it appears to
me also proper. If the Rajah of Quedah will con-
sider and act with propriety, I will assist him, and I
will be his security (or support him ) but I am ap-
prehensive he does not yet place confidence in me ;
wherefore, I now send Koon Aksorn and Kie Nimore
to wait upon my friend and consult with him upon


the Rajah of Quedah’s business agreeably to what is
mentioned in my friend’s letter, and to ascertain,
with certainty his wishes ; my friend will write to
me by Koon Aksorn and Kie Nitnor, that I may fully
comprehend.
When I am informed of his intentions, I will
devise means in some way or other to settle this ;
that there may be no disagreement in the road of
friendship ; and Koon Aksorn and Kie Nimor who
are now sent on this occasion will, with my friend’s
permission, have a meeting with the Rajah of
Quedah.
( A true Translation )
(Signed) JOHN ANDEESON
Malay Translr. to Govt.
Penang
Ist April 1824.


No. 2.
Memorandum.
Letter from the Rouble. W. E. PHILLIPS, Esqre.
Govr. of Prince of Wales Island to the Rajah of
Ligore.
The Governor of Penang has received the reply,
which the Rajah of Ligore has sent to his Letter of
the 10 day of the Moon’s decrease, in the Month of
January, and which was delivered to him by the
two Envoys, Ivoon Aksorn and Nai Nee ring.
Although the Govr. of Penang laments that his
Highness could not come to Kedda in as much as
his being on the spot would have saved much trouble
and delay, yet to prove his sincerity and good will
towards the Rajah of Ligore, he has treated his
two Envoys with every kindness and consideration,
and has fully discussed with them the different points
at issue between the King of Kedda and Siam, and
the views and wishes of the British Govt, con-
cerning the same.
The Governor of Penang must premise by
repeating what has been often communicated to the
Rajah of Ligore, that the British Government in
offering its mediation in favor of the King of
Kedda, is influenced by the most liberal and disin-
terested motives. It seeks, and naturally seeks, to
afford every friendly assistance and protection to its
ancient ally, and it is anxious to promote and secure
the quiet and welfare of the small surrounding
states, and to prevent quarrels and wars between the
more powerful states. But to attain such objects, it
does not look for any gain or territorial aggrandise-
ment, and, unless provoked, it has resolved not
to interfere in the affairs of Kedda, as far as
regards Siam and its dependencies, in any other
FORT WILLIAM 11th June 1824.


manner than by giving temperate counsel and advice,
and by offering its good offices and mediation in
favor of the Rajah of Kedda.
There is no doubt that the Rajah of Ligore has
derived no benefit or advantage from invading
Kedda, and that the difference of Religion, Langua-
ge and Custom, between its inhabitants and those
of his Highnesses Country, cannot justify any
opinion, that the Rajah of Ligore will hereafter be
able to derive any benefit or advantage from a con-
tinued occupation of the territories of Kedda. His
Highness will not only be constantly troubled with
the rebellions and machinations of the Malayan
Inhabitants, until Kedda becomes a perfect desert,
but he may also bring down upon himself and upon
the Court of Siam, all the evils and inconveniences
of an extensive hostile enterprise on the part of the
surrounding states.
It is therefore clear to the Governor of Penang
and must be equally so to the Rajah of Ligore, that
the most prudent and judicious course will be for
the Rajah of Kedda to be allowed to return to his
Country, and to rule it again according to its
ancient Laws and usages.
How so desirable an arrangement may be most
effectually adopted has been the subject of long and
anxious meditation to the Governor of Penang, but
after consulting very fully with the King of Kedda
and the Rajah of Ligore’s Envoys he is decidedly of
Opinion, that the enclosed propositions for settling
the disputes between Kedda and Siam, and for
restoring an honorable pacification between the
Rajah of Ligore and the King of Kedda are
moderate, just and necessary.
The King of Kedda has entirely agreed to
them, and if the Rajah of Ligore is sincere in his
desire of securing the good will and friendship


of the British Government, and in his expres-
sions of readiness to accept the offered media-
tion of the Governor of Penang, he cannot hesitate
a moment, in acceding also to these terms, and
in giving an immediate and unequivocalpprooff f
( and no proof could possibly be more honor-
able to his own Character, as well as gratifying to
the Governor of Penang ) of his determination to
confirm what he has so often written, and what ha
has more particularly instructed his Envoys to come
and declare to the Governor of Penang, by fulfilling
at once the 3d. of the enclosed articles of agreement,
proposed to be entered into between His Highness
and the King of Kedda,
'I he Rajah of Ligore, as well as the King of
Kedda, has expressed himself willing to abide by
the arbitration of the Governor of Penang who has
no desire but to reconcile these Chiefs on a basis
that may be honorable to themselves as well as
calculated to secure and promote the peace and
welfare of the surrounding states. The King of
Kedda will address an appropriate Letter to the
Rajah of Ligore, soliciting his friendship, and good
offices, and the Governor of Penang has only to beg
that if the Rajah of Ligore is not satisfied with the
terms which are now proposed to him for adjusting
the affairs of Kedda, he will come down to Kedda
himself, or depute some Envoys with full Powers to
form a conclusive engagement, and then instead of
the present tedious and unprofitable mode of
negotiation, the Governor of Penang will have it in
his power to ascertain more correctly the precise
views and feelings of the Rajah of Ligore, and to-
explain to His Highness more fully and satisfactorily
the different important considerations, which recom-
mend an early settlement of the existing disputes
between Kedda and Siam, and in fact, an immediate
acceptance of the accompanying terms of agreement,,
on the part of the Rajah of Ligore.


Lastly, the Governor of Penang thinks it right
to give the best proof to the Rajah of Ligore, that
the English are friendly to the Siamese, by
acquainting His Highness, that the British Govern-
ment has declared war against the Burmese, and
are about to attack the Country of Ava on an
extensive scale.
(Signed) W. E. PHILLIPS.


No. 3.
MEMORANDUM for Negotiation with the
Rajah of Ligor.
1. The Rajah of Kedda in lieu of the hereto-
fore unprofitable and irregularly sent ‘*Bunga Mass”
will pay to the Court of Siam an annual sum of
Spanish Dollars 2,000 on condition that such sum
shall ensure inviolate the Territory of Kedda, and
exempt it from all other Claims in Money, Men,
armed Prows or Provisions by Siam or its Depen-
dencies.
2. The Rajah of Kedda to be guaranteed the
free navigation and transition of all produce and
Merchandize up and down the rivers which enter into
his Territories through any Country subject to the
Siamese authority or Government.
3. Every member or Dependant of the Kedda
Family forcibly taken from the Country of Kedda
and now retained either at Siam or Ligor to be im-
mediately released and returned to Kedda together
with their Property.
4. Every Siamese to be withdrawn from the
Kedda Territory and care to be taken that the Malays
are not molested nor their Property plundered by the
Siamese while effecting their retreat. Any violation of
this compact to be deemed to annul what has proceeded.
5. The Rajah of Ligor shall pledge himself to
obtain to this agreement the Confirmation of the
Emperor of Siam, whilst the Government of Penang
will obtain the guarantee of the British Government
to a punctual payment of the sum agreed to be given
by the Rajah of Kedda.
FORT WILLIAM lltli June 1824.


No. 4.
TRANSLATION of a letter from the Rajah of
Ligor to the Honble. W. E. PHILLIPS, Governor
of Pulo Penang,
( After Compliments )
May my friend be informed that I received his
two letters one of which was brought by Koon Aksorn
and the other by Nei Sigou which were translated
into Siamese and fully understood by me. With
respect to Lebby Ghany, all the suspected persons
have been brought to Ligor in Chains, they have
been bound to the stake with extended arms and
beat in order to extort a confession according to the
laws of Siam, that we may obtain a certain declara-
tion, but none of them have yet confessed and they
have all been confined in prison.
There is another subject. Tok Johan, Wan Long
Kechil Panglima Saib, Che Naho Putill, Che Allang Che
Akeel, Che Musa, and Che Jay a who fled and took up
their abode under the Government of the white People
have concerted together, collected Prows and become
Pirates, attacking the vessels of people who are seeking
a livelihood at Sea, and they plunder the Birds nests
which form a part of the Revenue of Siam. 1 have
therefore sent Prows to guard and to give assistance
and protection to all the villages in the Country as
well as to restore tranquillity.
Such Malays as have become Pirates and who
may be found residing under the Siamese Government.
I shall cause to be seized and my friend should seize
and punish such Malays as reside in the Territories of
the white People, like those abovementioned, who may
FORT WILLIAM 11th June 1824


be guilty of such Crimes, do not let them find protec-
tion under the Government of the white people nor
become Pirates, and then all persons will be able to
go and come and trade without difficult}'.
There is one more point. It is stated in my
friends letter that it is reported an armament by land
and Sea (or naval and Military) is equipped, and if I
wish to maintain a sincere friendship, I will give per-
mission for my friend’s confidential people to go and
inspect them. I declare with real sincerity of heart
that I do not entertain a thought injurious to Pulo
Penang, and the Prows are prepared as ornaments* tor
the aid of the Country. lam aware that what is men-
tioned in the letter is proper ; but the desire to send
people to inspect evinces the appearance of a want of
confidence. Pet not my friend therefore longer en-
tertain any suspicion. Were he to send People to
examine, it would not be like a true heart, I have no
desire.to tell a falsehood and my sincerity will here/
after be made manifest. I consider how friendship
may be established and prolonged with my friend,
and every thing relating to this business I have com-
municated to Koon Aksorn and Nei Neinor who
proceed to wait upon my friend in order that he may
fully understand, Dated Wednesday the 11th of the
Moon’s rise 4th Month in the year Goat.
(A true Translation)
(Signed) JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Tr. to Govt,
Penang
2d. April 1824


No. 5.
The Governor of Penang lias received the reply of
the Rajah of Ligor to his two letters under date the
loth of December last and as His Highness has now
fully evinced his desire of discountenancing and
punishing all such proceedings as those relating to the
unfortunate murder of Lebby Ganny the Governor has
no hesitation in assuring him, that His Highness’s
letter and also the reports made by his two Envoys
(Noon Aksorn and Nei Neinor) are perfectly satisfactory.
The Governor of Penang had no other object in press-
ing the affair of Lebby Ganny so strongly than to
prove to Rajah of Ligor, that the British
Government would always notice the Conduct of
those who might shew themselves regardless of the
lives and property of its subjects, and to persuade
His Highness to join in the exertions which the
Governor of Penang is unceasingly making for sup-
pressing Piracy and for protecting the poor Native
Traders, The Rajah of Ligor's Envoys have them-
selves seen the two British Cruizers which are con-
stantly employed in protecting the navigation of the
surrounding seas.
The Governor of Penang hopes that the future
Correspondence between himself and the Rajah of
Ligore will be in a more friendly and satisfactory tone
and as a proof of his entire satisfaction with the
exertions, which the Rajah of Ligore has made to
discover the Murderers of Lebby Ganny, the Governor
begs, that if the crime cannot be substantiated
by the Evidence of two or more witnesses against
the suspected persons now under confinement the
Rajah of Ligore will liberate them, and bury this
discussion in oblivion.
14 April 1824.
(Signed) W. E. PHILLIPS.
(True Copies)
(Signed) R. IBBETSON
Secretary to Govt.
FORT WILLIAM 11th June 1824.


TO G. SWINTON Esqre.
Secry. to the Govt.
FORT WILLIAM
Sir,
I have the honor to report for the information ot
the Right Honble. the Govr. Genl., that upon receiv-
ing authentic accounts of the declaration ot war
o
against the Burmans I lost no time in making a
confidential communication to the Siamese Minister
upon, the subject.
I have now further the honor to state that in
obedience to the instructions contained in your letter
of the 30th of Jany * I shall embrace the opportunity
of a junk which is to sail tomorrow or the following
day for Siam to make an official communication.
I have &ca.
( Sd.) J. CRAWFURD, Resident.
V
SINGAPORE
11th May 1824.
FORT WILLIAM 11th June 1824.


FORT WILLIAM 19th Novr. 1824.
To G. SWINTON Esqr.
&c. &c. &c.
Sir,
In obedience to the instructions contained in your
letters of the 30th Janry. and 14th of March I have
the lion or to report that I have made an official com-
munication to the Siamese Government of the war in
which we are engaged with the State of Ava. A copy
of the letter which 1 have addressed to the Siamese
Minister on this Subject, and which was accompanied
by an accurate Malay translation effected under my
own inspection, is annexed to this dispatch for the
information of the Right Honble. the Governor
General in Council.
Government have had the goodness to observe
that in this document I have confined myself to such
a general declaration of our objects and sentiments as
seemed best suited to the genius and character of the
Siamese Court, and that I have abstained from propos-
ing any specific measure. This line of communication
has been preferred not less with a view to prevent
embarrassment to the ultimate and more mature
operations of our own Government, than from a due
consideration of the well known timidity and jealousy
of the foreign policy of the Siamese Court, which
notwithstanding its bitter hostility to the Burmans
will naturally view with some apprehension the near
approach of the British armies.
In reference- to this material subject, I am dis-
tinctly of opinion that the war with the Burmans will
be most efficiently conducted without attempting any
concerted plan of cooperation with the Siamese. This
power I make no doubt will of its own accord, and
after its own manner, seize the fortunate opportunity
which now presents itself for harassing the Burmans


in the most effectual manner of which it is capable,
while l)y attempting to combine their military opera-
tions with ours, we should only be shackled and
embarrassed by their ignorance and indocility, and
most probably disgraced by their cruelties and
excesses.
In one manner our direct assistance to the Siam-
ese will materially promote the general objects of the
war. This is by furnishing them with supplies of arms,
and I am happy to be enabled to report that this essen-
tial object will be effected without delay and without
subjecting the Government to any unnecessary expense,
as a small vessel is daily expected at this port from
England on her way to Siam with about eight
thousand stand of fire arms. These, with 20 pieces of
iron ordnance, will without any interference on the
part of Government, be transmitted to Siam in the
common course of commercial business. The ex-
pediency however of presenting the Siamese Court?
with a certain quantity of fire arms as a token of our
friendship and confidence may be suggested, and
indeed I am so much impressed with the utility of
this measure that 1 respectfully submit, that I have it
in view, should the war continue, or assume a more
serious aspect than seems at present probable, to
purchase a thousand stand of arms, and send them to
Siam in the name of the Right Honble. The Governor
General ; a proceeding which will certainly involve
the Government in an expense of 4< or 5000 Spanish
.Dollars, but for which I trust for their approbation,
shoidd it be considered to promote the public service.
I have now respectfully to advert to the important
question of the exchanges and agreements which it
may be advisable to make with the Siamese, and on
which I am directed to submit my opinion in your
letter of the 12th of March.
With the desire of placing before Government


all the information which I have been able to collect,,
bearing not only upon this particular question, but
upon our general interests and relations with the
nations of India beyond the Ganges, I have prepared
the rough sketch of a chart of those countries with
a series of explanatory notes, and I now transmit them
along with this dispatch, trusting that notwithstanding
the hurried manner in which they have been un-
avoidably got up, they may be found of some assistance
in the important deliberations which now occupy the
Government.
In discussing the question of our agreements and
exchanges with the Siamese Court, I shall take it for
granted that the maritime possessions of the Burmans
from Martaban to Mergui are conquered and occupied
by a British force, and that we are to negotiate with
this advantage. Under such a state of things, I have no
scruple in considering that the moment is at length
arrived when it is within our reach to arrange all our
differences with the Siamese—to place our commercial
intercourse both with that nation and with Ava upon
a liberal footing, calculated to open a new and exten-
sive channel to British industry’, and finally to place
us in an attitude which will afford us, at little risk or
expense, ample security against the future aggressions
and arrogance of either power.
This valuable object, as it appears to me, may be
attained by the measure of retaining permanent
possession of the Provinces of Mergui and Tavoy 7 , or
even by the more limited one of permanently occupying
the ports of Tavoy and Mergui, with perhaps a small
portion of the territory adjacent to each. , This last
restricted occupation, as it can scarcely 7 be deemed a
territorial extension, and is in justice no more than
a measure of precaution and security may probably
deserve a preference, and I shall therefore assume it
with a view to the arrangement which I have to offer
to the consideration of Government.


I venture therefore respectfully "to propose that
the ports of Mergui and Tavoy, but especially the
latter, should be retained as British possessions ; that
they should be fortified, and declared free ports on the
principle so successfully pursued in regard to Sing-
apore and that the maritime possessions of the
Burmans from Martaban downwards should be given
over to the Siamese in consideratipn of a favorable
commercial treaty, and certain securities connected
with Prince of Wales Island and its local relations,
With a view to explain the advantages contem-
plated by this arrangement, a brief account of those
two ports may be necessary. Tavoy ties between the
13° and 14° degrees of N, Latitude, and the mouth of
the river may be considered as the proper port. The
river of Tavoy to a considerable distance in the interior
is fit for native navigation. The town is about 8
leagues up the river situated in a fertile country
abounding in the ordinary necessaries of life. It is
but 7 ordinary miles * from Bang-hole, the capital of
Siam, and apparently not above 2 or 3 easy sail
at any season of the year from Martaban and Rangoon.
Mergui lies between the 12 and 13 degrees of
Latitude and is situated upon an island at the mouth
of the river of Tenasserim. It is described as in every
respect one of the most commodious ports in India,
admitting the ingress and egress of ships of any
burthen in both monsoons, being perfectly safe when
entered, and admitting of communication with the
British ports to the North and South of it, but
particularly with Calcutta, throuLdiout the whole year.
The neighbouring country is naturally fertile, and
even at present, and after the long misrule of the
Burmans, abounding in the necessaries of life. Many of
these advantages will be apparent from the inspection
of an ordinary chart of the Bay of Bengal. This
was the port given over to Louis the 14th in the
year 1688 by Treaty as one of the two Keys to the


Kingdom of Siam. It was actually occupied by a
French Force for a considerable time as well as
Bang-kok the modern Capital.
The first great advantage which may be con-
terpplated from the occupation of Tavoy and Mergui
will be the main security which they will afford ns
against the future insolences and aggressions of the
Burmans or even of the Siamese. By the occupation
of these posts * we shall at once be placed in an
attitude to command in no inconsiderable degree the
destinies of both powers without subjecting ourselves
to any risk, probably to little expense, and without
the. necessity of intermeddling in the politics of either
Oeurt, or incurring the hazard of extending our
territorial possessions as a necessary measure ef indern-
nit} r or retaliation for new provocations. Tavoy, as
just mentioned, lies upon the immediate confines of the
most assailable and vulnerable portion of the Barman
dominions, the subjugated and discontented Kingdom
of Pegu, and is within a few marches of the Siamese
capital. It may be safel} 7 expected therefore that the
bare conscience of our existence in this strong position
will produce a silent and salutary influence on the
native counsels which shall render direct interference
needless. Our own situation at the same time both at
Mergui and Tavoy will given us entire security from
the attacks or inroads of both of these States. These
Posts'* are assailable only by Sea, a mode of attack ot
which they are incapable, for, by land they are secured
by the natural barriers of mountains and forests
against the barbarous and unskilful tactics of these
Nations, the sufficient and conclusive proof of which
is the incapacity of the Siamese after frequent
attempts to reconquer them, notwithstanding their
vicinity to their capital, and the feeble opposition of
the Burmans.
The next great benefit which may be contemplated
from the possession of the Ports of Mergui and Tavoy


is immediately connected with the higher and more
general interests of our Indian Empire at large. The
central and convenient positions of these Posts* as well
as the natural resources of their neighbourhoods point
them out as stations of the utmost importance for the
refuge, the refreshment, the repair, or even the con-
struction both of our Military and Commercial Navy
in a period of European hostilities; an advantage
which is not now for the first time brought to the
notice of the Supreme Government. My own indi-
vidual conviction indeed of their utility in this point
of view is such that I venture respectfully to submit
it as my opinion that our Indian Commerce and even
our possessions will be scarcely secure from an
European enemy until the Ports of Mergui and Tavoy
be in our occupation. When on the other hand this
shall be the case, we are at once undisputed Masters
of the Commerce, the Navigation and the Military
Positions, not only of the Bay of Bengal, and the
Western Coast of Hindustan, but even of the whole
Straits of Malacca down to the China Sea, the most
important avenue to which is also under our control
as long as we maintain possession of Singapore.
The remaining advantage which may be expected
from the maintenance of these important Posts* on
the Coast of Tenasserim refer to the extension
and security of our Commerce. The safety and
accessibility of these Harbours, but especially of
that of Mergui have already been adverted to,
and in addition to these qualities, their central
and convenient geographical position for trade, with
the natural resources of the territories which surround
them, especially recommend them as fit stations for
Commercial Emporia. In reference to the first of
these advantages it is only necessary to refer to their
easy and not very distant communication with Bengal
on the one hand, and with the Straits of Malacca and
thus intermediately with China on the other, as well
as the easy access which they will afford us internally


to several millions of new customers among the
Burmans and Siamese, a people proved by recent
experience to have a taste and capacity for consuming
our manufactures.
The natural resources of the Provinces immediate-
ly connected with the Ports of Mergui and Tavoy are
from every account very considerable. I shall confine
myself here to an enumeration of a few of their prin-
cipal productions. These independent of a cheap
supply of corn consist of Tin, Sapan-wood, Sticlac
and Timber.
Tin exists in all the Countries of the Coast of
Tenasserim up to Tavoy inclusive, and the mines of
this metal which at present are in a state of great
depression, will soon become productive under British
protection, and with the skill and industry of the
Chinese Emigrants, who will soon be attracted to them
by the encouragement of our presence.
The ranges of mountains in the interior of these
Provinces afford the largest supply of Sapan wood in
the world, at present available only to Siam, from the
want of all market for it on the Western Coast. Of
this commodity it may be necessary to remark that
it is at present in high request as a dying material
among British Manufacturers, and that there is an
extensive demand for it in the British market where it
brings more than double the price of Logwood, a com-
modity the very privilege of cutting which has been
heretofore made the subject of conventions in the
Diplomacy of Europe.
The third Article of produce, Stic-lac, is one which
it is sufficiently known has under its different modific-
ations become of late years of great importance in
Commerce, promising in time to vie in value and ex-
tent of consumption with Indigo itself. Of the des-
scription produced in the Tenasserim Provinces it is


sufficient to state that it is of the same kind and
quality with that of Siam which by recent trials in the
Calcutta market is proved to be much superior to that
of Pegue and three times as valuable as that of Bengal.
The neighbourhood of Mergui produces abundance
of the wood called Murhoo"% which is well suited for
ship-building and among Indian Woods the next in
value to Teak. Neither this place nor Tavoy indeed
afford Teakwood itself which however is readily floated
down the river of Martaban at no inconvenient dis-
tance, this stream being said to pass thro’ some of
the principal Teak forests of Pegue. From thence it
might easily be conveyed even to Mergui by a voyage
of about one third the length of that for a similar
purpose from Rangoon to Calcutta.
As immediately connected with the subject 1 may
for a moment advert to the probability of rendering
the proposed British Settlements available for Naval
Depots, Arsenals, and Docks, and it may be con-
jectured that Mergui especially is peculiarly well fitted
for the formation of such establishments, as indepen-
dent of the other advantages already referred to, the
Tide instead of rising as at other European establish-
ments near the Equator to 6 and 8 feet rises here to
14 and 15 feet; an elevation considered by professional
men as necessary to the construction of wet docks.
In relation to the question of occupying Mergui
and Tavoy I shall only further respectfully add that
should this important measure be carried into effect
a pleasing prospect of industry will be developed, and
the trade of the Eastern Coast of the Bay of Bengal,
which was in early periods of the European connexion
one of the most considerable, hurt which the tyranny
and jealous policy of the Court of Ava have, for at
least half a century, nearly blotted out from the com-
mercial map of Asia, will under British protection
be speedily restored to a share of prosperity much.


beyond what it enjoyed in any former period of its
history.
The next point upon which I have the honor to
submit my sentiments is the nature of the arrangements
which it may be useful or convenient to make with
the Siamese Government respecting the local interests
of P. W. Island. Before entering upon this topic,
I feel it to be my duty to offer it respectfully as ray
clear and distinct conviction that the interests,
however valuable otherwise, are of secondary im-
portance to those which have just been considered,
while in fact the most essential of them are virtually
secured by the establishment of the former.
For facility of reference I beg to submit the
following brief sketch of the Malay State of Queda,
and its relations so immediately connected with the
present question. It extends above a hundred miles
along the shore from the Latitude of 6°. 50' to 5° and
embraces about one half the breadth of the Peninsula,
or from 40 to 60 miles. Besides this the numerous
islands on the coast belong to it; some of which are of
considerable size, but most of them desert and
uninhabited. To the south it is bounded by Perak, a
principality as large as itself and to the N, E. by
Patani which is much larger. Both of these are, like
itself, unquestionable tributaries of Siam.
Queda, before its occupation by the Siamese,
contained from 40 to 50,000 inhabitants, and the
Rajah, by creating monopolies and by other means
little short of extortion, realized an annual revenue Of
about 30,000 Dollars, exlusive of the stipend of 10,000
paid by the British Government. The .demand for
grain by the population of P. W. Island was the cause
of a considerable cultivation of rice in a few favored
spots along the banks of the rivers, but in general the
country is covered with an extensive forest, and to
such an extent that the population can scarcely be


computed to exceed 8 inhabitants to a square mile.
Queda is generally destitute of all those commodities
which give some commercial consequence to the other
states of the Peninsula; such as tin, gold, pepper
and other ordinary Malayan products.
It is almost superfluous to mention that P. W.
Island, with a strip of territory 20 miles long and 3
broad, are portions of the Queda principality, and that
they owe their present culture and population exclu-
sively to British protection, being one dreary and
uninhabited forest when we obtained possession. It is
of importance here to remark that since the Siamese
occupation, a vast number of the Malays of Queda
have emigrated into the British territories, transfer-
ring thither under more favorable auspices the culture
of grain which was formerly carried on within the
native districts for the supply of P. W. Island ; thus
contributing already to render any connection with
that country less necessary to us.
Prom this rapid sketch, it will perhaps appear to
the Government that the acquisition of the Supremacy
of Queda is ncrt a matter of the first moment to us, nor
perhaps one calculated to insure us any object of
material value —that it may entail upon us on the con-
trary future inconvenience and embarrassment, and
that while its relinquishment by the Siamese may be a
matter of considerable difficulty, to contend for it on
ours may involve the sacrifice of objects of far greater
moment and utility.
These different points demand respectively some
explanation. The great inconvenience which has been
felt at P. W. Island for the last 15 years, and since the
recovery of the Siamese power, has arisen simply and
solely, according to my conception, from the British
power having come into accidental collision with the
Siamese Government at this weak and detached point
of our Empire, and therefore in a situation not calcu-
lated to impress the proud and ignorant Court of Siam


with the necessary respect for our strength and
resources. This delusion will be at once dissipated by
our permanent occupation of Tavoy and Mergui, and
by the great lesson of our strength which the results
of the Burman war will have taught the nations be-
yond the Ganges, and which by commanding their
respect will in future render all palliative aud cor-
rective expedients unnecessary.
In the reports which I had the honor to lay be-
fore Government respecting the Mission to Siam, 1
offered it as my opinion that more advantage was
likely to accrue to us from a direct intercourse with
the Siamese than with the more uncivilized and less
industrious Malays, whose connection, although it had
lasted for near 40 years, had been productive of no
beneficial change in their own manners, and no sen-
sible advantage to us, and I still continue to entertain
these sentiments.
It is. however, to be remarked that the acquisition
of the supremacy of Queda, even could it be obtained
without difficulty and without sacrifice, by no means
removes from us the vicinage of the Siamese or their
political influence. They would still in such a case
possess the Superiority of Perak reaching far to the
South of us, and of Patani to the East, while their
own immediate territory would bound us to the north,
so that they would thus in a great measure continue
nearly to surround ourselves and our feeble ally.
The inconveniences which I am led to apprehend
by our acquiring the Supremacy over Queda arise
from the certainty of its becoming sooner or later
necessary for us to interfere in the affairs of the
Native Government. This principality is under our im-
mediate eye—the national character will be implicated
in its good or bad government, and that it will be ill
governed and our powerful support to the sovereign
employed as an instrument for the oppression of his
subjects, is what may reasonably be expected, not only


from the example of all former cases of a similar
nature, but from the barbarous character of the people
and the evil habits of their rulers. Such a state, of
things might ultimately lead to the necessity of
assuming the direct management of the Country, and
thus involve the question of territorial extension over
a Country destitute of natural resources, of singular
poverty, and of which the sovereignty would serve no
purpose, but to involve us in a needless and heayy
expence.
Even in the personal character of the present
Raja of Queda we have nothing to hope for should he
be restored, for it is admitted by his own friends that
his oppressive and rapacious conduct had long lost him
the affections of his subjects, that this encouraged the
invasion of the Siamese, and that it was in shoit the
principal cause which led to the loss of his throne.
I have respectfully to submit that according to
my conception of the local interests of P. W. Island
every useful advantage will be adequately secured by
a cession to us in full sovereignty of all that portion of
the Queda territory not already in our occupation
which extends from the river Crean to that of Marbao,
and backwards the whole way to the mountains of
Patani, and by a complete renunciation of the right
of sovereignty and supremacy over P. W. Island, neces-
sarily implying also a renunciation of the stipend paid
to the Rajas of Queda.
Over a tract of country of this limited extent,
British administration and legislation may be brought
to operate at once with advantage and efficiency,
and provision is already made for such an accession of
territory by the existing charter of Justice for the
Island. A well defined boundary such as now describ-
ed will, at the same time, I presume to believe, secure
us more effectually from collision with the Siamese
authority than the feeble remedy of interposing a


weak and tributaiy state, for in that situation we shall
be in direct contact with the comparatively strong
and responsible Government of Siam, then as 1 trust
bound to us by treaties, and awed into respect and
moderation as well by the commanding attitude of our
position on the Coast of Tenasserim as by the reputa-
tion of our arms, and united to us at the same time by
the common ties of a commercial intercourse which is
daily growing in magnitude and consequence.
A mature consideration of the character of the
new relation in which the Raja of Queda would stand
in the event of his becoming our tributary will un-
doubtedly add force to this argument. When restored
he must for ever be the secret enemy of the Siamese,
and with such sentiments, a conduct of much for-
bearance is scarcely to bo expected from him. The
Siamese on their part again with the known pride of
that people, can hardly be supposed to submit very
tamely to the sudden loss of a tributary and dependant
[ state j of whole centuries standing : Provocations
and insults will follow, and we may be readily
involved in the unprofitable quarrel of our ally.
The Raja of Queda while he was in authority can
scarcely be said to have established upon us any very
strong claims. He was placed indeed under circum-
stances of some temptation and some difficulty, but he
readily gave way to them, and his behaviour was
usually vacillating and uncandid, while there existed
strong reasons for complaining even of some positive
evasions of his connection with us. Whatever in-
demnity therefore he receives, should the Siamese not
voluntarily restore him to his throne, he will owe
rather to our sense of justice, and to our compassion,
than to any claim of a political nature. I must
respectfully suggest therefore that the stipend of
10,000 Spanish Dollars heretofore paid to him for
P. W. Island should now be paid to him as a Pension
for life. In such an event we shall amply have


acquitted ourselves of any obligation which we may
be supposed to lie under to him, and his own condi-
tion after all will not be worse than that of the titular
sultans of Johore who boast a much higher rank, or
if he should be inclined to take a different view of his
destiny, he must charge his misfortunes to the
Siamese Government who are the only authors of it.
The last question which I have the honor to
bring under the notice of Government is the com-
mercial arrangements which it may be expedient to
form with the Court of Siam. Upon this important
subject, 1 have already had the honor of submitting
my views at considerable length, and the period has
now arrived when I trust it will be in the power
of Government to obtain a considerable share of
freedom and security for our commercial interests with
that Kingdom.
It is scarcely necessary to insist at any length in
this place upon the extent and value of the tiado
which Siam is capable of conducting with the British
Dominions and I shall only shortly observe that it is
the persuasion of those who have had the gieatest
experience of it, and who are most interested in its
results that there is no Asiatic Country where so
decided a taste prevails for the consumption of
European and Indian manufactures, and few capable
of affording such rich and varied products in return.
That 1 may present to the Government however
at a single view a picture of the capabilities of this
branch of commerce, I beg leave to state the fe\\
following facts. The modern intercourse between
Siam and the British possessions had its first origin
about 12 years ago. The first year of the Establishment
of Singapore 4 junks from Siam visited the place.
This season there have visited it 35 junks which have
imported Siamese produce to the extent of between
4 and 5000 tons, and exported British and Indian


manufactures to the value of little less than 250,000
Spanish Dollars, or half a million of Calcutta Sicca
Rupees.
The statement now made does not include the
less considerable trade carried on at the same time
directly under the British flag, yet it is this branch
which more immediately requires and demands pro-
tection and security, because it is in this department,
on account of the superior capital, skill and essential
economy with which it is conducted, that there is
reason to look for the widest and most rapid extensions.
The principal obstacle which the European trade
has to contend with in Siam exists in the monopolies
and claims of pre-emption exercised by the officers of
the Siamese Government, and in general in their
vexatious and ignorant interference in the details of a
cargo. These restraints and vexations which are
nearly confined to it have during the two last years
almost entirely driven away European Shipping, and
having thus failed to produce to the Siamese officers
the emoluments upon which they were reckoning,
there is ground to hope, considering the favorable
auspices under which the negotiations will be
opened, that they will be induced to relinquish
their pernicious and useless privileges without any
serious difficulty.
The trade of the Chinese in Siam is upon the
whole on a fair footing, advantageous both to them-
selves and to the Siamese Government, and this
equitable and not invidious precedent for the establish-
ment of our own commercial interests may be kept
in mind. The terms of it however imply a consider-
able'knowledge of native details which would render
it less suitable to us, and upon the whole lam of
opinion, that the most convenient possible arrange-
ment for the British trade would be the pajuuent at
once of a-handsome and determinate sum for each ship


rated according to her tonnage or measurement —
implying of course an entire exemption from all export
and import duties.
The presents and perquisites of office now paid
should I am of opinion remain untouched. These are
neither oppressive nor heavy in amount, and their
continuance will at once gratify the vanity ot the
Siamese, and secure their attention and good offices.
I may take leave ot this question by respectfully
suggesting it as my humble conviction, that should
our trade with Siam be finally established on the
terms and conditions now submitted to the Right
Rouble, the Governor General, [ he] will, by carrying
such a measure into effect, confer an inestimable boon
upon the commercial interests of the Empire at large,
which must be appreciated with gratitude.
1 shall bring this dispatch to a conclusion by
offering to the consideration of the Right Honble. the
Governor General a few observations upon the most
expedient time and circumstances for conducting our
negotiations with the Court of Siam. It is my
distinct conviction on these points that the negotia-
tion should be conducted by the Political Agent
of the Governor General only—that it should
be conducted on the spot where our Armies are
acting, and before they are withdrawn ; but above ail,
that no haste should be evinced in making territorial
concessions to the Siamese. Unless the character of
the Siamese Court has been greatly misunderstood,
the display of our military power which is now
making in their immediate neighbourhood will pro-
duce a decided and a salutary change in its senti-
ments and polky, and such a moment must not be
lost. It will be obvious that the Agent to the
Governor General will under these circumstances
negotiate with an authority and efficiency which
cannot be looked for fi om any other quarter. He will
also obtain from his situation an accurate knowledge


ot all those local details which are at present wanting 1
and which are so essential to the success of the
negotiation. The conquests made on the Coast of
Tenasserim should be retained for a time sufficiently
long to convince the Siamese Court that we are not
unacquainted with the value of what we propose to
exchange with them, and in general it should be
made to appear that the negotiation is rather sought
tor on their part than tendered on ours.
1 have the honor to submit for the information of
the Right Honble. the Governor General in Council
the outlines of such a convention with the Siamese
Governmentas it appears to me would place our
relations with that power on a convenient and
advantageous footing. Each article is accompanied
by a few necessary explanations.
1 have &ca.
(Signed) J. CRAWFURD
Resident.
Singapore
31st May 1824.


FORT CORNWALLIS The 22 July 1824.
CAPTAIN CANNING at RANGOON.
To R. IBBETSON Esquire
Secretary to Government
FORT CORNWALLIS
Sir,
******
5. With reference to the communications pen-
ding between the Government of Fort Cornwallis and
the Siamese power, and more particularly to the
deputation of Lieutenant Low to the Rajah of Ligor,
it appears to me that this latter measure can hardly
fail of being productive of the most important results
with respect to the contest in which we are now
engaged with the Burmese. The King of Siam, pos-
sessed of authority and official information of our
being at war with that nation, will in all probability
advance his forces and thus further distract their
councils and operations to the Southward. It would
no doubt be highly desirable for a detached force from
this place to occupy Tavoy and Mergui, but the
unfavorable season of the year appears to afford little
chance of such an attempt being made with success.
* *****
I have &ca.
(Signed) J. CANNING Captn.
Political Agent.
Rangoon
10: June 1824.


FORT WILLIAM, 11th June 1824.
TO THE HONORABLE
WM. EDWARD PHILLIPS, Esqre.
Governor in Council of
Prince of Wales’ Island.
Honble. Sir,
We have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of
your dispatch dated 2Gth April last ", the perusal of
which has afforded us much satisfaction.
2. We regard as highly culpable the conduct of
the Rajah of Queda in opening a clandestine corres-
pondence with the Court of Ava, whilst living under
British protection. The consecpiences of that improper
and unjustifiable step could scarcely have failed of en-
tailing serious embarrassment under almost any other
circumstances than those of the present moment; we
nevertheless rejoice at the prospect which now exists
of the restoration of our antient Ally to his hereditary
dominions, on terms so fair and reasonable as those
stated in your President’s Minute ; and it will be very
satisfactory to us to find that the Government of Siam
receives your proposition to the above effect, in as
favorable a manner, as the Rajah of Ligore has done,
in the mean time the Ex-Rajah of Queda will of course
be on his guard against any treachery which the
Siamese may meditate the execution of, .under the
cloak of friendly and pacific intentions. We will only
add further on this point, that both the manner in
which the Honble. the Governor opened his Communi-
cations with the Rajah of Ligore on the subject of
Quedah, and the tenor of his several addresses to that
Chief have our entire approbation.


3. The Correspondence ot the Court ot Ava in
the Queda affair is extremely curious and interesting,
and demonstrates in a remarkable manner the grasp-
ing and ambitious spirit which influences the Councils
of that State.
4. The cordial disposition manifested by your
Govt, to co-operate to the extent of your means in our
projected attack on the capital of the enemy’s domini-
ons, demands our sincere acknowledgements, and w T e
doubt not that the Vessels and craft which you have
so promptly dispatched to the Rangoon River, will
prove of essential service. We trust to hear shortly
of their safe arrival, and shall be prepared to sanction
any expenses which you may have found it necessary
to incur in making arrangements for the hire or pur-
chase of these and other Boats. Your suggestion
regarding descents, Tavoy &ca, with the view to
collect a quantity of the large Burmah Boats, will
doubtless meet with due attention from the Bngi.
Genl. Sir A. Campbell, to whom the conduct and
regulation of all military operations on the coasts ot
Pecme and Tenasserim has been entrusted.
5. We have the honor to express our concurrence
in the measure of deputing Lieutt. Low on a Mission
to the Rajah of Ligore for the purpose of affording
explanation regarding the existing War between the
British Govt, and the State of Ava, and of urging
a speedy settlement of the Quedah question, and
shall look forward with particular interest to the
receipt of accounts of his reception and conferences.
6. We are of opinion that the active exertions of
the Siamese against the Burmahs should be invited and
encouraged to the utmost extent, though it will evident-
ly be desirable to let them prosecute hostilities entirely
in their own way, and to select their own points ot
attack, and you will of course abstain from committing


the British Government by any specific engagements
to support their future operations. From the deter-
mined spirit of defiance and hostility evinced by the
Burmese no less than from their bravery anl conduct
on several occasions, and the success which they have
obtained on our own frontier, it seems probable that
the contest will be obstinately prolonged by that
people, and hence there will doubtless be abundance
of leisure for the Siamese Govt, to second our measures
and at the same time recover any places which they
may desire to wrest from the common enemy, by
creating a powerful diversion on the Eastern frontier
of Ava.
7. We are apprized by a letter just received from
the Resident at Singapore ( Copy of which is herewith
transmitted) that that officer has communicated officially
to the Court of Siam the occurrence of war between
the British and Burmah Government.
8. Previous to the receipt of your present dis-
patch we had discovered and corrected our former
oversight in stating Junk Ceylon to be temporarily in
the possession of the Burmahs.
We have &ca.
( Signed) AMHERST
„ E. PAGET
„ J. FENDALL
FORT WILLIAM
11th June 1824.


FORT CORNWALLIS the 24 June 1824.
Letter from the Honble. W. B. PHILLIPS
Governor of Pulo Penang to the Rajah of Ligore.
The Governor of Pulo Penang has now the satis-
faction to communicate to His Highness the Rajah ot
Ligore the success of the British Arms against the
Burmahs. The' Port of Rangoon was taken in a few
hours and is now in possession of the British troops,
and Negrais, Cheduba and Bassein have also been
taken. Several large expeditions from Bengal, Madras
and Bombay have already proceeded to Rangoon and
others are to follow. If the Rajah of Ligore is dis-
posed to accede to the proposals lately made to him,
the Governor of Pulo Penang requests he will im-
mediately dispatch his fleets of Prows which are
equipped at the Northern Ports of Quedah to cooperate
with the British troops at Rangoon, by which His
Highness will participate in the glory of having sub-
dued the haughty power of Ava, which State has been
no less an enemy to the Siamese than it is to the
British Government.
The Governor again expresses a hope that the
Rajah of Ligore will not delay dispatching his Boats to
attack the Burmahs and expedite the conquest of the
Kingdom,
(Signed) W. E. PHILLIPS Governor.
Penang
15 June 1824.


FORT CORNWALLIS The 8 July 1824.
RESIDENT at SINGAPORE.
To,
R. IBBETSON Esquire
Secretary to the Government
Prince Wales Island.
Sir,
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of
of your letter of the 10 : of May transmitting agreeably
to the wish expressed by the Supreme Government,
various papers and documents connected with the
subject of the war in which we are engaged with the
state of Ava.
1 beg respectfully to lay before the Honorable the
Governor in Council copy of a letter which, in
obedience to instructions contained in a dispatch from
the Secretary to Government in the Political Depart-
ment dated 30 : January, I have addressed to the
Siamese Minister.
I shall have the honor of submitting to the
Honorable the Governor in Council without delay,
and from time to time such information from Siam
bearing upon the question of Burman war as may be
received at this place.
•
I have &ca.
(Signed) J. CRAWFORD
Resident.
Singapore
21 June 1824.


The letter of John Crawfurd Esquire Resident of
Singapore to His Excellency the Chao Pia Prah-Klang,
Chao Kun-Kosa &c.
I am commanded by the Governor General of
India to communicate to your Excellency for the
information of His Majesty the King of Siam, that he
has declared war against the Burmans, and shortly to
state the causes which have led to that event. The
Siamese Court sufficiently knows the faithless character
of the Burman Government, and the restless ambition
with which they are constantly disturbing the peace
of their neighbours. Last year intent upon the con-
quest and destruction of your nation, they sent an
embassy to the King of Cochin China praying him to
join them in an offensive league tor your overthrow,
but that prudent and just Prince has declined all
connexion with so dangerous a people. That your
Excellency may entertain no doubt respecting the
wicked purposes of this Mission, I send you a
translation of the letter with which the Burman
Embassadors were charged.
Our nation, which are the neigbours of the
Burmans to the West have not been able to escape by
a conduct of the most guarded forbearance, the effects
of their unprincipled ambition and vanity. For years
together they continued to harass us by seizing and
enslaving our subjects, and by addressing our Govern-
ment in the arrogant language of a people unacquaint-
ed with their own essential weakness and ignorant of
the forms of intercourse between great nations. This
insolence has at length been carried to the last
extremity by the seizure of one portion of our territory,
and the invasion of another. War has in consequence
been declared. A great fleet and army has sailed
from Bengal and Madras to seize upon Rangoon,
Martaban, Tavoy and Mergui, and the Governor
General has declared that he will not lay down his


arms until ample reparation shall have been made.
Conquest is not his object but your Excellency will
have the satisfaction of seeing, as the result of this
war, the Burman nation deprived for ever of the power
of disturbing the peace of their neighbours.
The Merchants of Calcutta, Penang and Singa-
pore have been directed to furnish you with every
description of arms and ammunition which you may
require, and 1 request you will be pleased to communi-
cate to the Honorable the Governor of Prince of Wales
Island or inform me in what manner we can be useful
to you in prosecuting the war against the common
enemy.
I have the commands of the Governor General to
make to his Majesty the strongest assurances of friend-
ship and good will, and I beg to offer you a small
present as a token of my respect.
(Signed) J. CRAWFURD,
Resident.
Singapore
13 May 1824.
A True Cop}*
(Signed) J. CRAWFURD,
Resident.


LIEUTT. LOW at TRANG.
To,
R. IBBETSON Esquire
Secretary to Government
Prince of Wales Island.
Sir,
I have the honor to report for the information of
the Honorable the Governor in Council that after
meeting with many vexatious obstacles to the prosecu-
tion of the objects of the Mission on which I ha\e
been deputed, and which have arisen out of the
extremely cautious disposition of the Siamese authori-
ties here and elsewhere —And after a tedious corres-
pondence with the Rajah of Ligor, which has only
served the more to excite instead of gratifying his
desire to become acquainted with particulars, His
Highness has at length adopted the singular resolution
of holding a conference with me here at .1 rang in place
of receiving me at Ligor.
This resolution of the Rajah, contained in a letter
to my address only reached me last night, and I have
lost no time in directing Captain Chevers to proceed
with this dispatch to Penang in order that the Honor-
able the Governor in Council may be apprized as early
as possible of the intentions of the Raja.
I have taken advantage of this fortunate deter-
mination of His Highness, and in my reply to his last
letter, which will probably reach him about the
middle of his journey, have given him fairly to under-
stand that however happy I will be to meet him here,
still that in not receiving the Mission at his capital
he has departed from the established customs of
independent nations in their treatment of embassies.
FORT CORNWALLIS The 8 : July 1824.


Although my endeavours to gain an overland
passage to Ligor have thus proved vain, yet it will I
hope be evident that this minor object, (in so far as
regards the main purposes of the Mission ) however
desirable in itself, could not have been attained with-
out foregoing the only chance remaining of procuring
a seasonable supply of boats.
His Highness may be expected here in the course
of five or six days, but not sooner.
As the time seems to me, from a perusal of my
instructions, to have passed, within which a supply of
boats might have proved of advantage to the public
Service, I am therefore very anxious to learn, before
conferring on the subject with the Rajah, whether the
Honorable the Governor in Council is still desirous
that an engagement be entered into with His High-
ness on this head.
Should the Rajah arrive before a reply returns to
this dispatch the subject can be postponed for a couple
of days. If boats are not now required and notice
shall reach me in time, a fair occasion will then pre-
sent itself for representing to His Highness the
excellent opportunity which his dilatory conduct has
lost him for displaying his friend yldisposition towards
the British Government and of realizing his former
numerous professions of the existence of amicable
feelings in his mind.
It seems to me however requisite in order to
account in some measure for His Highness’s conduct,
to notice that from the general tone adoped by him in
his correspondence with me, and that used by his
officers of rank in the various conferences I have had
with them, it would appear that His Highness stands
much more in awe, and lies more under the immediate
control, of the Court of Bankok than he is willing to
admit, or allow others to suspect.


The consideration that such might really be the
case has prevented me from hitherto alluding, except
in a very casual way to the subject of boats. My in-
structions did not warrant any other mode of procedure.
I have also every reason to believe that had any direct
application for boats been made .by me, the Rajah
would immediately have supposed that the Mission
had been sent for the sole purpose of asking for them,
and he might have been thereby induced to slight the
Mission instead of directing it to be treated with the
marked respect and attention it has met with, and he
would most probably in that case have left the matter
to the decision of the vain and presumptuous Court
of Siam, which would have readily and gladly seized
so inviting an occasion of holding up the English to
the world as a people who were urged by necessity
and not induced by mere motives of conveniency to
seek its aid. Much more therefore under this view
of the case would have been lost in real dignity at a
juncture when, if I mistake not, the chief aim seemed,
as it now seems, to be to impress the nations in our
neighbourhood with a just sense of the power and
humanity of the British, than could have been coun-
terbalanced by any aid in point of boats which the
Siamese might have been willing to grant.
It was only by a personal conference with the
Rajah that I could hope to effect the object in view,
and at the same time prevent His Highness presuming
too much on what he might feel disposed to grant.
From all the enquiries I have made and my own
observation, it does not appear to me that the Rajah is
in possession of more than twenty boats capable of
performing a voyage to Rangoon, and even these could
not venture to sea without considerable preparation.
They have no decks and are indifferently rigged, and
they are for the most part so low in the gunwale that
the least sea must wash over them.


I have seen some of those which were employed in
the invasion of Kedda, but they are nearly worn out
and quite unfit for the purpose required.
It shall be my duty (in the event of my not
receiving a reply to this letter insufficient time) to
conclude a provisional agreement only with the Rajah,
provided he has power to give boats without a previous
reference to Bankok.
After having fully conferred with His Highness,
I will dispatch a native boat to Penang with such
information as it may appear of importance should be
communicated to the Government.
I regret the necessity I have lain under of
detaining the Brig Commerce until this time. The
uncertainty regarding the real intentions of the Rajah
prevented me from landing the party at Trang, and
1 was aware that a haste to do so would only have
added to the apprehensions of our real views manifested
by the authorities there, and have proved detrimental
to the Mission.
Whilst waiting the decision of the Rajah of
Ligor, the Commerce cruized for fifteen days to the
Northward. This measure enabled me personally to
ascertain the condition and resources of the Siamese
Governments in that direction.
The observations which were made during that
period will be included in the Public Report of my
Proceedings which I will have the honor hereafter to
submit to Government.
But in the present posture of the British in respect
to Ava the following fact may seem worthy of notice.
The mutual boundary of the Burrnan and Siamese
possessions on this Coast of the Peninsula lies a little
to the Northward of a Siamese Post or Dependency
called Jiindong, on the south of which, and next


in order is a small government called Takoa Paa.
These lie to the Northward of Junkceylon or Salang.
I believe this boundary has been laid down with
tolerable precision in my map of Siam.
In so far as my experience and enquiries enable
me to judge, there exists not the least foundation for
the various reports spread abroad at Penang regarding
the force in men and fleets of prows belonging to the
Siamese on this Coast.
I beg further to report that the Escort and other
persons accompanying the Mission are in the most
healthy state, although they have been till within the
last three days crowded in the small Brig and con-
stantly exposed to rain and sun.
I have much pleasure in observing that Captain
Chevers Commanding the Brig and Mr. Freeman its
Supracargo, have cheerfully afforded me every assistance
which lay within their power.
1 have &ca.
(Signed) JAMES LOW
Agent.
Trang
21 June 1824.
THE SECRETARY reports, that the following-
reply to Lieutenant Low, having been circulated and
approved, was delivered to the Master Attendant with
directions to dispatch the same forthwith per Brig
Commerce.


FORT CORNWALLIS The 22 July 1824.
LIEUTENANT LOW at TRANG.
To
R. IBBETSON Esquire
Secretary to Government
Prince of Wales Island.
Sir,
With reference to my letter to your address dated
on the 21 Instant and forwarded by the Brig Com-
merce I have now the honor to report for the
information of the honorable the Governor in Council
that a Son of the Rajah of Ligor arrived here yester-
day with a retinue of three hundred soldiers. He
delivered to me a letter from the Rajah in which His
Highness expresses his extreme regret that a severe
indisposition, which attacked him two days before his
intended departure from Ligor, has prevented him
from immediately fulfilling his promise to meet and
confer with me at Trang. And also a hope that the
circumstance of his having sent down one of his sons
who possesses his entire confidence to visit me, will
remove from my mind any doubts which may then
have arisen of the sincerity of his professions of amity
towards the British Government at Penang, and may
induce me to prolong my stay in his country until I
shall be enabled fully to explain to him the nature
and extent of the subjects on which I have been
deputed.
The young Prince has returned to Ligor with my
reply to his father’s letter. He will return here again
in a few days.
I beg to be favored with such accounts regarding
the operations in the Barman Country as may have
reached Penang since the Mission left it, and as


the Honorable the Governor in Council may deem of
sufficient importance to be communicated by me to
the Rajah.
As it is impossible at present for me to saj r that
accidents may not happen to preclude a personal inter-
view with His Highness, I therefore beg to be lavored
with further instructions whether in such an extreme
case I shall be authorized to explain by letter or
otherwise to him the whole or any part of the subjects
connected with my Mission.
It seems to me material at this juncture to notice
that my fprmer suspicions, expressed in my last letter
to your address, of the inability of'the Rajah to con-
duct agreeably to his own inclinations or to decide on.
affairs connected with the policy of other states in
respect to Siam or Ligor, have been fully justified by
the sequel.
I have apprized His Highness that had he, at the
period of my arrival in his Country, made a fair and
open avowal of the now very circumscribed nature of
his power, it might have saved much vexatious corres-
pondence and would have prevented all the unnecssary
delay which has ensued.
It is evident however that as His Highness had
led the Honorable the Governor in Council to believe
what was then perhaps actually the case, that he
possessed a certain share of separate authority, or had
such vested in him by the Court of Siam, in matters
not involving serious discussion betwixt it and foreign
Courts His Highness therefore naturally shrunk as
long as he could from the mortifying confession that
his public actions must “ now be implicitly regulated
“ by a Council of Ministers who have lately been sent
u to Ligor from Bankok.”
I have without any formal notification on my part
clearly ascertained that the Rajah of Ligor could not


have sent a single boat to Rangoon without a previous
reference to Siam. A direct negotiation with the
Court of Siam was not I believe contemplated by the
Honorable the Governor in Council. But even had
such been entered on too much time must have elapsed
before the decision of that Court could have been
received at Ligor, and the consequent equipment and
repairs which the Raja’s boats would have required,
could have been finished, to have admitted of a
seasonable supply being procured.
It is probable that the Mission may be detained
in the Raja’s Country until the latter part of July.
For many reasons I am very anxious that the
Honorable the Governor in Council may be pleased to
order the Brig Commerce or some other vessel to
proceed from Penang so as to reach Trang about the
15 of July, and as the distance from the Harbour to
where the Mission will be encamped is considerable, to
intimate its arrival by firing two guns.
My messengers Khoon Aksorn and Nai Neim,
Siamese officers of rank, will deliver these dispatches,
and I request they may be sent back with all con-
venient expedition, as they are not empowered by the
Raja to make any communications and have been
placed solely at my disposal.
I beg that the Naick and four Sepoys who
accompany these officers may be allowed to return
with them. Ten days rations have been put on board
the prows, which it is to be expected will be sufficient
for the whole voyage.
I am happy to be able to report that all my party
are in perfect health.
I have &ca.
(Signed) JAMES LOW
Agent,
Trang
25 June 1824.


To LIEUTT. LOW.
To LIEUTENANT LOW
Sir,
I am directed to acknowledge the receipt of your
letter dated 21 ultimo from Trang and to convey to
you the following reply.
The Honorable the Governor in Council, con-
curring entirely in your view as to the time having
passed when a supply of boats from the Rajah of
Ligore would have proved of advantage to the public
service, desires that you will now enter into no
engagements for obtaining such, but content yourself
with apprizing His Highness, that the British
Expedition against Ava has captured Cheduba,
Negrais and Rangoon, and that should His Highness
or the Siamese Court desire to share in the glory of
subduing the pride of the Burmans, they cannot bo too
prompt and active in detaching to the British Army
all the Boats, and land and water carriage, as well as
other means of co-operation they can command.
The Governor in Council further desires that
after making the above communication to His High-
ness, you will use every exertion and endeavour to
persuade the Rajah also to afford you his aid in
procuring at Trang and any of the Ports of Ivedah, as
large supplies of Rice and Paddy as possible for the
use of this Settlement, where these articles have
become extremely scarce, and which induce the
necessity of every practicable exertion being used
to provide for the possible contingency of public want.
Having therefore effected all your arrangements
at Trang. you will endeavour before you quit the
place, finally to hold out inducements to the Rajah
and People there to send here, as.; well from Trang


as Pungah, as much rice and paddy as possible, assur-
ing them that until the Ist of October next a Bounty
or Premium at the rate of 15 Dollars per Coyan for
rice and of Dollars per Coyan for paddy will be
paid by this Government for all such supplies as may
be received here from thence. You will urge this
point on the Rajah of Ligor with particular force and
claim from him his best aid and assistance as a testi-
mony he can easily afford of his good disposition to
our interests.
Whether Grain is procurable or not to the North-
ward, 3'ou will apply to the Rajah for letters to the
Chiefs at all the Ports between Trang and Kedah, at
which for the same purpose you will touch on your
return and hold out the same inducements.
It is hoped that these inducements nmy be suffi-
cient to secure a plentiful supply of grain for this
place, but should such not be the case you are
authorized at Purlis and also at Kedah to purchase
at once, with the previous leave of the Rajah of Ligor,
as much grain as can be procurable and to draw bills
on this Government for the amount thereof, taking all
possible and secure means for the dispatch thereof to
this Port.
From the foregoing detail you will observe how
important an early supply of grain will prove. It
will be for you to provide as much of this article as
possible, and so to shape your communications as not
to appear more urgent on the occasion, than with
reference to the peculiar character of that Chieftain
will be actually desirable to effect the object.
The Charterparty of the Commerce will be out on
the 31 : instant, and if you can return, having effected
these arrangements within that period, it will be satis-
factory, but you must consider the fulfilment of the


wishes of Government in respect to grain as of the
first and primary importance.
I have &ca.
(Signed) R. IBBETSON
Secry. to Govt.
Fort Cornwallis
9 July 1824.


RAJAH of LIGOR.
Translation of a letter from the Rajah of Ligore to the
Honorable W. E. Phillips, Governor of Pulo Penang,
( After Compliments. )
I have heard it mentioned lately that inland of
Prye and at the River Mooda, the people who reside
under my friend’s Government have taken possession
of more land than is specified in the Treaty which has
long been in existence. In that Treaty the territory
which belongs to Pulo Penang and what appertains to
Quedah is distinctly specified, and this intelligence
having reached me I cannot be silent upon the subject,
for the Country of Quedah has been entirely transfer-
red to me by His Most Excellent Majesty of Siam. I
therefore request that my friend will adhere to the
treaty with justice, for my friend and 1 are desirous of
being upon amicable terms, and to prolong a good
understanding.
Moreover, Sri Johan Perkasu, a Malayan Chief,
who has long been a pirate, I have already represented
to my friend. He sent his people to steal the Birds’
Nests, which are part of the Revenues of the King of
Siam, and where he could not succeed in carrying
them all away he caused fires to be' kindled in the
caves to destroy them. He afterwards attacked
Chinese trading prows and the people who wish to go
and trade find it very hazardous to do so. Sri Johau
Perkasu is guilty of a variety of such like acts. I sent
prows to endeavour to seize him, but he fled and now
resides at Pulo Penang. Will my friend therefore
seize Sri Johau Perkasu and his follows who have been
FORT CORNWALLIS The 22 July 1824


committing such offences and follow the customs in
respect to their punishment.
Further, my friend sent a letter to Quedah, which
was forwarded to Ligore, stating that two Chines®
named Oosooye and Achuan. inhabitants of Pulo
Penang, had lied to Quedah, and requesting my
assistance to seize and return them. I ordered a
search to be made and learnt that they had gone to
Singora, 1 ordered them to be pursued and directed
that they should be seized if found: but Chinese
Oosooye and Achuan made their escape in a prow
from the Singora Fiver before the arrival of the
people whom I sent to seize them, and as it was not
known where they had fled to. I could not send prows
after them.
( A True Translation )
{ Signed ) JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Translator to Govt.
Penang
9: July 1824


To
. The Honorable the Secret Committee of the
Honorable the Court of Directors.
Honble. Sir,
* * * * * *
Para. 29. We shall in conclusion solicit the
attention of Your Honorable Committee to the Dis-
patches from the Government of Prince of Wales
Island recorded as per margin and to our reply thereto.
The zealous exertions made by that Government to
forward our views at Rangoon by supplying boats in
the manner which we had previously pointed out.
f appeared to us to merit our warmest acknowledgments.
1 Your Honorable Committee will observe that we have
approved the measure adopted by the Government of
Prince of Wales’s Island of deputing a British Officer
to Ligor to communicate personally with the Rajah on
the subject of the affairs of Kedah and to afford ex-
planation regarding the Burmah War, and that we
have authorized that Government and the Resident
at Singapore to invite and encourage the active
co-operation of the Siamese against the common
enemy, carefully abstaining however from committing
the Supreme Government by any specific engagements
to support their future measures.
30. Your Honorable Committee will doubtless
be gratified to learn from the above Papers that there
exists a prospect of effecting, by amicable negotiation
with the Siamese Government, the restoration of the
Rajah of Kedah to the full possession of his rights and
territories, under the guarantee of the British Govern-
ment, to his fulfilment of certain defined feudatory
obligations. The grasping and ambitious spirit of the
Court of Ava and its eagerness to seize the first
opening for interference in the affairs of the Malayan


Peninsula, would probably have forced this termination
of the differences between the King of Siam and his
feudatory the King of Kedah even had not the present
war occurred.
We have the honor &c.
AMHERST
t
EDWD. PAGET
JOHN EENDALL
Fort William
14th July 1824.


FORT CORNWALLIS The 14 September 1824.
MAJOR CANNING at RANGOON.
i
W. M. WILLIAMS Esquire
Deputy Secretary to Government
Fort Cornwallis.
Sir,
******
6. With reference to the co-operation of a
Siamese force with our operations, I beg leave to say
that Lieutenant Colonel Snow, Adjutant General of the
Madras Troops in this quarter, whom severe ill healtq
compels to make a voyage to your Presidency, is
authorized to enter into the fullest explanations on
this very important subject. The principal objects in
view are the obtaining a Siamese army, as numerous
as they majr be disposed to furnish, as soon as the
season shall admit of taking the field, for the invasion
of the Burman territory, it being understood that such
troops, if acting jointly with a British force, shall be
subject to the general disposal of the Officer Command-
ing the latter. When Mergui, Tavoy and eventually
Martaban shall have fallen into our possession it would
be desirable that these places should be held by Siamese
troops, under an imderstanding of their consenting to
evacuate them if required so to do at the conclusion of
peace. These conditions, particularly the latter, would
1 am aware be liable to much objection on the part of
the Siamese Government, but at the present moment
any arrangement that would involve the dismember-
ment of the Burmese dominions could not be enter-
tained. If the Siamese should have to evacuate the
above mentioned places, possibly some equivalent


might be devised that would prove satisfactory to
them. Another object of high importance looked t°
iu a connection with the Siamese, would be the pro-
curing from them draft and carriage cattle and
elephants to the largest extent they could supply. For
particulars of place, time. &c, &c. I should beg leave
to refer to Colonel Snow who is in full possession of
Sir Archibald Campbell’s plans. As time now begins
to press, a completion of these arrangements at the
earliest period would be most desirable.
******
I have &c.
(Signed) J. CANNING Major
Pol. Agt. Expdtn.
Eangoon
28th July 1824.


SIR A. CAMPBELL at RANGOON.
To the Secretary to the Government
Political Department
Prince of Wales Island.
Sir,
o # * * * *
As I conclude the Siamese will not allow the
present opportunity to escape of humbling their cruel
and inveterate foe, I have sent Lieut. Colonel Snow,
Deputy Adjutant General to the Madras Division of
the Army, an officer of experience and possessing my
confidence, to make such arrangements under the
sanction and authority of the Honorable the Governor
in Council, as may best tend to promote the interests
of our cause, should it be determined upon by the
Court of Siam to take a cordial and active part in the
war. I could wish to be speedily informed what
operations the Siamese troops may undertake: if a
junction with the expedition under my command is
contemplated, and how it may be best accomplished ;
should such be intended I trust the Siamese Generals
may be made most clearly to understand that they
must at all times act under the orders of the British
Commander.
It is my intention probably in a few days hence,
to detach a force to take possession of the enemy’s
maritime towns to the eastward, Mergui, Tavoy, &c.
&c., the capture of which will, I should imagine, not
fail to make a favorable impression of our power and
resources, influence the Cabinet of Siam, and prompt
the Government to decided exertion.
I have &c.
(Signed) A. CAMPBELL
Brigr. General
Head Quarters
Raugoon, 28 July 1824.
FORT CORNWALLIS The 14 September 1824.


THE following Minutes by the Honorable the
President, on the subject of the above letters, are
recorded.
MINUTE by the PRESIDENT.
In submitting the accompanying letters from Sir
A. Campbell and Major Canning to the Board, I think
it necessary to state the result of the communication
which has passed between myself and Lieutenant
Colonel Snow. I learn from him that it was intended
by Sir A. Campbell to detach a sufficient force to
occupy Tavoy, Mergui and Tenasserim as soon as he
had received authority from the Supreme Government
for that purpose, and which he expected every day to
arrive, a suggestion to that effect having been submitted
some time ago. Lieutenant Colonel Snow informs me
that he has the orders of Sir A. Campbell to return
from this to Mergui, under the idea that the troops
will previously have arrived there and taken posses-
sion ; that he has instructions to open communications
with the Siamese authorities in the manner that may
be suggested by us, for the purpose of inducing them
to assist the British force now acting against the
Burman Empire in the mode described in the letters
abovementioned.
My Colleagues are aware of the little success
which has attended the Mission of Lieutenant Low to
Ligore, the papers connected with which are under
preparation for transmission to Bengal, and I should
have been disposed to have deferred any further at-
tempt at negotiation, direct or indirect, with the
Siamese Government, until we could have received
further instructions from the Supreme Government,
the more especially as I entertain doubts whether it
was intended that we should proceed to the length of
a direct communication to the Court of Siam, now the
only resource likely to prove effectual. The letters


now before us, require however some immediate
measures to be taken, and we must adapt them to the
probable state of things, according to the best of our
judgment.
It appears to me that if the British Troops occupy
the abovementioned places, the contiguity into which
they will be brought with the Chiefs or governors
under the Siamese authority will almost unavoidably
produce the necessity of communication, and it seems
for many reasons desirable that the officers so called
upon to communicate, should carry with them (unless
intermediately vested with powers from a higher
authority) all the weight and respectability which
this Government can confer. I propose therefore,
that letters be written by me to the Siamese Chiefs in
the neighbourhood of Mergui and Tenasserim and
delivered to Lieutenant Colonel Snow, stating, with
reference to the proclamation already issued, the ob-
jects and causes which have induced the occupation of
those Countries by our Troops, and endeavouring to
impress on the minds of those Chiefs, the expediency
of treating them as friends, engaged against the com-
mon enemy of both nations, and of assisting the British
force with supply of provisions, carriage cattle and
such articles as may be required by the Officer Com-
manding. With respect however, to the more import-
ant and decisive measure of aiding with a body of
Siamese troops to accompany our army, as suggested
by Sir A. Campbell, it is not to be supposed that that
object can be obtained without direct application to
the Court of Siam, or even the deputation of a Con-
fidential Agent to that Court, for the express purpose.
On this last point I cannot but entertain some doubts
as to our power.
Referring however to the letter addressed to this
Government by the Right Honorable the Governor
General in Council under date 12th March last, in
which the probable occupation of Mergui, Tavoy &c.


is alluded to as affording a favorable opportunity for
negotiating an arrangement with the Court of Siam,
in respect to the affairs of Quedah, more immediately
affecting the interests of this Island—referring also to
that of the 11th June from the same high authority,
in which the expediency of holding out encouragement
for the co-operation of the Siamese Government is
generally enjoined—and considering that the period
seems at hand pointed out as the favorable opportunity
for negotiation, it may be hoped we shall not be ac-
cused of exceeding the line of our duty in availing
ourselves of it for the more important purpose of aid-
ing the success of our arms in the cause in which
O
they are engaged.
Under the emergency of the case, it appears to
me advisable that means should be afforded for com-
municating with the Court of Siam, in the event of
the Military and Political Authorities at Rangoon
considering such requisite for the interests of the
service. I propose therefore that Lieutenant Colonel
Snow should carry a letter addressed by me to the
Phra Khlang or Prime Minister at Siam or the general
nature above stated, but intimating in addition, that
provided the King of Siam consents or desires it, that
an officer will attend at the Court to explain the nature
of the assistance required. Powers to be used even-
tually may be given accordingly to Lieutt. Colonel
Snow. As to instructions to the Lieutenant Colonel,
these must of course be left with the authorities em-
ployed on the expedition, for I wish it to be distinctly
understood, that the object of Colonel Snow’s Mission,
if resorted to, can as far as depends on us embrace
only the military arrangements for the immediate
support of our troops and the aid of a Siamese force,
and does not extend to the negotiation of any ulterior
arrangements connected with the retention or restora-
tion of any of the conquered countries. These are
points which could only be discussed by the direct


authority of the Right Honorable the Governor General,
but, under existing circumstances, it may be desirable
to submit to His Lordship a Memorandum of all the
objects which may appear on our Records to have
hitherto been considered as desirable for the interests
of this Government, the attainment of which depends in
any degree on negotiation with the Siamese authorities *
with a marginal reference to the respective dates at
which they have come into discussion. As I understand
a Vessel will sail this day for Rangoon, I have directed
a letter to be drafted in reply to Major Canning, with
copy to Sir A. Campbell.
The Board will perceive by the draft now sub-
mitted, that I have made it to be understood that the
letters and powers to be entrusted to Lieutenant
Colonel Snow are to be used only in the event of
Tavoy, Mergui and Tenasserim being occupied by our
troops, and of no orders or instructions having been
intermediately received from the Supreme Govern-
ment. or any other circumstance intervened which
would render the use of them unnecessary or improper.
Adverting to the knowledge possessed by Lieuten-
ant Low of the Siamese language and of the habits
and customs of the Siamese Chiefs with whom he has
already had intercourse it has occurred to me that he
might be eminently useful in any future communica-
tions with them on the frontier. I suggested to
Lieutenant Colonel Snow the expediency of his accom-
panying him and as that officer has expressed his
desire of availing himself of Lieutenant Low’s services,
I propose that he should return along with him. It
may be proper also to send copies of the letters
received from Rangoon and reply to the Resident at
Singapore. Lieutenant Colonel Snow proposes leav-
ing this about the 20 : Instant.
( Signed ) R. FULLERTON.
Fort Cornwallis
6th September 1824.


MINUTE by the PRESIDENT,
Finding by farther reference to the proceedings of
this Government that our communications with Siam
have never been carried further than the address of,
letters to the Pia Phra Klang, Prime Minister of State,
it appears to me that the powers alluded to in my
minute of the 6th Instant as eventually to be used by
Lieutenant Colonel Snow, as a deputed Agent to that
Court, cannot with propriety be given. Our inter-
ference must therefore be limited to the granting of
letters to the three Chiefs of Ligor, Phunga and
Renong, and to the Phra Klang, drafts of which I
now submit to the Board.
( Signed ) R. FULLERTON.
11th September 1824.


To the RAJAH of LIGOR.
My Friend,
Your Highness has already been furnished with
copy of the declaration of war published by the Right
Honorable the Governor General of India, explaining
the causes which have led to the war between the
British Government and the Burman Nation. Your
Highness has also been informed thro’ Lieutenant Low,
sent to wait on you by my predecessor Mr, Phillips,
that the British troops had taken possession of
Rangoon and Cheduba. Altho’ no answer has been
received from your Highness to these communications,
at which lam surprized and concerned, nevertheless
from the friendship subsisting between 3 T our Highness’s
Government and that of Prince of Wales Island, 1
think it right to address another letter to inform my
friend that the British troops pursuing their victorious
career will, by the time this reaches you, be in posses-
sion ot Mergui and Tavoy and the adjacent countries
and that a favorable opportunity again offers for your
Highness to participate in the glory of humbling the
pride of the Burmans. My friend will no doubt con-
sider that as the British Nation is now engaged in war
against the common enemy of both the British and
Siamese Government, the British troops should be
looked upon as the friends of the latter by assisting
them with supplies of provisions, of cattle and elephants
to convey their stores and by directing a portion of
the troops under your Highness’s authority to act
against the Burmans ; at the same time the interests
of the Siamese Government must be furnished and
advanced. This letter will be sent to you by Lieu-
FORT CORNWALLIS The 14 September 1824.


tenant Colonel Snow, an officer of high rank, com-
manding the British troops at Mergui, and should
your Highness be disposed to assist the British troops
as required, all particulars will be communicated by
that Gentleman whom my friend will consider as fully
empowered to act by the Government of Prince of
Wales Island.
( Signed ) R. FULLERTON
Governor.


To THE PHRA KLANG.
His Majesty the King of Siam will long before
this have been informed of the war subsisting between
the British and Burmese Governments, and the causes
ot that war will have been explained to His Majesty
by the Proclamation issued by the Right Honorable
the Governor General of India, copy of which was
transmitted from Singapore by the Resident there.
His Majesty will also have been informed by a letter
addressed to you by Lieutenant Low, entrusted to the
charge of the Rajah of Ligor, that the British troops
had taken possession of Rangoon and Cheduba. Now
this is written to apprize His Majesty of Siam that the
British Troops in prosecution of the war have arrived
and taken possession of Tavoy and Mergui. Another
favorable opportunity is offered of participating in the
glory of subduing the Burmans. The British Govern-
ment being now engaged in war against a power that
is the common enemy of both the British and the
Siamese, it is hoped that His Majesty of Siam will
see the propriety of directing the Siamese Authorities
near the frontier to consider the British troops their
friends engaged in a common cause and assisting them
in the manner that may be pointed out by the Officer
Commanding them. It is hoped that His Majesty the
King will also perceive that by now employing a por-
tion ot his victorious troops in attacking the Burmahs
the reqj. interests of His Majesty cannot fail to be
materially promoted.
(Signed) R. FULLERTON
Governor.


To MAJOR CANNING at RANGOON,
To
MAJOR CANNING
Political Agent to the Governor General
RANGOON.
Sir,
I am directed by the Governor in Council to ac-
knowledge the receipt of your letter of 28th July last,
and to avail myself of an opportunity offering for com-
municating the result of Lieutenant Low s Mission to
Ligor, as well as conveying to you the opinions and
sentiments of this Government on the subject of JOUj.
letter now replied to and the measures intended to be
pursued in consequence, determined on alter the fullest
communication between our President and Lieutenant
Colonel Snow who arrived here on the 4th Instant.
2. In respect to the first point, the Governor
in Council has to intimate to you with much regret
the failure of Lieutenant Low’s Mission to Ligor
in all its objects. That officer returned some weeks
ago and from his report received on the 2nd. ultimo,*
it appears that the Rajah of Ligor had on various
pretences evaded all personal communication by de-
clining either to receive Lieutenant Low at Ligor or
meet him at Trang, where he remained upwards of
three months. To that place however the Rajah de-
puted his son, apparently with the view of discussing
the objects of the Mission, but without any powers to
negotiate or enter into any Settlement or agreement
on the subject at issue. The tedious and evasive com-
munications only produced conviction on the mind of
Lieutenant Low that the Rajah had no serious in-
tention of entering into any agreement, while the
information received from other quarters satisfied that
officer that the Rajah did not possess the independent
FORT CORNWALLIS The 14 September 1824.


power and free action contemplated by this Govern-
ment, and had no authority to conclude any definite
arrangement on those points the adjustment of which
formed the main objects of the Mission. Lieutenant
Low therefore left Trang on the Ist Ultimo, having
previously sent to the Rajah a sealed letter addressed
to the Phra Klang or Chief Minister of the King of
Siam,* of which a copy is enclosed and to which no
reply has yet been received.
3. Under these circumstances it now remains for
this Government to consider in what manner they can
best promote the immediate objects pointed out in
your letter * and the one which accompanied it from
Sir A. Campbell.* The following appears to be the
course of proceeding best calculated for the above
purpose, to be followed, however, on the presumption
that the British troops are actually in possession of
Tavoy, Mergui and Tenasserim. The occupation of those
places will bring our Military Authorities in the con-
tiguity of the Rajahs or Governors on the Western
frontier of the Siamese Monarchy, and a direct com-
munication raajr become unavoidable. With the view
of aiding such communication it is proposed to furnish
Lieutenant Colonel Snow with letters addressed by
our President to the Chiefs nearest the boundary,
containing in general terms (with reference to the
Proclamation of the Right Honorable the Governor
General in Council) the causes and objects which
have induced the occupation of those Countries
by our troops and impressing on them the expediency
of receiving them as friends and aiding by every
means the proceedings of the British power acting
against the Burmahs, the common enemy of both the
British and Siamese Governments, by furnishing
supplies of provisions and carriage as the Commander
of the troops may require.
4. Considering however the limited powers of
the Chiefs under Siamese Authority as displayed in
the case of Ligor, it is evident, that although partial


local and temporary assistance in the article of supply
may possibly be afforded by them, no measure of the
important and decisive nature alluded to, namely the
march and co-operation of a body of Siamese, troops,
can be expected without express sanction and orders of
the King of Siam.
5. If such co-operation continue to be considered
an object essential to success a direct communication
with, or even deputation to the Court of Siam may
be required, as affording the only prospect of its com-
pletion. On this point lam directed to state that the
Honorable the Governor in Council find themselves
under some difficulty. The direct deputation of an
Agent accredited by this Government has on several
occasions been discouraged. It was indeed on this
ground that the instructions to Lieutenant Low con-
fined him to personal negotiation with the Rajah of
Ligor and did not authorize him to proceed to Siam,
Adverting however to the urgency of the case, and
actuated by the consideration that the public interests
may, in the judgment of yourself and of Sir A.
Campbell, imperiously require such deputation, the
Governor in Council proposes furnishing Lieutenant
Colonel Suow with a letter to the Phra Klang or Prime
Minister at Siam similar in tenor to that addressed to
the subordinate Chiefs, and with power to be used
eventually in order to give to that officer under the
sanction of a local government the official character
required to enable him to conduct the duties of such
deputation.
6. In a letter received from the Right Honorable
the Governor General in Council under date 12 : March
last, the probable occupation of Tavoy, Mergui and
Junk Ceylon by our troops is alluded to as affording a
favorable opportunity of making a desirable arrange-
ment with the Government of Siam, in respect to the
affairs of Quedah, in which this Government is directly
interested, and the expediency of encouraging the


Siamese to co-operation with the British troops is
further enjoined in another letter of the 11th June
from the same high authority. It is presumable
therefore, that this Government will not be considered
as having gone beyond the strict line of its duty in
availing itself of the actual occurrence of the event
pointed out as the most favorable period for negotiat-
ing successfully with the Siamese Government.
7. It is scarcely necessary to repeat that these
powers are given to Lieutenant Colonel Snow under
the contemplation that the British troops are in
possession of Tavoy, Mergui and Tenasserim, and a
communication with the Siamese Government on the
subject thereby rendered advisable, and that no direct
orders from the Supreme Government have been
received, or other circumstance intermediately occur-
red of a nature rendering the use of these powers
unnecessary or improper.
8. Some arrangements connected with the state
of the vessel on which Lieutenant Colonel Low* arrived
will probably prevent his leaving this before the 20 :
Instant. In the mean time the Governor in Council
is not without some expectation of hearing further from
Rangoon. Considering his (Low’s) intimate and perfect
knowledge of the Siamese language and his having
been in the habit of intercourse with the Chiefs of the
Siamese Government, it has occurred to our President
that the presence of Lieutenant Low might be very
useful in any communications required to be made to
them and as Lieutenant Colonel Snow has concurred
in the opinion of advantage likely to result from his
assistance, it is proposed that he should accompany
him on his return.
1 have &c.
( Signed ) W. M. WILLIAMS
Offg. Secry. to Govt.
Fort Cornwallis
The 6th September 1824.


MR. J. ANDERSON.
To W. M. WILLIAMS Esquire
Acting Secretary to Government.
Sir,
Placed as I have been for some time past in
situations which have given me favorable opportunities
of acquiring information respecting the neighbouring
native states, while commercial agent to this Govern-
ment and more recently conducting the correspondence
between the late Governor and the Authorities at
Ligore and Quedah, 1 take the liberty of respectfully
submitting to the Honorable the Governor in
Council the result of my enquiries upon a sub-
ject which has during the last few years engaged
the attention of this Government, and a consideration
of which is daily becoming more momentous, in
consequence not only of the late commencement of
hostilities against the Burmahs, the meditated expedi-
tion against the Southern Ports of that Empire, the
very unsatisfactory footing upon which the British
Government at present stands with Siam, more
especially with the minor state of Ligore and its
present dependency of Quedah, but also the unsuc-
cessful issue of the late Governor’s negociations in
view to effect the restoration of the King of Quedah,
the deceit and cunning evinced by the Ligore
Chief and his Agents during the whole progress of
these negociations and the development of his real
intentions, by the uncourteous reception of the
Agent who was lately deputed to Trang.
FORT CORNWALLIS The 14 September 1824.


The first part of the accompanying paper* con-
tains some reflections upon the conquest of Perak
and Quedah, a brief account of the early Malayan
Establishments on the Peninsula and the relative
connection of the Quedah state with Siam and
Prince of Wales Island ; an exposition of the ad-
vantages likely to result from declaring Quedah and
the whole of the Malayan States under the protec-
tion of the British Government restoring a weak ally
to the throne of his ancestors, not so much from a
consideration of the claims which he has to support,
however strong, as from a regard to the interests
and prosperity of the British Settlements, to which
is added a few suggestions relative to the policy
to be pursued for the improvement of the declining
commerce of this Port with these States.
The second division contains a descriptive
sketch of the Tin countries on the Western side of
the Malayan Peninsula from the Island of Junk
Ceylon to the river Lingi, near Malacca, and the
rivers on that coast, intended to shew the boundai’ies
of the several states as defined and admitted by the
best native authorities, to point out the separate
rights of each, and the facilities wnich exist for
extending the commercial intercourse with these
states and drawing forth the valuable products with
which the Peninsula is known to abound.
The object of my investigation has been to re-
move some misconceptions which have been too
generally circulated respecting the tributary depen-
lence of Quedah upon Siam, as implied from the an-
jiently established ceremony of transmitting a
Boonga Mas, or gold and silver flower, and to direct
the attention of the higher authorities to a subject
>f deep importance to this settlement, which may
possibly not be overlooked in the future negotiations
vith the Court of Siam. It has been my aim, by


collecting and carefully comparing different authori-
ties to shew, not only the advantage to British . in-
terests, but the absolute necessity of immediate in-
terference in the affairs of Quedah.
The dispersions of the Malays by the lawless
oppressions of the Siamese is unquestionably giving
encouragement to a very alarming system of piracy,
and the decline of trade, the scarcity and enhanced
price of grain and other supplies have been too
sensibly felt of late to escape notice. Measures of
the utmost forbearance have already experienced a
trial of three years, but the prospect of a satisfactory
adjustment appears as distant as ever, while the
Government is obliged to comply with the selfish
policy of the authorities at Quedah and pa}' a bounty
upon the grain which used to be imported formerly
at one half the price.
These observations were penned in the latter
part of last year, prior to the knowledge of an in-
tended rupture with the Burmahs, and at a time
when the public mind at this Settlement was con-
siderably agitated by the reports which daily arrived
of a meditated invasion by the Siamese. These
remarks are submitted therefore with the utmost
deference, in the hope that the Honorable the
Governor in Council will indulgently overlook any
imperfections in the execution of the task in con-
sideration of the importance of the subject to the
interests of this Island.
I have &ca.
( Signed ) JOHN ANDERSON
T alay Trans, to Govt.
Penang
11th September 1824.


To the GOVERNOR GENERAL in
COUNCIL—Fort Win.
To
The RIGHT HONORABLE
WILLIAM PITT LORD AMHERST
Governor General in Council
FORT WILLIAM.
My Lord,
With reference to the Dispatch from this Govern-
ment to your Lordship in Council, under date the
26th April last, we have now the honor to transmit
the accompanying’ Copy of Lieutenant Low’s report
of his Mission to the Rajah of Ligor.
2. We greatly regret the unsuccessful issue of
the Mission in all its main objects -
[ The remainder of this letter contains merely
the substance of that already copied, addressed
to Major Canning.* It is not therefore con-
sidered necessary to repeat it here. The last
paragraph is as follows.]
10. We beg leave, in conclusion, to express
the expectation that in the several measures above
detailed, your Lordship in Council will not consider
this Government to have gone beyond the strict line
of its duty, in availing itself of the actual occurrence
of the events pointed out as the most favorable
period for negotiating successfully with the Siamese
Govern ment.
I have &ca.
{ Signed ) R. FULLERTON
„ J. MAC A LIST EE
W. A. CLUBLEY
Fort Cornwallis
The 13: September 1824.
FOJRT CORNWALLIS The 14 September 1824.


MINUTE by MR MACALISTER.
It was not until this forenoon that I had the
honor of perusing the President’s Minute and Diaffe
of a letter to Major Canning in reference to the im-
portant political objects for the furtherance of which
Lieutenant Colonel Snow has been deputed to this
Government. The Honorable Governor’s papers
have evidently been written under that sense of
responsibility which his recent arrival at this Pre-
sidency must cause him to feel when called upon to
express opinions on questions that to be fully
understood, require much local experience, as well
as a laborious reference to the past Proceedings of
the Board. As however the Supreme Government
and Major Canning must look to this Government
for some more decisive opinions than what the
Honorable President’s papers appear to me to convey,
I hope I shall not be deemed presumptuous if I
venture to submit to the consideration of my
superiors such views on the subject of the proposed
negotiations with Siam as have occurred to me.
In the first place, I still entertain the opinion,
which I verbally declared to the late Honorable
Governor some months ago, that the object desired
by the Supreme Government, of securing the active
co-operation of the Siamese Court in our war against
the state of Ava, will not only be much more difficult
of attainment than what is supposed in Bengal, but
even if attained will prove of very little advantage,
and probably of still less credit to us.
It is true a long standing and inveterate hatred
and rivalship subsist between the Siamese and
FORT CORNWALLS The 14 September 1824.


Barmans, yet it is not less true, that the Siamese not
only hate hat dread us much more than they do the
Barmans ; and this feeling of fear is at the present
moment, when we are making such approaches
towards their kingdom, too engrossing and powerful
to be easily removed from the jealous and suspicious
Court of Siam. Their arrogance also is so great and
preposterous that I have little doubt were we to
offer the Siamese Ministers restitution of their an-
cient possessions on the Coast of Tenasserim, they
would coollj 7 receive them as a matter of right, and
deem any return to us quite unnecessary.
Granting however that we succeed in persuad-
ing them to detach a body of troops to co-operate with
us against the Barman State, I feel confident that
such an accession will be an accession of weakness,
instead of strength to us. The jealousy of their
military conmanders, the acknowledged inferiority of
their troops to those of the Barmans in discipline
and conduct, their cruel and barbarous mode of
warfare, and their presumption and arrogance on all
occasions, would embarrass most materially the
operations of our army, and would disgust the peace-
able inhabitants of Ava, and render a final settle-
ment of the country much more difficult. When-
ever also we succeeded in subduing the Burman
Government, the Siamese Troops would claim the
whole honor and credit of the victory, and persuade
their Court to be a hundred-fold more haughty and
imperious and full of pretensions than what it is
already. But our very application to the Siamese
Court for co-operation or assistance will, I fear,
lower our character, and aggravate the insolence of
the King of Siam.
The only advantage we may receive from the
Siamese Government at the present crisis, is some
aid in elephants and provisions, but the best and I


think only certain mode of securing a supply of these,
will be by rendering it a regular mercantile transac-
tion, and offering to disburse the full expense there-
of. There will be some difficulty however in making
such supplies join our army ns soon as they may be
required, for the Country for many miles on each
side of the Siamese and Burman boundaries is well
known to be a desolate waste, through which the
passage of large convoys will be a much more
arduous work than what the patience or perseverance
of the Siamese will perhaps be able to accomplish.
And here I would beg to notice the plan of
opening a communication with the Siamese Court
by the way of Tavoy as it is proposed Lieutenant
Colonel Snow shall endeavour to effect. Putting
aside the almost inaccessibility of such a route, I
humbly conceive, with every respect for the high
military reputation of Lieutenant Colonel Snow,
that the selection of a person possessing more in-
formation regarding the nature and forms % of the
Governments in this quarter of the world than he
can possibly be expected to possess, is indispensible
if we desire to quiet the fears and blind the jealousy
and distrust of the Siamese Court on the present
occasion. I question also whether Lieutenant Low
will be a fit assistant to him. That officer, I infer
from his late Mission to Trang, is better acquainted
with the grammatical structure of the Siamese
Tongue than with their customs and forms of con-
ducting public business. It is also well known here
that the Rajah of Ligore, whose friends, as Mr.
Crawfurd experienced, are the leading members of
the Siamese Ministry, has taken personal offence at
some expressions used by Lieutenant Low in the
communications with the Ligorian officers.
If however it be determined that Lieutenant
Colonel Snow shall proceed to Bankok, he can


require no better or fuller information regarding the
affairs at Kedda and the political and commercial
objects desired by this Government, than what is
contained in the comprehensive paper, with its
numerous enclosures, which the late Governor’s
Military Secretary drew up for the purpose of being
given to Mr. Crawfurd, and which the late Honor-
able Governor adopted and recorded as a Minute in
Council in December 1821.*
( Signed ) J. MACALISTER.
The 13 Septr. 1824.


FORT CORNWALLIS The 23 September 1824.
WITH reference to the Minutes by the President
recorded on the Proceedings of the 14 : Instant *
APPROVED the following letter and enclosures
to Lieutenant Colonel Snow.
To
LIEUTENANT COLONEL SNOW.
Sir,
The general outline of the course of proceeding
intended to be pursued by this Government, con-
sequent on the letters received from Sir Archibald
Campbell and Major Canning, of which you were the
bearer, will have been explained in the communica-
tions which have passed between the Honorable the
President and yourself. For the sake of reference, I
am now directed to enclose copy of the letter lately
sent to Major Canning, and to intimate at the same
time that a subsequent reference to the records of this
Government having led the Honorable the Governor in
Council to believe that a deputation to the Court of
Siam could be resorted to only under the express
sanction and delegation of power from the Right
Honorable the Governor General, that part of the
contemplated arrangement has been abandoned.
2. The measures of this Government in support
of the object and views pointed out by Sir A. Campbell
will be confined therefore to the address of letters to
the Siamese Chiefs and authorities to whom the
occupation of Tavoy, Mergui and Tenasserim
will bring you in contiguity, and with whom the
necessity of holding communication will probably
arise, to the preparation of a letter to the Phra
Klang or Prime Minister at Siam, the transmis-
sion of which will be left to your discretion.


in which it is believed no difficulty will be found
through the medium of any one of the Chiefs already
mentioned, and lastly to the execution of powers from
this Government to communicate and make such
arrangements with the Chiefs for the supply of carriage
&ca. as you may be able to effect for the important
purposes pointed out by Sir A. Campbell. The letters
and powers with English translations are herewith
transmitted. From the knowledge possessed by
Lieutenant Low of the Siamese language and from his
having been already in communication with some of
the Native Chiefs it has been considered desirable that
that officer should accompany you, and as it may be
found expedient to depute him on the service in which
you are engaged, a duplicate power has been made out
in his name, to be used however only in the event of
your considering such deputation necessary for the
interests of the service.
3. Adverting to the uncertainty of the period
when our troops may arrive at Mergui, to the necessity
that may arise of your visiting some part of the Coast
for the purpose of obtaining information, and with the
view of ensuring due respect, in such event, the
Honorable the Governor has determined that a small
Escort (as per margin ) of the Local Corps of this
Island under the command of Lieutenant Low should
accompany you. The Board are aware that it would
have been very desirable that you should have been
attended by a vessel of a smaller description (than the
David Malcolm Transport which conveys you ) and of
a draft of water so as to have admitted a communication
with the shore and the rivers on the Coast. They
regret exceedingly that they have found it im-
practicable to provide one of the proper description
and capable of keeping her way with the Transport
at this season of the year. A small row boat with
a crew of six men will however be embarked tor your
use on the transport.


4. As the occasional presentation of small pre-
sents to the Chiefs with whom you will have to com-
municate may be useful and even necessary, the Board
have directed the sum of Dollars 3,000 to be delivered
to Lieutenant Low to be eventually disbursed under
your direction, and of which the amount * will be
rendered on his return to this Island.
5. From the general tenor of the letter enclosed,
you will perceive that in the measures now taken the
Honorable the Governor in Council proceeds on the
contemplation of Mergui, Tavoy and Tenasserim being
actually in possession of the British troops ; that it is
only on that contingency that the letters and powers
now entrusted to you are to be used. As it is possible
the expected orders from the Supreme Government
relative to the occupation of these places may be
accompanied with instructions as to the mode of
proceeding in respect to the Siamese Chiefs on the
frontier, it must also be understood that the Powers
now given ai'e not to be made use of in case the Right
Honorable the Governor General shall have delegated
Powers to any other person or signified the adoption
of a line of policy which would render your proceeding
on them unnecessary or improper, and are moreover
confined to such communication and arrangement as
may be required to carry into effect the views of Sir
A. Campbell in procuring carriage supplies &ca, and
eventually the co-operation of a body of Siamese
troops, but without discussing the ulterior question of
the final disposal of acquisitions made in the course
of the war.
G. It may be hoped that the occupation of those
Countries by our troops may dispose the Chiefs and
the Government of Siam to lend their aid in the supply
of carriage required for the further prosecution of the
war. But it becomes necessary to state that from the
little communication that has ever subsisted between


the Siamese and any European power [and] the
extreme suspicion evinced in such communication, a
speedy or active exertion on their part can hardly be
expected. It is probable they will await some signal
instance of success on our part before they can be
induced to take a decided line in support of the war,
but it is by no means impossible that the supply of
carriage, cattle, elephants, &ca. may be obtained as a
common commercial transaction in the Countries im-
mediately depending on Tavoy, Mergui, or in the
adjoining Siamese Territories, in respect to which you
will be guided of course by the instructions received
from Sir A. Campbell.
I have &c.
(Signed) W. M. WILLIAMS.
Offg. Secry. to Govt.
Fort Cornwallis
The 24. September 1824.
ORDERED that a Copy of the above letter be
transmitted for the information of Major Canning at
Rangoon.


THE following letter of instructions to Lieutenant
Low is also approved and recorded.
To LIEUTENANT J. LOW.
To
Lieutenant J. Low.
Sir,
Lieutenant Colonel Snow attached to the British
force employed at Rangoon having been deputed here
for the purpose of consulting as to the best means of
inducing the Siamese authorities to assist in the supply
of carriage cattle for the use of the army acting against
the Burmans, and eventually to employ a portion of
their troops against the common enemy ; it has been
judged necessary in the contemplation of the immediate
occupation of Tavoy and Mergui to grant letters to
Lieutenant Colonel Snow, addressed to the Chiefs in
the neighbourhood of the . Siamese frontier, in
furtherance of the objects above stated. As a direct
communication will become necessary, the Board ad-
verting to your knowledge of the Siamese language
and habits of the people with whom Lieutenant Colonel
Snow will have to communicate, have determined that
you should accompany him on the duty in which he is
now employed.
It has further been determined that a small party
of the Local Corps should attend Lieutenant Colonel
Snow as an honorary escoi’t as well as to ensure respect,
in the event of its being found necessary to land on
the Coast for the purpose of obtaining information; a
small Boat and Crew will be sent on board the David
Malcolm for that purpose. It lias further been deemed
advisable to advance to you the sum of dollars 3,000
for the purpose of providing such articles as may be
necessary according to the usual custom to present to
the Chiefs with whom it may be necessary to hold
intercourse.


The Board have granted to Lieutenant Colonel
Snow the necessary credentials for that purpose, but it
may be judged advisable by that officer to depute you
occasionally on such service. Duplicate Power is
transmitted herewith to be used only in the event of
Lieutenant Colonel Snow directing their use. You
will in this respect and all others connected with the
object of the present Mission conform to the instructions
and directions you may receive from that Officer. You
will endeavour, as done by you on a former occasion,
to obtain every possible information in respect to the
Coasts, Islands and Countries you may happen to visit.
The Board have determined to grant you the same
allowance as on your last deputation, viz. 500 Dollars
per Month. When .Lieutenant Colonel Snow shall in-
timate to you that your services are no longer necessary
you will make the best of your way back to this Island;
along with the escort and boat’s crew. Directions have
been given to make the usual advance, and embark the
usual supply of provisions for their use.
I am &ca.
( Signed ) W M. WILLIAMS.
Offg. Secry. to Govt.
Fort Cornwallis
The 24 September 1824.


FORT CORNWALLIS The 21 October 1824.
RESIDENT at SINGAPORE.
To
W. M. WILLIAMS Esquire
Acting Secretary to Government
Prince of Wales Island.
Sir,
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of
your letter of the 10 : September transmitting corres-
pondence with the Agent of the Governor-General and
Commander in Chief of the Rangoon force respecting
the war in which we are engaged with the state of
Ava, and more particularly touching the co-operation
which may be expected on the part of the Siamese
Government.
An opportunity has just occurred of communicat-
ing direct with Siam of which I have availed myself,
and I now beg leave to submit to the Honorable the
Governor in Council copy of the letters which I have
addressed to the Officers of the Siamese Government,
as well as of my dispatch to the Secretary to Govern-
ment in the Political Department explaining the views
and motives under which these were written. In
further explanation of the sentiments which I have
been led from many considerations to entertain on
the question of Siamese co-operation, I beg leave
respectfully to lay before the Honorable the Governor
in Council an extract of a dispatch which I had the
honor to address to the Supreme Government on
the 31st of May last,
I have &c.
(Signed) J. CRAWFURD
Resident.
Singapore
5 : October 1824.


THE letter of John Crawfurd Esquire Resident
at Singapore. To His Royal Highness the Prince
Kroma Meng Cheat &ca. &ca.
I have communicated to the Chao Piah Prah
Klang from time to time the origin and progress of
our war with the Burmans, and now have the honor to
address your Royal Highness on the same subject.
Your Royal Highness knows that four months ago a
large army proceeded to Rangoon, captured that place,
and has since repeatedly fought and beat the Burmans.
Detachments from the same force have taken Cheduba,
Ramree and Negrais. By the last accounts received
the General in Command had given orders for the
conquest of Martaban, Tavoy and Mergui. This last
advance of our arms will bring us close to the Siamese
frontier, and in such an event, your Royal Highness
may be assured that the British Commanders will pay
the utmost attention to the wishes and interests of
His Majesty the King of Siam, while they trust at the
same time to His Majesty’s friendship for co-operation
and support in vanquishing the common enemy. If
your Royal Highness will be pleased to convey to the
British General, to the .Governor of Prince of Wales
Island, or to myself the present and final views of the
Court on all the topics connected with this subject,
they will either be immediately attended to or con-
veyed to the Governor General of India, and there
receive all the consideration due to the friendship
which has been long professed and felt for the Siamese
nation.
I have further to inform your Royal Highness
that as soon as the season of the rains is over and
the Country open, the army of Rangoon will march to
Ummerapura, while a much larger force under His
Excellency the Commander in Chief of India will
move in the same direction from the frontiers of
Bengal. This will put aan end to the war.
By the present opportunity I send His Majesty


the King in the name of the Right Honorable the
Governor General a present of a thousand stand of fire
arras in token of his confidence and friendship, and
the merchants of Singapore have received full permis-
sion to furnish the Court of Siam with any number
which may be desired.
I beg your Royal Highness to accept of a gold
watch and 15 Catties of Coral as a mark of my high
consideration and respect.
(Signed) J. ORAWFURD
Resident.
Singapore
3 October 1824.


The letter of John Crawfurd Esquire, Resident of"
Singapore. To his Excellency the Chao Piah Prah-
Klang Chao Kun Kosa.
This letter will be delivered to your Excellency by
Mr. Gillies, the same respectable individual who visited
Siam last year, and I have to entreat for him a con-
tinuance of your favor and protection. He takes with
him a supply of fire arms for the use of the Govern-
ment with the full sanction of the Right Honorable the
Governor General of India, and to afford a proof of his
esteem and confidence,
I beg to announce to your Excellency that the
Island of Singapore has become permanently a British
possession, that the Dutch have forborn to make
further claim upon it, and further that they have ceded
to the English the town and territory of Malacca. The
commerce of Singapore continues daily to encrease—
there are still no duties whatsover levied on merchan-
dize and an extensive market is open for the produce
of your country. I hope therefore this year that many
junks will arrive from Siam, and that the Kings’s ship
may be induced again to repeat her voyage.
I beg your Excellency in token of my respect to
accept a double barrelled fowling piece of a new con-
struction, and an emerald ring.
( Signed ) J. CRAWFURD.
Resident.
Singapore
3: October 1824.


To
GEORGE SWINTON Esquire
Secretary to Government
FORT WILLIAM
Sir,
I have the honor to report for the information of
the Right Honble. the Governor General in Council,
that the English Ship Caroline proceeds without delay
to Siam, and that I have taken this opportunity of
again addressing the Siamese authorities on the subject
of the war in which we are engaged with the State
of Ava. Copies of the letters sent on this subject
addressed as usual to the Chiefs of the Foreign
Department are annexed. Government will have the
goodness to observe that I have still continued to
address the froward and suspicious Court of Siam in
the same strain of caution as heretofore, avoiding the
proposal of any specific measure of co-operation on the
grounds stated in a former dispatch, but at the same
time inviting, altho’ not courting, general co-operation
and assistance, while the means, as far as possible, are
furnished, and in the manner least calculated to awaken
jealousy, of giving us that co-operation.
I have not hitherto had the honor to receive any
reply to my dispatch in the Political Department of the
31 of May, and in which I had proposed to present the
Siamese Government with 1000 stand of arms in the
name of the Right Honorable the Governor General,
but the utility of this measure as a means of giving
confidence to that suspicious people, has been con-
stantly present to me, and the subject has within the
last few days been brought more urgently to my
attention by the official information transmitted to me
from the Government of Prince of Wales Island,
and from which it appears that Martaban, Tavoy
and Mergui were upon the point of being attacked —a


matter which would bring us into direct contact with
the Siamese, while the co-operation of that State is
anxiously looked for by the Commander of the
Rangoon force and the Agent of the Governor General.
Under these circumstances I have ventured to
assume the responsibility of presenting a thousand
stand of fire arms to the Siamese Court. These have
been procured at this place and consist of new Tower
proof muskets with bayonets complete, which I have
purchased at the rate of Nine Spanish Dollars each.
This price includes freight, and all other charges to
Siam, security to deliver the muskets, and an engage-
ment to bring back the return presents free of all
charge whatsoever. The return presents commonly
made at Siam amount to about two thirds of the value
received, estimating the prices in that country, and as
they are deliverable at this place free of all expence
to the Government, I may reckon that the actual
charge incurred by this measure will not exceed
2000 Spanish Dollars instead of four or five as esti-
mate in my former dispatch.
With respect to the minor presents, the gold watch
and fowling piece were purchased some time back with
the approbation of Government, and are already sanc-
tioned in the public accounts. The only other charges
are the coral presented to the Prince Kroma Cheat,
and a small emerald ring to the Minister, both of
which will cost together something less than 700
Dollars.
I have the honor further to report that in accord-
ance with the view of Siamese politics and Siamese
co-operation which I have taken both in this dispatch
and in that of the 31 of May, and under the sanction
contained in your dispatch of the 12 of March, I have
given permission for a further exportation of fire arms
to Siam, and that the Ship Caroline in consequence
will convey thither 2000 stand.


Government will be pleased to observe from the
contents of my letter to the Siamese Minister that Mr.
John Gillies, the same individual who proceeded last
year to Siam, proceeds thither again upon the present
occasion with commercial views, and proposes making
some short stay in the country. The former visit of
this gentleman to Siam afforded me satisfactory proofs
of his prudence and good sense, and I have in con-
sequence, and believing in the utility of this measure,
now given him the directions for his conduct, should
political matters be obtruded upon him, as is highly
probable, of which I have the honor to enclose a copy.*
I have &ca.
(Signed) J. ORAWFURD
Resident.
Singapore
4 October 1824.


MEMORANDUM of the various Points which
appear on the public records as desirable for the in-
terests of this Presidency, and to be obtained through
negotiation with the Court of Siam.
First. The restoration of the King of Kedah to
his territories free of all tribute or at.least subject only
to the triennial presentation of the Boonga Mas
( Golden Flower ) on the payment of a certain sum in
money not exceeding 4,000 Dollars annually and liable
to no further demands, order or mark of subjection
whatever. Should the money payment be acceded to
the Government of Prince of Wales Island to guarantee
the same.
REMARKS. This is a point of great political
importance, directly affecting the interests as well as
the credit and reputation of this Government. The
Grant of this Island was given by the King of Kedah,
and there seems every reason to believe that on grant-
ing it he considered himself fully authorized to make
the grant, and the British Government also acknow-
o 7
ledged that authority by receiving it and making the
Treat} 7 with him. Captain Light’s correspondence also
held out to him the constant hope ( which was the
principal inducement) of his thereby ensuring the
protection of the British Government against two
powerful neighbours ( the Burmans and Siamese ) then
contending for superiority. Although such protection
formed no express provision of the Treaty, and
although on the grounds of the state of Vassalage
in which he was supposed to stand in relation to
Siam, it was not deemed advisable to afford him
protection by the intervention of Military Force
and defence of his Kingdom, still the restoration
FORT CORNWALLIS The 21 October 1824.


of the King of Kedah, provided it can be brought
about by negotiation is an object not less sup-
ported b} 1 ' strict justice than sound policy. While
the Kedah Country was under the management of its
own King we had a friendly neighbour, looking up to
us for support and protection ; we had ample supplies
of grain and provisions j our commercial relations were
in a progressive state of amelioration; we had the
certainty of an amicable adjustment of all disputes
likely to arise ; certain co-operation in the prevention
of piracy and other crimes.
We have now a powerful, haughty, arrogant and
unaccommodating neighbour ; we are liable to constant
disputes, extremely troublesome, and though in the
eyes of Government and the European population not
absolutely dangerous, still destructive of the interests
of the Island by the constant alarm under which the
native inhabitants are kept, and the unsettled state of
mind produced on them by the fear of such neighbours.
Our supplies are completely cut off. From the opposi-
tion of the Malay inhabitants, and extreme aversion
to Siamese Government, insurrections are frequent,
cultivation is abandoned, and general confusion pre-
vails, while many of the Malay inhabitants driven out
from their homes have taken to piracy and plunder
for subsistence, which renders the navigation of the
neighbouring seas unsecure.
SECOND, The disavowal by the Siamese Gov-
ernment of all claims of superiority over any of the
Malay States on the Peninsula South of Patani.
This is another point of a political nature of
great importance not less to this Presidency than the
General trade of the Straits of Malacca. The admission
to
of their independence and the certainty of security
against Siamese encroachment is indispensible to the
future peace and tranquillity of the Malayan Peninsula.
Without entering minutely into the discussion of


the degree of dependence on which those states are
said to have been once placed in relation to Siam
and of the extent of control said to have been exerted
over them, on which very discordant opinions are
entertained, it is enough to remark it is very clear,
that no act of superiority whatever has been exerted
over any state South East of Kedah within the memory
of man. The triennial presentation of the Boonga
Mas was indeed the only mark of homage required
from the latter up to the year 1808, between which
period and 1818 constant demands were made and that
state was compelled to assist Siam with supplies of
grain, armed prows, &ca. and in the end to attack its
Southerly neighbour, the Rajah of Perak, in order to
compel him also to present the Boonga Mas, a mark
of subjection, clearly proved never to have been before
demanded, or complied with. The Rajah of Kedah
having succeeded in subjugating Perak, and having
entirely destroyed his military means thereby, was
himself attacked and driven out of his Kingdom.
It is generally rumoured that the same process is even
now in contemplation in respect to Perak and Salengore,
that is, to compel the former to attack the latter and
itself to fall an easy prey. We have a decided in-
terest in preventing further aggression and subjugation
by the Siamese Government. All the petty states
now menaced have long been on friendly terms with
us. We have made Commercial Treaties with them
providing for a free intercourse, and though these
Treaties are purely commercial, stipulating only for
free communication and a reciprocity in point of duties
&c. and containing no political pledge of defence,
still it must be observed that their falling under the
overwhelming 7 power of such a Government as the
Siamese must entirely destroy all commercial inter-
course and throw the whole Peninsula in disorder and
confusion ; even the, dangers to which these States
are now subjected by the threatening measures of the
Siamese tends to unsettle the minds of the inhabitants.


It is only under a settled and peaceable state of
things that trade can flourish, that the rich productions
of the country can be brought forth. We have an
interest therefore in protecting them as far as we can,
as well against foreign aggressions as internal disputes
with each other. The influence of this Government
over them is considerable, and if exerted by friendly
intercourse and communication will long be sufficient
without the use of arms to maintain all in these
places. It is only through that intercourse which
trade, the suppty of each others wants produces, that
the yet uncivilized inhabitants can by degrees be
brought to understand the blessings of settled life, and
it is not unreasonable to expect that such will be the
result of our intercourse with these states ; but it
clear that all the immediate commercial advantages, as
well as the well grounded hopes of future amelioration
must be lost, if the long exploded or rather imaginary
rights of supremacy of the Siamese are to be received
and admitted, and allowed to be practically enforced.
The insurance of protection to the Malay States against
unauthorized aggressions, if attainable by the course
of negotiation, and without recourse to arras, invari-
ably discouraged by superior authority, is an object
that needs but to be stated in order to obtain attention.
It is one which on principles of humanity alone might
even warrant stronger measures than amicable
negotiation.
THIRD. The free navigation of the rivers be-
tween the Trang and the Karian from their mouths to
their sources, as well as the free and unimpeded inter-
course over land with Patani and the Tin Countries in
the interior, and with Ligor, Singora and the other
ports on the eastern coast of the Malayan Peninsula on
fair and moderate duties on the articles on* transit or
exportation by either sea.
This is a point of commercial policy important to
the general trade, but of more particular advantage to


Siam itself, by opening a channel for the produce of
the eastern part of the Kingdom direct to the Bay of
Bengal, thus saving the circumnavigation of the whole
Malay Peninsula. The distance is said not to exceed
20 Leagues and between Ligore and Trang the journey
is performed in seven days, for the greater part there
is water communication and the porterage is easily
provided for by the use of elephants which abound, are
easily caught and trained in two months.
FOURTH. The free exportation from all the
Siam ports on the western side of the Peninsula of ail
articles of provision required for the use of Prince of
Wales Island.
This requires no remark.
FIFTH. The cession of the Island of Salan<y or
-Tnnk Ceylon to the British Government.
The advantages that would result from the posses-
sion of the Island are pointed out in the Minutes of
the Governor of this Presidency of 16th October 1819*
and 2/ December 1821*, the latter accompanied by
fourteen documents, in No. 11 of which all previous
information is concentrated, the principal being
contained in a letter from Captain Francis Light
addressed to the Governor General on the 18 June
1787. They may be stated thus. The great fertility
of the soil producing pepper, indigo, cotton, sugar,
coffee and rice in great abundance, the richness of its
tin mines, the protection it affords to shipping at all
seasons, and its convenient situation in respect to the
navigation of the Bay of Bengal, to which may be
added its commanding situation as a military station,
with the view of keeping in check both the Burman
and Siamese Governments in the event of an insular
being preferred to a continental position. Should a
free intercourse across the Isthmus, as contemplated in
article 3d, ever take place, this island would probably
become the emporium of all the Siamese trade with
India and Europe.


The Island it appears was offered to the British
Government in the year 1785 by its Siamese Chief,
and the persons employed in looking out for a con-
venient commercial port at the mouth of the Malacca
Straits seem to have hesitat ed between it and the
Island of Penang, at last preferred. The importance of
its possession was again pointed out to the Supreme
Government by that of Prince of Wales Island in the
year 1820, and an Embassy to Siam strongly recom-
mended, for the express purpose of obtaining it, but
the prospect of success was not then considered suf-
ficient to warrant the measure. The Island is now of
little use to the Siamese, its present possessors. Only
in 1810 it was attacked and completely taken posses-
sion of by the Birmans, who carried off to slavery many
of the inhabitants. After remaining some time they
were frightened into a re-embarkation, since which the
only inhabitants are about 200 Siamese generally in
too great a state of alarm to settle and turn the Island
to any account.
Should the result of the present war with the
Burmans place, as expected, ergui, Tavoy and Tenas-
serim in our possession, there can be no doubt, con-
sidering the value attached by the Siamese to these
countries, their old possession, that Junk Ceylon and
even one or two more Islands of the Mergui Archipe-
lago might be obtained in addition to the other points
stated in this Memorandum.


FORT CORNWALLIS The 25 November 1824.
To
G. SWINTON Esquire
Secretary to the Government
FORT WILLIAM
Sir,
I have the honor to report for the information of
the Right Honorable the Governor General in Council,
that there have arrived within the last days from
Siam a ship belonging to the King and nine junks.
By these opportunities I have received a reply to the
letter which I addressed to the Siamese Minister on
the 13th May, and two other communications, of all of
which translations or extracts are annexed.
The letter of the Minister expresses all that
suspicion and distrust which there was reason to
anticipate, and which is so characteristic of the Siam-
ese Government. From personal communications
received by the same opportunities it would appear
that as soon as the Siamese had received the first
reports of our war with the, Burmans, they sent a
strong detachment from Bangkok to Tavoy, to
ascertain the truth or otherwise of the report in
question. This detachment on approaching Tavoy,
and finding no British troops there, but on the
contrary the Burmans in full possession of the
country, made a hasty retreat. This circumstance
will account in some measure for the Siamese Ministers
incredulity respecting the war.
By the accounts now laid before Government, as
well as by private reports received at the same time,
it would appear that the King of Siam died on the
20 July after an illnfcss of six days continuance,
having been carried off by a strangury. His eldest.


but illegitimate son, the Prince Kroma Ohiat ascended
the throne the next day without experiencing any
opposition whatever, and apparently with the general
consent and approbation of the Siamese Chiefs. This
change in the Government, as the Prince is unques-
tionably the most intelligent and enlightened individual
of his nation, will possibly infuse some portion of
activity, and even liberality into the Siamese Govern-
ment. The Prah Klang, the individual through whom
we have hitherto conducted all our intercourse, has been
raised to the highest rank in the kingdom, and con-
tinues to enjoy the entire confidence of the new King.
It deserves to be noticed that contrary to the
customary order of events in Siam, the present
succession to the throne has not been accompanied by
any disturbances, or by any of those executions or
proscriptions which in that coimtry have usually
marked the commencement of a new reign.
I have &ca. &c.
(Signed) J. CRAWFURD.
Resident.
Singapore
oO October 1824.


THE LETTER of Chao Piah Prah-Klang Chao
Kun Kosa to John Crawfurd Esquire, Resident of
Singapore.
I have received your letter which states that the
Burmans have often deceived tlie English, and trans-
gressed against them, that war has in consequence
been declared, that the Governor General of India has
sent an army from Bengal and Madras to attack
Rangoon, Martaban, Tavoy and Mergui, and further
that he has given orders to the English merchants to
supply our nation with whatever merchandize we
require, on account of the esteem and friendship he
entertains for the Siamese.
You have informed me that the Burmans have
sent an Embassy to Cochin China, and the copy which
you have transmitted of the Burman King’s letter to
the King of Cochin China has been well understood,
and given His Majesty much satisfaction. In sending
it you have done the King an acceptable service.
The Siamese scouts are always vigilant and have
recently taken some Burman • prisoners. One of the
scouts reports that the Burman Mission was well re-
ceived in Cochin China, but that it is not ascertained
whether the presents were accepted or otherwise.
I have communicated to the King such parts of
the contents of Mr. Crawfurd’s letter as it was proper
His Majesty should know. His Majesty is thankful
to the Governor General of India for the permission
he has given to the English Merchants to sell fire
arms and ammunition to the Siamese.
You say that the English are at war with the Bur-
mans. Our scouts in scouring the Burman frontier
have taken some prisoners, who state that they know
FORT CORNWALLIS The 25 November 1824.


nothing of any war between the English and their own
nation. Also when the Burman Ambassadors returned
from Cochin China you were at war with the King of
Ava, yet Mr. Crawfurd, it is reported, received the
ambassadors at Singapore on their return from Cochin
China with civility and much friendship. It is further
reported that Burman merchants still continue to carry
on trade at P. W. Island. Under such circumstances
can your nation be at war with the Burmans ? These
statements have induced me to refrain from communi-
cating to the King what was stated in your letter
respecting the war.
\ou will do an acceptable service to His Majesty
the King if you will afford protection to such Siamese
merchants as visit Singapore to purchase arms and
ammunition, or recommend our merchants to the
Governor of P. W. Island, should the}* - desire to visit
that place for the same purpose.
His Majesty has directed the Intendant of the
warehouse to prepare his ship named Kera Kansumut
for sea, appointing KunsiPhasa to be her Commander.
He has directed this person to purchase a few articles
which he requires. He wishes you to take some notice
of her, and that her Commander may be allowed to
buy and sell without molestation. His Majesty desires,
if practicable, some cannon, some muskets, and a
quantity of glassware, according to a list with which
the Commander has been furnished. Let the ship, if
possible, return with the present monsoon.
The glassware which you sent has been duly re-
ceived, and in return I send you 30 Peculs of white
sugar as a token of my friendship. The King also has
directed the Storekeeper to send you 2 Peculs of Ivory,
10 Peculs of Tin, and 2 Peculs of Gamboge, which the
Commander of the ship will duly deliver to you.
Written on Friday the 6th day of the Dark Half
of the Bth Month of the year of the Monkey.


TRANSLATION of a PORTUGUESE LETTER.
To
JOHN CRAWFURD Esquire
Resident,
Sir,
I have the honor to inform you that the King of
Siam died on the 20: instant, and the next day with
general consent the Prince Kroma Chiat was proclaimed
King. The Prince Vangna Kromasak was disgraced
by the present Monarch. As soon as Prince Kroma
Chiat ascended the throne, he gave orders to allow all
nations that visited Siam to buy and sell, export and
import, with any inhabitant they thought proper,
without hindrance, they paying only the duties. This
was done without any altercation with the Chiefs.
I expect to go as an officer of a vessel. She sails
for China in the ensuing season. I have to beg you
will not mention to the Siamese the contents of my
letter to your address complaining of the Prah Klang,
as I have been fortunate enough to gain his favour.
I beg you will answer my letters, but I suppose you
have heard what I now communicate by Francis
Domingos Lopes, who is gone as a passenger in the
King’s ship to Singapore.
I beg to say that you must wait until my arrival'
at Singapore to explain a great injustice done to you,
as well as the predicament I was in with the Siamese
Government some time ago; for the Chiefs actually do
not credit any foreign intelligence they receive.
Your letters reached here in the month of June.
They were translated in the Siamese language, and
excited some mirth. The Minister in a sportive
manner said “ The English have no time to rest, on
“ account of the writing and other business they
“ have to go through.”
I have &c. &c.
( Signed ) J, K L.
Siam
25 July 1824.


EXTRACT of a letter from the Supra Cargo of
the Brig Shannon to his Commercial Correspondent at
Singapore.
I was called before him (the Prah Klang ) at 8
o’clock next morning, when I delivered all the letters
from you. After perusing them he asked me several
questions relative to Mr such as what kind of
a ship did we come in, one mast or two &c. Then
they began about the Burmah war, and asked thou-
sands of questions over and over again, some of them
very foolish indeed, all of which I answered to the best
of my knowledge. The Prah Klang said he must go
and tell the King, and I was to go home, but not to
go any where, nor see any person. They took veivf
good care that I should not go out at all events, as
they always took away the boat. I was called again
in the afternoon, but I took care to take all the
musters of the cargo with me to get them sent in with
the prices and of each kind. The Prah Klang
said that it was time enough to shew them in the
evening, and in the mean time to tell to the inter-
preters all 1 knew of the war, and they would write it
down. I told all that I had told them in the morning.
I then produced the musters, and told them the price
and quantity of each, which they marked on them in
their own writing, and said they would undergo diie
consideration. I yesterday was called two or three times
about the war, and the very same questions put over
and over again. These are the people to try a person’s
patience !! At last they got the Portuguese Consul to
interpret for me, and by his assistance I made them
comprehend all about the war, and shewed them on
a chart the Countries the English had taken from
the Burmahs. However the Prah Klang has been
very attentive, and sends us every day our breakfast,
dinner and supper ; to-day he sent us lots of fruit of
all sorts as a present, and seems very well pleased. I
had a letter for Prince Kroraachet from you, and 1 am


told from very good authority that he is going to im-
prove the trade very much, by allowing every person
to trade free, that is to say, by paying the duties which
are to be 8 per Cent, you can buy and sell to whom
you please. This will be a great advantage to us, for,
as the trade is just now, we must buy from Government,
and their goods are nearly 100 per cent higher than
you can purchase the same kind in the Bazar.
There is very great quantity of all kinds of Europe
Goods in this place just now. They are imported by
the junks from Singapore and Penang. I expect the
Shannon will be up here in two days.
Bangkok
4 September 1824.
(True Copies )
(Signed) J. CRAWFURD.
Resident.


FORT CORNWALLIS The 11th November 1824.
To
W. S. CRACROFT Esqr.
Acting Secretary to Government.
Sir,
I have the honor to acknow ledge the receipt of
your letter of the 26th October directing] me to sub-
mit for the consideration of the Honble. the Governor
in Council my opinion, which is the most feasible
of two modes of procedure for the removal of the
restrictions on the commerce carried on by the Muda
River with the countries in the interior of Wellesley
Province ; whether by application to the Kedah autho-
rities, or by making some arrangement with the
present renter of the farm; and further to state
whether any communication with the Rajah of Ligor
or his representatives would be advisable under exist-
ing circumstances.
I have given my utmost attention to subjects of
so much interest and importance and now beg to offer
the following observations.
The question of opening any direct communication
between the Government and the Rajah of Ligor or
his representatives involves that of proposing to pay
a sum of money to the Kedah authorities for the
privilege desired to be obtained.
The aggrandizing spirit of the Siamese evinced in
the conquest of the Kedah Territories would I fear
receive much encouragement from the opening of any
such correspondence with them on the part of the
British Government. I believe the present system of
Military Government established over the Malays of
that Country by their oppressors has never yet been
recognized, and there is one very obvious reason for


its not being so. As soon as they are acknowledged
to be the “ Jang deper Tuan ” or Ruling Power
according to the Treaty concluded by Sir G. Leith,
they will immediately demand payment of the annual
10,000 Spanish Dollars stipulated to be paid in
perpetuity or during the possession of Pulo Penang
and the territory of Province Wellesley by the
Company, and I should imagine it not to be the inten-
tion of Government to do any act which will give
ground for such a claim.
The jealousy and suspicion of the English which
prevails in the mind of the Rajah of Ligor and his
adherents is another reason for not opening a com-
munication with him. They would not be persuaded
that our views in obtaining a free navigation of the
Muda were .commercial, but would rather fear some
political negotiation with the Chiefs in the interior
for the purpose of preventing their future progress to
the southern parts of the Malay Peninsula, and the
result would be a stricter check either to the transit
of merchandize or the journeys of individuals than at
present prevails.
Little prospect of success is therefore left excep-
ting by the adoption of the second plan, viz. an
agreement with the present or future renters of the
farm. If the Honble. the Governor in Council will
permit me, I will make an attempt to do this without
pretending any express authority, but merely on the
ground of the great and increasing number of in-
habitants on this shore for whom I am desirous of
opening channels of employment, and I hope that
by holding out a prospect of mutual advantage much
[may] be effected to open and increase the trade.
Until I commence an arrangement with the farmers
I cannot tell whether a regular payment to them or an
agreement for certain fixed duties on the goods passed
up and down the river will be the best and easiest plan


and on this subject also I request a discretionary power
may be granted me.
I have &ca.
{ Signed ) A. D. MAINGY
Supdt. of Point Wellesley.
Point Wellesley
the 2d. Novr. [ 1824.]
AGREED that the plans proposed by the
Superintendent be approved and the discretionary
power solicited by him granted.


Secret Department
9
To
The Honble. The Secret Committee of the
Honble. the Court of Directors.
Honble. Sirs.
****##
Para. 5. The question of the future disposal of
Tavoy and Mergui, is now under our consideration,
and the result of our deliberations will be communi-
cated to Your Honorable Committee in a subsequent
address. Our present impression is, that the most
advisable course would be to restore those places to the
Siamese, from whom they were forcibly wrested by
the Burmese about 60 or 70 years ago ; but it may be
necessary to retain them for a short time in our own
hands, both with reference to the advantage, which
their possession will give us in any negotiations which
the Burmese Government may be desirous of opening
with us, should a revolution, such as above adverted to,
have really taken place, and to the embarrassment in
which we should be placed by precipitately making
them over to the Siamese, when their restoration to
the new Government of Ava, might facilitate the con-
clusion of terms of peace. Besides, we have just re-
ceived accounts from the Resident at Singapore, so
circumstantial, as in his estimation to be entitled to
some credit, that the King of Siam is dead, and the
Government has been seized by an illegitimate son.
In such a state of confusion, it might not be easy or
prudent to treat with one of the conflicting parties for
the throne, for the cession to the Siamese State of the
Provinces of Tavoy and Mergui.
* # * ?> # «
We have &c.
AMHERST
EDVVD. PAGET
JOHN PENDALL.
Port William
The 12th November 1824.


FORT CORNWALLIS The 25 November 1824.
To G. SWINTON Esquire
Secretary to the Government.
FORT WILLIAM
Sir,
I have the honor to lay respectfully before the
Right Honorable the Governor General in Council,
copy of a letter which I have addressed to the Siamese
Minister, and which was transmitted on a ship belong-
ing to the King of Siam that sailed last night for
Bangkok.
I entertain sanguine hopes that as soon as the
capture of Tavoy and Mergui shall have been duly
made known to the Siamese Government, they will be
induced to take some active steps in prosecution of
their annual hostilities against the Burmans. According
to the information which I have received at this place,
the countries which are the usual scenes of military
operations between the two nations are totally impass-
able from June to November. On the 20 of the latter
month according to old usage, the Siamese troops which
guard the frontiers take the field, and are stationed
during the whole of the dry season at the usual posts
of observation, viz : on the principal routes which lead
to the Burman country, and which are those of Mergui,
Tavoy, Martaban and Chaingmai. About 1,000 men
are said to be stationed at the three first mentioned
posts, and from sto 6,000 at the latter. This is stated
to be the usual amount of the Guards, and more
numerous forces are assembled when any enterprize
beyond the mere protection of the frontier is con-
templated.
There is every reason to hope that the present
crisis will stimulate the Siamese to an active prosecu-
tion of hostilities, and that thus an important diversion


will be effected in our favor; but even should this not
take place, 1 am of opinion that their entire neutrality
may be safely reckoned upon.
I have &c. &c.
(Signed) J. CRAWFURD
Resident.
Singapore
12 November 1824.
N.B.—A Copy of this dispatch, and generally of
all documents which relate to Siamese politics, is
transmitted to the Government of P. W. Island.


THE LETTER of JOHN CRAWFURD Esquire,
Resident of Singapore, to His Excellency the Chao
Piah Prah-Klang Chao Kun Kosa.
1 have had the honor to receive your Excellency’s
letter written on Friday the 6th day of the Dark Half
of the Bth Month of the present Year. I have com-
municated from time to time the events of the war
with the Burmans ; and beg now to state that on the
9th day of September the Fortress of Tavoy was
captured by the British arms, and on the 6th of
October that of Mergui. An official paper in the
English and Portuguese languages, which I have the
honor to enclose, gives the details of the transactions
in question*. In connection with this subject, I beg
to express my earnest hope that a friendly intercourse
will be immediately established between your Ex-
cellency and the British Commander at Tavoy and
Mergui.
1 have used every effort to expedite the departure
of the King’s ship, which has been delayed in all no
more than 25 days.
I have received the Present of 30 Peculs of Sugar
sent to me by your Excellency, and have to offer my
acknowledgments for a gift of 2 Peculs of Ivory, JO
Peculs of Tin and 2 Peculs of Gamboge from His
Majesty.
(Signed) J. CRAWFURD.
♦Singapore
II November 1824.
Time Copies
(Signed) J. CHAWFURD
Resident.


RAJAH of LIGOR.
Translation
of a letter from the Rajah of Ligore to the Honble.
Robt. Fullerton E?qr. Governor of Pulo Penang.
After Compliments.
May my friend be informed that his letter ( which
was sent to Quedah and forwarded from thence to
Ligor) announcing his arrival at Pulo Penang, and
having assumed charge of the Government, reached me
in safety. My friend expresses a desire to maintain a
friendly understanding between the two Governments,
and that the intercourse which has long subsisted
between Pulo Penang and Quedah may remain un-
interrupted. This friendly expression of my friend’s
sentiments has been received by me with correspond-
ing good will, and I shall be very anxious to encourage
an extensive intercourse between the two Governments.
I now send Aluang Ram Hi jo, Koon Aksorn and Nai
Neem to wait upon my friend according to custom to
promote a good understanding.
Dated the Ist of the Moon’s Descent, Year Kra.
A True Translation
( Signed ) JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Transr. to Govt.
Penang
the 20: Novr. 1824.
FORT CORNWALLIS The 25 November 1824


Secret Department.
To the HONORABLE the SECRET COMMITTEE
of the HONORABLE the COURT of DIRECTORS.
Honorable Sirs,
* * * « * *
Para. 3. We have now the honor to transmit
copies of our instructions to Sir Archibald Campbell
and letters to the Government of Prince ol Wales’s
Island and the Resident at Singapore, regarding the
disposal of Tavoy and Mergui, and the policy to be
pursued towards the Court of Siam, consequent upon
our occupation of those places, which questions were
under our consideration at the date of our last address.
We entertain a confident persuasion, that our desire to
avoid retaining permanent possession of Tavoy and
Merffui. and our determination not to entangle our-
& *
selves in extensive and complicated relations with the
Siamese Government, will be approved by your Honor-
able Committee. Of the death of the Siamese Monarch,
( adverted to in our former address ), we have now
received authentic accounts from the Resident at
Singapore, a copy of whose dispatch on the subject is
enclosed a number in the packet. It appears from
Mr. Crawfurd’s report, that the King died on the 20th
of July last, and that his son, the Prince Kroma Chiak,
was next day proclaimed King without opposition.
The new King is said to have issued an ordinance
very favorable to the enlargement and prosperity of
the external commerce of Siam.
******
We have &c.
AMHERST
EDWD. PAGET
JOHN FENDALL.
Fort William
7 December 1824.


FORT CORNWALLIS The 16 December 1824.
To the RAJAH of LIGOR.
Letter
from the Honorable Robert Fullerton Esq: Governor
of Prince of Wales Island, to the Rajah of Ligor.
I have to acknowledge the receipt of your
Highness’ letter brought by Aluang Ram Dicho, Kou
Aksorn and Nie Niem. and am happy to observe your
Highness professes a disposition to cultivate the good
will of the British Government. Your Highness’s
Envoys have received every proper attention from this
Government, and have been permitted freely to com-
municate with the Rajah of Quedah, as well as to
precure such articles of Merchandize as they required.
It is ray duty again to bring to your Highness’
notice the conduct of some persons who have lately
been carrying on a system of lawless plunder on the
borders of the Honble. Company’s territory, and to
request 3’our Highness’ co-operation in checking such
offences.
It has been reported to this Government, that
during the last two mouths extensive robberies have
been committed in the Province of Point Wellesley
and South part of this Island, by gangs of Malays
who after plundering houses, carry their bounty into
the adjoining Kedah territory.
On the night of the Ist Instant a gang to the
number of 15 or 10 landed from Boats at the village
of Sungei Nipah District of Sungei Kluang, plundere
two houses, and carried off the property across the
water. They are supposed to have come from the


Krean River. The Rivers and Villages of Kvvalla
Moocla and Karian are the places these plunderers
resort to, and where they find a ready market for
their booty.
I am therefore induced to suggest to your High-
ness, as the means of affording protection to the in-
habitants, that all persons, subjects of this Government,
detected in his territories, selling stolen goods, or in
any way concerned in these robberies, be forwarded
to this Government, where they will be punished as
the law directs; and I shall not fail to forward to
Kedah all such persons, subjects of your Highness,
as may be found so offending here, in order that they
may be brought to punishment.
The principal piracies lately committed are sup-
posed to have been perpetrated by Pakir Saib, Nga
Manid, Rajah Antar, Rajah Oosman and Rajah Kahar.
As your Highness’ messengers are now returning,
I can only repeat the satisfaction with which I shall
view an encreased Commercial intercourse between
the subjects of Penang and Ligor, and the suppression
of Piracy will much facilitate such intercourse. I
have ordered a cruizer to give safe convoy to your
Highness’ Messengers to Kedah.
(Signed) R. FULLERTON
Governor.
Penang
13 December 1824.


To
9
Major Alex. Balmain
Commanding Tavoy.
Sir,
Under the impression that it will prove satisfac-
tory to yon, as the officer in command of this province,
I have the pleasure to acquaint you that I have just
returned from a journey to the Siamese frontier, per-
sonally undertaken by me with a view to obtaining
Geographical information, and that during the whole
route and while in the boundary, I did not meet with
a single Siamese.
I am from this latter and other circumstances of
opinion that the Siamese have not a post of any con-
sequence within 30 miles of the Tavoy frontier. The
country 1 have passed through is in so quiet a state,
that I would not have the least hesitation (did a
necessity exist) in travelling all over it with a naique
and four sepoys only to look after stores and provisions.
1 performed the whole journey of eleven days on foot,
the road being impracticable to a horse or to cattle.
We fell in with one Stockade at Chok Phreea, about
17 miles from Tavoy. It is about 120 yards square,
and is constructed of bamboos, in the usual Burman
manner, having been formerly a Tavoyer post.
1 had the honor to hoist the British flag on the
summit of the mountainous ridge, along which the line
mutually bounding Siam and Tavoy lies, and to salute
it with 3 volleys of musquetry from a Havildar’s party
of 1 naique and 7 sepoys of the Prince of Wales Island
local Corps who escorted me, and in order to give the
Siamese ( whose boats I have no doubt frequently visit
the spot) a chance of learning that a British Officer
had been there, 1 enclosed, sealed up, and left in an
open but secure place, in a bottle, a memorandum ex-
planatory of the nature of my visit: a copy of this
document I herewith transmit.


About sixteen miles from Tavoy I discovered a
Mineral Spring of the high temperature of 144° of
Fahrenheit’s scale, an account of which as well as the
details of my route, will be transmitted by me to the
Prince of Wales Island Government, under whose
written instructions I am acting.
1 have &ca.
( Signed ) JAMES LOW Lt
Acting under the orders of the
Honble. the Govr. in Council
of Prince of Wales Island.
A true Copy
( Signed ) Alex. Balmain
Major Coming. Tavoy &c. &c. &c.


( Secret No. 34. )
To GEORGE SWINTON Esqr.
Secretary to Government
Secret and Political Department
&ca. &ca. &ca.
FORT WILLIAM
Sir,
* * «■ * * *
The Siamese, 1 have reason to think, will now
take a hearty and decided part in the war. A Mission
from some leaders of that Nation is now on its passage
from Martaban to this place. The enclosed document
forwarded to me gives an outline of their views and
sentiments couched, as you will observe, in very artful
terms, probably intended as an excuse for not having
declared themselves at an earlier period giving the
fullest attention to the general object of the Mission,
I will urge the immediate advance of their force, upon
the frontier of the conquered provinces, through
Martaban upon Pegu, and from thence, by the main
road to Thongoo, trusting to induce them to supply
my Columns moving forward on their left with
Carriage and Slaughter Cattle..
******
1 have the honor to be, &c. &c.
(Signed) A. CAMPBELL
Brigadier General.
Head Quarters
Rangoon, 3rd
February 1825.


A Letter from Three Taliens, Siamese Chieftains,
to the English Commander in Chief. Intimates their
arrival with ten thousand men in Caryapooree, and
that they have received information of the English
being in possession of Martaban, as also, that frequent
battles continue to take place between them and the
Bur mans. Should such be the case, and their services
be acceptable as allies, they will be happy to advance
and join the English with five thousand men, whom
they have already dispatched to Mikhasath (this is
close to Martaban ). State that they have done this in
consideration of the ancient friendship subsisting be-
tween the two nations and which they are most an-
xious to preserve, as well as to carry on friendly and
commercial intercourse, and hope therefore that the
British will as heretofore, respect their Talien Gods
and Temples and Priests, and take into their particular
care the Abasses, now living at Martaban, who are
their own brothers, as it were, in caste and country.
The Burmans having for a series of years oppressed
and tyrannized over us, we became the humblest of
nations, and at last took flight and found refuge in
Siam. The King of that country being a lover of
justice, the Protector of the distressed and a true ser-
vant of God, took pity on our misfortunes, and under
his authority we received and continue to receive hap-
piness, honour, promotion and subsistence.
The orders of this King, in former years, have
always been, that during the months of Natoh
and Peeagoo C December and January) we should,
with our forces, advance into the Burman Territories
and carry off as many Burmans, Abasses and iavoy
people as we could secure, but now, the country
being under protection of the English, we, consider-
ing our long friendship, have refrained from so
doing this year, and have not established as usual
Chokies and Posts for the purpose. We also hope that
the English will not molest any people, or confine


them, provided they should resort into the Martaban,
district for purposes of traffic, which they are very
anxious to do if sure there would be no obstructions
opposed to free and open communication. Be assured
that this is the real wish of our hearts, and in this is
nothing of falsehood or deceit. Further, we hope that
if the inhabitants of Martaban or Tavoy or Mergui
wish to come to us for purposes of traffic that they may
not be prevented, as we also promise not to prevent
any of the people under our authority from resorting
to the British Posts, so that constant friendly inter-
course may be kept up, as should alwa}"S be the case
between two nations so long connected by friendship,
and that friendship daily be made more firm ( by the
English cheerfully assenting to this proposal ) even
than it ever has been before. Farther, we have nob
yet any certain or correct information whether or not
the English have taken Rangoon, and still hold it,
which we have casually heard to be the case, therefore
beg to be favoured with information on the present
state of affairs at that place, and also to be told
whether it is the intention of the English, after gain-
ing victories as we hear they have done, to advance to
Ava. Let this information be sent quickly b}' r the
Bearers of this letter, and on receiving it a communi-
cation will be made to the King of Siam, and then let
the two nations go hand in hand together to complete
the business.
Dated Peeazoo 27th 1186, or about the 15th of
January 1825. Names and Titles of the writers of the
above as written. —Mynghee jo Bingeeah—Maha Zoka-r
Ka-ma (Zazah Deeh Buddhee Seeree Zaiah—
( Unagoon ).
( Signed ) J. A. JACKSON
Major and Deputy Quarter Master General.


From the General Commanding the Siamese
Detachment, to the British Officer Commanding
at Tavoy.
The Commander of the British Forces at Tavoy
has forwarded a letter signifying that certain people, to
the number of one hundred at least, had been carried
off by our people and taken to Siam from the Provinces
of Tavoy and Mergui.
The Siamese at the frontier posts have heretofore
been accustomed to make inroads into these Provinces,
and to carry off the inhabitants, and the late act ot
this description was done inadvertently, as the Siamese
were not aware that the British had fully occupied
Tavoy and Mergui. About fifteen men, who were
seized, have arrived at Bankock, the capital.
They have been treated with kindness, and had
all their wants supplied. These men, and all Tavoyers
have been told that they are at liberty to return to
their own country. The head of the party of Tavoyers
has been sent with his people to Tavoy, as the Siamese
now know that the English have taken possession ot
the Countries of Mergui and Tavoy.
The Siamese are desirous of keeping on friendly
terms with the British ( Here follows a list of ten
names of Tavoyers, who have returned ). These people
report that all their relations reside in Tavoy.
* A letter has been entrusted to Nace Sa, who
accompanies the party, who knows the road.
May the British and Siamese remain on terms of
amity.
Sealed on the 23d Day of February 1825.
A true translation
(Sd.) ALEX: BALMAIN
Major Commanding 7 Regt. N: I:


To
Captain Snodgrass
Military Secretary to Brigadier
General Sir A. Campbell, K. C. B.
&c. &c. &c.
Sir.
I have the honor to forward for the information of
Brigadier General Sir Archibald Campbell, K. C. 8.,
Commanding the Forces, a letter received on the Ist
instant from an officer of the Siamese Government
(who is now with 5,000 at Paurazee) and also an
English translation.
This forenoon I had an interview with the ten
Tavoyers who are alluded to in the letter, but they
onl}" desired to have three days’ leave to see their re-
lations here and to return to Siam, as their families
were there and of some, the fathers and mothers,
having been carried away at an early period of life
from this place.
I likewise beg leave to transmit copy of a letter I
received from Lieutenant Low, of the Prince of Wales
Island Establishment, and copy of a notice which he
left in a bottle on the boundary between the Siamese
Territory and the Province of Tavoy when on an
excursion to the frontiers.
I have &ca.
(Signed) ALEX: BALMAIN
Major Comg. the Provinces of
Tavoy &ca. &ca. &ca.
Tavoy
3d March 1825.


To Brigadier General
Sir A. CAMPBELL, K. C. B.
Commander of the Forces
Rangoon.
Sir,
On the 29th Ultimo, information having been
brought me that a Siamese flotilla had made its
appearance within a short distance ot this town, com-
mitting several acts of depredation on the villages, I
dispatched Lieutenant Drever with 50 Sepoys in
Country Boats in search of them.
He found them as described about S hours row
from this, amounting to near 30 sail of large boats,
well armed, pulling from 60 to 80 oars each. He
made towards them under English colours, and on
hoisting a white flag it was immediately answered.
A conference ensued, in which the Siamese Chief
regretted that his ignorance of our conquests in this
quarter had led him into acts of aggression on a
Country now under the British protection, and promised
to come the following day to Mergui and release all
the prisoners he had taken.
On the following day he made his appearance
with only nine boats, the rest he stated w'ould be here
on the morrow, when all the prisoners he had taken
should be released, and again renewed his protestations
respecting our conquests in this quarter, at the same
time requesting of me a paper tor the King explana-
tory of the causes of his sudden return without ac-
complishing his orders respecting the intended hostili-
ties in this quarter. This I promised to give him on
the release of all the prisoners he had taken in this
neighbourhood.
He remained here till the 2d, when three boats-
came in and he released 90 prisoners. But being inform-
ed that we were dissatisfied at the rest not arriving aa


promised, on the evening of the same day, taking ad-
vantage of the flood tide he weighed anchor and went
off apparent!}?- in great alarm with the whole of his
fleet, at the very hour fixed for paying me a third visit.
The boats of the Honourable Company's Cruizer
Thetis, which arrived on the 31 January, and some
country boats with sepoys, were immediately sent after
them, but night coming on could not ascertain their
Course.
It is with regret I have to inform you that I have
just heard of the Town of Tenasserim and several other
villages having been plundered, and a considerable
number of the inhabitants carried off on the following
day by this party. The Chief states himself to be
high in rank in the employ of the King of Siam, and
the inhabitants of all the surrounding country, as well
as those of this town, are in the greatest state of alarm
and trepidation,
I have the honor to enclose the name and titles of
the Chief and some of those who accompanied him in
the Siamese and English languages, and also a list of
losses sustained with the exception of what occurred at
Tenasserim on the 3d, and which not having yet
arrived, I do not think it of sufficient importance to
detain the boat. The number of the inhabitants carried
away are estimated at about 500 Souls.
I have &c.
(Signed) W. FRITH
Major Going. Mergui.
Mergui
7 Feby, 1525.


( Copy )
To Brigadier General Sir Archibald Campbell, K. 0. 8.,
&c. &c. Commanding British Forces.
Sir,
Agreeably to your instructions I remained at
Rangoon until the arrival of the deputies from the
Siamese Camp, whom I accompanied back to
Martaban on the 20th ulto., but owing to' the
intricacy of the navigation of its river at this season of
the year, I regret to say we did not land until the sth
instant. On the following day I wrote to the Chief
the substance of the subjoined letter No. 1, in answer
to the one forwarded to you at Rangoon prior to your
march from thence, and dispatched it along with the
deputies, who personally expressed their gratitude for
the attentions and civilities they had experienced both
at Rangoon and at this place.
On the 7th I received intimation that another
deputation, headed by the Chief's son, and a Sirdar of
consequence, was on the opposite side of the river,
waiting our permission and assistance to cross. Boats
were immediately ordered to convey them over, and at
the same time I directed suitable accommodations to
be prepared for their reception in the town.
In the course of the ensuing forenoon the visitors
arrived and were received with due honors; they
brought me a letter of which No. 2 is a translation.
On the succeeding day, I had a personal conference
with them on the subject of the correspondence that
had already passed, and on their ultimate views and
intentions, when it was clearly and unequivocally
stated that the Tallyen Chiefs with their followers
were ready and willing to aid us in any measures
that might lead to the overthrow of their in-
veterate enemies, the Burmese ; that they were in
fact at our entire disposal, and only waited our orders
to advance with their forces and act as we might think


proper to direct. The son, however, added, that as his
father was on the eve of paying us a visit, he begged I
would suspend the discussion of our future plans and
operations until he arrived : to this of course I assented.
It is not unworthy of remark that on the first
arrival of the deputies, their general conduct and
demeanour exhibited a considerable degree of alarm
and agitation, which however soon subsided, and before
they took their departure, which almost immediate!}*
succeeded the interview, they became familiar and
unembarrassed, and had altogether acquired a con-
fidence in our character, which promised an advan-
tageous result.
I had nearly omitted to state that in the course of
conversation, I was led to understand that our assis-
tance would be essentially requisite to enable their
army to cross to our side the water, and that its sub-
sistence depended also upon our means of supply. As
the Prize Stores of Martaban were capable of furnish-
ing them with abundance of Grain I offered our assis-
tance to alleviate this difficulty and immediately issued
instructions for placing every boat procurable in the
vicinity of this place at their disposal, and allotted
ground and villages contiguous to the town for their
encampment, and every measure was adopted to bring
their forces into prompt co-operation with your?
[ army ] marching upon Prome. Such was the state
of affairs here until the 12th inst. when rumours were
in circulation that differences of opinion and some
altercations had taken place among the Chieftains over
the water , and that they were breaking up their camp
and retiring upon their own country—that a Minister
of the King of Siam had arrived on or about, the lOtl;
with peremptory orders for their recall and that the
Chief, with whom we had principally been in com-
munication had expressed a disinclination to abandon
our interests, alleging that by such a proceeding at this
crisis he would justly incur the imputation of treachery
towards us.


On the 13th I received a letter from the Comman-
der of the Tallyen Army of which No. 3is a translation,
and on the succeeding day the paper No. 4, to both of
which I replied, expressing my regret that circum-
stances had occurred to counteract our wishes, and
their friendly intentions to take part with us in the
further prosecution of the war. My informer also
reported that their army had actually retired.
It is difficult for me to define the true reasons for
this apparently inconsistent line of policy on the part
of those Chieftains, but have no doubt, that on further
enquiry I shall be enabled to ascertain the actual state
of the case, which I will take the earliest opportunity
of communicating to you.
That such flattering prospects of a favourable issue
to the negotiation you intrusted to my management
should have been so suddenly defeated, is to me a
subject of the sincerest regret, but that you will believe
that the objects of the Mission were pursued with all
the industry and zeal of which I am capable 1 entertain
the fullest assurance.
The Diamond ring and other presents I shall make
over to the Commissariat Officer, to be disposed of on
account of Government agreeably to the usages of the
Service.
I have &c.
( Sigued ) H, T. SMITH—Lt. Coll.
Commanding at Martaban.
Martaban
17 March 1825.


Addressed to the Chiefs Ron Ron &c. &c.
Commander of the Army of Dooa na rauddee.
The Commander of the British Forces, General
Sir Archibald Campbell, Knight Commander of the
Bath &c. &c. &c. having received a letter from
the principal Siamese Chiefs, exercising power and
authority over a body of 5,000 Abassee and Tillian
warriors, encamped in the vicinity of Martaban, the
same is hereby acknowledged and the contents thereof
understood.
The British General takes this occasion through
me to express the satisfaction he feels in recognizing
the friendship and amity which has so long subsisted
between the English, Siamese and Abassee Nations,
and which it now becomes the interest and policy
of all parties to cement more firmly than ever.
The Supreme British Government of India has at
all times manifested an invariable desire to be at
Peace and upon the most friendly and amicable footing
with the neighbouring States, but the aggressions,
cruelty and violence so often exhibited by the Burmans,
without provocation, upon British subjects for some
time past, could no longer be tolerated and the Eng-
lish Government was at length compelled to vindicate
its honour by an appeal to arms; numerous armies
were accordingly directed to proceed into the dominions
of the King of Ava, not with a view of aggrandizing
the present extensive British territorial possessions,
but for the sole and only purpose of retaliating
upon the offenders and chastising and humbling
the arrogant pride and insolence of the rulers of the
Burman Empire. This object has been partly accom-
plished by the destruction of their armies in the
vicinity of Rangoon, the capture of all their sea port
towns and the demolition of their numerous stockades
and fastnesses, and the British forces are now advanc-
ing from different quarters by land aud water to carry


punishment and dismay into the very capital of his
dominions.
The injuries and indignities to which the Tallien
nation has been exposed for a series of years from their
enemies, the Burmans, has been a source of unceasing-
concern to your ancient friends the English. In the
present crisis of affairs it is by no means improbable
that opportunities may be offered them for retaliating
upon their oppressors and of re-establishing at no
distant period their ancient independence and
Sovereignty. In order however to ascertain the further
views and wishes of the Chiefs now encamped in this
province, acting by authority and in conjunction with
the wishes of the dignified King of Siam, as well as to
evince the high estimation in which his Majesty is
held by the several British authorities, the English
general Sir Archibald Campbell has deputed me (a
Colonel in the army serving under his command ) to
proceed to Martaban for the purpose of conferring with
the said Chiefs upon the most eligible means of
attacking, distressing and destroying their common
enemy the Burmans, and the Colonel has accordingly
arrived at Martaban in charge of the deputies sent by
the Siamese Chieftains who are consequently invited to
a friendly personal interview with the said Colonel
Smith at the earliest practicable period, which will no
doubt tend to facilitate arrangements for the mutual
benefit of both Nations and should any matters come
under discussion that may require specific instructions
from the Governor General in Council, the Colonel will
lose no time in laying them before his Government,
W the ultimate decision of that high and supreme
authority.
Colonel Smith begs to offer his prayers for the
health of His Majesty the King of Siam, and for the
prosperity and stability of Government, as also for the
ultimate restoration of the ancient dynasty of Pegue,
and the Colonel in conclusion assures the Chiefs to


whom this letter will be presented, that he will avail
himself with cordial satisfaction (as far as his authority
may extend) of any events in the future operations of
the war, which may enable him to afford assistance
for the attainment of that desirable object.
(Signed) H. T. SMITH—Lt. Coll.
Coming. Province of Martaban.
Martaban
Cth March 1825


LOW pra, muha, eea, tha, yem maa ee e raza, eq,
ga, muha, the, nuddee, pud, dee, thee, ree, zee, zee a
lion Ron Commander of the Array of Dooa, ra muddee-
represents :
That he was exceedingly gratified with the purport
of Coll. Smith’s letter, which he no sooner perused
than he dispatched to the King of Siam’s principal
minister for the purpose of being submitted to his
majesty by whose commands the Army of Dooa, ra,
muddee is encamped in these Territories.
The Commander of the army of Dooa, ra muddee
is fully aware of the cordial friendship which has sub-
sisted between the English nation and the Tullyens
from the earliest period of prosperity of their ancient
kingdom of Pegue, and which he trusts, please God, if
again recovered by conquest from their enemies will,
under more happy auspices, expand like the opening
bud into blossoms of future greatness and prosperity,
and afford occasion to their latest posterity to remem-
ber with thankfulness the friendly concern of Colonel
Smith for the Tully-en nation, who are never ungrate-
ful for the favors they receive from their allies.
. As uttee an, the present place of encampment of
the Commander of the Dooa, ra, muddee army is too
far distant to enable him to obtain with facility the
honor of the consultation and interview intended him
by Colonel Smith, it is his intention to advance to
Village of Tur ra na. In the mean time, Tha Myen,
dino mattee and Binneea bur, um the Son and Faujdar
of the Commander of the Army of Dooa, ra, muddee
will wait on Colonel Smith with this letter, and know
his intentions with respect to the time in which the
movement of the Dooa, ra muddee forces may be
required.
( Signed ) G. NORMAN—Captn.
Persian Translator.


Low, pra, muha, eea, eea, tha, yem ma ee, e raza,
egga, muha, the nuddee, puddee, thee, ree, zee, zeea
Ron Ron Commander of the Army of Dooa, ra muddee
represents :
That he sensibly feels the kindness and hospitality
which Colonel Smith manifested towards his Son and
Faujdar, whom he deputed to wait on the Colonel and
begs to acknowledge the favor shown himself by the
loan of his boats and the offer of corn to aid the sub-
sistence of his troops.
That he had it in contemplation to visit Colonel
Smith on the 11th of the present ( Siamese ) month for
the purpose of consultation and advice, but in the in-
terim his Majesty’s minister having arrived from Dooa
ra muddee with a dispatch stating that (i the season
“ of the rains was approaching, when it would be no
“ longer practicable for the troops to return either by
“ land or water and that it was moreover desirable that
“ the lands should be cultivated at their proper season/*
it is now become necessary that he should in obedience
to his Majesty’s commands return with his army to
his country.
But should any event occur to Coll. Smith, or any
business intervene which he may wish to communicate,
he will please to dispatch a messenger with a letter to
the Commander of the Army of Dooa, ra, muddee at
Chyke, sath Kuddyu Sing or Meena, moo, ee ( con-
tiguous places ) where his troops will be stationed.
That in the event of any of the Abassee or Siam
subjects having occasion to visit the Country of Mar-
taban it is hoped they will be admitted in the same
manner as the subjects of the English Government
will be received in our dominions of Dooa ra muddee,
as it is desirable that the friendship now subsisting
between the two nations should be preserved and
encreased.


As a token of his friendship the Commander of
the I)ooa, ra, muddee army has sent to Colonel Smith
a pair of elephants’ teeth and some bees’ wax, and begs
to subjoin his prayers for his welfare.
( Signed) G. NORMAN—Captn.
Persian Translator.


Been, ya Laghoou, Khoom Khan, brother of the
great Chief, represents to Colonel Smith, Commander
of the Country of Martaban :
That he has been exceedingly delighted with the
assurance given him by the interpreters, of the friend-
ship he bears towards the Siam and Abassee people,
as also with the hospitality and kindness with which
Colonel Smith received his nephew.
That he has sent by the interpreters a horse and
a ring which he will receive from their hands, and
keep as a memorial of his esteem and regard, and begs
to subscribe his prayers for Colonel Smith’s welfare.
(Signed) G. NORMAN—Captn.
Persian Translator.
{True Copies )
GEO: SWINTON
Secy, to Government.


To
Brigadier General
Sir Archibald Campbell, K. 0, 8., &c. &c.
Comg. British Forces
Camp.
Sir,
Since I had the honor of addressing you on the
17th Instant, a dependant of Bon Ron, the Tullyin
Commander of the Siamese army lately l " encamped in
the Province of Martaban has made his appearance in
this town, and spontaneously tendered the information
contained in the accompanying deposition. From the
open and unequivocal manner in which the statement
was made I am disposed to give it due credit, anp
more so for its corresponding in some instances with
the information I received from one of our own people,
who was for two or three days in the Camp of Ron
Ron prior to his departure, the purport of which is
already detailed in my first report.
The motives which actuated the Tullyen Chief in
receding from his engagements are now too obvious to
require any further explanation from me. I consider
it however equally my duty to state the substance of
another report, which was brought in by one of the
Zemindars of the district, who had followed Ron Ron
one or two marches on his return back to Siam,
namely, that he had been privately informed, that a
younger brother had succeeded to the throne of Siam,
in consequence of the elder having been educated and
initiated as a Poongee or priest, which by the laws
disqualified a Prince of the blood from succeeding to
the reins of Government; that the mother of the elder
son at the head of a faction had prevailed upon him to
cast off his clerical garb and assume the Sovereignty
of the Kingdom. A plan for a revolt was accordingly
laid and well digested ; that the Palace was assailed.


and that the younger brother was driven from the
throne with little or no bloodshed, and is now supposed
to be a wanderer in the dominions he so recently
ruled ; that in order to secure the fidelity and homage
of Ron Ron’s army, the newly-created King had seized
upon all their families aud property, upon the know-
ledge of which he suddenly broke up his camp and
retrograded.
The Zemindars of Martaban do not disavow having:
been in communication with Ron Ron shortly after his
arrival on the borders of the province, and of thus
having urged him to appeal to the justice and clemency
of the British Government for ultimately placing him
in authority at Martaban, and constituting him Chief
of the Tullyen people.
Ron Ron unquestionably possessed the affections
of the people and the zealous support and attachment
of all the zemindars throughout the ancient Tullyen
dominions, and their object in desiring to place him at
their head in the present unsettled state of affairs,
was, they said, to prevent civil war and anarchy in the
country on our relinquishing the conquests we had
made in this quarter, and that through his abilities
and influence they might become the means of resist-
ing the future views and attempts of the Burmese to
reestablish themselves in power and authority, which
if they succeed in doing, would subject them to the
most despotic fines and exactions, and even to a con-
fiscation of property and loss of life.
On my first arrival at Martaban I deemed it ad-
visable, with a view to ascertain the fidelity of the
people and the feeling which existed amongst them
towards our Government, to send round a notification
desiring to see the whole of the Zemindars of the dis-
tricts and the principal Kureens or people inhabiting
the hills and jungles, and who may in fact be consider-


Ed the principal ryots of the country. This summons
I am glad to say was cheerfully obeyed, and I had the
satisfaction of seeing them return well pleased with
their reception.
I have &ca.
( Signed ) H. T. SMITH Lt; Col.
Going, at Martaban.
Martaban
27 March 1825.


( Statement )
Shone Mong, a native of Martaban, who tied his
country about eleven years since, and after being em-
ployed during that period alternately in the service of
Hon Ron, Commander of the Army of Dooara, wuddee
and his brother Beenya Lajoon Khan, seized the op-
portunity of the decampment of these Chieftains’
troops from the territories of Martaban to return to
his own village, relates :
That about a twelve month since he was in atten-
dance on Ron Ron’s brother at the Court of Siam,
when a European Gentleman was introduced to the
King, to whom he presented in the name of his master
a diamond ring and 500 musquets ; on the receipt of
this present he heard his Majesty observe to his minis-
ters, I acquiesce with their request of intercourse, and
shortly after the Court was dismissed.
That after the departure of the European Gentle-
man, on his Majesty’s receiving intelligence of the
capture by the English of the Provinces of Martaban,
Tavoy and Mergui, he expressed his admiration of their
valour and prowess.
At this period Ron Ron was on the eve of depar-
ture from the Capital with the Dooara wuddee army
to the frontiers of the Burma dominions, on which
occasion his Majesty gave him an audience and told
him that as the Burma dominions were now likely to
fall an easy prey to the arms of the English, whose
newly acquired territories were now blended with those
of Siam, it would be politic to cultivate the friendship
of that nation, whose power was becoming more ex-
tensive than ever, and desired him to forbear making
captives as hitherto of the Burma Tultyen subjects, but
to destroy without distinction every Burmese, and
that he was at liberty moreover to use every gentle
means to attach to his interests and service whatever
fugitive Tullyens chance might throw in his way.


which his Majesty observed would not be difficult to
effect at the present juncture, when the fear of the
enemy would compel them to become wanderers from
their native homes.
That Ron Ron in prosecution of the views of his
Majesty left the Capital about six months ago with his
army, consisting of 3,000 Tullyens and 2,000 Siamese,
and after a march of 26 days arrived at Mykesath, a
town situated on the eastern borders of the Martaban
territories, and distant about 6 days march from
Martaban.
Here Ron Ron began to meditate schemes of per-
sonal aggrandizement, in furtherance of which he
opened a communication with the English authorities
at Martaban and Rangoon, for which his Majesty’s
known friendly sentiments towards them furnished
him with a good pretext. He thought it however
prudent, previously to the dispatch of his letters to
Martaban and Rangoon, to sound the inclinations of
the Tullyen Zemindars of those places, as also those of
Taik Kulla and Pegue, to whom he immediately on his
arrival at Mykesath sent emissaries for the purpose.
They were no sooner informed of the designs of this
Chieftain, than they unanimously promised him their
aid and support, recommending at the same time his
acting in concert, and with the advice of the English,
who they observed appeared to be indifferent as to the
Sovereign who should hereafter be placed on the throne
of their antient kingdom of Pegue.
Ron Ron encouraged by these assurances now
dispatched 4 of his subordinate Officers to the Com-
manding Officer of Martaban with a request that he
would direct them to be escorted to the General Com-
manding the troops at Rangoon, for whom they were
intrusted with a letter : at the same time to give this
measure the appearance of being conducted with his
Majesty’s sanction , he dispatched a Messenger with a
letter to the Court of Siam, the purport of which he
carefully concealed from those around him.


But the Siamese Ministers who were, from
prudential reasons, associated with him in authority,
soon discovered the nature of his connection with the
Tullyen Zemindars and Chieftains, and moreover
suspecting the motive of his negotiations with the
English, instantly made known the circumstance, with
every exaggeration, to the Court of Siam.
Incensed at the presumption of a man, whom he
had raised from obscurity to the dignity of command
of the Dooara, wuddee army, his Majesty instantly
dispatched one of his principal ministers with peremp-
tory orders for his recall.
Ron Ron, from this unexpected summons at the
critical moment he was strengthening his interest with
the local authorities of Rangoon and Martaban, was
thrown into the utmost consternation : he bewailed his
fate with tears, and retiring into his apartment refused
to see any one for several hours, and on the return of
Colonel Smith’s men entrusted with the care of the
boats, he repeatedly expressed his wish rather to die
than to suffer the reproach of duplicity and treachery,
which he said he feared Colonel Smith would with too
much appearance of justice impute to him.
(Signed) G. NORMAN Captn,
Pern. Translator.
( True Copies)
GEO: SWINTON
Secy, to the Govt.


FORT WILLIAM 13th May 1825.
CAPTAIN BURNEY
Fort Willian 3rd. of May 1825.
To George Swinton Esqr.
Secretary to Govt, in the Secret and Poll Dept.
SIR,
Having been directed by the Government of
Prince of Wales Island, on ray return from a Mission
to the Siamese States, to repair to Fort William and
place myself under the immediate orders of the Right
Honble. the Governor General in Council, I do myself
the honor to report my arrival, and to beg you will
have the goodness to take an opportunity of laying be-
fore His Lordship in Council, the enclosed Memoir, and
accompanying Geographical Sketch of the Siamese
States lying between Bangkok and Prince of Wales
Island. During my passage to Bengal I have en-
deavoured to apply an intimate acquaintance with the
views and records of the Penang Government and
some researches into, and personal observation of the
genius and character of the Malayan and Siamese
Nations, in compiling this review of the different
objects which have been proposed to the British
Government to be pursued in its negotiations with
the Court of Siam.
I have &c.
(Signed) H. BURNEY Capt. 25th
B. N. I.
Poll. Agent to the Siamese States
from the Govt, of P. W. I.


MEMOIR on the different objects which have been
proposed to the British Government to be pursued in
its negotiations with Siam respectfully submitted to
the Right Honble. the Governor General in Council,
by Captain H. Burney, 25th Regt., Political Agent to
the Siamese States from the Government of Prince of
Wales Island.
Fort William 3rd. May 1825.
In the year 1821, when Mr. Crawfurd was proceed-
ing on his Mission to Siam, the late Honble. Govr. of
Penang recapitulated from a memorandum which I had
the honor to compile, the various objects for the
attainment of which an Embassy to Siam had long
been recommended by the Govt, of Prince of Wales
Island.
.Three Commercial and five Political objects were
pointed out to Mr. Crawfurd with explanatory details.
Of the commercial points the first was, the con-
tinuance of a free importation of provisions from the
Kedah territories into Penang ; and an extension of
such privilege with respect to all the other contiguous
Siamese States. The 2d was to improve and secure
the trade and commerce between these States and
Penang by stipulating for a fixed rate of duties, a pro-
hibition of exclusive farms, a free navigation of the
numerous rivers which flow into the sea between the
Trang and Creean and an unimpeded intercourse by
means of those rivers and overland with the tin coun-
tries in the interior, and the different ports on the
Eastern shore of the Malayan Peninsula. The 3d was
to encourage the Siamese to make Penang a great tin
mart, and an emporium for all the tin produce of
Junkceylon, Patani, &ca.
The Political objects were divided into two classes.
The most important were, Ist. The restoration by


Siam of its Tributary, the King of Kedah, on certain
defined terms, for the due performance of which the
Penang Government alone should be guarantee, with-
out any future interference with our old ally on the
part of the Chiefs of Ligor, Singora, &ca. and 2ndly,
the establishment of an undisputed title to our occupa-
tion of Penang on terms that might at the same time
improve our future relations with the contiguous
Siamese States, comprising a mutual surrender of
criminals, and a permission for us, as the Guardian of
the sea and coasts around Penang, to occupy at any
time any of the islands between the Lancava Groupe
and Salengore.
The Second Class of Political objects were these.
The Ist was permission for us to place a small British
Establishment on Junkceylon, in view to the security
and improvement of our trade with that Island. The
2nd. was the cession to us of the small island of
Pankour on the Coast of Perak, in order that the
establishment of a British Post on it might facilitate
the trade in tin and the extirpation of piracy. The
3d. was a cession of additional territory to us on the
Kedah Coast opposite Penang, from our present
boundary, the south bank of the Muda River, to ten
orlongs or 13 1/3 were* beyond the north bank of the
Murboo River, and failing in this, a permission for us
to form two small establishments at the Mouth of
Murboo and Muda Rivers for the purpose of facilitat-
ing our intercourse with the interior countries, and of
effectually precluding pirates from taking shelter,
which they have ever done within those rivers.
Of the whole of the above points 'of negociation
Mr. Crawfurd was able to gain one only at Bangkok
' the virtual establishment of our right of sovereignty
in Prince of Wales Island and its territories on.
a the Peninsula.


h In the latter end of last year, the present Honble.
Governor of Penang comprised the whole of what ap-
peared to him as objects in which the immediate in-
terests of his Government were involved, and which
could be attainable only by negociation with the
Siamese Government within five points, each of which
was accompanied with a full exposition of the grounds
and motives upon which its expediency rested.
The Ist. was similar to the late Honble. Governor’s
first Political object of importance ; the restoration of
the King of Kedah on payment of a certain sum in
money, not exceeding 4,000 Dollars annually, for the
due payment of which the Penang Government to be
guarantee, and our ally to be liable to no further de-
mands, order or mark of subjection, unless perhaps to
the triennial presentation of the Boongha Mas or
Golden Flower. The 2nd. was, The disavowal by Siam
of all claims of superiority over any of the Malay
States on the Peninsula South of Patani. The 3rd.
was the same as the late Honble. Governor’s Second
Commercial object; the free navigation of the rivers
between the Trang and Creean, and unimpeded inter-
course with the Tin Countries and the interior and
Eastern side of the Malay Peninsula. The 4th was
the same as the late Honble. Governor’s first Commer-
cial object. The free exportation from all the Siamese
ports on the Western side of the Peninsula of all
. articles of provision required for the use of Penang,
The 5 and last was, the cession of Junkceylon or
Salang to the British Government.
Of the above points the Supreme Government
withheld its acquiescence from two, the 2nd. and sth.
It doubted the practicability of inducing the arrogant
and haughty Court of Siam to wave pretensions so
intimately affecting its pride and consequence as its
claims of superiority oyer the Malayan States on the
Peninsula, and it was decidedly adverse to any pro-
position for the cession of Junkceylon, as such a


measure would bring a weak and detached British
position into immediate contact with the ancient
Siamese territory itself, and thus infallibly augment
and multiply the existing chance and hazard of
national collision and disputes.
The Penang Government in its reply admitted,
that the object for which it had recommended obtaining
possession of Junkceylon would be fully attained by
the retention of Mergui and its Islands as British
possessions, and that the importance of any stipulation
for arresting the extension of Siamese Dominion over
the Malayan Peninsula was in some degree affected
by the changes about to take place on the Peninsula
in consequence of the Treaty lately concluded with
the Netherlands Government for the permanent
establishment of British authority at Malacca. The
intercourse that will naturally arise between the Gov-
ernment and the Malay States, the general dislike
entertained against the Siamese rule, added to their
own means of defence will probably arrest the course
of conquest in that quarter without any specific
Treaty.
During my late Mission to the Siamese States I
O
ascertained that the Siamese are fully sensible of the
great value of Junkceylon and that there is not the
smallest chance of that Island being ever ceded to us.
The Pya of “ Salang ” prides himself on his title, and
he took pains to correct the address of the letters
which I conveyed to him from the Ilonble. the Gover-
nor of Penang, and in which he was styled Pya of
‘‘ Pungah.” The very first consequence also of our
Burmese War has been to induce the Siamese to turn
their views towards improving Junkceylon, their es-
tablishment on which is to be restored the moment the
Pya of Salang returns from Bangkok, when his eldest
son is to be appointed Governor of that Island. It is
satisfactory however to know, that a much more liberal
arrangement exists with respect to the Tin produced


in that quarter than what has hitherto been reported,
that the Chief of Salang and his officers are very favor-
ably disposed towards us, and that our ships and com-
merce are sure of being hospitably and kindly received
at Pungah and Junkceylon.
I had every reason to believe, during my late
Mission also that the British Government will not
succeed in persuading the Court of Siam to consent by
regular treaty to the future independence of the Malay
States South of Patani, but that if such a principle be
at once assumed by us we shall be allowed to act upon
it without an}' serious demur or opposition. The ex-
tension of the Siamese dominion over Kedah and the
Malayan States being more an object of ambition with
the Chief of Ligore, than with the Court of Siam, the
members of which, with the exception of that Chief’s
Nephew, the Wang-na, being little interested in the
subject, I am satisfied that by means of the British Gov-
ernment at Malacca the operations of the Chief of Ligore
may be arrested without the chance of any break
with the Court of Siam. The Penang Government,
by making use only of the name of the Government of
Malacca, and of the treaties which subsisted between
the Netherlands Government and the States of Perak
and Salengore may so intimate to the Chief of Ligore a
request to withdraw from the former and a prohibition
against attacking the latter State as to relieve itself
from all hazard of a rupture with that Chief.
The Memorandum of the present Honble. Gover-
nor of Penang does not include four of the objects
recommended by the late Honble. Governor for nego-
tiation at Siam, namely, his 3rd Commercial, 2nd.
Political, and 2nd. and 3rd. minor Political points. I
presume it is considered that the commerce in Tin had
better be allowed to take its own course without en-
deavouring to support it, or direct it to Penang or to
any particular emporium by means of conventional
engagements, and that the possession of Pulo Pankour


if such be desirable, may now be more easily obtained
by the Government of Malacca opening a negotiation
for that purpose with its old ally the Rajah of Perak.
Doubts as to our rights of Sovereignty in Prince
of Wales Island were, I believe, first suggested to the
late Honble. Governor by Mr. Crawfurd. The fact of
an undisturbed occupation of the Island for 39 years,
and of its having been considered as a British posses-
sion in numerous Acts of the British Parliament, and
in a charter of Justice from our Sovereign, ought, I
think, to be set against such doubts, and Mr. Crawfurd
himself reported from Bangkok, that he “ had gained
this point, the virtual establishment of our right of
Sovereignty in Prince of Wales Island and its territory
on the Peninsula; that the frequent and distinct
references made to Prince of Wales Island throughout
his conference with the Siamese negotiators as a
British possession, left no doubt whatever upon his
mind that the Siamese looked upon our right of
sovereignty in Penang and the territory opposite to it
as not to be questioned, and that the right of the
Malay Prince to alienate a portion of his fief being
once admitted by the Siamese Court, and a total silence
of 36 years, must be looked upon as a valid and sub-
stantial admission of it/’
These doubts however having lately appeared
again, the Penang Government observed “At all
events we cannot consider it advisable to discuss any
article implying a doubt as to our right of possession
of this Island. The state of dependence to which
Kedah had been reduced prior to the expulsion of the
King is well known, but it is equally notorious that at
the time the island was ceded to us by the former
King, the triennial presentation of the Boongha Mas,
and that made to Ava as well as Siam, was the only
mark of homage, and which certainly does not convey
to the receiver any portion of the Sovereign Rights of
the other. As this Island and dependencies have long


been considered an integral part of the British Bonn-
" nions of India, it seem to us to be too late to allow the
question of right to be raised in any shape whatever.”
! On this point also the following observations were
supplied to mo by Mr. Anderson the Malay Translator
to the Penang Government, “It will be recollected
that shortly after the Conquest of Kedah, the Rajah of
Ligor ostensibly transferred the Government to the
old Uncle to the present Ex-King, evidently for no
other purpose than to make a demand of the annual
subsidy heretofore paid to the King. The claim was
then distinctly disavowed b} 7 the Governor of Penang
since which we have heard no more of Sultan
Ilenoodeen* or any other Malay authority at Kedah.
Neither the Rajah of Ligor nor the Court of Siam has
ever made any similar application since, nor have they
presumed to advance any pretension to supremacy over
Prince of Wales Island and the territory attached. In
all the Rajah’s correspondence there has never been
any mention of such a claim, and why should we study
to increase the arrogance of the Siamese by agitating
r ‘such a question and requiring the cession of a territory
which we have so long possessed without the sem-
blance of opposition or objection, and which must be
considered as ours from long and unopposed possession ?
With respect to an accession of territory on the
Coast of Kedah the Penang Government now considers
' if such an object be desirable it will in all probability
be much easier to attain it through the medium of the
, King of Kedah when restored to his throne, than
by direct negotiation with the Court of Siam;
and the Supreme Government has determined that
the Political considerations which suggest ail attempt
to effect a restoration of the Malay Government in
s Kedah resolve themselves into the following. The
British Government would unquestionably gain by
the measure in reputation among the Eastern States.
It would remove from the immediate vicinity of


Penang and from a state of actual contact with its
Continental Territory, a most troublesome and unac-
commodating neighbour, between whom and our
Government at Penang, disputes are at all times liable
to break out. It would restore to Penang those
necessary supplies of grain &c. from which it is
now completely cut off, and finally, it would put
a stop to the alarming increase of piracy which has
taken place in consequence of the flight of the Malay
population through dread of the Siamese, and
their addiction to predatory courses from wanting
* the means of subsistence. Mr. Orawfurd however
proposes to require Siam to cede to us a por-
tion of the territory of Kedah without attempting
to obtain any stipulation in favor of its King. But
on this point I presume the following observations by
the present Rouble. Governor of Penang will be
! considered conclusive. “ The 7th article seems to
i
abandon the interests of the King of Kedah and to
stipulate instead of them an increase of territory for
5 ourselves. It appears to me that our true policy is
Ist to keep up the petty States now standing between
us and the Siamese territory, and 2ndly to endeavour
t 0 restore those which have been subverted, so as to
prevent our coming in contact with that power in
this neighbourhood. The restitution of the King of
Kedah is a point I consider no less consistent with
true policy than essential to the credit and reputation
of our Government. As far as Political considerations
are concerned the same arguments apply to Perak, it
being miderstood that the Siamese from Ligor are
actually in possession. Should the restoration of the
King of Kedah prove impracticable, then I am willing
to admit that a cession of the territory stated by Mr.
Orawfurd might be advantageous, by interposing a
great portion of hill and forest between us. The ob-
ject of holding territory on the Continent opposite to
the Island was, that we might command the Straits


between the main land and the Island, and coun-
teract the tendency to plunder and piracy open from
the proximity to an unsettled Country. I admit
fully that the belt of land so occupied is too narrow,
being comprised within 3 miles of the shore, and
therefore terminating just as the land emerges from
Mangrove and swamps, and becomes fit for cultiva-
tion. Great no doubt would be the advantage of
some extension, but certainly not of such considera-
tion as to be an argument against the more essential
object of re-establishing, if possible, the Malay
Chief ship on defined terms, that is to say, subject to
the payment of a fixed sum to be guaranteed by us,
and no other mark of homage or subjection.”
In the restoration of the King of Kedah also is
involved the attainment of those subordinate points,
the free importation of Provisions from Kedah into
Penang, mutual surrender of criminals, and permis-
sion for us to occupy at any time any of the Islands
lying between the Lancava group and Pulo Pankour.
As regards also the more Southern States and
Islands, stipulations on such points may not be
easily executed between our Government at Malacca
and the Chiefs of Perak and Salengore. Thus then,
as far as the local interests of Penang are concerned,
the whole of the objects for negotiation with Siam
come to be resolved into the two points laid down
by the Supreme Government in its last dispatch.
Ist. To attempt to effect a restoration of the Malay
Government in Kedah, and its establishment on an
independent or at least improved footing—and 2ndly.
To stipulate for an unrestricted trade with the in-
terior and eastern coast of the Malay Peninsula, by
means of the overland routes, and rivers flowing
into the sea in the neighbourhood of Penang.
It appears to me that the best mode of
attaining these objects will be, to secure to our
negotiations at Bangkok the friendly assistance


of some of the Siamese Chiefs in the neighbour-
hood of Kedah, on whose reports only the Court
of Siam will be disposed to act, and to make
the general advantages to be derived by Siam in
other quarters outweigh the particular views of the
Chief of Ligor, who has entire possession of the
Kingdom of Kedah, and of the Western Coast of
the Malayan Peninsula, from Lat. 4° to 8° 20", and
exercises full control over the States of Singora,
Merdelong and Patani. I fear the time is past
when we might have rendered this Chief instru-
mental to the accomplishment of our wishes, not
only because his fears and suspicions have been
much excited against us, but because he has not
1 [? now] made arrangements for availing himself of
the whole of the resources of Kedah, and is therefore
deeply interested against the restoration of the
Kingdom to our old ally. The son at Kedah is ap-
propriating for his father the principal staples, tin,
paddy and timber, to the southward of Settool,
while the two sons at Meraket are appropriating the
staples of birds’ nests, tripang and timber for boat
building, from the northern portion of the Kingdom
of Kedah. The principal person, I was told at
Pungah, who feels interested in the affairs of Kedah
at the Court of Siam, is the Chief of Ligore’s
Nephew, the Wang-na or Heir apparent, to whom a
portion of the profits arising from the occupation of
Kedah is transmitted, and whose powerful influence
the Britsh negotiator will have to counteract.
Our best chance therefore of securing.the restoration
of the Malay Government in Kedah is to accept the
assistance, which the Chief of Salang and the other
Chiefs on the Isthmus of Krah have tendered and
which their present friendly disposition towards the
British Government, their good will towards the
Ex-King, to whose exertions principally they ascribe
the repulse of the Burmese from Junkceylon in.
1810, and their jealousy of the Chief of Ligore’a


growing power, will lead them to grant ns with
zeal and cordiality. Through the exertions of these
Chiefs, our negotiator at Bangkok may persuade the
Wang-na and his party, hy the offer of other advan-
tages to Siam on the Coast of Tenasserim, to agree
to divide with his uncle of Ligor some annual com-
pensation in money from the King of Kedah, and
to obtain his uncle’s consent to the arrangement by
means of a peremptory order, or proviso of other
benefits from the Court.
Yet we shall not, I think, be able to secure an
unrestricted trade with the whole of the Eastern
<’oast of the Malayan Peninsula until we remove the
distrust and suspicion with which the Chief of Ligor
has been filled against us, by mischievous tales and
misrepresentations taken to him from Penang.
Formerly, it is well known, that the greatest
obstructions to this trade, proceeded from our own
ally of Kedah, and in the event of his restoration
we ought at least to secure the use of some of the
best overland routes and navigable rivers, that is to
say, the free communication with Merdelong through
Lungu, with Singora, through Kangar and the
Purlis river, as well as through the Kubong Boya
Fiver, and with Kota Bharu, Kroh and the other tin
districts through Pulai and the Murboo Muda Prye
and Creean rivers. The passage to Ligor through
Kedah and Cassai, and by the Trang rivers through
Khuntinnee, and the passage to Merdelong from
the Plean river, will depend entirely on the relations
which the Government of Penang may succeed in
establishing with the Chief of Ligor.
There is another object which it would be
highly desirable to attain on the restoration of the
King of Kedah, namely, to release ourselves
from the obligation to pay to His Highness
the quit rent of 10,003 Dollars per annum
for possession of Penang and the Country on the


opposite coast. But referring to the poverty of
the Kingdom of Kedah, and the present miserable
condition of its inhabitants, I conceive that on the
resource of this quit rent from us our ally must
entirely depend for some years after his restoration.
The Government of Prince of Wales Island may
however make it an article of the new Treaty which
it will become necessary to conclude with him, to
reduce this quit rent to a moiety, and to stipulate
that it shall be paid for a definite number of years
only.
Besides the objects above noticed, and in which
the local relations of Prince of Wales Island are
principally involved, there are others of great
importance depending on negotiations with the
Siamese Government and bearing on the general
interests of the British Empire in India. These
may be divided into three points.
Ist. To induce the Siamese nation to co-operate
with us in the present war against Ava.
2nd. To secure ourselves at as little risk and
expence as possible against the future aggressions
of either Siam or Ava.
3rd. To improve our commercial relations with
the kingdom of Siam and obtain for British subjects
some share of its very valuable Commerce.
On the first point the Supreme Government
has explained to Brigadier General Sir Archd.
Campbell, that the sort of co-operation which would
be considered desirable from Siam, is not that it
should send its barbarous and undisciplined troops
to act in conjunction with our force, or even to ap-
proach any quarter where it is likely to be employed,
but it is conceived thfit the Siamese Government
might materially assist us, by moving an army
from some part of its N. W. frontiers in the direction


of the Capital of Ava, operating of course indepen-
dently and thus creating a powerful and perhaps a
very effectual diversion in our favor. Acting upon
this information I pressed the Chief of Ligor by
letter, as well as the Chiefs on the Isthmus of
Kraw, to urge the Court of Siam to push an army
from Zamee towards Mona and the capital of Ava,
by which movement the Siamese would be placed
between our forces and the Chinese frontier. But
I have since learnt from the newspapers that Sir Ar-
chibald Campbell advised the Siamese Envoys w r ho
visited his camp, to move their troops in a more
westerly direction, against Toongho the strongest
fort in the Burmese Empire, and this movement
is certainly preferable to the other, if by adopting
the former the Siamese have any chance of pene-
trating into the Capital of Ava before us. For
no one object however is the immediate de-
putation of a British Agent to Bangkok more
necessary than this of endeavouring to direct and
regulate the force which Siam may against
Ava, and to prevent its interfering with our line of
operations, or becoming burthensome and mischie-
vous, when we desire to accept any overtures for
peace, which we may drive the Burmese Government
to offer.
In my opinion, the best co-operation which we
can receive from the Siamese, is for them to afford
us supplies of carriage cattle and provisions and to
open as many points [of communication as possible
between our relative posts. It was from this con-
sideration that I prevailed upon the Pya of Salang to
join with me in writing the Siamese Government of
Tuccopa, Chaiya, Chimpohun, Puchpuri and Bach-
puri, to establish a free intercourse as soon as possi-
ble between their posts and the British Garrisons
at Tenasserim, Mergui, Tavoy, Ye and Martaban.
The 2nd. and 3d. of tne abovementioned points


Mr. Crawfurd’s
* Dispatch to
Mr. Secy. Swin-
ton dated Singa-
pore 31st May
1824.
* to be copied
later from Bengal
3*25
* I learn from the French
Catholic Missionaries at Pe-
nang that since our war with
Ava, the King of Cochin China
has ordered every European
and even the French Man-
darins to quit his Kingdom.
para. 4 and 6 of the ois-
patch# to the Penang from
the Supreme Govt, dated 19
Novr. 1824. and para. 4and c
of Mr. Secy. Swinton’s Dis-
patch to Sir Archd. Campbell
of the same date.
* Copied from
Straits Settle-
ments) Vol. 99.
for negotiation with Siam Mr. Crawfurd represented
to the Supreme Govt, may be attained by the measure
of retaining permanent possession of the Provinces
of Mergui and Tavoy, or even by the more limited
one of permanently occupying the Ports of Mergui
and Tavoy, but especially the latter with perhaps a
i small portion of the Territory adjacent to each, and
by ceding to the Siamese the maritime possessions
of the Burmese from Martaban downwards.
The Supreme Government however were disin-
clined to adopt the whole of Mr. Crawfurd’s sugges-
tions on the ground that as a general maxim all
extension of our territorial possessions and Political
relations on the side of the Indo-Chinese Nations is,
with reference to the peculiar character of those
States, to their decided jealousy of our power and
ambition, and to their proximity to China, earnestly
to be deprecated and declined as far as the course of
events and the force of circumstances will
the French permit.'* Sir Archibald Campbell was
ITIGS 3f Pc-
ur war with authorized to withdraw altogether from
ochin china Mergui, and to concentrate the whole
: rench°Man" detachment of Native troops at Tavoy,
Kingdom. and either to deliver charge of Mergui
to the Son of the Rajah of Tavoy, or give it up to
any of the adjoining Siamese Chiefs, as a practical
proof of the friendly sentiments which the British
Government cherishes towards His Majesty of Siam,
and as an earnest of the advantage which will accrue
to the Siamese Nation from co-operating with us in
our war against the common enemy‘of both states,
of the ois- The Supreme Government added, that
/t. n dated*°| , 9 on the whole it was of opinion that
para. « and c sooner or later we must withdraw from
ircTmpben ' J avO J as well as Mergui, and that if
we relinquish them in any other mode
than restoring them to Ava as an article in a future
treaty of Peace , it is desirable that we should en-
deavour to transfer possession to the Siamese, making


at the same time the best bargain Circumstances
will admit.
The Supreme Government having signified that
the above was only the present inclination of their
opinions, and that their minds were by no means
wholly resolved on these questions, and Brigr.
Genl, Sir Archibald Campbell not having judged it
necessary to avail himself of the permission which
he had received to withdraw our force from Mergui,
I beg to submit the considerations which appear to
me to render the policy of such a measure very
doubtful, if not injudicious.
t The Penang Government has observed on this
subject, that the motives actuating the British
Government in the relinquishment of any part of our
acquisitions on the Coast of Tenasserim at present
will not be fairly appreciated or even understood
by the Siamese—that their cession without some
equivalent, or at least, or without some com-
munication or urgent solicitation on the part of
the Siamese, will be attributed to a wrong cause,
and rather tend to encourage pretensions which
might not otherwise be entertained and that the
resources of these Countries in our possession during
the war will materially facilitate the provision of
carriage cattle and supplies for our army, and thus
contribute in a great degree to the prosecution
of the war. That the inconvenience of being in
contact with the Siamese authorities no arrangement
can now prevent, that as the British interests in
respect to the States of Ava and Siam can be
maintained only by the strength of our position,
and the known respectability of the British' Gover-
nment, we must place more reliance on their fears
than on their good faith for the prevention of
aggression, and assume the most commanding
situation which the progress of a just and necessary
war has placed within our reach,, and that the
permanent retention of Tavoy and Mergui in the


manner suggested by Mr. Crawfurd and their occup-
ation by British Troops will, by establishing a secure
footing and firm entrance into their territory in case
of need, overawe both Burmans and Siamese, and
thus oppose a check against the future aggression
of either of these States. The Penang Government
further represented that the above observations were
intended to apply to ali the late acquisitions on the
Coast of Tenasserim but that in respect to one of
them, Mergui, their records enable them to speak
with more certainty and confidence. In the letter
of Instructions from the Honble. Court of Directors
on the first establishment of the Govt, of Prince of
Wales Island the occupation of a convenient harbour
J on the Eastern side of the Bay of Bengal was pointed
out as an object of primary importance. Acheen
was contemplated in the first instance, falling in
that Mergui was pointed out as the next convenient
position. The objects in view were Ist The establish-
ment of a place of refit and security for our own
shipping in the time of war, and 2ndly The ex-
clusion of a foreign European enemy from a position
which afforded him extensive means of annoyance to
our trade. The result of all attempts to establish a
Port at Acheen will be found on the records of the
Supreme Government. Any further measures for
that end are now precluded by the late treaty with
the Netherlands Government and the objects are now
only attainable at Mergui. It is well known that
during the whole of the last war, French Privateers
and seven regular ships of war made Mergui a
place of constant resort, principally during the
severity of the S. W. Monsoon. They found means
of outfit and supply, and were enabled at the opening
of the fair season to commence their depredations in
any part of the Bay of Bengal. So long as Mergui and
the adjacent islands remain in the possession of a
Native Power, our Trade must be subjected to the
same risk in case of war with a foreign European or


American power. On the other hand, if in our
possession, a secure harbour is afforded to our pip-
ping in the most convenient position for the naviga-
tion of the Bay, whenever the danger of the seas, or
an enemy may render shelter advisable. However
convenient Penang may be for concentrating
the trade of the Northern Posts'of the island of
Sumatra, of the Malay Peninsula, and the adjacent
islands, it is too far to the South East to be used as
a place of resort for any ships except such as may be
bound through the Straits of Malacca. These con-
derations therefore mainly induced the former recom-
mendation of the Penang Government for obtaining
possession of Junkceylon, the object of which would
he fully obtained by the retention of Mergui and its
Islands as British possessions. In a commercial
point of view much may be said in favor of the re-
tention of Mergui. The river is understood to be
navigable to a considerable distance up the country
and through that channel a great portion of the
productions of Siam once found their outlet on the
Bay of Bengal,
The Penang Government concluded by tendering
its services - the Supreme Government to take charge
at once of lergui, on the arrival of the Bencoolen
Local Corps, or of a reinforcement of recruits from
Bengal for the Penang Local Corps.
The Supreme Government has of course received
by this time, agreeably to its requisition, the most
accurate information which could be collected through,
the officers on the spot regarding the geography,
resources and population of the Countries, on the
Coast of Tenasserira and the disposition of the in-
habitants towards the Siamese Government.
The only authentic information which I could
obtain during my late mission regar-ding the former
state of these countries was contained in apparently


an old book, in which I was shewn at Pungah a Code
of the Harbour and Custom House duties and regula-
tions in force at Mergui and Tenasserim whilst under
! the Siamese Government, and I procured a copy of this
document, as from its perusal we shall be able to
estimate what advantage our commerce may derive
from the measure of transferring the Ports to the
Siamese. I learnt much however in favor of the
advantageous commercial situation of Mergui, and
even the Native Commander of one of the brigs, which
were loading tin and rice at Pungah for the Coast of
Coromandel, solicited me to submit to our Govern-
ment the importance of retaining such a Port on the
eastern side of the Bay of Bengal as Mergui, whence
not only a valuable trade could always be conducted,
but large supplies of rice in times of scarcity on the
Coast of Coromandel, could be so easily shipped and
taken for the relief of the sufferers.
The journey from Mergui to Puchpuri, which
is two or three days distance only from Bangkok
routes * from Mergui to Chimpohun on the Pastern
side of the Isthmus of Krah, the one directly across
the country takes three days, and the other only
two days, being by sea to the Pak-chan or the
Rinnong river, which last is separated from the Chim-
pohun river by a space of land that may be traversed
in 4 hours, but through which I was assured by several
persons who have been there, as it lies between
two mountains, a canal might be easily made, and
thus a good passage by water might be secured quite
across the Isthmus of Krah. The importance of estab-
lishing such a safe and easy communication as this
would prove between the Gulfs of Bengal and Siam,
need not be discussed, and this project ought, I
submit, to form one of our objects of negotiation with
the Siamese Government. The shortest route from
the Gulf of Siam to Tavoy as well as to Mergui, I was
told, is that from Chimpohun, where the Siamese forces


destined to attack those places always assembled*
The Siamese Dominions on both sides of the Isthmus
of Krah are very thinly inhabited, the population of
the whole Government of Salang including that island
does not exceed 6000 Souls, and the coast between
Mergui and Junkceylon has for several years been
in a state of desolation. The Governor of Chimpohun
was entrusted by the Court of Siam with the
especial duty of watching the Burmese on the Coast
of Tenasserim, and he was not allowed to trade as
all ether Siamese Chiefs do. Chimpohun, fi in fact,
since the conquest of Tavoy and Mergui by the
Burmese, appears to have been converted into a purely
Military post or Garrison, and this circumstance
accounts for the entire cessation of that valuable
trade which formerly passed between Mergui and the
Gulf of Siam.
Mr. Crawfurd appears to have given the pre-
ference to Tavoy over Mergui for a British Establish-
ment, because he had been informed that the former
town is but seven ordinary marches from Bangkok,
the Capital of Siam. But that this information was
incorrect I think may be seen by a mere examination
of the chart, which places Tavoy 2 degrees and 45
minutes, or 191 statute miles in a direct line, and
without reference to the intervening mountains,
streams and forests, from Bangkok, a distance far
too great to be crossed in seven ordinary marches.
Captn. Low also has just proved by a report to the
Penang Government that it takes six days, and over
roads impassable even for an elephant, to reach the
Siamese boundary only from Tavoy.
The Supreme Government appears to have given
the preference to Tavoy over Mergui, because the
townsmen of the former place may be considered to
have established a claim to our protection by their
conduct in the surrender of it, and because Tavoy was


stated to furnish a naturally strong and defensible
position. As to the capability however of defending
Mergui there can be now no doubt. Captn. Poynton,
who assisted at its capture, assiires me that the place
not only possesses a noble harbour, but that it is
naturally of great strength, and that no vessel could
have approached it had it been properly garrisoned.
The Fort is placed upon a hill which completely com-
mands the harbour, and to fire at which he was obliged
to elevate the guns of his vessel at an angle of nearly
45 degrees.
The permanent occupation of both Tavoy and
Mergui would be more open to the objection so strongly
urged by the Supreme Government against the exten-
sion of our territorial possessions and political relations
than the retention of one of those places only, to servo
principally as a free port whence British subjects may
be secured a fair share in the valuable commerce of
Siam, while the intricate navigation of the Tavoy
Eiver and the distance of the town from the usual
place of anchorage for vessels of any burthen, are
unquestionably disadvantages, when compared with
the commodious harbour of Mergui and the circums-
tance of the latter being an island and hence more
defensible,
That the Siamese attach a great value to the
Coast of Tenasserim there is no question. The Pya of
Salang and his Ministers gave me every reason to
believe that their Sovereign would rejoice to recover
his ancient dominions on that coast, and they strove to
prevail upon me to pledge the restitution of a portion
of them. Very few of the present inhabitants of that
Coast however can recollect the time when Siam ruled
over them, or feel any partiality in favor of a state,
the troops and subjects of which they have never seen
but when destroying them, or being destroyed by
them. The Siamese do net appear to me to consider
themselves to possess such a title or claim to our


conquests as not to receive any portion, which we may
be disposed to deliver to them, with great satisfaction,
and even with some concessions in our favor, the
latter particularly if the cession be made by us with a
pledge of support. Adverting to the scanty population
of the Siameses States to the Southward of Bangkok, to
their long standing dread of the Burmese and to their
inferiority in courage and martial pursuits, 1 feel con-
fident that unless we retain a commanding situation
on the Coast of Tenasserira, or unless we reduce the
strength of the Burmese Government compared with
that of its Eastern neighbours more than what will be
considered our true policy, the Siamese will have very
little chance of keeping any cession which we make to
them in this quarter.
But the great consideration is, what is to become
of the inhabitants of the territory wdrich w-e may cede to
the Siamese ? for the probable effects of the Siamese
Government over them may be judged of by the declara-
tion of one of its own subjects, a Native Catholic Mission-
ary at Pungah, who observed to me that if the E itish
Government surrender the Coast of Tenasserim to the
Siamese, it will be taking the prey from the jaws of
the lion to deliver it into those of the tiger. Indepen-
dent then of all other arguments, I submit that this
one, the cause of humanity, urges us to retain posses-
sion of some spot on the Coast of Tenasserim that may
serve as an asylum for those inhabitants who may be
unwilling to live under the Siamese yoke, or who may
have forfeited, by their friendly conduct to during
the present war, the protection of the Burmese Govern-
ment. To this spot, in the event of our ceding a
portion of our conquests to the Siamese, thousands of
the poor inhabitants will fly, and by retaining such a
spot w T e shall certainly feel less reluctance or difficulty
in transfering some of these provinces to the Siamese.
But the more territory we cede to the Siamese,
the more of human misery I fear w u shall unavoidably


create. Mr. Crawfurd proposes to cede to them the
whole of the maritime possessions of the Burmese from
'Martaban downwards, and he enumerates them as
comprising two Provinces only, Tavoy and Mergui.
i Mr. Gibson informed me that these possessions of the
Burmese are divided into four Provinces, that of Marr-
taban, Ye, Tavojr and Tenasserim, which last extends
from Lat. 10° 50" long the rear of Tavoy and Ye
to Lat. 15° 50'. It will most probably be our
policy to circumscribe the power of Ava to the North-
ward and Westward, by emancipating Assam and
Munipoor, and by retaining perhaps the town and
river of Arracan, as points forming a convenient
natural boundary to the British territories, and much
more healthy and easy of defence than the jungles
near the Naof. The Siamese also, if they are sincere
in their intentions of co-operating with us in
the present war, will probably take possession of,
and desire 'to retain, some tracts of territory on
the easter-i frontiers of Ava, along the river
Thalneu, 1 f would therefore beg to recommend that
the Provinces of Martaban and Ye, but especially the
former, should be reserved to be restored to the
Burmese at the close of the war, and that the remainder
only including the Ports of Tavoy, Engram and Zernih,
should be ceded to the Siamese, with the exception
of Mergui, its contiguous islands, and a convenient
portion of territory on the main, of all which the
British Government should retain permanent possession.
The interposition of the Siamese between the Burmese
and our post at Mergui would be convenient, whilst
our presence there would enable the former to
strengthen themselves at Tavoy, Engram and Zernih,
which two last are said to command the pass into the
Siamese Territories, and by means of good garrisons
at these places they ought to keep their acquisitions,
which would then be well protected on the side of Ava.
It would be advisable for us to retain possession of
Tenasserim, which was formerly the great port for


* See t-torsburgh’s Direc-
tory Vol. 2 Page 18.27 Tavoy
island is described by him
“as The northernmost large
“ Island of that extensive
“ chain which fronts the coast
“ generally called the Mergui
“ or Tenasserim Archipelago;
“ which with the whole of this
*■ coast have never been regu-
“ larly surveyed, consequcnt-
“ ly very imperfectly known. ”
trade, and might, if left with the Siamese, interfere-
with the prosperity of Mergui, and we should reserve
to ourselves the of the whole of the.
islands from Tavoy Island to St. Mathews; almost
all of them produce birds’ nests and tripang, and some
irgh’s Direc- of them, particularly Dorael Island, have
18.27 Tavoy L J 5
bed by Him Pearl Banks, and they all lie in the
■nmost large track of vessels navigating the coast of
t extensive
its the coast
Tenasserim.* The Establishment of our
j the Mergui sovereignty over these isles will preclude
Archipelago;
V hoie of this any other power from occupying any of
ir been regu- them, will secure to our traders the
consequent-
:tiy known. » valuable objects in which they abound,
and will prevent any of them from becoming the
resort of piratical boats. The river Tinnau, which
comes from the north and discharges itself into the
Bay of Bengal in three channels on each side of
Mergui and Neclair Islands, would form a good natural
boundary to the east and south of the territory we
may retain, and its left bank should be reserved by us
in order to secure the Town of Tenasserim and
prevent the Siamese from interfering with the naviga-
tion of the river, by forming any establishments on
that bank. The boundary to the north might be
hereafter adjusted by Commissioners to be appointed
by the Siamese and by our Government.
If the views which I have above ventured to sub-
mit receive the approbation of the Supreme Govern-
ment they caii be immediately carried into effect, by
the Provinces of Tavoy and Tenasserim being placed
under the direction of the Honble. the Governor of
Prince of Wales Island, who has already been pleased
to tender his services, on the great value and importance
of which it would be impertinent in me to say a word.
Commissioners from Penang could with ease proceed
to Tavoy and Mergui, examine and report upon those
places at the same time that our Negotiator at Bangkok
might invite the Siamese Government to send Com


* The arival of the three
Companies of the 25th Regt.
from Natal, as well as of the
Bencoolen Local Corps will
shortly place a disposable
Military Force at Penang and
-the communication between
-that place and Mergui, which
during the North East Mon-
soon seldom takes more than
8 or IO days, could be much
facilitated during the South
West Monsoon or boisterous
weather, by means of the Pya
of Salang. Until a good road
be opened from Mergui to
Pungah boats could at any
season I imagine pass between
those places, or at all events
between Mergui and Tuccopa
by keeping within the islands
and close to the shore, wh;le
the passage between Penang
and Pungah is open at all
times of the year. Between
Tavoy and Penang a consider-
able trade has always been
conducted with the Capital
of (7 by) Chinese Merchants
residing at the latter place.
* Dispatch to
Mr, Secretary
Swinton of 31st
May 1824.
* Copied
See Factory
Records, Straits
Settlements,
Vol. 99.
or tne xnree . .. , . ,
ie 25th Rcgt. m issioners on its part to meet ours,
#eii as of the and mutually settle boundaries and other
i corps win p o i n fc s * j xnay add here that there is
disposable 1 J
Penang and one Gentleman of the Honble. Com-
ion between p an y» s Qi v il Service at Prince of Wales
lergui, which 1 J
h East Mon- Island, Mr, Maingy, the Superintendant
' S , l"^ re tha " of Province Wellesley, whose zeal and
uld be much •> 7
g the south intelligence, knowledge of the character
r boisterous a nd cus toms of the Eastern Nations,
ns of the Pya
a good road and above all, temper, and experience in
i Mergui to delicate and difficult duty of govern-
ouid at any
pass between ing a newly settled Country eminently
»t an events qualify him for the office of Commissioner
and Tuccopa
n the islands at Mergui, should it be determined to
shore, wh:ie reui i u permanent possession of that
veen Penang
open at aii Island.
ip. Between
g a consider- It has long been known that few
& t^ y capita" Asiatic Countries are capable of conduc-
e Merchants ting so extensive and valuab 1 ; a Trade
tter place ’ with the British Dominions as Siam, and
the Resident of Singapore proposes to tak the present
opportunity of obtaining a fair share of freedom and
security to our commerce with that Country, by per-
suading its Government to execute a Commercial
Treaty. He has accordingly submitted the draft of
such a Treaty comprised in 15 Articles. The Ist*
Articles proposes.
“ There shall be peace, friendship and good under-
standing between the British and Siamese Nations
&c. &c. ” To this is added a remark that there will
be some difficulty in finding or even mentioning His
Majesty’s Heirs and Successors, as this is a forbidden
topic, and that the name and title of the Siamese
officer to negotiate a treaty with is the Chow Pya Prah
Klang Chao Kun Kosa. The difficulty may ’be very
easily avoided by stating, as in many other of our
engagements with Oriental Nations, that “ This Treaty
shall be binding as long as '.e Sun and Moon endure,”


or “ retain their motion and splendour,” phrases in
common use among the Malay and Siamese. The
present Foreign Minister is a Pya and not a Prah,
and being related to the Royal family is often styled
Chow Pya Klang-Tha. The remaining words are
titles only. The above article however makes no
mention of the Honble. East India Company but I
presume that if an officer serving that authority be
deputed to frame the Treaty, the enagement must be
made, as every other Treaty with Asiatic States,
between Siam and the Honble. East India Company,
and I found it by no means difficult to make the
Siamese at Kedah and Pungah comprehend the
nature and constitution of that Body. I would
in lieu of this article therefore beg to propose the
following.
The Peace and friendship now subsisting between
His Majesty the King of Siam, and the Honble. Eng-
lish East India Company shall be perpetual; and this
Treaty consisting of Articles, concluded
in behalf of the Honble. Company on the one part,
by , in virtue of powers delegated to him
for that purpose by the Right Honble. Lord Amherst,
Governor General for all affairs of the British Nation
in India, and in behalf of his Majesty the King of Siam
on the other part, by shall endure as long
as the sun and moon retain their motion and splendour.
The 2nd. Article is,
The British Government for and on account of the
considerations hereafter specified, cedes to His Majesty
the King of Siam in full Sovereignty the Provinces
and Districts recently conquered by the British Arms
situated on the Bay of Bengal known by the names of
Tavoy and Mergui and bounded by and
with the exceptions specified in the next
Article.
The approval of the views which I have above


submitted would render it necessary to alter
article as follows.
The Honble. English East India Company for and
on account of the considerations hereinafter specified
agrees to cede to His Majesty the King of Siam in full
Sovereignty the Provinces of Tavoy and Tenasserim
recently conquered by the British Arms, situated on
the Bay of Bengal, including the Town and Fort of
Tavoy and the forts of Zemih and Engran, with the
exceptions however specified in the next article.
Mr. Crawfurd’s 3rd. Article is
“ The British Government hereby reserves to
itself in full Sovereignty the Ports and Harbours of
Tavoy and Mergui with miles of territory adjacent
to each.” For which might be substituted.
The Honble. English East India Company hereby
reserves to itself in full sovereignty, the Ports and
Harbours of Mergui and Tenasserim, all the Islands
lying off the Coast of Tenasserim from Tavoy Island
to St, Mathew’s, and a portion of territory adjacent to
Mergui on the Southward and eastward measuring six
miles beyond the left bank of the Tinnan River, and on
the Northward bounded by such a line, extending from
the sea to that River, as shall be hereafter pointed out
by British Commissioners on the spot.
To the above may be added a clause stipulating:
His Majesty the King of Siam, and the Government of
Prince of Wales Island on behalf of the Honble.
English East India Company, shall each immediately
depute two Commissioners to the Provinces of Tavoy
and Tenasserim with full powers to settle the mutual
boundaries and all other points connected with the
execution of this and the preceding article. Mr.
Crawfurd’s three following articles would require no
alteration excepting the Province of Tenasserim to be
substituted for that of Mergui.


4th. “ The most complete freedom of trade and
intercourse shall subsist between the British and
Siamese possessions within the Provinces of Tavoy
and Mergui, and no monopoty shall be created or com-
mercial restraints imposed by either of the contracting
parties without the consent of the other.”
sth. “ The Asiatic subjects of either of the con-
tracting parties of what ever description voluntarily
withdrawing from the Territories of the one Power to
that of the other within the Provinces of Tavoy and
Mergui shall be permitted so to do without let or
molestation and shall not afterwards be claimed by
either party.”
6th. “ The subjects of either of the contracting
parties when charged with the crimes of murder,
robbery, theft, or injury accompanied by force, or
when absconding on account of debt shall be amenable
to the laws and jurisdiction of the power in whose
territory such offender shall have been apprehended,
and the contracting parties reciprocally pledge them-
selves to afford every necessary assistance and facility
in bringing all such offenders to justice.”
To the 4th article might however be added this
clause : British subjects shall have full liberty at all
times to repair to the forests lying within the Siamese
possessions to cut and remove from thence Sapan
wood and timber of every description, on payment of
such moderate duties as the Contracting parties may
mutually agree to establish.
Mr. Crawfurd’s 7th article is
“ His Majesty the King of Siam for himself, heirs
and successors hereby cedes in full sovereignty to the
British Government that portion of the territory of
Kedah lying between the rivers Creean and Murboo,
these streams inclusive, and bounded to the North
East by the Mountains of Patani and Calantan, in-
cluding the islands of whatever description on the


* This boundary must have
been established many years
ago, as in an old chart publi-
shed in oairympie’s East India
pilot, and said to have been
sketched by Mr. Martin Lind-
say and to have been com-
pared with a chart submitted
le the Supreme Govt, by Mr.
Lyth, the Northern boundary
of Kedah is marked at the
driver Talavase or “Talaouee.’
Coast of the said Territory to the distance of five
leagues from the said Coast.”
The approval of the views which I have submitted
would render it necessary to substitute for the above
article the following.
The Honble. the English East India Company
engages that its Government at Prince of Wales Island
o O
shall guarantee an annual payment by the King of
Kedah of 4000 Dollars besides the triennial presenta-
tion of the Boongha Mas, to the King of Siam, and
his Majesty the King of Siam in consideration of such
guarantee agrees to restore to Sultan Ahmud Tajuden
Halim Shah and his heirs and successors, full posses-
sion of his Ancient Kingdom of Kedah, lying between
the rivers Oopih and Creean. The above payment and
presentation shall be made directly to the King of
Siam at Bangkok, and shall release the King of Kedah
from all other token, duty or homage, and from all
future interference with his Government or country on
the part of the Chow Pya of Ligore or any other
Siamese Chief.
The King of Kedah has a very long Siamese title
which it may be necessary to introduce into above
article. Much discussion appears lately to have arisen
as to the former boundaries of the Kingdom of Kedah,
but I was told at Lungu and at Trang, and the King
of Kedah, who ought to know, confirmed the truth of
my information, that the small stream of Oopih Lat.
7° 5", immediately above the river Talavase or Teluk-
•y must have luwas was the boundary last established
many years between the Kingdom of Kedah and the
chart publi- °
’s East India possessions of Merdelong.*' The southern
> have been boundary is well known to be the Creean
Martin Lind' J
been com- Bivor in Eat. 5° 10 • Every exertion
ma y b 0 made by our Negotiator at Bang-
n boundary kok to fix the money payment at as low an
ked at the amount as practicable for the above sum
“Talaouee.’ 1
of 4000 Drs. will perhaps press hard upon


our ally. In the same manner the presentation of the
Boongha Mas should be remitted altogether if possible,
although I fear such a stipulation, serving as it will
as a salve to the pride of the Court of Siam, will
give our ally the best chance of being restored;
The rent which the King of Kedah formerly paid to
Siam for the use of the whole of the islands lying
between Junkceylon and Kedah producing Birds*
Nests may be made a separate article of Treaty if
required at Bangkok, for with proper arrangements
our ally ought to realize a large profit on the 6,000
Dollars per annum which he paid.
It appears to me that the best way for our Nego-
tiator to dispose the Court of Siam to listen to his
overtures of the restoration of the King of Kedah, is to
throw out some hints, that in the event of his not
succeeding in attaining that point for our old ally, the
Supreme Government will perhaps take into con-
sideration the expediency of establishing His High
ness in some independent Principality on the Coast of
Tenasserim.
Mr. Crawfurd’s Bth Article is :
“ The commercial and other intercourse between
the British Territories so ceded by His Majesty the
King of Siam and the adjacent Siamese Territories
including the Tributary States of Perak and Patani,
the Provinces of Singora, Ligore, Junkcejlon and
Tenasserim shall be regulated on the conditions and
principle specified in the 4th, sth and 6th Articles of
the present Treaty.”
The above might then be altered as follows :
The commercial and other intercourse between
Prince of Wales Island and its dependencies, and the
whole of the adjacent Siamese States of Ligor, Singora,
Patani, Merdelong and Salang shall be regulated on
the conditions and principles specified in the 4th, sth
and 6th articles of the present Treaty.


The commercial and other intercourse between us
and Kedah will of course become the subject of a
Separate Treaty with our ally. Patani was overrun
by the Siamese so far back as 1786, but Perak appears
never to have acknowledged the supremacy of Siam
until forced to do it in 1818 and the British Govern-
ment has not yet, I believe, admitted to Siam its right
of preference to that State.
Mr. Crawfurd’s 9th, 10th and 11th articles are :
“ His Majesty the King of Siam for himself, his
heirs and successors hereby engages to permit all ships
and vessels under the British flag to trade to the Port
of Bangkok and the kingdom of Siam, on the terms
and conditions specified in the following articles/*’
“ British ships or vessels when they arrive in the
river Menara shall not be put to the inconvenience of
landing their small arms and cannon, or to be in any
way dismantled, but before arriving at the city of
Bangkok they shall land their gunpowder alone, which
shall be taken charge of by the officers of the Siamese
Government and returned previous to the departure of
such ship or vessel.”
British Merchants resorting to the Port of Bang-*
kok shall be permitted to sell and buy freely in the
open markets and no claim of pre-emption or right of
exclusive sale shall be exercised by any party to their
prejudice.
Our Negotiator at Bangkok should certainty en-
deavour to obtain permission for our ships to visit the
ports of Tuug-yai and Chantibon, mentioned by Mr.
Crawfurd, on the East Coast of the Gulf of Siam ;
Chaiya also on the West coast, I was assured at Pungah
would be a fine port for our trade. To the last article
I would recommend the addition of the following
clause. No British subject shall however be allowed to
settle in any part of the King of Siam’s Dominions


without such person having previously obtained per-
mission for such purpose from the Right Rouble, the
Governor General of India.
Mr. Crawfurd, while at Bangkok in 1822, observed
that he had no scruple in saying, that to provide for
the exclusion of Foreign Europeans is altogether super-
i fluous under the Siamese Government, the oppressive
character of which affords them no encouragement
•3 ~
whatever, and scarce the chance of a bare subsistence.
But British Agents from mercantile houses at Singapore
have lately been allowed to settle at Bangkok, and the
circumstance related to me by the Pya of Salang of a
person in the dress of an officer having last year visited
Bangkok and sold muskets, proves the necessity of
making some provision respecting the resort of British
Subjects to Siam.
Mr. Orawfurd’s 12th and 13th articles are:
“ Every British ship or vessel visiting the Port of
Bangkok for the purposes of trade shall pay a Tonnage
duty (say from 40 to 50) Ticals per Ton, to be levied
on her registered Tonnage, and in consideration
of the said impost she shall be exempted from the
payment of all Export and Import Duties whatsoever,
as well as of Anchorage or Harbour Dues or Duty
upon measurement.”
“ Pilotage and the usual Fees of Office shall be
paid by British vessels resorting to the Port of Bang-
kok, and the said Pilotage and Fees shall not be raised
beyond their present amount.”
To the latter article a remark is appended by Mr.
Crawfurd, that the fees of office are very moderate.
An examination of the Custom House Duties formerly
in force at Mergui and Tenasserim and according
to which rate they are now levied, 1 was assured, not
only at Pungah but at all the Siamese States, will
shew such fees of office must be extremely burthen some
to traders. Our Negotiators have succeeded in.


persuading other Oriental Nations, as wedded as the
Siamese to old customs, to commute such fees for
some duty easily levied, and similar exertions ought
surely to be used in Siam.*
e The 14th and 15th Articles are
“ The Ships and Vessels of His Majesty the King
of Siam shall be permitted to trade in the Ports of
Calcutta, Madras, Bombay and Ceylon on the terms of
the most favored Asiatic Nation,”
“ Ships and vessels of His Majesty the King of
Siam shall be permitted to trade at the ports of Prince
of Wales Island, Singapore, Mergui and Tavoy upon,
the same terms and conditions in all respects as ships
and vessels under the British flag are admitted to
trade at the Port of Bangkok.”
Mr. Crawfurd is of opinion that the Siamese are
not very likely to avail themselves of the stipulation
of the 14th Article, but it may be mentioned that the
King of Siam has several square rigged vessels which
have repeatedly visited the Coast of Coromandel and
occasionally Calcutta. The Chief of Ligor also has
trading ships and Brigs. With the Ports enumerated
in the 15th Article Malacca may now be joined.
To the above, the following articles may be added.
The Honble. English East India Company
engages that all Siamese subjects found in any part of
the Burmese possessions which may be conquered
during the present war shall be allowed a free pass and
afforded every facility to return to their own Country
with their families and effects, and His Majesty the
King of Siam in consideration of the happy union
which is now about to be cemented between himself
and the Honble. Company agrees to issue immediate
orders for every aid in Carriage Cattle and Supplies
and Provisions beinf? afforded to the British Troops
.serving in the Dominions of Ava, and for the naost


friendly t intercourse being opened between the British
Garrisons and Detachments and all Siamese Forts,
Towns or Posts contiguous to them.
His Majesty the King of Siam further engages to
co-operate with the British Government in the present
war against the common enemy of both States, by
attacking the Burmese possessions in the direction of
Tocnghoo and the Capital of Ava, and by consenting
that each Division of the Siamese forces which may be
sent for this purpose, shall be accompanied by a British
Officer who shall be the channel of communication
between the Siamese Commanders and the Commander
in Chief of the British Army in Ava, under whose
directions the operations of the Siamese forces shall
be entirely conducted.
fhe first part of the preceding articles will, I have
reason to know, be received with great satisfaction by
the Siamese Government and no co-operation on its
part will, I fear, prove eventually useful to us unless
we can obtain its consent to the concluding stipulation.
I have deemed it my duty to detail the consider-
ations which have occurred to me on a careful examin-
ation of Mr. Crawfurd’s proposed Treaty with the
Siamese Government although I fear that there is very
little chance of any negotiator on our part being able
to persuade that Government to execute such a Treaty,
the very number even of the articles of which will
immediately excite the fears and jealous}'- of the Court
of Bangkok. In all the intercourse which I have lately
had with the Siamese I found no part of the character
which La Loubere sketched of them more correct than,
that “ they engage themselves in writing as little as
“ they can. They will rather receive you into a fort
“ or castle than they will agree with you to surrender
“ them up to you by a Treaty in ample form, and
“ sealed by their Barcelon.'’ Besides, the Supreme
Govt, has observed that the negotiation of Treaties
and positive engagements with the Siamese Govt.


(supposing it willing to enter into them) may he re-
garded as open to serious objection, lest any future
violation of their conditions should impose upon us the
necessity of resenting such breach of Contract, and
the Penang Government has added, that it is fully im-
pressed with the belief, that no Treaties or Agreements
would bind the Siamese if an opportunity were offered
of deriving immediate though temporary advantage
by their infringement. To Mr. Crawfurd’s proposed
Treaty also the Supreme Government has declared that
two general objections present themselves; Ist, its
direct tendency to involve the British Government in
extensive and complicated relations with the Siamese,
and 2ndly, the apparent hopelessness of persuading
their arrogant and untractable Court to execute formally
an instrument granting so many Concessions and
Accommmodations in exchange for any thing which
■ we have to offer.
The Resident of Singapore however, than whom
there certainly is no British Officer more Competent
to form a Judgement, is of opinion that the moment
is at length arrived when it is within our reach
to persuade the Siamese Government to conclude such
a Treaty with us; and there is no question that
if we do not avail ourselves of the advantageous
situation in which the Burmese War and our occupation
of the former Siamese possessions on the Coast of
Tenasserim have placed us and of the favorable disposi-
tion of the present Monarch of Siam as shewn in his
late reception of some British Merchants, we shall never
meet with another such an opportunity of arranging
all our differences with the Siamese, and of improv-
ing our Commercial relations with their Country.
The Honble. the Governor of Penang has stated,
that an Embassy to Siam is indispensable, that it
should proceed under direct powers from the
Supreme Government and that, unless it be deemed
advisable with reference to other general objects


that the deputation should proceed from the immedi-
ate Seat of the War, it appears to him that the offer
and services of the Chief of Pungah should be made
use of. That Chief has a great interest at stake in
the Success of the British Arms. Junkceylon and
all the neighbouring Continent have long been kept
in a state of constant alarm from the Burmese so as
to have entirely prevented the settling of Inhabit-
ants, and no advantage has hitherto resulted from
their occupation. The successes of the British Arms
on the Coast of Tenasserim and the interposition of
'a British force at Mergui afford him a degree of
security never before enjoyed. To which considera-
tions I may add, that the Chief of Pungah is related
f to the Boyal family and to the present Pya Klang
or Foreign Minister with whom our Agent will have
to negotiate any Treaty; that he is well disposed
towards the King of Kedah, and jealous of the
Chief of Ligor’s growing power; and lastly, that
he has engaged in the most frank and cordial man-
ner to introduce a British Agent to his Sovereign
and to make his Son convey such an Officer to him
at Bangkok. The route from Pungah to Chaiya, if
passed before the end of June would occupy only six
days, and with the Chief of Pungah’s subjects and
150 or 200 Elephants, there would not, I am assured,
be the smallest difficulty in conveying as much bag-
gage across the Country as the Agent might desire,
while from Chaiya, where excellent accommodations
can be secured in Boats and Junks of the largest des-
cription, the passage to Bangkok during the present
South West Monsoon may be made in five or six
days. The Agent should be accompanied only by
an Escort of 30 Seapoys under a European or Native
Commissioned Officer, a Surgeon, and a quiet di-
ligent nautical Surveyor, by whom a Chart of the
West Coast of the Gulf of Siam, which is entirely
unknown, could be constructed, and he should be
recommended to regulate his behaviour and com


inunications according to the practice of the old
Ambassadors and travellers. That is endeavour to
visit the Siamese Chiefs and Ministers at their
private Apartments and hours of retirement, and to
interest and amuse them first by descriptions of
European manners and Customs ; pursuing which
practice I found during my late Mission was the only
way of securing the good will and confidence of this
jealous race, and of removing their fears and sus-
picions. The best presents for the King of Siam
and his Ministers as pointed out to me at Pungah,
would be some of the following Articles and certainly
not the least advantage in favor of accepting the
Chief of Pungah’s offer is that the most expensive
part of a Mission proceeding in such a manner would
be the presents, but by these alone unfortunately,
the Siamese Courtiers can be propitiated.
2 Palankeens
A large Chandelier
2 Diamond Rings of some value
2 Rings set with Rubies or Emeralds
10 or 12 Ditto of inferior Value
2 Sets of Gold Necklaces, Bracelets and Ear-rings
of English Jewellery of some value
10 or 12 Sets of Do. of inferior value.
2 Large English or Turkey Carpets
4 Pieces of Scarlet Broad Cloth.
4 Ditto of Yellow Do.
4 Ditto of Green Do.
C Pieces of Double Colours, of red on one side and
green or blue or yellow on the other. This descrip-
tion of cloth is in very great request at Siam.
Some English Cut Glass Ware, particularly glass boxes.
30 or 40 Sets of Bazars Scissors Penknives and
spectacles
4 Pieces of Gold and Silver Brocade
4 Do. of Tissue


see report of my Mission
•to Pungah Enclosures G. H.
addressed to e. a. Biundeii,
Esq. Actg. secy, to the Penang
Covt. dated 2(1. April last. *
* See ante, extracts from
-ihisVol. fSSOJ.
Some India Kincobs
20 or 30 Pieces of English Muslin
30 or 40 Do. of English Cottons
2 or 3 Gorges of Indian Do.
4 or 5 Cases of Fowling Pieces
Some curious Toys and Specimens of Mechanism
Some Warlike Stores—a pair of Brass 6 Pounders, 20
or 30 Blunderbusses—Several hundred Stands of
Muskets and pairs of Pistols, and 2 or 300
Canister Flasks of Gunpowder.
A Collection of Scents and Essences.
I am told that the Agent must endeavour to
present to the Wang-na a Duplicate of some of the
Articles which are given to the King, and 1 found the
Siamese every where passionately fond of precious
stones and English Jewellery. Their taste differs in
one respect from that of the Natives of Hindostan.
They prefer our Jeweller’s Gold (Suasa) to Manufactures
of the purer Metal.
Having thus submitted in the foregoing sheet
whatever reflections have occurred to me on the dif-
ferent objects w r hich have been proposed to the British
Government, to be pursued in its negotiations with
Siam, I hope I may now, without exhibiting arro-
gance or improper ambition state, that if it please
the Right Honble. the Govr. Genl. in Council to
>f my Mission confide in my discretion, perfect ac-
losurcs G. H. J
e. a. Biundeii, quaintance with the views and motives
,to the Penang Government and some knowledge
April last. *
of the genius and character ot the
extracts from gj amese Nation and authorize me to
accept the very cordial invitation which I have
received from the Pya of Salang . and his Son
and Ministers, to join them at Bangkok, I
shall endeavour by the most strenuous exertions to
prove myself worthy of such a high distinction.
The Chief of Ligor also has signified to me his
readiness to convey me to Bangkok, but the strong
personal interest which he feels against the restora


» For a character of this
Native of the Coast of Coro-
mandel and officer under the
Siamese Govt, see Report of
my Mission to Pungah ad-
dressed to E. A. Blundell, Esq.
Actg. Secy, to the Penang Govt,
dated 2d April last.
tion of the King of Kedah, as well as the incon-
venient and distant route by which he communicates
with Bangkok, would induce me to decline that
Chief’s offer. From Pungah I shall be able to
secure not only the friendly co-operation of the
Siamese Chiefs on the Isthmus of Krah, but in.
addition to my own Malay and Native Christian
Interpreters the very important services of Luang
icter of this Bam.* Honored then with a Commis-
aSt C T' s i° n under the Seal of the Bight
under the n
se Report of Honble. the Governor General, and
lUmden Esq' su PP^ with an order to procure the
Penang Govt, presents above enumerated, and with
a Dispatch to the address of the
Honble. the Governor of Prince of Wales Island
noticing such points as may not be comprised
or as may be disapproved of, in this Memoir, and
signifying that the Supreme Government entrusts
to his immediate guidance and direction the Settle-
ment of our acquisitions on the Coast of Tenasserim,
as well as the conduct of our negotiations at Siam, I
should be ready to depart again for Penang within
ten days, and strive to reach Bangkok before the
Ceremony of the late King’s funeral is concluded, or at
least before the dispersion of all the Siamese Chiefs
who are now assembling there. It appears to me that
the British Agent should proceed to Siam, furnished
in the first instance with instructions only to
ascertain and report from thence what portion of
the objects which have been proposed to the Supreme
Government can be accomplished, and to endeavour
to attain at least, whether by regular Treaty or
otherwise, these three points—restoration of the King
of Kedah, improvement of our Commercial relations,
and some co-operation in the present War.
(Signed) H. BURNEY Captn. 25th Regt.
Poll. Agent to the Siamese States from
the Govt, of P. W. I.


FORT WILLIAM 16th September 1825
Supplement to the Memoir Submitted to the Sup-
reme Government on the 3rd May 1825 by Captain H.
Burney Political Agent to the Siamese States.
Most of the following facts and circumstances were
known to me at the time I drew up my Memoir, but I
forbore mentioning them, through a belief that the
Supreme Government possessed much later information
respecting the Geography and Resources of the Tenas-
serim Coast.
The old Geographers terminated the Burmese pos-
sessions to the Southward at Mergui in about Lat r 12.
Dr. Hamilton extends them to a village named Mazi,
in about Lat: 10, and Captain Low to Chanma, which
he places still lower, in Lat: 9.30. Mr. Gibson pointed
out to me that the latter places Chanma too far to the
Southward and that since the time the former was at
Ava, Mirza has been destroyed, and the Siamese have
come up to Chanma, which he considered to bo in
Lat: 10°.30. The Siamese at Pungah admitted that
the present boundary is at Chanma, which they name
Pak Chan, but as all who had been there stated that a
boat could pass from Pak Chan to Mergui in 24 hours,
I think that place cannot be quite so far to the South-
ward as where even Mr. Gibson lays it down and I have
therefore placed it in my Geographical Sketch in about
Lat:lo°.so. Enquiry on the spot, however, will of
course be the only mode of ascertaining the precise
situation of Pak Chan. All between it and Mergui is
well known to be a desolate waste. Mr. Gibson further
stated that the Burmese Province of Tenasserira ex-
tended in the rear of Tavoy to Lat: 15.50, which *
Horsburgh describes the Tenasserim Archipelago to
commence at Tavoy Island in Lat: 13°. 16' and to ter-
minate to the Southward, at the Seyer Islands in Lat;
8. 28. The Coast of Tenasserim, as far as thtv


(a) See his
Tracts.
lb) Modern Universal His-
tory Ed. 1759. Page 199 Vol. 7th
from Histoire du Royaume
de Siam par Gervaise.
(c) See his Oriental Reper-
tory Vol. Ist Page 120.
<d) Universal Modern His-
tory from Histoire clu Ro-
yaumc de Siam par N.
Gervaise.
(e) D’Anvillc conjectured
IMcrgui to be the ancient
Berobe while M. Gosselin in
bis Geography of the Greeks
Sinalizcd attempts to prove,
with a greater appearance
of probability, that the Sou-
Burmese possessions are concerned, may be said to
include the Province of Tavoy. Colonel Franklin (a)
learnt when in Ava “ The Coast of Tenasserim is a
separate Government, the seaports of Tavoy and
Mergui have very little territory annexed, and are also
separate Governments.”
Tenasserim was in possession of the Siamese as
far back as 1568 when it was taken by a Burmah
King of Pegu, under which it continued until about
1603, when it was recovered by Siam. In 1613 it was
again besieged by the Burmese or Peguers, but they
were frustrated in their design by the Portugueze,
who appear then to have been settled here. The
navigation of the Tinnan or Tenasserim River is said,
by one authority, to be rendered difficult by rocks and
branches of Trees, with which its channel is full, and
niversai His- the stream is likewise so rapid that it
b 199 voi. 7th canno t, b e ascended above 3or 4 leagues
u Royaume
aise. a day (b). Dalrymple (c) states in 1759
Bntai Reper- the river was formerly navigable to
Tenasserim where the Portugueze had a
Port, but the communication is only open for boats at
present; whether the navigation of the river was
spoiled by accident or intentionally is uncertain. It
is reported there is a communication with Junk Ceylon
from Tenasserim for boats by the rivers within land.
The River of Chantibon on the East side of the Gulf
of Siam to which Mr. Crawfurd refers in his “ Notes
towards a Treaty” although not so large as some
other rivers in the Kingdom of Siam, is said to carry
large vessels with greater ease than any of them;
Modem His- notwithstanding a great bank of sand
ire du ro- a t (-} ie entrance, there is ahvays 14 or
™ par 15 feet water, (d)
conjectured Mergui, (e) with respect to its mas-
he ancient t erg may be presumed to have always
Gosselin i n ’ J 1 J
the Greeks followed the fate of Tenasserim which be-
ts to prove. f ore wa3 destroyed, w T as the principal
appearance
at the sou- port. Until 1687, when they were driven


-them part of Pegu is pto-
lemy’sAurea Chersonesus, the
Bay of Martaban his Magnus
Sinus Tenasscrrim his sina
Metropolis and Mergui his
port of catigara, the utmost
boundary of navigation in an-
cient times.
(f) New Account of the E>
Indies Pages 430 & 468 vol"
«th Pinkerton’s Collection of
Voyages.
Pegu is pto- out and many of them massacred through
the J ealous y of the old East India Com-
■im His sina pany, a good number of English Free
,"the 9 uimoLt Merchants were settled at Mergui, and
gation in an- drove a considerable trade here. Down
to the middle of the last century there
mt of the e- were the remains of an old English Fort
O & 468 vol" , , r . , _ . , N
Collection of M Mergui. ( Dahymple ). An old author,
Captain Hamilton (f), relates that in 1683
when the Jesuits persuaded the King of Siam to send
an Embassy to France, the same Ambassador came also
to London and settled a Treaty of Commerce for the
English who should trade in Siam. One of the first
objects of the French, when they established an in-
fluence at Siam in 1688, was to occupy Mergui, which
and Bangkok were considered as the two chief places
that open a passage into that Kingdom. A revolution
at Siam led to their also being driven out of Mergui
during the same year, but they did not evacuate the
fortress which they had constructed there, until after
they had stood a siege of 17 days with a force of ap-
parently less than 100 Europeans against an army
of 12,000 Siamese. The well in the Fort becoming
suddenly dry and water failing forced the French
Garrison to retire. I have not been able to ascertain
in what year the French again settled at Mergui, but
a respectable French Work ( Tabbe de la Croix’s Geog-
raphic Moderne ) gives the following account of their
Factory there in 1784 “ La Oompagnie Francis y a un
Comptoir, qui la met en etat de faire trafic des rubis,
et de toutes les pierreries de Pegu et d’Ava, aussi bien
que de I’etain, des bois de Charpente, et des ecailles de
Tortues.” At the time the Burmese took possession of
Tenasserim and Mergui in 1765 they appear to have
been well aware of the advantages of the port. The
Bishop of Tabracea writes in that year from Siam
“ Les Barmas apres s’etre rendus maitres de Mergey
allerent incontinent a J?6ftasserim, reduiserent cette
ville en cendres, et retournerent fortifier Mergey pour


ne plus I’abandonner et en faire le plus fameux port
de leur royaume.”
The French consider the port of Mergui as one of
the best and most secure in all the Indies, lying
between an island of that name and another
( Bandermacan ) to the west of it; and the} 7 describe
the town as situated on the North west point of the
island and very populous. Horsburgh relates that the
distance is about two leagues from the road to the town
of Mergui, and that vessels of moderate size, by taking
pilots can go over the bar into the river and anchor off
the Town in 5 fathoms water. “ Bullocks are not sold
here, but all other necessary refreshments may be ob-
tained by making some presents and entering into a
proper understanding with the Chiefs. Elephants
teeth, wax, wood, oil and other articles are exported
from hence in ships belonging to Merchants that reside
here, who, in general, are natives of Hindostan.
Water may be had in great plenty from a run in
Madramacan ( or Bandarmacan ) Island, also in Plan-
tein Island or in King’s Island Bay.” He further
states, “ King’s Island and most of the others are
inhabited, it is infested by tigers and snakes, and on it
and on the other islands, there is plenty of large
straight timber fit for masts and several parts of ship
building.” The principal productions of the district of
Mergui, according to Dr. Hamilton (gj are ambergrease,
the finest birds’ nests, biche de mer, cardamums, black
pepper, and betelnut; but at Mergui might further
be procured from Pegu and Ava, kutch, cotton, rice,
stick-lac, teak wood, hantal ( species of arsenic ) metals
and minerals ; and from Siam, tin and other metals,
sapan and other woods, stick-lac, peltry, rice, sugar,
elephants, elephants teeth, rhinoceros horns, benjamin,
salt-petre, salt and coffee, besides most of the valuable
commodities of China, of Cochin China, and even of
Japan to which skins and feathers were formerly taken
in large quantities from Siam by the Dutch and


(H) Turpin’s history of
Siam in vol. 9th of Pinkerton’s
Collection of Voyages.
Chinese. Colonel Franklin learnt that the greater part
of the birds’ nests found in the Mergui Archipelaga
are bought on the spot by the Malays, so that the
King’s only is brought to Rangoon and either con-
sumed by the Royal Family &c. or exported by the
way of Quantong. He also understood that most of
the Salt Fish and Blachong consumed in Ava are
taken from Tavoy and Mergui, while in the time of
Dalrymple, the commodities in chief demand at Mergui
were salt, iron, tobacco and Masulipatam chintzes.
Provisions were extremely plentiful and cheap, a dozen
or 20 fowls might be bought for a tical, fish were very
fine and equally cheap, and rice might be had for 12
pagodas per Gance when its price on the Coromandel
Coast was generally above 80 and sometimes even 80
pagodas per Gance. Turpin relates, that quantities of
pearls may be fished in the Isles of Mergui where they
are found of a fine water, perfectly round and the size
of a pea ; but that neither the Siamese nor the Bur-
mese have ever disclosed the whole source of this
wealth, fearful that their tyrants might oblige them to
labour gratuitously in this troublesome fishery ; that
no countiy in the universe produces finer elephants
than are to be found in Siam, the larger being as much
as 12 feet high ; that these animals form the greatest
sources of the King of Siam’s wealth, and that for-
merly, there was scarcely a year without at least 50
of them being sold at Mergui to the merchants who
came there from the Coast of Coromandel to trade in
them and who brought in exchange the finest linens and
stuffs from Bengal, Surat and Persia. He further
relates, that in the Province of Tenasserim, birds
of Paradise are sometimes found, and at Mergui
story of nightingales which are supposed to have
f Pinkerton’s t) een imported from Europe, (h)
: Voyages.
My friend Captain Robert Scott of Penang has
kindly communicated to me some letters and accounts
belonging to the estate of that well known Eastern


trader Mr. James Scott, in which I find, that whilst
Mr, S. was residing at Quedah during the year 1781,
2, 3, and 4 before our occupation of Penang, he
conducted a considerable trade with both Mergui and
Tavoy. The Portuguese vessels on their return from
China touched at Quedah and furnished him with Paw
Silk and coarse China ware, and in addition to such
articles he appears to have sent to Mergui and Tavoy
large quantities of Betel nut, with some Bengal opium,
and Madras piece goods, exchanging them for birds’
nests, tin, cardamums, elephants teeth, rhinoceros
horns, dried buffalo beef (for the Malays) and deer
and rhinoceros Skins. Mr. Scott had a small vessel
in employ between Quedah and the Coast of Tenasserim,
and I observe on one occasion, in October 1782, when
the vessel was bound to Mergui, her Commander found
five French vessels there and passed on to Tavoy.
The great impediment to commerce at that time
proceeded from the Governors of Tavoy and Mergui
being the principal traders themselves and buying
up the produce of those places for their own vessels.
A Mr. Reeves appears then to have been Shahbunder
at Mergui, to whom and to the “ Reverend Father
Padre Jaze Yigaria apostolica ” Mr. Scott’s
consignments were made.
Martaban was conquered by a Burmah King of
Pegu in 1545. The Siamese laid it waste in 1600,
but they never appear to have held long possession of
that place, for we find that it had a King of its own in
1604. In 1616 the King of Siam appears to have
offered the Port of Martaban to the Portugueze, yet a
King of Pegu settled his Court there in 1661, in order
to have his forces near the borders of Siam. Since the
last mentioned date, Martaban seems to have continued
under Pegu or Ava ; and with respect to Ye, as it is
known to have formed a part of the ancient kingdom
of Pegu, we may presume that it always followed the
fate of Martaban. The proper natives of these two
places, Dr. Hamilton learnt, were Talian or Mon. most


(i ) See page 223 Vol. Ist
of Dalrymple’sOriental Reper-
tory for a Copy of the Treaty-
Sec also page 115 of the same
■work for the terms on which
the King of Tavoy offered the
English an establishment in
Country in 1752.
of whom have retired to Siam, and are no doubt
anxious to recover the land of their Fathers.
The ancient kingdom of Pegu is described by old
European authors as having extended to the South-
ward as far only as Lat: 14°, and Tavoy, which it
conquered in 1614, was its frontier town for some time,
and afterwards, until the Burmese Empire was estab-
lished, the same place became the frontier town of the
Siamese in this direction. Hence there is every reason
to believe that at or near Tavoy it will not be difficult
to ascertain the existence of an eligible boundary.
The proper natives of Tavoy are well known to be
of an entirely different race from those of Martaban
and Ye. Jose a native Portugueze formerly Shahbun-
der of Bassein, whom I knew at Penang as one of the
Burmese Envoys to Ccchin China, and who was taken
at Tavoy, informed me when I visited him at Fort Wil-
liam, where he is now a prisoner that the inhabitants
of Martaban and Ye are Peguers, but that those of
Tavoy and Mergui are a mixed race, Arracanese,
Siamese and Burmese, the first being in his opinion
the original stock. This information may perhaps
be considered as supported by the following facts.
Arracan we are told, at one time extended its conquests
far to the Southward and took possession of Pegu,
although how long it kept possession of that Kingdom
does not appear, and Coll. Symes mentions, that the
Yomasor Yas, a race occupying a district to the west
of Ava, between it and Arracan, speak the language of
Tavoy.
It is true that Tavoy seems to have been an
independent principality in 1757 when Alompra
engaged us by Treaty to give aid to the Burmese
223 voi. ist against the King of that place (i).
ental Roper- • 1 '
tH© Treaty— .13 lit Coll* 11108 tllllllvS tllclt it OW6d its
Bf the same transitory independence to the Wars
»s on which
offered the that raged between the greater powers.
>ushment in Or perhaps, we then, following the


(k) Hamilton’s new ac-
count of the East Indies page
432 Vol. 8 of Pinkerton’s Col-
lection of Voyages.
example of the Portuguese, gave the title of King to
the Siamese Governor of the place; for it is well
known that they gave that title to the Governors of
certain places, who hold them by hereditary right, as
Tenasserim, Porselauck, Pipeh and the like ; and that
they conferred on the King of Siam the title of
Emperor according to the notion of the Spaniards who
think that Style due to Kings who have other Kings
for their vassals. It may be here mentioned also,
that the King:: of Siam, as the authors of the Universal
History surmise, always reckon as their tributaries
those States which have at any time been so. Whether
Queda of late years bore that relation to her, is certainly
a point of fact which ought to be proved from history
rather than argument. In 1614 we found that the
Portuguese destroyed the old city ot Queda. Abbe
Choisy in 1686 learnt that the King of Quedah was
tributary to the King of Siam, and La Loubdre reports
the same a few years after ; yet Captain Hamilton in
1720 found the Country independent, as he observes “ it
was many years tributary to Siam, but in the long
Pegu War it threw off the yoke.” At what date
the yoke was replaced, I have not been able to
s new ac- discover, (k)
Indies page
icrton’s coi- To return to Tavoy. Horsburgh
states that that place, in time of.war is
much frequented by French privateers when in want
of wood and water, that the distance of the town from
the usual place of anchorage is 8 or 9 leagues and that
there are in the river many islands and banks, with
various depths in the channel from to 4 fathoms.
When the Burmese took possession ofSiaminl767
the Governor of Tavoy believing that the Bishop of
Tabraca could be made serviceable to them in engaging
the French to visit Tavoy and Mergui, made the Bishop
return with him to Tavoy and the following is an
account of the journey, “Apres dix jours de navigation
on arriva le 16 Juin a I’endroit oil il fallait quitter les
bateaux. L’Eveque resta la jusqu’au 23 du raois. Lo


Chemiu de terre fat beaucoup plus penible, car outre
qu’il n’y a pas un seul village, ce ne sont que des mon-
tagnes escarpees et boisees, des vallees pleines de
bone, avec une riviere a passer et a repasser, soit
"a gue soit sur deux bambous, quand elle* trop pro-
fonde. L’Eveqne aimoit souvent mieux aller a la
nage sur son cheval que de se hazarder sur les
ponts de roseaux fragiles. Les animaux merae mour-
raient de la fatigue de taut de montees et de descentes.
Le chemiu etuit .bien des endroit borde des
deux cotes de corps morts, et des nuees de mouches
fatiguoient les voyageurs lorsqu’ils se reposaient.
Le riz commencoit a raanquer, lorsqu’on arriva
bien fatigue aux environs de Tavoil le 6 de Juillet.”'
There are however two instances on record of the
Journey between the capital of Siam and Mergui, when
the French occupied it, having been made in 10 days (1)
and on one of these occasions the party consisted of
prisoners in chains escorted by a detachment of Siamese
Soldiers. If Riply also, as I suspect, is another name
for Puchpuri there must have been at one time a car-
riage road from the Gulf of Siam to Mergui, for in a
letter from the Bishop of Tabraca from Siam in 1761,
we find the following passage ; “ J’ai envoye M. Martin
( a Merguy ). II alia jusqu’a Riply on Ton a coutume de
quitter les bateaux, et y attouchait* inutilement les
charettes pendant trois semaines.”
Tavoy Island (m) the late Mr. Gibson informed me
is the most productive of the Tenasserira Archipelago
in Birds’ nests and at Doneel Island to the Southward
there is a valuable pearl bank. Dr. Hamilton ac-
quainted us, that the tin of Tavoy is reckoned very-
fine ; that the mines are situated in a large hill on the
great central ridge of mountains, called Sakana, and
four days journey by land South and Bast from the
City of Tavoy, and that one branch of the Tinnan or
Tenasserim river springs from the vicinity of these
mines. If the plan of the boundary line to the north
of Mergui as suggested in the foregoing Memoir, be


<n) see His
Tracts.
( o } Pure silver or Saw has
four per cent alloy & is 2 per
cent below Sicca Standard &
100 Tickals of it weighing 142
Sa. Rs, were coined into Sa.
Bs. 134.3.6 Flowered Silver
or Roucence has 10 P. Ct. & is
8 Pr. Ct. below Sicca Standard
& 100 Ticals of itS wg. 142 Sa.
Rs. were coined into Sa. Rs,
126.8.4. 25 per Ct. Silver on
Rha. Chai na Keat Khai, has
40 per Ct. alloy & is 38 pr. Ct.
below Sicca Standard, & 100
Ticals of itweighing 142 St. Rs.
were coined into Sa. Rs. 91.
(p) Mr. S’s manu-
scripts. (q ) Gross weight is
ordinarily reckoned 365 lb.
per 100 vlss. Franklin.
adopted, we may perhaps find it practicable to make
that line include these mines as well as a portion of the
neighbouring Forest of Sapan Wood. Dalrymple
states that in Tavoy there is a gold mine also which
was reported in his time to be valuable. Colonel
Franklin (n) learnt that the price of tin at Tavoy wa s
from 40 to 50 Ticals per 100 Yiss, but that the metal
sold at Rangoon from 100 to 120 Ticals per 100 Yiss
or 21 Rupees 14 as. 11 p. for Bengal Maund. He also
states that the King of Ava provides for his children,
supports his household and his Ministers &c. not by
Tunkmahs on the Revenue, but by direct grants of
Territory, privileges of markets, or of levying imposts
&c.; that his Majesty’s direct revenues arise from the
tribute of the Chobwas, by the produce of the Crown
lands, mines, exports and imports; and his unsettled
revenues arise from confiscation, escheats, fines, dona-
tions &c. &c. most of the revenues are collected in
Kind, stored in magazines and converted into cash
according to circumstances. The tribute of the
Chobwas and duties on some particular articles, as
cotton, are paid in bullion. He further states, that
the Collector of the land revenue at Rangoon, remitted
to his Majesty annually for the whole Province of
Henzawaddy about 50,000 Ticals, and the Collector of
ror saw has g ea Customs 1,50,000 Ticals and that
*& Tavoy yielded an annual Revenue of
weighing 142 3Q 5 000 Ticals Flowered Silver or Sa.
Hs. 37 206(o), and Mergui about 40,000
10 p. ct. &is Ticals, or Sa. Rs. 49,608. Mr. James
wg*T»2*s*a. Scott(p) is advised by the Commander of
into sa. Rs. one of his vessels from Tavoy in January
It' 1783, that 40 or 50,000 Yiss or about
is 38 pr. ct. 1200(q) peculs of tin could be had there
ing 142 st rs. annually, and that Betel nut was in very
o sa. rs. 9i. great demand and produced from 35 to
P ' s 3 m ® nu 40 ticals per 100 Yiss.
ss weiaht is 1


It may be suggested that Mergui is scarcely to be
called an Island separated as it is from the main land
by a river only, and that King’s Island therefore
would perhaps be a more eligible site for an}’ Factory
which we may desire to settle in this cpiarter. But
there is one great objection to the latter Island. We
should have to incur a very heavy expense before it
could be cleared and populated to the same extent as
Mergui already is.
The important object of our retaining Mergui will
of course be to revive the ancient commerce which was
conducted with Siam through this channel, first by the
Portuguese and afterwards by the French. Opening
this passage, and restoring this old and almost forgotten
road into the rich kingdom of Siam, will be an enter-
prise of that nature of which it has been well observed,
its very reputation is capable of producing advantages,
of which no conception could have been formed before
the event which produced them (r). There is nothing
that will be so popular in England, or so likely to
prove a compensation to us for all the tr’ouble and ex-
pence of the present war, as the establishment of a
sCommercial Post in the vicinity of the Burman and
Siamese Dominions. The Commercial and Manufactur-
ing Community at home will hail such a measure with
the greatest satisfaction. Penang and Singapore may
be cited as instances of the facility, security and
extraordinary stimulus and improvement which the
establishment of such Emporia afford to our trade. A
Port of our own will be free from all those arbitrary
exactions, fees of office, privileges of pre-emption and
other petty obstructions by which the Siamese and
Burmese render all trade with them difficult and
precarious. It will, as has been done at Penang and
Singapore, concentrate and encourage the trade of the
natives and afford a secure depot and mart through
which the manufactures of England and British India
may be dispensed among the surrounding nations
whose means for making returns to us are known


to equal the state* which they possess for our com-
modities. With respect to Siam it has long been
said, that it is not the poverty of the soil which
relaxes commercial industry there—many obstacles
are opposed to the strangers making a fortune,
the frequent revolutions of this kingdom overturn es-
tablishments begun with the greatest success. The
Government not sufficiently acquainted with its own
interests, fetter the merchants by fixing at their will
the prices of merchandize. The King, the master of
trade, is the only one who buys from the stranger, as
he is the only one who sells him the productions of
the Country. This insolent despot imposes arbitrary
taxes which shut the entrance of his ports to the
Vessels of India and Europe. But a trifling militia
would be sufficient to extricate foreign merchants from
dependence on the Monarch. It would be easy to
erect a fort, which would soon become formidable by its
numerous defenders, who would there take refuse from
... i
the voracity of their oppressors. The inhabitants
would place their families and most precious effects in
it. Neighbouring kings would seek the alliance of
such a Colony, which would become useful to them. by
exchanging their superfluities for articles of luxury
and comfort, (s)
Captain Cox’s observations also with respect to the
Burmese is equally true of the Siamese. “Itis a farce
to talk of treaties with this people in the present state
of their information, for their ignorance of their real
interests is only to be equalled by their pride and pre-
sumption ; and unless I can open their eyes to their
own interests in the first instance and impress them
with a respectful awe of the English power in the
second, my remaining here ( Capital of Ava ) will only
expose the British character to degradation and subject
my Employers to unnecessary expence.” (t) The only
mode of ensuring the attention of the Court of
Siam to such points will be by presents. You are


never welcome to any creature belonging to it with-
out a present, and even the poor missionaries
have found the necessity of complying with this
established etiquette. One of them writes to
Europe from Siam. 1770 : “II faut ensuite, pour nos
succes, les moyens de faire quelque presens au
nouveau Roi et aux Mandarins. Telle est la necessity
de ces moyens qu’un g rand du pays futil * Re vos in-
times amis, ne feroit pas la moindre demarche pour
nous obligor, si auparavant il avoit reyu quelque
cadeau. Cette coutume a meme passe en proverbe
chez eux.” What has very lately been said of the
Cochin Chinese may also with little variation be ap-
plied to the Siamese. No abrupt change is to be
looked for in the commercial habits of any nation.
The slow and certain operation of neighbouring good
example together with the immense advantage of a
free communication with an adjacent English set-
tlement are perhaps the only possible methods of im-
proving the bigoted habits and uncourteous manners
of the Siamese, and of giving a stimulus to their trade,
far exceeding what can be looked for from any com-
mercial treaties however favorable.
(Signed) 11. BURNEY—Captain Poll. Agenti
to the Siamese States.
Penang Bth July 1825.


To
JOHN ANDERSON Esquire
Acting Secretary to Government,
Sir,
1 have the honor to enclose for the information of
the Honorable the Governor in Council, a letter*
from the Commander of the Honorable Company’s
Schooner Zephyr, transmitting one * from the Com-
mander ol the Hired Schooner Commerce, reporting
the departure of 100 Siamese Prahus from Kedah bound
to the Northward.
I have &ca.
(Signed) A. D. MAINGY
Supt. of Point Wellesley
Point Wellesley
16tli July 1825.


TRANSLATION of a letter from the principal
Minister of the King ot Siam addressed to the Officer
Commanding at Mergui.
Uika Muha Sena Buddee Maha Nagara Meeoo
Leenee uktur, rahus (sic.) addressed the following letter
to the Commanding Officer Commanding at Mergui for
the information of himself and the various subordinate
authorities placed under Ipm in that Province by the-
English Government.
It is not unknown to that distinguished officer
that the Six Individuals whom he deputed with letters
to the Court of Siam were intercepted in their route
and conducted back to Mergui Munmuldar of Chown-
pown ( sic ), who on being honored with an interview
with the said officer solemnly promised that no future
aggression should be committed to interrupt the friend-
ship that has hitherto subsisted between the two
nations, and that on the Munmuldars return to his
district he violated the promise which he had thus
made with the Commanding officer, who, to punish
th is misconduct, sent a force.into his country, where
an engagement ensuing, Six of the Munmuldar's boats
together with 145 prisoners were captured and sent to
Mergui, and that although it was evident that the
Munmildar acted in this matter from his own authority
alone, He the Commanding Officer assured himself of
the fact by enquiry of the captives whom, after hearing
their statement, he ordered to be confined.
The Minister of the Siamese Court is nevertheless
hopeful that in consideration of the amity and friend-
ship which has hitherto subsisted between the two
Nations the Commanding Officer at Mergui will release
the Captives so detained and that altho’ it be confessed
that the aggression originated in the Ummildar by his
FORT WILLIAM 16th September 1825


Seizure of the Subjects of the Mergui Province, yet
for the sake of perpetuating and confirming the pre-
sent relations of amity, it is hoped that the wishes ot
the Minister will meet his consideration.
It was with infinite satisfaction that the Court ot
Siam heard the intelligence of the Capture by the
English of the Provinces of Mergui, Tennaserim and
Tavoy with which Provinces it is now hoped the door
of communication will always in future be kept open.
To find the Country of a people against whom the
the Siamese nation entertains an antient and in-
veterate hatred to be subjected to the authority of the
English was of course source of exultation.
In conseqence of a requisition made from
Seehierpoor * for the aid of His Majesty’s troops a
large army was organized and prepared by Muha Pura
for that purpose and altho’ we awaited further in-
structions of the English Government regarding them
no further communication was received.
At this juncture from the recent decease of His
Majesty and the consequent ferment it has excited
among the Urnmaldars of these dominions, as also
from the setting in of the Monsoon our troops have
been prevented forming a junction with the English,
but on the termination of the monsoon a numerous
army will be ready for co-operation and will act con-
formably to the orders they may receive from the
British authority, and to which no opposition will be
offered in marching to whatever quarter they may be
directed to proceed in aid of the complete subjugation
of the Burmese dominions.
The Chowkies throughout the Siamese dominions
have been enjoined to offer no interruption to the
egress of all subjects of the British Government and
whenever it may suit the views of the English to


request the aid of the troops of these dominions they*
will be pleased to dispatch an emissary for that pur-
pose and as the most peremptory orders have been
issued (to the subordinate authorities ) throughout
our dominions to give intimation the moment they
hear of the approach of such emissary, no delay will
arise in the wishes of the Brigadier General being
made known to our Court.
In former times when Martaban, Tavoy, Mergui
and Tennasserim were dependencies of these domini-
ons uninterrupted intercourse was enjoyed by the
Byots of the respective Countries who were connected
by the ties of kindred and friendship. But this co-
mmunication has been long since prevented by the
hostility and enmity of the Burmese, an impediment
that will no longer exist now that these provinces
are subjected to the British authorities.
In regard to the Ummildar (we hope it will be
considered) that the impropriety of his conduct in
ill treating the ryots of the British Government,
entirely originated with himself, and indeed the
Siamese Court were totally ignorant of the Circums-
tance.
His own attempts at justification when awak-
ened to a sense of his misconduct were submitted
to His Majesty’s Ministers as follows.
That with a view of reconnoitering he proceeded
with his men towards the Countries bordering on the
provinces of Mergui, Tavoy and Tennasserim, that he
had not proceeded far when he fell in with certain
individuals belonging to the English provinces, who
were desirous that he himself and his Men should
return with them to their Commanding Officer, that in
consequence he accompanied them to the Head
Quarters of their Commanding Officer who received
him with Civility and attention, that after receiving
his dismissal he proceeded on his way to his own dis


trict where he encountered several rj'ots who had fled
the provinces of the English from terror of their Arms
and that as many of them had friends and relations in
Siam they willingly joined him, the rest he acknow -
ledges were rather compelled than persuaded to follow
him ; that before he reached home he found himself
pursued by 40 armed boats detached by the English at
whose approach the people of his district were greatly
alarmed, that he himself considering the amicable re-
lations that subsisted between the two Nations was at
a loss to conjecture the reason of their then approach-
ing him. This uncertainty however soon ceased to
perplex his mind for on nearer approach of the boats
they commenced a heavy fire of musquetry and soon
succeeded in making captives of 115 men of his
Majesty’s subjects. With those that remained he now-
sought refuge in an adjacent island, but the English
still continuing their pursuit and attack he was obliged
for his own defence and the preservation of his men to
return their fire ; that not being able to oppose any
efficient resistance, he retired to his own district, when
he repaired to His Majesty’s Court accompanied by
those whom he stated to have willingly joined his train.
On receiving this statement of the Mammuldar
his Majesty’s Ministers made every enquiry of those
whom he alleged to be his voluntary follow-ers as to
its truth or falsehood. The reply which they received
to their interrogatories w r as that many were willing
followers of the Ummildar and others were brought by
compulsion.
At this period one of their vessels which have
been long accustomed to carry on trade has arrived
from Seehasson at this port, commanded by Captain
Ewanjon who has brought a letter stating the wishes
of the English that he should be furnished for their
service with Horses, Elephants, Bullocks and Buffa-
loes to be sent to Rangoon and that grain would
hereafter be required for the same purpose.


The news of the intended cooperation of our
forces seemed to have given the English at Sehapoor
great delight.
To prevent future interruption of the amity and
friendship which now happily subsists between us we
have thought proper to punish the high misde-
meanour of our Ummildar originating in folly and
cfficiousness by imprisonment and removal from
the Government of his district, and have strictly
enjoined the person whom we have appointed his
successor to peimit all ryots belonging to the Pro-
vinces of Kergui, Tenasserim and Tavoy who may
appear to be in the Town ot Chawnpoun to depart
at their own free will and pleasure and we have
every confidence that this example, strengthened by
the consideration of that friendship which subsists
between the two nations will be followed by that
distinguished officer who will be pleased to dismiss
all such persons as he may have detained captives,
a measure which will ensure the stability and per-
manency of our respective amicable relations.
In order to remove all doubt and uncertainty
of the dismissal or detention of such ryots of the
English Provinces as may yet remain in these
dominions and whom the Kngiish may be desirous of
reclaiming it would be advisable that some one be
deputed to receive them and from whom a [note*]
of their delivery may be taken by the Officer of our
Government, And for the past offences of the Um-
muldar we trust a pardon will be conceded.
( A true Translation from the Persian )
(Signed) G. MORMAN.


FORT WILLIAM 7th October 1825.
Ordered that the following translations of two
Siamese letters to the address of Colonel Smith, en-
closed in Sir A, Campbell’s private dispatches dated
6th Angust recorded on the proceedings of Government
in this Department on the 26th of the same month
No. 19 to 23 be here recorded.
Translation of a Siamese letter to Colonel Smith.
Translation of a letter from the Siamese General to
the address of Colonel Smith.
Jo Prah, General of the Golden Country of See
Ayoktharah Durrawuddy Maha Eah tha Eah Eah Maha
Eah-Eaja Ega Maha Senah dee Pudee Zeree Zaali
Hunnaroon (sic). acquaints Colonel Smith, Commander
of the English Army at Martaban, that his letter has
reached him by the hands of Mou Bah ( Town Clerk )
Cheragee ( Secretary ) and Jacatoon f Jemadar ) with
which he is quite satisfied, while deliberating on the
friendship that should subsist with the English, a.
messenger with a letter arrived from Eaga Maha Sinah
de Pudee Prime Minister of the Golden Country of See
Ayoktharah Durrawuddy requesting i should repair to
his presence immediately. [am now arrived. 1 daily
think of you and by the favor of God and cur King
we are determined to join the English to fight and
destroy the Burmese.
Jora Muthagee was ever willing to come into our
dominions. He, his family with Men and Women,
were apprehended by Chequa and Nacan and sent into
our Country of which circumstance I had not the
slightest knowledge till your letter was received ; the
above two persons are now arrived. I have made the
Minister acquainted with these circumstances and
forwarded your letter to him. When your letter was
read to the Minister, he approved highly of its con-


tents, and felt very happy, and said you are truly our*
friend and the friendship between the two kingdoms
should be cultivated.
The Minister having sent for Moil Eah Cherageo
and Jacatoon they arrived at See Ayoktharah
Durrawuddy in the year 1187 (1825) in the Month of
Xachoom (May) on the 18 of the Moon and having
replied to some desultory questions put to them by
the Minister, presents of Cloth and Ungurkah were
made to them and orders given that they be hospitably
entertained.
Jora Muthagee having begged for permission to
return to his Country at the time I received your
letter and was deliberating on its contents, the
Minister promulgated an order that the people
brought away from Martaban had his full consent
to return to their Country with their family or re-
main in his. A number of people that had settled
in our Country long while ago, were anxious to meet
their relations in Martaban and many that had
settled at Martaban were as anxious to meet their
relations in our Country but as the Burmese and we
were at war they were apprehensive of taking any
steps to gratify their longings.
When our Force was Stockaded at Atharan I
sent a letter to you and the Rangoon General ( Sir
Archibald Campbell) Congratulating you on the
successes you have met with over the Burmese and
our willingness to assist you. We are very happy
of these results as through them a free intercourse
between the inhabitants of our Country and yours
will subsist, and our friendship thereby become
strongly cemented. A number of people from their
inclination have settled in our Country, while in
some instances the Petty Chiefs and General by im-
position and force brought others over, with the
expectation of being promoted by the Minister
to a higher post or remunerated. Under such


circumstances, an order Las been promulgated that
those people wishing to remain may do so or return
to their own Country as they please and such as
have been inclined to return I have placed under
charge of Mou Eah to see them safe to their destina-
tion, amounting in all Men and Women to 79 souls,
and with Cheragee Mou Meah Chan, who with his
family have lived here a long time, 26 more, making
a total including old men, women, children
and men 105 souls. I also send by this opportunity
a letter from the Minister which contains all he
would wish to convey to you. You must not make
yourself uneasy on any points. We are here and
ready to assist you.
Martaban is now in the possession of the
English. See Ayoktharah Durrawuddy and that
place must become one, a free intercourse must
subsist between the two Countries, and commerce
allowed to be carried on in both, without limit or
reserve. Ever since ray return from the Stockade
of Atharau my thoughts (day and night ) have
always been about you. I have been thinking to
join your army but we cannot avail ourselves of this
wish till the month of September or October; I will
make every endeavour personally accompanied by
my army to join you and fight and destroy the
Burmese at the time above specified. Our wishes
accord with yours, and we will fight to conquer.
After this the English and the Siamese will remain
sincere friends and the Countries united by the
bond of friendship. Formerly See Ayoktharah
Durrawuddy was on terms of amity with the Eng-
lish but now that amity is become more strongly
cemented and our intercourse therefore with each
other must be more general and unrestricted
( A true Translation )
(Signed) A. ROWLAND,


Translation of a Siamese letter to Colonel Smith.
Translation of a letter from the Prime Minister
of Siam to the address of Colonel Smith.
EG A MAH A Sina de pudee Amachee {sic) (prime
Minister ) of the Golden Country of See Ayoktharah
Durrawuddy sends this letter to Colonel Smith Com-
mander of the English Army at Martaban. In the
year 1186 ( 1824) in the month of Natho (December)
by the favor of our fortunate King whose virtues
are unequalled and who has rigorously kept the 10
Commandments and at whose Golden feet I am
always prostrate to attend to his commands, have
ordered Jo Prah Maha Yeotha eay Mali eay Rajah
Egah Maha Sina de pudee-Seeree Zaah Roonnaroon
with his army to join and assist the English to fight
and totally annihilate the Burmese. On his way he
encamped at Camboorey and took great precaution
to guard every point accessible by the enemy. He
forwarded a letter to me from thence conveying the
happy intelligence of the English having taken
possession of Martaban and other Countries of the
Burmese. The Burmese have all along been our
enemy and I have derived great satisfaction from
this tidings. From such a happy result Martaban
and See Ayoktharah Durrawuddy must now be con-
sidered as one, we must be friendly with one another
and a free intercourse should subsist between both
its inhabitants. I was glad to hear also after Jo
Prah had arrived at Atharan, he sent intelligence
of it to Colonel Smith and communicated our
willingness to assist him in joining to destroy the
Burmese and that our proceedings were approved
of by the Rangoon General ( Sir Archibald
Campbell). Whilst we were greeting on the happy
tidings of your successes over the Burmese our mirth
was changed into deep sorrow. We have had


the misfortune to receive the intelligence of the
death of our beloved King who, tired with the cares
and troubles of this world, has left it to join the
Angels of Heaven. It becomes the duty of all his
Ministers, Chiefs, Officers of rank, vassals &ca,
to pay the last obsequies to his remains, and the
year 1187 (1825) and the month of Kachoon (May}
has been fixed on for the funeral, at which time it
is expected we will have all assembled in the Golden
Country and, after taking the oath of allegiance to
the newly installed King, the funeral rites will be
performed. Owing to these preparations I was
induced to order Jo Prah back immediately to Durra-
wuddy. Just as my letter reached him he was on
the eve of returning with his army as he was suffer-
ing severely from indisposition. Jo Prah is arrived
at Durrawuddy.
I liave investigated the case of Jora Muthagea
and the men and women apprehended by the Petty
General and Cheque. Some of these people have
their relations in our Country, but perhaps the Petty
General and Cheque brought them over with the
expectation of being promoted to a higher post, or
remunerated by the King. Martaban formerly
belonged to the Burmese and was at war with the
Siamese. A number of people of the former place
having relations in our Country were anxious to
come over to them, but were fearful of taking the
step apprehending detection, but now Martaban and
Durrawuddy must be considered one, the road is
clear, and nothing can impede a free intercourse
with each other as the English and ourselves are on
the most friendly terms. I have therefore issued
orders that those who are willing to remain in my
Country have my permission to do so, or retire from
it, as they please. Jora Mouthagee and others who
were brought over have received every attention from
me with respect to their eatables and clothing.


Jo Prah our General having learnt by the way*
of Penang that the army at Rangoon was suffering 1
much from illness acquainted me with the circum-
stance. I received the intelligence with a great deal
of grief and concern, yet I did not place much credit
on the report owing to the distance from which the
report reached him. I sent an order however to
General Jo Prah to learn whether the report was
correct or not. Beenneah Yeathana Say Beenneah
Suttee Sehung Beenah Seehah Rajah Thameeng like
Nayean were deputed to accompany Jora Mutheegee
with a letter to obtain the truth of the story
Our General Jo Prah sent me information that
Mou yea had arrived with 30 followers at Manwa with
a letter from Colonel Smith. Hearing of this intelli-
gence I felt extremely happy and which letter I have
since received. Having maturely deliberated on the
contents of the letter I issued a promulgation that
Jo rah Muthagee with the men and women that were
apprehended and brought over had my permission to
return or remain in my country as it suited their own.
inclinations best, and such as have been inclined to
return I have placed under charge of Mou eah to see
them safe to their destination, amounting in all, men
and women, to 79 souls, and with Cheeragee Mou-
meah Chan who with his family have lived here a
long time 26 more, making a total including old men,
women children and men 105 souls. All this I have
done because the English and ourselves are friends
and we will join you and destroy the Burmese race
entirely. A number of people that have settled here for
a long time from Moon Tavoy and Tenasserim. to these
also have I had my orders communicated, and I have
left it to their option either to remain in our Country
or return to theirs. Being on such friendly terms
with you, I send this letter. So soon as the rainy
season is over our General Jo Prah will immediately join
you to fight and disperse the Burmese as he is already


an possession of my commands to do so. When the
Burmese are conquered tranquillity and peace wil
reign on all sides and our friendship will increase day
by day. I send two letters, one written in the
Siamese, the other in the Burmese language. The
contents of both are the same.
( A true Translation )
(Signed) A. HOWLAND,


FORT WILLIAM 27th April 1826.
Extracts from the Journal of an Excursion up the
Sanloon River by Lieut. Janies Low, August 1825.
******
There is reason to believe that plates of gold or
of silver have been placed below the foundations of
most of the Antie'nt Pagodas, commemorating the
period at which they were built, for I find in a Siam-
ese History of Ligore, which was once an indefinite
principality, that this practice was adhered to on the
occasion of the founding of the first Buddhist temple
there.
* . * * * # *
We returned about Nine o’clock to Ka tha. The
Siamese occupied it seems a stockade just opposite to
this village about two months previous to the period
of my visit. They had however destroyed it on their
departure, a few logs only remaining. The people did
not complain of having been harshly treated by the
Detachment which consisted of three hundred men.
It was evidently the policy of the Siamese to conciliate
the people from whom they should have to obtain
supplies in the event of their gaining possession of
the province which they have all along hoped might
be evacuated for their advantage expressly by the
British.
******
We cleared the Ka looivj soon Island where the
river acquires nearly its former breadth (is South of
its South point) Kammamoon a very rooky Island lies
close above this place, we kept on its north side where
is the widest channel. * * * We soon passed
the next Island which is small and nob so rocky as
that we had just left. A large stockade’ here came in


view...This Stockaded Post is called the Kayet or
Kiet, a name applied also to the Island lying off it. It
stands on the angle formed by the junction of
Yoonzalen Khyaung and the main river, here termed
1100100 by the Kareans and Salo-en by the Mons.
The post has been well chosen being defended on
two sides by these rivers and on the others by jungle
and a deep foss. It is an oblong of one hundred
and Ninety Yards by eighty seven composed of
upright beams ten feet high, with a bamboo stage
inside for the defenders to fire from. The Siamese
stormed this port on the breaking out of the late war
with Ava. The garrison consisted of about three
hundred Mons in the employment of the Martaban
Burman Governor. It was stated to me that the
Siamese swam across the river to invest it and they
succeeded in capturing its defenders. Ido not wonder
at this last circumstance if the latter were not
provided with better means of holding out than what
they seemed to have had, for along the whole works
inside were placed in regular order at intervals of ten
and twelve paces baskets full of large stones or
pebbles, evidently intended to be thrown at assailants.
The Siamese burned the gateway on their evacuating
the Post. *****
( Signed ) JAMES LOW
Martaban
August 1825.


Bengal Secret
and Political
Consultations,
Vol. 333.
Secret Dept.
No. 10.
Letter in duplicate of 3d of
June giving cover to Trans-
lations in the Portuguese Lan-
guage of my Credentials, &c.
Letter of 6lh June en-
closing Copies of dispatches
from the Rest, at Singapore
of 20th & 30th April & from
Brigr. Cenl. Sir A. Campbell of
10th May.
Letter of 7th June en-
closin'; Copy of a dispatch
rom Penang Govt, of 14th May.
FORT WILLIAM 16th September 1825.
Secret and Confidential
Political Department.
To G. Swinton, Esqr,
Secy, to Govt. Fort William.
Sir,
The Honble. the Governor having determined
upon taking up a vessel for the purpose of conveying
early information to the Right Honble. the Governor
General in Council of the present satisfactory state of
affairs at the Settlement, I do myself the honor to
acknowledge the receipt of your several dispatches
enumerated in the margin. I regret that in conse-
cate of 3d of quence of these dispatches having been
tuglcsVian- enclosed in the Post office Mails for this
cntiais,&c. Island, I did not receive them until my
h June en- , , , , «
f dispatches arrival here, or have an opportunity ot
it Singapore replying to them whilst I was in the
ampbe M°of vicinity of Fort William.
th June en- With reference to Brigr. Genl. Sir A.
t. of Campbell’s dispatch, I am happy to re-
port to you, that 1 have received intelligence via
Pungah, and the intelligence has been just confirmed
by the Governor of Ligore, that the Pya of Chimpohun
(Sanpan) by whom the depredations reported by Major
Frith were committed, has been disgraced by the King
of Siam, who is said to have entirely disapproved of
that Pya’s conduct.
On the subject of the dispatch from the Penang
Government it affords me much satisfaction to have it
in my power to lay before the Right Honble. the
Governor General in Council the enclosed copy of a
letter which I have just addressed to the Honble. the
Governor of this Island. From a personal acquaintance


with the Chief of Ligore, and from having visited
most parts of the Queda Territory, I was led to believe
and report to this Government that His Highness was
too well aware of our superior means and resources
ever to meditate an attack on this Island, that his
preparations were much exaggerated as to their extent,
that they were directed against Salangore, that the
best and most easy mode of preventing him from
subduing that Malay State was by this Government at
once prohibiting him and that if His Majesty could be
induced to give me a meeting, I indulged every hope
of being able to remove the distrust and suspicion with
which he has been filled against us by certain interested
Malays, who were actively employed in exciting-
similar unfriendly feelings on our part against His
Highness. Let me then do nwself the common justice
to beg you will solicit His Lordship in Council to com-
pare the enclosed report with those which 1 had
previously the honor to submit to this Government on
the 28th of January and 2d of April,
It is my desire and inclination as much as my
duty, to speak with every sentiment of respect and
veneration of the Honble. the Governor of .this Island,
from whom I have had the happiness of receiving
much personal kindness and consideration. But
during my absence at Calcutta the old report, which
was tried in 1822, of the Chief of Ligore proposing
to attack this Island, was again brought here. The
Honble. the Governor had not witnessed the ex-
travagance to which the false report of 1822 had
led many Gentlemen, nor had he resided a sufficient
time in this quarter of India to feel himself justified
in acting entirely upon his own knowledge and
judgment of the different characters of our inhabitants.
also, local feelings and impressions
so common in a small Settlement led to my reports
being put aside and discredited, and to new informa-
tion being received from Malay Spies and informers.


The Malays are as quick in discovering, and as in
genious in inventing, as the natives of Hindoostan,
whatever their European masters would like to hear.
Previous to my reports some opinions, most unfavorable
towards the character and designs of the Chief of
Ligore, had been given and published, and hence
every tale that was now brought confirmatory of those
opinions and in refutation of mine, was implicitly
received and reported to the Honble. the Governor
without the common precaution being taken of enquir-
ing, how such a poor and vagabond set of informers
could have learnt the secret views and Sentiments of
the Governor of Ligore. The only part of my reports to
which any attention was paid was that wherein I recom-
mended the Chief of Ligore being at once prohibited
against proceeding to Salangore ; and this measure, con-
ducted as it was-by my friend Mr. Maingy under the
immediate direction of the Honble. the Governor, was
attended with all the success that d had anticipated.
On my arrival here on the Bth of July I found sc
strong an excitation against the Chief of Ligore that 1
was obliged to reserve my opinions to myself, and to
solicit only that I might be allowed to inform His
Highness of my return. A principal officer, however,
told me, that my visiting Quedah was quite useless, and
cautioned me further to take care that His Highness
did not poison me. The enclose.! report details the
result of my visit, and f solicit only to add to it one or
two points for the particular information of the
Supreme Government.
The force and number of His Highness’s Boats
have been much magnified, and every thing else
that I saw or heard at Quedah proved to me, that
our Malay spies and informers had grossly exag-
gerated and misrepresented. As one proof of the
contemptible condition of His Highness’s Squadron
I will only mention, that when his state Boat came
along side of the vessel on board of which I had
proceeded to Quedah Roads, I found five of the


Crew which may be presumed to have consisted of
select men, lying at the bottom of the Boat in a
deplorable State of Sea Sickness while it was full
20 Minutes before any one of the rest could ascend
the side of my vessel. It was also maintained here,
that the force which the Chief of Ligore had collect-
ed was far too powerful to be intended merely
against Salangore, but it was forgotten that the
Rajah of Salangore had two years ago succeeded in
destroying 40 of His Highness’s boats at one blow,
and had invited to his assistance a set of very bold
and desperate pirates from the Southward, and it is
worthy of remark that our own Agent, when now
deputed to that quarter and in the character even of
a friend, finds it necessary to proceed with two
armed vessels, some gun boats and an escort of 2o
Sepoys.
I have considered it my duty to bring the above
particulars under the notice of the Right llonble.
the Governor General in Council in this manner,
with no view to injure or depreciate the character of
any public officer, but in order to submit to His
Lordship in Council, the necessity of repeating the
injunctions which were conveyed in the dispatch to
this Government under date the 19th of November
directing the Governor of Ligore to be treated with
a becoming respect and consideration and to submit
also the expediency of calling upon the officers of
this Government to divest themselves of all previous
preposessions of partizanship towards the Malays
and of improper animosity against the Chief of
Ligore and to receive the Agreement which His
Highness has now concluded in a spirit of frankness
and liberality.
I have &c.
( Signed ) H. BURNEY Captain
Poll. A gent to the Siamese States
Prince of Wales Island
10th August 1525.


FORT WILLIAM 27th April 1823.
To Captain Burney
Poll. Agent to the Siamese States.
Sir,
I am directed by the Honorable the Governor
in Council to acknowledge the receipt of your letter
under date the 30th August and to apprize you that
the necessary orders have been issued to the Com-
manding Officer of the Troops for holding in
readiness an escort of one Native Officer, 2 Haval-
dars, 2 Naiks, 2 Drummers and 30 Sepoys from the
25th Regt. under the command of a steady and
experienced officer, and for the Master Attendant to
engage, in communication with you, a suitable vessel
for the conveyance to Bankok of yourself and escort
and suit, for which also the commissariat has been
instructed to prepare a supply of provisions and
water equal to their consumption for four months.
The limited nature of the Medical Establish-
ment of this Presidency prevents the Governor in
Council acceding to your request with respect to Mr.
Asst. Surgeon Henderson and it is proposed there-
fore that Mr. Sub Assistt Surgeon Harris [should be
placed] under your orders.
The Governor in Council is not aware of any
necessity of adding to the instructions with which
you have already been furnished as far as the
British Interests in this quarter are concerned.
They may be reduced to the four following heads.
Ist. The restoration of the King of Quedah.
2nd. The withdrawal of the Siamese from Perak.
3rd. The prevention of further conquests by
the Siamese over the Malayan States on either side


of the Peninsula. The consequent maintenance of
the independence of those states and exclusion of the
Siamese powers from contact with the .British
Settlements in the straits and
4thly. The establishment of more free inter-
course and trade with the interior and eastern
side of the Malayan Peninsula by means of the
overland routes and numerous rivers flowing into
the sea in the neighbourhood of Penang.
For all other points, I am directed to refer you
to Para. 10 to 18 of the dispatch from the Supreme
Government of the JBth May with the instructions
to yourself from that authority. You will be
furnished from the Honble. the Governor with ap-
propriate letters from himself to the Chow Pya
Klang or Foreign Minister at Hankok and to such
other Native Chiefs whose places of residence
may be in your route to Bankolc, and you are request-
ed to provide yourself with a suitable address from
the King, of Quedah to the King of Siam and his
minister.
Under present circumstances the probable neces-
sity of another Campaign against Ava and the
consideration of the many points of discussion likely
to arise in the settlement of frontiers and actual
interchange of territories with Siam seem to point
out in strong terms the expediency of your proceed-
ing to Bankok with all possible expedition, so as to
afford as a British accredited Agent at the Court
an early medium of direct communication with it.
You will not fail however to touch at Salingapoor*
and communicate most freely and unreservedly on
all points of your Mission with the Besident of
that Settlement.
There is a point to which the Governor in Coun-
cil desires your early attention at Bankok, the
opening of an amicable and free intercourse between


our acquisitions on the Coast of Tenasserim and the
contiguous Siamese Posts by the adoption of which
measure it is hoped that the depredations of the
Siamese Chiefs in that neighbourhood would be
precluded in future, or arrangements made for the
restitution of the unfortunate Burmese captives taken
away from the provinces of Mergui and Tavoy.
I have &c.
(Signed) J. R. CUPP AGE
Actg. Secy, to Government.
Fort Cornwallis
The 10th September 1825.


FORT WILLIAM 16th September 1825.
To Captain Burney
Political Agent to the Siamese States.
SIR,
I am directed to acknowledge the receipt of
your dispatch of the 10th Ultimo* submitting copies
of your report to the Governor of Prince of Wales
Island, of your conferences with the Rajah of
Ligore and of the provisional Treaty concluded with
that Chief.
2. The Governor General in Council having
received from the Government of Prince of Wales
Island copies of the above mentioned documents and
expressed his sentiments on the subject of your
proceedings in his reply to the dispatch from that
Government, I am directed to transmit you a Copy
of His Lordship in Council’s letter* for your in-
formation, and to repeat to you, in this direct form,
the very high sense which Government entertains of
the ability, judgment and address displayed by you
on the occasion in question, and the confident ex-
pectation of Ris Lordship in Council that the
friendly understanding which you have established
with the Rajah of Ligore will contribute in an
essential degree to a satisfactory arrangement of ail
depending questions with the Court of Siam to
which you are about to proceed.
I have &ca.
(Signed) G. SWINTON
Secy, to Govt.
Fort William
16th Septr. 1825.


FORT WILLIAM 27th April 1826.
To
The Honorable
EGBERT FULLERTON
Governor &ca. &ca. &ca.
Honble. Sir,
"X - * -ir -)f-
On the day following [ dOth Sept. 1825 ] I as-
sumed charge of the Civil and Political administra-
tion of the Province of Mergui. * * *
My attention was at once directed to the deten-
tion ot‘ the Siamese prisoners, the particulars of
which have already been detailed in Major Frith’s
letter to Sir A. Campbell dated 27th March. I
visited these unfortunate men and found them in
irons, and I regret to add that the alarm which has
prevailed and still prevails at Mergui regarding the
Siamese prevented my having their irons struck off.
This had once been done by Major Frith, but it.
occasioned so much apprehension, that at night all
the women left their houses, and many families
removed without the stockade.
It is but justice to the officers formerly com-
manding at Mergui to shite that the irons are so
o o
light as scarcely to prove of any inconvenience. I
have endeavoured to contribute to the comfort of
the prisoners by directing them to be regularly sup-
plied with fish, salt, &ca , and by allowing a certain
number to enjoy exercise and to be taken every day
to the Tank without the stockade for the purpose of
enjoying a bath.
Captain Collins,on’s report of the confinement
of some Siamese Envoys does not entirely prove
correct. The men alluded to by the Officer belong


to the party now detained and were allowed to go to
Bankok in view of obtaining the return of the
Burmese carried away by the Pla of Chimpohun and
thereby their own release. They assert that the
Burmese will be sent back as soon as the rains are
over, and the circumstance of the return of these
men, and of the Pia of Chimpohun being disgraced,
leads me to hope suck will be the case. I have
however deemed it my duty to facilitate this measuie
as much as possible, convinced that it will materially
tend to restore tranquillity and give confidence, and
have therefore released ten of the prisoners and
placed them in charge of one of the followers of the
Chow Pia of Ligore who accompanied me from
Kedah and with instructions to take them to Ban-
kok. I communicated on this subject with the
Envoy to the Court of Siam, and Enclosures
Numbers 3 and 4* are Copies of letters forwarded to
the Pia Klang and Chow Pia of Ligore. I have also
availed myself of this opportunity to address the
different Siamese Chiefs residing near our frontier,
and now transmit copy of my letter.
In would be impossible to describe the distress
and misery occasioned by the depredations of the
Siamese since our Conquest of Mergui. Not a village
a few miles distant from the stockade has escaped,
and at least one thousand six hundred (1,600) of the
inhabitants have been carried away. Every village
in the interior is deserted, and scarcely a trading
boat is seen, but this can excite no surprise when it
is considered they have been deprived of their arms,
and then left without protection, thus almost invit-
ing the Siamese to repeat their incursions.
* * * * » *
Moandown (a hill so called) forms the southern
boundary of the Province of Tenasserim and of course
that of Mergui. It is distant about sixty miles from


Tenasserim ; the nearest inhabited Barman village
to this hill is called Sinkoan in whose vicinity are
two large ? the one standing without the boundary
of the Burmese the other within Siamese Territories.
It is stated that this boundary is well known to
both parties and from all I can learn the hill of
Moan down must be very nearly in the same parallel
of latitude as Pakchan or Charwa, defined by Captain
Burney as the boundary of the Province of Mergui.
The range of hills that divide the Isthmus and
form the Eastern boundary of the Province are dis-
tant about seventy-five miles in a direct course from
Tavoy. These hills are well known to both nations
as forming the boundary between them, and the
Siamese have stockades a few hours journey within
their frontiers in this quarter.
* •# * * *
The Country in the immediate neighbourhood
of the Burmese and Siamese boundaries is entirely
uncultivated for some days’ journey on both sides,
owing no doubt to the continued depredations carried
on by these nations. I cannot learn that there is
any communication from Mergui direct to its eastern
frontier, the whole is represented as Hills covered
with jungle and Forest.
# * # * *
I have &c.
(Signed) A. D. MAINGY.
Hired Prig Minerva
Tavoy River 13 th
October 1825.


After Compliments.
Mr. Maingy, appointed British Oommisioner for
the Provinces of Tavoy and Mergui, has to acquaint
his Friend the Baja Klang of his arrival at Mergui.
The Tan Chow Pya of Ligore will have already
informed the Pya {Clang that the Provinces of Mer-
gui and Tavoy are now placed under the direction
and orders of the Honorable the Governor of Prince
of Wales Island. Mr. Maingy has found no less
than one hundred and twenty two Siamese in con-
finement here, followers of the Pya of Chimpohun
who wantonly and unprovoked and forcibly carried
away from the Province no less than four hundred
Burmese who were then considered British Subjects,
the province of Mergui being at that period in pos-
session of the Fnglish.
Mr. Maingy however, anxious of evincing how
desirous the English nation is of preserving the most
intimate and friendly relations with the Siamese has
lost no time in dispatching to Bankok five of the
principal Siamese with five attendants at present
detained here. My Tuan, one of the followers of
the Tan Chow Pya of Ligore has ta'<en charge of
them, and to him Mr. Maingy refers his friend the
Pya Klang for all information. It is well known that
independent of the four hundred Burmese forcibly
carried away on one occasion by the Pya of Chimpo-
hun at i least J one thousand two hundred more of
the inhabitants of the Provinces of Mergui and
Tavoy have been taken away at different times by
different Siamese Chiefs, and as these one thousand
six hundred persons were actually British subjects
in consequence of the Provinces of Mergui and
Tavoy having been conquered by the English, I beg
FORT WILLIAM! 27th April 1826.


my friend will not delay their return but forward
them to Mergui or Tavoy, and on their arrival at
either of these places the Siamese now here shall be
released and every assistance afforded them to return
to their own Country.
Captain Henry Burney, Envoy to the Court of
Siam, will no doubt have assured the Pya Klang
that the return of the Siamese is certain as soon as
the Burmese are restored to the English authorities
either at Mergui or Tavoy. Any arrangement
Captain Henry Rurney may enter into regarding
the Siamese at Mergui Mr. Maingy faithfully pro-
mises to fulfil.
Mr. Maingy sends his friend the Pya Klang a.
piece of green cloth.
( True Copy )
( Signed) A, D. MAINGY
Commissioner for the Pro-
vinces of Mergui and Tavoy,


No. 4.
After Compliments.
Mr. Maingy now sends My Tuan with his followers
to his friend the Tan Chow Pya of Ligore who will
communicate all particulars regarding the voyage and
of all that he has seen at Mergui. Mr. Maingy,
anxious of evincing how desirous the English nation
is of maintaining the most friendly relations with the
Siamese, has lost no time in dispatching to Bankok
My Tuan and with him five of the principal Siamese
Chiefs with five of their attendants who have been
detained here some months and who were taken at the
time the Pia of Chimpohun, in defiance of the friend-
ship existing between the English and Siamese,
entered the Province of Mergui and carried away a
great Number of Burmese who were at that period
British subjects, owing to the conquest of the Province
by the English. The Siamese now detained here
admit that the Pya of Chimpohun on one occasion only
carried off upwards of four hundred inhabitants of the
Province of Mergui and besides these at least one
thousand two hundred more of the inhabitants of the
provinces of Mergui and Tavoy have been taken away
by different Siamese Chiefs.
Mr. Maingy therefore most strongly requests his
Friend the Tan Chow Pya of Ligore to use his utmost
endeavours to obtain the immediate return of the one
thousand six hundred Burmese now British 1 subjects,
all of whom are detained by different Siamese Chiefs.
My Tuan will inform the Chow Pya that Mr.
Maingy has greatly contributed to the comfort of the
Siamese now at Mergui, all of whom will be im-
mediately given up the moment the Burmese now
British subjects arrive at Mergui or Tavoy. If the
Chow Pya really wishes to evince the sincerity of his
friendship towards the English nation, he can give no
better proof of it than by the release of the one


thousand six hundred Burmese, now British subjects
detained in the Territories under the dominion of the
King of Siam.
Mr. Maingy sends his friend the Chow Bya a piece
of Green Cloth.
( True Copy )
(Signed) A. D. MAINGY
Commissioner for the
Provinces of Mergui
and Tavoy.


No. 5.
Mr. Maingy, appointed British Commissioner
for the Provinces of Mergui and Tavoy, has to
apprize and all other Siamese officers,
that the English nation is at war against the King of
Ava and his arrogant ministers and not against the
people of Siam, and that the Bight Honorable the
Governor General of British India has resolved upon
affording the inhabitants of Mergui and 'iavoya
Civil Government under the direction of the Honble.
the Governor of Prince of Wales Island, who has
therefor deputed Mr. Maingy to take charge of the
territory in this neighbourhood lately conquered
from the King of Ava by the British arms.
The English nation is particularly desirous of
preserving the most friendly relations with the
Siamese and Mr. Maingy has been especially in-
structed to respect the lives and property of all
Siamese subjects with whom he may meet. Mr.
Maingy has for many years lived in the Eastern
Countries, is well acquainted with the manners and
customs of the Siamese, Chinese and Burmans and
Malays, and is on terms of friendship with the
Siamese Chow Pya of Ligore. He will therefore
know how to conduct any correspondence with the
Siamese Chiefs in the neighbourhood and so point
out to them what means are necessary towards
establishing the most friendly and intimate relations
between the English and Siamese. Mr. Maingy
begs to assure all Siamese Officers and subjects that
so long as they treat the Burmese of Mergui and Tav-
oy with that consideration to which they are now
entitled as British subjects, the most liberal and
unrestricted trade and intercourse will be allowed
and encouraged between the Provinces of Mergui
and Tavoy and the contiguous Siamese Territories.
But several Siamese from ignorance of the nature and
extent of the British authority in these provinces have


made incursions and depredations against tlie Bur—
mese. Mr. Maingy most particularly cautions all
Siamese officers against the repetition of such un-
friendly acts, and he warns all Siamese officers who
may have taken possession of an}’' places which be-
longed to the Provinces surrendered to the English
to retire from such places, as they value and fear
the serious displeasure of the King of Siam, to whom
an Envoy is now on his way from the Right Honor-
able the Governor General of British India. Mr.
Maingy invites the neighbouring Siamese Chiefs to
open a friendly correspondence with him on all
matters connected with the Burmese War, or with
the affairs of these Provinces.
( True Copy )
(Signed) A. D. MAINGX Commissr.
for the Provinces of Mergui & Tavoy.


FORT WILLIAM 14th Octr. 1825
To
-I. E. CUPP AGE Esqr.
Acting Secretary of Prince of Wales’ Island.
Sir,
I am directed to acknowledge the receipt of your
dispatch of the 3rd ultimo, enclosing a Translation of
a letter from the Kajah of Ligore to the Honorable the
Governor of Penang and reporting the transmission of
a Box of Presents from the Rajah for the Governor
General,
2. In reply lam directed to state the satisfaction
which the Governor General in Council derives from
these testimonies of the desire of the Rajah of Ligore
to cultivate the friendship and good will of the British
Government, a disposition which His Lordship in
Council is assured will be met in the same spirit by
the Government of Prince of Wales’ Island and en-
couraged as much as possible.
3. The Governor General in Council will take an
early opportunity of making a suitable return of pre-
sents to the Rajah which will be forwarded from the
Persian Department.
I have &ca.
( Signed ) GEO, BWINTOX
Secy, to the Govt.
Fort William
14th Octr. 1825.


FORT WILLIAM 27th April 1826
A DESCRIPTION
of the Route from Tavoy to the top of the Naye
daung Pass on the Siamese Frontier.
The proximity of the Siamese Dominions to the
lately conquered Burman Province of Tavoy induced
me in February last to undertake a journey to the
Eastern Frontier of the latter; And as it had been
affirmed that there was a Military road in the direction
of Che up poch, that route was preferred.
******
About a mile from the foot of this Pass stood the
famous stockade of Che up poeh on the banks of a
small stream.
The Tavoyers depended on its garrison to keep
the Siamese in check in that quarter. Its site had
been very injudiciously chosen, for it is in the middle
of a plain, only a few hundred yards wide and quite
commanded by the heights on the east [ and ] west.
It lies now in ruins but numerous spikes were found
concealed amongst the long grass.
* * * * * *
At five miles two furlongs from Wa gong we
came upon a spot termed Wa-Chup-pen-ma celebrated
on account of a battle once fought there betwixt the
Burmans and Siamese.
******
There is not a house near this Pass ; so soon as
some observations had been made and it was evident that
the Siamese had no party here with which an amicable
conference could be held or any Post close to the Pass,
X hoisted the British Flag on the space betwixt the two
piles of stones, and saluted it with three rounds of


musketry from ray party, when it was hauled down
and a red handkerchief hoisted in its place to shew
that we had been there, and that a British Officer had
ascertained the boundary betwixt Tavoy and the
Siamese Dominions. Considering also the uncertainty
of affairs at this Crisis, a stone on which I rudely
engraved B. E. I. Coy. was buried on the spot.
As I had no authority from the Honorable the
Governor in Council to pass the frontier it became ray
duty to return, but with an adequate supply of pro-
visions we might have reached the Capital of Siam
in eight days from this point.
A Paper was left in a bottle on the Siamese pile
purporting that a British Officer had been there and
had been disappointed in not meeting on friendly
terms some Siamese Officer.
******
( Signed ) JAMES LOW.
Penang
Ist November 1825,


Mr. Maingy
■‘; • )
To G. Swinton Esqre.
Secy, to the Govt. Poll. Dept.
FORT WILLIAM
Sir,
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of
your letters of the IGfch Septr. the one transmitting
under an open cover the duplicate of a letter to the
Honorable Mr. Fullerton, the other enclosing a trans-
lation of a letter from the Chief Minister of the King
of Siam.
On my arrival at Mergui 1113" immediate attention
was directed to the Siamese who are there in confine-
ment, and I lost no time in addressing the Chief
Minister of the King of Siam, the Chow Pya of Ligoro
and Captain Burney regarding their release and the
return of the Burmese inhabitants forcibly carried
away by the Pya of Chimpohun. The letter addressed
to Captain Burney and received via Rangoon shall be
forwarded to that officer in the course of a few days as
I am making arrangements for ensuring a regular
communication between this place and Bankok.
I deem it my duty to transmit to you for the
information of the Right Honorable the Governor
General in Council copies of my reports from Mergui
and this place addressed to the Honorable the Governor
of Prince of Wales Island.
I have &c.
(Signed) A, D. MAINGY
Commissioner for the Provinces
of Mergui and Tavoy.
Tavoy
the Ist November 1825.
FORT WILLIAM 27th April 1825.


( Copies ) - -
Rangoon
30th Novi-. 1825.
Gfeo-: Swinton Esqre.
Secry. to Government
&c. &c ;
Calcutta.
Sir,
I have much pleasure in forwarding for the in-
formation of the Right Honorable The Governor
General in Council the enclosed Copies of highly satis-
factory letters from Captain Fenwick, Commanding at
Martaban, announcing the arrival of the Siamese army
under the command of the Roon Roon at that place,
and of their being in readiness to co-operate in any
manner their services may be wished with the British
army now serving in Ava.
I have &c.
( Signed ) W. SMELT
Lt. Col. and Brigr.
Going, Lower Provinces.


To
Brigadier Smelt
Coming, Lower Provinces.
Sir,
I have this day been honored with your queries
of the 4th Instant.
Since ray arrival here 1 have endeavoured to
trace out any remains of the race of the Pegu Royal
Family but in vain—it is asserted that the Rown Rown
is of the noblest blood of the Taliens, and that the
sudden recall of the Siamese army last year was on
account of a charge brought against him of wishing to
establish an independent Government here. In the
event of it becoming desirable to establish an inde-
pendent Government, the Talien Zemindars of Marta-
ban would furnish from three to four thousand men,
and the means we possess of arming them in a superior
manner would give them a decided advantage over
their neighbours. The wealth they have accumulated
during their connection with us, renders them much
averse to the idea of returning under the Barman
Government. 1 may add that the Zemindars are
reported to have behaved well in the skirmishes they
had with the followers of the Ex Governor of this place.
I have reason to think that the Ex Governor
meditates a retreat from his stockade at Rangoon, in
the direction of Tongho.
I have &c.
(Signed) 110BT. FENWICK
Captn. 12th Ilegt.
Martaban
12th Novr. 182‘*.
(True Copy )
(Signed) W. Smelt.
Brigadier


Brigadier Smelt
Commg. at Rangoon.
My dear Sir,
I he Siamese Army have at length shewn them-
selves. Their advance of 200 men arrived yesterday
with six officers, accompanying our Zemindars and
bearing two letters of which I now enclose translations
(as well as the shortness of the time will permit) and
a copy of my letter to Sir A. as far as relates to the
Rown Rown. Every thing seems as favorable as can
be desired, and almost to anticipate the General’s
wishes on that score, and 1 have not the least doubt
but any plan of the hind alluded to in your last may
be carried into effect, with great ultimate advantage
to our interests. I shall by paying the utmost
attention to the Rown Rown prepare the way for
any proposal which it may be hereafter advisable to
make to him.
The messages he has sent confidentially by our
Zemindars shew the confidence he is inclined to place
in us and the great desire he has to settle again
in his Native Country, and from comparing all
circumstances, 1 see no reason to doubt his sincerity.
I am unable to give any answer to his letter, being
yet uncertain whether the war is continued or not.
I shall therefore not dispatch any one to him until I
can decidedly inform him how we stand with the
Burman Government.
The Ex Governor I imagine will move towards
Tongho when he hears of the arrival of the Siamese.
I shall send out a strong party under our Zemindars
to favor the escape of a number of people he detains
by keeping their wives and children with him when
he, moves. These people have promised to come over
if they can find an opportunity, I am under no


apprehension of his attacking me, as /I will- have
notice of any movement lie may attempt and 1 know
my strength to be superior to any tiling he could effect.
{ Signed ) E. FENWICK.
Martaban
18th Novr. 1825.


To
Brigadier General
Sir A. Campbell K. C. B.
Commanding the Forces.
Sir,
I have the honor to forward two letters from the
Bown Rown received this day. Six Talien officers of
the Siamese army brought them accompanied by our
Zemindars, who took Lieutenant Colonel Conroy’s
letters to the Siamese Capital.
Ist. From these letters a very large Siamese force
may be expected in a few days. I am informed that
the first division will be composed entirely of Taliens
under the command of the Kown Rown and is estimated
-at 10,000, A Siamese force is reported to follow
under the command of the Prince of the Royal family.
2nd. From the private letter from the Rown Rown
and from the confidential message sent by our Zemin-
dars, there can be no doubt but that the Taliens, now
in Siam, would gladly embrace an opportunity of
returning to their native country and asserting their
independence. As the Rown Rown has been so long
at the head of so large a portion of this people, it is a
fortunate circumstance that his sentiments should fur-
nish an opportunity of gaining him over to our interests
at this juncture. The Taliens in the Siamese Country
are estimated above 100,000 souls, and it may be pre-
sumed that the Siamese Government will not be averse
to see the Pegu Goverraent, under a fiiendly Power,
rather than it should revert to their enemies.
3rd. 1 shall use my utmost exertions to conci-
liate the Rown Rown and afford every assistance to
the r lalien Division in which our Talien Zemindars are
ready to assist, as they look on these people as their
relations.
( A true Copy )
( Signed ) R. FENWICK
17th Novr. 1825.


Translation of a letter received from the Rown
Rown 17th November 1825.
After recapitulation of Colonel Conroy’s [ letter j
and Compliments, states that a large force from Siam
will soon arrive at Martaban and proceed to attack the
Burmese, but he is very anxious to be assured that
provisions may be supplied to his army, as being ob-
liged to inarch a great distance by land, they are
unable to bring a sufficient supply with them ; all the
surrounding country being under British protection
they cannot take subsistence without permission, and
as the Martaban country intervenes between the place
where the Ex-Governor of Martaban now is and the
army, it will be requisite to provide provisions in the
event of it being necessary to attack him. The Rown
Rown is very anxious on account of provisions, the
Siamese army being so numerous. That he is much
vexed at the delay which has taken place but should
Martaban be given up to the Siamese Government
there will be no difficulty and every assistance will be
given in prosecuting the war ; that little resistance
can be made by the Burmese to the united forces. In
furtherance of the above the Rown Rown was ordered
to assemble an army at Camboory.
That in the event of advancing to Ava, Mergui,
Tavoy and Martaban being in the hands of the English,,
the Siamese could apprehend no danger on that
Frontier.
That an army might be sent to attack the Burmese
also by the route of Temay Siam, That this letter is
written by order of the Council. That if Tavoy and
M artaban be given over to the Siamese Government
the united forces will easily reduce the Burmese.
( Requests a speedy answer.*)
Dated 11th of the Moon Tha den Kymat 1187.
L. S.


Translation of the private letter from the Rowu
Rown and said by the Talien who delivered it, to
be his true sentiments, the public letter being written
by order of the Siamese Government.
After recapitulation of Colonel Conroy’s letter,
he states that according to his desire a very large
Siamese Porce will now come 5 that as IVtartaban is
the native country of the Taliens ho hopes that subsis-
tence will be given them ; that he is very anxious to
leave the Siamese Country and requests that every-
thing may be done to further his departure from that
Country ; that he will advance in any direction neces-
sary and take care of the route by Pegue and Tongha.
Begs to have early intelligence.
L. S.


To
Brigadier Smelt
Commanding Lower Provinces.
Sir,
I have the honor to report the operations of the
enemy in this vicinity. Oudinah, the Ex Governor of
Martaban, detached 800 men to attack the Zemindars
of Iveikala and Bengyd Zurein ; after some resistance
these Chiefs were taken prisoners and put to death,
their towns burnt and people dispersed. About 500
have sought our protection and numbers are hourly
arriving. These Zemindars had never accepted our
protection, but Oudinah had found out their intentions
of doing so, and made this a plea for attacking them.
Oudinah now gives out his intention of moving
in this direction. 1 have found it necessary to
strengthen the Zemindar of Zengy by serving out
some of the repaired arms left here by Colonel Smith,
and b} r sending the advance of the Siamese (200) to
his assistance ; I shall also send 500 Siamese, who are
hourly expected, in the same direction. As the
Zengay people are all Taliens and aie well armed, I
have no doubt but they will be able to repulse any
attempts Oudinah can make. 1 have apprehended
a few Burman inhabitants of this place who were in
correspondence with Oudinah and had promised to
fire the town when he should approach.
You may rely that I shall neglect nothing in the
defence of the district.
I have &ca.
(Signed) ROBT. FENWICK
Martaban
27th Novr. 182b.
(true Copy—Sd.)
W. SMELT
(True Copies)
(Signed) GEO : BWINTON
Secy, to the Govt.


Resolutions of the Commisioners in Pegu and Ava.
Camp Miaday 19th Deer. 1825.
The Senior Commissioner having laid before the
Commission an original letter to his address from the
Rown Rown Commanding a Talien army ot 10,000
men in the service of the King of Siam, and a letter,
also to his address, from the Minister of Siam accom-
panying the army, forwarded by Captain Fenwick in
Civil charge of the Province of Martaban, it was re-
solved that an answer to the following effect, in the
Burmese Language, be forwarded under the joint
signature ot the Commissioners, to the General in
Chief of the Siamese Army.
“ The Commissioners of the British Government
in India for the affairs of Pegu and Ava have received
a friendly letter from the Minister of Siam, and they
hear with great pleasure that the Rown Rown has
advanced with an army of 10,000 men to co-operate
with the English troops, and that a larger army is
about to advance for the same purpose. The Commis-
sioners understand from the letter under acknowledg-
ment the wishes of the Siamese Government with
respect to the Province of Mergui and Tavoy, and
knowing as they do the feelings of friendship which
the British Government in India entertain for the
King of Siam, and their strong desire to give proof of
that friendship by gratifying the wishes of his Majesty,
they do not doubt but that after the conclusion of
hostilities by the entire defeat of the Burmese, by the
united efforts of the British and Siamese arms, the
Governor General in Council will find means to afford
full satisfaction to his Siamese Majesty with respect to
the Provinces above mentioned,.
The Commissioners further desire to notify to the
Chief authorities with the Siamese army, that they
have sent Captain Williamson to confer with them
upon all matters mentioned in the letter hereby


acknowledged, and upon whatever subject may arise
to require discussion. He will also remain with the
army. Whatever agreement Captain Williamson may
make, the Commissioners will confirm, and they request
the Siamese Authorities will consider his words as the
words of the Commissioners. Instructions have been
issued to that officer upon all subjects, and if the
Siamese treat him with confidence, it is certain that the
friendship which now so happily exists between those
two great nations, the English and the Siamese, will
be continued, and so strengthened as to endure. If
the Siamese Authorities, on the part of their King,
will depute an officer to accompany the Head Quarters
of the British Arni} r , and communicate with the
Commissioners, he will be gladly received, and treated
with all due honor and respect.”
The Commissioners further resolved with reference
to the concluding paragraph of the above letter to the
Siamese Authorities, to appoint Captain Williamson of
the 3d Regiment Madras Light Infantry to be Deputy
Political Agent, on the part of the British Government
in India with the Authorities Commanding or accom-
panying the Siamese Army, that a copy of the fore-
«'oina < letter should be forwarded to him for his
o
information, together with full and explicit instructions
for his guidance in his communications with the
Siamese Generals or Ministers, and that he should be
directed to make the most regular and detailed reports
upon all political matters connected with such com-
munications, addressing the same to the Secretary
to the Commission.
The Commissioners resolved to recommend to the
Kifidit Honorable the Governor General in Council that
Captain Williamson’s allowances, in his political
capacity, should be fixed at Calcutta Sicca Rupee? 500
per Mensem, with additional travelling allowances at
the rate 6f Calcutta Sicca Rupees 300 per Mensem, to


enable him to accompany the Siamese Head Quarters
with ease and certainty and to maintain such a suite
and establishment as may give him weight and res-
pectability in the eyes of the officers of that Nation
with whom he will be placed in Communication.
* * * * * -ss.
By order of the Commissioners.,
( Signed ) ROSS D. MANGLES
Secy. Comraissrs. in Pegu
and Ava.


( Copy )
To
BRIGADIER SMELT
&c. &c. &c.
Sir,
I am directed to acknowledge the receipt of your
dispatch of tire 30th ultimo, submitting copies of letters
from Captain Fenwick, commanding at Martaban.
2. The communications from that quarter are
considered to be highly interesting and important, and
have induced the Governor General to address special
instructions to Major General Sir Archibald Campbell,
a copy of which is herewith transmitted for your
information.
3. You will of course be guided by the instruc-
tions which you will receive from Sir Archibald
Campbell with regard to the mode and extent in which
it may be deemed expedient to avail onrselves of
Siamese co-operation, but in the absence of any special
directions on that head, you will not fail to manifest
the most friendly disposition towards the Taken Chief,
and to turn him and his troops to the best account,
reporting to me for the information of Government the
general feeling of the Peguers towards him, and their
opinion and wishes with regard to his pretensions or
those of any of the ancient Taken race in his train, to
the throne of Pegue.
4. You will be cautious however, how you en-
courage the Taken force to enter the lower parts of
Pegue, as it would appear that it must depend upon
us wholly for supplies. The most desirable arrange-
ment appears to be that the force in question should
march upon Thongho, keeping on the left side of the
Pegu river until nearly opposite that fortress: but on
so important a subject the Governor General in


Council cannot doubt that you will have received
instructions from Sir Archibald Campbell, who must
possess the most correct local information, and be best
able to judge how and where to employ the Siamese
troops to the greatest advantage.
I have Ac.
( Signed ) GEO : SWINTON
Secy, to Govt.
FORT WILLIAM
29th Deer. 1825.
A True Copy
{ Signed ) Geo : Swinton
Secy, to Govt.


( Copy )
To,
11. D. MANGLES, Esqr.
Secretary to the Commission
in Pegue and Ava.
Sir,
i arrived here on the 11th inst. and 1 have now
the honor to acquaint you, for the information of the
Commissioners, that in consequence of the Siamese
army under the Rown Rovvn being still at a great
distance from this place, I have been under the
necessity of forwarding their letter to the Siamese
Authorities, seeing no prospect at present of delivering
it in person for a considerable time, as the Rown Rown,
it would appear, had not yet arrived on this side of
the Mhinj-gunv-gyue-toury range of hills, which divide
these provinces from Siam. I have addressed a letter
to him stating I have been sent by the Commissioners
to accompany his army on its march into the Pegu
territory, with the view of co-operating with the
British troops now there, and that I will take the
earliest opportunity of joining him after I have re-
ceived information of his having passed the mountains.
I have also communicated to him that every exertion
will be used by the officer in charge of the province of
Martaban to supply his army with grain, and that it
therefore becomes necessary for him to make known
to me without reserve, his intended movements on that
account, as well as to afford me an opportunity of
reporting the progress of his force to the General
Commanding the British troops in Ava.
There are at present about 200 of the Rown
Ilown’s Division here, 100 of them at Ahtram (to which
place from hence there is water communication) and
000 at Keuu-beng, about 0 marches beyond Ahtvan.


The main body consisting of about 5000 men is
encamped at Khadung-seing ( about six marches from
Keun-leng) where they remain awaiting the result
of the communication made by the Minister to the
Commissioners through the officer Commanding this
place.
Since writing the above, an official communication
from Brigadier Smelt with some extracts of letter from
Malone have reached this, conveying intelligence of
negotiation having been commenced between the
Commissioners and the Burmese Authorities there,
which are likely to terminate in Peace. I have there-
fore dispatched another letter tp the Rown Rown
intimating the circumstances and requesting he will
remain on his present ground until further instructions
are received by me from Malone, and which will be
communicated to him with the least possible delay.
On second consideration I have intimated to the
Rown Rown the circumstances of the negotiations
going forward and that they will most likely end in
peace, and that he may either remain on his present
ground or move on towards this, at an easy rate, as
he thinks best,
1 have &c.
(Signed) W. WILLIAMSON
Captain
D. P, Agent.
Martaban
14th Jany. 1826.
(True Copies)
(Signed) GEO. SWINTON
Secy, to Govt.


Printed for ;private circulation.
THE
BURNEY PAPERS
Vol. 11.
PART 111.
(August 1825 to March 1825.)
Printed by order of the Vajiraiiana National Library.
BANGKOK
1911.




FORT CORNWALLIS—The 13 August 1825.
HEAD the following letter from the Political
Agent to the Siamese States, transmiting Copies of
Correspondence with the Rajah of Ligore previous to
his visit to Kedah.
POLITICAL AGENT to SIAMESE STATES.
To
JOHN ANDERSON Esquire
Actg. Secy, to Government.
Sir,
In conformity to the desire conveyed by yon, I
beg to submit to the Honorable the Governor in
Council, translations of the Correspondence that passed,
between His Highness the Governor of Ligore and
myself previous to ray late visit to Queda, together
with the memorandum with which the Honorable the
Governor furnished me for ray guidance.
I have &c. &c.
( Signed ) El. BURNEY
Poll. Agent to the Siamese
States
I*. W. Island.
5 August 1825.


TRANSLATION of a letter addressed to His High-
ness the Governor ofLigor by Captain Burney Political
Agent to the Siamese States dated 13th July 1825.
After Compliments—l have to inform my friend
that I have visited Bengal, where 1 had the honor*
to see the Governor General and Gentlemen in high
authority—that I am now returned to Penang ap-
pointed an Agent to the Governor General and that I
have heard from Mr. Maingy, that my friend desires
to see me. Let my friend understand, that if he still
desires to see me and will tell me so, I shall be happy
to visit him. I have heard that there has lately been
some difference between the inhabitants of Penang and
my friend’s people, and if my friend be willing, I shall
be happy to relieve his mind, and assist to settle the
same, b}?- pointing out to him the road of friendship,
because an intimacy of long standing subsists between
my friend and myself.
A True Translation
( Signed ) H. BURNEY
8011. Agent to the Siamese States.


TRANSLATION of the Repty received to the
foregoing letter from His Highness the Governor of
Ligore on the 25 July 1825.
After Compliments—Let my friend understand
that I have received his Letter stating that he has
returned to Penang appointed an Agent to the
Governor General, and that he has heard from Mr.
Maingy that I desired to see my friend, which is per-
fectly true. Some time ago I acquainted my friend
that I desired to come and see him at Quedah, but
my friend unexpectedly proceeded to Bengal, and
when I came I could not [see him]. Now my friend’s
letter is arrived in which I am informed that he is able
to meet me, of which I am exceedingly glad, because
I wish to consider of several matters friendly towards
the Governor General. But I wish to return home
quickly. Therefore I invite my friend to come soon,
and meet me at Queda without delay. And further,
if the Governor General desires to send Letters
to Siam, let my friend bring them with him
to Queda. I desire to consider of the road to friend-
ship and to improve, prolong and establish it. I
send China Loun with this letter, and when my
friend has understood its contents, I request he will
order China Loun to return quickly before him.
A True Translation
(Signed) H, BURNEY
Political Agent to the
Siamese States.
THE PRESIDENT lays before the Board the
following Translation of a letter to the Rajah of
Li gore, relative to deputing an Agent to Perak and
8a lan gore :


TO THE RAJAH OF LIGORE.
I have duly received the letter which my friend
lias sent to me by Captain Burney, and as my friend
has now given me a real proof of his desire to cultivate
friendship and alliance with the British Government 1
have to assure him that he will ever find me happy
and ready to treat my friend with respect and kindness,
and to permit his men and every other Siamese to visit
Penang and to hold intercourse and to trade with its
inhabitants without the least molestation. I have
determined upon immediately sending an Agent and
two strong Vessels to Perak and Salengore for the
purpose cf making such arrangements as will effectually
prevent disturbances between those States according
to the desire of my friend. Let my friend be under
no apprehension as to Rajah Hussein being allowed to
continue his depredations against Perak. The British
Government entertains no desire to occupy or govern
Perak or any other State near Penang, but it will
make it its duty to prevent the peace of neighbouring
States being disturbed from quarrels between them-
selves or between them and the Siamese. Peace and
Commerce are all the English Nation require.
The Agreement which my friend has concluded
with Captain Burney is very satisfactory to me
inasmuch as it will prevent all future discussion bet-
ween my friend and myself as well as all chance of
dispute between the Siamese and English. I shall be
most happy to forward this agreement to the governor
General without delay ; and to continue in the mean
time to cultivate the most friendly relations with
the Siamese with whom the English desire to live on
the most cordial footing ; I shall also from time to
time dispatch full accounts to my friend of the
nature and progress of the war in which the
.English are now engaged against the ancient enemies


of Slain, the Burmese, in order that my friend may
forward the same to His Master the King of Siam.
If my friend will send to me the Letter and presents
which he informed Captain Burney he desires to
transmit to the Governor General, I will take care and
forward them myself to His Lordship by the most safe
and speedy conveyance.
( Signed) R. FULLERTON
Governor,
. Bth August 1325.


THE PRESIDENT lays before the Board the
following’ Translation of letters to the Rajah of
Perak and Salengore, with Copy of the Commission
granted to Mr. Anderson.
TO THE RAJAH OF SALANGORE.
Letter
from the Honorable Robert Fullerton Esquire Gov-
ernor of Pulo Penang to the Rajah of Salangore.
This letter will be delivered to my friend by Mr.
John Anderson a Civil Servant of the Honorable
East India Company on this Establishment, who is
already acquainted with my friend and whom I
have deputed as my Agent for the purpose of endea-
vouring to adjust upon a sure and honorable basis
the differences now so unhappily subsisting between
my friend the Rajah of Perak and the Chow Pya of
Ligore.
Mr. Anderson will communicate with my friend
upon all points and I request that he may be re-
ceived with kindness and respect as an accredited
Envoy of the British Government.
It will be extremely satisfactory to me to learn
that my friend accedes readily to the proposals
which will be made to him on the part of my Agent,
by which the peace and prosperity of my friend’s
Country will be promoted, an end put to all mis-
understandings and Commerce will flourish.
Mr. Anderson will deliver some presents to my
friend as a mark of my esteem.
Dated 10 August 1825.
(Signed) R. FULLERTON
Governor.
Similar letter to Rajah of Perak.


COMMISSION.
Prince of Wales Island
10th August 1825.
BE IT KNOWN that I Robert Fullerton
Governor of Prince of Wales Island and its Depen-
dencies, have nominated and appointed JOHN
ANDERSON Esquire of the Honorable East India
Company’s Civil Service on the Establishment of
Pulo Penang to be my Agent to proceed to Perak
and Salangore and to negotiate with the Chiefs of
these States, so that the misunderstanding now so
unhappily prevailing in these Countries may be
settled and adjusted and peace and prosperity re-
established. I request therefore that all Rajahs and
Chiefs will receive this my Agent with respect and
attention as an accredited Agent of the English
Government.
( Signed ) R. FULLERTON
Governor.


READ the following Letter from Mr. Anderson.
MR. ANDERSON.
To W. E. FULLERTON Esquire.
Acting Depy. Secy, to Govt.
Sir,
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of
your letter of the Gth Instant acquainting me that the
Honorable the Governor in Council has been pleased
to require my services to proceed to Perak and Salangore
for the purpose of endeavouring to adjust certain
differences between the Chiefs of those States and the
Chow Pya of Li go re.
1 beg you will inform the Honorable the Governor
in Council that having now closed the dispatches for
England and Bengal, the necessary arrangements are
in progress for my quitting the harbour on Saturday
Morning the 13 Instant in prosecution of the duty
assigned to me.
I have this day delivered over charge of the
Offices of Accountant and Auditor and Accountant
General to the Court to Mr. Patullo.
I have Ac. &c.
(Signed) JOHN ANDERSON
Political Agent to Perak
and Salangore.


•READ the following letter from the Political
Agent to the Siamese States, applying for an
advance of 2,000 Dollars to be accounted for here-
after.
POLITICAL AGENT to the SIAMESE STATES.
P. W. Island 8 August 1825.
To
John Anderson Esquire
Actg. Secy, to Govt.
Sir,
I request you will do me the favor to solicit the
Honorable the Governor in Council to grant me an
advance of Spanish Dollars Two Thousand (2000) to
be accounted for when I next submit a regular
statement of my expenses. My late visit to Quedah,
as well as my proposed visit to the Coast of Tenas-
serim, has put me to several charges, and I am un-
w ill in o' to reduce the Amount of Cash with which
the Commissioner for Mergui and Tavoy may be
furnished.
I have &c. &c.
( Signed ) H. BURNEY Captn.
Poll. Agent to the Siamese
States.
THE SECRETARY reports that Capain Bur-
ney was informed that all advances must be obtained
from the Commissioner at Mergui, but that he was
authorized to draw his Personal Fay for the past
and present Month.
FORT CORNWALLIS-The 13 August 1825.


RECORDED the following dispatch to the Right-
Honorable the Governor General in Couilcil dated 4
Instant transmitting Copies of Captain Burney’s
Report of his recent proceedings at Quedah, together
with the Basis of a Treaty concluded by him.
To the Right Honorable
WILLIAM PITT LORD AMHERST
Governor General in Council
FORT WILLIAM.
My Lord,
We have been extremely desirous of addressing
your Lordship in Council in continuance of our
Dispatch of the 10th June last and of communicating
our proceedings and Negotiations with the Rajah
of Ligor with reference to his Armament at Kedah
which our duty led ns to watch with suitable caution
and corresponding preparations.
We have now the honor to transmit for your
Lordship’s information Copies of all the corres-
pondence which has since that period passed with
the Rajah of Ligore, and are happy to observe that
the remonstrances which our President made to that
Chief have Lad the effect of inducing him to relax
in his hostile intentions and subsequently of re-
moving from our vicinity a large portion of the
Forces which he had collected there.
It would appear however from the Corres-
pondence, that he had it in contemplation still to
persevere in an endeavour to move a force by land
across the Country to attack the state of Salengore
but even this point he has abandoned since the
return of Captain Barney and an interview which,
that officer has held with him.
The efficient measures which we had taken to
resist any meditated aggression and the display


*“• See Minute of
3 Aug. 1825 from
Factory Records,
Straits Settle-
ments, Vol. 102,
already sent.
of our Forces in his immediate vicinity have no
doubt tended to create in the mind of the Rajah of
Ligore a doubt of his means to extend his hostile
views to the Southern States. While therefore our
preparations added to our remonstrances have
tended to this favorable result and have afforded
time for the receipt of your Lordship’s Instructions
to us on the subject, the knowledge which he has
received of an expected re-inforcement of Troops for
this Presidency have tended to induce him to
pursue a different line of conduct and to relinquish
the contemplated enterprize to the Southward.
Captain Burney having returned to this 1 re-
sidency on the 9 July with your Lordship’s Commis-
sion and Instructions for a Mission to Bangkok our
President considered the state of affairs with the
Rajah of Ligore to admit of that officer availing
himself of an invitation from the Rajah to proceed
to Kedah and our President accordingly directed
him to proceed there and to avail himself of any
favorable opportunity of negotiating with him on the
various points at Issue, more particularly in respect
to our mediation for the adjustment of diffeiences
between him and the Rajah of Salengore. Ihe
Instructions to Captain Burney are enclosed with
this dispatch ; and we have the honor also to submit
a Copy of that Officer’s Report as well as of the
provisional Treaty which he has concluded with the
Rajah of Ligore.
We beg leave to submit at the same time a Copy
f of our President’s Minute* on the subject of the
' above-mentioned report and Treaty and to observe
” that the sentiments contained therein fully coincide
with our united views and opinions. Consistently
therewith it is our intention immediately to dispatch
an Agent to Salengore in the hope that the Rajah
of that place may be at once induced to fulfil the
expectations which we have a right to demand of


him, with a view to the final settlement, as far as
this Government is concerned, of the points wherein
our mediation and Interference may he essential.
The removal of Rajah Hussein from the Perak River
is a point equally important to our own Interests as
it is suitable to the views of the Rajah of Ligore, as
that person is known to be a leader of a Gang of
Pirates whose removal would under any circums-
tances have become indispensible for the safe
navigation of the Straits by the numerous small
vessels carrying on Trade.
The payment of small sums of money demanded
from the Rajah of Salengore cannot be considered as
burthensome or harsh upon that Chief, if upon enquiry
it should appear to us that he has been concerned in
seizing and destroying the Siamese Boats as repre-
sented. The Security that will be derived by him
against all future aggression will we trust induce him
to comply with our requisition. If these negotiations
and proceedings should have the effect of removing the
Siamese Forces and Authority from Kedah and of
ultimately re-establishing the Mala}' Government in
that unfortunate Country we conceive that we shall
gain a point of essential importance as confirming a
State of tranquillity which those Countries have been
strangers to for the last four years.
The final settlement of the matter must however
we apprehend still rest with the Court of Siam and we
entirely coincide with our President in the opinion
that even the Preliminary Treaty now so judiciously
concluded by Captain Burney will open to us the
channel for introducing those political questions into
the negotiations which our Envoy at Siam may have
to discuss at that Capital and we trust materially con-
tribute to their satisfactory conclusion.
Under existing circumstances and pending ne-
gotiations it would not however be prudent in our


judgment to reduce our fixed Military and Naval
Establishments below the scale proposed by our
President in his Minute of the . When
the expected reinforcement shall have arrived we
shall take measures for relieving therefrom the
Troops now on duty at Singapore and shall complete
the detachment at Malacca to 2 Companies from the
both Regiment returning to Bengal as opportunities
may offer [at] the Head Quarters and at least one
wing of the 25th Regiment now stationed in these
Settlements.
We have &c.
(Signed R. FULLERTON
W. A. CLUB LEY
R. I BEET SON
Fort Cornwallis
The 4 August 1825.


FORT CORNWALLIS—The 18th August 1825.
READ the following letter from the Political
Agent to the Siamese States relating to the Escort
for the Embassy to Siam,
POLITICAL AGENT TO THE SIAMESE STATES.
Prince of Wales Island,
Bth August 182-5.
To
The Honorable ROBERT FULLERTON Esquire.
Governor, &c,, &c., &c.
Honble. Sir,
In the sth Para, of my Letter of Instructions
from the Supreme Government, I am directed to
apply to you, for whatever aid I may require as to
an Escort of Mussulman Sepoys, Medical Officer &e.
As the Agreement which has been concluded with
the Chief of Ligore has now rendered my deputa-
tion to Siam certain and as after my visit to the
Cost of Tenasserim there will be little time for
me to make whatever arrangements may be
necessary for the progress of my Mission, I hope
you will now allow me to solicit you, that my Escort
may consist of a Paity of i Native Officer, 2
Havildars, 2 Naicks, 2 Drumers and 40 Sepoys from
the 25th Regiment: That Captain Macfarquhar
may be appointed to command it, and that Dr,
William Henderson may be placed in Medical
charge of the Mission.
Captain Macfarquhar has volunteered his ser-
vices to proceed with me, and I feel anxious to avail
myself of them for several reasons. The Governor
of Ligor and his numerous followers proposing to


accompany me, I shall have occasion for more than
ordinary prudence and caution to prevent au\r
differences arising between them and my Escort and
Followers; for which reason also I desire to have
Sepoys of my own Company, the 25th, who are
already acquainted with the language and customs
of Eastern Nations and who, I flatter myself, will
feel a personal interest in the success of my Mission.
Captain Macfarquhar also being in the entire con-
fidence of Mr. Maingy and myself, I shall not only
be able to derive much advantage from his assis-
tance in any difficulty that may occur at Bangkok,
but be more certain of opening an early and secure
communication by his means with the Commissioner
of Tavoy and Mergui.
Er. Henderson has also offered to accompany
me, and I am anxious to avail myself of his know-
ledge in every branch of natural History, for the
purpose of rendering my Mission subservient in some
degree to the interests of science.
1 have the honor to request your acceptance of
the accompanying Maps ; One being a copy of that
which I presented last year to the Right Honorable
the Governor General, and the other exhibiting all
the information, which I have since had an oppor-
tunity of collecting, with respect to the territory
lying between this Island and Bangoon and Bankok,
T have taken the liberty of inscribing the latter
Map to you.
I have &c, &c.
(Signed) H. BURNEY Captain
Pol: Agent to the Siamese
States.


POLITICAL AGENT to the SIAMESE STATES.
H. C. Hired Brig Minerva
Qaeda Hoads, the 15th August 1825.
To
'J he Honorable IL FULLERTON Esquire
Governor &c. &c. Ac.
Honorable Sir,
1 beg leave to report to you, that I landed at
Queda this morning accompanied by Mr. Maingy
and Mr. Blundell, and that the Governor of Ligor
evinced every proof of a continuation on his pait of
those good feelings towards us, which actuated him
to conclude the late Agreement with me. His High-
ness forwards to you by the Commerce a Box con-
taining a Letter and Presents from himself to the
Right Honorable the Governor General. A Copy of
the Letter addressed to His Lordship was shewn to
me, and its contents do not appear to me in any
wise objectionable. His Highness also requested
me, as he had delayed making preparations for his
departure until I returned, to allow him ten or
twelve days beyond the period fixed in our Agree-
ment for quitting Queda.
I am happy to acquaint you that His Highness
lias not only given me four of his followers to ac-
company me to Tavoy and Mergui, but has furnished
Mr. Maingy and myself each with an official Paper,
bearing the Seal of Pya Songkraam, the Commis-
sioner from Bangkok, as well as his own, desiring
all Siamese Officers to receive us as friends, and to
maintain and cultivate the most amicable intei course
with us, and with all acting under our orders on the
Coast of Tenasserim.
FORT CORNWALLIS The 18th August 1825.


His Highness has given me much reason to be-
lieve him sincere in his project of accompanying me
to Bangkok, and among the men whom he has attached
to me, he took especial care to select one, who is well
acquainted with the Western shores of the Gulf of
Siam, and fully qualified to pilot a vessel into the
Port of Li gov.
1 have &a/&c.
(Signed) H. BURNEY Captain
Pol. Agent to the Siamese
States.


THE PRESIDENT lays before the Board the
following Translation of a letter from the Rajah of
Ligore accompanying Presents from the Right Honor-
able the Governor General.
RAJAH OF LIGOR,
TRANSLATION of a Letter from the Rajah of
Ligor at Kedah, to the Honble. the Governor of P: W:
Island, dated Ist Moharram 124*1, vi/.t. 17th August
1825.
( After Compliments )
I beg to acquaint my friend that the Letter wliibh
he sent in charge of Captain Henry Burney, Anthony
Maingy and Edmund Blundell Esquires was received
by me with all those feelings of good will, due to a
communication arriving in the spirit of friendly inter-
course. On the subject of my intention to send certain
Articles to the Governor General of Bengal, which as
my friend’s Letter states I communicated to Captain
Burney, my friend expresses his willingness to for-
ward them to their destination by a fast sailing Vessel.
I comprehend the Contents of my Friend’s Letter in
every particular. The Articles which I intend for the
Governor General are as follows. Two pieces of Gold
flowered Cloth of Siamese Manufacture, One Bowl and
Stand, One Kettle and a Tea Pot made of the com-
position called Chutam, inlaid with Gold, likewise of
Siamese workmanship. These Articles, few indeed
and trifling in value, are accompanied by a Letter ex-
pressive of my wishes for a friendly connexion, which
has been seen by Captn. Burney and Messrs. Maingy and
Blundell and approved of by them. These articles have
been packed in a Box covered with yellow Cloth, and
entrusted by Captain Burney to the charge of Captain
Roberts, for the purpose of being delivered to my
friend at Pulo Pinang : who, I hope, will recognize in


this, a wish on my part to cultivate friendly and amic-
able relations, and I beg he will be so good as to
forward these articles to the Governor General as
soon as possible, and when he has done so, to do me
the favor to inform me thereof.
Adverting to the affairs of Perak and Salangore,
what my friend mentions in his Letter regarding send-
ing the two Vessels is proper and I request he will
exert his influence to expel Rajah Hassan from Perak ;
likewise to prevent the Rajah of Salangore from dis-
turbing the tranquillity of that Country, and to define
and establish the boundary between the two States
according to Treaty; in order that the Trade of the
Perak People may experience no molestation.
Captain Burney and Messrs. Maingy and Blundell
who were on their way to Marit (Mergui) and Tavoy,
having requested from me a letter in Siamese to assure
any man of rank who might arrive (at those places)
from the Capital, of their friendly intentions, 1 have
granted one to Messrs. Maingy and Blundell according
to their desire ; and they have sailed.
The present confidential visit of Captain Burney
argues that my friend’s suspicions are done away.
For my own part I shall be most happy to reciprocate
these friendly dispositions. It is my earnest wish
that a good understanding between the Siamese and
English may spring up and ripen into the fullest
friendship ; and the two nations become one.
Accompanying this (Letter) I send Akuat to pur-
chase a few Articles which 1 shall require for a funeral
feast. It being my intention to return this Month I
acquaint my friend therewith.
(Signer!) RICHARD GAUNTER
Acting Malay Translator.
P: W: ISLAND
19th August 1825.


P: S: On the 27th of Dulhajeh (13th Instant) three
Pirate Prahus which were cruizing off the Buntings
attacked some Malays belonging to Ban. who had come
to Kedah to purchase Padi for their subsistence, and
captured their Prahu and Grains, the Crew themselves
but narrowly effecting their Escape. I send my friend-
intimation of the circumstance agreeably to the
Courtesy which exists between neighbouring States
in Alliance with each other and my friend can order
out his Oruizers conformably to Treaty.
( Signed ) E. C.


FORT CORNWALLIS The 1st September 1825.
The President lays before the Board the following
Translation of a Letter from the Rajah of Ligore re-
lative to Mr. Anderson’s Mission to Salangore and the
Rajah of Kedah.
From RAJAH of LIGORE.
TRANSLATION.
Of a letter from the Rajah of Ligore at Kedah to
the Honorable Robert Fullerton Esquire Governor of
Prince of Wales Island, dated 9th Moharram 1241,
vizt. 24th August 1525.
After Compliments.
I write to inform my friend that as I intend
returning this Month I have sent Khoon Aksoon Tong
Pan Nineeam and Munreen ( Siamese ) my people to
purchase some articles for a funeral feast; also a few
other things that I require and request that my friend
will have the goodness to assist them in procuring
what they want.
I persuade myself from the confidential visit of
Captain Burney that a real union has been established
between the English and Siamese and that the good
understanding between my friend and self will be
zealously promoted and experience perpetual encrease.
I shall always consider my friend’s people who may
visit me, as my own, and trust mine will be equally
favored by him and allowed to visit and see my friend.
When my friend may forward the Presents I have
sent for the Governor General, I request he will write
and inform me by what Vessel they are gone.


My friend having dispatched Mr. John Anderson
to negotiate regarding the Rajah of Salaugore and
Rajah Hassan according to promise, I acquainted
him that my return to Ligore is only delayed until
I receive authentic information of the result, and
beg when it is known my friend will write and com-
municate the same to me.
I have determined to return forthwith, if no
answer is given to my letter to the Rajah of J£edah,
He asserts that lam hostile towards him. The
accompanying letter is an answer to him ; in it I
have stated everything fully. Khoon Aksoon has
charge thereof and has been desired to make known
the Contents to my friend first and request his per-
mission to deliver the same to the Rajah of Kedah,
( Signed ) R. GAUNTER
Acting Malay Translator.
Prince Wales Island
29th August 1825.
N. B. In the last letter the words “ according to
Treaty ” should have been perhaps rendered accord-
ing to promise in which sense they appear to be used
in this letter. Not knowing however what previous
correspondence had taken place I was not aware of
their precise import. The person called Akeat in
the former letter is the same with Khoou Aksoon.
( Signed ) If. G.


THE FOLLOWING letter from the Chow Pia
of Ligore to the Rajah of Kedah is laid before the
Board by the President.
From RAJAH of LIGORE to RAJAH of QUEDAH.
TRANSLATION of a letter from the Rajah or
Chow Pea of Ligore to the Rajah of Kedah address-
ed to the latter by his Siamese title of Chow Pea
of Chrai.
The Chow Pea Chrai in his answer writes and
expresses his apprehensions of returning to Kedah.
On a former occasion when Twwker Bisnoo who was
made Pea Umpai Nurat in concert with the Pea of
Singgora proceeded to the Capital with sinister pur-
poses against the Chow Pea Crai to undermine him
at Court, the letter solicited and confided in our
assistance and we in consequence incurred heavy
responsibility on his Account. The Chow Pea Crai
then conformed to our advice. The Pea Umpai
Nurat having accomplished his aims we afterwards
exerted our endeavours to effect a reconciliation
between the Chow Pea Chrai and his Imperial
Majesty Somdet Pra, and the Chow Pea Chrai is well
aware that the cause of his being obliged to abandon,
his Country, is owing to his secession from us.
'\ he Chow Pea Chrai having once more solicited
our kind Offices, We recurring to former motives
of good will towards him, feel sincerely disposed
from regrard to the Chow Pea Chrai to befriend him.
Should he still distrust, it rests with himself, his
destiny alone must have caused it, since in inviting
him to return our object is not to commit injury,
but to renew and cultivate for the future, the friend-
ship which formerly subsisted between us.


If the Chow Pea Chrai he in distress for any-
thing let him send a letter to say so.
Written the 9th of the present Month
( Moharram ) 1241, vizt. 26th August 1825.
( Signed ) R. GAUNTER.
Actg. My. Translr.
Prince of Wales Island
29th August 1825.


AGENT TO SIAMESE STATES.
To
The Honble. R. FULLERTON Esquire,
Governor, &c., &c., &c.
Honble. Sir, The return to this Settlement of
the Honorable Company’s hired Brig Minerva
rendering it impossible for me now to proceed to
the Coast of Tenasserim and return hither before
the latter end of October, the date at which the
Agreement with the Chief of Ligore engages me to
be at his Capital, on the other side of the Peninsula,
I beg permission to bring under your consideration
the above as well as the following circumstances.
Independent of the awkwardness of my not
being able to fulfil the stipulations to which the
public stands forth pledged, I learn from Mr,
Rorseburgh’s Directory and from several nautical
Men here, that after the middle and in some years
the beginning of October the Western side of the
Gulph of Siam becomes most unsafe to approach,
as a lee shore little known and beaten by a very
heavy surf. A Ship may perhaps succeed in enter-
ing Ligore harbour but then there would be little
chance of her getting out of it again to proceed to
Bangkok until the setting in of the South west
Monsoon in March.
I have always thought that if I could first see
the Tenasserim Country and acquire a knowledge of
the present condition of the old Siamese possessions
and their frontiers in that direction, I might make
myself much more acceptable at Bangkok. But in a
desire to secure this recommendation, I apprehend
1 ought not to overlook or forego the unusually
favorable circumstances that would attend my pro-
ceeding to Siam accompanied by the Chief of


Ligore. If also I proceed towards Bangkok im-
mediately T should reach it just before the ensuing
Campaign commenced when a correct knowledge of
the views and feelings of Siam and of her means of
assisting our Army in Carriage Cattle and supplies
would be most desirable. I should further be able
to touch at Tringano and Calantan and report to
you the actual condition of those Malay States and
I might have an opportunity of visiting Chimpohun
and of establishing friendly relations between the
Siamese Authorities in that Neighbourhood and our
Officers at Tavoy and Mergui.
I submit these considerations to you with every
deference, feeling assured that I need not here
declare my perfect readiness to proceed whither-
soever you may be pleased to order me.
I have Ac.
(Signed) H. BURNEY,
Pol: Agent to the
Siamese States.
Prince of Wales Island
30th August 1825.


FORT CORNWALLIS The 1st September 1825.
AGENT to SALANGORE.
To
The ACTING SECRETARY to GOVERNMENT
Prince of Wales Island.
Sir,
Para. Ist. I have the honor to report for the
information of the Honorable the Governor in
Council that in conformity to the Orders of Govern-
ment I embarked on board the Honorable Company’s
Schooner Zephyr early on Saturday Morning the
18th Instant and proceeded with the Vessels noted
in the Margin direct for Salaugore.
A succession of calms and Southerly winds
rendered the passage tedious, though not so much
so as I had reason to expect at this season of the
Year. We anchored at Salaugore Roads early on
the Morning of the 19th. I had a few days prior to
my departure from the Presidency dispatched an
express prahu with a letter to the Rajah giving him
notice of my coming for the purpose of bringing to
an amicable adjustment the differences subsisting
between him and the Chow Pya of Ligore requesting
him to make the necessary preparations for my
reception and intimating that as the objects of my
deputation were of weighty import it was desirable
that his Chiefs should be assembled, in order that I
might experience as little detention as possible.
8. On the passage down the Straits we fell in
with the dispatch boat bringing me a reply in which
the Rajah says: “I do not precisely comprehend
“ what is meant by the difference with the Siamese,


* The following is an Ex-
tract from the Paper purpor-
ting to be from the Rajah and
Chiefs of Perak to the Chow
Pya of Ligore, copy of which
accompanied Captain Bur-
ney’s report. “ The Rajah
“ Mooda of Salangore and his
“ Brother Rajah Dauia have
“ brought an Armament to
“ Perak and there are now at
“ Rautaw Pausang t 30 Prows
“ many more are entering the
“ River and they are concer-
“ ting with Rajah Hassan who
“ resides at Sungic Bidor to
“ commence hostilities and
11 create a disturbance in
“ Perak.’ 1
j;i Rantau Panjang
in a dup. copy.]
“ but I am desirous to be made acquainted therewith.
“ I have had no communication Avith them, and if
“ they wish to oppress me what can be done but
“ trust in the power of the Almighty.” He re-
quested that I would bring a few guns and some
shot with me.
4. My Messenger reported that he had not
seen any prows during his passage down but there
were about 20 lying at Salangore when he arrived
several of a pretty large size. The Rajah Mooda,
Rajah Daulah, the Chiefs reported to have lately
proceeded to Perak,* were also at Salangore when
ng is an ex- ti ie express prow arrived. The Rajah
aper purpor-
te Rajah and Mooda was just proceeding to Lackat,
to the chow a r j ver a little to the Northward of
opy of which
aptam Bur- Cape Racluido to deliver a quantity of
1 The Rajah Tin to a Prig which had been sent up
igore and his ;
Dauia have by the Acting Resident of Malacca,
rmamcnt to the price of which had been paid to the
s are now at
g t so Prows King at Salangore. The bearer of my
entering the letter also reported that he had not
' are cancer-
Hassan who observed or gained intelligence of any
igic Bidor to p roW s in the Perak River, fof which 1
utilities and A L
turbancc in he ascended a few reaches, nor at the
Bindings, with the exception of two or
1 three of a very small size which he believed to be
pirates and by one of which he was chased.
5. On anchoring, a salute of 13 Guns was
fired from the two Schooners, but no return was
made from the Fort. I immediately sent my Malay
Writer on shore with a complimentary letter to the
Rajah and his Son Rajah Usuh with whom I was
acquainted some years ago, announcing my arrival.
The King vyas very inquisitive and appeared distrust-
ful concerning the object of my visit. After some
explanation by my writer however he expressed his
obligations to the English for interposing between
him and the Siamese, and said he esteemed the


*
favor the more “because he had not solicited as-
sistance. He returned a Verbal Message that he
would receive me the following Morning.
6. Early in the Morning of the 20th I proceeded
on shore with the whole of my Escort and attendants
with all the boats (the vessels lying about 5 Miles
from the shore) and was received on landing by a
Salute of 0 Guns from a battery close to the Southern
point of the river where I found the Rajah ready to
receive me surrounded by three of his Sons, all the
females of his Family, his three Ministers, the Priests
and from 200 to 250 Men women and Children.
7. The Rajah received me cordially though with
some degree of restraint, and 1 delivered the letter and
some presents from the Honorable the Governor. On
perusing the letter he burst out into a sudden exclama-
tion “ I do not know the Siamese at all, why mention
“ them ? What does my friend require ? 1 will make
“ any concession to the English, but 1 will not listen
44 to any proposal in which the mention of the Siamese
“is included.” The Old Chief evinced great warmth
and shook with passion, but after a while recovered his
composure. During the three days that I was engaged
in communicating with the Rajah he frequently mani-
fested similar feelings and appeared to have an in-
veterate antipathy to the mention of the Siamese.
8. In reply to the Rajah’s enquiry as to what I
had to propose, I stated that there were several objects
of importance which 1 had to discuss, but that it would
be necessary in the first place to detail to him the
causes which had led to and the motives which
prompted the interference of the British Government
on this occasion.
9. I commenced therefore by observing agree-
ably to the instructions laid down in the Minutes of
the Honble. the Governor that in consequence of
the assembly of a large Siamese force at Kedah by


the Chow Piya of Ligore and the declaration of that
Chief that his object was an attack upon Sal an gore,
the Government of Prince of Wales Island, actuated
by an earnest desire to maintain peace, tranquillity
and a good understanding among the neighbouring
States, had tendered its friendly mediation to com-
pose the differences now unhappily subsisting; an
offer which had been accepted by the Chow Piya of
Ligore. I informed the Pajah that certain conces-
sions were required from him, which would be-
conducive to the end proposed and there were some
points which required explanation which it was
ray duty now to demand,
10. I dwelt upon the benefits which he had
already derived by the friendly intervention of the
English, and explained very distinctly that the
British Government was prompted by the most
disinterested and benevolent motives, that it had
no desire to acquire Territory, to interfere in the
management of his Country, to impose upon him
any commercial restraint, or to require from him
any engagement inconsistent with the perfect in-
dependence and permanent stability of his Govern-
ment
11. It was stated also to the Rajah that the
present negotiations were only part of an enlarged
and benevolent plan for restoring a good under-
standing amongst the neighbouring States and I
expressed my Confidence that from his long ex-
perience and intimate knowledge of the character
and proceedings of the British Government during
a period of more than half a Century that he had
been King of Salangore, he would be the last to
throw any obstacles in the way of the immediate
accomplishment of such a desirable result.
Although, I observed, some of the points I had to
propose might at first mention strike him as ob-
jectionable, 1 was prepared to listen to his argu


ments, to give due consideration to them, and to
discuss the whole with calmness and deliberation.
12. After a careful and attentive perusal of the
last report of the Political Agent to the Siamese States
and the Minute of the Honble. the Governor, I pre-
pared the different subjects for discussion in the fol-
lowing order, Tire primary objects of my Mission
appearing to be—
-Ist. To effect the removal of the piratical fleet
said to be assembled by the Rajah Mooda and Rajah
Daula of Salangore in conjunction with Rajah Hassan
in the neighbourhood of the Bindings and in the
Perak River.
2d, To require from the Rajah of Salangore an
explanation of the causes which induced him to
establish his Nephew Rajah Hassan at Perak ; to effect
the removal of that Chief from thence; and to throw
open the free navigation of the River with a view to
the prevention of further disputes, to obviate any pre-
tence on the part of the Chow Piya of Ligore for send-
ing an armament to Perak, and to afford the inhabitants
of the Country the means of supplying themselves
with grain of which there is reported to be a great
Scarcity.
3d. To negotiate for the establishment of a
settled boundary between the States of Perak and
Salangore, and to require an engagement against
further interference on the part of the Rajah of Salan-
gore with the former State.
4th. To require explanation relative to the des-
truction of the Ligore fleet at Perak about three Years
ago ( alleged to have been effected by the Rajah of
Salangore ) with a view to negociating for a com-
pensation to the Amount of Spanish Dollars 2,000, the
equivalent agreed to by the Chow Piya of Ligore, and
for the purpose of enabling Government to form a


* ‘ s,t ,s he (Ra J ah nassan)
and a great many Lanoon
-boats and pirates, called up
from the southward by the
Rajah of Salangorc for the
defence of his territory a-
gamst the Siamese that are
committing all these depred-
ations and piracies between
us and Malacca or which we
have lately heard so much. ”
icaptn. Burney’s Report.)
decisive opinion upon the subject after duly weighing
the Statements of both Parties.
10. The discussion of these several points
occupied two entire days in close communication with
the Rajah, his two kSons Rajah Usuh and Daula. and
his three principal Chiefs, vizt. the Datu Am Datu
Pangawa and Datu Geram.
14. With respect to the first point Vizt. the
removal of the large piratical fleet alluded (to) in
Captain Burney’s report, * I stated that it was
ijah Hassan ) understood a number of Lanoon pirates-
■any Lanoon
es, called up and others had been called up by the
vard by the J{ a j a h to his assistance and a representa-
orc for the
territory a- tion had been made against the pro-
ese that are ceedings cf his two Sons the Rajah Mooda
■ese depred-
:ies between and Daula for entering the Perak River
of winch we w ith a large fleet and disturbing the peace
•d so much. ” n °
(Report.; of the Country, that the immediate
removal of this force therefore was a principal object
of my mission. On the mention of the Lanoon pirates
being at Perak the King and his Chiefs around him
burst into a loud laugh with one accord, and declared
they had not heard of a single Lanoon prow being in
this quarter. With respect to his Sons going up with
a fleet, that was equally devoid of truth—his son Rajah
Daula—pointing to him, seated before me, having
gone there some time ago with two small prahus to
sell some gambier. His eldest son the Rajah Mooda,
he informed me had sailed about 10 days ago to Lakat,
a river within his territory, where a rich Tin mine
lias lately been opened for the purpose of delivering
06 Bahars to a vessel sent up by his friend Mr.
Cracroft, the Acting Resident at Malacca, of whom he
spoke in terms of great regard. He added you must
be assured this report has been spread by Perak people
to frighten the Siamese.


15. I replied that it was beyond doubt some
pirates had for a long time past been lurking about
the Sambilang Islands and Pankour, and had been
committing great depredations on the peaceable trad-
ing prows passing up the Straits. It was now deter-
mined to take effectual measures for the suppression
of such a barbarous practice and I Mas bound to tell
him frankly that any pi*ows hereafter found cruizing*
about in that neighbourhood would certainly be
destroyed. I was happy to receive from him, I
observed, a solemn disavowal that the prows belonged
to him, but with deference to the likelihood of some of
his subjects being addicted to piratical pursuits without
his knowledge or sanction, I cautioned him as he
valued the friendship of the English and wished to
preserve a good name, to establish a more vigilant
Superintendence over his people and not to permit
any piratical prows to resort to an}" of the rivers within
his territory nor to obtain supplies at any of the Ports
under his Government.
16. These observations 1 addressed very plainly
to the Rajah without the aid of an interpreter so that
there could be no misconceptions. He quickly inter-
rupted me by remarking “ then if, as you say, the
“ British Government is using effectual means to sup-
press piracy, why do }'ou permit pirates to resort to
“ Singapore and its vicinity ; that is their chief place
“of resort it is well known. Why do you not station
“ Cruizers further down the Straits ? I understand
“ you have Cruizers guarding from Pulo Biraan to
“ Pulo Bidan close to Pinang That is not the place
“ for them, you should have them going constantly up
and down the Straits. The Dutch used to have
“ many vessels to guard the Coasts,”
The Rajah added, “ I understand a Top
‘‘ belonging to a Chinaman at Malacca was lately
“ captured by Pirates in the Straits and that a
“ Brig was attacked and nearly taken close to the


Sambilang Islands.” He continued, “these pirate*
(i seem a match for your vessels. I heard from
“ Malacca that the Brig fired about 100 shot and
“ escaped only by a breeze of wind springing up.”
I observed that was a different sort of Vessel to our
regular armed Cruizers and that T. understood only
a few shot had hit the Minerva. “ How large were
the shot?” said he smartly. The introduction of
this subject gave me an opportunity of again submit-
ting the necessity of preventing prows from resorting
to the Sambilang Islands, and the Perak River and was
the very best argument I could have had for urging
the other points—the removal of Rajah Hassan <*fcc.
18. Notwithstanding the Rajah’s assurance.
Ids denial in the presence of all his Chiefs of the
knowledge of any assemblage of prows, and his rea-
diness to enter into an engagement for the suppres-
sion of piracy, my opinion is that Salangore like
most of the other Malay States has been a place of
resort for pirates and that the barbarous practice
has been much increased in this quarter since the
troubles commenced in Perak by the interference of
the Siamese. The existence of such a state of things
as has prevailed during the few last years and the
constant state of alarm in which the inhabitants
have been kept, has tended to unsettle their habits,
has called the labourers from the fields and the
Mines to arm for their defence and if it has not
already done so would soon have had the effect of
inspiring the whole population with a more martial
spirit than they heretofore possessed and rendering
them much more daring pirates than they have yet
proved to be. 1 ventured to anticipate (several years
ago) the result which seems to have transpired. The
proceedings of the Siamese have tended to encrease
piracy. I have great confidence however that the
evil has not yet advanced to such a stage as to be
irremediable and that the Malays are not become so
desperate as they would be were some change not


«ey^s t reDort° m «xh P + a -!- n Bur
«ey s report. “That Tuanku
** Hassan of saiangore has
“and is unjustly disturbing
“that P co^t anC) co'Timer.ce G f
mat Country and that the
“Rajah of saiangore had
“ sei'zed'th a t* d attackcd and
seized the troops and boats
“which His Highness had
“orotelT,° y °r: s a9 u ° for thc
protection of Perak. I then
“stated that i could not ad-
“«L P »c a . k . s T m ° =e
“ His Highness procotdeu
' by asking me whether he was
“ to receive no reparation for
“the insult and injury which
' the Rajah of saiangore had
,r committed against him by
“attacking hi s men and sei-
“»mg his Boats and property
“atPerakand whether Tuanku
hassan was to be allowed to
“ tyrannize over the Govern-
me nt and Country of Perak.
«/Para. e.)
to take place speedily. With the sentiments ot‘
deference which they entertain of the British Gov-
ernment the Malays will no doubt return to the
quiet pursuits of agriculture and commerce as soon
as they perceive the effects of the intervention of
the British Government and the removal of the
Siamese armament, which will render their longer
preparations for defence unnecessary. On the Faith
of the friendly intervention of the British Govern-
ment and in the confidence that the Siamese have
been deterred from an attack upon Salangore the
inhabitants informed me that they were clearing the
ground in the interior extensively for ensuring a
plentiful harvest of paddy this Season.
19. On the second point the llajah gave me
the following explanation. Rajah Hassan, Ins
captam Bur- nephew, was established at Sungie Bidor
That Tuanku L
ilangore has about 30 Miles up the Perak River by
mscif at the the express desire of the Rajah of Perak
'incipal river J
y disturbing and as a proof that there was a cordial
commerce of understanding between them at the
md that the
ana ore had time. He mentioned that the Aunt of
ittackcd and the p a jah 0 f Perak was married to
ps and boats _
ghness had Rajah Hassan. The nephew was placed
, ago for the there as his (the Rajah of Salangore’s)
erak. I then \ °
ould not ad-
Agent to receive half the duty on Tin
' a Siamcse exported Yizt. 6 Dollars Per Bhar, con-
ll*£, 5m }
S proceeded formabl 7 to an agreement entered into
tether he v/as between the Rajahs of the two states.
in?urJ o,l i, fo r -My Arguments for the removal of
injury which
tiangorc had Rajah Hassan met with great opposi-
"St h ' m by tion during the first conference and the
lets and sci- ~
nd property Rajah plainly told me on leaving late
•r*r“ i' l ie afternoon that he could nob
>eallowed to
the Govern- accede to the proposition ; that Perak
ry of Perak. was by conquest and that he could
not give up the privileges he had
acquired. On leaving him 1 told him he had better
think of it during the night and I would commit to


paper what I had said to him. His last words were,
i( Well it is of no use thinking, I cannot consent, but
“ you may write it down.”
20. The next morning I had scarce!}' taken my
seat when the Rajah jumped forward, seized me
violently by the hand, and much agitated said, “ Well
what have you to say to-day ?" I replied, “ The
“ same as yesterday.” He argued a long time and I
rejoined. At last lie said, “ Well, well, Ido not like
“ prolonging discussion and you always get the better
“ofme by argument if I let you go on. Do you want
“ the duty of 6 Dollars on the Tip, you shall have it.
“Do you want Perak, you shall have it. Ido not care
“ for Money.” I again explained that all the Govern-
ment required was peace, that the Rajah of Ligore
had agreed to dismiss his armament provided Rajah
Hassan was removed from Perak and that as he, the
Rajah of Salangore, had Territory enough besides, this
could be no sacrifice to him. The Rajah at last assented,
desiring me to recollect that this was done out of pure
regard to the English and he said, “ I would rather
“ die than give up five pice to the Siamese. Let the
“ Siamese come,” said he, 4 ‘ I will fight, and it I die they
“ may do what they please with my goods but the
“ object of their armament was not to take Salangore
“ only, it is to take the Rajah of Kedah—better be
tc upon your guard,”
21. The Rajah enquired how he should receive
the amount of certain debts due to him by the King
of Perak and several Chinese in that Country. 1
offered to speak to the Perak Chief on the subject
and the Rajah said he would address a letter to the
Honble. the Governor. He produced several letters
from the Rajah of Perak, one of which dated only 2
Months ago he gave me at my request and a trans-
lation of which is attached. This letter admits
certain debts and is interesting as it contains several
other observations of importance. It will be ob-


Extract from captain Bur-
ney’s report. “ His Highness
also wishes to introduce in
the «h Article a stipulation
that we shall settle the future
boundary between Perak and
Salangore at a river called
Soongy Nibong Angoos, which
•sabout an hour’s journey to
the southward of the Berman
River, But in a conference
which i had with the Young
Rerak Chief and his Atten-
slants, whom the Governor of
*Jgor e caned in, i learnt that
served the Rajah says the object of sending his
Brother and Chiefs to Kedah was to prevent the
Siamese if possible from corning to Perak. I have'
no doubt such is really the case, and that the Perak
people are spreading reports of the Rajah of
Salangore’s large force and the collection of Lanoon
prows purposely to alarm the Siamese and prevent
their going to Perak.
22. The Guns now at Sungee Bidor with Rajah
Hassan stated to be about *3O or 40 in number belong
to the Rajah of Salangore and he proposed to send
his Son Rajah Daula and a Chief to assist in bring-
ing them away. I informed him that there could in
my opinion be no objection to his nephew removing
such articles as were bona fide his property, but
advised him not to lay claim to any thing that was
not clearly his or to do any thing which would tend
to produce further difference. He assured me he
would be particular in this respect and that his only
object was to conform to the wishes of the Governor
of Pulo Penang. I ascertained through the medium of
my writer that on my departure after the first con-
ference all the Chiefs and the Rajah’s Sons urged
him to comply with the propositions I made which
he was himself rather averse to at first.
23. Relative to the 3d. point the Rajah ex-
pressed verj r considerable reluctance to relinquish
Captain Bur- the c ] a i ms which he had acquired first
lis Highness 1
ntroducc in by conquest and afterwards by treaty
i stipulation niore than 20 years ago. The Rajah
:le the future . J J
n Perak and admitted that prior to his conquest of
river called Perak in 1804 the boundary between
igoos, which _ J
i journey to the two States was the River Berman
the Berman hut he never heard of that mentioned
conference .
i the Young 111 Captain Burney s report. There is
his Atten- 110 suc h river as Sungei Nibong Angoos
Governor of
learnt that I was assured by the Rajah and all the


soongy Nibong Angoos Had
been the boundary 50 or 60
Years ago and that the Ber-
man River as i had always
heard was the last esta-
blishcd boundary between
saiangore and Perak.
Extract from Captain Bur-
ney’s report.l‘‘;His Highness
then obscrved'that Perak had
transmitted the‘Bunga Mas to
ingoos had Salangore people. There is a spot close
"at the°Ber- to the sea shore a little to the North-
had always ward of Tanjong Karang called Nibong
last esta- . 0 n 7 ...
•y between Angoos from some fishermen in cooking
•ak. their dinner setting fire to the trees,
during the dry season and burning them by accident
but there were never any houses there, nor was that
spot ever regarded as the boundaiy. As the Ber-
man River is laid down in Martin Lindsay’s Chart
and by several authors as the established boundary,
and the Rajah of Salangore at last assented, I fixed
that as the limit of his territory to the Northward
for the future.
24. It was not with less reluctance that the
Rajah assented to refrain from all future inter-
ference with Perak. He produced to me the original
treaty of defensive alliance between the late King
of Perak and himself dated in 1804 copy of which I
have taken and a translation of which accompanies
this. By virtue of that treaty he had proceeded to
Perak and remained 3 Months with the present
Rajah ; at his request performed the ceremony of
proclaiming him as Sovereign and elevating him to
the throne according to the Malayan Custom. He
assured me there had been a perfect understanding
between him and the Rajah of Perak and it was at
the latter’s express desire that he was there ; that
that Chief was equally averse to the Siamese as
himself but is deficient in courage and power to re-
sist and therefore affects not to oppose their coming.
25. With respect to the fourth point in dis-
cussion the Rajah betrayed great impatience when-
ever 1 adverted to it. He said that Che Hat, the
Chow Piya of Ligore’s Agent has sent a letter to
him from Perak written in Siamese, that nobody at
:ap tain Bun- Salangore understood that language,
n* 9 '’"® B ® and that being desirous of preventing
it Perak had ° r
unga Mas to the Siamese coming to Salangore and


Siam and that its Rajah had
directly applied to him for
assistance against Tuanku
Hassan and had deputed to
him at Ligore his, the Rajah’s
younger Brother Tuanku Kl-
chii Mooda who is now at
Kedah waiting to return to
Perak with the succour soli-
cited, and that with respect
to Salangore he had not in-
tended to interfere with it,
and had two years ago when
the Ligore men first went to
Perak transmitted a compli-
mentary letter and presents
to the Rajah of Salangore who
instead of trusting to these
assurances of his friendly
disposition suddenly and with-
out any provocation came up to
Perak and seized forty of his
High nesses boats which were
under charge of che Hat his
Malay interpreter to whom he
pointed as he was then on
duty before His Highness.”
:s Rajah had ascertaining the contents of the letter
nst Tuanku he had proceeded up with 17 small
deputed to prows to meet Che Hat at Perak by the
3 kn invitation also of the Rajah. Knowing
is now at the treacherous character of the
uccour soli- Siamese, and recollecting the manner
vith respect j n which they had come to Kedah and
ei T e with 'it, Perak he was the more anxious not to
rs ago when admit any Envoj'S from the Rajah of
d a compii- Ligore into his Country and to prevent
nd presents this he was solicitous to have a con-
ng" to r these ference with Che Hat at that place,
his friendly r xq ie Perak people, anxious to get rid of
jnoame ua»to the Siamese, spread a report that a large
i forty of his force from Salangore was entering the
che Hat his river and advised Che Hat to make his
•to whom he escape even before his prows entered
fighmsss!” °" the river. He lost no time in doing so,
and the prows fell into the hands of the Perak
people. About half the number were old and rotten
and were sunk. The Rajah denied having taken
any of them, and declared he had never seen Che
Hat nor a single Siamese. He added also that if
there wore two witnesses who could prove he or the
Salangore people took the Siamese prows he would
pay the 2000 Dollars required. He begged me
therefore to explain this fully to the Honble. the
Governor. He said it was all a plan ot the Perak
people themselves to get rid of the Siamese.
26, As my instructions on this head did not
warrant my pressing the matter but only enjoined
my making enquiry, I informed the Rajah that as
he had assented so readil} 1, to the other points I
would communicate his explanation to the Honble.
the Governor and it would rest with Government to
determine after a full consideration of all the cir-
cumstances whether the application on this head
should be renewed. I gave him clearly to under


stand on parting that I did not wave the demand and
that he might perhaps soon receive a further com-
munication on the subject.
27. Under all the circumstances of the case, I
venture respectfully to submit my opinion that it
would be impolitic to exact the performance of this
condition from the Rajah of Salangore. The Perak
Country was his by prior right of conquest and if he
was the means of expelling the Siamese from the
Country, a justification may be found for him in the
principle of self defence, for his own country was
in danger. He denies however having participated
in the booty. The records of the Penang Gov-
ernment show that Perak was under the control
of Salangore as far back as 1804 and 1806. In one
letter to the then Governor the present Sultan writes
—“ The People of Penang must not go to Perak at
present, for Perak from the River Korak to Bertung
Bras Basok is ray Country. This Country 1 have
taken by force of Powder and Ball, which Custom
the Governor is acquainted with.” This was in
1806. The Siamese practised a similar ceremony,
through the Agency of the King of Quedah in 1818.
No Siamese went there till the middle of 1822.
They made a very short stay and the King of
Salangore acquired his former ascendancy, and till
this moment he retains it by means of the establish-
ment of his nephew at Sungei Bidor. 'i here is no
doubt the Rajah of Perak has been courting the aid
and protection of the Rajah of Salangore against
the Siamese, although his dread of the latter power
has forced him to receive the Siamese and comply
with their demands. It is very certain that the
Rajah of Perak and his Subjects would hail with
joy an emancipation from the shackles imposed by
both the Siamese and Salangore, and would repay
with gratitude the friendly intervention that could
effect such a wished for object. In deference to the
British Government the Salangore Chief has now


consented to refrain from all interference; to
respect the established boundary ; and to direct the
removal of his nephew.
28. As the Rajah did not require from me any
formal Engagement so I did not find it necessary to
say more than what is pointed out in my instruc-
tions ; Yizt. that in the event of his ready compli-
ance with the requisitions now made, the same
intervention which had been manifested might be
expected. He requested I would beg the Honorable
the Governor to send him a few good Guns and
some Shot, for which he would pay any price. I
told him in reply, that this would have too much
the appearance of a wish to continue warlike pre-
parations, which it was our desire to put a stop to.
and that he must not entertain any expectation of
his request being complied with.
29. Having obtained the Rajah’s assent to en-
tering into arrangements to the effect above noticed,
I next turned my attention to the objects which were
pointed out as desirable to be attained in the event of
my negotiations being favourable for their accomplish-
ment, but which I was directed not to insist upon, if it
should be found that their completion tended to delay
or obstruct the more direct object of communication.
I therefore proposed to the Rajah that with the view
of cementing the friendship between the British
Government and himself it would be desirable that he
should renew the Commercial Agreement entered into
by Mr. Cracroft in 1818. To this he offered no ob-
jections, but on the contrary expressed a readiness to
do so. 1 then proposed that he should enter into an
Agreement for the mutual surrender of Criminals
which he readily assented to and also an obligation to
use his efforts for the suppression of Piracy.
30. When we had, after two long and fatiguing
discussions, come to a clear understanding as to the
mature of the Engagement to be entered into, I retired


with his Son Rajah Usuii and my Writer, to prepare a
draft of the Agreement, which being produced to him,
he attentively read over two or three times and com-
mented upon. He then directed his Son to .make a
Copy for me, to which he affixed his large Chop and
my Writer made a Copy for him. The Engagements
were then exchanged in due form, he observed
“ I have made several engagements, do not let ns bo
changing any more, let this be permanent.”
31. After exchanging the engagements, the
Rajah expressed a desire to see my Escort go through
their exercise and with the view of making the
ceremony of entering into an Engagement more formal
and impressive, I proposed a salute should be fired the
following day in honor of it. He quickly observed,
“ Very well, 1 know the custom of the English, and
every thing shall be ready.” On the 22d,, agreeably
to appointment, I again landed with all escort and
attendants, the sepoys paraded near the principal
Batteiy. A salute of 9 guns was fired from the
Fort in honor of the Agreement, followed by the
same number of Guns from the two vessels and S
vollies of musquetry by the Sepoys. The Rajah
accompanied me to witness the ceremony amidst a
large concourse of people and it had an imposing
effect and proved more than any thing else, that a
cordial iinderstanding prevailed, and is, I trust, a
pledge that the Rajah will adhere strictly to the
Engagement, which I have no doubt the Honble.
the Governor in Council will observe, is worded with
sufficient plainness and precision.
32. I did not fail to impress upon the King’s
mind that any infraction of the Engagement would
not be overlooked, that this was not a mere form, but
that it was expected he would perform the conditions
required of him in good faith and in the real spirit of
of truth and sincerity.


38. I had with me the Dutch Treaty which I
read over to him, and explained all the Articles re-
lative to our future relations on the Peninsula of
Malacca and the Island of Sumatra, with which lie
seemed much pleased.
34. On my departure the Rajah gave me a letter
to the Double, the Governor, the Contents of which
I was unacquainted with, and I considered it
preferable to allow him to write as he pleased.
This letter I have opened and now beg to attach a
translation. I have also received a present of 3 Bhar
of Tin for the Honble. the Governor to whom the
Old Chief on parting and shaking me cordially by the
hand, desired I would present his best compliments,
and requesting me to explain everything to him.
35. The Rajah made many enquiries about the
King of Kedah and the probability of his restoration.
On one occasion he abruptly enquired When is the
King of Kedah to be returned to his Country ? ” I
replied, that negotiations were in progress to that end,
and I was in hopes he would be restored ere long.
I will bet,” said he, “ 6,000 Dollars he is not returned
in 10 years.” He said the King of Kedah was a
woman for making so poor a resistance against the
Siamese.
36. During the 4 days that the vessels remained
at Salangore, my people were permitted to go about
freely, and I ascended the Hill on which the Fort is
situated. I reckoned that there are about 70 to 80
Guns of all sorts mounted on the great hill, and the
Batteries on 3 smaller hills below, but they are almost
all honey combed and unfit for service. The King*s
residence near the point is a most miserable abode for
Majesty; every thing betokened decay and delapidation.
The Hills however had been lately cleared of jungle
and new attap sheds erected over each of the guns.


which makes the batteries present a formidable ap-
pearance at a distance. It is in my opinion quite
absurd to suppose that the Siamese fitted out so large
a fleet and armament for the purpose of taking such a
wretchedly defended place as Salangore at present is.
10 or 20 Prows and 500 men, instead of 300 and
10,000, would have been quite sufficient. Most of
the Guns now mounted would on a single discharge be
precipitated down the hills, being all placed on the
edge of the sloping bank and not one in the Fort. At
least half of them would burst if fired twice. Captain
Poynton put his thumb into the touch holes of several.
37. The King on parting requested me to
furnish him with Paper to inscribe a Copy of the
Koran upon, which I promised to do at Penang, and
he gave a Commission to my Writer to get a hand-
some Copjr made for which he authorized him going
going to an expence of 100 Dollars.
38. I quitted Salangore late in the Evening of
the 22d and at day light on the morning of the 23d
we were opposite the Mouth of the River Berman,
which appears to be at least 2 miles wide at the
entrance. We have not fallen in with a single prow
during the voyage, and observed in Salangore River
altogether about 25 or 30 small boats which belonged
to the Chiefs and people from the villages up the
River and on the Coast, who were assembled on the
occasion of my visit. There were also two long
Chinese Sanpan Pankats and a Top disposing of Goods
and taking in Cargoes of Tin. The Vessels are now
standing up past the Sambilang Islands for the
Anchorage at Pulo Pankour, from whence I intend
dispatching a boat up the River to request an inter-
view with the Rajah of Perak.
39. 1 send the Malacca boat with this dispatch,
and request that she may be returned without delay
to Pulo Pankour. I expect that this boat will return
from Penang before my Messenger can possibly do so


from Perak. I am informed that the King is at
present residing at Beta, a distance of at least 70 or
80 Miles up the river.
40. It would, in my opinion, he advisable to
give notice to the Native traders at Penang, that Eice
may be exported to Perak. lam desirous, if possible,
of witnessing the removal of Eajah Hassan from
Bungei Bidor, prior to my return. I shall forthwith
send him notice of the Engagement entered into
with the Eajah of Salangore and require his
immediate departure.
I have &c.
( Signed) JOHN ANDERSON,
.Political Agent to Salangore and Perak.
H. C/s Schooner Zephyr at Anchor
between the Island of Panhour
and the Bindings. The 2Cth
August 1825.


TRANSLATION
of a letter from Sri Paduka Adenda Sultan Abdullah
IBa Allum Shah, King of Perak, to Sri Paduka
Kakanda Sultan Ibrahim Shah, King of Salangore.
After a profusion of Compliments and Invoca-
tions to God and the Prophet for the health and
prosperity of the King of Salangore, he proceeds—
With respect to the letter bearing the Chop of
my Elder Brother, which was sent by Che Ismael, ifc
has reached me in safety. What is mentioned con-
cerning Rajah Kechil Soolong being established at
Kwalaßidor by the Authority of my Elder Brother and
collecting Revenues is acceded to. As to the Agreement
or understanding between myself and the Rajah Kechil
Soolong, it continues the same as before. It is stated
in the letter that the Revenues are not correctly
accounted for. On this subject 1 request my Elder
Brother to consider well, these are under the
management of Rajah Kechil Soolong and whatever
he gives me 1 receive. As to the duties, I retain such
part of them as are prescribed in the Engagement
made with my Elder Brother formerly, which was
brought by the Shabundur, beyond that 1 know
nothing, for Rajah Kechil Soolong has not given me
an} 7 further information, and my Elder Brother must
of course be acquainted with all the proceedings of
Rajah Kechil Soolong in the Perak Country.
As to Massack and the Perak People who are
indebted to my Elder Brother, and the Guns they are
all under the authority and in the possession of the
Rajah Kechil Soolong, and the good understanding
between me and the Rajah Kechil Soolong has not
been altered.


If all the people of Perak remove to Kwala Bidor,
Kwala Bidor will still be a part of the Perak Country,
and as to the debts due to my Elder Brother, and
the guns, I will communicate with Rajah Kechil
Soolong, for my Elder Brother seems to look to me
for them. A part of the debts have been recovered
by the Rajah Kechil Soolong, and the Guns are
with him.
As to tire Siamese, 1 have not by any means
brought them hither, and the object of sending the
Rajah Kechil Mooda and Orang Koya besor to Siam,
was to endeavour to prevent the Siamese front
coming to Perak at all.
Moreover with respect to the Agreement and
Oath of fidelity which 1 have taken and made with
my Elder Brother they cannot be broken, and I will
adhere to the regulation which was given to me. 1
have hitherto adhered to it, and by the blessing of
God and the Prophet, whether it be my fate to go
to heaven or hell, I will continue to do so. If t
deviate from it I, shall not be entitled to the favor of
the Almighty and his Prophet but shall be cursed,
and if my Elder Brother does not adhere to his part
of the Agreement God and the Prophet will visit
him with displeasure. As to my debt to my Elder
Brother, I have no wish to deny it, and I have
requested the Rajah Kechil Soolong to settle it, I
have given him a Memorandum and I shall again
communicate with Jlijah Kechil Soolong on the
Subject.
Further with respect to the worship recom-
mended to my Elder Brother, I will, with the
blessing of tlie Almighty, while I live attend to that,
for the practice is prescribed by God and his Pro-
phet for the observance of all his disciples and true
followers: such is my intention.


Rated 3d. of Dul-Kaida in the Year cf the
Hijirah 1240, on Tuesday, corresponding with the
24th May 1825.
\ A True 'translation
(’hop of
Sultan Abdullah
ma-Alum Shah
King of Perak. /
(Sd.) JOHN’ ANDERSON,
Malay Translator to
Government.
The 26th August 1825.
Note. The King of Perak styles himself
il Adencla ” younger Brother, and the King of
Salangore “ Kakanda ” Elder Brother, these being
polite substitutes for the personal pronoun and
customary in the correspondence amongst Mala}'
Princes.
The .Rajah Kechil Soolong is meant for Tuanku
Hassan, Nephew of the King of Salangore.
On perusing the letter of which the foregoing
is a translation, the deception lately practised by
the Siamese is very apparent, in the fabrication of a
papec purporting to be from the Rajah of Perak
and Chiefs to the Chow Pya of Ligore, which Cap-
tain Burney brought a Copy of. I do not once
observe any of those words or expressions in this
letter to which I objected in the other. This is the
genuine production of the King, and a well
written letter. There are many Arabic words in it.
Signed) J. A.


FORT CORNWALLIS The 8th September 1825.
RAJAH of SALANGORE.
TRANSLATION of a letter from Sultan Ibrahim
Shah, Rajah of Salangore, to the Honble. Robert
Fullerton Esquire, Governor of P. W. Island—-dated
10th Moharram 1241—vizt. 26th August 1825.
After Compliments.
The letter which was brought by my friend’s
Agent Mr. John Anderson has safely reached me, and
I understand its contents. I replied to the requisition
of the said Agent to me to deliver up the property of
Sisat, that I had really never taken it—so far from
that I have never seen either it or Sisat, nor indeed
the property of any Perak people, although I did see
several of their boats founder. I afterwards had a
meeting with the Rajah of Perak, and having installed
him on the throne with royal honors deliver over
possession of that Country to him. He then entered
into a treaty with me, where by it was agreed that
twelve dollars (should be levied) on every Bhar,
(oftin), and that one half should go to my brother
the Rajah of Perak, and the other half to myself; which
treaty has been ratified on both sides in the most
solemn manner.
I was loth, as I told my friend’s Agent, to enter
into any discussion on the subject of the boundary
between Perak and Salangore, it being known to every-
one. I was on the point of returning to Salangore
when a messenger from the Rajah of Perak waited on
me with a request that I would lend him Guns which
I complied with.
As to my leaving Rajah Hassan behind it was by
the Kino- of Perak’s desire I did so—and moreover he
O
(Rajah Hassan) being the latter’s father (in law) it
would be beyond my power to restrain him. Should


my friend doubt this statement lie can order enquiry
to be made thereof at Perak, for it is most certain that
lie has married the Mother of the Rajah’s brother.
My friend’s Agent also stated that several of my
p rah us had gone to Perak, but I request my triend
will not listen to what people say. Only two small
boats accompanied my Sou who proceeded there with,
the duties.
It was further asserted by my friend’s Agent that
several Lannoon (pirate) prahus were at Salangore.
I declare it is no such thing and I beg my,friend will
disregard these reports. As his Agent is about to
proceed to Perak, he can ascertain whether there really
are such numerous boats at that place belonging*
either to myself or the Lannoons. I have never yet.
solicited aid from Lannoons. If ray friend is well
disposed towards me, he will make known the authors
of this report, and whether they be Perak people or
Siamese I shall be able to expose their falsehood.
1 have only further particularly to request of my
friend, that the treaty now making (or made) between
his Agent and me, may experience no detriment from
the influence of another Quarter. ['* This paragraph
is metaphorically and obscurely expressed in the
original.”]
(Signed) R. GAUNTER
Actg. Malay Translator.
P: W; Island
30 August 1825.


RAJAH of LIGORB.
TRANSLATION of a letter from the Chow Pya
ol Ligore to the Honble. Robert Fullerton Esquire
Governor of P. W. Island—dated Monday Month of
Moharrani.
After Compliments.
Having occasion for the following Articles I have
to request my friend will commission them for me
from Bengal, where I understand they are procurable
in abundance. Nine or ten Emeralds all correspond-
ing about the size of the tip of one’s finger—Nine or
ten Rubies to be also alike—and a Couple of Sapphires
similar to those worn by Europeans about their necks
and arms. When they arrive 1 beg my friend will be
so kind as to send them to Kedah, from whence they
can be forwarded to Ligore, together with a letter in-
forming me of their cost, which 1 will then remit.
( Signed ) R. GAUNTER
Actg. Malay Translator.
P. W. Island
2d. Sej)fc. 1825.


RAJAH of LIGORE.
TRANSLATION of a letter from the Chow Pya
of Li gore to the Honorable Robert I ullerton Lscp •
Governor of Prince of Wales Island dated 9th
Moharram 1241 vizt. 27th August 1825.
After Compliments.
1 beg to make known to my friend that when
galang (Junkceylon) was invaded by the Burmese
armament several of their people were taken prisoners
by the Siamese forces. The Burmese have been (our)
enemies from time immemorial, and as rebels to his
imperial Majesty they (Captives) by the laws of Siam
were to be sent up to the Capital. Halt ot them
however were taken to Ligore and kept there. (One
of these) a Burmese named Echin associating himself
with one Eduang a Siamese stole some Elephants and
escaped to Penang.
A Malay also called Arif the Nephew of Sri
Pekarma Jyali of Pulo Lankawi, (jointly with his
Uncle) took up Arms and killed a great many
Siamese. Sri Pekarma Jyah was himself also slain,
and Arif made prisoner in the prahu in which he
had engaged and killed the Siamese as aforesaid.
This traitor to his Imperial Majesty has tied to
Penang. I hope my friend will promote an alliance
by causing the fugitive offenders against the State
herein mentioned to be sent back and in cases of
offenders on the side of the English absconding to
Siam, 1 will in like manner send them back, con-
formably to the Treaty concluded with Captain
Burney. I pray my friend may be disposed to view
in such reciprocal Acts of friendly accommodation,
incitements to mutual cordiality and will accordingly
cause these runaway Culprits to be returned to me.
It is not my intention when they come to punish
their offence but to remand them to their former


condition. If my friend send them back it will be
an unequivocal token that the friendship and good
will he professes for me are sincere and I shall
acknowledge the same by a return of equal con-
fidence and regard.
( Signed ) R. GAUNTER,
Actg. Malay Translator.
P. W. Island
2d. September 1825.
ORDERED that a Copy of the above Letter be
sent to the Superintendent of Police with orders to
seize the persons alluded to, and to report as far as
possible on the merits of the case.


RAJAH of LIGORE.
TRANSLATION of a letter from the Chow Pya
of Li gore to the Honorable Robert Fullerton Esquire,
Governor of P. W. Island—dated Friday 18th Mohar-
ram 1241 vizt. 2d September 1525.
As it is my intention to return within the present
month, I have thought it due to the friendship which
indissolubly subsists between my friend and me, to
make him acquainted therewith. lam now only wait-
ing the arrival of Kun Aksorn who was sent to pur-
chase some articles to set out for Ligore, where 1 ex-
pect Captain Burney whom I have promised to conduct
to the Capital ; having already forwarded a written
express to notify my friend’s intention of deputing
him there. J request my friend will therefore cause
my friend Capt. Burney to set out as agreed on, in
order that our amicable relations may be established
on a perrnament footing.
Being now on the eve of my departure I wished to
send my friend some specimen of Siamese manufacture,
as a token, but not having time, 1 ordered a Teapot to
be made with which I have directed Dikong to follow
Kun Aksorn in order to present the same to my friend.
It is but a trifle, and in point of value unworthy his
acceptance, but I request my friend will nevertheless
receive and keep [itj as a pledge of our mutual regard,
which 1 hope will always continue unimpaired—for
Kedah and Penang are united by situation.
My two sons whom formerly his Imperial Majesty
was graciously pleased to direct should resident Kedah,
will 1 trust after my departure be admitted by my
friend to the same degree of friendly intimacy as my-
self. I request that all matters of business may be
communicated to me by letter, which can be forwarded
from Kedah, to me at Ligore, where 1 can satisfactorily
dispose of the same.


Being desirous of establishing a friendly under-
standing with the Governor General of Bengal, I beg
ray friend will have the goodness to forward the
Articles which I sent for him as soon as possible.
1 am now expecting intelligence regarding Mr.
Anderson’s Mission to Perak and Salangore.. If by any
means it be possible L would wish ray friend to send
rae the desired information by Run Aksorn, that I
may know what has been done. 1 trust my friend will
agreeably to his promise, inake such arrangements as
may tend to the encrease of mutual good will.
( Signed ) R. GAUNTER
Actg. Malay Translator.
P. W. Island
(jth September 1825.


THE following Minute by the President relative
to Captain Burney’s early departure on Lis Mission
to Siam is recorded.
MINUTE BY THE PRESIDENT.
The unfortunate accident which happened to
the Minerva and the consequent return to this port
with Mr. Maingy, Captain Burney and Mr. Blundell
has rendered it impossible for Captain Burney now
to visit the Coast of Tenasserim as intended without
losing the season for Siam. It becomes necessary
therefore that final arrangements should be made
for his departure to that Capital by Sea. So much
has already been written on the objects of that
Mission, it would be useless repetition here to enter
at length on the subject. As far as the British
Interests in this quarter are concerned they may be
abstracted thus: Ist. the restoration of the King
of Kedah ; 2d. the withdrawal of the Siamese from
Perak ; 3d. the prevention of further conquests by
the Siamese over the Malayan States on either side
of the Peninsula, the consequent maintenance of the
independence of those States and the exclusion of
the Siamese power from contact or contiguity with
the British Settlements in the Straits. Eor all
other points I refer to Paras. 10 to 13 of the letter
from the Supreme Government of 13th May 1825
with the instructions to Captain Burney therein
enclosed. It seems unnecessary to add to those
instructions. Under present circumstances the pro-
bable necessity of the Campaign against Ava, the
consideration of the many points of discussion
likely to arise in the Settlement of frontiers and
actual interchange of Territory with Siam seems
to point out in strong terms the expediency
of having a British accredited Agent at the
Capital of Siam at this juncture so as to afford a
medium of direct communication with that Court.


I propose therefore that the Master Attendant be
directed in communication with Captain Burney
to endeavour to engage a Vessel adapted to the
conveyance of the Mission to Bankok and as the
application of Captain Burney contained in his ad-
dress of the seems to come within the scope
of the Instructions of the Supreme Government I
propose that Captain McFarquhar, with the escort
required, be directed to hold themselves in readiness
to attend him.
(Signed) R. FULLERTON.
Ist September 1825.
ORDERED that detailed Instructions, in con-
formity to the President’s Minute, be prepared for
the guidance of Captain Barney, who, in communi-
cation with the Master Attendant, will be directed
to engage a suitable Vessel for the conveyance of
the Mission.
ORDERED also that the Commanding Officer
be addressed relative to the Escort to be attached,
that the Superintending Surgeon be desired to place
Mr. Sub Assistant Surgeon Harris in Medical
charge of the Mission, and lastly, that the Military
Paymaster do disburse upon Abstracts Pay and
allowances to the Detachment employed as an Es-
cort, up to the 15th Instant.


FORT CORNWALLIS The 15th September 1823,
RAJAH of LIGORE.
TRANSLATION of a letter from the Chow Pia.
Ligor to the Honorable the Governor of P. W.
Island, dated Sunday 20th Moharram viz. 4tli
September 1825.
After Compliments.
THE Raja of Perak having written to me to
say that there is a great scarcity of grain at that
place, and requested a supply of rice, 1 beg to ac-
quaint my friend that 1 am now preparing 4 prahus,
each laden with five Koyans of rice, and manned
with twenty two hands to send to him. These Boats
are yet at Kedah, and I have ordered Ambooii
Narain to proceed with this Letter and deliver it to
Khun Aksorn who will present it to my friend, and
at the same time request certificates from him
separately for each Boat, in order that the friendly
object of their voyage may be made known. I re-
quest my friend will expedite the furnishing of these
Papers and be so good as to dispatch Ambooii
Narain to Kedah, where he will deliver them to the
persons who are to proceed in charge of the Boats.
I rely on my friend’s compliance with this request.
( Signed ) RICHD. GAUNTER
Actg. Malay Translator.
P. VV. Island.
9th September 1825.
THE SECRETARY reports that a reply in the
Negative was forwarded to the Rajah of Ligore.


POLITICAL AGENT to the SIAMESE STATES.
To
J. R. CUPPAGE Esquire
Acting Secretary to Government
Sir,
In reply to your Letter of the Bth Instant, I
have to forward enclosed an Account of the further
Articles required by me in order to complete my
stock of public presents for the King and Court of
Siam. The Honble. the Governor in Council is well
aware that the distribution of Presents at Bangkok
is the only mode of securing the services of the
Officers, and through them the attention of the
Court of Siam. But it will be my duty to govern
the distribution of the enclosed List of Articles
valued at Drs. 3538, as well as of the more expensive
articles furnished to me at Port William, with due
care and economy, and accoring only as the pro-
spects of success open before me.
I would beg to suggest that I be further
authorized to provide myselt with some appropriate
present, as a Service of Glass or 30 or 40 Stands of
Muskets, of the value of Two hundred Dollars, to
offer to the Chow Pya Klang or Foreign Minister
at Bangkok, in the name of the Honble. the Gov-
ernor of this Island.
I have &c. &c.
(Signed) H. BURNEY
Pol: Agent.
P. W, Island
10th September 1825.
POUT CORN WALLIS The 15th September 1825.


ACCOUNT of farther Articles required to com-
plete the Stock of public Presents for the Envoy
from the Right Honorable the Governor General to
the Court of Siam.
For the King of Siam,
S.D. P S.D. P
1 Piece of Scarlet Cloth (Superfine) 43. —
I Do. of Green Do, Do. ... 43.
1 Do. of Yellow Do. Do. ... 43. —
1 Do. of Velvet 25.—-
1 Do. of Jaconet Muslin 20.
I Do. Do. Do 14.
1 Do. of Cambric 9.
1 Do. Do 7.
10 Do. of Long Cloth, 3 Cubits
wide @l9 Drs. each ... 190, —
2 Do. of Corded Muslin @ 15
Drs. each 30.
1 Corge of Coarse India Cloth 50. —
Total 474. —
474.—
For the Wang-Na.
The same as the above .... 474.
474. —-
For the Chow Pya Klang.
The same 474.—•
474,—
For the Chakri.
4 Piece of Scarlet Cloth 21.
4 Do. of Green Do. 21.
4 Do. of Velvet 13.
2 Pieces of English Muslin @l5 Drs,
per piece 30.


5 Pieces of English Long Cloth @
19 Drs. per piece 95:
lBo—
. 180.—
For the Kalahom.
The same ... . . 180. — 180.—
For the Inferior Officers and Chiefs.
An Assortment of Common Ceylon
Stones and Jewels 500.
C Watches @ 25 each 150, —
40 Pieces of English Chintz @ 6|
per piece 270- —
30 Pieces of English Long Cloth
@ 14 per piece 420.
3 Pieces of Aurora Cloth @ 25 per
piece ... 84.
8 Dozen of Aniseed @ 4 Drs. per
Dozen 32.
A Case of Handkerchiefs of various
Patterns 300. —
Total 1750. —
1756.
Total Spanish Dollars 3538.
( Signed ) H. BURNEY Captn.
Pol. Agent.
P. W. Island
lOth September 182-“.
UNSOLVED, that the same be authorized.


POLITICAL AGENT to the SIAMESE STATES.
P. W, Island, 14th September 1825
To J. R. CUPP AGE Esquire
Acting Secretary to Government.
Sir,
I beg leave to report for the information of the
Honble. the Governor in Council that in communica-
tion with the Master Attendant, I have engaged the
English Brig Guardian for the conveyance of the
Mission from the Right Honorable the Governor
General to Siam at 1.600 Dollars per Month, and
enclosed I have to submit one Cop) r of the Charter
Party which has been duly executed by Captain G.
Sutherland, the Commander of the Brig, and myself.
I beg also to enclose an Indent for a small supply
of Stationery ; and another for such Medicines as Mr -
Sub Assistant Surgeon, under the directions of the
Superintending Surgeon, desires to provide for the
use of the Mission.
With respect to any supply of Cash, which it may
be necessary for me to take with me to Siam, I solicit
to be guided entirely by the Orders of the Honble.
the Governor in Council. I do not contemplate the
Charges of the whole of the Mission at Bangkok will
exceed Three Thousand (3,000) Dollars.
I have &c. &c.
(Signed) H. BURNEY
Pol: Agent.
RESOLVED, that the Indents be passed and that
an Advance of Two Months be made to the Political
Agent on his Estimate of 3,000 Dollars per Month.


FORT CORNWALLIS The 22 September 1825.
TRANSLATION of a Letter from the Honorable
the Governor of Prince of Wales Island to the Chow
Pya of Li gore dated 10 Septr. 1825.
After Compliments.
I have duly received my friends several letters
under date but have been unable to reply
to them sooner from a press of public business.
My friends letter and presents for the Right
Honorable the Governor General were carefully dis-
patched to Bengal six days ago by a large ship called
the Elizabeth. Captain Burney embarks in a few days
to proceed to Ligore and Bangkok, and he will
happy to commission from Bengal the Stones and
Jewels required by my friend, if my friend will have
the goodness to give that Officer when they meet a
more particular description of these things.
I am much obliged to my friend for his very hand-
some token of friendship, the Silver ornamental Kettle
which he has sent to me. I am very anxious that a
cordial good understanding should subsist between my
friend and myself, and that through our means the
English and Siamese should be as one Nation. Let
my friend ask Khun Aksorn whether he and all his
attendants have not received every kindness and favor
since they have been at Penang, and whether they
have not been allowed to go whithersoever they
pleased, and to buy and sell with as much ease and
freedom as the oldest inhabitants of Penang. All the
English require from the Siamese, and 1 from my friend
is, that in the Siamese Countries the same freedom
of trade and intercourse may be afforded to British
Subjects as that which Khun Aksorn and every other
Siamese receive at Penang. Let my friend be assured


of my continued desire to cultivate amicable relations
with him, and with all whom he may leave after him at
Kedah. I shall entrust to Captain Burney’s charge to
deliver to my friend at Ligore, a suitable return for the
friendly token which he has sent to me.
With respect to my friend’s last letter, notifying
his desire to send some Boats laden with Bice to Perak’
1 would recommend my friend not to think of sending
any Boats to that Country, until all the Pirates and
wicked men are driven away from it. Mr. Anderson
lias not yet returned from his Mission, but Captain
Burney will take to my friend at Ligore a full account
of all that the English may do at Perak and Salangore,
in fulfilment of the Agreement with my friend. When-
ever the Bajah of Perak is liberated from the thraldom
of Bajah Hassan and replaced in the Government of
Ids own Country, 1 will send word to my friend’s sou
at Kedah, and engage to order one of the English
Cruizers to give safe convoy to such of my friend s
Boats as may be appointed to visit Perak. Let my
friend be under no uneasiness with respect to the
scarcity of Bice at Perak. Mr. Anderson has taken
grain with him, and the moment the Salangore people
leave Perak, the Native traders of Penang will carry
abundance of Grain to that Country. I am now an-
xious only that my friend will return to Ligore as soon
as possible and be ready to accompany Captain Brunei
to Bangkok before the adverse monsoon sets in.
Concerning the offenders mentioned in one of my
friend’s letters, I understand from Khun Aksorn that
two of them have returned to Kedah. As to the other,
Arif. I have given orders to the Police to search foi
and apprehend him, and will communicate to my friend
hereafter the result. With respect to the Muskets my
friend is desirous of purchasing, it is proper to acquaint
my friend that the British Government does not permit
the Trading in Fire Arms, as such would enable Pirates
and other bad persons to possess themselves of these


Articles, but as a mark of particular favor to my friend,
1 have, in compliance with his request allowed Khun
Aksorn to procure thirty.
( Signed ) R. GAUNTER.
Acting Malay Translator.
N. B. After tin's letter had been closed and
delivered to Khun Aksorn, it was thought advisable to
send with it some small present in return for the
Kettle, or rather as a token of friendship and good will.
One of the value of 65 Dollars Avas accordingly pro-
cured, and delivered to the Envoy for the Chow Pya in
the name of the Honorable the Governor.
( Signed ) 11. GAUNTER.


READ the following letter from the President to
the Prah Klang at Bangkok.
TO THE PRAH KLANG at BANGKOK.
LETTER addressed by the Honorable Robert
Fullerton Esqr. Governor of Prince of Wales Island to
the Chow Pya Klang or Foreign Minister at Bangkok.
Prince of Wales Island
20 September 1825.
THE Governor of Prince of Wales Island has much
pleasure in acquainting the Chow Pya Klang, that
the Right Honorable the Governor General of British
India, has deputed Captain Henry Burney as his Envoy
to the King of Siam, for the purpose of tendering to
His Majesty the congratulations of the British Govern-
ment on his accession to the ancient and distinguished
Throne of his Ancestors, and for the purpose of
affording to His Majesty and his Ministers every
explanation regarding the War in which the British,
Nation is now engaged with the Burmese, the old and
inveterate enemies of the Siamese. The English Nation
desires to preserve the most intimate friendly relations
with the Siamese, and the Governor of Prince of Wales
Island, under whose charge the Provinces of Tavoy
and Mergui, which have lately been conquered by the
British from the King of Ava, are now placed, has
given especial directions to all British Officers in that
quarter, and to Mr. Maingy the Chief Officer, to re-
spect the lives and property of all Siamese Subjects,
and to open the most amicable intercourse, and a free
trade with the contiguous Siamese Governments. The
Governor of Prince of Wales Island proposes himself in
a few weeks to proceed to Tavoy and Mergui, and to
FORT CORNWALLIS The 22 September 1825.


make arrangements for settling any disputes that may
have occurred between the British and Siamese
officers, and for preventing the recurrence of such
things.
The Chow Pya Klang will learn from the Chow
I ya of Ligore, that he has concluded a Preliminary
Agreement with Captain Henry Burney, by which
all discussions between the Government of Prince of
Wales Island and the Chow Pya of Ligore respecting
the Country of Kedah are put in a course of adjust-
ment, mutually beneficial to the English and Siamese.
The English Government seeks no accession of ter-
ritory or power, and invites the Court of Siam only to
join with it in cementing a lasting friendship, and in
establishing free and unrestricted intercourse between
their respective people.
On the subject of Kedah, as well as on the means,
of opening a most advantageous trade between the
English and Siamese Countries, Captain Burney has*
been authorized by the Right Honorable the Governor
General to discuss and forward to Bengal, any propo-
sition which the wisdom and good sense of the Pya
Klang may suggest to him. If there is any matter
in which the Governor of Prince of Wales Island may
serve the Pya Klang in this quarter, the Governor
begs the Pya Klang will let him know ; and in the
mean time Captain Burney, whom the Governor of
Prince of Wales Island recommends to the kind atten-
tion cf the Pya Klang, will have the honor to offer some
presents in the name of the Governor of Prince oP
Wales Island to the Chow Pya Klang'.


HEAD the following Letter from the President to
the Rajahs of Tringano, Kalantan &c. &c.
LETTER addressed by the Honorable R. Fullerton
Esquire, Governor of Prince of Wales Island, Jo the
RAJAHS of TRINGANO and KALANTAN and
PYAS of PUNGAH. CHAIYA, CHIMPOHUN and
PUCHPURI, and CHOW PYA of RACHPURL
Prince of Wales Island
20 Septr. 1825.
I have to acquaint my friend that Captain Heni\
Burnev is proceeding to Bangkok as an Envoy to the
King of Siam from the Right Honorable the Governor
General of British India.
Captain Burney may have an opportunity of
stopping at rny friend’s place of residence, and of
assuring him of my friendly regard and cordial good
wishes : and I therefore furnish Captain Burney with
this letter, in order that my friend may see and
converse with that Officer, and state to him any
matters which my friend may desire me to know, so
that the friendship and good will which now subsist
between my friend and the British Government may
receive encrease and stability.
READ a letter from the Political Agent to the
Siamese States, intimating his intention of sailing on
the 24: Instant,


POLL. AGENT to PERAK and SALANGORE.
To
THE ACTING SECRETARY to Government.
Sir,
1 have the honor to submit enclosed for the in-
formation of the Rouble, the Governor in Council,
Translation of a letter to my address received this day
from the King of Salangore. The bearer of the letter
informed me that ten small Prows accompanied him
from Salangore to Perak, and that several Chiefs had
been sent up to convey the Guns in charge of Rajah
Hassan at Kwalla Bidor to Salangore,
I have &c.
(Signed) JOHN ANDERSON
Poll. Agent to Perak
and Salangore.
Penang
18 Sepr. 1825.


Translation
of a letter from Paduka Sri Sultan Ibrahim, King of
Salangore, to Mr. John Anderson.
After Compliments.
May my friend be informed that some delay has
taken place with respect to the Engagement entered
into between ns, in consequence of my being some-
what indisposed. As to the debts due to me by the
King of Perak, I beg my friend will demand the pay-
ment of them : other persons who were indebted to
me in Perak inform me they have paid the amount to
the King. If my friend does not settle this 1 must go
and demand them myself - for I made known this to
my friend ; but as lie was about to proceed himself,
he objected to my going. The Statement of my debts
is with the King of Perak, and my friend may
examine the Account.
Moreover, with respect to Perak, I have restored
it to the King; there was, however, an engagement
that I should receive 0 Drs. or half the Duty of 12.
Drs. per Bahar on Tin ; such was the engagement-
known to white people as well as black. I also
proclaimed him King. Let my friend examine the
Engagement.
I send this letter by See Sarnon, who in the
event of my friend having quitted Perak and returned
to Pulo Penang, will convey it to him, in order that
I may not be supposed to have failed in my Engage-
ment.
Dated on the 27th of Moharrum 1241, Saturday,
or 10th September 1825.
A True Translation
(Signed) JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Transr. to Govt.
Penang
18: Septr. 1825.


To
The ACTING SECRETARY to GOVERNMENT.
Sir,
Para. Ist. In continuation of my letter of the
26th Ultimo I have now the honor to submit for the
information of the Honble. the Governor in Council,
a report of my proceedings and negociations at Perak.
2d. The boat which 1 sent with my dispatch
above-mentioned, having returned to Pulo Pankour on
Thursday morning the Ist Instt,, and my Messenger
from Perak in the Afternoon of the same day, 1 lost
no time in making the necessary preparations for
proceeding up the River. My writer was about eight
davs being obliged to ascend the River to Bota, where
the King was residing, a distance of upwards of 100
Miles according to Forrest’s scale, lie brought me a
reply from the King and .was accompanied by the
Shabundar with a large boat, manned by Chinese and
pulling 26 Oars ; with 3 Prahus sent down for my
accommodation. Having myself embarked on board
the Schooner William Money and distributed a party
of 22 Soldiers and provisions amongst the other boats,
we quitted the anchorage of Pulo Pankour at Midnight,
and running along the Coast, entered the Perak
River at day light on the 2d Instt. ; near the entrance
we fell in with five small prahus having on board the
King’s Brother Rajah Abdullah, Rajah Kechil Tangah,
the Sultan Mooda Laxamana and other Chiefs who
came down to meet me and assist in towing my boat
up the river. These Chiefs brought me presents of
poultry, fruit &c., and welcomed my arrival with the
greatest cordiality. * ■
3. During the passage up our fleet was gradually
increased bv the arrival of several other Chiefs in
small prahus, and my boat being towed by three or
four at a time, rendered the passage up the river more
expeditious than I experienced on a former occasion


without such friendly assistance. Early in the morn-
ing of the 3d. we arrived close to the residence of
of Rajah Hassan at Kwala Bidor, situated at the junc-
tion of that river with the Perak, where we were
saluted by a great many discharges of guns, swivels &c,
from the stockade of that Chief and the China Captain
or Chief of a party of about 200 Chinese who reside at
a village on the opposite side of the Bidor river. These
salutes I returned from Swivels on board my two boats.
4. Rajah Hassan having expressed a great desire
to see me and the tide being unfavorable for proceeding
further, J landed and paid that Chief a visit. 1 candidly
explained to him the objects of my mission as regarded
himself and urged him to prepare to leave the Country
without unnecessary delay. He appeared almost over-
powered with distress and wounded pride, but seemed
to recover composure and cheerfulness after some ex-
planations which I gave him. He called me into a
s mall back apartment where he said he was anxious to
have a little private conversation. This room was filled
with spears Muskets, Blunderbusses &c. His object
was perhaps to impress me with an idea of his means
in the way of arms and to prevent his Attendants in
the Hall, where he received me, hearing any observa-
tions which 1 might have occasion to make, hurtful to
his pride.
He informed me he had not received any orders or
communication whatever from the King of Salangore
on the Subject of his removal and that he was at a loss
to know how to act, that he might be blamed if
he quitted the place without the King’s orders &ca.
.1 learnt however from another source that a prow had
arrived from Salangore the morning before and brought
intimation that the King’s Son Rajah Doula, was
coming up, as stated in His Majesty’s letter to the
Honble. the Governor and this intelligence was con-
firmed by our falling in with Rajah Doula’s two prows
in the night of the Bth Instt. proceeding up the river,
as we were descending.


5. After a conference of about half an hour I
took 1113’ leave of Rajah Hassan, informing him, that as
1 had no doubt he would receive orders from the Kins:
cf Salangore, prior to rr<3 r return down the river, X
should expect to see him nearly read}’ to depart when
1 descended. The China Captain and others brought
me off small presents of poultry &ca., which I repaid by
some small return. Leaving Kwala Bidor a little
after noon, we reached Rantau Panjang late in the
evening of Saturday the 3d. where I learnt that the
King had descended the River from Bota to meet me
and was at Sungie Trus, about 6 or 7 miles further up.
Here I was again saluted by the China Captain of
Rantau Panjang.. The whole Chinese population was
until about a year ago under one head, a division
however took place, and a regular engagement between
the two parties in which 4 or 5 were killed and many
wounded ; after which the}* separated and the former
Captain established himself at Kwala Bidor.
6. On the morning of the 4th 1 proceeded up
the river in a small prow with the Sultan Mooda and
the other Chiefs, accompanied by m 3' escort and
attendants, distributed in other small covered boats
to the number of 15 or 16 which were propelled
by long poles, the current being rapid and the
stream shallow about Rantau Panjang. At noon we
came in sight of the King’s flotilla consisting of
about from 20 to 30 small prows lying opposite a large
temporaiy Balei or Hall, which he had erected to
receive me in. As soon as m} T boat reached the shore
a, large part}’ of the King’s attendants, carrying Um-
brellas, spears &ca. with a Chief bearing a Salver, came
down to receive the letter from the Honble. the Govern-
or. The party then formed a Street on each Side and
I was preceded by a band of Music, with a Chief
bearing the letter and attended by the principal Chiefs
walking; behind me. The whole was conducted with
great regularity: My Escort also formed a Street


close to the entrance of the Balei at the door of which
the King met me and gave me a cordial reception.
It is impossible for me to express tlie degree of joy
and I may say enthusiasm with which my arrival was
welcomed by all classes, and the friendly and hospit-
able attentions continued till the last. I was saluted
on arrival and departure.
7. It being Sunday and the time not being
particularly pressing, 1 proposed that we should defer
the discussion of business till the following day, which
the King readily assented to, and. promised to come
down at an early hour the next morning to meet me at
Rantau Panjang, We had however a long conversation
and the King often adverted to his great respect for
the English and his anxiety to conciliate the Penang
Government by even 7 possible means, referred to my
former visit as Commercial Agent and our acquaintance
when he was Heir apparent and asked me why we did
not prosecute the trade in tin, which, from the great
rise in price, of late years, would have proved so
advantageous. He also made frequent reference to the
solicitations of his father for British interference. In
the afternoon 1 returned to Rantau Panjang.
8. On the sth, the King agreeably to appoint-
ment, descended the river and I was engaged all that
day in discussing the several points, in obtaining an
engagement, and during the following day and part of
the 7th in collecting farther information from him
relative to the proceedings of the Siamese, the state of
his country, his views and feelings • and I shall now
proceed to give, as well as 1 am able, a connected
narrative of the most important information which 1.
obtained.
9. As soon as the King had perused the letter from
the Honble. the Governor, with which he expressed
the greatest satisfaction, he voluntarily informed
me that he had been apprized by the Chow Piya of


Ligore of my intended Mission and had a few days
before received a large dispatch overland upon the
subject. He then called his writer to bring the
dispatch, which he handed to me for ray perusal
and he permitted me to retain the letters (3 in
number) till the following morning. In the interval
my Clerk made correct Copies of them and I have
the honor to submit translations of them herewith.
Any remarks of mine upon the Style of these letters
and the cunning and duplicity of the Chow Piya
of Ligore may perhaps be wholly unnecessary. The
letters speak for themselves. The King candidly
owned he had been kept in a constant state of
dread and apprehension from the ambitious ami
aggrandizing spirit of the Siamese and that weak-
ness and an inability to make effectual resistance
had compelled him to acknowledge a submission
which was not sincere. He added “my brother and
“ Chiefs are still at Quedah, I am very anxious
about their return and fear the Siamese may injure
“ them, if Ido not comply with their wishes.” The
paper enclosed by the Chow Piya to the King pur-
porting to be a Copy of the letter from the Honble.
the Governor proves to be a copy of the rough
draft of my commission, which I desired ray writer
to prepare, prior to my departure, and which not
pleasing me was put aside in his desk. It now
appears that Che Ktam, the Chow Piya’s intelligen-
cer, was at the Office on the day it was written ; my
clerk missed the paper, but considered it of no con-
sequence and he is now fully convinced as I am, that
Eta in stole it from his desk.* I beg to attach a
literal translation of it. It does not differ very
* Since writing this, Ettyrn wiio was on the point of
returning to Kedah, from which place he lately came
with the Envoys, upon being taxed with this Act this
morning, fell at the feet of my writer, confessed the
fact and implored pardon.


materially from the approved commission which was
afterwards written.
10. As to the presentation of the Boongha Mas
—he said that was a matter in which he would be
guided solely by the wishes of the British Govern-
ment. He would be so much the better pleased to
be relieved entirely from the Siamese control, if pos-
sible ; but if peace could be preserved by presenting
the Gold and Silver Flower, he was ready to conform
to the wishes of the Government, He informed me
that it had been presented only twice by Perak, and
reminded me that it was he whoso long opposed com-
pliance with the ceremony till the country was over-
come by Quedah in 1818. The King gave me the
following information, in the presence of all his
Chiefs, relative to the presentation of the Boongha
Mas. He said that prior to a demand being suddenly
made by Kedda in the name of Siam about the year
1815 or 1810, Perak had never presented the Boongah
Mas nor was any demand made for it. They had done
nothing to provoke the Siamese and were in no way
tributary to that nation. A compliance with the
ceremony was Jong resisted, but they were overcome
by the superior means of Quedah. The Old King, his
father, died soon after the Country was overcome. As
resistance was useless and he was desirous to preserve
peace, he had sent the Boongha Mas twice. This
“ Boongha Mas dan Perak ” is a representation of a
small tree made of gold and silver filagree. The
quantity of gold required is 4 Buncals, which costs
there 80 Dollars, and eight dollars weight of silver.
Four ornamented spears are also sent, and some
presents of scarlet and white cloth &ca. purchased
at Penang likewise accompany it. The whole ex-
pence does not exceed 1,000 Spanish Dollars and
the ceremony is triennial, thus making an average
annual expence of Spanish Dollars As far
as regards expence therefore, he said, the ceremony


was immaterial, and he would gladly pay more to be
relieved from any further interference.
11. With respect to the armament proposed to
be sent to Feralc for the purpose of attacking Salan-
gore, the King said that the arrival of 1,000
Siamese, much less 3,500 as m entioned, would bring
total ruin upon the Country and such had of late
been the terror of the Ryots that many of them
were prepared to quit the country with their families
the moment they heard of the approach of the
Siamese; that they were afraid to plant paddy, as
they had no expectation of reaping it, and that con-
sequently the measures lately adopted by the British
Government for preventing a Siamese force proceed-
ing to Perak were most satisfactory to him. He
remarked that it was true a friendly understanding
had formerly | existed, but in ] consequence of these
troubles, the Sons of the King Yizt. the Eajah
Mooda and Doula and his nephew Rajah Hassan
had been gradually assuming more power than they
should, which they were enabled to do, from the
weak and defenceless state of the Country.
12. 1 put some questions to the King about
the letters which the ( how Piya of Ligore sent
to Penang professing to be from him and bearing
his Chop. I remarked upon the difference of style
of these letters and the many expressions which
were not only different from those used by Malays
but almost unknown to them. The King said what
1 observed was very true, that all the expressions to
which 1 had objected were not his, that he permitted
his Chop to he put to the letters which were written
by a Quedah Malay a renegade low born wretch whom
1 saw, formerly named Kaya Ahiya (now dignified
with the title of Tuanko Raja Maha Mantri by the
Siamesej who is in the interest of the Chow Piya
for the time being, as he would be in any other for
a very trifling consideration. The King whispered


to me he was afraid of the Siamese and that this
man (pointing to him) had been instructed to write
in this Style and to make representations by Che
Hat the Confidential Interpreter of the Chow Piya~
I called the man forward and in the presence of all
the Chiefs I made my observations and stated the
grounds upon which I had pronounced the paper
(Copy of which I carried with me) to be a fabrication.
The man himself, as well as all present, admitted
the truth and justice of my observations.
13. I next adverted to the great exaggeration
in that paper concerning the number of prahus with
which the King of Salangore’s sons had lately
entered the river. They all admitted that there had
never been more than 5 of a very small size and that
the professed object of the Rajah Mooda’s visit
was to pay some duties collected by Rajah Hassaa
to the King. The King however said he was afraid
of Rajah Mooda, who is certainly a very bad
character, and he would not give him a meeting.
The King of Salangore’s sons therefore returned
without molesting him or the Ryots farther.
14. Concerning the piratical fleet which was
assembled a short time since in the neighbourhood
of the Sambilang Islands and Pankour, the people-
of Perak informed me that they came from Rhio
and Limgin and the neighbourhood of Singapore;
that they are the same marauders who have for
many years past come up the straits at certain sea-
sons of the year and committed depredations be-
tween Malacca and Penang. Their favorite places
of resort are Pula Pankour and the Straits of Colong.
None of these Prahus had entered the Perak river.
The names of some of the piratical Panglimas were
mentioned to me. They had captured 2 Perak
prahus laden with rattans for this place ; one or two
of the crew having escaped, described them. All
agreed in saying that Rajah Hassan had only a.


few small prahus belonging to him and that those
of Salangore were of the smallest size. I have rea-
son to believe the Rhio boats were connected with
Salangore and were prepared to oppose the Siamese,
although they made no scruple of attacking any
vessel they were capable of mastering, as they have
been in the habit of doing for many years past.
15. The King repeatedly urged me to remain in
the Country’ and establish a factory. He said he would
give up his whole Country to the English, granting
him only a small allowance to maintain himself. He
says he does not like the cares and troubles of Govern-
ment, and that he would willingly resign all to their
management, that he had no desire to amass money,
for he had no security in keeping it, and that he was
chiefly desirous of confining himself to the performance
of his religious duties. He adverted also to the great
profits which the Dutch formerly derived by the tin
trade, when they had a factory at Perak, and said
that Perak could never be tranquil without the
superintending control of an European Government.
16. In consequence of the troubles of late years,
the King had not been at Rantau Panjang (where
he formerly resided) for two years and upwards.
He had never, although about 40 years of age, seen
the sea, and his Cousin Rajah Kechil Tangah, and
Brother Rajah Abdullah, both grown up men, had
never seen the sea, or descended the river so far till
they met me. In fact the navigation of the river
has of late been shut up entirely to the inhabitants
of the interior who were afraid to go down until my
arrival gave them confidence.
17. The account which I received at Salangore
of the flight of Che Hat from Perak about years
ago and the seizure of the 40 Siamese prows was
corroborated in a very great degree by some of the
most intelligent Chiefs of Perak, The following is


a literal transcript of a written Statement of all the
circumstances as delivered to me by two of them.
Shortly after the Conquest of Quedah the Chow
Piya of Ligore sent a letter to the King of Perak,
demanding the Bcongha Mas ; the Hajah Bendahra
(lately dead) and several of the principal Chiefs
thought it prudent to comply, but Rajah Ahmed
(a chief from Slack long residing at Perak and since
dead) and who had a powerful party of subordinate
Chiefs to back him, objected upon the grounds that
Perak had nothing to do with the Siamese, that the
country had been overcome by Quedah and that as
the King of Quedah was at Penang, it would be
proper to convey the Boongha Mas to him. The
Rajah Bandahra’s party however prevailed and that
Chief proceeded across the Country with the Boongha
Mas, which he presented to the Chow Piya of
Ligore* mutual animosity between Rajah Ahmed
and the Rajah Bendahra.
18. When the Rajah Bendahra returned to
Perak, lie was accompanied by some Siamese, the
Chief named Aiming Tait and Che Hat, a native of
Calantan, long in the confidence of the Chow Piya.
Upon their arrival they commenced a general plun-
der and seized effects of all the Chiefs who had
opposed the presentation of the Boongha Mas.
These Chief were Rajah Ahmed Nackoda Mahomed,
Datu Sri Dava Rajah, Che Marasin, Che Mapak, and
Che Paudah Ibrahim, to the amount of upwards of
10,000 Dollars. Che Hat established himself as the
Agent and representative of the Chow Piya of
Ligore and in his name committed the most shame-
ful extortion and practised the most revolting bar-
barities. The King was under the greatest influence
of terror from this worthless ruffian. His will for
a time was law. He claimed every thing he could
lay his hands on and having collected a large booty,
was preparing to return to Quedah with the spoils.


19. I pause here to narrate one of the many
instances of the savage ferocity of Che Hat. During
his passage from hence to Perak (for he was on that
occasion, it will be remembered, permitted to pass
through this harbour), he fell in with a small prow
belonging to the son of a late wealthy native mer-
chant of this island at Trong, from whom he pur-
chased rice to the value of 75 Dollars, desiring the
young man to follow him to Perak where he would
receive the amount. He did so, but upon demand-
ing the money he was seized and bound and in the
dead of night he was cast into the river and
perished, his mouth being previously stuffed by Che
Hat’s orders with cloth to prevent his screams being
heard. This fact is well known at Perak, and by
several respectable inhabitants of Penang.
20. During Che Hat’s stay of six or seven months
at Perak, Kackoda Mahomed, one of the persons
before named, who had been plundered of some
property by the Siamese, contrived to play the
hypocrite and ingratiate himself with Che Hat. He
gave him his daughter for a Wife and resided in the
same Stockade, pretending the greatest attachment
and submission. When all the booty had been
embarked on board the prahus, he by the consent
and connivance of several of the Chiefs clandestinely
sent Nackoda Falla to Salangore to invite the King
and Chiefs of that Country to come up and attack
the Siamese. Rajah Ahmed also went to Salangore
and the King was led to expect by these Chiefs he
would himself soon be attacked by the Siamese. It
is generally understood also that the whole of the
Chiefs of the Perak Country were concerned in this
affair. The above named were the ostensible prime
movers. I know that the aid of the King of Salan-
gore was earnestly solicited although a more explicit
avowal at present might be attended with danger to
those making the disclosure.


21. The Rajah Mooda of Salangore, it appears
lost no time in proceeding to Perak and reached
Kwala Bidor. Che Hat was at this time posted on
a small Island called Pulo Kichil about 15 Miles
higher up the river. Some skirmishing took place
between the people of Salangore and those of Perak,
who were, or pretended to be in the interest of the
Siamese, or who were afraid of their vengeance.
Nackoda Mahomed worked upon Che Hat’s fears
and as a near relative, urged him to seek safety by
flight. He lost no time in doing: so with all his
O P5
Siamese and a greater part of the Malay followers,
taking his Wife with him,
22. After he had proceeded about half the
journey across the Country to Quedah, he was over-
taken by his relative Nackoda Mahomed, who pointed
out the great inconvenience of carrying a female with
him, and begged him to let her remain in his charge
until all was settled. Prior to following Che Hat,
however, this crafty Chief had with the aid of the
Rajah Bindahara, Mahomed Saha, Etam Ammen and
Kauda Ahmed, with their respective followers, seized
upon and appropriated to their own use the greater
part of the Tin and the effects left in the Siamese prows,
aud the remainder, a small portion, fell into the hands
of the Rajah Mooda of Salangore and his followers.
The Wife of Che Hat was soon after married to a Perak
Chief and Nackoda Mahomed was said to be possessed
of about 3,000 Dollars as his share of the spoil, and is
now in confidential employ as an envoy between the
Chow Piya and the King. An inference may be drawn
as to the real disposition of the King from this very
fact, he is not ignorant of the part played by Nackoda
Mahomed.
23. The Siamese having been driven out, the
Rajah of Salangore proclaimed the King of Perak and
invested him with royal authority in conformity to an


ancient treaty existing between the two states and an
engagement was entered into that lie should receive
half the duty on all Tin as a reimbursement for the
expences attending his giving protection to the King.
Rajah Hassan was appointed as the Collector of the
revenues at Kwala Bidor by mutual consent. The
King of Perak glad to be relieved of the Siamese at
the moment, the more readily assented to this last
arrangement and a good understanding subsisted for
some time. He married the King’s Aunt; who now
lives separate from him at Rautau Panjang. The
irregular payment of the duties and their reduced
amount, a desire of the part of Rajah Hassan to mono-
polize the commerce, his interference with traders and
the Ryots, and other restrictive measures have render-
ed him unpopular amongst the people and obnoxious
to the King, and his Majesty is now equally anxious to
get rid of the interference of Salangore as he is of the
Siamese.
24. Perhaps when he first assented to the
establishment of Hassan, the King regarded the
alternative as the least of two evils which he was
forced to make a choice of, the [ ? and ] expected
more consideration from one of his nation and
religion than from the .Siamese. The Malays as
well as the Siamese however do not comprehend the
principles which should actuate a protecting power.
The right of protective interference is too often
made a plea for oppression.
25. About five or six months ago a Siamese
Chief named Nai Kct and a iMalay Chief named
Maharaja-lola, with about 300 Malay followers
proceeded to Perak and remained a short time, Nai
Kot returned about six weeks ago to Quedah, and
there was not a single Siamese in the Perak country
when I was there, although Captain Burney states
he was informed there were about 15 or 20 Siamese
with the Rajah of Perak. By the late arrange-


ments the King earnestly hopes that the Siamese
will be prevented from interfering in the Govern-
ment of his Country. It is clear however, the Chow
Piya, of Ligore, from the tenor of his letter, medit-
ates an infraction of his treaty, and sending some
of his Chiefs to assist in the Government. Were
he permitted to do this, his treaty would prove a
downright imposition and we should thus have been
made his Agents in expelling Rajah Hassan and
tying the hands of the King of Salangore, therebj'
in fact, affording him assistance in attaining the
object he has so long aimed at Yizt. an entire
control over Perak. lam sure it is needless for me
to dwell upon the manifest expediency of preventing
the Chow Piya from exercising any control what-
ever. The King and people of Perak will repay with
gratitude our interference, and the commerce of the
country will soon make compensation for the expences
unavoidably sustained while we shall confer addi-
tional security on our more easterly settlements,
which would require a large additional force if the
Siamese are permitted to come in contact with them.
26. With the disposition on the part of the
.King and Chiefs which 1 have before described, it re-
quired no arguments of much weight from me, to
induce him readily to assent to make an engagement as
was pointed out in my instructions, for the purpose of
obviating any pretext on the part of the Chow Piya of
Ligore for disturbing his Country. It seemed to me
to be necessary to obtain from the Rajah a formal
engagement recognizing the established boundary,
agreeing to the removal of Rajah Hassan and stipula-
ting for freedom of trade, and throwing open the
navigation of all the rivers within his Kingdom. To
that engagement, which was drafted in Malay, and of
which a correct translation is attached, I beg to refer.
I considered it preferable not to insert the engagement
relative to the transmission of the Boongha Mas, but


recommended the Rajah to allude to this in his letter
to the Honble. the Governor which is equally binding
and leaves it optional with Government to exact the
performance of this or not as may appear to be
advisable and just, after an attentive consideration of
all circumstances. This arrangement leaves the Gov-
ernment free to act as may be deemed best.
27. It will I trust be noticed with satisfaction
by Government, that the duty on Tin has been reduced
by the voluntary consent of the King, exactly one half.
The collection of the duties is now entrusted to the
Shabundar as it formerty was, and as a proof of a
cordial understanding on this head, it may be only
necessary to mention that I saw the duties paid, on a
quantity exported on 3 Prows which accompanied me
up from Perak. Rajah Hassan was fully satisfied with
this arrangement and it was in fact an intimate friend
of his who owned the Tin and paid the duty to the
King. The navigation of the Perak river has now
been thrown open.
28. With respect to the great scarcity of rice
reported bj’ Captain Burney it is only necessary to state
that it was selling at 11 Gantoms Per Dollar when I
left Perak which is fully as cheap as it is at Penang at
present. The fact is, the Ryots are so poor at present,
that they have not the means of purchasing it at any
price. My knowledge of the Siamese character does
not lead me to think that the desire of the Chow Piya
to send several boats with rice proceeds from charitable
motives or that he would sell it one fraction cheaper
than any body else. I conceive that his professed
intentions of sending prows with rice is all a trick to
introduce by degrees a large party of Siamese: so
think the inhabitants of Perak.
29. I have before adverted to the two parties
which prevailed relative to the compliance with the
demands of Siam. In consequence of these divisions


3 Chiefs named Datu Sideeva Rajah, Che Panda
Ibrahim and Che Mapak had estranged themselves
from the King upwards of twelve months and had
established themselves close to Rajah Hassan afc
Kwala Bidor. On my arrival, these Chiefs entreated
permision to accompany me to wait on the King
and to profess their allegiance, which I consented to ;
in my presence the King gave them a kind reception and
a reconciliation took place. These and many other
Chiefs were prepared to fly the country on the arrival
of the Siamese, and they and others had often urged
the King to resistance, which he was afraid to risk,
and hence they seceded from him
30. After entering into a formal engagement
! with the King, I deemed it proper to send an official
notice to Rajah Hassan to quit the country in con-
formity to the several engagements which had been
entered into ; this I sent by my writer. ] received a
reply in six hours. Translations of these documents
are hereby annexed. Under all circumstances 1 con-
sidered this Chief entitled to some consideration and
I accordingly resolved to give him a meeting on my
passage down the river. 1 have ever found a little
conciliation blended with authority productive of good.
31. During my stay at Perak the Chiefs waited
upon me daily and were unremitting in their attentions
rand civilities. The King begged me to permit one of
the Cruizers to remain till Rajah Hassan had taken his
departure which I should have been disposed to have
taken upon myself the responsibility of doing, if the
provisions had not been expended. Having however
settled every thing and taken my leave of the King who
came down at day light on the 7th Instant with all his
Chiefs to bid me farewell, I quitted Rantau Pangong
and reached Kwala Bidor at noon the same day, after
considerable trouble in dragging the Schooner over
the numerous sand-banks.


32. On my arrival opposite the residence of Rajah
Hassan, I sent my writer ashore with an invitation to
the Rajah to come on board. I had been apprized that
lie had killed a Buffaloe and prepared an entertainment
for me, which I declined. He immediately came on
board in a small canoe, unattended by followers, ex-
cept 30r4 of his confidential friends. I entered into
conversation and told him that as he had a large family
of wives and relations, 1 had no inclination to use any
force to compel him to quit the place without a little
time to prepare. This seemed to relieve his anxiety,
for he had been led to expect he would be ordered to quit
the place peremptorily that day, and my writer remarked
that great preparations had been made on shore for
resistance. Many guns and swivels were collected
opposite the entrance of his Stockade and all his
attendants, about 100 in number were armed with
long swords and krises. He said he was still without
orders from Salangore, but as he had no doubt it was
resolved he should quit the place, ho proposed to send
an Agent to Penang without delay, to purchase a large
prahu or two to embark his famity on and enquired if
I thought he would be permitted to reside in the
Honble, Company’s territory. I told him that as it was
not the object of the Government to oppress him, but
merely to restore peace to Perak, which could only be
done by his removal, I did not think there would be
any objection to his taking up his abode in the Com-
pany’s Territory, so long as he conducted himself with
propriety, and I advised him in a temperate manner to
make immediate preparations for his departure. He
complained much of the great loss he would sustain,
having planted a considerable quantity of Paddy.
Some of the Perak Chiefs however offered to take this
off his hands at a fair valuation.
33. He admitted the propriety of my observa-
tions and promised he would make his stay as short
as possible. In conclusion I informed him that as
engagements had been entered into, and he now


only remained for a time by indulgence, I informed *
him, at his peril, not to collect any more duties,
and to prevent prows passing up and down the
River, and not to oppress and interfere with the
Rajah, all of which he solemnly engaged to observe.
The Scales and brass Weights belonging to the
“ or?
King had been transferred to his charge when he
“ o
came to reside as the Collector, and he professed a
readiness to deliver them over to me to be sent to
the King. I declined accepting them however, and
said this might lay over till he had received final
instructions from Salangore, intimating at the same
time, that if he was disposed to manifest a friendly
and conciliatory disposition towards the Rajah, he
would voluntarily deliver them to the Shabundar on
his return up the river after accompanying me to
Pankour. I also explained that I did not require
any formal engagement from him, the King of
Salangore as his principal having engaged for his
removal. He brought me off some poultry as a
present and after I had descended the river a short
distance he sent off one of his people with 4 large
slabs of tin as a token of his good intentions. I
could not help feeling pity for the evident distress
of the man. He is an uncommonly stout portly
looking Man.
34. I was not a little surprized that the orders
of the King of Salangore had not sooner been sent,
it was suggested to me however by some of my
attendants that the .Rajah Mooda or heir apparent,
who did not wait for me at Salangore, might have
influenced his father to change his determination in
some degree, and induced him to swerve from his
engagement, which was not entered into without
due deliberation, and I was not altogether free from
apprehension that some attempt might be made
upon ray small party on the passage down the river.
I therefore took every proper precaution to guard


against any treachery and had all my party under
arms during the passage down the river. I was ac-
companied by the Shabundar and the large Chulia
boat, which towed my schooner down the river,
'J he Shabundar seemed to be under great apprehen-
sions from pirates in the river. I would beg
suggest the propriety of sending a cruizer to remain
in the Perak river until Rajah Hassan has removed,
for the purpose of preserving tranquillity and ensur-
ing his speedy departure.
35. During the night of the 7th we fell in with
) 2 prows, which upon hoisting, * we were informed,
were from Salangore with Rajah Daula, the King’s
son, on board, but the current was too rapid to
to enable us to communicate and he passed on. I
am led to expect he was the bearer of the order,
and it was he whom the King mentioned in the
letter to the Honble. the Governor, his intention of
sending to bring away the Guns.
3G. On the following 1 day we fell in with a
prow near the mouth of the river which we called
along side and the Chief on board proved to be
the celebrated Nakoda Mahomed before mentioned
who had proceeded across to Quedah the day after the
arrival of my writer with the letter which I had
addressed to the King from Pankaur, and was now
on 1 1 is return with a dispatch from the Chow Piya of
Ligore, having quitted Quedah only 4 days before,
and passed through the Straits of Penang. This
person informed me all the Rajah of Ligore’s fleet
had returned to Traaug, and that the armament
from Sangora, Murdalong &ca. had been dispersed.
The King of Perak’s brother he said was still at
Quedah, and was to be sent back after his return.
Several prahus were also loaded with Paddy and
i’ice to be sent to Perak, as soon as the Chow
Piya learnt the result of my Mission and heard of
the removal of Rajah Hassan. This person has been


continuing to ingratiate himself into the favor of
the Siamese, and it is supposed is playing a deep
game. When he first went to Quedah, after Che Hat’s
discomfiture, it was generally expected he would have
lost his head, but the Siamese, it would appear, have
not yet been informed of his treachery.
37. On the morning of the 9th we reached the
Honble. Company’s Schooner Zephyr and Fattal Garib
at the Sambelang Islands, made all sail and arrived
at the Presidency late on the evening of the 10th.
Instant, after an absence of exactly four Weeks. The
only accident that happened were the loss of one of
the Zephyr’s anchors during some blowing weather
at Pankour, and one belonging to the William Money,
from which we were forced to cut in the river, having
hooked to a tree 3 fathoms deep. I received several
presents of tin from the King and others in return
for the presents given by me, which shall be hereafter
noticed.
38. From the observations which I have had
occasion to make in this and my preceding report, it
will be observed, that the information obtained by the
Political Agent to the Siamese from the Chow Piya
of Ligor, and that acquired by me, united to my own
personal observations, differ materially in several
points. I have felt it my duty to state fairly, what I
heard and observed and it will rest with the superior
judgment of Government to decide upon the case in
all its bearings. As the Political Agent has com-
mented a little upon the information derived by me
from Che Etam, in my capacity of Translator, I feel
it a duty incumbent upon me to make a few remarks
in reply. That Etam is a spy of the Chow Piya is
very certain from his being here at this moment
in the capacity of intelligencer as is well known, and
more especially by his robbing my writer’s desk of the
draft of a commission, which he carried to his Master,
and which is the enclosure transmitted to the King


of Perak, I was well aware, as I have often stated
to the Honble. the Governor, that he was a spy for
both parties and guided my conduct towards him
accordingly. Under the influence of excessive fear
and in the expectation of some advantage, he gave the
information which I submitted. I could point out 5 or
6 instances in which his information has proved
correct and certainly somewhat useful to Government.
Such persons are ever ready to deny or avow as
circumstances may dictate. With respect to the
number of prows, his estimate, I am fully convinced
was under the mark. I had at the time many means
of information. The Chiefs of Perak informed me they
had been assured by the Siamese themselves the
number of prows was upwards of 400 and the Troops
10,000 men.
39. As to the anticipation that the season was
unfavorable as to prevent the fleet issuing from the
Traang, I can onty say that I differ very much from
Captain Burney and his nautical friends. I always
stated publicly and privately that the fleet was prepared
and would issue out at a certain time. I foretold it
long before. The registers in the Master Attendant’s
Office show that boats of the smallest size have been
in the habit of coming from Traang and navigating
the Straits at all seasons of the year. 1 have been
in the habit of sending, and seeing sent, small prows
of a ton burthen at all seasons. The best proof is,
that I sent one to Salengore of less than that burthen
and also to Traang at that very time, another lately
to Salengore and one of two tons accompanied me
and kept at sea with the vessels, making two trips to
the Presidency in a Month, and this perhaps as bad
a month as any. The boat which I met entering the
Perak river a few days ago from Quedah, was not
more than Tons burthen.
40. But if the Political Agent’s arguments be
admitted that the Siamese fleet could not with safety


have proceeded to Salangore, we must naturally
conceive the Chow Piya had some other object in
coming down suddenly with so large a fleet to
Quedah. I have always entertained and do enter-
tain, the belief that he had a more important object
than the conquest of Salangore in view. His pre-
parations were out of all proportion to the enter-
prize avowed and I believe this to be the opinion of
the best informed Natives at Quedah, Penang, Perak
and Salangore. His Highness accustomed to success
from intrigue and deeply disguised treachery, did
not anticipate a discovery of his views or any op-
position. The display of our means had made him
pause and he now reverts to conciliation. I may be
wrong, but I have not formed my opinions in haste,
nor would I hazard them here but from very sub-
stantial grounds and mature reflections.
41. My opinion is, that there will be no tran-
quillity to the Settlement of Penang and the adjoin-
ing Malay States, and there will never be any end
to the ambition of the Chow Piya of Ligor so long
as his large Marine equipment now assembled at
Traang and the Northern Ports continues undis-
persed. The fleet will be always prepared to start,at a
short notice and a force will be required to watch its
movements. He will send a few boats at first to
Perak and more by degrees, if not prevented, under
the pretence of trading. His agents will remain under
the plea of collecting debts and various reasons will
be urged until lie acquires complete possession. Such
are my unaltered views of His Highness’s character.
When I look over all the correspondence with the
Chief, when I revert to the innumerable instances
in which he has practised deception, to the detection
of his falsehood by the late Governor and Capt.
Low, and even by the present Political Agent, to
the Style of his correspondence and that threat in
one of his earliest letters, four years ago, which he


lias in part realized, by assembling (as he said he
would do) a large Army to attack any State
that gave protection to the King of Quedah, I
cannot refiain from thus publicly expressing a
deliberate opinion that vve must rely more upon his
fears than his good will for his pacific intentions.
These opinions I submit with great deference to
Government. I am emboldened to give them, by
observing that many of my former conjectures have
been amply realized and from the responsibility I
feel attached to the Official Situation I hold.
42. The alarming encrease of piracy in these
Straits, principally in the vicinity of the Sambelang
Islands, is a subject which has lately attracted much
notice both at this Settlement and the neighbouring
O O
ones of Malacca and Singapore. The maintenance
of a large Marine force would not in my opinion, be
so effectual and would be more expensive perhaps,
than the establishment of a Military post at the
Island of Pankour, which has long since been
pointed out as an eligble situation for such a pur-
pose. The plan of forming such a Post, sanctioned
by the Supreme Government in 1818, was abandoned
in consequence of the difficulty of obtaining a proper
title to its occupation. lam happy to observe this
objection is now entirely removed. The King of
Perak, off whose Coast it lies and to whom it in-
dubitably belongs, tendered it to me for that purpose
and expressed an anxious hope that the British Gov-
ernment would form a post there forthwith. It is
unnecessary to dwell upon the advantages which
would accrue from such a measure. They have
been often adverted to and anticipated by others
more competent than I am to form an opinion
upon the subject, as the records will show.
Such a measure would tend to the effectual sup-
pression of piracy in these Straits and give
security to the native traders. The Island would


form a depot for the tin and other merchandize from
Perak—the expences would be but trifling.
43. The Island of Pankour abounds with very
fine timber for ship building, particularly a large
tree called Chingal. Asa proof of the durability of
this wood, which is accounted to be superior in this
respect, in the estimation of the natives, to Teak, it
may be only necessary to mention, that a prow built
of that w r ood in the same year that Penang was es-
tablished, or 40 years ago, accompanied me up from
Perak. Some of the trees are 30 feet in circum-
ference. On the Island and the main opposite,
Damrner and Rattans of the best quality are pro-
curable, according to my own observation in great
quantities. At Teluk Piridut, 3 miles from the
Island, Rajah Hassan informed me he obtained 10
Pahars or 30 Peculs of Tin by digging a fathom
deep and at Teluk Sera, close to Pulo Salong about
8 miles to the Northward, there is a rich mine of tin,
the ore beingfound in abundance two fathoms under
ground. The inhabitants of Perak are afraid from*
resorting there from a dread of the pirates. The
anchorage is excellent, fresh water abundant, and
the rocks are covered with shell fish.
44. Three points of primary importance would
be gained by the establishment of a Post at Pan-
kour. Ist and chiefly the suppression of piracy*
2d. a direct control over Perak, by which the Siamese
would be prevented from extending their conquests to
the Southward, 3d the encrease of trade in that
valuable article of commerce, tin, and a place of re-
freshment and refitment, for native traders from all
quarters, navigating these Straits.
45. I perform a pleasing duty in bringing to the
Notice of the Honble. the Governor in Council the
useful Services of Captain Poynton Commanding the


Honble. Company’s Schooner Zephyr, and the com-
manders and crews of the other vessels, as well as my
Clerk, Mr. Fransiz, and I must not omit to record my
approbation of the steady and soldier like conduct of
Subedar Major Devy sing and the detachment of the
25th Regiment Bengal N : Infantry forming my
escort. The utmost cheerfulness prevailed and every
person vied with each other in rendering himself use-
ful and promoting the public service.
I have the honor to be
Sir,
Your Most Obedient Servant
(Signed) JOHN ANDERSON,
Political Agent to
Perak and Salangore.
Fort Cornwallis
The loth Septr. 1825,


No. 1.
TRANSLATION of a Letter from Paduka Sri
Sultan Abdullah, King of Perak to Mr. John Ander-
son Agent to the Honble. the Governor of Pula
Penang.
(After Compliments.)
\
, The letter which my friend sent me by
idlah / Che Hamid has duly reached me and I fully
•ale. / comprehend its contents. As to my friend’s
/ desire that I should proceed to meet him
at Pankour, I should be very happy, but I
have never been at sea and there are no prows at
Perak at present in which I could with propriety
embark to meet my friend. I now send, however,
a China Toukang with Rajah Kechil Tanjah-
Laxamana Panglima Bukit Gantang and the Sha-.
bundar, with some small prahus to wait on ray
friend and on which he may embark and come to
meet me. These are not such as I could wish, but
my friend must excuse this. Written on the 15th
day of Moharram, Monday 1241.
A True Translation
Chop of
Paduka Sri
Sultan Abdullah j
King of Perak. /
(Signed) JOHN ANDERSON
My. Transr.


No. 2.
TRANSLATION of a letter from Aluang Packdi
Juta Minister of the Chow Piya of Ligore to Sultan
Abdullah, the Rajah Mooda Tuanko Maha Mantri
\ and the assembled Chiefs of the Perak Country.
I The Chow Piya of Ligore had been pleased to
' direct the equipment of a force of 3,500 Men to be
sent to Perak, and all was ready when Captain Henry
Burney, as Agent of the Governor Genl. of Bengal,
arrived from Bengal and the Governor of Pulo Penang,
who making obeisance to the soles of the royal slippers
of the Panhua Chow Tan who is most glorious, re-
presented a friendly desire to establish union and good
will and requesting that a greater friendship than
formerly might be established with the Siamese, stat-
ing also that the Governor of Bengal had prepared
goods as an offering to the amount of 50,000 with
which Captain H. Burney was sent to make obeisance
to the most powerful King of Siam and begging the
Chow Piya to assist in forwarding him to the Capital.
Captain Henry Burney the Agent of the Governor
Genl. of Bengal making obeisance at the soles of the
slippers of Panhua Chow Tan who is most glorious and
delicately (or with soft words) begged that the arma-
ment might not be sent to attack Salengore, engaging
on behalf of the Governor of Pulo Penang that he
would speak to the Rajah of Salengore and effect the
removal of Rajah Hassan from the Perak Country,
preventing also the people of Perak from being forcibly
carried away by him. He also said that the Perak
Country was of no use to the English and that they
would not govern it, but that the Country was under
the authority of Siam, to send the Boonga Mas dun
Perak, and observe the customs of states that are
tributary.


Moreover he said with respect to the Rajah of
Salengore’s seizing the goods when Che Hat went
(to Perak ) the Governor of Pinang would negotiate
and cause the payment of the dollar’s, the Governor of
Pulo Pinang would also prevent the King of Salengore
from going to commit further disturbances in the
Perak Country and that he would also fix with the
Rajah of Salengore a proper boundary between the
two Countries agreeably to former Custom, that is the
River Burn am.
The Chow Piya therefore .having considered, did
not wish* to destroy the good understanding with the
Governor General of Bengal. At the time Oaptn. H.
Burney presented himself before the Chow Piya at
Keddah, Kai Kot and Che Walira suddenly arrived at
Keddah and the Chow Piya was informed of the con-
tents of the letter which the Rajah of Perak sent the
Chow Piya, called Capbn. H. Burney and was pleased
of his favor to acquaint him that the Rajah of Perak
had sent a letter by Nai Kot and Che Walim repre-
senting that the Rajah Mooda of Salengore had brought
prahus to Perak, as stated in the Rajah of Perak’s
letter. Oaptn. H. Burney there upon represented to
the soles of the slippers of the Chow Pijm of Ligore
who is most glorious, that a ship should be sent
agreeably to the engagement to remove Rajah Hassan
and to force the Rajah Mooda to return. Captn. H.
Burney promised to go and settle with the Governor
of Palo Penang, and the Chow Piya therefore waited
for a time to learn the result.
When Captain H. Barney returned to Pulo Penang
he sent a letter respectfully representing that the
Governor of Pulo Penang was about to send Mr. John
Anderson to stop at Perak, and then proceed to
Salengore, wherefore the Chow Piya has been pleased
to dispatch Nakoda Mahomed with all haste to convey
this letter in order that the Rajah of Perak may be pre-
viously informed. If Mr. John Anderson meets with
the Rajah of Perak let the Rajah speak properly. Do


not yield superiority to tire English, but speak with
decision. If the Rajah of Salengore does not conform
to what will be required of him agreeably to the en-
gagement of the Governor of Pulo Penang, the business
with Salengore will be taken into consideration and
settled by force. Every thing relative to all this
business has been made known to Nakoda Mahomed
and the Rajah will consult with him so that the affairs
of the Country may not be received.
The Chow Pi3 r a of Ligore entertains much regard
for the Rajah of Perak and he will respectfully make
him known to the mighty King of Siam and obtain a
great name for him in Siam, so that his name may be
famous and good in the Perak Country more than
formerly, and the Chow Piya will hereafter make
known to the Rajah of Perak all, after having made a
representation to the Mighty King of Siam.
With respect to the intention of the Chow Piya to
send the large Armament, he has thought it proper to
detain it for the present, for there is not war : if it
were to be sent to remain inactive only there would be
great difficulty of procuring Paddy at Perak. The
Rajah Kechil Mooda and Orang Kayabesar will be
sent over land, and some Siamese and Malays Chiefs
are preparing with 200 Ryots and upwards to accom-
pany them, who will become associates in conducting
the affairs of the Country with the King of Perak. A
more particular reply cannot be sent at present to the
King’s letter because Nakoda Mahomed is dispatched
without delay to make known all the intelligence
respecting the English as above alluded to, in order
that the Rajah of Perak may be previously informed.
Respecting all other business, that shall be sent
hereafter.
Dated Saturday 29th Dalhajah or 15th August 1825.
A true Translation.
( Signed ) JOHN ANDERSON.
Malay Translator.


No. 3.
TRANSLATION of a letter from Aluang Packdi
Quata Minister of the Chow Piya of Ligore to Sultan
Abdullah Rajah Mooda Tuanko Maha Mantri and all
the assembled Chiefs of Perak.
\ I have been directed by the Chow Piya ot
| Ligore to make known that Captain Henry Burney
j the representative of the Governor General of Bengal,
/ having respectfully presented himself before the
Chow Piya and delicately begged to detain the
Armament for the present and not to send it to attack
Salangore, engaging on the part of the Governor of
Pulo Penang and the Chiefs of the English residing
there to speak to the Rajah of Salangore to remove
Rajah Hassan from the Perak Country and not to
permit the subjects of Perak to be taken away by force
as is more particularly stated in the letter which
accompanies this, and to communicate the Chow Piya’s
desire that if Rajah Hassan conforms to the engagement
of the Governor of Pulo Penang perhaps some of the
people residing with Rajah Hassan may be alarmed
and wish to proceed with him. The Rajah of Perak,
the Rajah Mooda Tuanko Maha Mantri and the other
Chiefs are directed to pacify them; to tell them all
that they will be free from all blame and advise them
to remain quietly at Perak as before and not to quit
with Rajah Hassan. Dated 29th Dalhajah Saturday
1240 or 15th August 1825.
A True Translation
(Signed) JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Translator.


No. 4.
TRANSLATION of a letter from Alaung Faded!
Juta, Minister of the Chow Piya of Ligore to Sultan
Abdullah, Rajah Mooda Tuanko Maha Mantri and
the assembled Chiefs of Perak.
\ I am directed by the Chow Piya of Ligore
\ to transmit a Copy of letters from the Rajah of
Pulo Penang to the address of the Rajah of
/ Salangore and the Rajah of Perak, which are
,/ alike, and it is given to Nakoda Mahomet to
convey to the Rajah of Perak for his information.
In this letter of the Governor of Pulo Penang, there
is nothing certain. The Agent to be sent is Mr.
John Anderson, who is to settle the business. The
English are very knowing and no confidence can be
placed in them, and they may possibly take
advantage; wherefore take care and consider all
circumstances. Whatever Mr. John Anderson may
state, let the Rajah of Perak reply that he has
transferred the Country to the Chow Piya of Ligore,
certainly, and that the Rajah [ is ] in charge of the
Country and that he has not power to negociate
upon important business, but say that he must
represent all to the Chow Piya of Ligore.
When that English Agent waits on the Rajah let
the Rajah of Perak speak with firmness ; that there
may be no dissentiou and the business be settled at
once. All the circumstances have been confided to
Nakoda Mahomet and the Rajah of Perak will consult
with him upon every thing relating to this business,
in order that there may be no variation on the road of
prosperity of the business of the powerful King of Siam
and the Chow Piya of Ligore, so that it may be favor-
able to the King of Perak.
With respect to what is stated above, let the
Rajah of Perak reply that the Country of Perak has


been transferred to the Chow Piya of Ligore and that
he wishes to obtain a good name from the great King
of Siam, and in order that the Country may be secured
to the Rajah of Perak to remain Rajah and to descend
to his family as before. Do not let the Rajah of Perak
entertain suspicion, for the Chow Piya of Ligore enter-
tains real favor for him and he will request the gx'eat
King to confer great honor upon him, so that his
name may be famous amongst all Malayan Countries.
Dated 29th Dalhayah, Saturday 1240 or 15th
August 1825.
(The foregoing Translation is as literal as
possible.)
(Signed) JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Translator.


No, 5.
Copy of a rough draft of a Commission drafted by
the Malay Writer to the Malay Translator, which was
not approved, and was laid aside—translated as follows.
I the Honble. Robert Fullerton, Governor of Pulo
Penang and its dependencies, make known to ray
friends, to the King of Perak an d the King of Salangore
and all other Chiefs, that I send as my Agent Mr.
-John Anderson, to represent me and wait on the Kings
of Perak and Salangore, and other Chiefs, for the pur-
pose of giving them good counsel and settling every-
thing agreeably to propriety amongst all parties, in
order that friendship may be fully established and a
good understanding prolonged, so that union may re-
main as lung as the Sun and Moon may endure. 1
request that my friends will place confidence in my
Agent and give attention to his advice, with sincerity
and that they will receive him with respect and kind-
ness as my agent in order that g )od will may continue.
True Copy.
( Signed ) JOHN ANDERSON.
My. T. anslator.


No. 6.
TRANSLATION of an Engagement of His Majesty
Paduka Sri Sultan Abdullah Ma-alura Shah who is
seated on the Royal Throne of the Perak Country given
to Mr. John Anderson, Agent to the Honble. Robert
Fullerton, Governor of Palo Penang, on behalf of the
Honble. English East India Company, as a token of
lasting Alliance and friendship, which can never be
changed so long as the Sun and Moon shall endure—in
c! 5 o
order that friendship and union may be prolonged and
continued from this day forth, for ever.
ARTICLE Ist. His Majesty the King of Perak
hereby agrees to fix the boundary between the States
of Perak and Salangore at the River Burnam, and
there shall be no encroachment on either side and His
Majesty engages not (o interfere in the Government of
Salangore nor will he send any Armament into that
Country, the subjects of Perak however being per-
mitted to proceed thither for commercial purposes,
conforming to the established rules and customs of
other traders there frequenting.
ARTICLE 2d. * With respect to the agreement
entered into between His Majesty the King of Salangore
and Mr. John Anderson, Agent to the Honble. Robert
Fullerton Governor of Pulo Penang, providing for the
removal of Rajah Hassan from the Perak Country
and its dependencies; the King of Perak is well
please! with this arrangement. He engages not to
receive Rajah Hassan nor peimit him to return to any
part of the Perak territory. His Majesty the King of
Perak aho engages that he will not grant a monopoly
or entrust the Collection of the revenues in future to
any other, in order that there may be no further distur-
bances in the Country, and he has hereby fixed the duty
on the Tin exported from the Perak Country at 6 Dollars
Per Bahar, in order that the Commerce of the Kingdom


may be thrown open and extended, that popu-
lation my be encreased, that all traders may be
encouraged to resort to Perak such as the subjects of
the English Government, the Siamese, Salangore and
others, and that they may be enabled to carry on an
intercourse with ease and satisfaction and be at liberty
to resort to all the ports, settlements and rivers within
tlie State to trade without any interruption for ever.
This engagement is hereby made and to it is
affixed [as ] a token of its validity the Chop of his
Majesty the King of Perak and it is delivered to Mr #
John Anderson, Agent to the Honble. Robert Fuller-
ton, Governor of Pulo Penang.
This paper written on the 6th day of September
1825 of the English Year, and on the 20th day of
Moharrara. Monday in the Year of the Hejirah 124 d.
CHOP of XXXy
PA DUKA SHI |
SULTAN ABDULLAH /
King of Perak. J
( True Copy )
(Bd.) JOHN ANDERSON
P. A.


( CHOP of \
PADUKA SRI
SULTAN ABDULLAH
King of Perak. /
No. 7.
TRANSLATION of a letter from His Majesty
Pacluka Sri Sultan Abdullah King of Perak to the
Honorable Robert Fullerton Esqr. Governor of Pulo
Penang.
_ ( After Compliments.)
With respect to the letter which was
\ brought by my friend’s Agent, Mr. John
l SRI \ Anderson, it has reached me and I received
DUX LAH I ie customary form. All that is
Perak / therein written 1 fully understand respect-
/ ing Mr. John Anderson settling the differ-
/ ences between Salangore and this Country,
consequent noon the negociations of my
friend with the Chow Piya of Ligore which
are very satisfactory, my heart is full and entirely gratifi-
ed with the result of Mr. John Anderson’s proceedings.
As to Rajah Hassan he has ordered him to quit
this my territory, and the boundary between Perak
and Salangore has been fixed at the River Burnam,
agreeably to former Custom.
With respect to the engagement between the
Chow Piya of Ligore and friend, I have also seen
and understood it. Concerning the Boongha Mas I
have sent it twice, and if it be considered proper 1 will
prepare and send it again as a token of remembrance
on my part to the King of Siam, for I am a very
insignificant man and am under great apprehensions.
On this my friend is better able to judge respecting
every thing connected with the business. Such is my
representation.
Dated 22d Moharram, Mon da}’ 1241, or sth
September 1825.
A Time Translation.
( Signed ) JOHN ANDERSON.
My. Translator.


No. 8.
TRANSLATION of a paper sent to Rajah Has-
san at Kwala Bidor b} 7 John Anderson, Agent to tho
Governor of Pulo Penang, at Rantau Panjang in the
Perak Country.
I
I, John Anderson, Agent to the Honble. Robert
Fullerton, Governor of Pulo Penang and its depen-
dencies, by virtue of the powers vested in him by the
Honorable East India Company, whose seal is here-
unto affixed, hereby give notice to Tuanko Rajah
Hassan, that I have ft na 11 y adjusted and settled all the
points of difference between the Chow Piya of Ligore,
the King of Salangore, and the King of Perak, and
conformably to the orders of the Honorable the Gov-
ernor of Pulo Penang and the Engagements which
have been entered into with the several Chiefs above
named it becomes my duty to intimate to Rajah
Hassan with truth and propriety, that he must quit
the Perak territory with haste, in order that there may
be no further differences, and that discussion may not
be prolonged.
Written the 23d. day of Moharram 1241, or 6th
September 1825.
A True Copy
(Signed) .JOHN ANDERSON
P. A.


No. 9.
TRANSLATION of a letter from Tuanko Rajah
Hassan to Mr. John Anderson, Agent to the Governor
of Pulo Penang.
Rajah Hassan presents many compliments to our
friend Mr. John Anderson, and acquaints him that his
letter has reached him in safety. With respect to
our friend’s order to remove, it is well, and we cannot
intrude by asking a little delay from our friend. Our
friend however will consider towards us, for all things
are not ready. When our friend Mr. Anderson
descends the river, we are anxious to meet him and
represent all circumstances. We present many com-
pliments to our friend.
Dated 23d. Moharram Tuesday 1241 or Gth
September 1825.
True Translation's
( Signed) J. A.
My. Translator.
True Copies
(Signed) JOHN ANDERSON
Political Agent to Perak &
Salangore.
ORDERED that a Copy be furnished to Captain
Burney and that the report do lay over for considera-
tion.


FORT CORNWALLIS The 29 September 1825.
SEPARATE.
READ the following letter from the Political
Agent to the Siamese States, submitting observations
on Mr. Anderson’s Report recorded on the Proceedings
of last Council.
POLL. AGENT to the SIAMESE STATES.
Prince of Wales Island
19 September 1825.
To
THE HONORABLE R. EULLERTON Esquire
Governor &c. &c, &c.
Honorable Sir,
Mr. Anderson’s Reports of his Mission to
Salangore and Perak appearing to me to require cer-
tain explanations from me, I solicit permission to
submit them for your consideration, before you deter-
mine upon the course of measures which it may be now
expedient to adopt with respect to our political relations
in this neighbourhood
1 have the misfortune to differ from Mr. Anderson.
We agree however as to the necessity of preventing the
extension of Siamese Dominion to the southward, and
he has proved what I had hoped, that the British
Government will have no difficulty in persuading the
Chiefs of Salangore and Perak to come to any measures
that it may propose to this end. Indeed, 1 never
entertained any doubt as to this point. I only feared
how far ray superiors would approve of the policy of
entering into closer relations with these petty States.
1 submit Mr. Anderson’s reports give rather too
favorable a picture of the old Chief of Salangore, who


lias long been known to be deeply concerned with
Pirates, and on whose veracity I should not be disposed
to place implicit credit. “ Of all the Malayan States on
“ the Peninsula, the Government of Salangore,” as
described by Mr. Crawfurd, “ labours under the
“ heaviest Mala Fama on the score of piracy, man
“ stealing, manslaughter and similar peccadillos of the
“ Code of Malayan morals.” It is also some mouths
since we were told by the same competent authority
“The Pirates of the Illanous are widely extended,
being carried on all the way from their Native Coun-
try ( Island of Magindanus ) to the Spice Islands on
one side, and to the Straits of Malacca on the other.
In these last indeed they have formed within the last
two years two permanent establishments, one of these
situated on Sumatra near ludragiri, is called Ritti,
and the other a small island on the Coast of Linga is
named Salangut.” I beg to question therefore the
truth of the Chief of Salangore’s denial of all know-
ledge of the Lanoon boats, and I may add that from
information received at this Island, the pirates to the
Southward were termed Lanoons by me, and not, as
supposed by Mr. Anderson, by the Chief of Ligore,
who, I presume, never heard of such a race.
It appears that Mr. Anderson could have obtained
from Salangore, if he had pressed the point, the
pecuniary compensation which we are pledged to pay
to the Chief of Ligore, on account of the forty Boats
he lost at Perak. During my negotiations at Queda,
I found it absolutely necessary to win over Che Hat,
and the other principal advisers of the Ligore Chief,
by holding out to them some prospect of personal
advantage in my plan of arrangement. I refused to
take any notice of the great value, as declared by
them, of the contents of the Boats, naturally con-
ceiving that the whole was stolen property. But I
thought I should be justified in estimating the value
of the 40 Boats and their appointments only at 2,000
Dollars, and to this sum, therefore, I limited tha


amount of compensation, it is not the Chow Pya,
but his followers who will benefit by that payment,
and I must leave it to }mu Honorable Sir, to determine
from Mr. Anderson’s Report, whether the Boats were
not taken by Salangore, whoever might have seized
their contents. The British Government, I should
think, cannot listen to the statement, that it is not
the Chief of Salangore, but his son and heir apparent,
Raja Daula, who shared in the booty, or who is
connected with the mal-practices to the Southward.
Our duty and policy must be, I submit, to teach the
Malay Chiefs, that we shall hold them responsible for
whatever trespasses their sons and adherents may
commit against the tranquillity of States and security
of trade.
As for the poor Chief of Perak, it is evident that no
dependence can be placed on any thing that he may
say or do, unless we adopt some more determinate
measures for his protection ; and indeed without
entering into positive alliances of an offensive and
defensive character with him and the other Malayan
Chiefs, 1 do not see how we can exercise the right of
supporting their independence. Neither of Mr. An-
derson’s Agreements comprise this great point of
raising up a barrier against Siamese Conquest to the
Southward. If the Court of Siam refuse to ratify my
Agreement with the Chief of Ligore, and determine
upon prosecuting its views against Perak and Salan-
gore, I do not observe in the present engagements
with those States, such a pledge of protection on our
part, as would afford us a right and title wherewith to
oppose the Siamese.
I am happy to state that Mr. Crawfurd in a
communication which I have lately received from
him, “ agrees with me entirely in considering it
quite hopeless to get the Siamese by Treaty to yield
up their supremacy over the Malayan States, but
thinks that if an alliance, offensive and defensive.


were entered into with those States, Patani excepted,
which is in a great measure peopled by Siamese, the
prudent Government of Bangkok would pocket the
affront.” I apprehend then that my best course at
Siam will be to endeavour to persuade the Govern-
ment as a measure absolutely necessary, in order to
prevent all chance of dispute, between its Southern
States, and our Settlements of Penang, Malacca
and Singapore, to draw a line of demarcation for
the Southern boundary of its Empire, without going
into any discussion as to its right of Supremacy over
Kalantan, Tringano and Perak. If possible, I shall
certainly seek, as instructed by you to have this line
drawn from Patani to the River Trang or Oapih.
But in the event of my failing to effect the removal
of the Siamese from Quedah, I trust, Honorable
Sir, you will perceive that the question of Siamese
dominion, as far as Quedah is concerned, is widely
different, and for the following reasons, from that
which bears on Perak, Kalantan and Tringano.
With respect to the last mentioned States, the
British Government has never absolutely recognized
the right of Siam to control them, whilst their in-
habitants remain in general unmolested and free.
Here, then, we are at full liberty to interfere as
much as may be necessary for securing a con-
tinuance of the present state of things, and this
may be done I am confident without the chance of
our being called upon to undertake active Military
operations. With respect to Quedah, however, the
great mischief has already been done. The Country
throughout is in the occupation of the Siamese. We
have publicly acknowledged their right of interfering
with it. The Inhabitants for the most part have
been driven out, and many of them forced to adopt
a life of Piracy, from which it will perhaps be
impossible to reclaim them, whilst the only re-
spectable Chiefs and Ministers of the former


Malayan Government have been destroyed. Under
such circumstances therefore and adverting par-
ticularly to the imbecile character of the King of
Queda, unsupported as he would be by any such
men as his deceased Bindahara, Laxamana and
Tomongong, it has often been a matter of doubt to
me, whether the restoration of His Highness is
an object much to be desired, or at least one for
which we should make any important sacrifice.
Were the point once settled against His High-
ness, we might make a general arrangement highly
advantageous to ourselves. ‘1 here would be no
difficulty, as I before submitted, in forming offensive
and defensive alliances with Kalantanon
and Perak on the other, for precluding the further
pr ogress of Siam on the Malayan Peninsula. There
would be no difficulty also, I have reason to believe,
in persuading the Chief of Ligore to enter into
engagements with us, for confining himeslf within
Queda and Patani, for securing to us a more free
and liberal trade and intercourse with every part of
Queda and the adjoining Siamese territories than
what we have ever possessed ; and lastly for pro-
viding some Annual Stipend out of the Revenues
of Queda to be paid to the King by the Chief of
Ligore. This last stipulation would not only save
us some expence, but maintain the point of honor,
which many consider as engaged to support the in-
terests of the King of Queda. But such an arrange-
ment,us this could never be carried into full effect,
so long as 11 is Highness continued to live at this
Island or his friends and partisans to exasperate
the Chief of Ligore’s natural distrust and jealousy.
And this brings me to notice the most unpleasant
portion of Mr. Anderson’s reports.
I am by no means surprized at the contents of
the letters addressed by Luang Packdee to the Chief


of Perak. I only wonder under all circumstances
that these Documents do not tell more against the
Chief of Ligore. Unhappily a violent degree of
personal animosity exists against Mr. Anderson in
the breast of that Chief, who in July made many
complaints to me, and again in August, in the pre-
sence of Mr. Maingy, used such language as obliged
us both to check him. His principal charge was,
that the Malay Translator had said and done every
thing to provoke a War between the Siamese and
this Government, and no explanation on my part
would induce the ('kief to disbelieve what his
Envoys and Malay friends had told him. - Hence,
when he heard that Mr Anderson had proceeded-to
Perak and Salangore, he suspected, as I discovered
on ray second visit, that he lord been deceived, and
that he would suffer in reput ition to the Southward.
I presume then, that it was to save his character in
some measure with Perak, to which he had before
transmitted many vaunting declarations, and to
protect himself, as he believed, against the Malay
Translator’s representations, he ordered explanations
to be written to Perak. The language in which
they are made proves them to bo the composition of
one of those mischievous Malays, who have been so
active in fomenting all the late misunderstandings.
The expression making obeisance to the soles of the
Royal Slippers, is peculiarly Mahometan, and so
little in character of a Siamese, from whom the
letters purport to be, that I strongly suspect the
writer intended them to be seen by us. A reference
to the forged Chops and Letters which were
discovered at Acheen in 1819, will shew that the
Malays are very expert in this mode of doing
mischief. It is to be regretted Mr. Anderson did
not take charge of the Original letters, as the pos-
session of them, whenever authenticated would give
us considerable advantage in any further discussion
with the Chief of Ligore,


But Mr. Anderson apprehends, that this Chief"
still meditates interference with the Government ot
Perak. Of course he does,, and will continue to do so,
until we avail ourselves of the power, which we now
possess, of entering into such an alliance with Perak,
as may preclude Siamese interference altogether. 1
distinctly showed in my report of the Ist of August,
that the Chow Pya considered Perak as a Siamese
tributary, that I had denied it, and had only been able
to wave the discussion, without settling the matter
either way. My agreement however was so drawn out,
as to afford our Agent to Perak the means of preclud-
ing by express treaty with its Chief, the interference
of the Chow Pya of Ligore with the Country and
Government of Perak on any pretence. At Quedah I
could never have prevailed on the Chow Pya to resign
by Treaty all Siamese right of Supremacy over Perak.
1 contented myself with preventing the force which he
had prepared from proceeding to that Country and
destroying it, and with securing to ourselves the right
of attacking any Detachment of Siamese Armed Men
or Boats that we might find to the Southward, and I.
conceived it would rest with our Negotiator at Perak,
to devise means for precluding Siamese interference in
the many other forms in which it may be attempted.
Unless therefore, some farther measures than those
adopted by Mr. Anderson be concerted with both
Salangore and Perak, it is manifest, as that Gentleman
fears, that the whole of his labours will especially
benefit the Chow P} T a of Ligore, and that His High-
ness will have made us the Agents in securing to
himself an easy and undisturbed control over the
Government of Perak. The Chief of that Country is
evidently surrounded by factious Chiefs and intriguing
Subjects, and unless we engage with him by Treaty
not to admit of Siamese interference with his Govern-
ment, the Emissaries of Ligore will of course continue
to alarm and direct him, and the Chow Pya of Ligore to
seek to establish Siamese control through their Agency.


I am sorry Mr. Anderson should suppose that
my notice of Che Etam in my report of the Ist
August, rendered it “ incumbent upon him to make
a few remarks in r/ply.” I can assure you Honble.
Sir, that in that report I studiously abstained from
stating many things, that would have proved the in-
correctness of Malayan Spies and Informers, and the
extraordinary credulity of some minds. I wish to
adopt the same course on the present occasion,
although there are many points on which I could
tender explanation. Whether the Malay Translator
returns the feelings which the Chow Pya of Ligore
entertains against him, as the Chow Pya himself
imagines from the reports, I believe, of Che Etam,
the Honorable Board can best determine, from
observation of that Gentleman’s conduct and reports.
I must again beg to state as I submitted in April
last, that I do not propose to set myself up as
an Apologist for the Siamese Chief. The Malay
Translator has never once seen him. I have now
visited him several times, and all I ask in his favor,
is a little exercise cf liberality. I have reported
of him only that which I have seen and heard
myself, and I am perfectly indifferent Avhether
my superiors finally determine upon treating him
as a friend or foe. In the mean time, I would
only beg to protest against the plan of putting the
worst possible construction on everv thing said or
done by the Chief of Ligore, and the best on what-
ever may come from a Malay Chief or Informer.
In conclusion I may state that the fact of small
Boats coasting close along the shore, and running
into some of the numberless creeks and rivers at the
first appearance of bad weather, cannot surely be
produced as a proof, that large War Boats may
voyage with the same ease during this Monsoon,
when the weather cannot be depended upon for two
hours together, and when such efficient Vessels as


the Honble. Company’s Schooner Zephyr part from
their Anchors whilst lying off the Coast.
How far Mr. Anderson’s predictions have been
verified I do not know, but 1 submit that all political
predictions are extremely hazardous, and that a
habit of using or making such must preclude the
exercise of a cool and dispassionate judgment on
any question, in which the party predicted against
is concerned.
I have &c.
( Signed ) H. BURNEY Captn.
Political Agent to
the Siamese States.
THE above having been referred to Mr. Ander-
son, the following explanatory letter from that
Gentleman is recorded.


POLL. AGENT to PERAK and SALANGORE.
i
To
The Honorable Robert Fullerton Esquire,
Governor, &c. &c. &c.
Honorable Sir,
I must claim permission respectfully to offer some
reply to the letter of the Political Agent to the
Siamese States of the 19 Instant. I must leave Cap-
tain Burney to reconcile to his own mind the style of
the present letter, with his private communications to
me. I cannot perceive to what good object such an
intemperate effusion ’will tend. Such a latitude of
animadversion and so querulous a disposition on the
part of a Subordinate Officer, will be best appreciated
by Government.
I naturally inferred that the style and tenor of
the letters from the Minister of the Chow Piya of
Ligoi’e to the King of Perak would excite disagreeable
feelings in Captain Burney’s mind. I did not con-
sider it optional with me to withhold from the ins-
pection of Government documents of such importance,
as giving a clear insight into the views and policy of
the Chow Piya of Ligore, in respect to Perak. These
letters came officially before me, there was no doubt of
their authenticity; they bore the large Chop and were
in the handwriting of Che Hat, who is so frequently
mentioned by Captain Burney as the Chow Piya’s
Confidential Secretary. A few days after my return,
from the late Mission, Captain Burney called upon
me, and perused the letters, with the aid of my
writers. He then admitted that they were very
characteristic of the Chow Piya and that the expres-
sions were indubitably Siamese. I have not seen
him since, and must own that the letter put into my
hands yesterday surprized me very much.


In alluding to the letters Captain Burney terms
them “the most unpleasant portion of Mr. Ander-
son’s report.” It would be a waste of words to prove
all the inconsistencies in the letter to which I am
now replying. It is fortunate that in administering
the poison, he also provides an antidote. In one
part he attempts to prove, by reference to forged
Chops at Acheen in 1819, that the letters of which
1 have produced translations, are the “ composition
of some mischievous Malays ” and in the same
breath, he admits that they were written by the
Chow Piya of Ligore’s orders, to obviate any possible
deception on my part; insinuations both extremely
complimentary to me. He says, “ hence when he
“ heard that Mr. Anderson had proceeded to Perak
“ and Salangore, he suspected, as I discovered on
“ my second visit, that he had been deceived and
“ that he would suffer in reputation to the South-
“ ward. 1 presume then that it was to save his
“ character in some measure with Perak to which
“ he had transmitted many vaunting declarations,
“ and to protect himself, as he believed, against the
“ Malay Translator’s representations, he ordered
“ explanations to be written to Perak.” How can
Captain Burney reconcile such contradictions ? The
reputation and character of the Chow Piya are too
well established to be affected by any thing the
Malay Translator could urge.
Captain Burney omits tc notice in what parti-
cular respect the Chow Piya of Ligore anticipated
deception ; it would seem indeed, from the sequel
of his report, that I have not proved such an
adept as he would have had me be. Had I at-
tended to his verbal suggestions, I should assuredly
have laid myself more open to the imputation.
If a little sagacity and penetration in prying into
the real views of the Chow Piya and perceiving what
is conducive to the interest of my employers and
the welfare of the neighbouring Malay States, gives


me a title to such honorable distinction on the part
of His Highness, I am content to receive it. I
remember when Captain Burney first communicated
your intention of requiring my Services to proceed
to Perak and Salangore, he was pleased to ascribe
to me very great influence with the .Malays and said
many civil things on that head.
With respect to the letters, I have only to state
that the originals, corresponding in the writing and
other respects with those received from the Chow
Piya, were handed to me by the King of Perak in
open assembly; were in my possession 24 hours and
copied and carefully examined by two writers. I
have been Malay Translator to Government several
years, and have been sent upon three Missions. I
have not yet been proved such a dupe as Captain
Burney would have it believed. It will be for
Government to determine whether the letters do not
bear the genuine marks of authenticity in all res-
pects. I fear indeed, the King entrusted to me
more than he should have done consistently with
prudence; and I have reason to know that it was so
suggested to him by his Minister, after he had given
me the letters and hence he has the greater claim to
consideration. He is not aware that I made Copies
of them.
I do not count it any misfortune, *as Captain
Burney does, that he and I differ widely in several
points, when I observe that my opinions are not
discordant with equally good authority. I have
the satisfaction of perceiving that my general
sentiments on the question are in unison with
those of such public officers as Mr, Maingy and
Captain Low, both of whom have had sufficient
opportunities of forming a correct estimate of the
Chow Fiya’s character, nor is it matter of surprize
that his Highness should regard me with no very


friendly feeling. It must be remembered that I
have long been the Interpreter when the late
Governor and yourself have had occasion to make
some severe observations to the Envoys and I have
been the translator of some strong letters of
remonstrance; yet his Highness has condescended
to write me Civil Letters, to send me presents, to
desire his Envoys to enquire about the health of my
Children, to invite me to Kedah, saying that next
to yourself, I was the person he was most desirous
of transacting business with &c. If Captain Burney’s
assertion be true, that “ unhappily a violent degree
(i of personal animosity exists against Mr. Anderson
“in the breast of that Chief,” the circumstance
only tends to afford another proof of the insincerity
of the Chow Piya—a failing in which he has been
so often convicted by the late Governor, Mr. Maingy,
Captain Low and others. Captain Burney’s own
reports are so replete with contradictions, and
various plans, that I own I am really unable to form
a decided opinion, either [as] to his real estimate of
the Chow Piya’s character, his own views of policy,
or the objects he aims at by negotiation.
The Chow Piya has alternately vented his
abuse upon Captain Low, Mr. Maingy and Captain
Burney himself, and I cannot be surprised that I
am not permitted to escape. I acknowledge myself
to be friendly to the simple and oppressed Malays
and I esteem it one of the most flattering distinc-
tions of my public life that the Chow Piya has
ascribed to me such penetration. It has assuredly
been my anxious care to watch his proceedings and
to collect the earliest intelligence of his designs. A
weighty responsibility attached to me. My inform-
ation has been submitted to Government, but Captain
Burney forgets that while he seeks to criminate me,
he is in fact presuming to animadvert upon the
deliberative proceedings and acts of Government.


He has a much greater stake at issue than I have.
My office is not dependent upon the continuance of
description * with the Siamese. He has a lucrative
appointment entirely dependent upon the settlement
of this unhappy business and he has been now-
engaged 10 months. How much longer the adjust-
ment of differences may be delayed it is impossible
for me to predict.
I rejoice to find that after being compelled from a
sense of duty, to say so much in disparagement of the
King of Salangore, Captain Burney thinks I have not
been sufficiently severe. I do not perceive what benefit
would be gained by my indulging in invective against
an old Chief, worn down with years, who has been on
terms of friendly alliance with the British Govt, upwards
of half a century. I would recommend Captain Burney
to peruse 11137- reports with more attention. He is obli-
ged to have recourse to an extract from the Singapore
Chronicle (tho’ he quotes the opinion as Mr Craw-
furd’s ) to do awa} r with any little favorable impres-
sion which my report may have excited. He gives
another extract from the same paper to prove that
there are such pirates as Lanoons, which all the world
knows, but that extract is quite out of the record.
Captain Burney says “it appears Mr Anderson
could have obtained from Salangore, if he had pressed
the point, the compensation which we are
pledged to pay.” In what part of ni} T report does
Captain Burney find such an assurance? I distinctly
stated that I left that point open for negotiation.
I believe indeed that the King of Salangore has such
a respect for the English and such a dread of their
power that he would yield up his Crown, if pressed,
but as his explanation relative to the seizure of the
Siamese prows did not seem to warrant my insisting
upon that point, I contented myself by following } r ouir
orders and submitting the explanation obtained.


The Political Agent says “ I found it absolutely"
“ necessary to win over Che Hat and the other
“ principal advisers of the Ligore Chief by holding out
“ to them some prospect of personal advantage in my
“ plan of arrangement. I refused to take notice of the
“ great value as declared by them, of the contents of the-
“ boats, naturally conceiving that the whole was stolen
“ property , It is not the Chow Piya but his followers
“ who will benefit by that payment.” This puts the
matter quite in a new light. Captain Burney’s former
report gives me no insight into this mystery. My
conception of this is that it was deemed neces-
sary to give a handsome douceur to Che Hat for
writing the Treaty which was brought about mainly
by him, and to promote his private interests at the
expence of his Master. 1 have always been in-
structed to consider it derogatory to the dignity and
character of the British Government to gain any
objects of political importance by bribing inferior
servants. Captain Burnej", from his frequent allusion
to the efficacy of presents, seems to rest all his success
upon an incessant and endless presentation of gifts.
Mr. Crawford’s opinion on this head is excel-
lent. “ They (the Siamese ■ are mercenary beggars
“ from the highest to the lowest. A man well dis-
“ posed to us at Bangkok asked my Interpreter one
“ day if I had expended all my presents. I had not,
“ but to elicit his opinion, the Interpreter said I
had. The reply was “then it is all over with you ”
This requires little comment. If the attachment of
the Siamese is to be gained by such means only, or
rather if their civillity is to be procured only by
such a practice and their respect rest upon such
unsound a foundation, there will be but little
security, a continual expence and outlay will be
necessary to keep them in good humour and we
shall be regarded as tribute bearers. Surely the
British Government does not court the friendship of


the Siamese at such an expen ce. Captain Burney
attributed much of his success at Poongah to con-
ciliating with money and presents a native of the
Coromandel Coast in the employ of the Pya. A
liberal interchange of presents is conformable to the
practice of most Asiatic States but to rest the suc-
cess of weighty political measures upon the quantum
of presents offered and to substitute valuable gifts
for argument and authority is a poor resource. If
it be desirable and just to make a liberal allowance
to the Siamese for any concession on their part, it
would -be far preferable in my opinion, to come to a
clear understanding at once and make a fixed money
payment.
The treaty made by Captain Burney does not
absolutely pledge the payment of 2,000 Drs.—it
pledges only negotiation ; but the duration of that
negotiation is not limited and very little time has
yet been lost. Your Instructions on this head were,
“ in respect to the demand for compensation for the
“ destruction of the Ligore fleet, some explanation
“ must be given before any decisive opinion can be
“ formed by the Government; ” and again “it
“ must be held in mind that we are proceeding only
“ upon the assertion of one of the parties in
“ dispute.” I submitted the Information obtained.
It rests with the superior judgement of Government
to determine what further steps shall be taken.
The demand has not been waved ; the subject is as
open for negotiation as it was a mouth ago. , Rajah
Daula is not the heir apparent of Salangore, as
stated by Captain Burney. That officer does not
allude to the treaty between Perak and Salan-
gore and prior rights, rights respected by the
Government of Penang many years before the
Siamese claimed the Boonga Mas from Perak. He
passes over without notice all the arguments of
importance.


There can be but one opinion upon the particip-
ation of the King of Salangore in the expulsion of the
Siamese from Perak. It is acknowledged on all sides,
that a fleet of prows from Salangore under the command
of the Rajah Moodah or heir apparent and Rajah Daula
did proceed to Perak and that the old King himself
followed immediately after. It is also stated that some
skirmishing did take place ; some of the booty perhaps
and at all events some of the prows must have fallen
into the possession of the Salengore people. This also
is stated by the King and Chiefs of Perak. The King
of Salengore denies having participated in the plunder;
it was incumbent upon me to communicate his denial
to Government, He has since repeated it in a letter.
The question then is, is he not responsible for the acts
of his sons ? It may also be enquired how far he was
justified by prior treaty to expel 1 the Siamese and
whether Che Hat had any right to be at Perak at all.
All these are points to be considered. My own im-
pression is that it would be very satisfactory if the
Chow Pya could be persuaded to wave this demand
altogether; but if you, Honorable Sir, are of opinion
that the Rajah of Salengore should be required to pay
the Two Thousand 2,000 Dollars as the price of his
relief from the Siamese interference, I dare say he
would comply with your requisition. Whether he is
guilty to the extent stated by the Siamese or not is
impossible for me to say. He will not, at all events,
admit it. I always understood and it is so stated
in my Pamphlet, that the force from Salengore had
expelled the Siamese. The additional particulars
furnished by the Perak Chiefs give us a clearer
insight into the matter.
As to an offensive and defensive alliance with
Perak and Salengore, however pleased I might have
been to have entered into such an engagement, I had
no authority to do so. I was reminded by you that
“ our mediation for the present is amicable only and


was cautioned to abstain from any expression or
“ declaration which would ultimately commit ns to the
“ necessity of the more severe measures of Military
“ interference ” and I was directed to enter into a
negotiation with the King of Perak “ submitting the
“ result before any definitive arrangement be made.”
The second Article of Captain Burney’s treaty
provides that “ the Governor of Ligore engages that no
“ Siamese force by land or water shall proceed to
“ Perak or settle in that Country. " Although I have
not by a formal engagement pledged the Government;
I led the King to expect the intervention of the
British Government, and I have provided for the non
interference of the Siamese by obtaining an engage-
ment stipulating for the freedom of trade and naviga-
tion to the English as well as others, a fixed duty and
established boundary, and the Kings have been re-
cognized and treated as Sovereigns and independent
Princes. I flatter myself enough has been done to
secure ever}' proper and legitimate object for the
present. It rests only with the Chow Piya of Ligore
to fulfil his part of the engagement, by returning to his
own Country and disbanding his Armament and
refraining from sending any men to Perak ; the Kings
of Salangore and Perak will, I trust, perform what they
have pledged.
It is not absolutely necessary in my view, for this
Government to enter into specific engagements with
the Chiefs cf Perak and Salengore, formally guaran-
teeing their independence. It may be enough that a
communication of the determination of the British
Government to uphold the independence of these
States, which have never yet been regarded in any
other light than as independent, be made to the Chow
Piya of Ligore. I have not, by a formal writing, in-
volved the Government in any pledge to support this ;
but nothing has been conceded to the Siamese by me.
This Government has denied the right of the Siamese


to supremacy over Perak, and Captain Burney’s treaty,
as he observes, gives a right to prevent the Rajah of
Ligore from sending any force to remain at Perak.
Had I given the King of Perak a formal recognition of
independence in the face of Captain Burney’s report it
is probable the Chow Piya’s indignation against me
would have been raised to an extreme pitch. When
lie observes however a determination to prevent his
interference with Perak, he will I hope, abandon his
views. Had I been vested with the authority, it would
have been a most easy and gratifying duty to have
entered into offensive and defensive alliances, which
Captain Burney seems to think I should have done,
• #
although the tenor of his report and your instructions
do not contemplate such objects from my deputation,
I must own that I was solicited to give a written
pledge, but does Captain Burnejr think I would have
presumed to run headlong into such an engagement
without your orders. I am perfectly aware of the
caution which has hitherto been used and the circum-
spection necessary on such a point. The Chow Pi} r a
upon your remonstrance made through Mr. Maingy
and by letter engaged to abandon his hostile enterprise
to the Southward and to disband his forces. Captain
Burney’s treaty was a repetition of that engagement,
but he pledged certain conditions which were not
foreseen. The Chow Pya engaged to return to Ligore
in 20 days—upwards of 50 have already expired and
he is still at Kedah.
I must claim some little credit for the opinion
expressed in Captain Burney’s letter as being jointly
that of himself and Mr. Crawfurd viz ; that the
Siamese Government would pocket the affront of
of our declaring the independence of the Malay
States. In the pamphlet which I had the honor of
submitting, I have repeatedly stated such to be my
conviction and that all negotiation for their regular
cession would be in vain. lam happy to find that
on this, which is the main point, we entirely agree.


But after such a declaration, I lament to ob-
serve that Captain Burney doubts the expediency of
the restoration of the Malayan Government of Kedah ,
to effect which, was, as far as raj recollection serves
me, the primary object of his appointment as
Political Agent. If, as he seems to have done, he
has abandoned as hopeless, the interests of our
ally and adopted sentiments so much at variance
with the oft-recorded views of this Government,
any argument of mine, after all that has been said
and done upon this important subject by more
competent authority, would be futile and useless.
I think I may with equal truth ascribe to him
feelings towards the Siamese very much akin to
those he attributes to me in favor of the Malays.
In all his* reports, Captain Burney has never
omitted to animadvert severely upon the Ex-King
of Kedah. In the present letter he is called
‘■imbecile”—the King of Perak “a poor weak man”
and the King of Salangore “a pirate” and everything
that is bad. As Captain Burney says of the Chow
Piya—Captain Burney has not seen the Kings of
Perak and Salengore ;“ I have. I only ask a little
liberality.” I have the advantage however of being
acquainted with the language and character of the
people for whom I am accused of partiality, while
his acquaintance with the people of Ligore is but of
recent origin. I have been always led to believe
that conciliation and kindness and a ready access
are consonant with the wishes of the Honorable
Court in the intercourse of their Servants with the
Natives, and if I have been fortunate enough in
attaching the several Malay Chiefs to the British
Government and myself personally I must be content
to bear the reproach which the Chow Pya seeks to
attach to me.
In another Para, of his letter Captain Burney
argues in favor of yielding up to the Chow Piya of
Ligore the full and unqualified right to the pos


session of Kedah, which has hitherto been the main
object of contention and all the expensive negocia-
tions of this Government. The bias on Captain
Burney’s mind cannot be mistaken when he hints at
the removal of the King of Kedah from this Island
and accepting on his part a pecuniary compensation
from the Rajah of Ligore 1! This is entirely a novel
plan. It is not long since he contended for our
right to drive the Siamese out and he now urges the
complete right of the Chow Piya, a right which if
ever acknowledged at all by Government, Captain
Burney himself was mainly instrumental in con-
ceding. It will be for you, Honorable Sir, to decide
how far such suggestions as are now submitted,
may be consonant with your instructions and the
object of Captain Burney’s appointment.
The Chow Piya charges me, according to
Captain Burney’s statement, with provoking a war
between the Siamese and this Government. I may
perhaps be charged with provoking the rupture at
Mergui and the hostile designs of the Siamese in other
quarters, because I long since predicted that they were
not to be trusted and that they would never be
induced to aid us against the Burmahs. If a con-
scientious desire on my part to anticipate any possible
evil designs of the Siamese and a zealous furtherance
of the views of Government for the attainment of the
important objects contemplated by you and the
Supreme Government render me liable to the imputa-
tion, 1 must submit to the accusation, What is the
interpretation of the following para, of Captain Burney’s
report dated Ist August, but that he anticipates
something like hostilities and he prides himself upon
having secured a fair plea for using force. He says
“ this Treaty gives us a right which we certainly did
“ not possess before of preventing Siamese troops and
* e war boats from proceeding to Perak and Salengore,
and this I consider to be the great point gained.”
Hoes not Captain Burney anticipate the necessity of


recourse to arms when he says that he contented himself
with “ securing to ourselves the right of attacking any
detachment of Siamese armed men or boats that we
might find to the Southward.”
And in his late letter he says “ but Mr. Ander-
“ son apprehends that this Chief still meditates inter-
“ ference with the Government of Perak. Of course
“ he does and will continue to do so, until we avail
ourselves of the power which we now possess of
entering into such an alliance with Perak as may
“ preclude Siamese interference altogether. I dis-
“ tinctly showed in my report of the Ist August that
“ ie Chow Piya considered Perak as a Siamese tribu-
tary —that I had denied it. and had only been able
to wave the discussion, without settling the matter
either away. My agreement however was so drawn
out, as to afford our Agent to Perak the means of
“ precluding by express treaty with its Chief, the
“ interference of the Chow Piya of Ligore with the
“ Country and Government of Perak on any pretence.”
There was nothing in Captain Burney’s report leading
to any such inference. ' If, as he says, we now possess
by virtue of his treaty, the right of preventing the
Chow Piya going to Perak what more is required ? So
far from Captain Burney being impressed with any
such sentiments as he has now expressed relative to
the independence of Perak, when I sailed, he repeatedly
reminded me of the absolute necessity oj obtaining an
engagement from the King to transmit the Boonga,
Mas ! ! How can he contend that it was designed
I should formally declare the independence of Perak,
when he states in his report dated Ist August “ His
Highness desired much to introduce in the treaty a
clause respecting the transmission of the Boonga Mas
to Siam on the part of Perak, and I had much difficulty
in preventing its introduction. I observed however
that if the Rajah of Perak engaged and was willing to
to send such a token of vassalage to Siam, the British
Government would not prevent it.”


In the present letter he says “ At Queclah I could
“ never have prevailed on the Chow Piya to resign by
“ treaty all Siamese right of Supremacy over Perak.”
What then does Captain Burney mean by the pre-
ceding observations, but to find fault with me for
not exceeding my instructions and practising that
very deception which the Chow Piya ascribes to me.
Captain Burney’s treaty provides only as far as
respects Perak for the removal of Rajah Hassaa
and the establishment of a defined boundary. Captain
Burney remarks “ unless therefore some further
“ measures than those adopted by Mr. Anderson
tl be concerted with both Salengore and Perak, it is
“ manifest, as that Gentleman infers, that the,
“ whole of his labours will especially benefit the
<( Chow Piya of Ligore only and that His Highness
“ will have made us the Agents in securing to him-
“ self an easy and undisturbed control over the
“ Government of Perak. The Chief of that Country
“ is evidently surrounded by factious Chiefs and
“ intriguing subjects and unless we engage with
“ him by treaty not to admit of Siamese inter-
ference with his Government, the emissaries of
“ Ligore will of course continue to alarm and direct.
“ him and the Chow Piya of Ligore to seek to
‘‘'establish Siamese control through their Agency.”
The King as I have stated, has no power, though he
has every inclination to resist Siamese interference ;
such an engagement, had I made it, would have in
the present state of affairs endangered the personal
safety of the King, exasperated the Chow Piya of
Ligore and in the face of Captain Burney’s pacific
reports and proceedings, justly exposed me to the
imputation of deception. How can a gentleman of
Captain Burney’s age and experience permit himself
to argue so inconsistently.
With respect to my returning the feelings
which the Chow Piya is said to entertain for me,
it is quite superfluous to say more in my own favor


than that I have no personal acquaintance with him
and have never seen him, consequently our animosity
must be founded on public grounds. His Highness
is a principal—l am only a subordinate Agent or
the organ of conveying the orders of my superiors,
and I trust it will be no discredit to me, if I have per-
formed my duty with firmness. I have been a mere
Translator and Interpreter, but I have, like every
other public officer, formed my opinions of His
Highness from his proceedings and correspondence.
Captain Burney alludes to the credulity of some
minds. I have had reason to remark this failing
. too. That Officer made it appear in one of his early
reports that the Chow Piya had been persuaded to
come across to meet him, agreeable to his requisition.
We have seen for what object he came. Captain
Burney states the Chow Piya said he had lost the
credit of assisting us with boats and His Highness
lays all the blame on Captain Low. The Supreme
Government has pronounced, ( according to Mr.
Orawfurd), all expectations of co-operation from the
Siamese to have been delusory.
In one of his early reports, altho’ he liberally
quoted the sentiments of his Agent Achong, in
several points, he omits to state that person’s estimate
of the number of prows equipped by the Chow Piya
of Ligore. Achong gives the number at 300 and
upwards. Captain Burney however says there were
little more than 'half that number. He observes
there were (at Khontaie) 30 new boats building,
100 old ones, most of them too old and decayed to
be again used. Mr. Maingy and others have fully
established the incorrectness of this last assertion.
Captain Burney has several times alluded to the
reported likelihood of his being detained at Trang.
The following extract will shew that there was more
foundation for the report than he would make it


appear, by the cursory way and air of ridicule in
which he notices the rumour in subsequent reports.
“ I invited ” he says “ the Luang to accompany me
“ (to Khontanie) but he vehemently opposed my
proceeding farther and even observed, that if I
“ went to Khontanie I should perhaps be prevented
“ from leaving it again. To this threat I laughingly
“ replied, through my interpreter, that I should be
‘ very happy to be detained by him , as [ was anxious
to take up my residence amongst the Siamese and
“ then weighed anchor and stood up the river.’’
He was pressed to return and considered it impolitic
to persist in doing what ‘‘ I was now i satisfied the
Chow Piyaiof Ligore was most anxious to prevent.”
It appears that some-(Malays were spectators of
this affair and brought the report to Penang of
the probable detention of Captain Burney he
attempted to proceed up the Trang river.
I am accused of prejudice against the Chow
Piya of Ligore. What does Captain Burney himself
say on a former occasion ? “I do not set myself up
“ as an apologist for the Chow Piya of Ligore, who
<f 1 believe possesses much ambition and all the
“ little arts and cunning with which that passion is
li usually connected in the breasts of native princes.”
1 have never seen His Highness and I confess I have
formed my opinions very much from the information
contained in Captain Burney’s reports. I certainly do
regard the Chow Piya as a very dangerous and trouble-
some neighbour ; and I have no other prejudice than
that naturally inspired by the restless character of the
man and the inconveniences which have resulted
therefrom. If I entertain an unfavourable opinion
of the Chow Piya lam not singular. Captain Low
states in his report of the 10 April 1824 that u the
“ duplicity and contempt of whatever is dignified in
“ the conduct of the Kajah and his Officers by his
“ orders, we may suppose on this occasion must be


“ sufficient to convince us of the hollowness of his
“ professions and the little advantage to be gained
“ by treating with him as an independent and liberal
“ minded prince.” These sentiments were approved
and acted upon by the late Government, and I
cannot observe anything in the conduct of the
Chow Piya since, which tends to create a more
favorable impression. On the contrary, his recent
proceedings have been more than ever calculated to
prove the correctness of Captain Low’s opinion and
the resolutions of Government.
Perfectly sensible as i am of the liberal and
moderate principles which actuate this Government,
in consonance with the express wishes and directions
of the Supreme Government and the Honorable Court
of Directors, I cannot be insensible to the credit which
I, as a public officer of this Government, would gain,
by a successful cooperation in maintaining peace and a
cordial understanding with the adjoining states. The
conduct of the Siamese has been such as to point
out the necessity of guarding against treachery and
preventing undue encroachments. You, Honorable Sir,
will do me the justice to bear testimony that I have
ever deprecated the necessity of resorting to military
interference or coming to an open rupture with the
Siamese, so long as it can be avoided. All I have
ever presumed to urge has been the necessity of
vigilant precaution and a display of adequate means to
resist encroachment. I have only to shield myself
under the conviction of having done my best to ward
off probable danger by submitting, as 1 was bound to do,
the best information procurable, I do not assume
infallibility ; but 1 trust I shall at least be protected
against such mischievous remarks as Captain Burney
has made. The charge of encouraging war is a weighty
one, and must be my apology for this lengthened
detail.


For your information, Honorable Sir, 1 feel con-
fident that the preceding remarks are quite super-
fluous ; but as Captain Burney’s letter maybe recorded,
I am anxious that my explanation should be laid
before the higher authorities also.
I have, &c. &c. &c.
( Signed) JOHN ANDERSON
Roll. Agent tosPerak and Salengore.
Penang
21 September 1825.


THE HONBLE. THE PRESIDENT lays before
the Board the following Minute on Mr. Anderson’s
Reports* containing a detailed view of the points
about to be discussed with the Court of Siam.
MINUTE by the PRESIDENT.
Mr. Andeison having returned from Perak and
Salengore, and sent in the Report of his Proceedings;
I now record the sentiments and opinions entertained
by me on those Proceedings, as well as the sugges-
tions which occur to me on the future measures to be
pursued : It is scarcely necessary to recapitulate
the views and objects of our interference, founded
on the extreme inconvenience that must have
resulted from the subjugation of Salengore and the
approximation of Siamese Dominion to our Settle-
ments, of those inconveniences the Supreme Govern-
ment appear to be alike sensible ; the difficulty in
our Course, for preventing them, has been the
danger of a rupture with Siam, and unless their
counteractions could be effected without such result
it is clear that we must have allowed conquest,
however inconvenient, to have taken its course.
It would no doubt have been most desirable that
things should have remained as they were, that no
steps should have been taken by the Chief of Ligor,
before the sentiments of the authorities in England
were received as to the line of Policy to be pursued;
the preservation of such a state of things however
was beyond our power. Had the Chief of Ligor
proceeded by Sea, and at a proper distance from the
Island, we could have had no ground for interference
and the same reasoning would apply to an attack by
Land beyond our control. The free passage of his
Armament thro’ this Harbour, seems to have been a
sine qua non, of his undertaking, and this we had a
rin-ht to admit or refuse, and the refusal produced the
O


application for our Mediation; under the informa-
tion furnished by. Captain Burney on his last visit
to Queda, that an armed force was in preparation
for the attack on Salengore, further delay on the
decision became impossible. Had the Armament
proceeded, it seems clear from the report of Mr.
Anderson, founded on the information of the Rajah
of Perak himself, that there was no prospect of
successful resistance. That the whole of those
Countries must have been thrown into confusion
and ultimately subdued, all the evils which we were
desirous to prevent, must have been perfected long
before the sentiments of the authorities in England
could have been received. And even then, tho’ they
had taken the same view of the Case as we have
done, and determined on preventing further Con-
quest in this quarter, the mischief would have been
complete and irrecoverable : On the receipt of the
above information and the consequent arrangement
made by Captain Burney there remained no alterna-
tive, we must either have availed ourselves of the
opening made, by undertaking the mediation for the
adjustment of differences, or at once have abandoned
all hopes of counteraction. Having followed the
former course, it now remains to consider the terras
required by the disputing parties.
2. The Rajah of Ligor engages that no
Siamese Force by land or water shall proceed to
Perak or settle in that country.
The Rajah of Ligor engages that no Siamese
force by land or water, shall proceed to Salangore.
The Rajah of Ligor engages to proceed to
Siam on the subject of the restoration of the King
of Quedah, and if the King of Siam consents, he
engages to withdraw his people from that country,
to permit the King to return to his Kingdom, to
release the family and relations, and that no
Siamese force shall afterwards by land or water
enter the territories of the King of Quedah.


By the 2nd. and sth. Articles the main objects of
our Interference are attained—the arrest of further
conquest towards the South. The 7th embraces an-
other object which the records show to have been one
never lost sight of by this Government.
The Governor of Ligor engages to return home
within twenty days, with the armament which he has
brought to Quedah.
On the other side it is provided, That the Govern-
ment will effect the removal of Rajah Hussein of
Salengore from Perak, and prevent him from forcibly
taking away such of the inhabitants of the country, as
may be unwilling to accompany him. The British
Government declare that they have themselves no in-
tention of occupying Perak or interfering with its
administration.
The Government agrees to negotiate with the
co o
Rajah of Salengore to obtain payment from him to the
Governor of Ligor, of a sum of Spanish dollars 2,000,
for the Boats and other property belonging to the
latter which the Rajah of Salengore is said to have
seized at Perak; and will prevent that Rajah from
disturbing the Peace of Perak. And the British
Government further engages to negotiate with those
Rajahs, for the establishment of an equitable boundary ?
between the respective States.
The Government engages, if the King of Quedah
be restored to his Kingdom, that H. M. shall send the
Boongah Mas triennially to Ligor to convey to the
King of Siam. The English Government declare that
they have no desire to interfere with the Government
of Quedah. The other articles are of a general nature,
for continuance of friendship, free intercourse, and
suppressing Piracy. In reference to the Articles affect-
ing Salengore and Perak, it became necessary to
depute an Agent to those States to obtain from them
an explanation of the circumstances set forth by the


Rajah of Ligor, and eventual!}' to induce them to
acquiesce in the terms proposed. The Proceedings of
Mr. Anderson, the Agent deputed, are now before
the Board.
It was not to be expected that the reports of the
two disputing parties should correspond, and we accord-
ingly find a very material difference in their accounts
of the same transactions. To the first point, as to
Rajah Hussein, it was stated that he resided in the
Perak country with the assent of the King whose aunt
{ he had married. The Rajah of Salengore has however
5 agreed and provided for his removal. The Reports
stated by Captain Burney as communicated to him at
Quedah respecting the number of Piratical Prows in the
Perak River were also contradicted. The circumstance
of such Prows having actually been at the mouth of
Perak river and the Sambelang Islands is beyond
all doubt, and altho’ such would not be acknowledged,
there seems to me little doubt that they were in com-
munication with the Rajah, and that they would have
been employed in his defence. These occurrences we
have a right to prevent, and the occasional presence of
an Armed Vessel can alone effectually remedy the evil.
In respect to the next point urged viz. the non in-
terference in the affairs of Perak it was urged that a
connection had long subsisted between Perak and
Salengore, ever since the year 1804, and a treaty was
produced bearing that date between the two States ; on
this point more will be said in another place. It is
enough here to observe that the Rajah of Salengore
agrees to discontinue all such interference in future.
The same article determines the boundary between the
two States, as stipulated in the Articles of Agreement
with Ligor; the other articles are of a general nature,
for mutual intercourse, reciprocal exchange of offen-
ders, and suppression of Piracy. The only point un-
adjusted is that for the payment of 2000 dollars, on


which the Rajah of Salengore has explained in a man-
ner very different from the representation made to
> Captain Burney: That he received no part of the
property seized on the occasion ; That the seizure of
the boats was made by the Perak’s people having, by
means of a false alarm, procured the sudden departure
of the Siamese who accompanied Che Hat the Ligor
Agent and [who it] has been generally understood
was guilty of great rapacity; and that the Perak
people in reality, in seizing the Ligor boats, seized
only their own property, and sunk the boats, ft under
these circumstances, the demand of 2000 dollars be
enforced from Salengore, it can only be as an offering
for the maintenance of tranquillity and not a just
compensation for damage actually done by him. As a
part of an Agreement subject to the final decision of
the Right Honorable the Governor General in Council,
this point may remain open till the sentiments of his
Lordship on the whole subject be received.
Unless it should be found that the non payment
is likely in the opinion of Captain Burney to interfere
materially with the objects of his Mission. In that
case it may be paid from the Treasury, to be recovered
eventually from Salengore.
The report of Mr. Anderson of the 15th Septr. con-
tains the account of the actual state in which the Rajah
of Perak is placed. It is evident that he is now liable
to the alternate exactions and oppressions of his
neighbours on each side. There can be no doubt of
the views of Ligor against that state. The letters
written by that Chief and delivered to Mr, Anderson
sufficiently display the ambitious and intriguing spirit
that has hitherto marked the conduct of the Rajah of
Ligor; On the other hand there seems just reason
for believing, that the object of the Rajah of Salengore
in exercising any control or supremacy over Perak
is defensive. He is well aware of the views of the


Siamese against Perak, and lie is equally aware that
should that State be placed in complete subjugation to
Ligor, that his own kingdom must soon fall into the
same situation. This is exactly the result which it is
our object to prevent. By the 2d, Article of the
Agreement made with Captain Burney, the Rajah of
Ligor engages to send no force to Perak. It must be
our business to ensure the fulfilment of this Agreement
in its true sense, and prevent any interference with
Perak, either by one or the other of its neighbours.
Prom Perak or Salengore little or no opposition can be
dreaded. look up to us as the only barrier
against subjugation and destruction. The readiness
with which they assent to every proposition affords
sufficient proof of their dependence on us. It is from
the Rajah of Ligor, all along the aggressor, that the
breach of Agreement is to be expected, but it is to be
hoped that the same influence that produced the ad-
mission of our mediation, and the same dread of our
power will, discreetly used, secure their adherence to
the terms.
The Removal of Rajah Hussan is an object which
it is desirable to see carried into execution as soon as
possible. I propose therefore to dispatch an armed
vessel to remain near the mouth of the Perak river,
until that part of the agreement be carried into execu-
tion. It will be desirable however if possible to make
some arrangement for the future disposal of that per-
son, where [he will be] less exposed to the temptation
to which men like him of predatory habits, are too much
disposed to yield. If willing,to reside within the limits
of AVellesley Province, subject of course to our laws
and regulations, I see no objection to the allotment of
land for that purpose. I annex herewith drafts of
letters intended to be addressed to the respective
Chiefs interested in the late negotiations.
Deeming it necessary that Captain Burney
should be fully well informed as to the occurrences


at Perak and Salengore in completion of the Agree-
ment entered into with the JRajah of Ligor, Mr.
Anderson’s report was submitted to him. His
observations with the replies of Mr. Anderson are
annexed to this Minute. It was not (as I have
already observed ) to be expected that the disputing
parties would give the same account of the same
transactions and it is not surprising, that the Gen-
tlemen employed, should each receive their impression
from those with whom they have been in communica-
tion ; as far as those differences bear on the question
of the superior degree of penetration or credibility
to be attached to the different views they have taken
of the character and conduct of the parties with whom
they have been negotiating it is enough to observe
that as both have well performed the duties required
of them it is unnecessary to pass any decision on
the relative merits of the negotiations. The address
of Captain Burney contains some observations
on the general subject before us which it seems here
necessary to notice: First, the general question
of the general independence of the Malay States:
Second, The relative advantages of abandoning the
interests of the King of Quedah and making thereby
more favorable terms with the Rajah of Ligor.
In respect to the first, it has been observed by
Mr. Crawfurd, “ That it is hopeless to prevail on the
“ Siamese by Treaty to yield their Supremacy over
“ the Malayan States; but that if alliances offensive
“ and defensive were entered into with those States,
“ Patani excepted, which is now peopled by Siamese,
u the prudent Government of Bankok would pockefc
“ the affront.”
But there is a previous question here to be
answered: Has the Government of Bangkok any
legitimate right to consider such an act as an affront ?
Siamese supremacy over the Malay Peninsula has been
set forth but it is a thing taken for granted and not;


proved. I have never seen any authority produced
.tor it beyond the vague tradition of events, said
to have passed 700 years ago, and in so far as the
history of every State has been traced in the Malayan
Annals, is directly disproved. The occasion of war
between the Siamese and the Malay States, in which
the latter were general!} 7 successful we find set forth
in history ; but not one instance of acknowledged
or established dependency of the one, or supremacy
of the other, has ever been produced. The Malays
certainly were never the natural subjects of Siam,
they are of a different origin, descent, religion,
and language. The Malay States are weak; those
of Siam powerful; the dependence therefore is the
result of power, not of right, and has operation
only in respect to those whose proximity has enabled
the latter to turn its power to the subjugation of
its neighbour. The mere assertion of a claim, which
the asserter never had and never could establish,
and which the relative state never acknowledged, is a
mere nullity and can never surely be urged as a legi-
timate bar to a connection with another State if it
suits the policy of such to contract it. It may be well
therefore that the negotiator should abstain entirely
from agitating a question amounting to an admission
of such unfounded rights, he should confine himself to
negotiation in respect to those only whose dependence
has. however unfortunately and erroneously, been by
ourselves admitted and promoted, and those are
Quedah, to the full extent; Perak partially only as
will now be shewn.
It is scarcely necessary to recapitulate the history
of the former, It was the northernmost of the Malay
States and next to the Siamese Government of Ligor,
the first therefore to feel the effects of their proximity.
It is admitted at the time of the cession of the Island,
to have presented the Boongah Mas to Siam, but it is
clear that it occasionally sent the Boongah Mas to Ava


also. To those who attenively read the first agreement
proposed for the cession, no doubt can be entertained
that the protection of the British Government against
both Ava and Siam was the object in view. It cer-
tainly was not at the time considered that the mere
presentation of the Boongah Mas placed the King in
such a state of subjection as to authorize the direct
interference, exaction and oppression afterwards
practised. Had it been so considered it must have
followed that the King had no right to cede and that
we had no right to accept the Island, but in reality
the presentation of the Boongah Mas, according to the
general practice of those countries, bears no such
construction of dependence as has been put upon it,
Siam sends the Boongah Mas to China, but
we have never heard of China exercising any
control or interference in the internal Govern-
ment of Siam. Much misconstruction has arisen
as usual on such occasions, by the erroneous
application of European Ideas and terms to Indian
customs. Boongah Mas has been confounded with
tribute, and then followed homage, vassalage, liege
070 " o
lordship and supremacy and all the feudal jargon of
Europe which when applied to this part of the world
has never failed to mislead the judgment and confound
the understanding. The triennial presentation of the
Boongah Mas being the only connection that subsists
between Quedah and Siam the British Government
were fully justified in supporting the King against all
further interference and encroachment. Had the King-
ceded the whole kingdom to the British Government
instead of the Island of Penang all the legitimate obli-
gation the Government incurred to Siam, would have
been the regular presentation of the Boongah Mas as
done by their predecessors. Beyond that all was the
undue aggression of power on one part and the
unavoidable submission of weakness on the other,
against which the weaker state had a right to protect
itself by a connection with a more powerful one, and


another powerful state, provided it suited its own
interests, has an unquestionable right to bestow it.
That a course of policy founded on this principle
would not have been opposed by Siam itself seems
pretty clear.
Mr. Crawfurd on this point observes, “ A firm
“ tone and vigorous conduct will be indispensably
“ requisite. The Siamese are surrounded by weak
“ neighbours, whom they have subjugated and to whom
“ they have dictated without resistance. This and their
“ great ignorance of all foreign nations, has rendered
“ them altho’ essentially weak and puerile, avaricious,
“ vain and arrogant to such an extreme as to fancy
“ themselves nothing less than the very first nation on
“ the Globe. These unfounded pretensions mislead them
“ so egregious!}", that it is scarcely safe even to attempt
“ to conciliate them, and thus the most moderate
“ policy on the part of other nations, will always
“ be in danger of being construed by them into
“ timidity and apprehension of their own power.
“ From my personal experience of this singular and
“ impracticable character, it is now my firm con-
“ viction, that had the circumstances of the time
“ warranted the Penang Government in promptly
“ repelling even by Military force the threatened
“ invasion of the Island, the partial invasion of the
“ opposite coast, and the threatening and arrogant
“ language of the Government of Ligore, that the
“ fears of the Siamese Court would have induced it to
“ have made ample atonement, to have retraced its
steps, to have withdrawn its force from Quedah, and
“ even forborne in future from meddling in the affairs of
that state.” It was deemed advisable however to follow
another course. The encroachments of the Siamese
were allowed, they made endless exactions from the
King of Quedah, compelled him to attack Perak, and
when his resources were completely destroyed, drove
him out of his kingdom.


As there never occurred in the annals of India an
instance of a Native Chief suffering so severely from
British connection, so his restoration becomes essen-
tial to the character and reputation of the British
Government. After the admissions that have been
made, it is by negotiation only that that event can be
brought about. There is no doubt that so long as we
protect the King on this Island, the Rajah of Ligore
cannot consider himself secure in his new possession,
and as he would run many risks to get possession of
the person of the King so would he be ready to pur-
chase from us by favorable terms the abandonment of
his cause ; but it can only be under the conviction, re-
sulting from trial, of the utter hopelessness of success,
that we should ever allow ourselves to contemplate
the abandonment of his cause in pursuit of other
objects of our own. I fully admit however the
necessity of a final decision one way or other, for I am
well aware that no confidence or cordiality can exist
between us and our present neighbour so long as the
King of Quedah remains in his present situation.
With respect to Perak, its history and political
relations are known, and have been clearly traced since
the year of the Hejira 1021, A. D. 1612. It had all
along been a dependency of Malacca. In 1619 it was
conquered with Quedah by the King of Acheen and sent
the Boongah Mas to that King ; in 1642 Malacca was
taken by the Dutch with the assistance of the Achinese.
From that period Perak has been a dependency of the
Dutch at Malacca, It is presumable that they got
their title to it from the King of Acheen ; Perak
remained subject to the Dutch, who established a
factory and stockade there for the purpose of securing
their Tin Monopoly up to the year 1795, when
Malacca was taken possession of by the British
Government. A detachment from this Island took
possession of the Fort at Perak, and expelling the
Dutch, delivered up the whole country to its own.


King. In 1804/5 a difference arose between the
Kings of Perak and Salengore respecting the boundary,
when the former took possession of the country. In
1814 we find the King of Quedah remonstrating to
this Government, and earnestly requesting advice on
the cruel order he had received to attack the King
of Perak, The subject was referred to the considera-
tion of the Malay Translator, Col. McTnnes.
That Gentleman's report refers principally to
Quedah ; his observations in respect to Perak it is
quite unnecessary to repeat. He seems to have drawn
his conclusions from the mere representations ot
the Quedah Vakeels, and the whole narrative is
directly contradicted by the known history of Perak.
There is not a vestige of proof that Siam ever demand-
ed, or that Perak ever gave the Boongah Mas. The in-
ferences of the Malay Translator seem to be drawn from
occurrences at least 600 years old. We have traced
the political connection of Perak from 1612 a period
of more than 200 years, there is no mention of any
dependence on Siam. So far from it, it is clearly
shewn that Perak is connected with, and dependent on
quite another power ; the view of the Mala} 7 Translator
seems to have been adopted and communicated to the
; Supreme Government who intimate their anxiety on
the welfare and security of the King of Quedah and
their conviction of the undesirable consequences likely
to result from the extension of Siamese conquest in
the vicinity of Malacca, and authorize a Mission, to
mediate all differences.
The suggestions of Col. Mclnnes having been
adopted and acted on, we can only now express
our regret that on such mistaken premises a course
of policy should have been pursued which has
proved so embarrassing and destructive of our
interests on the Malay Peninsula. In the year
1818 Perak was subdued by Quedah, acting under
orders from Ligore, and the King, at. the instiga-
tion and persuasion of this Government agreed


and has twice sent the Boongah Mas to Siam, and
here for the first time commenced the slightest mark
of dependence on Siam, by that State, ihe Siamese
were again driven out in 1822 by the Rajah of
Salengore who restored the King of Perak by treaty,
but settled his son and Tuanko Hussein at the mouth
of the river. These are the transactions which formed
the subject of the late negotiations. It must be
evident that Siam can have no legitimate right
over Perak 5 we certainly stand in a certain degiee
committed by the support we have so unfortunately
given since the year 1804, but it may be hoped
that if our negotiator cannot succeed in entirely
rescuing Perak from all subjection, that it will
hereafter be confined to the presentation of the
Boongah Mas only, and preclude entirely all further
interference with that state.
While on this subject it becomes necessary to
refer back to the past effects of that influence long-
exercised over the Peninsula by the Dutch Government
which has now ceased, as well as the alteration likely
to be produced from the extension of Siamese means
resulting from the diminished power of their great
enemies the Burmese. The Dutch, as already ex-
plained, withdrew from Malacca in 1795. So long afe
they remained, their presence on the principles they
acted, must have served as a complete barrier against
Siamese encroachments on Perak and Salengore ; and
had they remained it is probable that Quedah also
would have been saved: There can be little doubt that
the King when pressed hard by the Siamese and dis-
appointed in aid from the English would have thrown
himself on the Dutch, and there can be as little doubt
that that power would have eagerly received him, on
the terms invariably observed by them, that is
to say, their Political Alliance would have been
afforded to save them from European interference,
their military force to protect against native powers.


receiving in return the ' exclusive privileges of the
trade of the country. The Records of this Government
sufficiently shew the dread invariably entertained
by Captain Light lest the King should throw himself
into the hands of some foreign European Power, the
French, Dutch and Danes having all held out to him
the most promising terms for a settlement in his
Country. From those dangers, the war with the
French of 1793 and with the Dutch of 1795 relieved
us, but it at the same time removed the main barrier
against Siamese encroachment. On taking possession
of Malacca and of Perak, we did not continue the con-
trolling authority exercised over Salengore and Perak
by the Dutch, We followed the more liberal policy
of declaring them free and independent, but on thus
foregoing for ourselves a right evidently derivable
from conquest, the great subject of regret is, that we
afterwards, on a mistaken view of Siamese claim,
allowed one at least ( Perak ) to fall ostensibly under
the dominion of a native power equall}’actuated by a
spirit of commercial monopoly and far more severe,
oppressive and cruel in its conduct towards its Malay
subjects. The Dutch nation resumed their possession
of Malacca in the year 1818, in the year 1819 they
renewed their political relations with Salengore, and
the Dutch Governor at Malacca addressed a Letter to
the King of Perak preparatory to the same arrange-
ment. The treaty with Salengore was in the mean
time, in 1820, annulled by orders from Batavia, and
the King of Salengore again declared free and inde-
pendent. It is probable that the Government of
Batavia had by that time made up their minds on
tiie abandonment and withdrawal from the Malay
Peninsula lately carried into effect by the Treaty of
March 1824. Their object in contemplating the final
cession was no doubt the same which actuated them
on the temporary Cession in 1795, namely to lessen
the value of the acquisition by diminishing the Politi-
cal Influence of a settlement which they were soon to


abandon. The Dutch authority is now finally with-
drawn from the Peninsula ; the great barrier that has
for centuries opposed the subjugation of the Peninsula
is permanently removed, and we are now to decide
whether in taking the place of the Dutch we are to
permit or prevent the result. The revival of Dutch
treaties and obligations involving generally the ex-
clusive monopoly of trade cannot be desirable. On
the same principle that the temporary policy in 1795
was to be considered as liberal so we must consider the
same to be as a permanent measure ; but we must not.
not forget that the admission of their independence of
our own power will be little benefit to them and of
infinite prejudice to ourselves, if we allow another
native state possessing no claim whatever to reduce
them as they have done Quedah to the wretched con-
dition of abject slavery and dependence.
We must here keep in mind that the Siamese
and Burmese have been at war for more than fifty
years. All the country between Mergui and Junk-
ceylon has been the scene of alternate conquest.
Junkceylon itself was plundered by the Burmese
only in 1810. The whole time, troops and attention
of the Siamese States of (Jhampoon, Phionga and
Ligor have been directed to the one object of keep-
ing off the Burmese. From all that expence and
trouble they are relieved by our conquest of Mergui
and Tavoy and consequent interposition between
them and their inveterate foe. All the resources
directed to the above object are set at liberty for
other pursuits. And late events here have suffi-
ciently demonstrated that the first of their objects
is the subjugation of the Malay Peninsula. The
future condition of all the States there must there-
fore entirely depend on the decision of the British
Government. I am aware that it has been urged
and may still be the opinion of some that the Malay
States being of unsettled and predatory habits and


given to piracy, it would be better that the
Peninsula should be under the dominion of a settled
and powerful state. I confess that 1 cannot concur
in this opinion, nor do I believe it to correspond with
political principles generally pursued. It appears
to me that a few petty states, who never could
possibly be dangerous, who themselves looking up
to us for protection are not likely to harbour views
of hostility against us, would be infinitely safer
neighbours to petty commercial settlements than a
powerful state able to draw a large force to a given
point whenever it suited their purpose. In respect
to commercial considerations we can draw the best
conclusions of probable results from references to
those places where Siamase principles are in the
fullest operation and I have never understood that
the Siamese at Bangkok are more liberal in their
regulations of trade, or more fair in their dealings
than the Malay Rajahs in our neighbourhood. That
the Malay States are much addicted to piracy may
be true, such probably will never be entirely eradi-
cated by local application, but it surely may be
hoped that the discreet exercise of that influeuce
which the British Government will always possess
will tend to the progress and amelioration of the
government of those States and the introduction of
more peaceful habits and the prevention of suck
occurrences.
But against the admission of Siamese Supremacy
on this principle, there occurs another serious objection,
the detestation and aversion of the Malays themselves
to Siamese Government: Altho' there be little chance
of their ultimate successful resistance if left to
themselves, we may be assured they would not yield
without a struggle; and a long course of anarchy*
confusion and interruption of commerce would be
the inevitable result.
By the late treaty we have given up the right of


forming political connections on the Island of Sumatra,
we have received in return the corresponding right
over .the Malay Peninsula, but I apprehend that a line
of policy which by the admission of Siamese Supremacy
would exclude us from the first purchase of its valuable
productions would ill compensate for the loss of what
we have relinquished.
*lt remains for the superior wisdom of those to
whom we owe obedience to decide on the future line
of policy to be pursued; it should in my opinion
be our object to prevent the mischief becoming
irremediable before that decision arrives, and I have
written this minute not merely in further explanation
of opinions already expressed, but to caution Captain
Burney against admitting Siamese rights of supremacy
which might debar us hereafter from taking those
States under our protection and effectually maintaining
their Independence,
( Signed ) R. FULLERTON
24th September 1 825,


THE PRESIDENT lays before the Board the
following Translation of a letter to his address from
the Rajah of Ligore.
THE RAJAH of LIGORE.
TRANSLATION
of a letter from the Chow Piya of Ligore to the
Honorable Robert Fullerton Esquire Governor of
Pulo Penang.
( After Compliments. )
May my friend be informed that his reply
which he sent by Koon Aksorn reached me in safety,
and I feel extremely obliged to my friend. lam
now about to return and shall certainly set out on
Friday, the 12th day of the 10th Month. The
Monsoon for proceeding to the Capital is nearly at
an end and if much delay takes place in departure it
will be attended with difficulty to get up. With
respect to Captain Burney’s engagement that I would
convey him to the Capital, if he has not already
sailed, let him depart without delay; I will convey
him to the Capital and will settle the business
agreeable to the desire of the Governor General of
Bengal, and establish a permanent friendship.
Moreover, when Koon Aksorn was formerly sent
to purchase something, he did not procure enough,
wherefore I send that person Nai Neem and Nai
Simie to purchase some more articles to follow me
with all haste and to accompany me to the Capital.
I rely upon my friend that he will receive and treat
these people like his own subjects, in order that
they may return speedily and that there ray be no
delay.
Farther, with respect to Mr. John Anderson’s
proceeding to Perak and Salengore, I hear he has


returned, and I am very anxious to be informed of
the business. I therefore beg my friend to send me
a letter and inform me.
With reference to the letter sent me respecting
the Criminal named Arif, I request my friend will
cause further search to be made for him. Mr. Gaunter
stated that my friend was desirous of being informed
of the appearance of this person Arif and enquired of
Koon Aksorn, requesting a description of him to be
sent, in order that he might be apprehended. Arif is
is a young man, neither tall nor short, his complexion
reddish, his hair straight, his face a little marked with
small pox, and he is a relative of Che Jaya, of Pulo
Langkawi. Let my friend call Che Jaya and enquire
of him, who will no doubt if intimidated discover him.
When my friend sends me Arif, it will redound much
to the honor of my friend and be a great proof of his
friendship for me; I shall be exceedingly pleased.
The four lamps which Mr. Gaunter delivered to Koon
Aksorn in my friend’s Name, I have received with
great pleasure.
Moreover, what 1 have now stated is done with a
pure heart and friendly disposition. The Siamese are
not well acquainted with all the customs of the
English, and should any mistake or deviation from
their etiquette be made let not my friend be displeased.
My son, whom the great King has sent to reside at
Kedah, is a young man and I am now about to return
leaving him behind. I therefore trust that a mutual
friendship will be established between my friend and
him ; Kedah and Pulo Penang are very close to each
other, and a good understanding and friendly inter-
course should prevail.
I have nothing in the way of Siamese manufac-
ture that is novel to send my friend, and therefore
send him two Coyans of rice as a token for the pre-
sent 5 I will hereafter look for something of Siamese
workmanship to repay ray friend’s favor.


I have occasion for a high horse, and
desired Koon Aksorn to endeavour to purchase [? one]
to bring with him. I have also sent a prow for the
purpose of embarking him on, if he can be procured.
Should Koon Aksorn be in difficulty I request my
friend to assist him, in order that he
speedily. Dated 10th of 10th Month in the year 1241.
( A true Translation )
(Signed) JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Transr, to Govt.
Pinang
27th Septr. 1825.


SON of RAJAH of LIGORE.
TRANSLATION
of a letter from Chow Koou Nooi son of the Chow
Fiya of Ligore to Captain Henry Burney.
I am directed by the Piya of Ligore to write a
letter and say that he intends returning on Friday,
the 12th day of the 10th Month, which is positively
fixed. The Monsoon for going to the Capital
will soon be unfavorable and it will be difficult to
proceed, wherefore let my friend sail speedily
agreeably to the engagement in order that there
may be no delay in arriving there, so that the
business may be settled, and friendship and a good
understanding promoted. Dated 10th of jOth
Month year Ze 1241.
A true Translation
( Signed ) JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Transr. to Govt.
Pinang
27th Septr. 1825.


THE FOLLOWING letter to the Rajah of
Ligore advising the departure of Captain Burney
is recorded.
To,
THE RAJAH of LIGORE.
LETTER
from the Honorable Robert Fullerton Governor of
Pulo Penang to the Chow Fiya of Ligore.
I have to acquaint my friend that Captain
Burney has departed to meet my friend at Ligore
according to his agreement and that I have given
that officer full instructions to show ray friend every
thing that Mr. Anderson has done at Perak and
Salengore on the part of the British Government
and to explain all the arrangements which have been
made which are in conformity to my orders and
have my approval. lam about to dispatch a Cruizer
to Perak to await the fulfilment of the engagement
which has been made for the immediate removal of
Rajah Hussan and to give full effect to the other
arrangements. I enclose for my friend’s informa-
tion, copies of the engagements entered into with
the Chiefs of Perak and Salensrore.
Having now with so much trouble and expence,
adjusted the various points of difference between
my friend and the States of Perak and Salengore
and laid the foundation for the reestablishment of
peace, order and tranquillity, I expect nothing on
the part of my friend or any of his people will be
done to revive party differences, I shall take care
to keep Salengore and Perak firmly to their engage-
ments and must recommend my friend to keep
quiet on his part. I trust a cordial friendship will
be firmly established through the Agency of my
friend and Captain Burney at the Capital between
the Siamese and British Governments.


I have frequently assured my friend cf my ready
inclination and desire to cultivate friendly relations
with the Siamese, and I expect my friend will leave
especial orders at Quedah, that nothing be done on
[ the ] part of any of my friend’s people, calculated to-
disturb the arrangement which has been made at
Perak and Salengore, or to interrupt the harmony and
p-ood will which have now been established between
O
my friend and myself, and through us between the
Siamese and English nations.
I wish my friend a safe and prosperous journey
and hope he will receive Captain Burney with kind-
ness and attention and speedily accompany him to the
Capital to confirm with the Emperor, the friendship
now so happily established between us.
(Signed) R. FULLERTON
Governor.
The 23rd. Septr. 1825
Translated
(Sd.) J. A.
My, Transr.


THE FOLLOWING letter to the Rajah of Perak,
in reply to one received through Mr. Anderson is laid
before the Board.
To,
THE RAJAH of PERAK.
LETTER
from the Honorable Robert Fullerton, Governor of’
Pulo Pinang to Paduka Sri Sultan Abdullah King of
Perak.
I have duly received my friend’s letter brought
by my Agent, Mr. Anderson, and that Gentleman has
also laid before me the engagement given to him by
my friend which is extremely satisfactory to me, as
evincing a disposition to prolong that cordial under-
standing which has, for a length of time subsisted be-
tween the state of Perak and the Governments of Pulo
Penang and Malacca. It was a source of deep regret
to me to observe the destruction and differences
prevailing in my friend’s country, and desirous of
prolonging and securing his independence and the full
exercise of his Sovereign rights, I adopted such mea-
sures as appeared to me were calculated to secure these
important objects. The cordial reception which my
friend and his Chiefs gave to my Agent and the respect
and attention shewn to him are gratifying to me, in
as much as it proves that ray proffered mediation
has been received with proper feeling. The engage-
ments now entered into betwixt my friend, the Chow
Piya of Ligore and the King of Salengore, under
the sanction of the British Government will no doubt
have the effect of putting a stop to all differences
and misunderstandings and restoring peace and
tranquillity amongst the neighbouring states. The
conditions of the treaty with the Chow Piya of Ligore
having been carried into effect and being in progress,
through the agency of the British Government, the


Chow Piya will return to his own country, his forces
will be entirely disbanded, and he will be prevented
from exercising any future interference whatever over
the states of Perak and Salengore. it is the object and
intention of the British Government to uphold and
support the independence of their states and to pre-
vent all encroachment or interference on either side to
avoid disputes. I expect therefore that my friend will
duly conform to his engagement in all respects, whereby
encouragement will be held out to traders to resort to
his country, his own means [and] resources will be
encreased and a cordial understanding will prevail
amongst all parties. Peace and an unrestricted
commercial intercourse are all that is desired b}' the
British Government.
My Agent informed me that my friend was
desirous that a Cruizer should remain at Perak till
Rajah Hassan had finally quitted the Country. I
have received information that the King of Salengore
has sent prows to convey away the Guns from Kwala
Bidor and I now send two Cruizers to expedite the
departure of Rajah Hassan, to afford protection to the
Ryots and to bring me a report of the evacuation of
the post of Kwala Bidor by that Chief. I request that
my friend will inform Mr. Cracroft of his Welfare.
(Signed) R. FULLERTON
Pinang 21st Septr. 1825.
Translated
(Sd.) J. A.
My. Trausr.


THE following Letter to the Rajah of Salengore
dispatched by the H. C. C. Prince of Wales is recorded.
To
, THE RAJAH of SALENGORE.
BCJ
;r.
Letter
from the Honorable Robert Fullerton, Governor of
Pulo Penang to Paduka Sri Sultan Ibrahim King of
Salengore.
I have duly received my friend’s several letters
and understand their contents. Mr. Anderson has
also laid before me a translation of a lettor to his
address, in which ray friend states that he had been
prevented by indisposition from sooner dispatching
the prows destined to convey away the guns in charge
of Rajah Hassan at Kwala Bidor. I ara happy to find
however that my friend is proceeding to carry into
effect in the spirit of sincerity and truth, the stipula-
tions of the engagement which he entered into with
mv Agent, Mr. Anderson. This letter will be con-
v D '
veyed to ray friend by a Captain Collinson of one of
the Cruizers, who has been directed to remain at
Perak until the removal of Rajah Hassan is effected
and to bring the intelligence to that effect. I trust
therefore that no delay will take place. If Rajah
Hassan desires, as he mentioned to Mr. Anderson, to
take up his abode within the Honorable Company’s
territory, there will be no objection to his doing so,
conforming to the rules and customs observed by the
Subjects of the Honble. Company.
My friend states that he did not seize any of
the Siamese prows, but he cannot deny that a fleet
of prows proceeded from Salengore to Perak in charge
of his Sons the Rajah Mooda and Daula. From the
statements I have received, the value of the property
on board the pralms was very considerable and I


think it will be proper for my friend to pay 2,000
Dollars by which his independence will be entirely
secured and he will be finally freed from all in-
terference on the part of the Siamese. My friend
cannot be ignorant that but for the intervention of
the British Government he would have been attacked
some Months ago, and 2,000 Dollars is a small
sacrifice for a relief from such a threatened calamity.
On these grounds therefore I expect that my friend
will pay the sum proposed. If it pleases my friend
to pay the amount the Captain will receive it
in Tin or Dollars, or if he will send me a reply
engaging to pay it he may send it when more
convenient to himself. As to my friend’s debts in
Perak these will be taken into consideration after
the removal of Hajah Hassan, the King of Perak
informed,my Agent that he also had some accounts
to produce. Let not the road of friendship be
destroyed by disputes on this head. Engagements
have now been made, fixing the established boundary
between Perak and Salengore, by which I trust all
future differences will be obviated and I must
caution my friend that as these engagements have
been made under the sanction of the British Govern-
ment, and it is my determination to cause the same
to be enforced, and to prevent interference of the
Siamese or the sending of men to the Southward
and to secure to each Chief the free and full pos-
session of his Sovereign rights, that it will be
incumbent on my friend to observe the conditions of
the agreement, for no deviation can be permitted.
The several provisions in that agreement are
satisfactory to me and I hope may be the means of
ensuring tranquillity and cordial understanding
among all parties, promoting union and good will
between Salengore, Pulo Penang and Perak and
extending and encouraging the trade between the
respective States, to the mutual advantage and.
peace of all.


I shall be happy to receive accounts of my
friend’s welfare.
(Signed) R. FULLERTON
Governor.
Penang
21st Septr. 1825.
Translated
(Signed) J. ANDERSON
Malay Translator to Govt.


To the RAJAH HASSAN at KWALA BIDOR.
LETTER from MR. JOHN ANDERSON to
RAJAH HASSAN at KWALA BIDOR.
I am directed by the Honble. Robert Fullerton
Governor of Pulo Penang to inform my friend that a
letter has been received from the King of Salengore
mentioning his having sent prows to convey away the
Guns in my friend’s charge and to express an expecta-
tion that my friend has already made the necessary
preparations for his immediate departure from the
Perak Country agreeably to the engagement entered
into and his own assurances to me.
•
With respect to my friend’s wish to take up his
abode in the Honble. Company’s Territory, I have
made known his wishes to the Honble. the Governor
who has been pleased to say there will be no objection
to his residing here so long as my friend pleases,
conforming however to the rules and customs ot the
subjects ot the Honble. Company. It will give me
satisfaction to receive ray friend with kindness.
One of the Honble. Company’s Cruizers is sent to
remain at Perak and to bring a report of my friend’s
final departure from Perak. Let him therefore make
no delay.
(Signed) JOHN ANDERSON
Pol. Agent to Perak and Salengore
Penang
23d. Septr. 1825.
Translated
J. A.
M : T : to Govt.


FORT CORNWALLIS. The 1st December 1825.
HEAD a further letter from the Resident of
Singapore with the following copy of a dispatch to
the Supreme Government containing further intel-
ligence from Siam and Java.
RESIDENT of SINGAPORE.
(Copies)
To
G. SWINTON Esqre.
Secretary to the Government
FORT WILLIAM
SIR,
The annual Junks from Siam have begun to arrive
in considerable numbers and a ship belonging to the
King arrived on the 6th instant. The latter brought
me a letter from the Prah-KJang containing nothing
but a recommendation of the Commander. The
Country throughout is in a state of perfect tranquillity.
As well as I am able to ascertain, the Chief of Chum-
pon, the person by whose orders the inhabitants of the
province of Mergui were carried off as prisoners, has
been severely punished by the King of Siam, being at
present imprisoned in irons. Considerable anxiety
is felt by the Court for the fate of the Siamese seized
and detained by the Commanding Officer at Mergui in
retaliation tor the depredations committed by this
individual. Of the sentiments entertained by the
Court of Siam in regard to their relation to the British
power, the only notice I am able to supply is contained
in the annexed extract of a letter from the Agent of a
mercantile house at this place, now at Bangkok.
[The remainder of this letter deals with Java and
Celebes.]
I have &c. (Signed) J. CRAWFURD
(Signed) J. CRAWFURD
Resident.
Singapore
Bth Novr. 1825.


EXTRACT of a private letter from the Agent of a
Mercantile House at Singapore residing at Bangkok,
dated the 31st August 1825.
The Siamese intend to send an expedition to
assist the King of Ligor in taking Salengore and
Perak. The Captain of the Port asked me if those
places had any connexion with the British. 1 said
they had, and was afraid that the English would not
allow them to take either of them, at the same time
telling him that I, as a Merchant, had nothing to do
with matters of that nature, and only told so much to
him as a private friend. He immediately went and
told the Prah-Klang, who instantly went to the Palace,
taking the Port Captain with him to inform the King.
What alteration it made in his plans 1 do not know.
Twenty of their war boats dropped down the river the
other day. Where they went, I could find no person
that would inform me. Notwithstanding Mr. Craw-
furd’s friendly assurances to this Government, they
still believe that the English have a design upon their
Country and I think all the world would not convince
them to the contrary. The Prah-Klang says why
does Mr. Crawfurd always inform us of the Governor
General’s friendship, that is as much as to say he does
not always intend to befriend us. We are daily
expecting the Commissioners Ship here from Bengal
which will I hope bring us good news of the final
conclusion of the War.


THE PRESIDENT records the following Minute.
MINUTE by the PRESIDENT.
Adverting to the question of discussion that may
arise between Captain Burney and the Siamese
Government respecting the Malay states it appears
advisable that he should be furnished with copies of*
all Treaties made by the Dutch Government as well as
the British that may be found on our records. I
propose accordingly that they be copied and trans-
mitted via Singapore by the first opportunity
(Signed) R. FULLERTON
25th November 1825,
THE ACTING SECRETARY reports that copies
of the following treaties and papers, being all that
could be found on record, were duly forwarded by the
Honorable Company’s Ship Orient to Singapore foe
transmission to Captain Burney at Bangkok.
( Note—No list of treaties &c. appears.)
FORT CORNWALLIS The Ist December 1825.


THE PRESIDENT records the following Minute.
MINUTE by the PRESIDENT.
In reference to the letters from the Supreme
Government of 2d and 16th September last, a few
observations seem necessary. In respect to the first 1
fear we have failed in conveying sufficient explanation
of the extent of our views and intentions towards
Perak and Salengore, and of the nature of the coun-
teraction we meant to oppose against the Siamese
encroachments on those States. On the perusal of
the treaty concluded between the British and the
Netherlands Government on the 24th of March 1824,
the nature of the political relations to be maintained
between us and the neighbouring Malay States, which
may be said to have been, for ages under the protec-
tion of the Dutch at Malacca, appeared to me one of
the first questions that would arise after our occupa-
tion of that settlement and until that question could
be decided by Superior authority it certainly appeared
to me most desirable that the extension of Siamese
dominion towards that quarter should, if possible,
be prevented. But great as I considered the object,
it certainly did not occur to me that we should be
justified in using actual force in defence of those
States and thereby involving ourselves in positive
hostility witli a Siamese Chief. Military operations
were not therefore in our contemplation ; all that could
be done was to counteract their progress by use of the
legitimate means at our disposal, to refuse our consent
to their armament passing thro’ the Harbour, to point
out to them the circumstance of our having taken the
place of the Dutch at Malacca, and the danger of
future collision in consequence between the two
Governments, and lastly in so far as existing disputes
between the Rajah of Ligor and Salengore afforded a
pretence of attack, to attempt the removal of such
pretence by offering to mediate on the adjustment of


all disputes. It was only on these principles that the
extension of Siamese dominion over the Peninsula
was intended to be counteracted, it is satisfactory that
the course has to this period been attended with suc-
cess and highly gratifying to find by the letters of
the 16th September that our measures have met the
entire approbation of the Supreme Government. It
may be hoped that the exertions of Captain Burney
will prove successful in putting a final stop to the
further subjugation of the Malay Peninsula, but even
if he should fail still much is gained by keeping
things in the same state pending decision of the
►Superior authorities in Europe, and it must be our
study by opposing the same means of counteraction to
prevent the evil becoming irremediable before the
receipt of that decision which will relieve us ot
considerable doubt and embarrassment on this im-
portant question.
(Signed) R. FULLERTON
30th November 1825.


PORT CORNWALLIS The 15 December 1825.
RAJAH of SALENGORE.
TRANSLATION of a letter from Sultan Ibrahim
Rajah of Salengore to the Honble. Robert Fullerton
Governor of Pulo Penang.
( After (’ompliments.)
May my friend be informed that the letter of
which Nakoda Attak was tlie bearer has reached
me in safety and 1 understand its contents. With
respect to what is mentioned in relation to pirates,
I have never harboured them and my friend may
examine and ascertain that they have never been
permitted to remain in my country. My friend may
send a Cruizer to search if lie pleases. Moreover
my friend knows that from the earliest times I have
not harboured pirates and he directs me to check
them ; but I cannot prevent them, my friend only
can put a stop to these proceedings; for I am
ignorant of them. If there be any person who says
I give protection to pirates, my friend can send a
cruizer with the informer to look after them and I
am anxious to know who has stated that I harbour
pirates.
Farther it is mentioned in my friend’s letter
that he will settle with the Rajah of Perak relative
to my property and all this time I have refrained
from going to demand it, as my friend has said he
will do so; and if he had not said he would do so, I
shall go myself. With respect to the engagement
entered into between my friend and myself I shall
not deviate from it and I only interfere with Perak
because the Rajah has some of my property; but
if my friend will settle all I shall not interfere
farther.


The Rajah again alludes to the duty on Tin at
Perak to which he has so frequently adverted and to
which he has entirely relinquished the right.
As to the Siamese, why has my friend permitted
them to proceed to Perak ? My friend mentioned
that he intended to restore peace between Perak
and Salengore. The Siamese have restored the old
Laxamana. Why has my friend not prevented
them ? and if they persisted, my friend might use
force. The Siamese have also appointed Nakoda
Mahomet Rajah Makota. r <•
Dated 27th Rabial Akhir 1211.
(A True Translation)
(Signed) JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Translator to Govt.
Pinang
15 Deer. 1825.
ORDERED th at with ref e rence to the i n tel-
ligeuce contained in the concluding paragraph of
the foregoing letter, a letter be addressed to the
Bajiuda Muda remonstrating against the occupation
of Perak Ivy the Siamese forces, requiring their re-
call, and a strict adherence on the part of the
Siamese Government to the late Treaty concluded
at Kedah with the Rajah of Ligore and Captain
Burney Political Agent for the Honorable Company,


FORT CORNWALLIS The 22d December 1825.
THE following letter from the Honble. the
Governor to the Chow Pya of Ligor and one from
the Malay Translator to the son of that chief, are
recorded.
» To the CHOW PYA of LIGOR.
Letter
from the Honble. Robert Fullerton Esquire Governor
of Pulo Penang to the Chow Pya of Ligor.
When a few months ago Captain Burney con-
cluded a treaty of peace and friendship with my
friend and I undertook to adjust the differences
which then unhappily subsisted between my friend
and the States of Perak and Salengore. I expected
that a termination would have been put to all
farther discussion or reference on such subjects ;
but I regret to observe, that no sooner had I with
much trouble and expence adjusted all the points of
difference complained of, and ray friend had pro-
ceeded on his return to Ligore, agreeably to his
promise, than a party of several hundred Siamese and
Malays proceeded across from Kedah to Perak where
I am informed they still remain.
I took little notice of this for some time, as it
was asserted by some of my friend’s Agents that the
party was merely intended to accompany the Rajah
Kechil Mooda and other Perak Chiefs and that they
would return without delay to Kedah. It appears
however, that not only the land party which pro-
ceeded to Perak, but the boats which were sent
under convoy of a cruizer from hence still remain
there and complaints have been made that Nakoda
Mahomed has been promoted by Siamese authority
to an important post in the Perak Government and


is now exercising powers there which are not only
extremely offensive to the Ryots of the Country
but which being sanctioned by any of my friends
officers is an infraction of the solemn engagement
between my friend and the British Government.
'Hie treaty between my friend and Captain
Burney has been approved and ratified by the Right
Honble. the Governor General and I must now
therefore require my friend to give immediate direc-
tions for the return of the parties from Perak and to
abstain from future interference in the Government
of the country agreeably to existing engagements
with the several states. In this I expect there will
be no delaj’.
(Signed) R. FULLERTON
Govr.
Penang
16 Deer. 1825.
[ The letter from the Malay Translator to the
son of the Chow Pya of Ligor follows, bat it contains
no new matter.]


SUPTDT. of POLICE.
W. S. Cracroft Esquire.
Secretary to Government.
Sir,
I have the honor to enclose for the information of
Government a Siamese and Malayan paper under the
seal or Chop of one Aluang Pea Nyoot, who I under-
stand is the Ohom Pea Ban or Siamese Commander in
Chief at Kedah, which was found in possession of a
•Tawi man of this place named Yusuf or Joosoo : from
the date of the paper it appears to be about three
months old.
This Document seems to be a sorb of grant or
commission in the name of the Rajah of Ligor to said
Joosoo conferring on him some privileges or favour*
and requiring him to use his endeavours to bring back
the Malays of Kedah and Lankawi to settle in that
Island.
Joosoo is a petty trader between there and Kedah,
and is 1 believe a nephew of Bappoo Cundoo, the king
of Kedah’s late head man, his family has resided in
this Island many years. He was found with this paper
in his possession on board his prahu in the Krian river
tln-ee or four days ago, by some boats that went up the
river under charge of the commander of the Blossom in
quest of pirates, and from two or three other papers
that were found in his prahu there can be no doubt
but he is on terms of intimacy and friendship with the
notorious Kedah pirate Pakir saib, with whom he had
probably gone up the Krian to confer when met with
by our boats. He however says he went there for
trading purposes, and there is no proof to the contrary -
FORT CORNWALLIS The 22d December 1825.


He says the paper now transmitted was given to
him about three months ago by the Raja of Ligor
himself, the day he left Kedah to return to his own
Country, and that it is merely intended as a pass or
Certificate to exempt him from duties in Rice provided
he exports the same for the use of the inhabitants of
Lankawi and for no other place ; and also on consider-
ation that he will endeavour to get some of the good
and peaceable inhabitants who fled from Kedah and
that place to return and settle there.
Joosoo appears to have remained at Kedah some
Weeks after the Raja’s departure tor Ligor, and to
have returned here from thence about a month ago.
I have &c.
( Signed ) R. GAUNTER
Sup. of Police.
Police Office
21 Dec. 1825.
ORDERED, that the Commission be sent to the
Translator for translation.


FORT WILLIAM 13th May 1825.
No. 1.
E. A. Blundell Esquire
Acting Secretary to Government
Sir,
I have now the honor to submit for the inform-
ation of the Honorable the Governor in Council, a
detailed report of my proceedings since I last left
the Presidency on the 7th of February. I propose
to frame my report in three separate letters—No. I
the present letter will refer to my communications
with the Governor of Ligore and the officers subject
to his authority; No. 2to those with the Governor
of Salang and the Siamese States to the northward
of Pungah ; and No. 3 will give cover to a Map and
a memorandum, containing such details respecting
geography and other subjects of general inform-
ation, as I was enabled to gather during the pro-
gress of my mission.
I arrived at Kedah on the Bth of February, and
found no difficulty in obtaining from the Baginda
Muda the promised letters of introduction to the
Pya of Salang and Prahs of Tuccotong and
Tuccopa. To the Pya of Chimpohun he declared
his inability to write, as neither himself nor any of
his officers is acquainted with that Governors precise
titles, and to address him without inscribing them
correctly would be highly disrespectful. He declined
also to order two of his more intelligent Siamese
servants to accompany me, on the plea of his having
too few Siamese at Kedah to spare a single man,
but the attendants whom he selected, Malays, I
deemed it prudent to accept, as I believed, and I
afterwards found I was right in so believing, that
I should be able to make even their presence useful
at any place which I might visit in the Kingdom of
Kedah.


I. was told of Khoon Aksorn’s having passed
Kedah the day before my arrival, and as he was a
Messenger proceeding directly from the Chow Pya of
Ligore, the Baginda Muda observed, that the Honor-
able the Governor had better communicate his wishes
with respect to the mutual surrender of criminals
between Kedah and Penang to Khoon Aksorn, and
that in fact he, the Baginda Muda, had now no power
to conclude any arrangement for this purpose with me.
I learnt also that my Chinese Agent, Achong, had
been forwarded to Ligore on the 30th of January.
The Baginda Muda and his officers appeared to
place much more confidence in me during this visit
than what they had previously done, and even the
surly Chiom Pya Ban was more civil. I was solicited
to land some of my Escort and to exercise the Sepoys
before the young Chief ; and he fatigued me in making
me describe to him the forms of salutation and of
receiving and paying visits in England, At my de-
parture also, he engaged me to accompany him on an
excursion up Elephant Mount whenever I again
visted Kedah,
As usual, however, I had to persuade him ta
destroy the first draft of his proposed reply to the
letter from the Honorable the Governor, and to
substitute something more precise and intelligent.
He as well as Chiom Pya Ban charged the King of
Kedah with constantly sending spies and emissaries
into the Kedah territories, in order to sow suspicions
into the minds of the Siamese, and to incite the Mala}'
inhabitants to revolt, and they smiled incredulously at
my assurances, that the King had been earnestly
cautioned by our Government against such pro-
ceedings. I found they firmly believed that many of
the piratical incursions made by the Kings relatives
and adherents, are made with our privity and full con-
currence, and they fairly told me that as long as the
King of Kedah continued at Penang, no confidence or


good understanding could subsist between the English
and Siamese. I was subsequently told by the Malayan
writer to Chiom Pya Ban, that among themselves, the
Siamese are in the habit of saying that they can never
live at Kedah in security so long as the English are
allowed to occupy Penang. But I discovered this
writer to be secretly in the interest of the King of
Kedah, and I suspect, that he had only heard the same
observation as that which the Baginda Muda and the
Chiom had made to me, but that he repeated it in the
manner most likely to injure my intercourse with the
Siamese.
There was a report of Kedah that a British Agent
had arrived at Bangkok, having crossed the Country
from the Western Sea, that he had presented a
thousand stand of muskets to the King of Siam —that
His Majesty had resolved upon co-operating with the
British Forces against Ava, and that he had observer!
several officers of high rank and 70,000 men to be held
in readiness to march against the Burmese in the
direction of Clieung-mai; and also the Chow Pya of
Ligore to open friendly communications with the
Honorable the Governor of Penang, for which purpose
Khoon Aksorn had been deputed. On questioning
the Baginda Muda regarding this intelligence, he ac-
knowledged that such a report had reached Kedah, but
professed his inability to tell me how far it was true,
and ho declared, that the objects of Khoon Aksorn s
visit to Penang were two-fold—first, to offer the loan of
the boats and vessels for which Captain Low had applied;
and secondly, to purchase some cloths and other articles
for his father to take to Bangkok for the funeral of the
late King of Siam. 1 learnt, however, privately, just
before leaving Kedah, and found at Pungah that I had
in part learnt correctly, that the Court of Siam being
incredulous on the subject of our successes against
Ava, and distrustful of the accounts which Mr. Craw-
furd from Singapore and other British officers had


transmitted, had directed the Chow Pya of Ligore to
open communications with the Honorable the Governor
and endeavour by that means to obtain correct and
full intelligence regarding our proceedings, and that
the Chow Pya had accordingly deputed Khoon Aksorn
to Penang, with instructions to pretend to purchase
cloths, and to discuss with the Honorable the Governor
propositions for restoring the King of Kedah, and
even to offer a loan of boats, at the same time that he
exerted himself to learn and ascertain as much as
he possibly could regarding the nature and progress of
the war.
It was my original intention and desire, ou
leaving Penang to proceed from Kedah and visit
Mergui and Rinnong, to ascertain the precise state ot
the war. and the nature of the Siamese claims and
authority in that quarter before I met the Governor of
Ligore, but apprehensive that I might be delayed to
the northward long after Achong reached Trang, and
believing that this Government considered my inter-
view with the Chow Pya as the principal object of my
Mission, I determined upon confining myself to
collecting and communicating intelligence between
Kedah and Pungah during the interval of Achong’s
absence.
From Kedah we proceeded towards the Purlts
district. Having heard that the Chiom or Luang
here, Rat-Mintha, is a very intelligent person and a
near relative of the Pya ot Chaiya, I ascended on the
14th February thirteen miles up the Purlis River to
Kangar, where 1 found fifteen large boats equipping,
and about three hundred inhabitants, forty Siamese
only, twenty Chinese, and from two to three hundred
Malays. The Chiom had unfortunately been sum-
moned to Kedah the day before, but I was received by
those in charge of the place with civility, and allowed
to walk about and converse indiscriminately with the
Inhabitants. The Chiom's character had been justly


represented to me. The Malays here appeared happy
and contented. Paddy was extremely cheap and
allowed to be freely exported—and several traders
from Penang were loading their little boats with every
semblance of confidence.
I met here Sing-chon, a Chinese servant belong-
ing to the Pya of Singora who, was returning to his
master from Penang with a large supply of Europe
and Indian cloths destined for the King of Siam’s
funeral. He assured me, that his master had not the
slightest idea or chance of being appointed to the
charge of Kedah. He further told me, that lie had
been allowed to visit Penang, because his business
related to the King of Siam, but that he was closely
watched by the followers of the Chief of Ligore.
On my return from Kangar, I stopped and landed
at Kayang, a small village about five miles from
the mouth of the Purlis River, containing ten Siamese
under a Morn, Prab, ten or twelve Chinese, and from
fifty to sixty Malays. I found the principal China-
man here named Hingoo, is an agent of Che Toah at
Penang, who has farmed the exclusive state * of
opium, Salt and Cotton Wool in this District.
We next proceeded towards the Sittool District,
and on the 18th of February ascended through the
Qualla Settool tooah, or Sungey Membang Legarce,
to Membang Segara, a small village about ten miles
from the sea, containing fifteen or twenty Malays onty
under an old Malay named Tuankee Long, He told
me, that a Morn, Pullusn, with ten Siamese are living
some miles further in the interior, where many Chinese
are settled cultivating paddy, that Membang Segara is
the limit of the Baginda Muda’s authority, and under
the orders of the Chow Pya’s two eldest sons residing
a few miles further to the northward, up the Meeraket
River; and that the greater portion of the Malayan
inhabitants of thfs District has fled to Penang. The
River Membang Segara is shallow and not navigable


for even a canoe excepting when the tide enters.
There could be no large boats built here, but I learnt
here and again at Lungu, that the two young chiefs
of Meerakit are equipping at that place from twenty
to thirty boats.
On questioning the inhabitants of Membang
Segara as to the cause and nature of the insurrection
which occurred in this District two years ago, they
told me that the whole originated in some emissaries,
they believe from Penang, having spread a report that
that the Siamese were about to transport all the wives
and children of the Malays to Ligore, and that this
report, which was entirely false, had led to the destruc-
tion of many lives, and to the emigration of nearly two
thousand people. They farther stated that much
mischief had been done, and was continuing to be done
by such emissaries, who would not allow Malays to
live peaceably under the Siamese Government.
The people at Membang Segara, and at every
place to the north of it wherever I visited, I found
speaking Siamese among themselves, as if it were their
vernacular tongue.
From Membang Segara, we proceeded towards the
Meerakit river, and anchored near Pulo Eepoh, an
Island described as possessing a very abundant tripang
fishery around it ; we attempted on the 20th of
February to ascend the Meerakit river, but the extreme
shallowness of the bar at its mouth shewed us that our
schooner had no chance of entering the river excepting
on the top of high water.
We next proceeded towards the Lungu District
and landed on the 21st February at Lungu, a small
village, situate about a quarter of a mile up a small
stream, and containing about thirty Chinese, and from
fifty to sixty. Malays and orang Laut, under a Chinese
captain named Ceet. This river, I saw immediately,
was quite unfit for building or equipping boats in, and


on questioning the Chinese captain, I learnt that this
stream is called Qualla Lungu muda, and that a few
miles more to the northward there is another called
Sungey Beebera, and sometimes Qualla Lungu tooah ,
where the Siamese are building two or three boats, but
that even that stream is too small to admit of the con-
struction of large vessels. He further told me, what I
had previously heard, that a large bod}* of the followers
of the Pya of Singora live several miles up the Rubong
Boya, a large river between the Meerakit and Lungu,
but that I could not communicate with any of them,
as the mouth of. the river is occupied by a party of
Ligorians.
I learnt here, and the information was subsequent-
ly confirmed, that the two sons of the Chow Pya named
Phoh Klora and Phoh Pho, are placed at Meerakit for
the purpose of superiiitending the preservation of the
Edible Birds’ nests, and the collection of a tithe on all
tripang caught, in which two valuable articles of com-
merce the shores and rocky isles between Purlis and
Pak-lao abound, and that the authority of these young
Chiefs extends to Sangey Oopih, which is a small
stream just above the river Te-luwas or Talavase, and
which was the last established boundary between the
King and the Pya of Merdelongs possessions.
I delivered a complimentary letter and some pre-
sents to the Chinese captain to be forwarded to the
young Chiefs at Meerakit, which he said a messenger
from Lungu could reach in a few hours.
Prom Lungu, we proceeded towards the river
Trang. We had previously ascertained that Forrests’
Telaga, Telaga Toojoo, Mannevillete’s Pundaen, and
Horsburgh’s Talavase (Te-luwas ; as well as Pulo
Telibon and several other places on the coast between
Lungu and Pak-lao, Pak-lao, had been deserted ever
since the occupation of Junkceylon by the Burmese in
1810, and that they are now the haunts of Pirates, or


occasionally of Orang Laut when engaged in fishing
for tripang, at Tanjong Sittar, a small island lying in
a deep bay to the north af Teluwas, which bay is not
noticed in an}’ chart that we had, and at the river
Plean near Trang, we learnt that parties of the fol-
lowers of the Pya of Merdelong or Khontelon are
residing. But I was assured that the inhabitants at
these two places, as well as their master are entirely
under the orders of the Ohow-Pya, and I did not
therefore attempt to communicate with them.
On the passage to the River Trang, we were par-
ticularly struck with the strange appearance of the
rocks and isles named by Forrest “ Rough Saddle,”
“ Square,” “ Cleft ” and “ Two Canisters,” and we
found at the first mentioned isle, called by the Malays
Pulo Butt tra, and at another near it called Pulo Laang,
two Prows from Settool posted to guard the edible
Birds’ nests.
We anchored on the 24th February to the Fast of
Pulo Telibon on the channel between that island and
the main, and on the following day, we ascended the
Trang river. About six miles from the mouth of the
River, we were for the first time stopped and desired
to anchor, by a Siamese officer in charge of a small post
situated in the midst of jungle. As 1 understood from
my native pilots that Junsoo was only a furlong higher
up the river, and as my followers required some re-
freshments, which could not be procured at this
Siamese fort, I requested the officer to allow the
schooner to proceed to Junsoo, but he objected, and we
anchored. After addressing a letter however, to the
Chiom or Luang na-rong che-lattee in charge of Khan-
tannee, reporting my arrival, and giving it to the
Siamese officer here to forward, I signified my intention
of proceeding to Junsoo, and waiting there for the
Chiom’s reply. The officer opposed my intention, but
quieting him a little by promising not to attempt
to advance any farther than Junsoo until we received


the Chiom’s reply, vve passed on to that village, which
we found to be a poor looking place, containing about
thirty Chinese, twenty Chuliahs, and from fifty to sixty
Malays only.
At 10 A. M. on the following day, the bearer
of my letter returned with a message from the Chiom
at Khantanee, stating, that he would come down and
meet [me ] at Junsoo. 1 was now convinced that
it was the object of these Siamese, to .prevent my
seeing Khantannee, and had the wind and tide at
the time been favorable, I should have immediately
advanced towards that place under a pretext that
1 could not think of giving the Chiom so much
trouble as to come down to meet me. He arrived how-
ever at one o’Clock, just as the tide began to make,
and was accompanied by his writer and the second in
rank at Khantannee, an officer called nai-Belat,
On questioning them respecting Achong, they
declared that nothing had been heard of him, and the
nai Belat, who I found had arrived from Legore but
two days before, assured me that Achong had not
arrived there previous to his departure. This nai
Belat proved himself a genuine Siamese. He pre-
tended to have as yet heard a vague rumour only of
the Burmese war, although I knew he had seen
Captain Low last year. He would not deny the cor-
rectness of my observation, that, Achong having left
Kedah twenty eight days ago, ought to have reached
Legore before he quitted it, and in fact he “ would not
appear to be better instructed than myself” even in
the “ things of his own Country ” although I was a
stranger.
Anxious to ascertain the exact number of Boats
equipping at Khantannee, regarding which I had
heard the most conflicting accounts, I determined now
that the tide had turned, upon attempting to proceed
to that town. I affected therefore to be dissatisfied


with the conversation of the Luang , and to complain
to him against a Ohuliah, who had been extremely im-
pertinent to us at Junsoo, and declaring [my] intention
of proceeding to Khantannee, for the purpose of dis-
patching one of my own followers across the Country
to Ligore. I invited the Luang to accompany me, but
he vehemently opposed my proceeding further, and even
observed, that if I went to Khantanee, I should perhaps
be prevented from leaving it again. To this threat
I laughingly replied, through my interpreters, that
I should be very happy to be detained by him as I
was anxious to take up my residence among the Siamese
and then weighed anchor and stood up the river. The
Luang dispatched the nai Belat to follow me, and this
officer at length besought me in such earnest and
abject terms not to proceed, stating that the Luang
and himself would be most severely punished by the
Chow Pya of Ligore the moment he heard of an
English vessel having ascended to Khantannee, that
I was induced to stop, from a reflexion that it would
be cruel towards these men to proceed, and impolitic,,
in the present stage of my negotiations, to persist in
doing what I was now satisfied the Chow Pya of
Ligore was most anxious to prevent. Shortly after I
anchored, the Luang, who also now appeared to have
been following us, came up; and both he and the nai
Belat appeared most grateful at my forbearance. I
took care to let them understand that I had stopped
because I was now convinced that their Master did not
wish me to see Khantannee, and because I was too
desirous of securing his friendship to give offence
upon such a trivial point.
I then explained to these officers the necessity
which existed for my seeing their master as soon as
possible, and delivered to them the second letter to
his address from the Honorable the Governor, together
with a short one from myself. They declared, that
answers to these letters might be expected from


Ligore in fifteen days. I endeavoured to point out
the inaccuracy of their assertion and appealed to
several of my followers, who had assured me, anti
who now assured them, that they had repeatedly
gone from Khantannee to Ligore in the present season
in three days, but these officers still maintained, that
no answer could be expected in less than fifteen days.
From this, as well as from Nai Belat’s previous con-
versation, I was fully persuaded, that the nai Belafc
must have been sent down from Ligore to prepare the
Luang here against my arrival, and that the Chow Pya
had no intention of meeting me at Khantannee,
desiring some delay, perhaps until the return of Khoon
Aksorn from Penang, before he determined the time
for seeing me.
These officers however and I parted on the most
friendly terms, and they readily gave me a Pilot to
navigate the Schooner down the river. From this
Pilot, who had been the Datoo or Chief of Pulo
Tebbon, and who was a remarkably intelligent Malay,
and an old acquaintance of one of my followers, I
learnt that the Chow Pya of Ligore has received the
most unfavorable reports regarding the views of this
Government, and, that he fully believes it is meditat-
ing an attack against him at Ligore, and that [with]
this view Captain Low had been sent last year to
collect routes across the Country. I had heard some
of these tales on ray first visit to Kedah, and it was
from them principally that I received the impression,
which I submitted to Government in my first report
of the 28th January, namely, “ I am by no means
“ sanguine of being now allowed to pass across the
“ Country to Ligore.” The Datoo also gave me reason
to believe, that the objects of my mission have been in
the same manner most grossly misrepresented to the
Siamese. From him, as well as from some of the
inhabitants of Junsoo, I gathered, that there are at
Khantannee thirty new boats building, and about oite


hundred old ones of all sizes, and two brigs laid up,
most of them being too old and decayed to be again
used.
From Pulo Tebbon, we proceeded on the 27 of
February towards Pungah, off which we anchored on
the 4th of March. To the northward of Trang, the
Ohow Pya of Ligore’s authority, as I heretofore reported,
extends to Pak-lao, a river and small town about eight
miles to the north east of the Pungah river. Many
of the places formerly occupied between Trang and
Pak-lao, have also been deserted since the invasion of
Junkceylon by the Burmese; Pulo Loutar-Comb, where
there are some medicinal springs, Tak-Ding-den and
Nak Kraat are now without inhabitants, without
even orang Laut. Cassai contains a small population,
employed in cultivating paddy, collecting tripang
from the orang Laut, and catching Elephants, in
which animals the country to the north of Trang
is reputed to abound. Vessels from the coast of Co-
romandel occasionally visit Cassai, as well as the river
Trang for these animals. Ghuby is a small village
to the south of Cassai, near a mountain whose peak
appears from four to five thousand feet high, and its
inhabitants are employed in the same manner as at
Cassai. At Pak-lao some tew ( sic ) collected ; and
here by orders from Siam, the Chiefs and people from
Salang and Pungah are allowed to keep their elephants
and to pass freely towards or from Chaiya on the Gulf
of Siam. There is a direct route from Pungah to
Chaiya, but as it passes over the high mountains which
enclose the valley of Pungah, it is by no means so
convenient or so expeditious as the route from Paklao,
to which the people from Pungah can come in boats
within four hours. Between Pungah and Pak-lao are
a small river and town named Bosin, subject to the
Pya of Salang, and its inhabitants are engaged in
cultivating paddy.
While returning to Trang foom Pungah on the


21st ultimo, agreeably to the arrangement which 1 had
previously concerted with the Chiom of Khantannee, I
received a letter from Penang announcing the in-
telligence that Achong had failed to persuade the
Chow Pya of Ligore to grant me an immediate inter-
view, and I resolved therefore upon returning to the
Presidency, as soon as possible without touching at
Trang.
Since my return I have seen Achong, and I learn
from him, that on his first arrival at Ligore,
the Chow Pya’s suspicions were roused against him.
That when he succeeded in removing them, the Chow
Pya determined on coming down to Kedah in thirty
or forty days to give me an audience there in prefer-
ence to Trang, which place he said would be too far
from the Honorable the Governor, to whom it might
be necessary to make reference—that the Chief accord-
ingly prepared two letters, stating his intention, the
one addressed to the Honorable the Governor from
himself, and the other to me from his favorite son,
whom I had seen at Quedah in 1822, and between
whom and me, the Chow Pya told Achong, there exists
much friendly regard—and that he delivered these
letters to Achong and desired him to return to Penang
via Kedah, notwithstanding Achong’s pressing en-
treaty to be allowed to go down and meet me at Trang.
Achong learnt whilst at Ligore, that much doubt
and suspicion exist at Bangkok respecting our pro-
ceedings against the Burmese, and that an Army is
assembling in Siam. He ascertained also, that there
is not a syllable of truth in the report which was
1 brought here of the rising influence of the Pya of
Singora, and that the Chow Pya of Ligore is determined
upon attacking Salangore at the first favorable #
opportunity.*
I consider Achong’s mission to to have partially
succeeded in two points only. First, lie has persuaded


the Chow Pya to agree to come and give me an
interview at Kedah ; and secondly he has established
beyond further dispute the question as to the superior
influence of this Chief to that of the Pya of Singora.
I am forced to own however, that Achong has dis-
appointed me, inasmuch as he allowed the Chow Pya
of Ligore, to betray him to show to that Chief a journal
of his journey from Kedah to Ligore. which he had
kept, and the very sight of which tended to confirm all
the Chow Pya’s suspicions as to our desire of procuring
routes through his territories. After this act of im-
prudence on the part of Achong, I am by no means
surprised, that the Chow Pya would neither allow him
to go down to Trang, nor his officers permit me to
visit Khantannee.
I have now the honor to acknowledge the receipt
of the dispatches enumerated in the margin. The
first and second were transmitted for my information,
and to the last mentioned only, I have to solicit per-
mission to submit a reply.
The Honorable the Governor in Council lias
. inferred from a perusal of the Letter addressed by the
Chow Pya of Ligore to the Honorable the Governor,
that that Chief has no intention of granting me a
personal interview, but the enclosed translation of the
letter addressed to me at the same time by the young
and favorite son at Ligore will shew that the Chow
Pya actually proposes to meet me at Kedah, and I own
I consider the tenor of this letter as extremely friendly,
and the circumstance of the Chow Pya having desired
his son to write it, is viewed by me as a certain proof
of his good will towards me. I do not presume to
understand the Malayan language so thoroughly as
the Translator to Government but I am aware of what
I think he has overlooked, that the letter to the
Honorable the Governor is written in a language
which the Chow P} 7 a of Ligore cannot read, and that
the Interpreter and Malay Writers employed by the


Siamese are of the most abject description, a mixed
breed between a Siamese and Malay, most of whom
write a bad hand, and compose most incorrectly in the
Malayan tongue. It is inconceivable the trouble and
vexation which the Malay writer to the Baginda Muda
at Kedah gave me, before I could make him use intel-
ligible and precise language in the replies to the
letters from the Honorable the Governor, Precision
in language is above all things avoided by such
writers who expect the loss of their heads will
follow any phrase which may commit their master
more than he desires. The bad handwriting of such a
writer should not therefore, 1 submit, be considered
as “ disrespectful,” a charge the justice of which
Achong vehemently denies, and one which, under
existing circumstances, would be the last, I should
think, that the Chow Pya would be disposed to incur.
He possesses too much cunning not to see that being
disrespectful to the Honorable the Governor, would
be the most impolitic thing he could do, while his
plans against Salangore are in progress.
I do not propose to set myself up as an apologist
for the Chow Pya of Ligore, who, I believe, possesses
much ambition and all the little arts, and cunning
with which that passion is usually connected in the
breasts of Native Princes. It must however have
been observed by the Honorable the Governor, as
much as by myself, that a very strong prejudice pre-
vails against that Chief, and that not only the most
unfavorable construction is put upon every thing he
says and does, but the most wild and extravagant tales
are hourly brought and circulated here in view r to
keep alive and aggravate our prejudice against him.
I have every reason to know, that the same wild and
mischievous tales are taken to him against this
Government, and that he at the present moment firmly
believes that a force is ready at settlement-
to be pushed across the country Ligore the


moment we have obtained correct routes. Can it
then be matter for surprise that he and all his followers
view us with the utmost jealousy and suspicion, or
that he fears to receive our Envoys or accept our
proffered kindness ?
Nothing proved to me more forcibly that we had
been most grossly misrepresented to the Ligoreans than
the conduct of the Chiefs and of the whole of the com-
mon people at Pungah, who, though resembling the
Ligoreans in language, features and dress, appeared in
their conduct towards us to be of an entirely different
race. This was an observation made by all who ac-
companied me to Pungah.
I have just been informed by Mr. Maingy that
the return and reports of my Malay followers have
proved of the greatest service in quieting the fears of
the inhabitants of Province Wellesley, all of whom
fully credited, notwithstanding his assertions, a report
lately brought of the Siamese being prepared to make
an immediate attack upon that Province and many of
whom had packed up their property in order to be
ready to fly to Penang at the first alarm. After know-
ing this, and also that it was believed by many Gentle-
men here last year, that the Chief of Ligore had
ordered Captain Low to be poisoned, and now lately,
that he had cut me off, we cannot wonder that similar
idle tales make an impression at Ligor and Kedah.
I believe that the Chow Pya of Ligore is sincere
in his intention of coming down to Kedah, and that
he will admit me to a personal interview, at which
unless my views and intentions be already grievously
misrepresented to him, I still hope to be able to re-
move much of the distrust and suspicion with which
he has been filled. I do not imagine that he is coming
down merely to superintend the prosecution of
hostilities against Salengore, because 1 believe that
the number of boats which he is equipping, and has


ready for service, is much exaggerated, and that it is in-
sufficient to enable him to undertake the attack during
the present favourable north east monsoon. His pro-
posing such a delay as thirty or forty days, is imputed
to his desire of gaining time until his preparations
are completed, but the fact is, that he has no time to
spare as the South west monsoon is fast approaching,
and the season for his operations is already nearly
past. I am inclined to ascribe the delay to his desire
of first receiving Khoon Aksorn’s report from Penang,
and to a necessity which, I learnt at Pungah, existed
for him, as well as for every other Siamese Governor,
to be at his station on the first day of the present
moon, when the oath of allegiance to the King of Siam
was taken by himself and all his officers. The Prahs
of Tuccotong and Tuccopa were obliged to hurry away
from Pungah before my departure, in order to reach
their respective Capitals in time to perform this cere-
money in the manner prescribed by the laws of Siam.
I fear the time is passed when we might have
rendered the Chow Pya instrumental without much
difficulty in the accomplishment of the views of this
Government with respect to Kedah, not only because
his fears and suspicions have been much excited
against us, but because has now made arrangements
for availing himself of the whole resources of that
kingdom, and is therefore deeply interested against
its restoration to our old ally. The son at Kedah is
appropriating for his father the principal staples,
namely—Padd}g Timber and Tin to the southward of
Settool, while the sons at Meerakit are appropriating
the staples to the northward, Birds’ nests, Tripang,
and Timber for Boat Building. The Chow Pya, as
I have before mentioned, levies a tithe on all tripang
caught off the Kedah shores, and monopolizes the
whole of the Edible Birds’ nests from the different
islands in this neighbourhood, the produce of both
of which sources of revenue was estimated by Mr.


James Scott, at 16,000 Dollars per annum. The paddy
and timber, the produce of Kedah, are retained for
the most part for the use of the Ligoreans themselves,
but I believe the whole of the tripang and Birds’
nests gathered, finds its way to Penang. Of late
3 7 ears also our Malay inhabitants from the opposite
shore, as well as from this Island, have been fitting out
boats and making long voyages, as far even as the
Rinnong River, for the purpose of gathering birds’
nests, and in these adventures, which are extremely
hazardous and dangerous, they are accused of plun-
dering such rocky islets of the Kedah territories as
they find unprotected by Siamese boats.
The Pya of Salang however assured me, that the
Chow Pya possesses great influence at Bangkok through
his nephew, the present Wang-na, or Heir apparent,
to whom he is said to transmit a portion of the profits
arising from his occupation of Kedah. It is this
intelligence that induces me earnestly to beg the
Honorable the Governor in Council not to determine
upon discontinuing all intercourse with the Chow Pya,
but rather keep him in good humour and occupied
until the other important objects which we require
from the Siamese are attained at Bangkok although I
am now fully satisfied that this Chief possesses no
power to conclude a treaty with us, and that he is in
truth a subordinate officer, bound implicitly to follow
the dictates of his superiors at Siam, and by no means
a Raja or Sovereign as he has been styled by us, yet
I was told at Pungah, and I believe it, that we shall
be able to make no impression in our negotiations at
Siam, but through the intervention of the Siamese
Governors in this neighbourhood, on whose reports
only the Court of Bangkok will act. I conceive
therefore it will be most impolitic to court the opposi-
tion of the Chow Pya against the exertions of any
agent who may be deputed to Siam.


It is deeply to be regretted, that on the first
arrival of the Ligorean forces at Kedah, a small detach'-
ment, and a very small one would have been sufficient,
had not been sent there to drive them out again. I am
convinced that such a measure would not have brought
on any serious dispute with Siam, and the Pya ot
Salang assured me, that at Bangkok, very little
interest is felt regarding Kedah, and that it was not
until the Chow Pya had for many years been reporting
the disaffection of the King of Kedah that he at length
received a permission simply “ to do as he pleased
against that monarch.”
My superiors have decided that the restoration of
the King of Kedah will be most advantageous to
British interests, and it becomes me only to submit
such suggestions as may have occurred to me respect-
ing the most prompt and efficient mode of accomplish-
ing that object. I found at Pungah the Chief and his
Ministers very kindly disposed towards the King of
Kedah, to whose exertions and particularly to the
exertions of whose late unfortunate Bindahara, they
principally ascribe the repulse of the Burmese from
Salang in 1810. The boats sent by the King on that
occasion were by far the most efficient and formidable
to the Burmese, and the Bindahara is reported to have
possessed great skill and precision in directing cannon,
and to have himself fired the shot which killed the
Chief of Mergui. Besides this cause for feeling well
disposed towards the King of Kedah, the of Salang
I found is not on most cordial terms with the Chow
Pya of Ligore, some coolness and jealousy having been
created by the circumstance of a great many adherents
of the latter having been received and protected
at Bengal.
The only person whom it will be necessary to
conciliate at Bangkok is the wang-na, and through the
friendly aid of the Pya of Salang, I should think
it will not be difficult to prevail on that personage to


agree to divide with his uncle some annual compensa-
tion in money from the King of Kedah, and to agree
also to obtain his uncle’s consent to such a scheme by
means of an imperial order or promise of other advan-
tages from the King of Siam. The British Govern-
ment may be guarantee for the regular payment of
this compensation in the manner proposed by the
late Honorable Governor, who, however fixed an an-
nual sum of only 2,000 Dollars to be paid by the King
of Kedah to Siam in lieu of all other claims. Bub
it appears that Siam had for many years, even before
our occupation of Penang, ( See Mr. James Scott’s
Deports upon Junkceylon) been deriving a direct
revenue in cash of 6,000 Dollars per annum from the
King of Kedah on account of the birds’ nests in the
islands contiguous to his kingdom. I was told at
Pungah, that this revenue or rent to Siam was paid
through the Chow Pya of Ligore, but the King of
Kedah assures me, that an officer from Bangkok
annually came down to demand and receive the 6,000
Dollars.
With respect to the projected attack upon
Salangore, L have great hopes that the Chow Pya’s pre-
parations will not be completed in time to undertake
that measure until the next north east monsoon. If
however he should be enabled to attempt it immediately,
the best and most eas} r mode of preventing it, is by
this Government at once prohibiting him, and declar-
ing its intention of protecting Salangore. 1 believe
such a declaration may be communicated to the Chow
Pya in manner calculated not only to stop him,
but to prevent an actual breach between us. Another
certainly less hazardous line, but one that may
ultimately perhaps prove more embarrassing, could
be adopted, by our requesting the Chow Pya to
suspend his operations against Salangore until we had
satisfied ourselves, at Bangkok, that he possesses proper
authority from that Court to undertake such hostilities.


To conclude, I am inclined to believe from all I
have seen and heard, that it will be much easier to
obtain from Siam the entire restoration of the King of
Kedah, than any such cession of territory to ourselves
as is proposed in the 7th article of Mr. Crawfurd’s
“ notes towards a treaty with the Siamese, ” and that
the British Government will not succeed in persuad-
ing the Court of Siam to consent by regular treaty to
the future independence of the Malayan States, but
that if it be assumed at once by us, we shall be allowed
to act upon that principle without any serious demur.
I am convinced Loubere is quite correct in stating
that the Siamese “ engage themselves in writing as
“ little as they can. They will rather receive you into
“ a Port, or into a Castle than they will agree with you
“ by treaty in ample form sealed by their Barcalon. ”
I have &c.
(Signed) H. BURNEY. Captn.
Poll. Agent to the Siamese States.
Prince of Wales Island
The 2d. April 1525.
True Copy
(Signed) E. A. BLUNDELL.
Actg. Secy, to Govt.


No, 2.
To E. A. BLUNDELL Esqre.
Acting Secretary to Government.
Sir,
I have the honor in this letter to detail, for the
information of the Honorable the Governor in Council,
my communication, with the Pya of Salang, and the
Chiefs on the Isthmus of Kraw, the result of which
communications I have already reported in my letter
under date the 24th ultimo.
Before leaving the Presidency on the last occasion,
1 had formed an acquaintance with Luang Took-Krat,
an officer from Tuccopa, who had come here on some
commercial business, and who engaged to prepare not
only his master, the Prah of Tuccopa, but the Pya of
Salang, to whom he was first going, for a visit from
me. When therefore, on the 4th of March, I sent
my native Interpreters on shore at Pungah to report
my arrival, the Pya of Salang remarked, that he had
been expecting me for several days, and had prepared
a House for my reception, and immediately ordered
some pilots to return with my Interpreters to the
Jess}*, and navigate the schooner up to Pungah.
On the morning of the 6th we reached Pungah,
and took possession of the House prepared for our
reception. Shortly after a native of the Coast of
Coromandel, whose name is Nakoda Bapoo, but who
possesses the title of Luang Siri Maharajah Lam, and
the office, under the seal of tire King of Siam, of
Dubash and Interpreter at Pungah called upon me and
made known that* the Pya had desired him to attend
to all ray wishes, and to acquaint me, that I should be
received in state at 11 o’clock. At the hour ap-
pointed, I proceeded, accompanied by all my followers,
[to] the Pya’s house, where I was received with much
ceremony.
FORT WILLIAM 13th May 1825.


About three or four hundred men, armed with
muskets and clothed in scarlet serge, surrounded the
Hall of xVudience, while a Siamese band was playing
on each side. The interior of the Hall was divided
into three separate stages. On the first and highest
sat the Pya with his sword and Betel bearers &c. On
the next, and about a foot lower, sat his Ministers the
Tan Belat and Tan Yokabat, some Commissioners from
Bangkok, the Prahs of Tuccatong and Tuccopa, and the
Pya’s youngest Son, a lad of about thirteen years of age.
Near to these I was placed, with the Pya’s and my
own Interpreters. Behind us, and about two feet
lower, the place was crowded with the Pya’s petty
officers, and apparently with every class of tho
Inhabitants of Pungah.
I presented the second letter from the Honble.
the Governor and my Commission. The first letter
stating in general terms the objects of my mission, 1
had previously forwarded to the Pya. My Commission
was read and a copy of it was taken down in the
Siamese language, in doing which my own Malay
interpreters were requested to assist.
The after enquiries respecting the health of
the Right Honble. the Governor General, and of the
Honble. the Governor of Penang observed that he was
truly happy to welcome a British Agent at Pungah,
where he had lived for so many years without ever
having seen one. He was absent at Bangkok when
Capt. Low visited Pungah last year. He then declared,
that he entertained a very cordial regard towards the
English and that as we were now punishing the
Burmese, the old enemy of Siam, every Siamese was
bound to cultivate the most friendly relations with us,
but particularly the inhabitants of Salang and Pungah
who had been for so many years living in hourly dread
of the Burmese. He then put some questions to
me regarding the progress of the war, and when


replying to them, I stated, that I had a great many
details on that subject to communicate and that I
hoped he would grant me, on some early day, a
more private and confidential interview, when J
could show him maps of the Country, and more
unreservedly explain to him all that he desired to
know. He highly approved of seeing me unattended
by all this state and show, which he said were great
impediments to the transaction of business and pro-
mised to see me again as soon as possible.
After some other general conversation, a very
plentiful dinner, dressed after the Chinese fashion, was
placed before Mr. Cuthbertson and me, and when we
had partaken of it, we returned home much pleased
with this our first visit.
During this interview, I observed the extraordin-
ary influence which the Chuliah Luang Lam exercised
over the Pya and the whole of his officers, who
appeared to adopt all the Interpreter's opinions and
suggestions. I made it a point therefore to gain the
interest of this man, and, with presents and promises,
1 made him most serviceable to me. He could visit
the Pya and his Ministers at any hour of the day or
night, and he repeatedly proved to me, that he could
persuade them to do whatever he desired. So well
aware is he of his great influence, that he even asked
me one day—“ Do you not see, Sir, that 1 hold in my
“ hand the brains of these people, and that I can
“ release and retain just as much of them as I please ? ”
He was well acquainted with the late Mr. Light and
Mr. James Scott, as well as with the character and
proceedings of the British Government in India, and
he certainly proved himself attached to the
English. He is married to a Siamese woman,
and speaks the Siamese language like a native,
and having repeatedly been at Bangkok, he pressed
me to proceed thither at once, engaging with his


knowledge of the character and views of the
principal people there, to obtain anything which the
British Government may desire from that Court. I
must, in fine, do this man the justice to own, that
during all my communications with him, I never
caught him telling me an untruth. On taking leave
ofthePyathe first day. he told me, that his eldest
son, who was not then present, was preparing a
Siamese play for my amusement, and accordingly on the
following day, accompanied by Luang Lain, I paid a
visit to the young Chief who received me with great
cordiality. He is about 30 years of age, and of a
frank and cheerful disposition, but unfortunately rather
addicted to gaming. I was almost every day after-
wards in this young man’s house and as he possessed
some authority in the Government, and much influence
over his father, I procured through his means some
information and copies of papers which his father
hesitated to give me. He pressed me to proceed to
Bangkok immediately—offered to wait at Bangkok
until I could return thither with sufficient power, and
promised to afford me at Bangkok, and on the route
thither, every assistance and advice in his power. He
is married to the sister of a Prah from Bangkok, who
has farmed the privilege of smelting Tin at Pungah.
In the evening of this da}’, the 7th of March, I
proceeded in an undress, accompanied by Luang Lam
and my interpreters only, to the Pya’s house, where
himself and son and principal officers were assembled
with very few attendants. 1 seated myself near the
. Young Chief in the same manner as the rest were seat-
ed, and opening a map of India, and of the Burmese
and Siamese territories, gave them as full and satis-
factory an account as I could of the origin and
progress of the Burmese War. The whole listened
with great attention, and the Tan Belat put down the
names of a great many places in the Siamese Character
on one of Horsburgh’s Charts, with copies of which I


had presented the Pya, his son and the Prah of Tuccopa.
The Pya then observed, that all what I had reported
was highly gratifying, and would, he was sure,
afford so much satisfaction to the King of Siam,
that he, the Pya, could not hesitate to invite me at
once to accompany him to Bangkok, whither he was
about to proceed in the course of a month or three
weeks for the purpose of assisting at the funeral of
the late King. On my declaring that I possessed
no power to visit Siam, he questioned me much
regarding the time which it would take for me to
obtain sufficient powers and added, “ Since you
“ cannot proceed to Bangkok, I wish you would give
“ me a Note in writing of all that you said this
“ evening, and of the objects of your Mission. ”
♦
Some enquiries were then made regarding the
Burmese Embassy to Cochin China, and as I for-
tunately possessed Copies in the Burmese Language,
which Mr. Gibson had given me, of the letter
addressed by the King of Ava to the King of
Cochin China, and of the letter of instructions from
the Burmese Ministers to their Ambassadors, I sent
for these documents, and shewed them as well as a
Chinese drawing of the reception of the Embassy at
Saigon. The interest which the sight of these
papers created cannot be described, and they all
assured me, that I should be received at Bangkok
with the greatest cordiality, if I gave the King such
a proof of the good will of the English towards the
Siamese as the production of these papers would be
considered.
The Pya detained me until 1 o’clock in the
morning.
On the Bth of March, I visited the Tan Belat,
whose duties at Pungah are said to be the same as those
of the Bindahara in Malayan States, and whom the
Luang Lam always called “ Vizier.” He is an elderly
man, shrewd, intelligent and of extremely mild man


ner, and he appears justly to have acquired great
influence over the Pya, his master Luang Lam. how-
ever was * thing with him also, and I was not therefore
long in securing his good will and confidence.
On the same day, I called on the Tan Yokobat,
the Prahs of Tuccotong and Tuccopa, and the Kha
Luang Mekhong or principal Commissioner from
Bangkok.
The first, the Yokobat, is related to the Pya of
Salang by marriage, and his duties are said to be
similar to those of the Laxaraana in Malayan States.
He appeared low-bred, and by no means intelligent.
The Second, the Prah of Tnccatong, is a mean
looking man, but extremely quick aiid shrewd in con-
versation, and the Pya of Salang having once been an
officer immediately under him as the Yokobat at Natoi,
some coolness and reserve now exist between them.
He exercises authority over the Christian village of
Tham, Pak-Phra or Poppra Khokloce, Brahgri, Natoi,
Tuccatong and Patai, the whole containing, 1 was told,
no more than six or seven hundred people, but he
is entirely subject to the orders of the Pya of Salang,
who it may be observed by his letter to the Honble.
the Governor includes the names of some of the
abovementioned places in his enumeration of the eight
countries which he governs. This Prah can proceed
from Pungah to the seat of his Government, Tuc-
oatong, in less than a day. He travels by water to
Tham, and thence on Elephants.
The third person I visited was the Prah of Tuccopa,
who is married to a sister of the Pya of Salang. He
is an unusually stout thick set man, but not very in-
telligent, and apparently a little distrustful of our in-
tentions. He exercises authority over Bangsak,
Khokhak, Tuccopa, Thungtroce, Korot and Korak, the
whole containing from one thousand to twelve hundred
inhabitants, but he is entirely under the orders of the


Pya of Salang, who includes some of the abovemen-
tioned villages also in his title. This Prah can pro-
ceed from Pungah to the Seat of his Government,
Tuccopa, on elephants in three days and two nights,
and he can reach Chaiya from Tuccopa in two or
three days.*
The Prah of Tuccopa seemed a little shy in con-
sequence of some questions which I put to him regard-
ing the boats alluded to in Mr. Secretary Cracraft’s
letter to me under date the 17th of February.* There
were none of them or of their crews at Pungah, and I
was told, that three or four of the boats were at Tucco-
pa, to which place they had been driven in the Squall
that separated them from Capt. Poynton. The Prah
promised to write and order one or two of the crew,
who he admitted are at Tuccopa, to repair to Pungah,
but they did not make their appearance whilst I was
there.
Both of the above Prahs had come to Pungah to
meet the Commissioners from Bangkok, thirteen of
whom had been deputed to register the population in
this quarter of the Siamese dominions, and both of
these prahs were obliged to hurry away from Pungah
before my departure, in order to be present at their
respective stations in time to take the oath of fidelity
to the King of Siam in the manner prescribed by the
laws of the Country.
The last person whom I visited on that day, was
Prah-Wechit-Senee, the Kha Luang (literally Slave of
the Court) Me-Khong, or Principal Commissioner from
Bangkok. He is a tall stout man, but apparently a
debauchee, and he proved himself to me to possess all
the rapacity of a Siamese Courtier. 1 had taken to
him as well as to the other persons of rank some pre-
sents of cloth &ca. and the day after my visit, he sent a
message privately to me, to inform me, that he would
like to have a little more of that description of Scarlet


cloth of which I had presented him with a piece. I
was too disgusted to take any notice of this message,
but a few days after, I found this Kha Luang was
using the powerful influence which he possessed as an
officer from Bangkok to thwart my plans, and I there-
fore deemed it prudent to call upon him with another
piece of the cloth, with which I think I entirely won
him. He promised to explain everything I had said,
fully and satisfactorily to the Ministers at Bangkok,
and to touch on his way at Chirapohun and render the
Pya of that place favourable to the opening of a com-
munication with Tenasserim and Mergui. He gave
me some advice as to the particular presents which a
British Envoy to Siam ought to take for the different
officers, and observed, that if the Envoy desires to
make an impression at Bangkok, he must be supplied
with a Commission under the Hand and Seal of the
Bight Honble. the Governor General. He added, that
u letter and presents from the Honble. the Governor of
Penang, would however be useful in any negotiations
that might be necessary regarding the King of Kedah ;
and on my asking whether if the King accompanied
the British Envoy, he would be kindly received, he
replied, after cautiously looking around, “ The King
of Kedah had better not be taken to Bangkok until
the British Agent has settled everything there regard-
ing him with the Wang-na, the Chow Pya of Ligore’s
Nephew, ”
The Kha Luang informed me that he had regis-
tered “ about 2000 Men ” as Vassals or Slaves of the
Soil throughout the territories subject to the Pya of
Salang. and I afterwards learnt, from the Nakoda
of a Native Brig who was loading rice and tin for
the Coast of Coromandel, and who from having formerly
met the Kha Luang on that Coast, was now on very
intimate terms with him, that the Kha-Luang told
him the exact number of such persons which he had
registered was 1225. The Names of every other


Siamese subject are also registered, but these vassals
or slaves have the word “ Salang ” pricked in the
Siamese character on their wrists. The Kha-Luang
had previously to their coming to Pungah visited
Ligore and registered the Siamese inhabitants there,
and an officer had accompanied them from that place
in order to claim certain subjects of Ligore who had
fled to Pungah ; but I was told by Luang Lam, that
the Fja ot Salang had privately given notice to
the refugees of the object of this officer’s coming to
Pungah, and had advised them to keep themselves
concealed until his departure.
In manneis the Ij-a Ci Salang is extremely affable
and pleasing, and he does not appear to want intelli-
gence. He is much beloved by his subjects for the
mildness of his rule and his whole conduct to me, I
uni bound to declare was marked by great cordiality
and good will. He is about 50 years of age, and I
should think rather of an indolent disposition. His
father’s sister was married to the late King of Siam
which event led to his appointment from Yakobat
ot Isatoy, to Iya ot Salang. He is said to possess
great in fluence at Bangkok, being connected by mar-
riage with the Kalahom and Chew Pya-Elang, and
with the Pyas of Rachpuri and Puchpuri and I was in-
formed by Luang Lam he is about to take his Daughter
up. to Bangkok tor the present King. He seemed to
entertain no apprehensions as to what might be said
at Bangkok respecting any thing which he might say
or do, and he shewed me a very handsome gold Betel
Set and service of plate which the present King of
Siam, he said, had lately sent to him. The Jurisdic-
tion of the Pya of Salang extends from Pak-lao to
ilinnong, including Junk, Ceylon, but the whole of
this extensive tract is very thinly inhabited, since it
was laid waste by the Burmese in 1810, the population
now not exceeding six thousand souls, I was assured
by a Catholic Priest, Padre Juan, to whom I shall


hereafter have occasion to refer. The inhabitants of
Pungah itself consist of about five hundred Chinese,
and two thousand Siamese and Natives of other
Countries. A little above Pungah I was told that
there are five hundred Chinese, and six or seven
hundred Siamese employed in mining.
The Pya of Salang states in his title, that he is
the Governor of eight places, namely Salang, Bangri,
Tuccatong, Tuccopa, Korak, Poongha, Pukit and
Pak-Phra ; and here I may take occasion to report,
that the office of Governor of a province is not
invariably hereditary. The Sons of several of thb
former Pyas of Salang are now living at Pungah, and
one of them is a subordinate officer under the present
Pya as Chiom of Pukit, an ancient town in Junkcejdon,
which at one time had a Pya distinct from that
of Salang. If a Govr. has a son old enough to be-
taken to Bangkok, and presented at Court his succes-
sion to his father is then previously arranged and
purchased by his father’s influence and presents joined
to his own. But almost everything curious or valuable
which these Governors acquire, finds its way to Bang-
kok, and they pride themselves also in presenting
their Daughters to the Royal bed.
I found the Schooner which we had carried up to
Pungah could not be taken down the river again, until
the return of the spring tides, in consequence of the
immense number of targe trees which have fallen down
its steep banks, or have floated down from the
forests in the interior, and which have been allowed as
a means of defence against the Burmese, so to impede
the navigation of the river, that in many places, an
ordinary-sized native boat even cannot pass during the
neap tides. During the thirteen days that I was thus
obliged to wait at Pungah, I daily saw the young
Chief, and some of the officers assembled there, ami
was admitted every other night to a private interview
with the Pya of Salang himself.


After I had in two or three more interviews
interested and amused the Chief by giving him long
descriptions of the Customs and manners of the
English, he threw aside all reserve and communicated
more useful information. He declared that he had
received a letter from the King of Siam desiring him,
as he was near Mergui and the British possessions in
this quarter, to collect and transmit full and accurate
intelligence of our proceedings, respecting which His
Majesty had heard accounts on which, he said, he
could not entirely depend, from Mr. Crawfurd at Sin-
gapore, and from some Burmese fugitives who had
been seized by the Pya of Chumpohun and transmitted
to Bangkok. He gave me reason to believe, that at
Bangkok there exists every disposition to co-operate
with us against the Burmese, and that the Wang-na is
even assembling an army for that purpose, but that the
Court is waiting for some more distinct communica-
tions regarding our views and intentions before it
will resolve upon acting. He put many questions
to me regarding our future proceedings on the Coast of
Tenasserim, leading me to infer that the Siamese
would rejoice to recover their ancient dominions there,
and he, as well as his Ministers, strove to prevail upon
me to pledge the restoration of a portion of them or
even the restoration of the Siamese Prisoners carried
away by the Burmese from Junkceylon and other places
to Mergui and Tavoy, and this last measure he observed
would be considered as a very great proof of our good
"ill* I contented myself with replying, that the
British Government did not seek for any extension of
territory and that it would perhaps depend upon the
conduct of the Court of Siam as to what arrano-ements
O
it would be necessary to make regarding our conquests
on the Coast of Tenasserim, but that with respect
to the Siamese Prisoners at Mergui and Tavoy, 1 was
certain our Government would never prevent their
leaving those places as soon as they pleased, and re-
turning to their own country. I pointed out also.


* i wasmyscif at]
isic. j Pungah that my being
a military man, so far from
exciting suspicion and alarm,
as . had been toid here to
expect, obtained for me much
greater consideration, i was
two or three times requested
to appear in full uniform, in
seeing and examining which
the chiefs appeared as much
mterested as children.
that the best mode for the Siamese to secure the
accomplishment of their wishes regarding the country
of Tenasserim would. I thought, be by immediately
opening Communications with our different Com-
manders and Garrisons and moving an army towards
’surprisedat] the capital of Ava through Cheung-mai
iat my being an( j jy[ one i 1- The Pya of Salang had not
so far from - °
>n and alarm, heard from Bangkok for three months,
told here to ] le wa s there himself four months
I for me much
ration, i was ago, and he told me a curious story of an
cs requested “officer,” a person dressed in Epau-
II uniform, in ' 1 1
nining which lettes ” having come to that city about
ired as much seven or ffioffit months ago from Singa-
ildren. n to fo
pore, and of his having “ sold Muskets,”
though what communications he had come to make to
the Court, had not transpired. *
When I had again been requested to put down in
writing a Note of the objects of my Mission, I drew
up the paper marked C. in the Enclosures, after
once more carefully examining the documents with
which I had been furnished by Government, A
Translation of this paper was made into the Siamese
language at the Young Chief’s House, in the presence
of himself, the Tan Belat, Tan Yokobat, and the Prah
of Tuccopa, to complete which Luang Lara and my
Malay and Christian Interpreters assisted me. Such
was the confidence at last established between the Pya
of Salang and myself, that he even sent for my
own Malay Interpreter to assist Luang Lam in making
a Siamese version of the letters which the Honble.
the Governor had addressed to him in the Malayan
Character. The Pya had near him no respectable
person who could read that character.
Upon visiting the Pya after he had seen the
Siamese translation of my note he expressed himself
highly pleased with it, and declared his intention of
immediately dispatching a Courier with it to Bangkok,


as lie was certain its contents would be highly
gratifying to the King his master and would tend to
remove at once all that distrust and suspicion with
which our proceedings are now viewed at Bangkok. I
then suggested to him the advantage of our uniting
to open friendly communications between the British
Commanders at Mergui, Tenasserim, Tavoy, Ye and
Martaban, and the Governors of the contiguous Siamese
posts. He immediately agreed to forward letters and
presents from me to the different Siamese officers, and
to accompany them with the most friendly letters
from himself. When I mentioned that the establish-
ment of such an intercourse between our Garrisons
and the Siamese Posts might be very profitable to the
Siamese themselves, whose Provisions would perhaps
find a ready sale at our garrisons, the Prah of Tuccopa,
who was then present, requested to be supplied \Vith
a letter to the officer commanding the British force
at Mergui, to which he said he would dispatch a
boat-load of merchandize the moment he returned
to Tuccopa.
In preparing ray letters for the different Siamese
Governors, the Young Chief of Salang afforded me
very kind assistance and sent his own writer to my
house to transcribe my letters in the Siamese language.
The Tan Belat afterwards examined the letters, cor-
rected some inaccuracies of expression, and shewed me
a draft of the letters which the Pya was about to send
with mine, and nothing certainly could be more kind
and friendly. For copies of the letters addressed by
me to the British Commanders at Mergui, Tenasserim,
Tavoy, Ye and Martaban, and to the Siamese Gov-
ernors of Chaiya, Chimpohun, Puchpuri and Rachpuri,
1 beg to refer to I), E and F of the enclosures.
The Pya of Salang repeatedly expressed himself
in the most flattering terms as to the happiness which
my arrival had afforded him, and he one day told me.


that two days before my arrival he had dreamt a dream
which had made a great impression upon him, and
which he had related on the following morning to his
son and ministers. He had dreamt that he had walked
from Pungah to Bangkok over the bodies of dead men.
Hence, he said, he was anxious to take me to Bangkok
with him, and he would write a reply to the Honble.
the Governor to request particularly that I should bo
sent back, and to offer to leave his son at Pungah to
convey me to him (The Pya) at Bangkok. I told him
that it would rest with the Governor General to deter-
mine what officer should be deputed to communicate
his wishes to the King of Siam and that most proba-
bly a letter * from Bengal had already reached Penang
signifying his Lordship’s determination.
I learnt that the people of Pungah when proceed-
ing to Bangkok first go in boats in four hours to Pak-
lao, a small town under the orders of the Chow Pya of
Ligore, but established as a thoroughfare by the King
of Siam. That from Pak-lao they pass across the
country on elephants in three days to Pennoin near
the junction of the rivers Bandon and Chaiya. That
at Pennom, they embark in small boats and pass iu
two or three days more rapidly down the Chaiya river,
to Chaiya, where they embark in large junks, which
take from four to twenty four days to reach Bangkok
according as the South West or North East Monsoon
prevails. The Pya’s eldest son told me that they hacl
at least a hundred and fifty elephants at Pak-lao, and
as a proof that there would be no difficulty in safely
passing a British Envoy with as much baggage as he
pleases by this route to Bangkok, he stated that his
father had but lately brought through Chaiya and
Pennom to Pak-lao on elephants, a hundred peculs of
sugar and the same quantity of fine lac, which had
been sent down from Bangkok to Chaiya, There is a
direct route from Pungah to Chaiya, but it passes over
the mountains which enclose the valley of Pungah and


is steep and inconvenient. I saw the mouth of the
• Pak-lao river from sea, and should take it to be not
* more than eight miles to the North East of the mouth
i of the Pungah lliver. *
r
I was allowed at Pungah to apply to any person I
pleased for information respecting the Geographical
Situation of the different Siamese Towns and expe-
rienced no difficulty in obtaining a map of the West
Coast of the Gulph of Siam from Ligore to Bangkok.
The Young Chief himself, who had repeatedly passed
along that Coast, and touched at most places on it,
kindly examined, and with some of his own attendants,
corrected this map. But I found it impossible for some
time to obtain exact information regarding the number
and situation of the different places between Tuccopa
and Mergui, and the point which was considered as
the boundary between the Siamese and Burmese
possessions. There were few at Pungah who appeared
to have visited the country above Tuccopa, and they
differed much as to the precise boundary between
these States. Some of the followers of the Prah of
Tuccopa could, I was informed, have given me correct
information, but their master, whose authority does
not extend beyond Korak, appeared to be afraid of
giving offence to the Pya of Chimpohun, in whose
jurisdiction the Country between Korak and the
Burmese Frontiers is placed. The Prah and the Pya
of Salang advised me to apply to the Pya of Chimpohun
for information on this point, and they, as well as
the Kha Luang from Bangkok, offered to explain
everything to the satisfaction of the Pya of Chimpohun
on their passage to Siam.
I met at Pungah Padre Juan a Catholic Priest, a
native of Junkceylon who was educated by the Catholic
Missionaries at Bangkok, and had lived some years
at Penang, whither he had fled on the invasion of
Junkceylon by the Burmese in 1810. He now lives


at Tham a small Christian village containing only
twenty or thirty souls, situate between Tuccotong
and Pungah. liecollecting having formerly seen
me at Penang, he came to pay me a visit, and
freely communicated to me as much intelligence
regarding the country and people as he possessed. I
trusted to his report of places even which he had not
visited, as 1 conceived his education and knowledge of
French and Latin entitled his opinion to respect, and
upon his authority, I stated in my first letter to the
officer commanding at Mergui, that at Thongla-ong and
Muang Kloo-ung is the Siamese boundary. Subse-
quently however I obtained I think more correct
information from Ta-Khun-tip, a Siamese priest, who
had often been at Rinnong, and who drew for me a
Chart of the Coast, and from Prah Boree-rach-
Soomeeas, who had often visited Pak-Chan. This
Prah arrived from Chaiya but two days before my
departure from Pungah, and on hearing all that 1 had
communicated there he twice called upon me and
applied for a letter to the Officer Commanding at
Mergui declaring his intention, the moment he return-
ed to Chaiya, of either going himself or detaching an
Agent to Mergui with merchandize via Chimpohun
and Pak-chan. He seemed an intelligent young man
of very prepossessing manners, and I have no doubt
of his sincerity.
For further particulars regarding the Geogra-
phical situation of the Siamese boundaries, I must beg
leave to refer to the communications which I addressed
to the Officers commanding at Mergui &ca. (Enclosures
C. D. E. and F. ) and to Map and Memorandum which
will be submitted hereafter. I will here only add, that
Padre Juan, who had visited Rachpuri and Puchpuri,
informed me, that the former place is only four days jour-
ney from the pass of the three Pagodas, the established
boundary between the Siamese and Burmese territories
to the East of Martaban, and that from the latter


place, Puchpuri, to Mergui, there is a pass and
route which may be crossed in five days. I waS
further informed by the Pya of Salang, and his officers
that the Chakri at Bangkok superintends the affairs of
every Province to the North of that City and the
Kalahom the affairs of those lying to the south of that
city, and that to those officers respectively the most
minute reports are made by the Governors of every
Province from Singora to Cheung-mai.
The last day I was at Pungah the 19th March, I
witnessed an interesting ceremony. Assured that I
had now entirely secured the good will and confidence
of the Pya of Salang and his son, I did not hesitate to
attend and sit down in the midst of the whole of the
Public Officers who were assembled in a large shed,,
and their wives in an adjoining house, to swear the
oath of fidelity to the King of Siam, which oath I was
told every person holding a situation under the King
of Siam, is obliged, with his wife, to take twice a year,
on the first da} 7 s of the fifth and eleventh moon. I
may hereafter have occasion to give a detailed account
of this ceremony, but I shall mention here, that it
consisted in the Pya and all the officers while the
Priests recited prayers, turning towards the North
(Bangkok) falling prostrate and striking their heads on
ground three successive times, and in afterwards read-
ing a long oath, and drinking some water in which a
musket ball had been put, and the points of a sword
and spear dipped. I was good humouredly pressed by
the Pya and his son to strike my head on the ground
when the rest did so, and to drink some of the water,
offering to get me made a Prah by the King of Siam.
They were however perfectly satisfied with my standing
up and bowing towards the north whenever the rest
prostrated themselves. Some of the Commissioners
from Bangkok importuned me much to drink a little
of the water stating that my doing so would be
highly gratifying to the King, but of course I declined,


and endeavoured to pacify them by pointing out that;
I held no office under their Master, and was besides
ignorant of the precise nature of the obligation, which
they had previously read and which they annexed to
this ceremony of drinking water.
1 observed the Pya of Salang prides himself on his
title, and he took pains to correct the address of the
letters which I carried to him from the Honble. the
Governor, and in which he was styled Pya of Pungah.
The Siamese are fully sensible of the great value of
Junkceylon. The very first consequence of our
Burmese war has been to induce the Siamese to turn
their views towards improving that Island and their
Establishment there is to be restored the moment the
Pya returns from Bangkok, when his eldest son is to
be appointed Governor of Salang. Since the Burmese
laid it waste, the inhabitants, which were at one time
estimated at twelve thousand, have never exceeded
eight hundred or a thousand men, and the greater por-
tion of these even and all the women and children live
ther* but half the year, retiring during the North East
monsoon to Pungah. In the same manner, its produce
of tin, which in the time of Forest was estimated at
live hundred tons per annum, has not of late years
exceeded twenty tons, or eighty hhars. The inhabit-
ants are chiefly engaged in cultivating paddy, of which
grain 1 was assured by the young Chief, that Island
exported at least three hundred Coyans per annum.
The mortality of the Governors of Junkceylon, consi-
dering that the Island is deemed healthy, is very
remarkable. Luang Lam told me that he had seen
eight die.
Although I am satisfied that there is not the
smallest chance of Junkceylon being ever ceded to
us, yet I think that were it compatible with the
general mercantile arrangements of the Honorable
Company, the measure of establishing a factory


and commercial Agent there, or at Pimgah (and
to this extent only I believe the late Honble. Colonel
Bannerman’s plan was limited) could be easily
carried into effect, and would prove very profitable.
Our Merchants at Penang, and the people of Pungali
themselves complained of it, do not appear to be
aware of the great means for carrying on trade which
that place possesses, both in respect to its own
produce, and in respect to the produce of Siam which
can be so easily brought down via Chaiya. If a Com-
mercial Agent on the part of the Honble. Company
were fixed at Junkceylon orPungah, in order to excite
the industry of the inhabitants, and create a more
effectual demand for the produce of those places and
of Siam, I have little doubt but he would be able
annually to send to Penang a supply of Lac, Sapan
Wood, Tin, Birds’ nests. Tripang, Ivory and other
Commodities sufficient to load two or three large
Indiamen. Our Commercial Agent at Junkceylon
might also offer, with two or three small Gun Boats,
to join with the Siamese in protecting the Coasts and
checking piracy, a service which is much required,
and which the Siamese here would, 1 think, receive
with gratitude.
Nothing however would tend more immediately
to improve our commercial relations with Pimgah,
than a survey of its harbour, which ships of the largest
description may visit, and of the coast between it and
Kedah, a good chart of almost the whole of which is
even to this day a desideratum in hydrography. Of
all the charts which we had with us, the oldest, one
of D’Apres do Mannevillete’s, most resembled what
we observed and what the Native Pilots described
around Pungah. A small island in the harbour of
Pungah, called by the Siamese Ko-mak or Palo
Penang, and remarkable as the only one covered with
trees, the rest being high and rocky, and as being-
near the best anchorage, we took the liberty of


naming “Fullerton’s Isle” in honor of the Governor of
this Island.
I was happy to find at Pungah a much more liberal
arrangement with respect to the trade in tin than what
I had previously learnt. No tin [is] ever sent to
Bangkok but when specially required, for instance
100 hhars were sent for the King of Siam to give to
Mr, Crawfurd in return for the presents from the
Eight Honble. the Governor General, and about the
same quantity is now about to be dispatched for the
Funeral of the late King. Thp privilege of smelting
the tin ore is farmed by a Siamese Prah from Bangkok
who is engaged to give the King of Siam for this
privilege 140 hhars of tin and 40 muskets per annum.
His Majesty’s tin is either sold on the spot or brought
to Penang and sold, and the proceeds are remitted to
Siam in cash or in such articles as may be specially
commissioned. Thus I was repeatedly assured, that
the whole of the tin, excepting a portion occasionally
when demanded for Public purposes at Bangkok, finds-
its way to Penang. Some times also, as was the case
when 1 was at Pungah, Native vessels call in there
and export tin to the Coast of Coromandel. The
selling price of the metal at Pungah is 50 Dollars for
the large Bhar, equal to 3 peculs and 56 Catties. To
the farmer, all the tin ore is brought and he pays 2
Dollars for 3 measures full of it, the measure being a
basket containing from 14 to 15 catties, and a great
source of this profit consists in the manner in which
this measure is struck. The farmer paid formerly one
Dollar only for 3 measures, but since the devastation
of Junkceyloh the King of Siam has directed the price
paid to the miner to be raised to 2 Dollars. The ore
is smelted no less than seven times and the mode of
smelting it is the same as what Mr. Light described 40
years ago, and the produce about the same, vixt. 7 Per
cent. At Pungah the metal is most abundant, from
1000 to 1200 Bhars having been collected during the


past year. Most of the miners and all the smelters
are Chinese, and the former do not work as they did
at Junkceylon in separate pits, but in trenches.
The Pya of Salang has the privilege of taking from
the farmer whatever portion of tin he may require
at a fixed rate of 48 Dollars Per Bhar.
■Elephant’s Tusks and Rhinoceros’s horns only
are now Royal monopolies, the whole of what is
collected being ordered to be sent to Bangkok, an
order which I was told the Pya of Salang often
takes upon himself to disobey. The import duties
at Pungah on Cottons and Salt are six per cent
and the anchorage fees at the rate of one hundred
and twenty five dollars for every fifty Bhars of Tin
exported, being particularly high. I recommended
the Pya to reduce them as a means of inviting more
Ships to visit his port; but he observed that the
present rate had been fixed for centuries and could
not be altered except by order from the King.
There is no import duty on opium, and several other
articles. The consumplion ot the first has been
prohibited by the King of Siam, without much effect
however, as i daily observed at Pungah. The
Chinese Junks pay only four per Cent on Cottons,
and a moiety only of the other duties which are
levied on square rigged vessels. The Chinese pos-
sess many other advantages in the Siamese Ter-
ritories, and are allowed to visit and settle in any
part of them. We can be at no loss to know the
cause of such indulgence when we observe that the
Siamese Chiefs admire fair women, and generally,
in preference to their own females, marry the daugh-
ters of Chinese or fair women of Chinese Extraction,
The Wife of the Young Chief of Salang is evidently
of such origin, and this circumstance accounts for the
Pya of Singora, and so many of the other Siamese
Governors being of Chinese Extraction, the bias of
whose minds must of course be to favor the Chinese,


The only authentic information I could obtain
regarding the former state of the Country of Tenas-
serim, was contained in apparently an old book in
which I was shewn a Code of Harbour and Custom
House duties and regulations in force at Mergui and
Tenasserim whilst under the Siamese Government-
I procured a copy of this document by means of the
young Chief, and I beg to annex a translation of it,
as from its perusal Government will be enabled to
estimate what advantage our commerce may pro-
bably derive from the measure of transferring this
country to the Siamese. I saw clearly at Pungah,
that the Siamese do not consider themselves to
possess such a title or claim to our Conquests on
this Coast as to require us to surrender more of
them than what we may be inclined to do. I am
sure they will be most happy to receive any portion
of them, and as to what I was told at Kedah, on my
first visit there, and the Chow Pya of Ligore himself
appears to have told the same tale to my Chinese
Agent Achong, that “the Court of Bangkok is
quite indifferent regarding the possession of any
portion of the Coast of Tenasserim ” it may be
easily explained when we reflect that the Coast is
too far from Ligore for its chief to benefit by any
cession of it, while the natural effect of such cession
will be to increase the power and influence only of
some of his rivals, the Governors of the Siamese
Provinces immediately contiguous to if.
I learnt much at Pungah respecting the
advantageous commercial situation of Mergui, and
even the Nakoda of one of the native Brigs which
were loading with rice and tin for the Coast of
Coromandel solicited me to submit to the con-
sideration of our Government the importance
of retaining such a post on the eastern side
of the Bay of Bengal as Mergui, whence not
only a valuable trade could always be conducted but


large supplies of rice in times of scarcity on the
Coast of Coromandel could be so easily received and
taken for the relief ot the sufferers. As to the
capability of defending that Island there can be no
doubt. Captain Poynton who assisted at its cap-
ture, declares, that Mergui not only possesses a
noble harbour, but that it is naturally a very strong
place, the Fort being placed upon a hill which com-
pletely commands the harbour, to fire at which he
was obliged to elevate the Guns of his Vessel at an
angle of nearly forty five degrees.
Our Steam Boat at Rangoon appears to have
excited great interest at Bangkok, and innumerable
were the questions put to me both at Pungah and
Kedah respecting the nature and principle of sucli
a vessel.
The event of the late King of Siam’s demise
was concealed by the Court at Bangkok for two
months, nor was it disclosed, nor the people ordered
to go into mourning, until every preparation was
made for resisting any attack or interference, which,
I was assured at Pungah, the Court believed might
be attempted by the English from Prince of 1 Vales
Island. The Siamese form of mourning for a King
is the same as that of the Chinese—every subject is.
ordered to shave his head, and it was not without
much crying, I was told, that the Women of Pungah
consented to lose their long tresses.
I have thus detailed. I hope not too minutely,
the nature of my communications at Pungah, and 1
beg to annex correct translations of the replies
which the Pya of Salang and Prahs of Tuccatong
and Tuccopa have given in the Siamese Language
to the letters addressed to them by the Honble. the
Governor. Whatever may be the ultimate deter-
mination of Government, I have here earnestly to


request, that some early token may be transmitted
to these Chiefs in acknowledgment of the cordial
good will and kindness with which they received
me, and for which I really feel grateful to them.
In my intercourse with them, as well as with the
Baginda Muda of Kedah, I adopted the practice of
the old travellers and ambassadors. After a first
formal and ceremonious interview, in which I proved
to them that I possessed sufficient rank and powers,
I threw aside all state and show, visited them
privately and quietly, and endeavoured through my
knowledge of the Malayan language [ and my ]
Native Christian and Hindoostannee Interpreters, to
interest and amuse them by descriptions of our
customs and manners, and altho’ I did not dance a
minuet as Kampfer did before the King and Court
of Siam, or sing a Psalm as Lancaster did before
the King of Acheen, still I did not hesitate to do
things perhaps just as likely to excite risibility, and
I found my plan eminently successful. It was the
adoption of such a practice that enabled me to
remove their suspicions and collect from them
intelligence on any subject that I desired. I do
not hesitate then to recommend to Government to
accept the proffered assistance of these Chiefs at
Bangkok, not only because 1 have experienced such
kindness at their hands, but because I am more than
ever convinced, that no impression can be made in
our negotiations with Siam respecting the arrange-
ments we desire to accomplish in this neighbour-
hood, but through the aid and intervention of the
Chiefs residing near us.
I beg to submit to the particular notice of the
Honble. the Governor in Council, that I am under the
most important obligations to Mr. Maingy, the Su-
perintendent of Province Wellesley ; who had in the
true spirit of that zeal for the public, which so highly
distinguishes him, and of that friendship which has
long subsisted between us transferred to me several


of his own Malay Servants and attendants, to ac-
company me on this mission. I found these men
well acquainted with the Siamese language, and with
every part of the Kedah and Ligore territories, and
in possession of such superior worth and intelligence
as a long servitude under Mr. Maingy could not fail
to impart to them. I am much indebted also to
Mr. Cracroft, who from his situation as Secretary
to Government, and from his intimate acquaintance
with the Malayan language and customs, and with
the records of Government, was so well qualified to
afford me useful and judicious hints. Mr. Anderson,
the Malay Translator to Government, kindly gave
me all the aid which his superior acquirements
enabled him to give and I may add with pride and
pleasure, that no Mission ever quitted Penang under
more friendly, cordial and zealous assistance than
what mine had the great fortune to receive. I felt
the deepest regret on my return to the Presidency,
to find, that there was one Gentleman, the late Mr.
Williams, Deputy Secretary to Government, to
whom it was no longer in my power to express my
gratitude. He had, with that good nature which
had endeared him so much to all who knew him,
insisted on my accepting the giatuitous use of his
schooner or Pleasure Boat, and this favor proved of
the most essential service to my mission.
I have now only to hope that the Honble. the
Governor in Council will consider that the objects
cf my mission towards the Isthmus of Kraw, as far
as they were detailed in my Letter of Instructions
of the Bth of January,* have been so attended to by
me, as to justify his expectations. I trust he will be
satisfied, that the Siamese do not possess any such
title or claim to the late Conquests on the Coast of
Tenasserim, as interfere with the British Govern-
ment disposing of them in whatever manner it
pleases, that the Court of Siam will receive a British


Envoy at the present juncture with every satisfac-
tion, and lastly, that the Chiefs on the Isthmus of
Kraw are Servants implicitly bound by, and actually
obeying the dictates of their Superiors at Bangkok.
I have &c.
( Signed ) H. BURNEY Capt.
Poll. Agent to the Siamese States.
Prince of Wales Island
the 2d. April 1825.
True Copy
( Signed ) E. A. BLUNDELL
Actg. Secy, to Govt.


A.
TRANSLATION of a letter from the Son of
the Rajah of Ligore, at Li gore, to Captain Burney.
( After Compliments.)
With respect to my friend Captain Burney
sending China Achong with a Letter from the Gov-
ernor of Pulo Penang and one from himself to ray
father the Rajah of Ligore, which he brought across
from Quedah to Ligore, my father received them
with much satisfaction, in order that friendship
might be prolonged.
My father, the Rajah of Ligore, understands
the contents of the letter from the Governor of Pulo
Penang and my friend Captain Burney, relating to
the English having engaged in hostilities with the
Burrnahs and taken many towns and that my friend
Captain Burney had been sent as the representative
of the Governor of Pulo Penang to transact business.
It is mentioned in the letter of my friend
Captain Burney, that the Governor of Bengal had
directed him to come to establish friendship. My
friend Captain Burney therefore requests to meet
my father the Rajah of Ligore at Trang. My
father, the Rajah of Ligore is much pleased and
desirous that the Siamese and English Countries
should be on friendly terms and be like one; he
would have gone to Trang agreeably to the request
of my friend Captain Burney, expressed in his
letter, but it appears to him that it is too far distant
from the Rajah of Puio Penang. My father the
Rajah of Ligore, intends to come to Quedah, to be
near the Governor of Pulo Penang, in order that
business may be considered with facility, and that
the road of friendship may be followed more than
formerly.
FORT WILLIAM 13th May 1825,


The Eajah of Ligore is seriously disposed
to preserve friendship and a good understand-
ing with the English. He intends to proceed to
Quedah in thirty or forty days, wherefore wait a
little. When the Eajah of Ligore comes to Quedah,
the business will be considered agreeably to the wish
of the Governor of Pulo Penang and ray friend Cap-
tain Purney as mentioned in his letter.
Further, with respect to the articles brought
by China Achong, these are a Necklace, two arm
bangles, two candlesticks and a shawl, which were
received as a token of friendship. There is not at
present time to prepare a suitable return of Siamese
manufacture, but when the Eajah of Ligore and 1
come to Quedah, some articles will be prepared to
send as a token of friendship.
Dated 3rd. of Eajah 1240.
Penang
the 26th March 1825.
A True Translation
(Signed) JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Transr. to Govt.


c.
NOTE delivered to the Pya of Salang for the
purpose of being forwarded to the Court of Siam by
Captain Henry Burney, Political Agent from the
Government of Prince of Wales Island to the Siamese
States.
Pungah 11th March 1825.
The unprovoked aggressions and hostile demons-
trations of Ava having forced the British Government
to declare war against that State, and British troops
having taken possession not only of Assam, Cheduba,
Negrais, Bassein, Rangoon, Serian, Dalla, Pegu,
Martaban and Ye, but of Tavoy, Mergui and Tenas-
serim, places immediately contiguous to the Siamese
territories, Captain Henry Burney has been deputed
by the Government of Prince of Wales Island, under
the direction and authority of the Right Honble. the
Governor General in Council, to visit the Siamese
States in this neighbourhood, in order to explain to
them fully the origin and progress of the war, to
satisfy them of the sincere good will of the British
Government towards the Court of Siam ; to invite
them to consider the British Troops as friends, hostilely
engaged only against the ancient and inveterate
enemies of the Siamese, and to assure them, that the
British Officers and Soldiers on the Frontiers of Siam
have been particularly cautioned to treat the subjects
and property of Siam with every respect and attention.
Captain Burney has arrived at Pungah, and given
to the Pya of Salang, to his sou and Tan Belat and
Tan Yokabat, as well as to the Prahs of Tuccopa and
Tuccatong and to the Kha-Luang from Bangkok, de-
tailed account of the nature and progress of the present
war, and they have engaged to repeat the same to the
Court of Siam, Captain Burney will then here only
state, that as the British Troops have established
themselves in the vicinity of the Siamese possessions.


the Right Honble. the Governor General is desirous
of deputing an Agent to the Court of Siam, in order
to satisfy it more fully and unreservedly than can bo
done by letter, of the views and objects of the British
Government, and as the time is arrived when the
Siamese will have an opportunity of punishing their
ancient and overbearing foe, the Right Honble. the
Governor General is willing to*point out to the Court of
Siam, in what manner the co-operation of the Siamese
in the present war may be rendered most serviceable to
themselves, and most injurious to the Burmese. The
Right Honble. the Governor General disavows all
intentions of aggrandizement, and is therefore further
willing to acquaint the Court of Siam what are his views
with respect to the Conquered Burmese Territories,
as well as to hear what arrangements that Court may
be disposed to make with the British Government
concerning the recovery of any portion of its former
possessions on the Coast of Tenasserim.
Captain Burney possesses many documents to
shew the Court of Siam what was the real purpose of
the Mission which was deputed two years ago by the
King of Ava to the King of Cochin China, and he
trusts that the production of these papers, as well as
the frank and candid manner in which the British
Government offers to make the Court of Siam fully
apprized of its views and intentions with respect to
the Burmese, will be considered by that Court as
unequivocal proofs of the sincerity and good feeling
■with which the British Government is actuated towards
the Siamese Nation.
.Signed) H. BURNEY Capt. Poll. Agent
from the Penang Govt, to the
Siamese States.
( A true Copy. )


D.
LETTER addressed through the Pya of Salang to the
Pya of Chimpohun by Captain H. Burney, Political
Agent from the Penang Govt, to the Siamese States.
Pungah 15th March 1825.
This letter is addressed by Captain Burney to the
Pya of Chimpohun to inform him that the Govern-
ment of Penang, under the authority of the Right
Honble. the Governor General in Council, has deputed
Captain Burney to visit the Siamese States in this
neighbourhood in order to acquaint them that the
British Government has declared war against Ava,
and that the British troops having taken possession of
several Burmese Countries, are on their way to the
capital of Ava. The Burmese are well known to be
the ancient and inveterate enemies of the Siamese, and
as the British Government has sent troops to punish
them, the time is at length come for the Siamese to
prevail over the Burmese, and this they will not fail
to do if they now come forward and co-operate with
the English. The Right Honble. the Governor
General of Bengal has sent positive orders to the
British Officers and Soldiers stationed on the frontiers
of Siam, at Martaban, Ye, Tavoy, Mergui and Tenas-
serim, to treat the subjects and property of Siam witli
every respect and attention, and to maintain the most
friendly intercourse with the contiguous Siamese posts.
Captain Burney therefore encloses a Letter in English
addressed to the British Officer commanding at Tenas-
serim or Mergui, and requests the Pya of Chimpohun
will forward it to the nearest station by some of his
own servants and thus open a mutually beneficial in-
tercourse between Chimpohun and those places for the
purposes of trade as well as of friendship.
Captain Burney has arrived at Pungah from
Penang with various letters and papers, and lie has
fully explained to the Pya of Salang every particular


regarding the Burmese War, and this letter together
with a dispatch addressed in the Malayan language by,
the Honble. the Governor of Penang and a box con-
taining certain presents Captain Burney will deliver
in charge to the Pya of Salang, who has promised to
forward the whole to the Pya of Chimphoun with a letter
from himself. Captain Burney has made not only the Pya
of Salang but his Son and Tan Belat and Tan Yokabat,
the Prahs of Tuccopa and Tuccatong, and the Kha-
Luang Me-Khong from Bangkok intimately acquainted
with every thing regarding the Burmese war, and they
have engaged to forward immediately an official
Note from him to the Court of Siam and to report to
it, as also to repeat to the Pya of Chimpohun on their
passage to Bangkok, the agreeable intelligence which
Captain Burney has communicated to them.
Captain Burney begs the Pya of Chimpohun will
excuse any errors or omissions which the Pya may
observe in this address, and which Captain Burney’s
ignorance of the Siamese tongue prevents his dis-
covering.
Captain Burney also begs the Pya will do him the
favor to transmit a reply to him at Penang as soon as
possible through the Pya of Salang and if the reply be
accompanied by a map of the Siamese frontiers ad-
jacent to Tavoy, Mergui and Tenasserim, the British
Government will be apprized of the line that separates
the Burmese and Siamese possessions in this quarter,
and will be enabled to prohibit its troops against
entering in any direction within the Siamese bound-
ary. On this last subject Captain Burney has particu-
larly communicated with the Prah of Tuccopa and Kha
Luang Me-Khong and they have promised to explain
it more fully to the Pya of Chimpohun.
( Signed) H. BURNEY Capt. Poll. Agent -
from the Penang Govt, to the
Siamese States.
A true Copy
(Signed) H. BURNEY Poll. Agent.


A Copy of the above letter, with the necessary
alterations, and excluding only the passages contained
within inverted commas, * was also addressed to the
Pya of Puchpuri and Chow Pya of Rachpuri. A Copy
of the same was addressed thro’ the Pya of Ligore’s
son to the Pya of Chaiya, and this last contained an
additional paragraph stating that the letter and pre-
sents would be delivered to him by Prah Boree-rach-
Soombat,
(Signed) H. BURNEY Poll. Agent.


E.
DISPATCH addressed through the Pyas of Sa-
lang and Chimpohun to the Officer Commanding tha
British Troops at Tenasserim or Mergui by Captn.
H. Burney Political Agent from the Penang Govern-
ment to the Siamese States.
Pungah Lat: 821 Long: 98 23 *
15th March 1825.
Sir,
The Pya or Governor of Salang having engaged
to transmit letters and presents from me to the Chow
Pya of Rachpuri, to the Pya of Puchpuri, and to the
1 *ya of Chimpohun, with letters from himself, joining
in my invitation to those Siamese Governors to open a
friendly intercourse with the British Troops stationed
in the vicinity of their respective commands, I do
myself the honor to address } T ou under the following
circumstances, which I beg you will lose no time in
reporting for the information of Brigadier General Sir
Archibald Campbell, K. C. 8., K. C. I. S. &c. &c. &c.
Having been deputed by the Governor of Prince
of Wales Island under the authority of the Right
Honble. the Governor General in Council, to visit the
Siamese States in this neighbourhood, I arrived on the
6th Inst, at this place, where I found assembled the
Prahs of Tuccotong and Tuccopa and a Kha Luang or
Commissioner from Bangkok, and where I have experi-
enced the greatest kindness and cordiality. Having
explained to the Pya, to his son, and Ministers, and to
the Siamese Officers assembled here every particular
regarding the origin and progress of the Burmese
War, I was at first invited to accompany them to
Bangkok, whither they are about to proceed in the
course of a month or three weeks for the purpose of
assisting at the funeral of the late King of Siam, but on.


my declaring that I possessed no powers to visit Bang-
kok, the Pya resolved on transmitting immediately an
account of all I have communicated, together with an
official note from myself to the Court of Siam, and one
addressing ? [edto ] the Honble. the Governor of
Prince of Wales Island to request that I may be sent
back to this place as soon as possible with sufficient
powers from the Supreme Government and to offer to
convey me to the capital via Chaiya, a large Town
situated above Ligore on the Gulf of Siam. lam
therefore to return to Penang to-morrow with such a
letter from the Pya of this place.
In the mean time the Pya having engaged to
transmit letters and presents from me to the before-
mentioned Siamese Governors, with letters from him-
self, I have been induced to address a Copy of this
Dispatch to the Officer Commanding the British forces
at Tenasserim or Mergui thro’ the channel of the Pya
of Chimpohun or Chounpioun, which person exercised
the especial duty of watching the Burmese at Tavoy
and Mergui, and lias charge of the pass into the
Siamese Territories, and of the whole boundary line
in this quarter. The Siamese appear of late years to
have been recovering some of their ancient dominions
to the Southward of Mergui, and their boundary line
at present is reported here to cross the Isthmus of
Kraw at Mooung Kroo-ong and Thongla-ong, two
places on the western sea quite desolate and without
inhabitants, nearly opposite to Chimpohun on the Gulf
of Siam. Their frontier town to the Southward of
Mergui would appear to be Pak-Chan, which is a little
to the north of Rinnong or Rendohg River opposite to
St. Matthew’s Island, and which is perhaps the same
place as that which the Burmese call Ohan-ra situated
in about Latitude 10.50. The journey from Chimpo-
hun to Mergui is said to take only three days.
I have learnt here that a great many of the
Burmese who had fled from Tavoy and Mergui on our


* Many Siamese as we!! as
Burmese places appear to
Have two names, one in the
learned, and another in the
vulgar tongue. The first of
these are in common use at
Pungah, and the third I believe
are Burmese corruptions. I
suspect Dr. Hamilton’s Piappi
to which he says a passage
can be made from Junkccylon
in six or seven days [ Page 235
No. 18 of Edinburgh Philoso-
phical is a fourth
name for Puchpuri. Sd. H. B.
occupation of those places, have been seized by the
Pya of Chimpohun, and transmitted to Bangkok, and
that the Court of Siam, distrustful of the accounts of
the Burmese war which Mr. Crawfurd from Singapore
and other British officers had communicated, has lately
ordered the Pya of this place to collect and transmit
full and positive accounts of our proceedings.
The Prah or Lieut. Govr, of Tuccopa who. under
the control of the Pya of this place, exercises authority
on the Isthmus of Kraw from Patai in about Latitude
8. 40 to Korah or Kraw a small village a little to the
southward of Rennong having consented to depute an
Agent from Tuccopa to Mergui for the purpose of
establishing a friendly and commercial intercourse
between those ports, I shall deliver a copy of this
dispatch to the Prah for him to forward to the British
Officer Commanding at Mergui. The Prah has further
promised to stop at Chimpohun on his passage to
Bangkok, and to communicate every friendly intelli-
gence to the Pya of that place under whose authority
are Pak-chan and Rennong, the former only containing
a few inhabitants.
se as won as The Pya Puchpuri,* Phreephree or
appear to M . .
one in the * e P ei T> which appears to be situated on
ithcr in the the river marked Cham in Horsburgh’s
i men use at Charts, has charge of the boundary to
lira i believe the North of Chimpohun and Mergui,
eruptions. I n ~ r ,
iton’s Piappi and as tlie journey from Puchpuri to
; a passage Mergui takes only five days, and as
Junkccylon .. , . . ~, , . , ,
ys, Page 235 Puchpuri is within two or three days
fgh Phi lose- journey from Bangkok, I shall address
J* sd. mTs. a Copy of this dispatch to the Officer
Commanding at Mergui or Tavoy, through the channel
of that Pya.
The Chow Pya of Rachpuri, Ratphree or Yatpee,
which appears to be situated on the river marked


Bencaser in Horsburgh’s Charts, but named Me-Klong
by the Siamese, has charge of the boundary to the
Northwest of Bangkok, and particularly of the Pass of
three Pagodas called by the Burmese Eugaru and by
the Siamese Prache-dee-Sam-ong (three towers). As
this place leads from Martaban or Moultama to Bang-
kok, and is not four days journey from Rachpuri, and
as the Chow Pya of this place is said to be an officer
of high rank connected with the family of Siam,
and in almost daily communication with Bangkok, I
shall address a fourth copy of this letter to the British
Officer Commanding at Martaban, Ye or Tavoy through
the channel of this Chow Pya.
Should any of the above mentioned Siamese
Governors accept the invitation thus forwarded by the
Pya of Salang and myself 1 am sure I need not suggest
to you the expediency of treating any Agents who
may be deputed for the purposes either of trade or
friendly intercourse, with every attention and kindness,
so that the Communication thus opened may be fol-
lowed up and rendered mutually beneficial to the
Siamese and to oiir troops in Ava. I have acquainted
each of these Governors that the British Officers and
troops on the frontiers of Siam have received very
peremptory orders to respect the subjects and property
of that Nation.
1 have &c.
( Signed ) H. BURNEY Capt.
Poll. Agent from the Penang
Govt, to the Siamese States.
A true Copy
( Signed ) H. BURNEY Poll. Agent.


A Copy of the above letter, directed to “ the
Officer Commanding the British Forces at Mergui ”
was given to the Prah of Tuccopa, and besides the
above, two Copies were delivered to the Pya of Salang,
one enclosed in a letter to the Pya of Puchpuri and
directed to (l The Officer Commanding the British
Forces at Tavoy or Mergin'; ” and the other enclosed
in a letter to the Chow Pya of Rachpuri, and directed
to “ The Officer Commanding the British Forces at
Martaban, Ye or Tavoy.”
( Signed ) H. BURNEY Poll. Agent.


p.
DISPATCH addressed thro’ the eldest son of the
Pya of Salang, the Prah Boon-rach-Soombat and Pya
of Chaiya to the officer commanding the British Troops
at Mergui.
Pungah 18th March 1825.
Sir,
Since addressing you on the 15th Inst, thro’ the
Prah of Tuccopa and Pyas of Puchpuri and Chimpohun,
an officer of some rank, Prah Boree-rach-Soombat, has
arrived here from Chaiya ; and as he, after hearing all
I had communicated to the Pya of Salang, has resolved
upon immediately trying a commercial adventure to
Mergui, and has applied to me for a letter to your
address, I am induced to write to you again thro’ the
Pya of Chaiya, to whom the Prah abovementioned is
about to return with a letter from the Young Chief
here, as well as with one from myself giving cover to
this dispatch.
The Prah Boree-rach-Soombat proposes to pass
overland from Chimpohun to Pak-Chan which will
take him only one day, and then to proceed by water
to Mergui, which he can reach in another day. I feel
assured that both himself and his servants will ex-
perience from you that kindness and attention which
are recommended by a consideration of the expediency
of our opening as soon as possible a friendly intercourse
with the Siamese.
Since addressing you before, 1 have ascertained
that Moo-ang Kloo-ung or Kruu-ung and Thong-
la-ong are to the Southward of llennong; that Pak-
Chan is as far as the Siamese have been able to estab-
lish themselves between Junkceylon and Mergui; and
that Pak-Chan and llennong are under the immediate
•charge of a Luang or officer from Chimpohun, stationed


about the centre of the Isthmus of Kraw, at a place
called Mooung Krah, which name, I may add, so nearly
resembles the Korah or Kraw near Tuccopa, that the
Siamese themselves are often obliged to distinguish
it by the term Rennong-Kraw.
I have &c.
(Signed) H. BURNEY Gapt. Poll.
Agent from the Penang Govt, to
the Siamese States.
A true Copy
(Signed) H. BURNEY Poll. Agent.


G.
TRANSLATION of a letter from the Rajah Nar-
ong Ruangrit, Prasit, Chit Song Kram, who governs
eight Countries, Vizt. Jongsylong, Boonglee, Taccooa
Tong, Taceooapa, Koral, Poongha and Pakit commonly
styled Pia Poongha, to the Honble. the Governor of
Prince of Wales Island.
I have received a letter by Captain Burney and
perceive that he is a Commissioner from the Governor
of Pulo Penang, to explain everything relative to the
English having taken thirteen of the Burmese Coun-
tries, which I am very glad to learn, for the Burmahs
have been great enemies to the Siamese. Captain
Burney mentioned also that the Governor General had
sent a letter for the King of Siam, which letter con-
tains information about the war between the English
and Burmahs, but the letter was at Pulo Penang.
Captain Burney seems to be a clever man, and
possessed of good understanding, and I have received
him with pleasure and respect. The letter which he
brought I have sent a reply to the Governor’s letter
by Captain Burney, who returns to Pulo Penang, and
I request the Governor will send the letter from the
Governor General of Bengal, with which Captain
Burney can return to Poongha again, that I may send
the letter and him to the King of Siam.
Captain Burney has sent letters to the Rajah of
Chimpohun, Rachaboory, and Petchboory, All the
articles which he brought I have received. lam now
preparing to depart for Bangkok and shall await him
there, and I shall explain all that I have learnt from
him. My son is waiting at Poongha to accompany
him to Bangkok,
Dated Thursday the 29th of the fourth month and
Year 1186 Pi vok.
Penang
26 th March, 1825.
(Signed) JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Transr. to Govt.


H.
TRANSLATION of a letter from the Rajah of
Tuccoona Tong and Bonglee to the Honble. the
Governor of Prince of Wales "Island.
We have received a letter from Captain Burney
and we know for certain that the English have taken
several of the Burmah Countries. Captain Burney
went to Poongha to explain all the circumstances to
the Rajah of Jongsalong and to the Chiefs of Tuccoona
Tong and Tucooapa ; we have accordingly prepared a
letter and sent it to the King of Siam to explain all
we have heard from Captain Burney. We have been
made fully acquainted with the wish of the Governor
of Pulo Penang to be on friendly terms with the
King of Siam and we are perfectly satisfied with
the explanations contained in the letter from the Govr.
of Pulo Penang.
The Rajah of Jongsalong, Tuccoona Tong and
Tacooapa have jointly received Captain Burney with
great pleasure, we have sent the letter to the Pana-
hua-Chauthan Piya Accamahasena-thibody,* in order
that he may explain every thing to the King of Siam.
Captain Burney seems to be a clever man and
possessed of good understanding. If the Governor of
Pulo Penang has any business hereafter, we wish that
he will send Captain Burney again, for we are ac-
quainted with him. If he does come back to Poongha
upon any subject of business, we shall jointly assist in
promoting the wishes of the Governor of Pulo Penang.
Dated Thursday the 29th of the fourth Month
and year 1186 Pi vok.
A true Translation
( Signed ) JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Transr. to Govt.


I.
TRANSLATION of a letter from the Phra-jofc
Pac-dee Si-phichaisongkram, Commander of Tuccopa,
to the Governor of Prince of Wales Island.
( After Compliments.)
I have received a letter and presents from Captain
Burney, and know all the contents of the letter. I
have, in conjunction with the Rajah of Jan Sylang
( Junkceylon ) sent a letter to the King of Siam, and
if His Majesty returns any particular reply, I will
write to the Governor of Pulo Penang by the first
opportunity.
Captain Burney has given a note or a kind of pass
to go and trade at Meigui, and a letter has been sent
to Tuccopa that they may prepare every article of trade
to go to Mergui. Captain Burnejr has sent a map
to the King of Siam to shew also to the Rajah of
Choomphon, that the Rajah of Ohoomphon may know.
Dated Thursday the 29th of the fourth Month and
year 1186 Pi vok.
A true Translation
( Signed ) JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Transr. to Govt.
Penang
the 26th March 1825.
True Copies
( Signed ) G.* W. BLUNDELL Actg. Secy,
to Govt.
* sic. ? A. E. Blundell.




Fruited for private circulation.
THE
BURNEY PAPERS
Vol. II.
PART IV.
(November 1824 to June 1827.)
Printed by order of the Vajirañana National Library.
BANGKOK
1911.




FORT WILLIAM 19th November 1824.
Deputy Secretary at Prince of Wales’s Island.
To G. SWINTON Esq r.
Secy, to Govt. PORT WILLIAM.
Sir,
* * # # # #
Mr. Gibson, whilst here, described in very strong-
terms the riches and advantageous position of the
territory and ports in the Southern Provinces of the
Bunnan Empire, but the Right Honble. the Govr.
Genl. in Council must already be well apprized of
the immense value -which the Burmese Court place on
these Provinces, and particularly on the ports of
Mergui and Tavoy, and this Government is convinced
His Lordship in Council will not restore them to Siam
without requiring in return the cession to us of a
freedom of trade with those places, and indeed a
general removal of all those vexations and restraints
with which commerce is at present fettered at the
capital, as well as at all the other ports of Siam. The
Renovation * of the lift le Kingdom of Kedah, however
desirable to the immediate interests of this Settlement,
cannot for one moment be considered of such impor-
tance to the British Empire at large as the establish-
ment of an unrestricted trade with the whole Siamese
Empire, and with the interior and Eastern Coast of
Malay Peninsula by means of those overland routes
and of those rivers flowing into the sea in the im-
mediate neighbourhood of this Island. This valuable
object in addition to the restoration of the King of
Kedah, this Government could undoubtedly obtain
without difficulty, were it only authorized by His
Lordship in Council to open a negotiation for such


purpose with the Court of Siam and Rajah of Ligore,
founded on the contemplated transfer to Siam ot
Mergui and Tavoy.
I have &c.
( Signed ) J. M. Williams,
Depy. Sec}", to Govt.
Fort Cornwallis
The 11th June 1824.


Fort William 27th April 1826.
Tenasserim anti Mergui.
# * * # * #
>t. It is well known that this Province was claimed
by the Siamese about the period when the English
first visited these seas, and that it was taken posses-
sion of by the Barmans in 1760.
. ******
The Siamese have carried off since the breaking
■O
out of the present war 1,000 persons at the least com-
putation, The troops employed in this service were a
few Bankok and Contingencies from Six Districts on
the West Shore of the Gulf of Siam viz Chaiya Phoom
ree ung choomphan—Ban taphan Mai and Preep pree.
These are laid down in my Geographical Sketch of
Siam.
To check any further encroachment a detachment
of about 70 men under a subaltern officer might bo
spared from the Mergui Garrison and thrown into
Tenasserim. It would be requisite to relieve it
monthly, as being in the midst of a wild jungle
country, the place will not likely prove healthy. A
compact stockade ought to be built at this place before
any troops are sent to it and indeed no outposts would
he safe without such a defence; as before noticed
Tenasserim has been lately entirely demolished.
The whole of the Siamese party is reported to
have consisted of 5 to 800 men, 123 men of this
force have been taken prisoners, from several of
these 1 learnt that a large body has been ordered by
the Siamese Court to proceed to Choomphan and to
hold themselves in readiness to march to Mergiii
should it be found requisite to enforce their restitu-
tion. Perhaps these prisoners have raised this report


Avitli the view of alarming the British Authorities at
Mergui and of inducing them to order their release. >
It is probable that as the Siamese cannot spare
men they will be glad to restore and exchange the
Mersruiers who have been carried off by them for those
O *
prisoners. The inhabitants of Tenasserim detest the
♦Siamese and fear them too and it is quite evident that
they feel their inferiority as soldiers.
* * « * *
With respect to the Siamese and any alleged
probability of their ever acting against us in concert
with the people of this coast, I shall only observe that
in the breasts of the latter there exists a deadly feeling
of hatred towards the former built on the multiplied
and cruel injuries sustained from them in times past,
and that any appearances which should lead them to
suppose that they were again to fall under Siamese
ride might urge them to revolt. They seem so well
attached to the British that were these Provinces
abandoned I have not a doubt that two thirds of the
population would rejoice to be permitted to settle
under the Penang Government.
v,» */**
( Signed) J. LOW. Lieut. Lately
employed on the Tenasserim Coast
under the orders of the Honble. the
Governor in Council of Prince of
Wales Island.
Prince of Wales’s Island
Ist October 1825.


TAVAI.
* * * » * . #
Lavai was governed by an independent prince
until the progress of the Thai or Siamese race south-
ward brought them in contact with the petty states
from Martaban to Malacca. Even at this period and*,
until long afterwards it is likely that the Prince of
lavai merely acknowledged the supremac} 7 ' of Siam,
without being subject to its direct authority, for we
find that the English recognised Tavai as an indepen
dent Principality in 1751 and that it was not until
1786 the Barmans gained possession of it. In 1790
its Governor conspired against his Master the King of
Ava and delivered the province into the hands of the
Siamese. But it was soon retaken by the Barmans.
Ihe Siamese carried off during the period of their
sway 5000 of the inhabitants, arid distributed them
over different parts of Siam. Previous to its recent
occupation by the British it was molested by Nhameh,.
a famous Siamese Chief, who surprised and conveyed
to Siam numbers of the Tavoyers, He was himself at
last surprised by Ma Aumda, a Barman of Tavai, who
took him prisoner in the middle of a dark night and
dispersed his party. He was shut up in an iron cage
and sent to Rangoon where he died in 1823 of Cholera
Morbus. Ma aumda received a present of 1000 Ticals
of silver and various honorary dresses from the King
and was appointed Second in Council at Tavai, which
office he held when that place was captured by the
British.
* ******
(Signed) J, LOW
P. W. Island.
Ist November 1825.
FORT WILLIAM 27th April 1826.


Mautama or Martaban.
******
The Siamese have given us a very good specimen
of their indecision and cunning since the war broke
out. While success on the side of the British seemed
doubtful no suggestion could induce them to take an
active share in the war against Ava, and their conduct
while encamped with a considerable army on the
eastern branch of the Martaban river was of such a
dubious sort that they were properly believed to be
enemies rather than friends.
Coll. Smith had permitted the Chiefs to send
over parties to purchase provisions in the Bazar, and
it was found out soon after that an alarming number
had on various pretences remained in the town —one
man in a fit of intoxication had boasted that Martaban
would soon be in the possession of their army.
Captain Williamson who succeeded to Coll. Smith
was therefore under the necessity of forthwith ordering
every Siamese out of the place. Since that time
several Burmans have privately stated that a project
was at the period alluded to in agitation by individuals
(Burmans and Peguers in their interest) to murder all
the European officers and to introduce the Siamese to
the town, who were not to appear in the business, but
to give out that on learning the event they had hurried
to assist their friends the English. No public invest!”
gation of this matter has yet taken place, but it will
serve to shew the degree of caution with which their
proffered friendship should be viewed.
Their army on learning the check which Genl. Cot-
ton had met with at Dennabyoo, which was rapidly all
FORT WILLIAM 27th April 1826.


over the country and may have reached them a week
after that event, suddenly broke off their conference
with Coll. Smith, without assigning any reason, and
retreated towards Siam, at which retrograde movement
His Siamese Majesty was much displeased and
directed the General to return to the confines of
Martaban. A party of about 100 men lay encamped
on the right of my route from Wakoo to the town,
their advanced parties on seeing my sepoys fled pre-
cipitately.
There is one point of their conduct requiring
attention. It is clear that amongst other objects they
aim at reviving the ancient Mon or Pegu Dynasty.
Their motive is equally clear. They are aware that
the Prince who through their interposition and aid
should be placed upon the throne would from feelings
both of gratitude and of interest admit Siamese
Officers to Civil and Military Offices and that Siam in
fact would virtually govern. It is well known that
the Siamese have lately used every means in their
power to conciliate the Mons and that although they
have prevented many of that nation who have been
stolen or kidnapped on former occasions from re-
turning to their country, yet they have treated them
with as much or even greater consideration than their
own people. In various letters which will no doubt
have been laid before the Supreme Government, the
Siamese Court affirms that it has permitted all the
Peguers who chose it to return home, but it is a fact
too apparent to require illustration or proof that the
most effective part of the Siamese army is at this
moment comprised of Peguers and that without
mercenaries their army would scarcely deserve the
the name of one. It is not however believed that
these Peguers are much attached to the Siamese Gov-
ernment and it is supposed that the detention of their
families by the latter alone ensures their fidelity.


Upon three several very late occasions I have been
credibly informed when a great alarm was created in
Bankok by a false report that a fleet of British ships
was in the river, when the people were preparing to
fly with their effects and the troops were hastily got
together. Certain symptoms are said to have shewn
themselves indicating that the Pegu part of the army
had no disposition to engage in the then expected
contest. The King it has also been stated to me talked
of submission, while his Courtiers said if the Country
is to he taken from us we ought not to forego it without
a struggle. The efficient part of the Siamese army is
said not to exceed 1000 men. Since the alarms above
noticed they have been endeavouring to construct
chain works to throw across the river, but in which
they are more likely to betray their ignorance than
to place serious obstacles in the way of vessels
navigating it.
I have had no occasion to alter the opinion ex-
pressed by me when employed on the Mission to the
Ligor Rajah that the Siamese would not be found of
any service during the war. They now come forward
when the “ golden ” can barely support the weight of
a tottering monarchy and offer “ to exterminate the
Barmans ” for this is their expression in reply to a
letter addressed to the Siamese Court by Coll. Smith.
Such an offer is in accordance with the ideas of a
demisavage people and points out the horrid evils
which would ensue were an army of Siamese to have
an opportunity of settling an account of several cen-
turies of revenge in the heart of Burma.
It is in vain now to suppose that even were they
willing to assist the British any serious diversion
could be made in the direction of Martaban. The
roads to Ava from that Province are not practicable
until the middle of November and to send a Siamese
army through Pegu would 01113 7 enable it to follow ia


the ( ? wake ) of the British in the advance on Ava and
would certainly be detrimental to our interest in the
lower Province, for the Siamese would never be able
to proceed without plundering the people who have
obtained British protection. The only quarter in
which a diversion could now be effected with a
Siamese force is that of their eastern or North Eastern
frontier of Ava. The Siamese have easy access to the
Martaban Province by the route of the Phra-Loong-
choo or Three Pagodas and so long as a shadow' of
probability shall remain of their obtaining possession
of Martaban they will keep up a body of troops either
on their own or as heretofore within the Martaban
frontier.
The Siamese are an aspiring race, yet wanting
adequate means to realize highly ambitious projects.
An increase of those means seems to be an inevitable
consequence of the present war with Ava and lies
without any acquisition of territory in the direction
of that state. While the Burman sw'ay over its neigh-
bour is suspended, Siam has leisure to strengthen
herself and improve her resources, as the military
spirit of the Burmans has been already broken by the
successes of the British, and their future condition
is likely to be much more circumscribed than it ever
has been since they became a conquering people. It
is reasonable to conclude that Siam will in time
( ? rise) to the first rank amongst Indo-Chinese States.
She may not then perhaps find it convenient to
extend herself West, but the Malacca Peninsula lies
before her, an easy prey if we exclude the British
possessions. These last may not be endangered, but
they will certainly be exposed to annoyance from and
probably to misunderstandings with the Court of
Bangkok with reference to relations or existing
treaties with Malayan Rajas. Siam will likely also
turn her attention to Camboja and Laos, winch cannot
be supposed capable of resisting her long.


In a military point of view I should say that the
Burmese mode of fighting is nearly the same as
theirs, which if I may be allowed to use the expression
is defensive while it is most actively offensive.
******
( Signed ) James Low
Lt. 46th Regt. M. N. I.
Martaban
15th August 1826.


FORT CORNWALLIS The 26 October 1826.
To JOHN ANDERSON Esquire
Secretary to Government
Prince ot Wales Island.
Sir,
I have the honor to report for the information of
the Honorable the Governor in Council, that the pro-
visions which were brought with the Mission having
been expended, and as its return may still be delayed
for a short period, I have deemed it requisite to dis-
patch with all expedition the schooner Zephyr for an
additional supply of rations.
I beg further to report that 1 only .await the
arrival of the Rajah Muda and his party from the in-
terior to bring the negociations with the King to a
termination which I have every reason to believe will
prove quite favorable. I request to be supplied with,
another supply of 100 Rupees worth of presents.
I have &c.
( Signed ) James how Lt.
Political Agent.
Allahan
13th October 1823.


FORT WILLIAM 22 Decr. 1826.
Brig Guardian off Fort William
2d Deer. 1826
To G. Swinton Esqre.
Secy, to Govt, in the Secret
and Political Department.
Sir,
I do myself the honor to report ray arrival having
left Prince of Wales Island on the 17th of October,
and touched at Queda, Mergui and Tavoy on ray
passage to Bengal. Herewith I beg to deliver to you
the Treaty negotiated by me with the Ministers of
of Siam, the Communication addressed by the King of
Siam to the Bight Honble. the Governor General and
the letters addressed to his Lordship and to yourself
by Chao Phya Phra Khlang, the Minister for trade and
foreign affairs at Bangkok.
The whole of the presents returned by the King
and Court of Siam were ordered to be landed at Prince
of Wales Island by the Government there.
I beg leave also to tender for the examination of
the Supreme Government the accompanying report
exhibiting in three parts full and digested accounts of
the transactions and negotiations in which I have been
engaged, and of the information which I have been
able to collect on all points connected with the late
Mission to Siam.
No. 1. gives a general view of the objects of the
Mission with an account of the proceedings as far as
the primary objects of the Mission were concerned.
No. 2. details my proceedings with respect to the
Commercial objects of the Mission, and the informa-
tion collected and opinions formed by me respecting
the trade, resources and Government of Siam.


No. 3 details my proceedings and sentiments with
reference to the King of Qucda and the Malay States
on the Peninsula of Malacca. 1 regret extremely
that this last paper should be so voluminous but the
dissatisfaction which the Government of Prince of
Wales Island has expressed at the result of the Mission
on this point, imposed upon me the necesshy- of
submitting a full examination of the opinions adopted
by the officers of Government, regarding the dependent
nature of the connexion which has always subsisted
between the Chiefs of the Malay Principalities, and
particularly the Ex-King of Queda, and the Kings of
Siam, and regarding the right and policy of the
British Government interfering on a large scale with
the pretensions of Siam over a portion of the Penin-
sula of Malacca.
I have &ca.
( Signed ) H. BURNEY Captain
late Envoy to the Coiirt
of Siam.


No. 1.
Mr. Crawford’s reception at the Court of Siam in
1822 held out, it must be confessed, little encourage-
ment to the British Government to depute another
Mission to so jealous and impracticable a race, yet
immediately upon the rupture with Ava, that Gentle-
man himself officially reported his opinion, that the
moment had at length arrived when it was within our
reach to arrange all our differences with the Siamese,
and to place our commercial intercourse both with that
nation and with Ava upon a liberal footing, calculated
to British industry.
In order to furnish the Court of Siam with correct
information respecting our intended operations against
Ava, and to discover its aims and feelings on the
occasion, the Government of Prince of Wales Island
was induced in April 1824 to depute Lieut. James
Low of the Madras 46th Native Infantry on a Mission
' to the Rajah or Siamese Governor of Ligor*, but that
Chief declined either to allow the Envoy to cross
the country to Ligor, or to give him a meeting.
His Highness’s mind, Lieut. Low reported, had been
filled with distrust and apprehension towards the
Government of Prince of Wales Island by certain
native inhabitants living under its protection; and
during that officers absence, the King of Queda re-
ported at Penang that he had read certain information
of a design on the part of the Siamese Chief to poison
the Envoy.
In the month of September of the same year Lieut.
Colonel Snow of the Madras Establishment arrived at
Prince of Wales Island from Rangoon, instructed by Sir
Archibald Campbell and the late Major Canning to
concert with the Government of that Island some plan
for obtaining the co-operation of a Siamese army, and
the invasion of the Burmese territory in the direction of
the Coast of Tenasserim, and for procuring from the
Siamese draft and carriage cattle to the largest extent


they could supply. It was proposed that the Siamese
troops, if acting jointly with a British force, should be
subject to the general disposal of the Officer Command-
ing the latter, and that when Tavoy, Mergui and
Martaban fell into our possession, those places should
be held by Siamese troops, under an understanding
of their consenting to evacuate them, if required so
to do at the conclusion of peace, when possibly some
equivalent might be devised that would prove satisfac-
tory to the Court of Siam.
The Honble. the Governor of Prince of Wales
Island furnished Lieut. Col. Snow with letters to the
Phra Khlang or Foreign Minister at Bangkok, and to
some of the Siamese Governors in the neighbourhood
of Mergui, and gave that officer the powers necessary
for the opening of an} r negotiation with the Siamese
authorities, rather in the hope of some opportunity
being afforded for developing the sentiments of those
chiefs than of procuring military aid, beyond the
facility of providing carriage cattle and supplies for
the use of the army at Rangoon.
Lieut. Colonel Snow reached the Coast of Tenas-
serim after the whole of it had fallen into our posses-
sion, and meeting with no opportunity for opening a
negotiation with the Siamese through either Tavoy or
Mergui, he returned to the army. Lieut. Low, who had
accompanied him as Assistant was afterwards remanded
from Rangoon to Tavoy, when he took advantage of
his situation to visit the interior of that province and
of Martaban for the purpose of supplying Government
with some account of the new conquests.
In January 1825 the British Government still
continued ignorant of the views and feelings of the
Siamese Court with respect to the Burmese war, but at
that period the death of the old King ot Siam, and the
accession to the throne of an illegitimate son being
O o
considered as events likely to effect important changes


in the policy of that kingdom, the Honble. the
Governor of Prince of Wales Island upon a previous
recommendation from the Right Honble. the Governor
General in Council was pleased to appoint Captain
Henry Burney of the 25th Bengal Native Infantry
Political Agent to the Siamese States in the neigh-
bourhood of that Island, with instructions to collect
such authentic information and undertake such per-
sonal communications with the Raja of Ligor and
other Siamese Chiefs, as might pave the way for a
correct determination of those points in which the
British interests were involved.
Previous to this appointment Captain Burney had
i some personal acquaintance with the Raja of Ligor
1 and his son, the Governor of Queda. In March 1822
when the Penang Government had been induced to
suspend the relief of the troops, which was then in
progress, in consequence of the inhabitants of that
Island having taken alarm at the force that his High-
ness had collected at Queda, and at the tales that
Malay refugees and the partizans of the King of Queda
had brought to them. Captain Burney volunteered to
visit the Siamese Chief, and ascertain the nature of his
designs and force, which were then found to be greatly
misrepresented and to be most harmless as far as the
British Government was concerned. In the month
of May following Captain Burney was invited by His
Highness to revisit him, when he was instructed by
the Government of Prince of Wales Island to endea-
vour to effect the release of the family and personal
servants of the King of Queda, whom the Siamese
Chief had seized upon his first irruption into Queda.
The Raja of Ligor however was well aware of the ad-
vantage which the detention of those captives gave
him, and he shrewdly referred to the cii'cumstance
of the British Government having detained the
family of Tippoo Sultan. Captain Burney reported at
that time to the Government of Prince of Wales Island


his conviction that the Siamese Chief had determined
to annex Queda permanently to his own territories.
But that Officer now pursuant to his instructions
as Political Agent to the Siamese States visited in the
Months of January, February and March 1825, Queda
and the whole coast of the Siamese territories from
Prince of Wales Island to Pungah in Lat. B°. 21'
Long. 98°. 31. He found that the most wild and
mischievous tales against the Government of Prince of
Wales Island had been taken to the Rajah of Ligor
and his Officers, who were at that moment firmly
persuaded that a force was ready at P, W. I. to be
pushed across the Country to Ligor, the moment we
obtained correct routes. As that Chief and his fol-
lowers viewed us with the utmost jealousy and suspicion,
and refused to receive our envoys or to accept our
preferred kindness, Captain Burney could only obtain
the consent of His Highness’s son at Quedah to send a
Chinese Agent to Ligor in order to urge his father the
Rajah to give the Political Agent a personal interview
on the western coast of the Malayan Peninsula. He,
in the mean time, visited almost every river in the
territory of Queda, and saw that the Raja of Ligor
had made arrangements for availing himself of the
whole resources of that kingdom, amounting, it was
said, to nearly 30,000 Dollars per annum, and that His
Highness was therefore deeply interested against its
restoration to the former Malay Chief. The son at
Quedah was appropriating for his father the principal
staples of paddy, timber and tin to the southward of
Seettool, while two other sons, who were stationed at
Merakit were appropriating the staples to the north-
ward, namely Birds’ nests, Tripang and timber for Boat
building. Captain Burney ascertained also that the
Siamese Chief was equipping a large fleet of boats for
the purpose of proceeding to the Southward of Prince
of Wales Island to occupy the state of Perak, which
had been brought under the dominion of Siam in 1818


by the Raja of Queda, and to attack the State of
Salangore, the Raja of which had in 1823 driven out
a party of Siamese from Perak, and had established
his nephew Tuanko or Raja Hussein at the Mouth of
the Perak River to control the trade and government
of that Country.
Captain Burnej 7 farther observed that the Siamese
at Queda did not entirely credit the fact of our being
at war with Ava, suspecting that our object in spread-
ing such a report was in view only that our officers
might be allowed to cross the country towards Ligor
and Bangkok.
At Pungah Captain Burney met with the most
liberal and friendly reception from the Siamese Chief,
who is also Governor of Junkceylon, Tukoa-pa and
Tukoa-thong, the deputy Governors of which last
places, as well as a Commissioner from Bangkok, were
then assembled there. He was told by the Governor
ot Junkceylon that he had lately received orders from
Siam directing him, as he was near Mergui and the
British possessions, to collect and transmit full and
.accurate accounts of our proceedings, respecting which
the Court of Siam had heard accounts upon which it
said, it could not entirely depend, and Captain Burney
was led to believe, that Siam would rejoice to recover
her ancient dominions on the coast of Tenasserim, but
that any such transfer would ensure to the whole of the
Burmese inhabitants there the most inhuman treat-
ment. He was further solicited to pledge an immediate
restoration by the British Government of the Siamese
prisoners who had been carried away by the Burmese
from Junkceylon and other places, and he was earnestly
invited to accompany the Governor of Junkceylon to
Bangkok, whither that Chief was about to proceed in
the course of a month or 3 weeks for the purpose ot
assisting at the funeral of the late King of Siam.
Possessing no powers at that time to visit Siam,
Captain Burney contented himself with furnishing the


Governor of Junkceylon witli a note for the Court of
Bangkok, detailing the proceedings of the British
Government against Ava, and with short letters ad-
dressed to the British Commanders at Mergui, Tenas-
serim, Tavoy, Ye and Martaban to be forwarded
through the Governors of the contiguous Siamese
towns, in view to open and establish a friendly
intercourse between our Garrisons and the Siamese
posts.
Captain Burney here learnt that the Siamese
Chiefs in the Isthmus of Kraw are servants of the
State of Siam, implicitly bound by and actually
ing the dictates of their superiors at Bangkok, and
that we should be able to make no impression in our
negotiations at Bangkok, respecting Queda, but
through the intervention of the Siamese Governors in
the neighbourhood of Prince of Wales Island. The
Governor of Junkceylon declared, that the Raja of
Ligor possessed great influence at Bangkok through
his nephew the present Wangna, to whom he trans-
mitted almost the whole of the proceedings arising
from his occupation of Queda, and that in view to
effect a restoration of the King of Queda it would be
neeessary to offer either some suitable compensation
to the Wangna and Raja of Ligor, or some equivalent
to the Court of Siam, calculated to make tile general
advantages to be derived by it in other quarters out-
weigh the more immediate views of those two Chiefs.
Junkceylon, in the time of Captain Forrest in
1780, had a population of upwards of 12,000 souls, and
yielded a produce of 500 Tons of Tin, but since Novr.
1809 when the Burmese made a sudden descent upon
it and laid it w r aste, that Island and all the neigh-
bouring continent has been kept in a state of constant
alarm from the Burmese, so as to have entirely pre-
vented the settling of inhabitants there : altho’ the
Siamese drove the Burmese out of the Island within a
few' w'eeks yet they derived scarcely any advantage


from its reoccupation. The seat of the Government
was removed to Pungah on the main land to which all
the women and children of the greater portion of the
800 or 1000 men only who now inhabit Junkceylon
retire during the N. E. monsoon. The successes of
the British arms on the Coast of Tenasserim and the
interposition of a British force at Mergui promise to
afford to the Chief and inhabitants of Pungah a degree
of security which they have never before enjoyed, and
the very first consequence of our Burmese War was to
induce the Siamese to turn their views towards
improving Junkceylon. The Commercial Regulations
at Pungah and Junkceylon may be considered liberal.
The Siamese are fully aware of the value of Junk-
ceylon and the Governor prides himselt on the title of
Governor of that Island in preference to that of Gov-
ernor of Pungah. His authority extends only as far as
about Lat: o°. 30' and the Governor of Ch’hoomp’hon,
a settlement on the east coast, holds special charge of
the Siamese frontier in this direction. The River
Pak-chan, or as the Burmese call it Chanma in about
Lat: 10°. 50' formed the southern boundary of the
Burmese. Captain Burney was informed that there
would be no difficulty in opening a navigable com-
munication across the Isthmus of Kraw between the
Pak-chan and the Ch’hoomp’hon river which flows
into the Gulf of Siam in nearly the same parallel of
latitude.
This information was subsequently confirmed by
Mr. Leal who was employed as one of Captain Burney’s
interpreters at Bangkok, and who visited Pakchan and
Ch’hoomp’hon in March last.
The Governor of Junkceylon, in reply to the letter
delivered to him from the Honorable the Governor of
Prince of Wales Island requested that Captain Burney
might be sent back and offered to leave his son at
Pungah to convey that officer to him at Bangkok.


On Captain Burney’s return to Penang at the
latter end of March 1824, he found his Chinese Agent
to Ligore had returned some days before with a letter
from the Siamese Chief, engaging to give Captain
Burney a meeting at Quedah in the course of 30 or 40
days. The severe indisposition of his daughter, who
died soon after, was stated to be the cause of this
delay. During Captain Burney’s absence a report was
circulated by the friends of the King of Quedah, that
the Rajah of Ligore had resolved upon seizing the
person of that officer.
The Honorable the Governor of Prince of Wales
Island now deemed it advisable that Captain Burney
should proceed to Calcutta and lay before the Right
Honble. the Governor General in Council the informa-
tion which he had collected during his mission, deli-
vering at the same time the following opinion, that an
Embassy to Siam for the purpose of negotiating the
final adjustment of the various points in discussion
with the Kingdom of Siam was indispensable, and that
the cession of a portion of the Coast of Tenasserim to
the Siamese might be tendered as the equivalent for
the main object, namely the restoration of the King of
Queda, desired in the direction of Prince of Wales Island.
Captain Burney arrived at Calcutta in May 1825
.and submitted to the consideration of the Rifdit
o
Honble. the Governor General a plan for placing
our conquests of Mergui and Tavoy under the superin-
tendence and direction of the Honble. the Governor of
Prince of Wales Island and for deputing an Envoy to
the Court of Siam to negotiate, upon certain defined
terms, the different objects desired by the British
Government. The Right Honble. the Governor General
in Council was pleased to approve of a part of Captain
Burney’s plan. The Coast of Tenasserim was placed
under the Honble. the Governor of Prince of Wales
Island, in order that full and accurate information
might be obtained regarding its real value, extent.


resources and population, and the claims which the
inhabitants might have established to our protection,
as well as what portion of the territory in question
should be annexed permanently to the British pos-
sessions, and what relinquished. It has
been submitted to the Supreme Government that the
unexpected manner in which the war had brought
us into the immediate vicinity of the Siamese
Dominions was calculated with so jealous and ignorant
a race as the Siamese to lead to some collision or
embarrassment, if steps were not taken for informing
them more fully than they had hitherto been of our
ulterior views. The British Government at Martaban,
Tavoy and Mergui were weak, while a Siamese
force, it was believed, of considerable strength, was
near each of those towns. To congratulate the new
King of Siam upon his accession to the throne was
judged by the Supreme Government to furnish a good
ostensible object for deputing an Envoy to Siam and
satisfying that Court of our friendly intentions. On
this subject therefore His Highness in Council de-
clared, that he had no objection to try the experiment
of a Mission to the King of Siam, but that the cha-
racter of the Mission must be in the first instance
entirely complimentaiy and conciliatory, and that
the Governor in Council was not prepared to hold out
to the Siamese distinct expectation of our ceding
to them the Province of Tavoy or Mergui. Captain
Burney was furnished with credentials as an Envoy
on the part of the Right Honble. the Governor
General to the Court of Siam, to be made use of at the
discretion of the Honble. the Governor of Prince of
Wales Island, and he was instructed, if eventually
deputed to appear at Bangkok, to offer the Compli-
ments of the Right Honble. the Governor General on
the accession of the new King, to assure His Majesty
of our friendly disposition and desire to cultivate a
good understanding with the State of Siam, to afford
the fullest information on every point connected with.


the Burmah war, and to propose in exchange for cer-
tain Siamese detained at Mergui as well as for the
Siamese prisoners demanded by the Governor of Junk-
ceylon, a release of all inhabitants who had been car-
ried away by the Siamese Officers from the Tenasserim
Coast since it fell into our possession. Captain
Burney was empowered at the same time, should
circumstances prove favorable, to, combine with the
above objects an endeavour to effect the desired im-
provement in our Commercial relations with Siam,
as also the restoration of the King of Queda to his
territories on the terms and footing recommended by
the Government of Prince of Wales Island, viz. tire
British Government to guarantee an annual payment
of 4,000 Spanish Dollars, and triennial presentation
of the customary Gold and Silver Flowers to the King
of Siam from His Highness of Queda, in lieu of all
other claims or right of future interference with respect
to him on the part of Siam or her subordinate Gov-
ernors. But the Right Honble. the Governor General
in Council gave the Envoy no authority to tender
to the Siamese any such cession of Territory as was
known and suggested to be the equivalent most likely
to persuade the Court of Siam to reestablish the
Malayan Government in Queda.
Before noticing that part of Captain Burney’s
instructions which referred to the Burmese war, it
may be necessary to state that in the month of
February 1825, a Siamese Detachment had arrived
near Martaban and deputed some Agents to the Head
Quarters of Sir A. Campbell, who instructed Coll,
Henry Smith of the Madras Establishment to ac-
company them back to Martaban, where that officer
had a conference with another deputation headed by
the son of the Chief of the Siamese Detachment and a
Sirdar of consequence, who stated that the Siamese
Detachment was the army of Dooara-wuddee, consisting
of a body of 500 Abassee and Talieu warriors, com-


inanded by a Peguan Chief styled Ron Rov, that the
Talien Chiefs with their followers were ready and
willing to aid us in any measures that might lead to
the overthrow of their inveterate enemies the Burmese,
that they were in fact at our entire disposal and only
wanted our orders to advance with their forces and act
as we might think proper to direct. But a few days
after, on the 12th of March, before any plan could be
arranged for the operation of this army of Dooara-
Wuddee, it suddenly broke up its camp and retired
upon Siam. The Chief reported his reason for retiring
was, that one of the King of Siam’s ministers had
arrived with a dispatch stating that the season of the
rains was approaching when it would be no longer
practicable for the troops to return either by land or
water, and that it was moreover desirable that the lands
should be cultivated at their proper season. Coll.
Smith found the inhabitants of Martaban in secret com-
munication with the Chief of the Siamese Detachment
whom they desired to set up as the head of the Talien
people, and he had reason to suspect that Chief was
meditating schemes of personal aggrandizement.
On the 3d March . 1825 Major Balmain of the
Madras Establishment Commanding the Province of
Tavo} r , received a report purporting to be from a
Siamese General commanding a detachment of 5000
men at Paunzeik. It was in reply to a representation
from Major Balmain against the conduct of the Siam-
ese who had carried away some of the inhabitants of
the Province, and it stated, with professions of friend-
ship, that the captives had been treated with kindness
at Bangkok, having had all their wants supplied, and
being left at liberty to return to their own country.
But in the direction of Mergui the conduct of the
Siamese appeared decidedly hostile. They plundered
the town of Tenasserim and several villages on the 3d
of February : and carried off a considerable number of
Inhabitants. The whole district of Mergui was kept


in a constant state of alarm in consequence of these
depreciations until the 31st March, when a detach-
ment of sepoys under Lieut. Driver of the 7th Madras
Regiment, whom Major Frith of His Majesty’s 38th
Regt., the officer commanding at Mergui, had em-
barked in some Country Boats, proceeded and attacked
a Siamese flotilla in that neighbourhood. It proved
to be under Rajah of Sampon (Siamese Governor of
Ch’homp’hon) who was well aware of Mergui being in
our possession, having visited it in the preceding
month, but who now declared that he was obeying the
orders of his King. The Chief escaped but six of his
armed boats and 124 Siamese were taken and detained
at Mergui by Major Frith, who transmitted a notifica-
tion of the affair to the Court of Siam. During his
visit to Mergui this Chief had taken some unaccount-
able alarm and made a sudden departure, proceeding
however with his boats straight to Tenasserim, where
the British colours were flying. He pulled them down
with insult, and sacked the town. Some idea of the
real objects of the above Siamese Detachments may be
gathered from a perusal of the following passage in a
letter which Chao Phya Phra Khlang, the foreign
minister at Bangkok, addressed to Mr. Crawfurd late
Resident at Singapore, on the 18th February 1825.
“ One of your letters states that if we would help your
nation against the Burmans you would be obliged to
us. This has been done and I have written to you
before on the subject. Formerly we used to send Chao
Phya Maha Yotha the Peguan General with troops to the
Northern Provinces to be on the look out and to seize
all the Burmans that might fall into his hands. But
as we now know that the English are at war with
them, we have sent him with a large force to protect
our northern frontier. His Majesty has further com-
manded to be levied more troops and to send them
towards the upper Provinces. When Chao Phya Maha
Yotha reached Martaban he found that the place had
been conquered by the English, so he remains there.


1 have sent a person to Chao Phya Maha Yotha with
a letter to the British Commander at Rangoon, but
have not received an answer. The people of Tavoy and
Pegu that were here, have all gone back to those places,
as they heard that they were under the English. Our
scouts are all on the alert, and they are trying to get
every information in order to distract the Burmans.
All those that wish to go back the King permits to
do so, and provides them with money &ca. as well as
with an escort that they may reach their country
in safety.”
Altho’ in forwarding the above letter to the
Supreme Government Mr. Crawfurd stated, that under
all the circumstances of our present situation in rela-
t ion to the Court of Siam, he was disposed entirely to
rely on the assurances now given of co-operation and
assistance, still in Captain Burney’s instructions as
Envoy to the Court of Siam, he was distinctly informed
that the Supreme Government had long ceased to
consider Siamese co-operation in the Burmese War in
any way important or desirable. He was directed not
to include an application for such aid in his negotia-
tions, further than a supply of Draft and Carriage
Cattle if practicable and required, and to explain only
that it-was open to the Siamese to attack any paid of
the Burmese Dominions from their North Western
frontier, provided it were not occupied by our troops,
nor under British protection.
Captain Burney left Calcutta in June 1825,
and on his return to Prince of Wales Island, he found
that the preparations of the Raja of Ligor at Queda,
for occupying Perak and subjugating Salangore,
were on so large a scale as again to alarm the
inhabitants of Prince of Wales Island for the safety of
that Settlement, and to induce the Honble. the Gov-
ernor to adopt some precautionary measures, the
decisive character of which had caused the Raja to


pause in his proceedings. Several Malays assured the
inhabitants of Prince of Wales Island that the Raja of
Ligore’s preparations were directed against that Island,
and some of them went so far as to communicate the
whole of the Raja of Ligore’s intentions and plans
of attack with a surprising minuteness of detail.
Captain Burney obtained leave to pay His Highness a
visit, at which that officer persuaded him on the 31st
July to conclude a provisional treaty, by which His
Highness engaged to dismiss his armaments, to leave
his quarrel with Salengore to the mediation of the
Honble. the Governor of Prince of Wales Island, and
to accompany Captain Burney to Bangkok, if that
officer would touch at Ligor on his passage, and to
join with him in submitting to the King of Siam a
proposition for the restoration of the King of Queda
on the terms and footing suggested by the Govern-
ment of Prince of Wales Island, The Raja of Ligor
further engaged, that no Siamese armament should
proceed by land or water to Perak or settle there.
The Government of Prince of Wales Island had
of late particularly pressed on the attention of the
Supreme Government the expediency of counterac-
ting the exertions which the Siamese were making
to extend their conquests to the Southward of Prince
of Wales Island over the States of Perak and Sa-
lengore, and on that point the Governor General in
Council had observed, when authorizing the deputa-
tion of an Emmy to Siam, that sensibly as His Lord-
ship in Council must feel the positive evil and incon-
venience of having our settlement at Malacca, and
eventually Singapore, brought into contact with the
Siamese power, and deprived of a large part of their
accustomed resources and supplies of provisions by the
successive subjugation and depopulation of all the
petty states in the southern parts of the Peninsula,
still the degree of counteraction, if any, to be opposed
by the British Government was a question replete


with difficulty and embarrassment, in the ab-
sence of all communication of the sentiments
of the Home Authorities regarding the extension
of the Siamese Supremacy, or other absolute govern-
ment over the whole of the Malayan Peninsula. His
Lordship in Council at the same time deprecated any
direct threat or prohibition to be made to the Siamese
by which the British Government might be committed
to ulterior procedures.
The Government of Prince of Wales Island there-
fore believed itself empowered only to refuse the Raja
of Ligor’s Expedition passage to the Southward
through the Harbour of Prince of Wales Island, the
route which the Siamese considered most convenient,
and which their fleet in 1822 was allowed to take.
Captain Burney’s agreement with His Highness was
directed to giving that Government a right to prevent
the Siamese from moving their flotilla to the South-
ward, outside of Penang or from passing a force to
Perak overland. This was the great point gained by
that treaty, to prevent the extension of Siamese
dominion to the vicinity of Malacca, and at least post-
pone the occupation of Perak and Salengore by the
Siamese, until it should be decided what degree ot
counteraction ought to be opposed by the British
Government to the spirit of aggrandizement manifest-
ed by the Court of Siam.
Mr. Anderson of the Prince of Wales Island Civil
Service was deputed to Salengore and Perak, and he
succeeded without any difficulty in persuading the
Chief of the former state to engage not to interfere
in future with the latter, and to withdraw Tuankoo
Hussein from his post at the Mouth of the Perak
River.
The Hon. the Governor of Prince of Wales Island
having deputed Messrs. Maingy and Blundell to take
charge of the Coast of Tenasserim, now determined


upon authorizing Captain Burney to accept the offer
of the Bajah of Ligor, and to proceed to Ligor and
accompany His Highness to Bangkok. The Hon.
the Governor in thus resolving upon forwarding the
Mission to Sianq a point which had been left solely
to his discretion, was guided mainly by a consideration
of the circumstances connected with the Burmese
war, the expectation of another campaign against Ava,
and the necessity of possessing an early medium of
direct communication with the Court of Siam through
a British accredited Agent,
It is proper here to state that in addition to the
restoration of the King of Queda, the Government of
Prince of Wales Island had recommended to the
Supreme Government the attainment of four objects
in our negotiations with Siam. They were these :
Ist. The disavowal by the Siamese Government
of all claims of superiority over any of the Malayan
States on the Peninsula South of the State of Patani.
2d. The free navigation of the Eivers between
the Trang and the Creean, from their mouths to their
sources, as well as the free and unimpeded intercourse
overland with Patani and the Tin Countries in the
interior, and with Ligor, Singora, and the other parts
on the Eastern Coast of the Malayan Peninsula, on fair
and moderate duties on the transit or exportation of
merchandize by either sea.
3d. The free importation from all the Siamese
ports on the Western side of the Peninsula, of all
articles of provisions required for the use of Prince
of Wales Island.
4th, The cession of the Island of Salang or
Junkceylon to the British Government.
But the Governor General in Council had observed
in 1824, that although he fully coincided in the view


taken by the Government of Prince of Wales Island
of the advantages which would result from the Siam-
ese being prevailed on to relinquish all claims of
supremacy over the Malayan States on the Peninsula
South of Patani, yet he entertained the strongest
doubts of the practicability of inducing the arrogant
and haughty Court of Siam to wave pretensions so
intimately affecting its pride and consequence, and
he questioned therefore the expediency of agitating
the proposition at all.
The Governor General in Council had also ex-
pressed himself at that time decidedly adverse to any
proposition for the cession to us of Junkceylon, and the
Government of Prince of Wales Island had subse-
quent ty considered that the objects for which it had
recommended the occupation of Junkceylon would
be fully attained by the retention of Mergui and its
islands as British possessions.
The Governor in Council however authorized the
Government of Prince of Wales Island to deliver the
Envoy such special and additional instructions as it
might consider proper or necessary, with reference
to the actual state of affairs on his arrival at Prince of
Wales Island and that Government therefore apprized
the Envoy, that it was not aware of any necessity of
adding to the instructions with which he had already
been furnished, but that as far as the British interests
in that quarter were concerned they might be reduced
into the four following heads.
Ist. The restoration of the King of Queda.
2ndly, The withdrawal of the Siamese from
Perak.
3dly. The prevention of further conquests by
the Siamese over the Malayan States on either side
of the Peninsula. The consequent maintenance of the
independence of those States, and exclusion of the


Siamese power from contact with the British Settle-
ments in the Straits, and
4thly. The Establishment of a more free inter-
course and trade with the interior and eastern side of
the Malayan Peninsula by means of the overland routes
and numerous rivers flowing into the sea in the neigh-
bourhood of Penang.
But the primary and most important object of the
Mission to Siam, as viewed by the Governor General
in Council, was the maintenance of harmony between
two states which had suddenly come into contact,
whose troops were in contiguity, and whose subjects of
difference and dispute were so likely to arise and be-
come matter of hostile contention. The other objects,
which the Mission was empowered to endeavour to
attain at Bangkok, in the event only of circumstances
proving favorable, were an improvement in our com-
mercial relations with Siam and the restoration of the
King of Queda, and respecting these objects even,
the Supreme Government observed, “ we have so little
at present to offer in the way of equivalent, that we
consider it vain to hope that any advantages beyond
those above specified can be gained by negotiation.
Indeed, we do not very clearly perceive how the
Government of Siam and the Rajah of Ligor, will ever
be persuaded to forego the profit which it seems they
derive from the direct occupation of Quedah, unless we
are prepared to tender Tavoy or Mergui as an induce-
ment.” But the Hon. the Governor of Prince of Wales
Island had proposed the cession of a portion of the
Coast of Tenasserim to the Siamese, as the equivalent
for the main object desired in the direction of Prince
of Wales Island, and during Captain Burney’s Mission
to Pungah, he had ascertained that the only means
of restoring the King of Quedah would be to
make the general advantages to be derived by the
Court of Siam in other quarters, outweigh the more


immediate views of the Wangna and Raja of Ligor,.
unless we could offer to these Chiefs themselves some
more equivalent compensation than the 4000 Dollars
per annum proposed by the Government of Prince of
Wales Island. When therefore the Supreme Govern-
ment determined against holding out to the Siamese
any distinct expectation of our ceding to them the
Province of Tavoy or Mergui, it virtually gave up the
Rajah of Quedah.
To accomplish the objects of his Mission, Captain
Burney, as may be seen throughout his instructions,
could use no other instruments than those of concilia-
tion and address. He was called upon to prove to a
jealous, vain and ignorant race, that the realization of
those objects would be a mutual benefit to the British
and Siamese nations, and he was particularly bound
by the whole character of his Mission not to use in his
negotiations any means which had the smallest chance
of placing our relations with Siam upon a worse foot-
ing than that on which they were before his deputa-
tion.
Captain Burney experienced the utmost difficulty
in persuading the Raja of Ligor to insert in the treaty
which was concluded with him, any stipulation in
favor of the King of Quedah, against whom His High-
ness spoke with great asperity. He accepted however
the Rajah of Ligor’s offer to accompany him to Bang-
kok, in preference to that of the Governor of Pungah,
conceiving that the former had much more influence
at Court, and that as his own interests and those of
his nephew the Wangna, were so much concerned
with the occupation of Quedah, some advantage might
be gained by rendering them the channel of the nego-
tiation for restoring the King of Quedah. Unprovided
with any equivalent to offer to the Court of Siam to
outweigh the more immediate view of those Chiefs,
whose party in 1822 constituted the principal opposi-
tion to Mr. Crawfurd’s negotiation. Captain Burney


saw, that it would he necessary for him to conciliate
these individuals at Bangkok, in view that if he failed
in removing Quedah from their grasp he might at
least secure their cordial cooperation towards effecting
the other objects of the Mission.
The Brig Guardian, Captain George Sutherland,
was taken up to convey the Mission, to which were
attached a medical officer of the Prince of Wales Island
Establishment, Mr. Sub Assistant Surgeon Harris
and an escort of 30 Sepoys under the Command of
Captain Hugh Macfarquhar, who was subsequently ap-
pointed by the Supreme Government Assistant to the
Envoy. The Mission sailed from Prince of Wales
Island on the 25th September 1825 and after touching
at Malacca and Singapore, arrived at Tringano on the
17th October, Here the King of Siam’s ship bound to
Singapore was waiting in consequence of a report which
some Malay Boats had brought to this Coast, and which
had been sent up to Siam by an Express Boat, stating
that there were five frigates and an expedition fitting
out at Singapore for the purpose of proceeding against
Bangkok. The Mission having relieved the fears of
the Commander of the King of Siam’s ship, and
informed itself of the present state of Tringano and of
its relations with Siam and Calantan, proceeded towards
Ligor, where it arrived on the 28th October and learnt
that the Hajah had quitted Quedah the moment he
heard of Captain Burney’s departure from Prince of
Wales Island, and that he had been for several days
ready with his boats to proceed to Siam. The illness
of His Highness’s youngest and favorite son however
detained the Mission for 10 days, at the expira-
tion of which Captain Burney insisted upon proceeding
notwithstanding the most urgent entreaties of the
Chief to wait until he could accompany the Mission.
The North-East Monsoon now appeared to have set
in, and it was too late in the season for the Siamese
Boats to proceed to Bangkok, while the Mission Brig,


which His Highness personally inspected, was found
inadequate to accommodate himself and his family.
It was at length agreed, that Captain Burney should
leave with the Rajah Mr. Sub Assistant Surgeon
Harris and Mr. Leal (one of his interpreters a native
of the Azores) to accompany His Highness overland to
Bangkok, and that the latter should furnish Captain
Burney with letters to the King, Wangna and other
officers in Siam and send on board the Brig one ot
his sons and a Commissioner from Bangkok with their
followers.
Means had been taken as usual by some of the
mischievous native inhabitants of Prince of Wales
Island to fill the Rajah of Ligor’s mind with distrust
against the British Government and that Chief candidly
declared he had been assured Captain Burnejr had
visited the whole of the Quedah territory in the
beginning of the year, and had so readily engaged to
meet him now at Ligor for the express purpose of
collecting information respecting the state and condition
of his dominions, to enable the British Government
to possess itself of them.
The Mission found Ligor with few inhabitants,
no trade and insignificant resources. It appears never
to have recovered from the visit of Alompra who laid
it .waste on his route to Siam, The Burmese Army
had again occupied it so lately as the year 1786.
The ruins only of Buddhist temples and pyramids
attest its having been once an independent kingdom,
or of sufficient importance for the seat of a Dutch
Factory. But the appearance of Ligor convinced the
Mission, that the territory of Quedah is a much more
valuable and desirable possession to the Raja of Ligor
than what had been generally supposed, and that His
Highness would require some greater inducement to
relinquish his conquest than that offered by the
Government of Prince of Wales Island.


* From this point onwards
this document contains va-
x
nous extracts from reports
and letters already copied,
e T’ lmpos ®| ble
to omitthe duplicate portions
without interfering with the
sequence of the document.
oint onwards * The Mission left Ligor on the Bth
contains va- November, arrived off the Bar of Siam on
From reports
sady copied, the 20th, and anchored off Paknam, a
•, impossible v ii]age at tJie mouth of the Menara on
cate portions 0
•ing with the the 28th. We soon found that all our
exertions would be necessary to conciliate
the Court of Siam, which had received the intelligence
from Tringano of an expedition equipping at Singapore
to attack Bangkok. That intelligence had excited a
strong sensation at the Capital, had caused the Fort of
Paknam and Paklaat to be hastily repaired and streng-
thened, and had now led the Court to transmit very
peremptory orders to the Chief of Paknam to insist
up jin the delivery and deposit of the Guns of the
Mission Brig at Paknam, and to receive no excuse.
It has been an established custom of the country,
since the French were driven out of Bangkok, for all
foreign vessels to deposit their guns at Paknam before
they proceed to the Capital, but this regulation was
not enforced in the case of the Portuguese Consul,
nor against Mr, Crawfurd, who was detained at Pak-
nam for only 24 hours. We were detained seven days
during which messages daily passed between the
.Ministers and us, and interpreters and other Siamese
officers were sent to discover our real objects, and the
personal character of the different members of the
Mission. Anxious as we were to conciliate the Court,
we considered that we should not be justified in doing
that which the .Portuguese and the preceding British
Mission had refused to do, and we feared that
a compliance on our part would lead the Siamese
Ministers to suppose that the British Government
was courting an alliance with Siam, and disposed
to make sacrifices and concessions to her in conse-
quence of the Burmese War. The son, followers and
letters of the Raja of Ligor were sent up to the
capital, and their influence joined to a decided com-
munication on our part, that it within 24 hours the
Court did not supply us with Boats, or permit the.


♦ Note.—Something like
-this action is used in most
Courts in India and was per-
formed before the King of
Caubul by Mr. Elphinstonc
who observes “we then held
up our hands towards Heaven
as if praying for the King.”
The ceremonial in Siam how-
ever is more I ike supplication
addressed to the King him-
self.
Brig to pass up to the capital with her Guns we should
withdraw from the Country, induced the Ministers at
length to submit the matter to the King, who immedi-
ately ordered the Brig to be passed, and the Mission
to be received with all honor and distinction. On
the 4th of December the Mission Brig was met at
Paklaat by a deputation with a fleet of war boats with
colours, streamers and bands of music, for the purpose
of convejdng the Governor General’s letter and the
Envoy to the capital where we arrived late on the
evening of the same day.
Our first discussions with the Phra Khlang and
other Siamese officers respected she ceremonial to be
observed at our presentation to the King. Exertions
were made by them for 2 or 3 days, to persuade us to
take off our shoes, and to perform the same prostra-
tions as the Siamese. But we succeeded at last in
over-ruling such degrading ceremonies, and in arran-
ging that the Envoy himself should deliver the
Governor General’s letter in the presence of the King,
that he should be accompanied by his own interpre-
ters and permitted to read before His Majesty a com-
plimentary speech, a copy of which accompanied
by a translation in the Siamese language was at the
same time to be laid before the King: and that in
addition to the whole of the members of the Mission,
the Commander of the Brig Guardian and Mr. Kobert
Hunter, a British Merchant residing at Bangkok
should be admitted to the audience, and that we
should be furnished with state boats and suitable
ething like conveyances to take us to the Palace.
Ed in most * ..
id was per- VV e agreed however once to perform a
tie King of p ar fc 0 f the Siamese mode of saluting
Elphinstonc , . . ,
e then held His Majesty vizt. to join our hands
mds Heaven an d raise them three times against the
lam*how- forehead,* and consented that the Envoy
supplication should not deliver the Governor General’s
King him j e^er i n to Majesty’s hands in the


same maimer as the French Ambassadors had formerly
done, but deposit it in a Gold Yase to be placed
a few paces in front of His Majesty. It is probable
that we might have arranged these points also
conformably to our own ideas, but so earnest an appeal
was made to us not to shock the feelings and pride of
the Court as to omit all Siamese modes of salutation,
or to approach close to His Majesty’s person whilst the
first Ministers of the Country would be lying prostrate
at a distance, that w T e deemed it prudent to take the
credit of making these concessions.
We were introduced with great ceremony to His
Majesty the King of Siam on the 16th December, and
to His Highness the Wangna, or as he is styled by
the native Christians of Bangkok the second king>
on the 18th, followed on both occasions by hundreds
of Boats and an immense concourse of spectators.
A house was specially built for our accommodation, a
boat with ten boatmen was allotted to us, and a
monthly allowance of 240 Ticals from the King,
and 120 from the Wangna w r as granted for the
expenses of our Table. Bice and fruit w T ere often
sent to our followers, and Siamese dishes
brought to us from the King and Wangna, tokens
of Koyal favor and consideration that were said to
excite the surprize and envy r of every Siamese who
witnessed them. We were next introduced to Chao
Krom Meun Soorin and Chao Krom Meun Bak, the
princes of the blood placed at the head of the Foreign
and Judicial Departments of the Kingdom, and we
succeeded in being allowed to visit the tw r o principal
Ministers of the Country, Chao Phya Chak-kri and
Chao Phya Akka Mahasena or Kalahom, and several
of the subordinate Ministers such as Phya Kray, the
Wangna’s Phra Khlang, Phya Wisoot his Deputy,
Phya Phiphut Kosa the Deputy of the King’s Phra
Khlang, Chao Phya Maha Yotha, the General who
Commanded the Siamese Detachment near Martaban,
and the Governors of Ligor and Singora. Finding the


Foreign Minister Chao Phya Phra Khlang unfriendly
to the Mission and indisposed to report all our verbal
representations to his colleagues, the other five minis-
ters, with whom he forms the Privy Council of the
Kingdom, we opened a communication in writing with
these authorities, and prevailed upon them to allow
us to attend their meetings, and discuss and settle,
after repeated conferences with the whole of them, the
several objects of our Mission. We procured an
audience of leave from the King on the 17th July, and
from the Wangna on the 18th, on the night of which
day we quitted Bangkok, charged with a Treaty of
Friendship and Commerce which we had negotiated
with the Ministers and a reply from the King himself
to the Letter from the Right Honble. the Governor
General.
The complimentary part of the Mission therefore
it is to be hoped will be considered as satisfactorily
fulfilled.
The conciliatory part however was more difficult.
We have already mentioned the rephrt of the the Ex-
pedition at Singapore sent up from Tringano. Major
Frith’s affair with the Governor of Ch’homphon and
the Rajah of Ligor’s discussion with the Government
of Prince of Wales Island had previously excited
much apprehension of our views and future proceedings.
Reinforcements of men and arms had been sent down
by the Court of Siam to both Ligor and Ch’homphon,
and the strongest injunctions issued to the Siamese
officers contiguous to Mergui and Tavoy to avoid all
communications with those British Posts. The letters
which Captain Burney had delivered to the Governor
of Junkceylon to be forwarded through the Governors
of Chaiya, Ch’humphon, and Phiphi were sent up by
these Governors to the Capital and opened and read,
and even the Rajah of Ligor to whom Captain Burney
had entrusted a letter to be forwarded to Mr. Maingy
from Ch’homphon, was refused permission to forward


it by Phya Kray, the Wangna’s Phra Khlang, wlio
had been special!} 7 deputed by the Court to take
charge of that place. The letters which were deli-
vered to the Chief of Junkceylon had been written so
as to meet the possible case of their being inter-
cepted, and the examination of them at Bangkok had
therefore given satisfaction to the Ministers. Still the
wildest and most improbable tales respecting the
hostile intentions of the British Government con-
tinued to be brought to Bangkok by Peguers, Chinese
and above all by Malays, who reported that im-
mediately after the conquest of Ava the British Army
was to move against Siam, and that the British
Government had resolved upon expelling the Siamese
from Quedah and taking possession of that territory,
and of every other State on the Mala} 7 Peninsula.
Our Mission was declared to have no other object than
to try and force the Court of Siam to consent to these
last mentioned arrangements and to the establishment
of a factory and Resident at Bangkok, and if successful
to gather intelligence respecting the topography and re-
sources of the country, and the best mode of attacking
the capital. The first measure also which we had occa-
sion to propose at Bangkok brought down upon us the
hostility of almost all the Ministers and subordinate offi-
cers of the Court. Viewing the inhuman treatment which
the Burmese captives from the Coast of Tenasserim ex-
perienced from their Siamese masters, we were urged
to make great exertions to effect the immediate release
and return of these poor creatures. But they had
been allotted as slaves and gratuitous labourers among
the different ministers and officers, whose personal
interests were strongly opposed to the measure of
restoring them, Chao Phya Phra Khlang never
forgave us for having put a stop to a splendid temple
which a party of these Burmese was building for him,
and he was said to be the person who recommended
the Court to transmit an order to the Rajah of Ligor,
prohibiting him against bringing overland Messrs,


Harris and Leal, who had been left with him. The
order reached the Rajah near Ch’humphon, when
shortly after at Puttin in about Lat: 11° 28', His
Highness made excuses for embarking those Gentlemen
in a small boat and forwarding them by water to
Bangkok, where they arrived on the 31st January.
Patience, firmness and reiterated explanations on our
part were at length producing impression on the
Court, when in the middle of February a report was
circulated that we were about to send the Mission Brig-
back to Prince of Wales Island for the purpose of
leading the way to a fleet of ships destined to attack
Bangkok. We had determined upon this measure
with a full concurrence of the Ministers, in order to
receive any instructions that our Government might
desire to convey to us with reference to the then sup-
posed termination of the Burmese war, as well as to
procure an additional supply of some articles of
provisions for the sepoys of our escort. An offer to
detain the Brig pacified the Court, but a few
after, the Syrang of the Mission Brig, who had
absconded upon her departure, was apprehended and
examined by some of the Principal Siamese Ministers,
to whose enquiries as to the real object of our
Mission, he uttered the most mischievous falsehoods.
He declared that the Brig had certainly been
dispatched with the hostile intention before mentioned,
that the Envoy was a very dangerous character
leagued in Secret Treaty with the Rajah of Ligor to
place him on the throne of Siam with the assistance of
the British Government and now employed only in
collecting intelligence respecting the condition of the
country for the information of the Armament, which
the Brig Guardian had gone to bring up. At this time
also, a Peguer arrived from the neighbourhood of
Mergui, and stated that a fleet of 60 ships had been
collected at that place, and a Chinese arrived overland
from Singora, with a report of an expedition being
ready at Prince of Wales Island to proceed against


Bangkok. Troops were called into the capital from
the interior, the forts at Paklaat and Paknam were
manned and additional defences commenced. All was
war and bustle. The situation of the Mission was now
by no means comfortable. Not a word uttered by any
of us received credit. The boatmen allotted to us
were removed and we were evidently viewed with
indignation as well as distrust. The renewal of hos-
tilities with Ava also, accounts of which arrived at this
very time, threw back our negotiations, the whole of
which we found we had to begin again.
As long as this delusion lasted, and it lasted for
upwards of a month, we could oppose to it nothing but
good humoured and quiet expostulations. At length
on the 27th of March, a merchant vessel belonging
to Messrs, Morgan, Hunter and Co. arrived from
Singapore, and made the Phra Khlang (who the
moment its arrival was announced had hurried down to
Paknam believing that it was the first of the English
expedition) doubtful of the correctness of the tales
which had been brought to the Court. We now trans-
mitted for the consideration of the Ministers the Draft
of a Treaty of friendship and Commerce. As this docu-
ment clearly showed the full extent of the wishes of
the British Government it served in some measure
to pacify the Court, which saw and admitted the
security and advantage such a treaty would afford to
Siam, and further that there was only one object, the
restoration of the King of Quedah, which it was really
disinclined to concede to us.
On the 3d of May the return of the Mission Brig
without any other vessel, and with, as it was carefully
noted, precisely the same number of guns and fire
arms as she before had, tended to convince the most
suspicious of the truth and fairness of our proceedings.
The ministers now consented to a proposition which
we had repeatedly made, of attending their meetings
to discuss and finally settle the several articles of a


treaty. After repeated and most earnest attempts to
persuade the Court to restore the King of Quedah to
his territories, we found that if we pressed the measure
we should deviate from the leading article of our
instructions and first object of our Mission, concilia-
tion, and render the Court so dissatisfied with the
British Government and with ourselves as to preclude
the effectual attainment of an}'- of the other objects of
our Mission. Under these considerations we deter-
mined upon foregoing that question upon certain con-
ditions which will be noticed in another place. This
concession materially facilitated the remainder of our
negotiations, and certainly inspired the Court with a
favourable impression of our moderation and forbear-
ance.
We found the Court of Siam divided into two
parties, and headed respectively by the King and
Wangna. The King’s party is intelligent, moderate
and really well disposed to cultivate friendly relations
with the British Government. His Majesty was de-
clared to be favorable to our wishes with respect to
Quedah, but the Wangna’s party is characterized by
the conceit, and ignorance natural to the Siamese, and
His Highness, under whose special superintendence
the southern portion of the Siamese Empire is placed,
and into whose separate treasury are received the re-
venues of Quedah, was most decidedly opposed to the
restoration of the Malay Chief of Quedah. Every
attempt that we made to press this subject on the
Court, irritated and exasperated His Highness, who
we heard sent down orders to fortify Quedah, and who
on one occasion, as we learnt from a source to which
we could not refuse credit, although we ridiculed the
intelligence at the time, proposed to the Ministers to
hang up the Envoy for presuming to vex the Court
with representations concerning Quedah, contrary to
the tenor of the Governor General’s letter to the King’
of Siam, and therefore it was to be believed without


any authority from His Lordship. The Wangna is aii-
important personage in the Siamese Government. He
is not only in special charge of the Southern portion
of the Kingdom, but he is at the head of its military
establishment. He must be consulted by the King’s
Ministers on all public acts of his Majesty, He has
his own Court and Ministers corresponding in number
and duties with those belonging to the King and he
receives one third of the whole revenues of the king-
dom. To render such a personage discontented with
our negotiations would perhaps have only been
to lay the foundation of a war between the two
states. The only treaty to be made with such
a state as Siam is clearly one which it will be
her interest and advantage to keep. By adopting
a high tone, that is by intimidation, supposing
such a mode of negotiation to have been consonant
with the instructions of the Envoy, the Mission might
perhaps have carried the Quedah question, but it
would have carried nothing else, and whether such a
mode of accomplishing that object would have been
ultimately an advantage to the British Government,
will be shewn in a succeeding paper, in which the
whole question respecting the restoration of the King
of Quedah, and the right and policy of the British
Government adopting the line of conduct recommended
by the Government of Prince of Wales Island with
respect to the Malay States on the Peninsula of
Malacca will be fully discussed. Sound policy as well
as the orders of the Governor General in Council
pointed out that unless the Mission could effect the
restoration of the King of Quedah by r amicable nego-
tiation, and make an arrangement by wjiich it would
be the interest of the Siamese to abide, the point had
much better be conceded. The Mission had to make
its selection, to place our relations with the Siamese
either on a conciliatory and friendly or an unsettled
and hollow footing. Hence amicable tho at times
rather importunate representations were all it con-


sidered itself justified to make, and when these failed,
advantage was taken of the influence of the party
immediately benefited by such failure to render it
less mischievous to our interests, and to effect the
other objects of our Mission. Whatever might have
been the real intentions of the Rajah of Ligor when
he was persuaded in the treaty concluded with him
at Quedah, to promise to assist the Envoy to-
wards accomplishing the views of the Penang
Government relative to the King of Quedah,
there is no question that on his arrival at Bangkok
he was obliged, like every other Provincial Siamese
Governor or Subordinate Chief, to adopt implicitly
and religiously the views and feelings of the leading
members of the Court, and His Highness and his
party certainly did exert themselves most strenuously
to counterbalance the failure of the Mission in matters
in which they were immediately interested, by
securing it success in all its other objects.
No sort of discredit can result to the British
Government from the failure of the Mission to effect
the restoration of the Chief of Quedah, for the King
and a majority of the Court of Siam are well aware of
our power of enforcing compliance with all our wishes,
and certainly at no period of our history in India
could we so well afford as at the present moment, to
conciliate the Siamese by giving them a proof of our
moderation and forbearance.
Nothing could have been easier to the late
Mission than to have brought on a war with the Gov-
ernment of Siam * with a much more arduous task to
conciliate and pacify such a jealous race, under the
circumstances in which we found it. Whether the
Mission has succeeded in effectually conciliating the
Court of Siam [time] only can shew, and as regards
a continuance of its friendly sentiments, much no
doubt will depend upon the conduct of those officers
who may be placed in communication with the Raja of


Ligor and other Siamese Chiefs. That the amicable
manner in which the Mission quitted Bangkok has
produced a very favorable impression we have already
received intelligence from two British Merchants
Messrs. Hunter and Mallock, residents there, with
whom the inhabitants have renewed commercial inter-
course, which had been stopped during the period the
Court was doubtful of the result of our negotiations.
It is impossible to conceive the mischief that is
done at Bangkok by the tales of terror brought by
those who, seeing the Siamese already mistrustful of
our views and intentions, tell them whatever they
will most readily believe, and most like to hear.
Fortunately, true courage and suspicion are seldom
companions. If the Siamese only possessed as much
spirit as they shew distrust, they would several months
ago have been incited to declare war against the
English Government, and to attack some of our con-
quests on the Coast of Tenasserim, of the former
limited strength of the Garrisons in which quarter,
they were well apprized.
On the subject of the Burmese War, in addition
to the communications with the Siamese which we
have before noticed, we had seen at Singapore a letter
addressed by Chao Phya Phra Khlang to Mr. Crawfurd
on the 21st August 1825, stating that Phya Mahd.
Yotha had returned to the capital from Martaban to
attend the funeral of the late King, and declaring that
“ when the rainy season is over, it is His Majesty’s
design to send the Phya Maha 5: otha again to cooperate
with the English against the Burmans. This will be
either in October or November as you wished, as also
to supply the British Commanders with Elephants,
Buffaloes and Oxen. His Majesty has ordered me
to direct all the Chiefs of the Western and Northern
Provinces to do so if they are needed.” At Bang-
kok, however, we soon found that the Court of Siam
never had any intention of cooperating with us


in the war against Ava, and that it sought only
to seize for itself whatever it might without danger
either from us or the Burmese. Upon the first in-
telligence of the expedition against Rangoon, the King
had enquired the number of our troops, and on being
told that it amounted to about 10,000 men, he observed
“ those men will only be seized and made grass cutters
to the King of Ava’s Elephants,” For a long time the
Court of Siam would not believe a word of our success,
and at length, when the truth was at last forced upon
it, Chao Phya Maha Yotha, a Pegu emigrant, with a
Detachment of Peguers and Siamese, was sent to take
■ 'possession of Martaban, but with two sets of dis-
patches, to be ceded * according as he might find the
English or the Burmese the victorious party. He
found Martaban already in our possession, and he then
opened the communication which we have before men-
tioned with Sir A. Campbell and Colonel Smith,
deceiving us into a belief that his Detachment had
been sent to co-operate with us, but desirous only of
acquiring correct information respecting the progress
of the war. Agreeably to his instructions he seized
as many of the Burmese inhabitants as he could and
watched near Martaban an opportunity for gaining
any advantages for Siam out of the reverses of either
party. He returned to the capital with a thousand
Peguers, principally women and children several of
whom had British Certificates of protection. Some
difference of opinion took place between him and a
Phya Phiphat, a former deputy of the Phra Khlang,
who had been sent to his Detachment. Phya Phiphat
died shortly after his return to the capital, and this, it
was said, had saved him from severe punishment.
Another officer, Phya Soorasena, the deputy of the
Kalahom, had been sent towards Tavoy on a similar
errand, and he was the person who communicated with
Major Balmain from Punjeck, the Burmese name for
the Siamese Menam noi, a post upon a small river of


the same name, which forms the north western bianch
of the Meklong. He brought away about 200 of the
inhabitants of Tavoy, and died shortly after his return
to the capital.
The Governor of Ch’homphon was ordered to the
capital and confined in irons in consequence of his
dispute with Major Frith. But the truth is, the feais
of the Court of Siam that the dispute would have
involved it with the British Government had led it to
sacrifice the Governor of Ch’homphon, who had only
been a little too zealous in the execution of the
Court’s orders, to make as many Burmese prisoners as
possible. It is singular that the Governor of Ch horn-
phon also died at the capital shortly after he arrived
there. He carried away about 1600 inhabitants fiom
the districts of Mergui and Tenasserim.
During the war the King of Ava opened a com-
munication with the King of Siam, at one time
offering to assist at the funeral of the late King, and
again beseeching the King of Siam to be neutral in
the war, stating that the English had suddenly, it was
true, possessed themselves of many parts of his
dominions, but that they would never reach his capital,
and that the Burmese would soon expel them from
the Country provided the Siamese only remained
neutral. This information was implicitly credited by
the Siamese Ministers, who, however inimical to the
Burmese, were by no means satisfied with our successes.
A regard for their common jealousy of our power, and
fear of our ulterior proceedings made them extremely
anxious to see the war concluded. A few days before
the arrival of the Mission at Bangkok, Maha Yotha
had returned with his Detachment to the frontiers of
Martaban, and a native Christian, who had met them
passing up the Meklong in boats, assured us they v> ere
plundering every boat belonging to their own.
countrymen which came near them.


Our first application to the Court was in pur-
suance of our instructions, for a supply of draft and
carriage cattle, to be forwarded to Sir A. Campbell’s
army. The Phra Khlang, who had written the letter
above cited to Mr. Crawfurd, declared that the
Siamese could not comply with our application, as it
would be contrary to their religious tenets to send
us animals to be killed for food of our troops. We
pointed out that we did not eat elephants, and that
it was draft and carriage cattle that the army required.
We were told that the Siamese would not believe
[but] that the English would kill and eat whatever
animals might be sent. To a written application
subsequently made to the Ministers accompanied by
an offer of defraying all expences, they replied that to
send an army and elephants and horses to receive pay
for fighting would be so unusual, that the proposition
could not even be mentioned to the King ; that the
animals were necessary parts of the Siamese Army ;
that if the army did not move against the Burmese,
they would be employed on some other service in the
kingdom, and that it was not desirable that they should
be put in an unserviceable condition. The truth came
out afterwards, when some of our sepoys and Mr. Leal
passed through Maha Yotha’s post. The Siamese had
really no draft or carriage cattle to spare. Maha Yotha
had not more than 20 elephants and 150 horses with
his army, and no buffaloes or oxen of any description.
We early saw the contemptible nature of the
Siamese soldiery, and the delusion of expecting any
thing like a cooperation from them in the war against
Ava. But on the 27th December we received a
letter from Captain Fenwick, Commanding at Marta-
ban, shewing us that Sir Archibald Campbell had
planned the campaign under an expectation of Siam-
ese cooperation, and of Maha Yotha proceeding with
his Dooarawuddee Army to cover the Division of the
British Army under Colonel Pepper moving against
Toonghas. We were then induced to recommend


to the Court to order Maha Yotha to join Colonel
Pepper, but we were answered that unless Martaban
and Tavoy were [surrendered] unconditionally to
the Siamese, to be formed into points d’appui for
their line of operations, as well as depots for their
provisions and stores, their armies could not ad-
vance. We pointed out that Tavoy was too distant
from the scene of warfare and offered to engage
that every fighting man of the Siamese army, whilst
employed by us should be supplied by our com-
missariat with the same rations as our own men,
but the possession of both those towns, with the
whole of their provinces, was declared indispensable.
The truth here also came out afterwards, that the
army of Dooarawuddee did not consist of more than
1000 or 1200 men, who were employed in cutting
Sapan Wood and cultivating cotton near Meuam
noi, and that whole of the Siamese detachments
called * on the Frontiers of Tavoy never exceeded
3000 men, while on the frontiers of Tenasserim,
although there was a large force of 8 or 9000 men,
it was placed at Ch’homphon as a measure of
defence and precaution against any retaliation
which the incursions of the former Phya of ChTiom-
phon might urge us to use. We succeeded only in
sending some sepoys from our escort to Martaban
and Tavoy with dispatches to Sir Archibald Campbell
and Mr. Commissioner Maingy, communicating the
actual state of affairs at Bangkok. Yet some distrust
was entertained by the Court that our object in send-
ing those sepojs might be to ascertain the direction
and condition of the roads into Siam, and orders
were therefore given to convey our messengers by
circuitous and difficult routes.
We regretted to see that the letters addressed
to the Siamese by the British Commissioners in Ava,
as well as by our officers at Martaban, recommend-
ing the advance of Maha Yotha’s force, led the


Court to believe that such was the necessity for the
aid of the Siamese Troops, that if it only held out a
little, it would be certain of obtaining possession of
Martaban and Tavoy upon its own terms. Some
idea of the inconveniences to which Siamese co-
operation, had it ever come, would have subjected us,
may be inferred from the reasons why the Court of
Siam, as declared by one of its own ministers,
desired to obtain the entire occupation of the Pro-
vinces of Tavoy and Martaban before it engaged to
march its troops against Ava. It was stated that
the Court feared that the habits and manners of the
Siamese Soldiery could never assimilate with those
of ours, that to pillage and plunder are the regular
parts of the Siamese mode of warfare, which the
Court could not attempt to forbid ; that it is an
established rule in their wars for the officers and
soldiers to seize whatever property may belong to
the officers or subjects of the enemy, as much as
for the Government to take whatever property be-
longs to the Government of the enemy; that even
when the King of Siam travels from one place to
another, his soldiers and attendants are accustomed
to seize whatever they see and like; that the
Siamese soldier could not be prevented from plunder-
ing whatever he took a fancy to, even if assured by
us of daily rations ; and that as the Court of Siam
knew that such practices are not, and would not be
tolerated by us, it was certain that if its troops
joined ours, their conduct would soon bring on the
most serious disputes between the two nations.
It may appear strange that the Court of Siam
had not collected a larger army than the above-
mentioned two Detachments near Martaban and
Tavoy, and the force at Ch’homphon. But the fact
is the Siamese Court would have found it extremely
difficult to have fulfilled the boast which it had
made in its correspondence with the British Com-


missioners in Ava, of collecting tens of thousands
of troops. We certainly read in history of the
Siamese during the wars with Pegue and Laos
assembling immense armies, but the habits of the
existing inhabitants and constitution of their
military, as well as the altered condition of the
kingdom, would preclude the possibility of such a
step being adopted at present, excepting in a case
of the last extremity. Although it may be presump-
tion to differ from such an authority as Mr. Craw-
furd, the members of the late Mission cannot agree
with him in estimating the population of the Empire
cf Siam at so high a rate as five millions. In the
time of Loubere it was reckoned at only 1,900,000
and admitting that account did not include the
Malayan Principalities or Siamese possessions in
Laos and Cambodia, yet since the period it was
formed, the population of the Southern portion of
the kingdom and on the frontiers towards Pegue,
was almost entirely destroyed by the Burmese inva-
sions under Alompra and under the General of
Sbembuan and Menderagee. Ligor, Caraburi, Phrip-
pri and Ratphri, were in Loubere’s time large and
flourishing towns, but they, as well as the whole
countiy around them, are now very scantily popu-
lated, and almost a desert, as some of the Mission
had an opportunity of seeing. The frontiers of
Siam towards Cambodia also have been much de-
populated from incessant disputes with the in-
habitants of that country, and of the portion
subject to Cochin China. The wild and moun-
tainous countries of Laos cannot be considered as
very favorable to population and they also have
suffered severely during the last century, being
alternately in the possession of the Burmese and
Siamese. Fitch, an English traveller in the year
1087, passed from Pegue to Chaung mai “ through
many fruitful and pleasant countries ” but such a
journey at present would shew nothing save forests


and deserts. All the enquiries made by the mem-
bers of the Mission tended also to prove that the
population of Siam forms the same curious anomaly
as what Bruce observed in the Countries of Syria
and Arabia that the proportion of women is nearly
three to one man. Every Siamese confirmed this as
a well known fact, and referred us [ to ] every house
at Bangkok where the female children would invari-
ably be found to bear a most unequal proportion to
the males. Without dwelling however on this
alleged disparity of births, it is well known that the
service which the King of Siam demands from a
portion of the males is most destructive to human
life. This service is not limited to 4or 6 months'
as some European authors mention, but according
to the caprice of the Sovereign and his ministers,
and the exigency of any public works. We were
assured that the construction of the building in
which the remains of the late King were burnt and
which had occupied the workmen upwards of 12
months, had cost several hundreds of lives, and that
no less than 500 men had died last year in the labor
of transporting to Bangkok from the interior, an
enormous tree intended for a large boat for the
present King.
The standing army of Siam may be said to be
composed of this portion of the inhabitants avlio owe
service to the King, who are styled ‘‘Rachahaiis’' and
the number of whom in the whole Empire is estimated
by the Portuguese Consul at Bangkok at only
40,000. Not only all officers who bear any titles
above the rank of Luang, and their families and
dependants, but all Chinese and priests forming a
large portion of the inhabitants, and slaves, and all
who can pay a money compensation are exempted
from this service to the King. The “ Rachalcans ”
are builders, woodcutters and cultivators for the
King, as well as soldiers, and when detached on


military service, the want of labourers in some other
departments of the King’s works is felt. A portion
only of them therefore can he detached without
inconvenience, which none of the remaining and
exempted part of the population would be inclined
to remedy. In case of serious danger to the state of
course the whole of the inhabitants of the Country
could be levied en masse , as appears to have been the
case in Ava during the late war, and in Siam during
her former wars with that State and Laos, and under
Sovereigns ambitious of military glory. But the
long state of peace and repose which the free portion
of the inhabitants of Siam has enjoyed, renders it
equally indisposed to, and unfit for military service,
and the above description of the standing army will
preclude all idea of such soldiers being either dis-
ciplined, available for distant service, or well inclined
for it. The families of the men being detained as
hostages in charge of the Chiefs of the districts to
which they severally belong, must constitute the
only bond of union in a Siamese army detached
on service.
Maha Yotha, in his correspondence with our
officers in Ava, must have been instructed to give
an erroneous impression of his power and influence
in Siam, and of the objects for which his force
had been sent to the frontiers. We ascertained
that he had no power to act or move but as he
might be ordered by the Court of Siam, to which he
was obliged to refer on the most trifling points,
and that he and his detachment though principally
composed of Peguers, styled themselves “ the army
of Doorawuddee ” * and were Siamese subjects,
instructed and anxious more to effect the aggrandize-
ment of Siam than to promote the restoration of
their own independence, or the re-establishment of
their ancient kingdom. We visited Maha Yotha
on his return to Bangkok, and found him certainly


of most respectable appearance and superior man-
ners, but to shew the jealousy with which the
Siamese Court view him, we may mention that we
learnt after our visit, that two of the subordinate
Ministers were concealed in a room adjoining that
in which the Chief received us during the whole
time of our conference. He declared to us that no
branch of the ancient royal race of Pegue now
remains, and that he is the son of a former Pegue
Governor of Martaban, who had retired with his
family to Siam upon the annihilation of the Pegue
Dynasty,
But the number of tales that Maha Yotha and
his followers sent to Bangkok is incredible. Not a
week passed without some intelligence of disasters
experienced by the British Army; and however
absurd were these tales, the Court at one time
credited them in preference to the official accounts
received and communicated by us. Once the
Burmese had succeeded in blowing up the whole
English army with gunpowder. Another time in
drowning it by flooding the whole country, another
time in destroying it by poisoning all the wells and
streams in its neighbourhood Three several times
accounts were brought of the Burmese drawing the
English into an ambuscade upon pretence of
meeting them to treat for peace, and completely
destroying them. Another time, during the
negotiation for a peace, the King of Ava
had, according to custom, sent down to each person
of the English army a lady, who had risen at night
and slain her companion. Just before the close
of the war, a tale was brought that the Burmese
had succeeded in cutting a ditch in rear of Sir
Archibald Campbell’s army, which could neither
advance nor retreat, and some time even after the
Treaty of Peace was signed Phya Ratnachak, who
had been for a long time at Martaban, brought a.


circumstantial story of the Burmese having attacked
and overwhelmed our army whilst evacuating the
country, and of 80 ships full of wounded having
sailed from Rangoon. The ready credit, which
these absurd tales received from the Court of Siam,
too clearly manifested its real feelings towards us,
while such accounts had a most mischievous effect
upon our proceedings, by unsettling the public mind
at Bangkok, augmenting the spirit of procrastina-
tion which characterizes the Siamese at all times,
and adding to the difficulty of bringing our negotia-
tions with the Siamese Ministers to a close.
Under these circumstances the termination of
the Burmese war even did not prove of so much aid
to our negotiations with the Court of Siam as might
have been expected. The abortive negotiations at
Patanago gave the Siamese Ministers, who had
confidently predicted such a result, a very great
advantage over us, and even after the receipt of a
copy of the treaty concluded at Yandaboo, accounts
were daily brought to Bangkok and believed by
most of the Ministers, of some foul act of treachery
being committed by the Burmese against the English.
We were therefore obliged to found arguments
upon the successful termination of the war with,
more caution and hesitation than what we had done
after the treaty signed at Patanago. At our dis-
tance from and with our limited communications with
the seat of war, it was impossible for us to prevent
such false tales of disaster from impairing the effect
of our success in the minds of the Siamese Ministers.
Altho’ the circumstance of our obliging the
Government of Ava to cede treasure to us prevented
the Siamese Court from questioning our decided
superiority in the war so much as it would otherwise
have been inclined to do, in consefxuence of our
army not having taken the Burmese capital 3 still the


Siamese are so fickle and thoughtless, as well as
procrastinating a race, that the impression, such as
it was which our successes against Ava had produced,
was fast wearing away, and we saw that if we did
not take immediate advantage of this impression,
the expiration of a few more weeks would revive and
strengthen the opposition of the party hostile to us
at Bangkok, would dissipate the fears of those
members of the Court who believed in the reports
of our hostile intentions, and would preclude all
chance of our bringing the Court of Siam to any
adjustment of the points at issue between us.
Mr. Crawfurd having at one time been of
opinion, that the negotiation with the Siamese
would unquestionably be conducted to most advan-
tage at the seat of our military operations, and there
by an agent of the Governor General negotiating
with an accredited Envoy from Bangkok on the spot,
or corresponding across the country with the Court
direct, it became one of our early endeavours to
persuade the Court to depute an Agent to the Head
Quarters of our Army to confer and arrange all
matters with the British Commissioners. Although
we repeatedly pressed this point, we never made the
smallest impression. We found that no Siamese
Ministers would ever dream of proceeding upon
such a Mission, and that such are the jealousy and
distrust entertained by the Court towards its own
officers, that if one had been deputed, he would have
received no powers to act on the spot, or to ensure
to us that any part of his proceedings would be
ultimately confirmed at the capital. There were
many important points besides the direction of a
Siamese Auxiliary Army, namely, the contemplated
re-establishment of the Pegue Empire, the settlement
of mutual boundaries and the extent of territory
desired by the Siamese, for the due arrangement of
all of which we repeatedly pointed out without


success the advantage of the Court of Siam deputing
an Agent with full powers to the spot. Nothing
was more adverse to its customs or ideas. To
induce it to adopt such a measure, we at one time
even promised to apply to Sir Archibald Campbell to
to place the Siamese troops in possession of Martaban,
but upon hinting only one day to the Phra Khlang
the expediency of his proceeding to that quarter, he
seemed as much startled as if we had proposed to him
to make a voyage to Europe, That a correspondence
with the Court of Siam across the Country however
would have effected nothing may be seen by the letters
which the Phra Khlang wrote to Mr, Crawfurd, and
by those which actually passed between the British
Commissioners in Ava and the Siamese Ministers, as
well as by the replies which the Court returned to the
Memorials that we addressed to it. The official style
of correspondence among the Siamese is puerile,
intolerably verbose, regardless of truth and most
studiously vague and indefinite. We were always
obliged to reiterate an application before we could
obtain a precise answer, and there is no question that
if we had not held personal conferences with the
Ministers our negotiations would not even now have
been brought to any conclusion.
It may be here necessary to state, that according
to the constitution of the Siamese Government, no
writing can be shown to the King until after the six
ministers forming the Privy Council have examined
and ascertained that it is fit to meet the Royal Eye.
Expressions in one or two of our first memorials
to the ministers were objected to, and upon our
refusing to alter them, we were privately assured that
the documents had not been laid before the King.
Knowing His Majesty to be the most enlightened and
moderate man of the Court, and well disposed towards
ns, we made it a study in our later memorials to
produce our arguments in such language as to deprive


the Ministers of all pretext for suppressing our
correspondence. This explanation will serve to account
for some of our letters not displaying so high a tone
as we often adopted at our conferences with the
Ministers, where we saw it might be used with some
advantage, although still very sparingly. Such are
the pride and ignorance of the Siamese Ministers, that
mild and affable demeanour on the part of a negotiator
subjects him to neglect and contempt, while an earnest
and high tone irritates and keeps them at a distance.
Yet we found a prudent mixture of both lines of
conduct the most advantageous mode of treating not
only the Ministers but every other class of Siamese.
Warmth of language is indispensable to rouse a
Siamese from his habitual apathy and self-conceit,
but when he has been roused to pay due attention he
must be soothed into conceding what is required, and
prevented, if possible from separating with his pride
wounded.
The native Portuguese Interpreters and officers at
the Court of Siam are a most timid and degraded set,
and appear before their Siamese Chiefs with much more
abject servility and trembling than their own Siamese
followers. They dare not mention or even interpret to a
Siamese superior any thing that they believe calculated
to displease him, and he on all occasions treats them
with the utmost contempt. The Phra Khlang has
most communication with these Interpreters, and his
aversion to Europeans is ‘most remarkable. Every
time that the Envoy uttered a disagreeable truth or
pressed a point, that Minister viewed such conduct
as an act of disrespect and insolence, and it was often
ludicrous to observe his astonishment at what he con-
sidered the impertinence and presumption of the Envoy.
Silence in return to an application or observation
implies a refusal or dissatisfaction on the part of a
Siamese officer, and no Interpreter dares repeat a
speech which may be so received. But however con-
venient such a practice might be to a Siamese, in the


situation of the Envoy he was often obliged to insist;
upon an answer, and force the Minister to notice what
had been said, and such conduct always provoked and
offended that proud and arrogant Chief. Unhappily
all Europeans are considered by the Siamese officers of
the same race and caste as their native Portuguese
subjects, and it is to this circumstance rather than to
what a late author * supposes, to their having submit-
ted to accumulate [ d ] injuries and to the most degrad-
ing insults, in order to gain paltry advantages, that
the character of Europeans stands but very low with
the Siamese. So far from such a charge of unworthy
humiliation being applicable to English traders at
Siam, their fault would appear to have been one of an
entirely opposite character. In the time of Captain
Hamilton in 1719, he was told that the English had not
good manners enough to be admitted into the presence
of so great a king as that of Siam, and Turpin
in his History of Siam states, that the haughtiness of
the English and their refractory spirit could not bend
to the yoke of a despot, and obliged them to quit
Siam. Of almost every British vessel that has visited
Bangkok for some years past, the commander whilst
there, was engaged in continual disputes with the
Siamese and departed in anger, leaving on the apathe-
tic minds of the Siamese unfavorable impressions
of the violence and intemperance of the British cha-
racter. The spirituous liquor smnshoo also is ex-
tremely cheap at Bangkok, and it is scarcely possible
to prevent a clandestine introduction of it on board of
vessels. The Siamese viewed with the utmost horror
the conduct of European sailors belonging to one or
two English vessels that visited Siam \\ ith European
Crews. But the truth is, none but men of the most
placid and placable tempers ought to go to Siam.
It requires the exertion of the most unwearied pa-
tience and of the most imperturbable temper to
refrain from resenting the falsehood, extortions and
barefaced attempts at imposition, which a trader is


doomed to encounter daily at Bangkok. Some of the
Commanders of English vessels, who parted on bad
terms with the Siamese, have revenged themselves
afterwards by writing alarming letters to the Phra
Khlang and other Siamese officers informing them
that the English would soon visit and chastise the
Government of Siam.
The re-establishment of the Pegue Kingdom was
never desired by the Siamese Government which
dreads the removal of its Pegue subjects who compose
some of its most useful artisans, and many of whom
are employed by the Court in situations of great trust
and confidence. A large portion of the population
of Siam has always consisted of Peguers. Mr.
Crawfurd in 1822 tells* us that they amounted
to about 43,000 souls, and we were easily convinced
that no inducement would prevail on the Siamese
to deprive themselves of the services of so useful a race
or permit it to quit the country. There are several
Pegue inhabitants of Siam claiming descent from Pegue
families of greater rank and antiquity than what Maha
Yotha can boast, but that Chief certainly is the first
in capacity and energy. He is considered as the best
military officer in the service of Siam and has been
most often and successfully employed against the
Burmese. But had the Court of Siam understood for
-a moment that the British Government contemplated
placing him on the throne of Pegue, he would have
been immediately recalled and he would most probably
have lost his head. Two of his brothers are said to
have been included in the cruel execution which
signalized the late King of Siam’s accession to the
throne of every Chief of merit or influence near it.
He himself escaped by being absent from the capital
at the time, and his fidelity during his late deputation
towards Martaban w r as ensured in the usual Siamese
manner by his wife and children being retained at
Bangkok in the power of the Court. We had reason


to suspect that in Maha Yotha’s communication with
the British Officers at AJartaban the flattering tempta-
tion of a throne was seducing him in some measure
from his allegiance to Siam, and that he was transmit-
ting to the Court the abovementioned accounts of
disasters befalling cur army in order to alarm his
masters into peimitting him to join the English, and
step the progress of the Burmese, for the Siamese were
equally averse to the Burmese as to the English
obtaining a decided superiority. Considering that
this Chief’s father long held employment under the
Siamese Government and that he himself has served
it from infancy in situations of command, his secession
no doubt would have been followed by hundreds
of the Pegue emigrants in Siam. But this event
would only have served to renew all the quarrels
between the Siamese and Peguers, and to draw
the British Government into a labyrinth of Indo-
Chinese politics. The Peguers are divided by the
Siamese into two parties, as they are attached or
subject to themselves or to the Burmese, and these are
respectively styled “ Mon Thai ” and “ Mon Phoma .”
The latter would appear sometimes to be called
“ Abassees.” The principal Peguers by long residence
and service, and by marriage and other connections
in either Ava or Siam, are either Burmese or Siamese
subjects in mind as well as body. A few of the second
classes only may possess some sentiments of patriotism,
or desire of independence, but they could never dis-
play such virtues against the power of Siam and Ava,
unless they were placed under the absolute pupillage
of the British Government.
A Pegue subject of Siam if placed at the head of
any state which we might have desired to establish in
Pegue would have been less likely to prevent the re-
introduction into it of Burmese influence than any
Tallien Chief, who may have served the Government of
Ava, or who may have been brought up under it.


But unless the Court of Siam acquiesced in the
arrangement, which nothing but intimidation could
have induced it to have done, this plan of settlement
would have been ineffectual. The reestablishment of
the Pegue Kingdom therefore would have been more
open to objection, and more likely to involve the
British Government in extensive complicated relations
than the measure of our undertaking the direct charge
and Government of the conquered territory.
It may be mentioned here, that the proper limits of
the antient Pegue Kingdom seem to have been about
the 14th degree of north latitude, or as far as Tavoy,
according to early European travellers. Captain
Hamilton in the beginning of the 38th Century asserts
the limits extended as far as “ Maravi ” which Symes
and other authors consider Mergui, but that Hamilton
did not mean that town is evident from having but a
few pages after given a full description of it under the
name of “ Merjee” and as he describes Merjee as the
next place on the continent to the Southward of Mar-
taban, and does not mention Tavoy at all, his Maravi
is most probably a corruption of the Burmese Mien
Taive or Dawe, Town of Tavoy, which was certainly in
existence long before Hamilton visited India.
Every proposition which the Mission made to the
Siamese of settling the boundaries between the Siamese
dominions and our conquests on the Coast of Tenasserim
was received with extreme distrust. We were first
answered that there could be no occasion for settling
boundaries, until it were ascertained that we could
retain those conquests against the Burmese, and we
were afterwards told to make enquiries from the old
inhabitants of Tavoy and Mergui, and fix our
boundaries according to their statements. The
boundaries between the Siamese and Burmese con-
sisted of a tract of mountain and forest which is several
mi les [ ? wide ], and which could not be said to belong
to either nation. Each had detachments on the lookout


to seize any person of the other party found straying"
within the tract. The Court of Siam seems anxious to
prevent any reduction of this breadth of waste and jun-
gle, that has ever constituted the best protection to
Siam in that direction, and it may perhaps be consider-
ed good policy in us to keep up this tract of desolation
between the Siamese and any possessions that the
British Government may retain on the Coast of Tenas-
serim as the intervention of a mountainous waste may
reduce the chances of dispute and collision. The
arrangement to which the Mission at length brought
Ihe Siamese to acquiesce in the 3rd Article of the
Treaty will, it is hoped sufficiently provide for the
settlement of any doubts that may arise respecting the
limits of the Siamese dominions and our possessions
on the Coast of Tenasserim. But the Court of Siam
at present is unwilling to see us form roads of com-
munication through the border wastes, not only as the
measure may open an approach to its capital, but as it
may facilitate the escape into our territories of Pegue
Emigrants and other inhabitants from Siam.
The great trade which once existed with Siam
through Mergui was entirely stopped when the Bur-
mese took possession of the latter place and destroyed
the old city of Tenasserim in 1759. As long as the
Burmese continued in possession of the Coast of
Tenasserim the former trade, of course could not be
expected to revive, but with a port on that Coast in
our possession, the reopening of the old channel of
trade could not be difficult. The commerce of Siam
itself has but recently begun to recover from the
consequences of the Burmese successes of that period,
and with our principles of encouraging and protecting
free trade and intercourse, joined to the growing
importance and accumulation of the Commerce of
Bangkok and the aversion of the Siamese to navigation,
the old overland course must be reopened and re-
established, if a perfectly good understanding only be


maintained between the two Governments. The
first and for a long time the only attempts will
have to be made by our own subjects, by Chi-
nese and natives of Hindostan and of the Coast of
Coromandel. The Siamese at present object to anjr
Burmese or Peguer entering their dominions from
our possessions on the Coast of Tenasserim and they
consider the former trade with that Coast as a matter
of History, adducing the paucity of elephants there
now, as a proof of the impossibility of reviving it.
But the Chinese and natives of Hindostan and of the
Coast of Coromandel are after all, the onlv portion of
our subjects likely to engage in such a trade and when
the Siamese observe with what comparatively little
difficulty and how profitably it is conducted they
will soon seek a share in it.
On the subject of cession of territory to Siam the
Mission found it extremely difficult to persuade the
Court to disclose its real wishes. Some schism was
said to exist in the Siamese cabinet concerning the
policy of accepting any territory on the Coast of
Tenasserim, Some of the Ministers referred to the
treacherous conduct in former years of Burmese and
Siamese Governors of Tavoy and Mergui and argued
that if the Court formed establishments in that quarter
it would lead to the repetition of such acts of
treachery. The English, as well as the Burmese
they maintained, would have an opportunity of bribing
or intriguing with the Siamese Governors in that
quarter, for a ready admission from thence into the
Siamese territories. But that the majority of the
Court coveted territory on the Coast of Tenasserim
Avas evident from the Maha Yotha and Phya Soora
Sena having been detached, in the first instance, as
the Ministers themselves avowed, to seize upon
Martaban and Tavoy, and from the attempts which the
Court of Siam subsequently made to persuade the
British Commissioners in A\ r a to cede those Pro-


vinces to it upon a mere promise, which there is
reason to believe it never intended to fulfil, of
cooperating in the war against Ava. In that manner,
and in no other, would the Court have received ter-
ritory from us. The Ministers took great pains to
explain to the Mission that Martaban and Tavoy were
not necessary to Siam, and that they required posses-
sion of them for the purpose only of being enabled to
cooperate in the war with more effect. But they took
no steps for collecting such an army as would have
been of service, and only - proposed to do so, after they
were put in possession of Tavoy and Martaban, when
even if their promise had been sincere, it would have
been too late to have fulfilled it with any prospect
of advantage to us. The Ministers in the first ins-
tance declared Mergui and Tavoy to belong of right
to Siam, and the Mission was informed that possession
of those places was never regularly ceded to the
Burmese by Treaty as Symes would appear to have
understood. Both nations discontinued extensive
warfare from exhaustion and not by mutual consent or
any formal Treaty of Peace.
The Ministers subsequently refused to acknowledge
their desire of receiving territory from us, both from
an unwillingness to grant any real equivalent in
return, and from a suspicion that the cession would be
coupled by us with some unpleasant conditions. Still
the Mission left Bangkok with an impression that the
Siamese would readily accept of Martaban and lavoy
but that they would not willingly cede any thing in
return, not even the restoration of Quedah.
It is extremely difficult however to persuade such
a capricious and mistrustful Court as that of Siam to
disclose its real views and feelings, and it is scarcely
possible for a British negotiator to form any rational
conjecture respecting grounds and motives of action
which are not founded on the same modes of reasoning
as would govern the conduct of a European Court.


In any plan for ceding a portion of our conquests
to Siam two points require to be considered. First
that she could retain the territory against even the
reduced power of Ava, and secondly the inhabitants
woidd readily receive their new masters, or at least not
experience from them an undue measure of oppression.
Martaban once belonged to Siam, and was afterwards
the point at which the Burmese armies were always
collected for the purpose of invading Siam. It ap-
peal’s capable of being made a post of considerable
strength, while it is inhabited chiefly by Peguers who
were in extensive communication with their brethren
in Siam during the whole of the late war. The
Siamese Ministers also seemed to put the chief value
upon this province until a report was brought to
Bangkok of the Country being depopulated and of the
town of Martaban being destroyed by fire. The in-
habitants of the Province of Ye also are said to be
s Peguers. But the Provinces of Tavoy, * Mergui and
' Tenasserim are inhabited by a race of Burmese,
and judging from the cruel and inhuman treatment.
' t experienced by the captives brought from those Pro-
vinces to Bangkok during the last year, we saw that
’ the cession to the Siamese of part of those con-
quests with the inhabitants was to be deprecated by
ever}’ consideration of humanity. The first act of the
Siamese would be to carry away as slaves to Bangkok
the population of those Provinces, and no negotiations
with the Court would succeed in ensuring good
treatment to those Burmese. This was a convic-
tion forced upon Captain Burney at Bangkok, against
opinions which he had previously entertained, for
the plan which he had submitted to the Governor
General in Council for negotiating the restoration of
the King of Quedah involved a cession of territory on
the Coast of Tenasserim as an equivalent to the Court
of Siam.
Still the Government of Prince of Wales Island


continues impressed with the expediency of removing
the Siamese from Quedah, and as serious doubts are
entertained of the policy of the British Government
retaining possession of the whole extent of territory
ceded by the Burmese on the Coast of Tenasserim, a
plan may perhaps be yet devised for reconciling most
of the objections and securing perhaps all that is
really worth securing. Were the British Government
to retain, with the sovereignty of all the islands off
that coast, a sufficient spot either at Amherst Town or
Mergui as a commercial post only, such a position
would soon secure an extensive channel for our
commerce, would soonest yield a return to us, and
would enable us to exercise as little or as much inter-
ference as we might please with both Siam and Ava.
The same objections as have before been urged against
the restoration of the Pegue Kingdom would apply
with greater force to any scheme for setting up a
minor independent state in any part of this territory.
But the inhabitants might be offered lands and other
indulgences at the proposed commercial post, or upon
any of the islands and the rest of the territory,
while such of the Pegue or other inhabitants as pre-
ferred remaining upon it might then be delivered
to the Siamese, upon condition that they ceded in
return all that the Government of Prince of Wales
Island has pointed out.* No plan however can be
devised for disposing of these conquests without some
objections, and the plan suggested above would involve
these difficulties. By bringing Siam on this side of
her border wastes, and in closer contact with Ava, we
should be setting them in immediate hostilities which
* Namely—lst. The disavowal by the Siamese Gov-
ernment of all claims of superiority over any of
the Malayan States on the Peninsula South of the
State of Patani.
2dly. The restoration of the King of Quedah.
ddly. The cession of the Island of Salang or Junk-
ceylon to the British Government.


would ruin the contiguous territories, and destroy alt
those sources of advantage that we might expect to
flow into our neighbouring commercial post, unless we
resolved upon undertaking the task of keeping the
peace between those two states from that post. We
must also be prepared to enforce a compliance on the
part of Siam with the arrangements which the Govern-
ment of Prince of Wales Island has recommended.
Bather than any unconditional cession of territory
should be made to Siam, it might be considered better
to restore the whole of those conquests to the Burm-
ese, and enable them to keep the Siamese from
prosecuting their designs to the Southward, unless it
be supposed that such a diversion in favor of the
Malay Principalities would be equally created by
setting to Siam the new and troublesome task of main-
taining possessions so in contact with the
Burmese. The Mission had an opportunity of visiting
Mergui and Tavoy on its return to Calcutta. The
Supreme Government labours under some difficulty in
obtaining a full account of the nature of the ceded ter-
ritory in this direction. While some public officers
are unwilling to depreciate the value of conquests
which form the principal results of the late expensive
war, the opinions of others are likely to be biassed by
a consideration of the important duties that they have
been called upon to perform, among a new and inter-
esting race of people. But population is the great
desideratum in the ceded territory, the inhabitants
not exceeding one to every square mile, and until
this desideratum be supplied, which it cannot for
many years, the expectation of a territorial revenue or
of any thing calculated to meet the very heavy expence
of the present civil and military establishments must
be decidedly and completely delusive. The territory
is admirably adapted for European colonization, pos-
sessing abundance of unoccupied and improveable
land and the existing inhabitants having no prejudices,
peculiar rights or feelings against assimilating with


Europeans. This object of retaining the territory
could be effectually accomplished under the direct
management only of the Crown. As far as the in-
terests of the East India Company are concerned,
every useful purpose might be attained by retaining
possession of a small portion only of the territory to
serve as a commercial post and entrepot for our trade
with the neighbouring Siamese and Burmese inhabit-
ants and as a port of refit and security for our shipping
in time of war, or when meeting with disaster in the
Bay of Bengal. It is generally declared to the East-
ward that no vessel in distress can ever venture to
bear up for the Bay of Martaban. The Town of Tavoy
is too inconveniently situated for shipping, but a
post might certainty be formed closer to the mouth
of the river, or near Crale Island, and the chief
establishments removed to it. Nothing can be more
safe and commodious than the harbour of Mergui,
although in many situations a vessel in distress could
not venture to bear up for that port also, in conse-
quence of the narrowness of the channels between the
islands lying off that Coast, and the great depth and
frequency of calms close to them. St. Mathew’s Island
is more in the track of shipping and more easily
approached, and a small post there would best answer
the object of a port of refit to ships in distress,
but for the purpose of renewing and establishing a
profitable and extensive trade with the Siamese, and
of excluding a foreign European Enemy from again
finding in this quarter the means of annoying the
general commerce of India, a position at Mergui or
Tavoy must be best adapted. The island of Negrais
might be made to serve as the entrepot to the trade
with the Burmese, if Arracan or Cheduba be not
considered fully sufficient. The whole of the rest of
this ceded territory could be restored to Ava or ceded
to Siam upon the conditions before mentioned. The
Siamese will no doubt prove the most peaceable
neighbours, for it will be long difficult for the Burmese


to entertain friendly feelings towards any Settlements'
that we may make on any territory conquered from
them. Too much cannot be said in favor of a nautical
survey being immediately ordered of the whole of the
Coast and Islands connected with the ceded territory.
It is impossible to form an adequate notion of
the inveterate hatred and hostility cherished by the
Siamese against their Burmese neighbours. They
will not allow themselves to suppose the possibility
even of any peace subsisting between the two nations.
Most of the Siamese consider the former successes of
Ava over Siam as matters of histor} 7 -, and profess to
entertain no dread of the Burmese. But under a
vapouring and boasting exterior we observed a real
apprehension of the power of Ava, whose population
appears to be far superior to that of Siam in every
military quality and whose armies, if they had not to
carry their own provisions over the mountainous waste
of the borders, would have crossed it much oftener than
they have done. It forms part of the established laws
of Siam to admit of no Burmese into their territories,
and to hold no friendly intercourse with them. The
Siamese Ministers ridiculed the idea of our making
»
peace with such a treacherous and perfidious race, and
their plan of warfare in our circumstances would have
been to have destroyed Umerapoora and every place
above Prome and Toongho, and to have fallen back on
those towns, laying waste the whole country between
them and the capital of Ava. Their reply to the first
communication which we made to them of the close
of the war, furnishes curious proof of their opinions
regarding the Burmese character, and of the temper
with which they regarded the clause in our treaty,
admitting them to the benefits of peace. They sub-
sequently declined to accept of those benefits and
plainly showed that they considered the treaty as of no
value whatever. They seemed also to consider that the
time had arrived for them to retaliate on the Bunn-


ese and that the reduction of the power and means
of Ava in the late contest with us -would afford the
Siamese an opportunity for a successful attack upon
some part of the Burmese dominions. But the Bur-
mese have probably of late made a great advance in
Military tactics, and they may have greater inclination
and ability than, ever to find their way to Bangkok.
In proportion as the terms of our treaty press upon
them in the north and west they will try to move to-
wards the south and west. We learnt at Bangkok that
since the close of the war, a party of Siamese had en-
tered the Burmese territories near Zittaun from the
direction of Laos to the north east and brought away
several Burmese to Siam, and it becomes therefore
necessary for the British Government to decide im-
mediately whether it will suit its policy to commit itself
so much as the 10th article of the treaty with Ava ap-
peal’s to do, to interference in the disputes between
these two nations. Upon the arrival of the Mission
at Bangkok, we soon discovered that to propose an ex-
change only of the Siamese Prisoners at Mergui and in
other parts of Ava for the Burmese inhabitants carried
away from our conquests, would be fully nugatory.
The Court would not believe that we should return the
Siamese, and at any rate it considered the Burmese
captives of much greater value than its own lazy
subjects. Almost all public works and laborious ser-
vices are executed at Bangkok by the Burmese
prisoners and they receive so small a subsistence from
Government that they are permitted to levy Con-
tributions upon the inhabitants of the Country, who
attend the bazars in boats and ply the river with
vegetables, fruit and other articles of food. We
repeatedly saw two or three Burmese prisoners in
a boat chasing and plundering the boat of some
old Siamese woman. The inhabitants who had been
carried away from our conquests on the Coast of
Tenasserim we found distributed at Bangkok among
all the public officers, who were deriving the ben (fit


of their services at scarcely any expense and who
had all an immediate interest in opposing our wishes
for the release of these poor creatures. An allowance
of half a chupa of paddy a day, without any
clothing or habitation, was granted to them, while
they were employed in the most servile and laborious
occupations, and were suffering much from the ravages
of small pox and cholera morbus. A great portion
of them consisted of women and children, and as
they had been brought to the Capital at an in-
clement season and over the most difficult roads, some
of them having been first taken up from near Marta-
ban to Chung-mai, and thence brought down, a great
mortality had naturally occurred amongst them. At
least one half of them had died. It was impossible that
we could remain indifferent to such inhumanity, and
Ave made the strongest appeal to the King, Wangna,
Kalahom, Phra Khlang and every other officer
whom we saw. Our applications were at first met
with vague and unsatisfactory declarations that these
prisoners should be sent back as soon as the Court
was convinced of our ability to retain our conquests,
that His Majesty had not put irons on them, and
that they were at liberty to return if they desired it.
We answered that we thought it was more probable
the Burmese troops would return to Bangkok than
to our conquests on the Coast of Tenasserim, and we
pointed out the absurdity of telling poor men who
were several hundred miles from their homes, that
they might return, destitute as they must be of all
means of returning and travelling such a distance.
As soon as we learnt that our representations had
made an impression on the superior understanding of
the King, and that the Ministers and subordinate
officers only were opposing us, we adopted a higher
tone and used more strong and decisive language,
pointing out the necessity which would exist for the
British Government avenging the cruelties committed
on its Burmese subjects, and threatening to quit


the Country if they were not immediately sent back.
This forced the Ministers at length to acquiesce, but
they did it with a very bad grace, sending at once
to the premises occupied by the Mission upwards of
600 of the men, women and children whom the Phya
Ch’homphon had seized. No arrangements were made
for supplying them with food or clothing, and they
had no shelter while the thermometer was so low as
58°, and many of them were suffering from Cholera
Morbus and small pox. To one of our remonstrances
against such cruelties the Ministers coolly replied, that
as these people were enemies the Siamese could not feel
any compassion for their sufferings, but we succeeded at
length in forcing the Court to supply us with provi-
sions and junks for the conveyance of these poor
creatures to Bengnarora, whence in the month of
March, 547 men, women and children were taken
across the country to Mergui, under charge of one of
our interpreters. An order was sent at the same time
to Phya Kray at Ch’homphon to release and send to
Mergui another party of 237, which had been detained
at the former place.
The Ministers repeatedly declared that no other
prisoners remained, but in the month of May we dis-
covered and forced them to acknowledge the party of
Peguers which Maha Yotha had brought away from
the vicinity of Martaban, and several of which from
meeting with old acquaintances among the Pegue
emigrants in Siam, did not certainly experience so
harsh a treatment as the Burmese prisoners had done,
although they were equally anxious to escape from
that state of slavery in which they were kept. To
effect their release the Mission had to go through the
same vexatious discussions as on the former occasion,
before the Siamese Court was prevailed upon in the
latter end of June to forward in the same manner to
Mergui, another party of 640 men, women and chil-
dren under charge of another of our interpreters.


The Mission subsequently effected the release of
8 more of these poor wretches, and of 5 native
Christians, whom a party of Siamese had seized five
years ago on the Coast of Tavoy ; and these prisoners
were brought away from Siam in the Mission Brig.
It is one of the established laws of Siam, as of
China, for none of its inhabitants to quit the country,
and this law is applied in a great measure to all natives
of other countries who may visit Siam. We received
numerous applications from Chuliahs and natives ot
Hindoostan, as well as from Malays for our inter-
ference to enable them to quit the country. The
Siamese Government seems at all times to dread any
diminution of its population, and it was contrary to
its established policy, as well as adverse to the personal
interests of the ministers to permit the removal of the
Burmese captives. ' The Letters from the Phra Khlang
and other Ministers to our officers declaring that these
Burmese were well treated and at liberty to return
home, were completely delusive, and we were told in
plain terms that they would never have been released
but for the arrival of the Mission. Whatever there-
fore may be the final decision of our superiors respect-
ing the exertions of the late Mission to Siam, every
member of it will feel great and lasting satisfaction
that he was instrumental in rescuing upwards of 1400
of his fellow creatures from a most intolerable slavery.
It may be mentioned here that the M ission ascertained
at Bangkok that Chinese Junks and other native ves-
sels are in the habit of clandestinely carrying away
Malays from our different settlements to the Eastward,
and selling them for slaves in Siam.
The Mission had an opportunity of again seeing
the released Burmese captives at Mergui, where they
crowded round the members of the Mission with pre-
sents and tokens of gratitude in the most pleasing
and gratifying manner. No instance had ever before


occurred of the return of captives from Siam and tli©
arrival of these prisoners at Mergui was as astonishing
and embarrassing as the return to life of the dead.
The British Authorities there were required to decide
upon the claims of husbands for their wives, mas-
ters for their slaves, and owners for their lauds
and other property, that had all undergone alienation
according to ancient custom, upon the abduction
of the prisoners by the Siamese. The small party
of Siamese which Major Frith had detained were
released the moment these Burmese prisoners arrived
at Mergui. The conduct of the inhabitants of Mergui
towards these Siamese prisoners formed a striking
contrast to that their townsmen received in Siam.
They repeatedly requested the permission of the
British Authorities at Mergui to be allowed to deliver
to the Siamese in confinement supplies of fruit,
clothing and other articles, which they voluntarily
brought to promote the comfort of people who, they
said, although enemies were in adversity. It is
unpleasant to relate that the Mission did not see
or [hear of a single instance of a Siamese showing
kindness or even commiseration towards a Burmese
prisoner at Bangkok.
The Mission learnt at Tavoy and Mergui, that
the intelligence of its arrival at Bangkok had been
hailed with the utmost satisfaction by the inhabitants
of those provinces, and that it had immediately dis-
sipated the alarm and nnquietude under which the
Burmese had been living for several months, in hourly
•expectation of incursions or attack on the part of their
♦Siamese neighboirrs. In conclusion we hope we may
be permitted to cite the following extract from a
private letter addressed to the Envoy at Bangkok by
an officer of high rank after visiting the Coast of
Tenasserim. “It is well you went to Bangkok. If
you had not been there to dandle and sing to those
grown up babies, they would have been throwing


some of their playthings at our heads, and we must
have been obliged to give them a thumping or put
them in a corner. In plain words, your being there
has prevented much misunderstanding, and kept the
Siamese from giving way* to the temptations held out
by our reduced means of defence from Martaban
to Mergui.”
(Signed) H. BURNEY Captain
late Envoy to the Court
of Siam.
Fort William
Deer. 2d. 1820.


[An Extract of the foregoing report appears
in Home Series , Miscellaneous, vol. 675, to which
is added the following (endorsed Fort William,
Secret Dept., 6th July 1827): —]
Since writing the above the overthrow of the
Tallien insurrection against the Burmese Government,
and the immigration into our territory South and
East of the Saluen River of nearly 20,000 Peguers
must now render it impossible for the British Govern-
ment to restore the ceded territory to Ava, and to
deliver the large body of refugees to the vengeance of
the Burmese. Many of these Peguers, with their
principal, the Syrian Chief, here it is understood,
applied to be allowed to settle near the “ Three
Pagodas ” on the frontiers of Siam, whence the}’, no
doubt, hope to open an intercourse with their
numerous brethren in that kingdom. This event, if
we retain the territory, may soon become the cause of
some * understanding between ourselves and the
Siamese who would be much dissatisfied with losing
any of their Pegu subjects. But if we decide against
retaining the whole of the ceded territory, the arrival
of so large a body of Peguers may assist us much in
making some general arrangement with the Siamese
and delivering a portion of the territory to them in
exchange for the objects required from them. The
only dfficulty which may occur in our negotiation with
the Siamese is, that we shall be bound to insist upon
one condition, that a free passage be afforded to all
inhabitants who may desire to quit the territory upon
its cession to the Siamese. The Siamese Ministers as
they value the people more than the territory will
be unwilling to accede to this condition from
an apprehension that most of the inhabitants may
follow us.
During another visit to Tavoy Captain Burney
lias had an opportunity of extending his enquiries and


observations respecting the ceded territory and he is
compelled to confess, that its possession will never
be made profitable with the present race of inhabitants.
This indigenous race has to be taught industry, desire
of gain, value of acquisition, and in short every thing
that can make them useful or productive labourers.
They are as averse as the Malays to labour, and like
the Malays they are content with cultivating a little
paddy for their subistence and as one or two days*
labour can supply them with the scanty means of
subsistence they require for eight or ten days, they
will work only for that short period. The price of
labour is kept up by the indolence and apathy of the
people and two rupees a da}? - have been repeatedly
offered without effect for the services of common
labourers. As long as the price of labour continues at
this exorbitant rate, the plans proposed by speculative
Europeans, to take grants of land and cultivate
indigo, cotton and other products, can never succeed.
An exotic race of Chulias and Chinese must be
introduced, and how long and expensive such a
process is, may be seen in the instance of Penang,
where we have not yet succeeded in teaching the
Malay population habits of industry and a desire of
bettering their condition.
The Supreme Government had therefore better
determine at once upon delivering this ceded territory
to the Siamese, and retaining with the Sovereignty of
all the islands, one small but well fortified post only,
for the purposes of a commercial entrepot, and a port
where our vessels may refit when in distress, and
whence we mayfprevent in case of another European
war, any other power from seeking a settlement
or place of shelter for its privateers on this Eastern
side of the Bay of Bengal.
( Signed ) H. BURNEY


It may be useful to detail here the information
and opinions collected and formed by the late Mission
respecting the general commerce of Siam.
The trade with China is the most extensive as
well as the most ancient part of the foreign commerce
of Bangkok. From the earliest time a very close
connection has subsisted between Siam and the Celes-
tial Empire and the former has always endeavoured to
maintain and preserve this connection by periodical
embassies to the latter. These Embassies, even when
believed by early European voyagers to be sent to do
homage and to acknowledge the supremacy of China,
were considered b}" them as they now really are,
intended only to secure uninterrupted liberty of trade ;
and this official communication is now confined to an
annual Mission to Canton, and a triennial one to Pekin
bearing presents consisting of small supplies of each
description of the produce of Siam. Such presents
were lately returned to the Governor General and
pointed out to the Mission as the greatest compliment
which the King of Siam could pay to His Lordship.
A very large portion of the population of Siam are
Chinese and their descendants, the number of whom
settled at Bangkok was declared to the Mission to be
almost equal to that of the rest of the inhabitants,
while from 2 to 3000 new settlers are annually
arriving from China. Many of the Chinese possess
Siamese titles, but their influence in the state is by
no means so considerable as might have been expected
from their number and general intelligence. The
manufacturers of sugar and other articles, the Junk
builders and navigators, and most of the shopkeepers
Extracts from H. Burney’s Report respecting
the commerce of Siam.


at Bangkok are Chinese, from whom the Government
is said to derive a revenue of one lack Ticals per
mensem, by a capitation tax upon every adult re-
sident consisting of a seal or chop to be worn round
the v rist, for ydiicli 4£ ticals are charged, and which
is renewable every three years. Not only the wants
of these Chinese, but the wants of the Siamese
themselves, who all use Chinese crapes, porcelain,
teas and sweetmeats, render an intercourse with China
as necessary as it is extensive. Nearly 30,000 Tons
of Junks are sent to navigate between Bangkok and
China. From 20 to 45 large junks annually arrive
from Hainan and from 36 to 50 Junks from Canton,
and from Eurin, Mengpo and the other east parts of
China between which last and Bangkok the trade
is so profitable as to yield at least 300 per cent.
In this last trade the King and most of the officers
of Siam are engaged, and it is said that large profits
are realized even if only one out of two vessels return.
Many junks are annually lost, but that [ ? though ]
they are easily replaced [it is] to be feared [they can]
never succeed in opening so profitable and extensive
a channel in Siam as Mr. Crawfurd anticipates.
The Chinese Merchants of Bangkok trade also with
the Malay Ports to which from 30 to 40 junks are
annually sent. During the past year six went to
Bhio and the ports in Borneo and Java, and about
.26 to Singapore and Penang, but in the year
1824 Mr. Crawfurd reports that 30 junks visited
Singapore with Siamese produce to the extent of 4
or 5000 tons, returning with British and India manu-
factures to the value of nearly 2 Lack 50,000 Dollars.
Besides these junks about 30 Malay prows trade between
the Malay States and Bangkok, importing gold dust,
birds nests, dammer, dragon’s blood, tin, rattans,
sharks, mows and fins Malay dresses and a coarse
species of Aguila wood, and exporting rice, paddy, oil,
sugar, salt, iron, iron posts and a little sticklac and
Benjamin. His Majesty’s ship the only Synore* rigged


vessel belonging- to Siam, made an annual voyage to
Singapore and the Malay ports with little profit, and
she has lately been lost on her return voyage. But
the Court of Siam takes little interest in this trade
and as a proof of its indifference we may mention that
during the whole of the negotiations of the Envoy no
attempt was ever made to secure any reciprocal ad-
vantage for this trade, or to obtain a pledge even that
the very moderate duties and anchorage charges now
levied at Singapore, Malacca and Penang upon the
junks from Siam should not be increased. This
indifference however, under which this trade has
increased and prospered has begun to change so far,
that during the last two years many new duties have
been imposed upon the Chinese junks engaged in it.
An additional measurement duty has been imposed
upon them, and they have lately been assessed for the
purpose even of meeting the expense of conveying
stores for the purpose of fortifying the Mouth of the
Menam.
The junks trading with the British Settlements to
the East also make their principal profit on their
export of Hice, Sugar, oil &c., which their connections
in the interior of Siam enable them to procure at very
low rates, and they can afford to undersell the
English merchants at Bangkok in their import of
English and India cottons and other manufactures.
But while English vessels may navigate at all
seasons, these junks make but one voyage during
the year and there is besides no security for the
continuance of this native trade, for the Siamese
Government as we have already seem, will never
hesitate to check and reduce it by additional duties.
To talk of its being the interest of the Government
not to adopt such a measure is absurd. In fact the
imports to Singapore during the past season were
by no measure [ ? means'] so great as they were


during the year reported by Mr. Crawford in 1824.
These considerations will prove the advantage of th&
Commercial part of the treaty lately negotiated in
refutation of those who are of opinion that the best
and most profitable mode of trading with Siam is by
means of the junks which now pass between that
Kingdom and Singapore. The trade of the Chinese
also is under the Prah Khlang, superintended by an
Officer in his Department named Phya Ch’hoduk who
is of Chinese extraction and is accused of having
amassed great wealth by extortion and other im-
proper means.
The trade between Cochin China and Siam em-
ployed from 20 to 50 small junks, the principal
imports being mats for sails, houses, silk, betlenut,
coarse cottons, some times Shumshoo, and the exports
iron, barks of trees for dyeing and other purposes,
hides, rice, paddy Ac. Many of the productions
of Cambodia, such as Gamboge, cardamuns, silk and
silk cloth, aguila wood, skins, ivory &c. are imported
to Bangkok by these junks. Much jealousy and dis-
trust subsist between the Government of Siam and
Cochin China, on account of the possessions
of the former in Cambodia, although a mutual diplom-
atic intercourse is regularly maintained between the
Phra Khlang at Paknam. * As this Envoy * brought
only one shipwrecking Siamese, and as he used re-
peated and the most urgent application to be allowed
to visit the Capital, the general opinion at Bangkok
was that the real design of the Embassy was to ascer-
tain the object of the British Mission. The number
of Cochin Chinese settled at Bangkok is said to amount
only to 300.
Almost all the most valuable exports of Siam
Benjamin, cotton, teak, copper, peltry, stick lac, lead,
Ac. are the products of Laos, a great portion of which
is now annexed to the Kingdom of Siam. But it is sur-
prizing to find how little is really known at Bangkok


respecting the country and people of Laos. Only 1500
of that nation are said to be recognised as a distinct
portion of the production* of Chinese. They are said
to prefer their own manufactures to English Broad
Cloth, which are at present said to be too dear for
their consumption.
The very valuable trade which was formerly con-
ducted between Siam and Japan has ceased entirely.
Some of the Chinese Junks occasionally import from
the more Eastern parts of China, a few of the produc-
tions of Japan, copper, lackered ware and crapes,
which last are in great demand among the princes and
chief officers of the Court.
No commercial intercourse now exists with Acheen
or with Persia and the states of Southern India, with
which the King of Siam formerly maintained diploma-
tic relations.
The trade with Surat is the only portion remain-
ing of the valuable commerce that appears in former
time to have existed between Siam and the people of
Western India or the Moors. Two small brigs of 200
tons, generally under Nakhodas, alternately visit
Bangkok each year from Surat importing Kinkhaubs,
spices, chintzes and other coarse cottons, and export-
ing sugar, ivoiy, aguila wood, benjamin and gamboge.
The conduct of the Siamese officers towards these
vessels was most iniquitous. The Prah Khlang
and his officers fixed the price of every article of
merchandize brought by the Surat traders and took
and distributed among themselves whatever portion of
the cargoes they pleased for the purpose of retailing
the same afterwards at a profit to themselves. The
[? revenue ] derived by these means by the Phra
Xhlang’s department rendered it a matter of the
greatest trouble before the Mission could persuade the
Siamese negotiators to extend to these Surat Traders,
the benefit of the treaty in which they were at length


included, as sailing under the English flag and being
in fact English subjects. Nothing can give a more
striking proof of the advantage of the trade of Siam,
notwithstanding all the exactions and vexations which
attend it, than the case of the Surat traders. The
Mission witnessed the distress and extortion experi-
enced in December last by the Nakhoda of the Surat
brig, who was almost distracted in the attempt only
of * converting payment for his cargo, and who was
repeatedly seen crying like a child, yet this very
person [came] again this year to pass through the same
sufferings. The immediate superintendence of the
trade of the Surat Merchants is in the hands of Phya
Si-phi-phut and Phya Chula both of whom belong to
the department of the Phra Khlang.
It may now be useful to give a short sketch of
the attempts which each European nation has made
to obtain a share in the commerce of Siam.
The Portuguese were the first European nation to
establish a communication with Siam, as well as with
otner parts of India. Immediately after the conquest
of Malacca by the Portuguese in 1511 Alfonso de
Albuquerque received an Embassy from Siam and in
return deputed thither Anthony de Miranda to improve
commercial relations with the object it is said to build
a Fort in any part of this kingdom they would choose.
In 1610 the King sent ambassadors to Goa acknowled-
ging the favors received from the Portugueze and offer-
ing them the port of Martaban to build a fort and
maintain a garrison there and a fleet to cruize on that
sea against the King of Dna ( Dawe or Tavoy ). The
Portuguese sent them back with an ambassador from
themselves to propose that the two nations should join
their forces to subdue the King of Ava, that there
should be a free trade between Siam and Malacca, and.
that the King of Siam should not admit the Dutch
into the country. The King replied that the


Portuguese might freely resort to his ports, and be
exempt from all duties, and that his subjects should
trade at Malacca, that the reason they had not done it
of late was the ill usage they found there, that he had
admitted the English, Dutch and Mala) 7 s into his
ports for the great respect they showed him and the
esteem he had for them. That he had assisted the
Portuguese against the Hollanders; that he was no
ways concerned for the harm those of Malacca had
done the Queen of Patani, because she was a mad
woman, but she being now dead he had placed one of
more sense there and desired there might be free
trade with her as well as with Siam; that the goods
of such Portuguese as died in his dominions should
go to their heirs, and that he had ordered all Por-
tuguese who committed any crime should be tried at
this Court, to prevent any wrong being done them
by the prejudice of magistrates. The King sent back
with the Portuguese Envoy two Siamese to go as
Ambassadors to Spain. The privilege then granted
by the King of Siam to all vessels visiting Siam from
Malacca to bo exempt from duty continued apparently
down to a very late date. In 1621 the King of
Siam sent another Embassy to Goa desiring some
Franciscans would come to preach in his domi-
nions when one was sent, and his Majesty is said to
have built a church for him at his own expense. In
1624 a difference arose between the Siamese and
Portuguese, in consequence of the latter having
attacked and taken possession of a Dutch frigate
lying-in the Menam river, which vessel the King of
Siam made the Portuguese restore and they as well
as the Spaniards from Manilla for some years afterwards
harassed the Siamese trade with China. In 1684
the King of Portugal having sent an Envoy to Siam
to renew the ancient alliance, the King of Siam
deputed a Mission to Portugal via Goa, and the account
of the shipwreck and the sufferings of Occun Chamnam
and the other Siamese Ambassadors off the Cape of


Good Hope may be seen in the interesting relation
translated and published by Tachard in his Second
Voyage an Royaume de Siam, p. 309 et seq. During
the period of* the French Embassies in 1685 and 1688,
of Kempfer’s visit in 1689, and of Captain Hamilton’s
visit in 1719, the Portuguese do not appear to have
cultivated much commercial intercourse with Siam
although the French notice a Portuguese Factory
at Yothia. But in the year 1780, the Queen of
Portugal deputed a Mission to Siam via Goa for the
purpose of renewing the ancient alliance, to which
end assistance of 5000 men and of a supply of arms
was afforded against the Burmese. The King of Siam
declined the offer of auxiliary troops, but requested
a supply of arms, and offered the Portuguese permis-
sion to establish a factory and Consul at Yothia.
We heard at Bangkok a curious anecdote respecting
the Portuguese Envoy sent at this time. He took
offence at some part of the conduct of the Court
of Siam, and appealed against it to the poor
Native Christians resident at Yothia, among whom he
circulated an address. Of course, the moment this pro-
ceeding came to the knowledge of the Court the Envoy
was placed in confinement. At this time and down to
a late date the Portugueze from Macao carried.* In
1816 Mr. Carlos de Silveira, a native of the Brazils
settled at Macao, having occasion to make a trading
voyage to Siam, finding the Court well disposed to
enter into nearer relations with the Portuguese, re-
presented the matter on his return to the then Viceroy
of Goa, who deputed him in 1818 to take up the offer
made by the King of Siam in 1781, and to obtain the
acquiescence of the Siamese Court to a treaty of
friendship and commerce, a draft of which consisting
of 23 articles, was drawn out and given to him by the
Viceroy. Although this Instrument was drawn out
with all the formality and minuteness used in a Treaty
of Alliance between two European States, Mr. Silveira
obtained the acquiescence of the Siamese Court to tha


greatest part of it. The principal articles were, that
the Portuguese vessels visiting Bangkok was not a suf-
ficient object for maintaining a Factory and Consul
there ; * they directed him to remove the escort of
* troops, consider his appointment of Consul abrogated
and apply to Macao for payment of his salary and other
charges. Mr. Silveira removed his escort to Macao in a
small brig which happened then to be bound for that
port, but remonstrated against such a summary mode
ot proceeding with regard to himself, and he has sub-
sequently made man}? - fruitless appeals to the restored
Government at Goa, in order to induce it to transmit
to him the means of defraying his charge and leaving
the country in a suitable manner, Mr. Silveira’s
situation is at present so peculiar a one, that he
has been induced to apply to the late Mission to
submit his case to the Government of British India.
The Siamese, as was said before, considers all
Christian nations of the same rank and caste, and it is
the policy of every European Government, but parti-
cularly of that which is likely to have most intercourse
in future with Siam, to remove the unfavorable exam-
ple of European diplomacy which is daily to be seen
at Bangkok in the conduct of the Portuguese Gov-
ernment towards Mr. Silveira, who has been left poor
and destitute in a place to which he had been deputed
as a public character with all honor and distinction.
Indeed, the late Mission experienced some difficulties
which would never have arisen but for this conduct
of the Government of Goa to their Consul. The
Siamese Negotiators hesitated much to put any faith
in the declaration and public acts of the Envoy, fearing
that his own Government might not acknowledge
or ratify them and no argument could induce the
Ministers to deliver to the Envoy a Copy of the Treaty
with the King of Siam’s seal, declaring that they
could not incur the risk of exposing His Majesty to
the insult, which would follow the Governor General’s
declining to ratify an Instrument having the Royal


Seal. This was the cause of the arrangement pro-
posing that the ratifications of the Treaty shall be
exchanged at Queda.
The situation of the Portuguese Consul and the
manner in which the Court of Siam treats him, early
convinced the late Mission of the impossibility of
endeavouring to establish a British Factory and Consul
at Bangkok. Mr. Crawfurd cites an instance of Mr.
Silveira having been confined and threatened by the
Siamese authorities, and the want of respect and
proper consideration which they appeared on all
occasions to show to that Gentleman as well as
sometimes to our own Envoy, satisfied the Mission that
even if this object of a Bangkok factory could be accom-
plished, the measure would inevitably bring on a war
between the two Governments in less than six months.
The Siamese Court itself seemed fully aware that the
British Mission received the most useful cordial assist-
ance on every occasion from Mr. Silveira, to whom
every Member of the Mission is indebted for many
acts of kindness and the most friendly and gentlemanly
attentions.
Mr. Silveira has received from the Siamese
Government the inferior title of Luang. No Portuguese
vessel has visited Siam during the last six years, but
the Siamese Ministers declared that as many of the
Portuguese have fought with the Siamese against
their enemies, and many descendants of Portuguese
are now serving the King of Siam in the Army and
other Departments that nation, as well as Chinese,
possess strong claims to be favoured in Siam over
every other foreign people.
Besides Mr. Silveira and his secretary Mr. Baptiste,
the only European Portugueze now residing at Bang-
kok is Mr. Joachim Lendia, who has been several years
practising physic among the native Christians. He is
too poor and inoffensive to attract the notice of the


Siamese authorities, and he avoids as much as possible
communication with any of them. Of the Native
Christians there are about 1000 or 1200 Souls at
Bangkok, divided into four different Churches, Sta.
Cruz, Sta. Conceptio, or Campang Cambodia, St.
Rozario and St. Assencio. Sta Cruz is the largest and
at the head of it are Joze Piedada, the Port Captain,
and Sebastian his deputy. They both understand
Latin and speak a jargon of that language, and having
been to Macao and seen other places besides Siam,
they are better informed than most of their brethren.
Piedada whose Siamese title is Luang Surasakhon is
generally employed by the Phra Khlang and the Court
as the principal interpreter in their communications
with Europeans and Americans and were it not for
an unfortunate propensity for liquor he would be the
most respectable Native Christian at Bangkok. The
Mission found him extremely useful, always good
humoured and ready to oblige or to give information as
far as his fear of the Siamese authorities did not pre-
vent him. He had the great merit also of not pretend-
ing to know more than what he really did respecting
the views and proceedings of his Masters. The Mis-
sion found Sebastian, styled by the Siamese Luang
Capitan phanit, honest and inoffensive but extremely
timid and rather inclined to exaggerate difficulties.
He also is in constant attendance at the Phra Khlancfs
office as an interpreter. Besides these, most of the
Linguists live at Sta, Cruz. 'Augustine, Ragraundi
Domingo Jun, &c. who are those sent down to the
bar to meet European or American vessels, are in
attendance on the Commanders during their stay in
the Country, but they possess few means of rendering
themselves useful to a stranger, and live in hourly
apprehension of offending their Siamese masters.
Some of the Native Christians of Sta. Cruz practice
a profession which is generally unknown to the
Siamese, that of washermen and others can make them-
s pl ves useful as Bazar men or purveyors to strangers*


The Mission found Augustine Machado and his wife
Manica very serviceable in this last occupation.
The obstensible head of the village of Sta. Con-
ception is Don Miguel or Wiset Song Khram,
who is the only Native Christian with so high a
Siamese title, but whose age and imbecility give him
(little consideration. He and some other Native Chris-
tian of this village are employed the S. of France of
the name of Esprit Joseph Marie Florent.* He has
been about 39 years in the country and although he is
a remarkably lively old gentleman of the old French
school, he lives in very great seclusion and in hourly
anxiety not to give offence to the Siamese Authorities.
He is served and treated by the Native Christians
with all the forms of Siamese reverence shown by
them to a Siamese Chief. He is seldom noticed
by their Court and his episcopal duties, as far as
improving his flock and rendering it superior in
character and manners to the Siamese, seem to be
much confined by his apprehension of offending the
Court. It cannot be concealed that the Native
Christians of Bangkok are by no means more remarkable
for manhood, reverence for truth, or love of cleanliness,
than what Captain Hamilton found their ancestors
in 1719,
The first intercourse which France opened with
Siam was in 1662 when the Bishops nominated by
the See of Rome arrived at Yothia. These Bishops
being refused a dhect passage by the Dutch in their
vessels were obliged to proceed by a tedious and
circuitous overland route through Persia, the Coast
of Coromandel and Tenasserim to Siam. In 1678 the
Bishop of Heliopolis returned to Siam with credentials
as Ambassador from the King of France and shortly
after a Siamese Embassjr, which appears to have been
lost, was deputed to France. In 1683 another
Siamese Mission was deputed, which led to the French
Embassies under M. Chaumont in 1685 and Messrs


Loubere and Ceberet in 1687, the principal object of
which, a most unfounded expectation of converting
Chao Narayana, King of Siam, to Christianity, is well
known. The French succeeded in obtaining possession
of Bangkok and Mergui, but the differences which
shortly after arose between M. de Farges party and
the Siamese, and the manner in (which the whole of
the French were finally expelled by Petracha in 1689
are also well known. Siamese Envoys were sent to
Europe with both the French Missions and in 1690/1
M. Tachard by a third visit from Europe to Siam via
Mergui where he landed with some of the Siamese
Envoys appears to have restored the French Church
at Siam. But although the French subsequently
possessed a factory at Mergui, Ereir influence in the
kingdom was never regained, and it is considered by
the Siamese of the present day as a mere fable of
Europeans. The Bishop of Siam is now the only
Frenchman in the King of Siam’s dominions. Tire
French factory at Mergui existed so lately as the year
1784, when it was described as the means of enabling
that nation to obtain the productions of Pegu and
Siam, besides affording convenient shelter for its
privateers in time of war. We ought to read at the
same time with the accounts of the French Ambas-
sadors the representation which Count Forbin gives of
the character and proceedings of the Siamese towards,*
after the departure of M, Chaumout. M. Loubere’s
description of the customs, diet, religion and manners
of the Siamese is strikingly just and correct to this
day, but his account of the general appearance of the
country and character of the people is far too highly
coloured, and the members of the Mission repeatedly
asked themselves whether they could be the same
people and country as those seen by M. Loubere.
The Court and the arrangement of the Government
are any thing but magnificent or well regulated while
the statement that the fidelity of the common people
is inviolable in all sorts of traffic, that in the bazars


the seller counts not the money which he receives, nor
the buyer the commodity which he buys by the tale, is
egregiously erroneous. Every attempt is made by the
Siamese to deceive and defraud, and the foreign trader
in particular cannot be too cautious in examining the
quality and quantity of his purchase, and the descrip-
tion of the money which he receives. The ticals current
although all of nearly equal weight, have 10 or 12
different impressions. Each sovereign puts his own
mark on the money he coins, without calling in that
of his predecessor. The China King Phya Taks is a
rude representation of a fort, the late king’s that of
a man with extended [ ? arms ] and legs and the pre-
sent king’s that of his palace. The inhabitants are
most capricious with respect to the Ticals they will
take, some rejecting what others readily receive, and
notwithstanding the very severe punishment which
attends the discovery of forgery or uttering of base
coin, a large portion of the current ticals is copper or
tin. As proofs of the extent to which the currency is
debased we may mention that at least 15 per cent of
the money brought for the table of the Envoy direct!} 7 "
from King’s treasury was base, and the King’s prin-
cipal physician assured the Mission that his salary
was 8 ticals per annum, paid by the Treasurer, with
an engagement that 2 out of the 8 shall be received
in bad coin.
The first intercourse opened by the Dutch with
Siam appears to have been about the year 1604, when
Admiral Warwijk learning at Patani from Siam that
their king was accustomed to depute an annual Mis-
sion to the Emperor of China to do homage, and that
the Siamese ambassadors were furnished with this
monarch’s Seal* Arms to pass their junks and trade into
the interior of China, conceived a plan of opening a
trade and intercourse by this means between the Dutch
and Chinese. The Admiral sent a Dutch Agent
Specx with letters and presents to the King of Siam,


requesting His Majesty to permit this Agent to
proceed to China in the train of the Siamese Mission.
When he was recalled he returned to Java with some
Siamese Envoys who were afterwards conveyed to
Europe to Prince Maurice and during whose passage
thither the}? - appear to have been plundered of some
precious stones under a very unproble* pretext. In
1613 General Brouwer established some commercial
relations with Siam on his passage to Japan, and in
1634 whilst he was Governor General of Java, Joost
Schouten built an elegant and spacious factory and
store houses at Siam, and this establishment was said
for some time to be the most splendid the Dutch
possessed in India. In 1624 a Dutch frigate was at-
tacked in the Menam river by the Portuguese, who
were however made to restore it by the King of Siam.
The Dutch afterwards assisted the Siamese against
Portuguese and Spaniards of Manilla. About the year
1639 they sent six ships to punish the people of Patani
on account of the King of Siam. About the year
1662 the Dutch are described in one account to have
had so large a commercial intercourse with Siam as to
load 40 ships there annually, but in 1664 they quar-
relled with the King of Siam and removed for a time
their factories from both Ligor and Siam. In the
time of M. Loub6re in 1687 the Dutch appear to have
entered into a regular treaty with the King of Siam
for the whole of the skins produced in his Kingdom
requiring the same for their Japan trade, although
onty 2 or 3 Dutch barks then visited Siam annually.
The Dutch vessels trading with Japan generally touch-
ed at Siam and in 1689 M. Kaempfer visited Siam and
sold as slaves,* He found the Court not only deaf to all
his applications for the release of these unfortunates,
but so irritable whenever he pressed the subject that on
the last occasion of his paying a visit to the present
King, then Prince Krom Chet, he took a loaded pistol in
his pocket in view to be prepared to resent any personal
indignity that might be offered to him, when he again


demanded a release of the Javanese, without whom
however he was at last obliged to quit the country.
Since that date the King of Siam’s ship having been
obliged to put into Mint was charged, it is said at
Bangkok, with extraordinary duties by the Nether-
lands Government, at Banca, amounting to a sum of
f 2000 Dollars.* Some commuication has also lately
0 passed, but through native agents of no character,.
’ between Java and Siam, in consequence of a small
brig belonging to some of the Siamese Officers having
been carried off or declared* by the crew at one of the
ports in Borneo.
Little communication appears to have passed
between Siam and the Spaniards, excepting during the
time the crowns of Portugal and Spain were joined,
and exertions were made to obstruct the rising com-
merce of the Dutch in Siam, a purpose which brought
the Spaniards into collision with the Siamese. In
1629 a Mission was sent from Siam to Manilla claim-
ing redress for the ravages committed by the Spaniards
in the Port of Siam and for the seizure of the ambas-
sador of that Country proceeding to China. In 1717
it appears a Mission was sent from Manilla to Siam
proposing to cultivate friendly and commercial rela-
tions .with that Country and applying for liberty to
settle a factory, which was granted, but prevented
from being carried into execution bj* the misconduct
of the Spaniards in the mean time to a Siamese Vessel
that happened to touch at Manilla.
The Americans have recently opened a commercial
intercourse with Siam. They bring to Bangkok no
other cargo than Muskets, gun powder, brimstone and
Spanish dollars which are extremely acceptable to
the Siamese and export only sugar, with which they
can be readily supplied, the trade of the Americans
being thus much more simply and quickly conducted
than that of English Merchants, who require so long a


period to dispose of their large and various imports oP
cottons and other merchandize, and to procure other
returns if possible. Sugar is the trade, beyond ques-
tion, which the Siamese Court is most desirous of see-
ing increase. In the year 1818 a Captain Hale visited
Bangkok with an American vessel and engaged to re-
turn with a cargo of muskets, an engagement which
he fulfilled, and which obtained for him the Siamese
title of Luang, and some offer it is said, to the
American Government to establish a factory at Bang-
kok. Several American vessels incited by the success
of Captain Hale’s speculation, afterwards visited Bang-
kok, but the} 7 suffered much b} 7 the extortion of the
Phra Khlang, who fined an American vessel nearly
2000 Dollars for a very trifling damage done to a Junk
in the Siamese Officers* in America, and preventing
1 any other of their countrymen from visiting Bangkok.
The Mission is bound however to acknowledge an act
of gentlemanly courtesy and very obliging attention
performed by Captain Coffin of the Liverpool Packet,
who took charge of the Envoy’s dispatches, and
deviated from his route to land them at Singapore.
The Mission would recommend any British Mer-
chants desirous of trading with Siam to make the first
voyage there with Spanish Dollars only. He will find
himself much more his own master at Bangkok, and
much better able to ascertain the nature and objects of
the commerce of the Country and the character of
those who superintend it.
We shall now proceed to notice the steps taken
by our own nation to open a profitable commercial
intercourse with the Kingdom of Siam. Captain
Middleton settled the first English factory in Siam in
1610. It was subsequently withdrawn, and replaced
two or three times until the year 1686, when some
misunderstanding took place between the two nations,
the cause of which misunderstanding, as well as the


subsequent proceedings of the Government of Fort
St. George, are differently explained by Captains
Hamilton and Dalrymple from the Madras records.
In the year 1684 Captain Hamilton relates that the
Siamese Envoys, sent to France visited London and
there concluded a Commercial treaty with our nation.
In the year 1685 M. Chaumont found an English
factory in Siam, the Chief of which appears to have
conformed to the custom of the country, prostrating
himself and taking off his shoes before the King of
Siam. In 1687 the Government of Fort St. George
appears to have led to the massacre of some English
settled at Mergui, and to the destruction of the
influence which many of them possessed in the ter-
ritories of the King of Siam. Before that fatal
time Hamilton says the English were so beloved
and favored at the Court of Siam that they had
places of trust conferred upon them, in both the
civil and military branches of the Government. In
1705 the Governor of Fort St. George addressed the
King of Siam to renew a commercial intercourse, and
in 1712 the King of Siam invited the English to make
a Settlement in Siam on the same [ terms j as had
been conceded to the Dutch. But Captain Hamilton
declares that in 1718 a Mr. Collet, a Governor of Fort
St, George sent an agent to annul the treaty of
London, and to make a new one detrimental to all
British Subjects except those employed by that
Governor. This account would show that the
vexatious system and heavy rate of duties which
have attended the trade of British Subjects in Siam
down to the present date were no more than what
one of our own authorities had introduced, for the
revised treaty stipulated, Hamilton says, that all
British subjects that had not Collett’s letter should*
their ship, which came to about £SOO for a ship of
300 tons, to sell their cargoes to whom they pleased,
but the money to have been expended with respect to
the advantage of the trade of that Kingdom. It was


said that little broad cloth was consumed by Siam and
that the sale of that commodity depended on China
and Japan. But if the statement of the Dutch, lading
forty ships yearly at one time in Siam, be true, no
doubt can be entertained of the value of this trade
and of its being equal, if under [ ? unmolested ] and
left to full and free operation, to employ annually
more than 4or 5 ships of moderate size. The Dutch
conducted so extensive a trade with Siam whilst there
existed a general liberty of commerce, which had
invited to Siam a great multitude of strangers of
different nations, but the father of Chao Naraya [nal
appears to have introduced the mischievous system
of monopolizing the trade and becoming the principal
merchant of the country, a system by which a few
years after, in Loubere’s time, the Dutch trade was re-
duced to 2 or 3 barks, and the richest foreigners,
particularly the Moors, forced to retire elsewhere.
Before the occupation of Prince of Wales Island
in 1786 Mr. Light and several other Country Trader s
made voyages to Siam, and that gentleman received
from the Siamese Government the title of Phya.
The Governor of that island had often suggested to
[thej Supreme Government the advantage of opening
a friendly intercourse with Siam, a measure which
was not adopted until the year 1821 when Mr. Crawfurd
was deputed at Bangkok as agent from the Most
Noble the Governor General. The knowledge which
that gentleman acquired of the state of parties at Siam,
of the disposition of the Court and of the habits and
customs of the people enabled him not only in his
situation of Resident at Singapore to improve several
favorable opportunities for facilitating and extending
the trade of British subjects with Siam, but to afford
to the late Mission such advice and information as
materially facilitated its duties. In the year 1823 Mr.
Gillies of the firm of Messrs. Morgan Hunter & Co. of
of Singapore proceeded to Bangkok and was soon after


followed by two other gentlemen of the same House,
Mr. Robert Hunter and Mr. J. Mallock, who obtained
the permission of the Phra Khlang to remain at the
capital, where the Mission found them in a house
belonging to the Ministers and close to his own resi-
dence. These Gentlemen had succeeded in a surpris-
ing degree in disarming the jealousy of the Siamese
officers and in conciliating the good will of the Phra
Khlang and of every class of inhabitants, and the Mis-
sion received from both of them on every occasion the
most cordial and friendly assistance and co-operation.
Indeed were it not for what these gentlemen com-
municated without reserve or hesitation of their
experience of the character of the Siamese officers, of
the objects and course of the trade, of the nature of
the difficulties imposed upon it, and of the means
[of overcoming them, the Mission by these gentle-
men with the liberality and politeness of English
merchants.
Any merchant visiting Siam ought to live on.
board ship and keep a shop there instead of taking a
house on shore. He must have a convenient ladder by
the gangway for people to get easily on board, and he
must take great care to behave extremely civilly to all
the Chinese and Siamese who may visit him, and not
appear offended with them whenever they go away with-
out purchasing, which they may frequently do. If they
are slighted or insulted there is little chance of their
returning or any of their friends coming to purchase
any thing. Anchor rather above or below the Phra
Khlang’s house, and as near to the opposite shore as
possible. All the shopkeepers have a very great aver-
sion to be seen purchasing from Europeans where they
may be seen by the Phra Khlang or his petty officers,
and this notwithstanding a general liberty to do so
may have been granted. Never give the Phra Khlang
or any other persons the most distant idea of the
description of goods you want to purchase, which will


prevent them from raising the price. Continue
purchasing quietly whenever you find any thing which
suits you. There are many Native Christians who go
on board without the least intention of purchasing,
merely to get presents ; and very often they do much
mischief by not only informing the Phra Khlang of
whatever they see, but by preventing the natives from
purchasing. They can never be of any service, and
with the exception of Piedada, Beneditti and Pascoal,
they are all so miserably poor that they cannot
purchase any thing. Never give credit in Siam unless
to the # King, Phra Khlang, or great officers, but
receive the money, or whatever commodity } r ou barter
for when you deliver your property. If it is difficult
to sell, it is 10,000 times more so to get the money
afterwards. A Oopjr of the mercantile part of the
treaty in Siamese and Chinese would be extremely
useful to hang up when the Shop is kept, for the in-
formation of the people. There are many people able
to purchase a whole case, and therefore it is advisable
to sell in cargoes, as well as cases, as may best suit
the buyer.
To the above directions the following observations
may be added. As far as the people are concerned,
there is a good deal of truth in Count Porbins remark
to Louis the 14th—“ Sire, le royaume de Siam ne
produit rien et ne consume rien.” Nature spontaneous-
ly and the Chinese produce every object of foreign
trade in Siam, The Siamese certainly cultivate paddy
and orchards, and manufacture some kinds of cloths
and silks. But they are content with the abundant
supply of rice and fruit with which nature has blessed
their country, and they in general prefer their own
cotton and silk manufacture to those of Great Britain,
not only as being stronger and capable of lasting
almost a whole life, but as requiring, in their opinion,
no washing, to which operation their clothes are very
rarely subjected. The dress of both sexes is so similar.


that it is often difficult to distinguish them. Both
wear a cotton or silk (Pha nung ) round the waist,
brought up between the legs, and fastened behind like
a Hindoo’s Dhotee. The representation of Siamese
women in the works of the early European travellers
do not exhibit them dressed in this manner and [ I ]
was informed that it was introduced at the time of the
Burmese siege of Yothia, in order to deceive the
assailants into a belief of a larger body of men being
among: the besieged. Both sexes also wear a narrow
O O
piece of China crape of the dimensions of an English
lady’s scarf Pha hom, Pha Saboric. The men, unless
in cold weather keep this scarf round the waist. The
women wear it some times like a scarf round the neck
and hanging over each bosom very carelessly and
sometimes they tie it tightly around or across the
bosom. At home most of the lower classes of the
women remove the crape and wear no covering above
the waist. The prevailing colours of this scarf among
the men are black and white, and among the women the
lower orders have it generally of black. There is a
peculiar pattern for each class of Siamese Officers. The
Princes and highest officers wear Surat Kinkhauhs or
Siamese Gold Cloths on public duty.
There is as yet a very limited demand in Siam for
English Broad Cloth (Saklat). Yellow for the King
and Priests; Scarlet, Green and particularly double
colours, that is scarlet on one side and green or blue
on the other, are most in demand. The consumption
of English woollens at Bangkok is estimated by
Mr. Hunter at about 700 pieces annually. The
King, Wangna and Phra Khlang are the principal
purchasers.
A taste for English Cottons is however rising in
Siam and as within the last year or two the importa-
tion has been excessive, the consumption it is to be
hoped will extend with the reduced prices. The
Chintzes Pha-lai vvilah or Pha chhip wilah are worn by


the principal chiefs there and particularly by the
women —quite unsaleable what are called Siam dresses.
Pha nung wilat also are unsaleable if they have borders
at the sides —they should have them at the two ends
only. Furniture chintz is of no use in Siam, Cambric
and Jaconet Menshies Pha hai Klooi small ’ sprigs of
gold or silver or plain are admired. Long cloths, as
well as plain muslins, are principally bought for the
purpose of being made into dresses for the Priests,
and dyed yellow. They cannot be of too great a
breadth. Shawls India Pha san or English Imitation
are used but they should be long as no Siamese will
accept of a square one for nothing.
Ordnance Pun Yai in great demand and old
cannon brings a price far be3 7 ond its value. Muskets,
Pun Khap Sila, are now not in such great demand
as they were 2or 3 years ago. A Pecul of sugar is the
usual price for a musket. Some recent importation
disappointed the Siamese, who have since made all
muskets offered for sale undergo a proof which scarcely
one in ten can stand. They load the piece with*
which often of course bursts the barrel in the firing.
They now prefer an old musket to 2 or 3 new ones.
* ears pierced for rings. Yet they admire jewellery
and common Ceylon jewels often find a ready and
profitable sale. Good English spectacles are in great
demand.
Sugar, Namtan Sai, is the principal article ex-
ported from Siam by European and American vessels,
and it has been said to be “ the cheapest and as good
as any ever seen. v The Chinese are the sole manu-
facturers and the produce may be increased to any
amount. The Mission found this article subject to an
inland duty of 2 sailings per pecul, which will of
course still be levied, and an export duty of 6 salungs
per pecul. As the collection of the duty is farmed for
300 catties or 30,400 Ticals (sic ! ) per annum, the net


annual produce of the sugar allowing for the profits and
embezzlements of the farmer, the produce may cer-
tainly be estimated at double the amount. The osten-
sible farmer is a poor Chinese named Khun Phithac
part of whose contract engages him to deliver supplies
of sugar to the King, Wangna and principal officers
at lower than the market rate. The real farmers are
said to be Krom Meun Soorin, Phya Siphiphut and
Tha Phra K, who take as much of the profit of the
farm as they can, leaving to the Chinese Khun Phithac
to meet in the best way he can the different requisi-
tions made upon him from time to time by the King,
Wangna and other officers for supplies of sugar at
reduced rates. The extent of such requisition
depends upon the number of articles purchased by
these personages, and they pay for almost all purchases
in sugar. To make up the losses upon such requisi-
tions Khun Phithac and the whole of his department
do every thing in their power to deceive and defraud
the foreign merchants. No person who has not been
at Bangkok can form any conception of the exertions
which are made by the Chinese farmer and his
Servants to weary out the patience of the foreign
merchant, and deceive him as to the quality and
quantity of the article, for which the contract may be
made, or order given by the King, Wangna &c. in his
favor. Day after day the same boats with bad sugar
are brought to the vessel and declared to be other
boats newly arrived from the sugar districts; and the
most impudent and pertinacious attempts are made to
induce the Commander of the Foreign Vessel to receive
sugar of an inferior quality, or with short weight.
Sugar forms the great article of barter from the King
to the lowest officer. Almost everything is paid for
in Sugar and 1060 Peculs of it were delivered to the
Envoy among the returns for the presents taken
by him. The following were given to the Envoy
as the prices and amount of the four descriptions of
sugar.


No. 1 from to 8 per pecul produce 30,000 exported 20,000
„2 „ 6 to 7 Do. Do. Do. 0
> 70,000 Do. 30,000
„3 „ 5 to 6 Do. Do. Do. J
„ 4 very brown from 2\ to 3 Ticals Do. Do. 20,000 Do. 20,000
A great portion of the last is conveyed to China, and
it appeared to the Mission from its quality and very
low price to be likely to answer for exportation to
Europe for the distillers or manufacturers.
Nak’honsh’haisi on the Thachin River and Bang-
plasoi, Petrii and Chantabun on the East Coast of the
Gulf of Siam are the principal places of manufacture,
and there the article is said to be procurable at
much lower prices than at Bangkok. The Mission
endeavoured to introduce into the treaty a distinct
clause permitting British merchants to proceed
themselves to these places to procure their own sup-
plies of sugar, but after much discussion the Siamese
Ministers declared, that the terms of the treaty would
admit of British Merchants deputing to those districts
any Chinese or Siamese subjects to procure their
supplies and that no difficulty whatever should be
interposed to prevent British Merchants from making
such arrangements. Sugar is sold by the Chinese
steelyard and pecul, but upon examining the measure
carefully, the pecul weight was found to be only 129£
instead of 133g lbs.
Rice is the most abundant production of Siam.'
There are two kinds one called the Garden Paddy or
Rice Khao pluek or Khao san, m suen, which is the
growth of some very favorable and well cultivated
spots near Bangkok and the other called the country
Paddy or Rice Khao yluek or Khao Na Meuang being
the growth of the interior and other parts. The price
of the former description of Rice is 24 to 32 ticals per
coyan, and of the latter 15 to 20 ticals per coyan, an ( f
the usual export duty is 8 Ticals per pecul. Rice is
sold by the Siamese measure, a Thanan choopah or


cocoanut shell, 21 of which go to a measuie or basket,,
and 100 measures to a Siamese coyan, equal to form
25 to 27 China peculs in weight.
The Government of Siam do not admit ol a free
exportation * quality and abundance of its teak. The
finest is brought down the Menam in large rafts from
Eaheng on the borders of Laos, and these xafts
may be bought for very moderate prices. The Por-
tuguese consul purchased 300 logs of from 5 to (>
sailings each. There are other timbers besides
teak, of very fine quality for the purposes of ship
building and in great abundance. The Portuguese
Consul purchased the whole of the masts and yards
for a ship of 500 tons burthen for only 1300
Ticals. The usual mode of selling timber is by
measurement of the length in Siamese fathoms cubits
and spans, and of the circumference in Kams or fists
one placed over the other. The great abundance of
timber at Bangkok and the rise of the tide there fiom
18 to 20 feet during spring tides induced the Mission
to believe that were some proper shipwrights, Parsees
from Bombay or Burmese from Bangkok, taken to
teach the Chinese and Siamese, feu* places in the
world could offer greater advantages for ship building.
The Mission therefore used much exertion to
persuade the Siamese Ministers to insert a clause in
the Treaty specially engaging the Siamese Govern-
ment to afford facilities to British Subjects desirous of
building vessels at Bangkok. The Ministers declined
however to insert such a clause but declaied that
should the treaty be ratified by the Governor General
and friendly relations permanently established be-
tween the Siamese and British nations, no difficulties
should be interposed to prevent British subjects from
undertaking Shipbuilding at Bangkok.
Cocoa nut oil, Namman Maphrao, would form a
good article of export from Siam. There is a great


abundance of it, and the usual price of the Ist sort is
from 7 to 8 ticals per pecul and of the 2nd sort from
to 64 per pecul. The annual produce is said to be
50,000 peculs of which 20,000 are exported. The
usual price of this article at Penang and Singapore
has of late years been as high as 18 and 20 Sp.
Dollars per pecul.
The Benzoin of Siam, or rather Laos Kam-yan is
cleaner whiter and much finer in appearance than that
of Sumatra, and in consequence of the favorable report
which was first made of it Messrs. Hunter and Mallock
bought up a good quantity. Subsequent advices
from England however informed them that the
Chemists of London had discovered it not to be the
same substance or of equal value as the Benzoin of
Sumatra. The price at Bangkok was at one time so
high as 120 ticals per pecul, but it has lately fallen to
50 ticals.
Of Gamboge Rong we may only mention that
there are two kinds, one in large cakes, and the other
cleaner and more valuable in long round pieces,
having been filled in bamboos. The usual price of
the former is from 4*o to 50 ticals per pecul, and of
the latter from 50 to GO Ticals. The annual produce
of the whole is estimated at 250 or 300 peculs. A
muster of this article brought to Calcutta has been
much admired.
The quantity of Tin Dihuk annually brought to
Bangkok is estimated at 10,000 peculs of which only
5000 are exported. Ligor, Ch’hoomphon and other
places on the west coast of the Gulf of Siam send up
their tin to the capital. The produce of Junkceylon
is seldom sent up but upon special requisition. The
Chief of Phoonga with an Agent there on the part of
the King, disposes of the produce of Junkceylon in
the direction of Penang and the Coast of Coromandel.
32 ticals per Ct. is the usual price at Bangkok.


Of Ivory Gna Ghhang we may observe, that the
annual produce is estimated at 800 peculs, and that
the usual price is 150 ticals per pecul of 2 teeth and
8 ticals less for every additional tooth required to
make up the pecul. A good many rhinoceros horns
No ret may be had at Bangkok where a curious one
sometimes produces so high a price as 400 ticals for
the China market.
The annual produce of sticklac Khrang of 3
qualities is estimated at 15000 peculs and the usual
prices from 14 to 15, from 13 to 14 and from 7 to 8
ticals respectively. A muster of this article brought
to Calcutta has been much admired.
Black Pepper Phrik Thai is 11 or 12 ticals per
pecul and the produce 70,000 peculs. White pepper
Phrik Ton is 24 to 26 ticals per pecul and the produce
250 peculs. These prices with an export duty of 3
and 6 ticals per pecul prevented the British Merchant
from taking away this article, almost the whole of
which has hitherto been reserved by the King and
Court for their trade to China.
There is an abundance of salt Kleua in Siam of
the finest quality. At least 2000 Coyans might be
annually exported, from 3 to 6 ticals per coyan of 25
peculs.
The finest cotton Fai in Siam is the produce of
some district on the confines of Tavoy near Menam.
A muster of this brought to Calcutta has been much
admired. The annual produce of three qualities of this
article is estimated at 50,000 peculs. The usual price
of the first is from 17 to 22 ticals and of the 2nd. from
15 to 18 ticals per pecul. There is a 3rd. quality sold
with the seed for to 7 ticals per pecul.
Cow and buffaloes hides Nang Ngooa, JS ang
Khwai may be had to an extent of 30,000 at the rate
of from to 4 ticals per pecul.


There are 3 qualities of Cardamoms Sak-Kra-van
almost the whole of which is carried to China. The
first sells for 280 ticals per pecul and there are about
200 peculs of it produced. The 2nd. for 200 ticals,
and there are about 300 peculs of which about 50
peculs are consumed in the country. The 3d sells for
about 150 ticals per pecul and of this there is about
the same quantity produced and consumed in the
country as of the 2d. quality.
Bees wax Khi pheung may be had in Siam of a
good quality and sometimes cheap. The quantity
annually brought to Bangkok was estimated at 250 to
300 peculs and the usual price said to be from 50 to
100 ticals per pecul.
Besides a little gold Thong Kham and Iron Lek
from the West coast of the Gulf of Siam, some Copper
Thong cleng and Lead Dihook dan from Laos and Tin*
* * » # * *
Bengal rum might be very profitably carried to Bang-
kok and might be made from its cheapness and better
quality to throw out of use entirely the pernicious
spirit Shumshoo Lao Chek , of which so large a quant-
ity is now consumed in the country that the Excise
farms upon it yield to the Government a revenue of
3,448 Catties or 275,840 Ticals per annum. The
Chinese population admit that no respectable Siamese
is addicted to drinking. Very few however of the
Chinese have ever been persuaded to taste European
wines or Cherry Brandy.
A British Merchant or Commander should always
insist upon transacting his business directly with the
Phra Khlang, who will be found much more tractable
and moderate than his subordinate officers, to wdiom
however he is very fond of referring the foreign trade.
The best hours for seeing the Phra Khlang are in the
morning and evening between 6 and 9 o’clock. He as
well as every other Minister attends the King twice in


the 24 hours, between 8 or 9 and 1 or 2 o’clock. Most
of the public business is transacted at the night
audiences, and the Phra Khlang if at home is generally
bathing or sleeping between 1 and 5 o’clock in the
afternoon.
Respecting the navigation of the Menam the
Mission collected the following information.
Mandelslo in 1639 relates “That channel of this
river which is most commodious for barks or vessels is
that which lies most E. at thirteen degrees and a half
elevation, but what makes it useless is that there lies
a shelve a league in length or better, at the mouth of
the river, which at low water holds not above 5 or 6
foot water. At high water it holds 15 or 16 foot, and
in September, October and November 17 or 1.8 foot.
Vessels of great burthen ordinarily stay in the road two
leagues from the shelve, where having at no time less
than 5 or 6 fathom water they ride secure.
Tachard in 1685 states that the river at its mouth
is * the result tended to confirm what we had privately
learnt at Bangkok, that the Siamese pilots are
instructed to navigate foreign vessels through the
worst channel over the bar. All our enquiries led us
to believe that at no time of the year is the water
over the bar so much as 19 or 20 feet, but that in
the Spring and in the months of September October
and November it may sometimes be so high as 17 feet
and during the rest of the year from 12 to 15.
The bar itself consists of a narrow strip of hard
sand, about 5 or 600 feet wide, and on this some
Chinese junks are annually lost but on both sides of
this strip and particularly towards the land, the
ground is soft mud in which a vessel may lie for an} r
time 3 or 4 feet deep, or through which it may warp
without the smallest chance of injury. The nature
and periodical changes of the tides in Siam are very
little known to European navigators. At the bar we


found most water on the 3d. or 4th. night after the
change of the moon, the day tides were inconsiderable*
and at Bangkok we often observed but one tide
during the 24 hours, and very often it was not of
sufficient force to cause the vessel to swing to it.
Still it would be prudent for vessels proceeding to
Bangkok to moor off the town, as lying at single
anchor subjects a vessel to sheer about the river,
and to damage some of the floating houses on each
side, any accident of which nature will involve the
Commander in very unpleasant discussions with the
Phra Khlang and the owners of the houses for com-
pensation. Within the bar however the Menam is
certainly one of the finest streams in the world. The
Mission Brig in working up repeatedly came so close
to the banks as to force the branches of trees into the
stern windows, and to excite much alarm that she
would ground if the lead had not shown 5, 6 or 7
fathoms of water. With the exception of only one
place, where a bank has been formed bjr the old Dutch
store house (Fort Amsterdam) having fallen into the
stream, the navigation from Paknam to Bangkok is
free from all danger or and the map of the
river given in Kaempfer’s History of Japan appears
extremely correct. There is a small channel however
not marked in that map, through which a small boat
may pass in some seasons of the year * 5 minutes.
The lower entrance of the channel is at Paklaat on the
right bank of the * Members of the Mission
o
were forced to take shelter in bed at sunset from
these troublesome animals.
Tables of Siamese Coins, Weights and Measures.
Coins and Currency.
2124 Bia hoi or Cowries 1 Phai This was formerly
a very small Silver coin
now very seldom seen.


2 Phai 1 Song phai or double phai.
This coin also is seldom
seen.
t
4 Phai or 2 Song phai 1 Phooang.
2 Phooang 1 Sailing or as the Portu-
guese call it Mayam.
4 Sailings or Mayams 1 Ngun or Silver Bat or as
the Portuguese call it tical
—nearly Sa. Rs.
4 Bat or Ticals 1 Tumling or Chinese tale,
♦ 6 *
an imaginary coin.
20 Tumling or tale ... 1 Ch’hang or Catty or 80
Bat or Ticals.
50 Ch’hang or Catties ... 1 Hap or pecul 4000 Bat
or ticals.
Accounts are always kept in Catties, Tumlings,
Ticals, Salungs and Phooangs, but it should be remem-
bered that the Chinese pecul of 100 Catties is never
used in the account of Government. If the coin be-
come whiter in the fire it is taken as good silver—if
darker or black it is considered base.
The Rupee and copper pice are not current at
Bangkok but the Sp. Dollars, called Ngun Rujen . is
readily taken at an exchange of Salungs per Sp.
Dollar.
Measure.
12 Niou or thumbs breadth 1 Kheup or Span.
2 Kheup 1 Sok or Cubit
2 Sok 1 Khen or Arms length
from the thumb to armpit
4- Sok ... 1 Wa or fathom equal to
6 feet 6 inches English.
20 Wa 1 Sen .
100 Sen 1 Yot or Siamese league^


By the above land, cloth and ships are measured.
Timber is measured by fathoms in length, and Kam or
fists one over the other in circumference.
The timber fathom is said to be 4 inches less than
the above, which was taken from a careful measure of
the King’s Rod and found to be 78 inches. The Kam
is above 5 inches.
Weights.
16 Tumling or Chinese Tale 1 Ch’hang or Chinese
Catty.
100 Oh’hang or Catties ... 1 Hap or Chinese pecnl
which ought to equal
lbs. English, but
upon examination it was
found to be only
lbs. The Siamese pecnl
is subdivided into 50
catties but the Chinese
is that in most general
use except in money
accounts.
Measures
Salt, Paddy and Rice measure as established
by the King.
4 Phai mui or handfuls 1 Thanan, Choopah, or
cocoa nut shell,
21 Thanan 1 Thang, para, measure
or basket.
100 Thang 1 Kyen or Coyan, equal
to from 25 to 27 P.
weight,
2 Thangs or baskets are allowed to every Coyan of
paddy and to every Coyan of rice. Salt, paddy
and rice measures are often used by private
agreement.


25 Thanans, Choopasses or
Cocoa nut shells ... 1 Thang, para, measure
or basket.
80 Thang 1 Koyen or Coyan equal
to from 20 to 22 peculs
weight.
The Penang Coyan is equal to 800 Gantoms or
3200 Choopahs.
The Siamese Coj T an is not more than 2000 or
2100 Choopahs.
Shumshoo or Wine Measure.
20 Thanans or Choopahs or
Cocoa nut shells 1 Thang.
4 Thang 1 Hap or Pecul.
Oil is sometimes sold by the same measure as
paddy and rice—generally by weight at the rate of
about 100 Choopahs or Thanan to the Hap or Pecul.
We shall give some account of the principal
officers of the Court of Siam. In the character of the
present King of Siam we have every ground for look-
ing forward to a continuance of friendly relations with
the Government of Siam. He is the same person
whom Mr. Crawfurd describes as Krom Chet, the eldest
son of the late Monarch by an inferior wife. His
succession to the throne was effected without the
slightest bloodshed and with the full consent of all
the other Princes, who considered him much more
qualified to the throne. Asiatic States being ill
regulated and rendered uncertain by the caprice or
partiality of the Kings themselves, the most advanced
in age is preferred, or rather it is force which always
decides it. The people* to the Royal family, and
not to a certain prince of the Royal family. The
; present King is now about 39 years of age, and the
actual personal interest which he takes in all affairs
of the kingdom, has rendered him generally popular.


He is not so extravagant, superstitious or addicted to
to women as the late Monarch was, and the office
which he filled in the time of that indolent Monarch,
of superintending the foreign and commercial Depart-
ments of the State has put him in possession of a
great deal of practical information respecting the real
interests of his country, and the power and resources
of the British Government. From all that the late
Mission saw and heard of the King, it had no hesita-
tion in considering him as the first person in the
Court, in talent and intelligence. His Majesty early
saw the advantage of entering into a treaty with the
British Government, and his sentiments regulated the
conduct of P. Krom Meun Soorin, as Avell as the
demeanour of the Phra Khlang, who always returned
from the Palace with an increase of politeness and
complaisance towards the Envoy. His Majesty im-
mediately upon his accession liberated the whole of his
father’s wives and concubines, contrary to the practice
upon every former occasion when the successor to the
throne took possession of the women as well as the
estate of his father. He directed also the pecuniary
allowances fixed by the late Monarch for his principal
wife and eldest son Chao Fa to be continued, showing
in these two instances a pi’opriety and generosity of
conduct which have gained him an unusual pro-
portion of respect and reverence from the people of
Siam. His first name was Chao Thap Prince Army,
having been born on the day that his father had given
orders to assemble an army against the Burmese.
But this name according to the customs of the Siamese
is now r never mentioned, and he is knowm only as
Chao Chivit, the Lord of Life, Wang Looung, Lord of
the Palace, or more generally Phra Phoothi Chao yu
hua, the God Phut or Boodh who dwells over every
head. Almost every object that the Mission succeeded
in bringing to the notice of the King it accomplished.
The difficulty was to persuade or oblige the Ministers
to communicate our opinion and wdshes to His Majesty


The first and principal object of any future Mission to
Siam ought to be directed towards altering this system
of the Minister being the only channel of communica-
tion and of effecting a direct intercourse with the King.
His Majesty has several children by inferior wives, and
it is supposed that he will nominate a Daughter of tho
Raja of Ligor by whom he lias lately had a son, his
principal wife. The Queen of Siam however does not,
like [ the queen ] of Ava, possess any influence in the
State, nor is she known to interfere in any matter
beyond the domestic arrangements among the females
in the interior of the Palace. It may here be added,
that the White Elephants of Siam also neither possess
the same high rank in the state, nor is treated with
the same magnificence and veneration as the white
elephants of Ava, There are two animals of this des-
cription now at Bangkok, and although the title of
Chao Phya Pheu-uk is bestowed upon them, they have
no high officers to attend upon them nor are they
lodged in any splendour or served in vessels of any
value. They are viewed by the lowest Siamese with-
out any adoration or even any extraordinary respect.
The personage next in rank to the King is the
Wang-na who is the same Prince styled Krom Sak
during: Mr. Crawfurd’s Mission. He is uncle to the
present King and nephew to the Raja of Ligor. We
have already given some account of the nature of this
office and of the characters of the person now filling it.
It is difficult to denominate this officer by any term
known to Europeans.
# * * * # *
The term Wang-na has been translated Heir
Apparent but the real signification is “ Front of the
Palace ” meaning that this officer is the first ami
nearest to the Place. During some reigns there has
been an officer of very nearly equal rank and con-
sideration styled “Wanj-lang” or “ Rear of the Palace.”


But the existence of that office, as well as that of
Wang-na seems to depend upon the will of the King.
The late Monarch maintained neither. During some
reigns also, but only apparently during a minority,
there have been two other officers of very high rank,
named Chao Phya Sudham montri and Chao Phya,
Sudhama-dhiroj, who were superior in rank to the
other Ministers, and a kind of guardians of the King’s
person and who could approach him at all hours.
The other title of the Wang-na is Phra Banthoon,
or the Sacred First Petitioner, he being considered
as the person to whom all petitions are to be sub-
mitted in the first instance. The next persons in the
State of Siam are the twe Princes of the blood, Chao
Krom Meun Soorin, who presides over the foreign
and commercial affairs, particularly over the Phra
Khlang’s Department and Chao Krom Meun-Ram, who
superintends the judicial and military departments.
They are brothers and second cousins of the King.
The Mission was introduced to both these Princes,
and at the Palace of Chao Krom Meun Soorin the Envoy
and six ministers met to discuss and finally settle the
Treaty of Alliance. The Prince himself presided over
and regulated these deliberations, and on every occasion
His Highness displayed such intelligence, candour,
moderation and princely courtesy as surprised and
commanded the respect and gratitude of the Members
of the Mission, who earnestly beg to recommend
that some special token of the Governor General’s
acknowledgment of such conduct be transmitted from
Bengal to that place. There are in the whole nearly
3000 Princes in Siam, Most of them receive some
small stipends from the Crown, but very few of
them possess any office in the State. Little can be
said in favour of the character or conduct of many of
these Princes. They engage in trade and some of
them in trade of the lowest kind. The Mission saw
o«e Prince, a tinman, whose person, according to the


Siamese law of Debtor and Creditor Messrs. Hunter
and Mallock once detained in their own house in
consequence of his breach of faith and attempt to
evade payment; and we heard an anecdote of another
Prince who collected the duties upon Sapan wood and
sugar. In fact he may be more properly considered
as the Farmer of both these sources of revenue. He
is said to be a great personal favorite with the
King, and he will most probably succeed his brother
as Phra Khlang in the event of tire death or removal
to a higher office of the latter. As he possesses much
more intelligence, energy and courtesy than his bro-
ther, he will most probably make a much better Phra
Khlang. The characters of Phya Ch’hoduck and Phya
Chula, as well as of the subordinate officers Batsithi,
Luang Keoyat or Pomat, and the Native Christian In-
terpreters have been given before. All letters by sea
are carried to the Phra Khlang, who exercises also a
superintendence over all places on the East Coast of the
Gulf of Siam, from Paknam to the frontiers of Cochin
China, the Governors of which places transmit their
reports directly to that Minister. All letters that
arrive at Bangkok overland are carried to the Depart-
ment of the Kalahom. In all future communications
with the Court of Siam the Mission would suggest the
following course to be adopted. The address from the
Governor General to the. King of Siam should be a
very short and complimentary one, referring to another
letter from the Secretary to Government in the Politi-
cal Department which last letter should declare the
objects of the communication, and these cannot be
given in too great a detail. Translations in the Portu-
guese language only should accompany the letter, in
which care must be taken to enumerate and describe
each particular article of the presents, that may be
transmitted at the same time. The translations from
the Persian or Malay languages into the Siamese
appeared to the Mission to be very inaccurately
made. ♦


The next Minister to the Phra Khlang is Chao
Phya Thorama, or as he is often styled Krom Wang.
He is a kind of Lord Chamberlain or Lord Steward,
and exercises superintendence over the king’s house-
hold, and those residing within the very* of the Palace-
The present incumbent was lately one of the Phra
Khlang’s Department and styled Phya-Thip-Kosa.
He is an old man, possessing apparently but little
influence in the State, and the Mission saw him and
his deputy and Assistant Phya or Ok Phya Raj Mon
thien, and Phya or Ok Phya Bam-rophak, only at the
conferences which took place between the Envoy
and the Privy Council. The sth Minister of State is
Chao Phya Phollo-thep or as he is often styled
Krom na. He is the officer at the head of the Land
Revenues of the country, and the collector general of
the taxes. The present incumbent is an old infirm
man, reputed to be extremely rich, and one of his
daughters is the Phra Khlang’s principal wife. The
Minister on a certain day annually stands on one leg
during an hour and whilst a field is ploughed around
him. If he fails to stand the allotted time he is
abused and beaten by the populace, and if successful
he exercises all the powers of the King during that
day and receives on his own account whatever customs
or other [revenues] are paid in on that day. This
absurd ceremony has been substituted for the ancient
custom which required the Kings of Siam, as well as
the Emperors of China, to descend and hold the
plough with their own hands once a year. The
Mission saw this Minister and his deputy Phya or
Ok Phya Phracha chip only at the conference
between the Envoy and the Privy Council.
The 6th Minister of State is Chao Phya Yomarat
or as he is often styled Krom meu-ung. He is the
chief Criminal Judge of the Kingdom, and all mur-
ders, thefts and robberies committed,as well at Bang-
kok, as at the other parts of the Kingdom under the


jurisdiction of the Chakri, Kalahom and Phra Khlang
are referred to this officer. The present incumbent
appears a quiet, humble character, possessing little or
no influence in affairs of State. The Mission saw him
and his deputy Phya or Ok Phya Eat Eong-Muang
only at the conferences between the Envoy and the
Privy Council.
The Ministers of the Wangna are as follows.
Phya or Okphya Chasen similar to the King’s Chakri
and his Deputy Phya or Okphya Rajjotha.
Phya or Okphya Kalahom , and his deputy Fhya or Ok
phya Sena phubet.
Phya or Ok phya Monthian thiban similar to the
King’s Tharama.
Phya or Ok phya Vichhaiinira similar to the
King’s Yomorat.
Phya or Ok phya and his deputies Phya Wisoot Kosa,
and Phya similar to the King’s Phra Khlang and his
deputies Phya Phiphut and Phya Si phi phut.
The Mission had much communication with Phya
Kray and Phya Wisoot.
Both of them had visited Penang and other
countries to the East and both of them displayed a
proportionable superiority of intelligence to the other
Ministers of the King. These Ministers as well as
some other of the Wangna’s petty officers—Radsithi
the Port Captain, Luang Sunton a Moorman, and
Khun Chit—are joined with the Phra Khlang’s
Department. Ok phya or Ok ya is taken from the
Cambodian title Ok-neaa, and it is used only in the
letters and public writings of the deputies and
Assistants of the King’s principal Ministers and of
the Ministers and their Deputies belonging to the
Wangna. Ok-phra , Ok Khun , Ok Mean &c. cited by


the old European travellers are now out of vogue.
The following is a list of the Sianese titles now con-
ferred by the King of Siam.
Ist. Chao —a Prince.
2d. Chao Phya —Besides the Principal Ministers and
a few other of the highest officers at Bangkok,
this title has been conferred upon the Governor
of only two Provinces, Ligor and Chantabun.
3d. Ok-pkya or Okya —This official rank has been
before explained.
4th. Phya —Besides many officers at Bangkok, this
title is conferred upon most of the Governors of
Provinces, who are styled Phya tSalang, Phya
Choomphon, Phya Soongkhla &c.
sth. Phra —By this term all priests are designated ancT
yet it is a civil Title also conferred upon many
officers at Bangkok, as Phra Wis 'd Rosa (! ), Phra
Lacon &c. and upon the Governors of districts,
as Phra Tukoa pr, Phra Tukoa thong &c,
6th. Luang or Chiom. The second is more respect-
able than the first and is used only by an
inferior to a Luang whose title is most exten-
sively conferred. It is very common however
to see one of this rank whipped.
7th. Khun or Mome. The 2d. term here also is said
to be more respectful than the first. Most of
the Native Christian Interpreters hold this title.
8 th. Meun.
Nai. This term is often applied to the
chiefs of a Department as well as given to an
officer like a centurion.
The Mission has collected a number of Diction-
aries, Vocabularies, Historical and other works in the
Siamese language, respecting which it may be found.


by learning that ilia, according to the accent, is a
horse, a dog or to come, Seeua a mat, a tiger, a dress
or clever, and Kao, rice, mountain, white, news and to
enter.
This paper cannot be closed without some endea-
vour to submit to the notice of Government, and to
do justice to the conduct of those with whom it was
the good fortune of the late Envoy to Siam to be con-
nected. To the sound sense and judgment, and the
dispassionate mind which Captain H. Macfarquhar
applied to every question, as well as to the cordial
and friendly assistance which he afforded on every
occasion, the Envoy feels deeply indebted. Mr. Acting-
Assistant S.* Harris not only gratuitously assisted
the Envoy as an Amanuensis, but took pains to
acquire a knowledge of * Ligor and the Phra Khlang
were afraid to let him administer to their children
until they had seen him first take such medicines
fearlessly.
To Captain G. Sutherland also the Envoy is much
obliged for his constant attentions and for the great
care which he took on every occasion to prevent any
of the crew of the Guardian from giving offence to the
Siamese.
The escort of sepoys also, under Mer Soobavey
Subadar having been selected from the same regiment
as that to which the Envoy belongs, showed at all
times a most pleasing interest in the success of the
Mission under several awkward circumstances, and
particularly on the voyage from Ligor to Bangkok
when the Rajah of Ligor’s followers were discovered to
have laid in salted and pickled pork as sea provisions
the whole of the sepoys conducted themselves with*
the conduct of sepoys Shaick Bannoo Shaick Kascar
Ally, Shaik Maddar Bux Ist and Syed Noquedeen, who


volunteered to convey the Envoys dispatches to Mar-
taban and Tavoy, and who proceeded to those places
and returned from there over a difficult and most un-
healthy country, in company only of some Siamese and
Peguers, with whose language they were wholly un-
acquainted. On their return to Bangkok these were
all attacked by a fever which nearly carried them to
their graves.
( Signed ) H. BURNEY.
Envoy to the Court of Siam.
Fort William *
2d. Deer. 1826.
* There follow Burney’s notes and explanations of
the various articles of the treaty. These have already
been printed.


FORT WILLIAM 22d December 1826.
No. 3.
In this separate paper it is proposed to discuss
the questions relating to the local interests of Prince
of Wales Island, and to report the proceedings of the
Mission with reference to the King of Queda and the
Malay States on the Peninsula of Malacca.
Much difference of opinion prevails among the
public officers to the Eastward with respect to the
origin and nature of the relations subsisting between
those States and the Empire of Siam. While some
maintain that the present state of things has been
produced by an undue aggression of power on the part
of Siam, others are willing to acknowledge her inter-
ference to be founded on ancient rights and obligations.
The question is one of fact and history, and not, as
it has been too much treated, one of speculation *
and argument. The commencement of authentic
history among the Malays is considered only to be
dated from the introduction of Mahometanism, and the
late Dr. Leyden has translated a work of character
among the Malays, the “ Sejara Malaya ” or Malay
Annals, which comprise a compilation of the most
popular traditions existing among that people. The
Portuguese historians had considered the Peninsula of
Malacca to be the original country of the Malays, and
had attributed the foundation of the City of Malacca
to a Javan Chief, who after receiving an asylum from a
King of Singapore murdered him and took possession
of his throne, from which he was subsequently driven
out by a King of Siam, whose son-in-law and
vassal the deceased was. But later Dutch authors
on the authority of Malayan books of character,
have proved that the original country of the Malaya
was Menangeabow in the interior of Sumatra, whence
a colony passed through Palembang on the same


Island to the extremity of the Malay Peninsula, and
founded the City of Singapore about the year 11G0,
and that in 1252, a King of Singapore, being hard
pressed by the forces of a King of Maja-pahit in J a va,
retired to the Northward and afterwards to the western
Coast of the Peninsula, where in the following year
he founded a new City to which he gave the name of
Malacca. The indigenous inhabitants of the Penin-
sula are supposed to be a species of woolly headed
negroes, some of which race are now occasionally to
be seen. The above mentioned Malay Annals confirm
this account of the migration of the Malays and of the
origin of Malacca, but state some important circum-
stances regarding the former possessors of the Malay
Peninsula, which circumstances have heen omitted in
an account of the early Malayan Establishments on
the Peninsula compiled by an officer belonging to the
Establishment of Prince of Wales Island. The Malay
Annals declare that previous to the arrival of the
Malays on the Peninsula some relations subsisted bet-
ween Siam and the Chiefs of the Island of Bintang.
That at that time there was a City of some extent
with a fort on the banks of the river Binding in the
vicinity of Perak, and another country and fort up the
river of Johor bearing a Siamese name, Khlang
Khian, or place of the emerald, and defended by
Siamese troops ; that the land of Siam in ancient times
Avas named Seheri Navi and had all the regions under
the wind (the phrase familiarly employed by the
Malays to denote their own countries) dependent
on it, and that formerly Pahang A\ r as an ex-
tensive country dependent on Siam. The Mission
has not yet had an opportunity of examining some
historical works which it obtained at Bangkok in the
Siamese language, but Lieut. Low states that books in
his possession mention that Queda was originally
colonized by the Siamese, and early governed by a
Siamese race, which had been made to acknowledge
the supremacy of Siam until the introduction of


Islamism, That a Raja of Queda is afterwards noticed
as one of the tributaries of Ligor, and that although
the race has now become mixed by the arrival of
Malays from other countries, there is not a respectable
and well informed Native of Queda who will attempt
to deny, that previous to the introduction of Maho-
metanism his country was exclusively inhabited by
the Siamese race, who were worshippers of Boodh or
some other Hindoo Deity. The only knowledge which
has been published in Europe regarding the early
history of the Siamese is that obtained by M. Loubere,
who says that it is full of fables and that it does not
ascend very high with any character of truth. The
Siamese epoch begins from the death of Sommona
Kodom in the year 544 before Christ. The first King
of Siam began his reign in the of Christ 756, and
kept his court at Chay Pappi Mahanakon, a place the
situation of which is unknown. The 11th King re-
moved the capital to Tasoo Nagora Louang the
situation of which also is unknown. In the year 1187
the 23rd. King removed his capital to Lakhontay in
about Lat. 20° and afterwards to Pipeli or Phriphri.
The situation of this last city in about Lat. 13°. 20"
and immediately contiguous to the Malay Peninsula,
must have enabled Siam at that time to overlook
the whole of the Malay States. The 27th King of
Siam began in 1350 to build the city of Si-a-yoo-tha-ya
where he fixed his capital. M. Loubere does not
state whether the Siamese historians mention early
connexion between Siam and the Malay States, but
according to the Malaj 7 Annals, the influence of
the 2d. King of Malacca and Bth Malay King
Sultan Mahomed Shah, who ascended the throne
in 1276 and reigned 57 years, and who first
embraced the Mahomedan religion, extended over the
islands*of Lengen and Bintang, together with Johore,
Pahang, Queda and Perak, the whole of which acquired
the appellation of Malaya, and that it was only ten
years before the foundation of the city of Si-a-yoo-tha


ya in the year of Christ 1340, that the Siamese
first began to interfere with the Government of
Malacca which was then under its sixth King
Sultan Mozuffar Shah. A King of Siam being-
jealous of the growing power of Malacca invaded
the country, and in a second expedition laid siege
to the capital, where his armies were entirely
repulsed. The 7th King of Malacca Sultan Mansur
Shah, who ascended the throne in 1374 appears
to have deputed an Embassy to the King of China
as well as one to the King of Siam, and with
respect to his successor Sultan Ala-wa-eddin, who
ascended the throne in 1447 Mr. Marsden states
that during his reign of 30 years nothing parti-
cular is recorded, but there is reason to believe
that his country during some part of that time
was under the power of the Siamese. The Malay
Annals confirm the first part of what Mr. Marsden
states, as with exception of a war with the King-
dom of Aru in Sumatra, they give frivolous
accounts only of Sultan Ala-wa-eddin’s discussions
with the police of Malacca, but they make no
mention whatever of Siam during this monarch’s
reign ; and Mr. Marsden does not cite the grounds
or authority upon which he believes Malacca to have
submitted at this time to the power of the Siamese.
In 1509 Sultan Mahomed Shah the 9th and last
King of Malacca succeeded in repelling an attack
which a Rajah of Ligor had been ordered by
the King of Siam to make against Pahang. This
had been called an aggression on the part of the
King of Siam, although the Malay Annals relate
that Pahang was formerly dependent on Siam and that
its Chief spoke the Siamese language at the time
Sultan Mansur Shah of Malacca had attacked and
possessed himself of it. The Portuguese conquered
Malacca in 1511 and drove the above mentioned
Sultan Mahomed Shah to Johor, to the extremity
of the Peninsula. At the time Alonzo de Albu


querque took Malacca he received there an Embassy
from the King of Siam, who is said to have
rejoiced to see his quarrel revenged, though by
another hand, and who six years afterwards, agreed
to an application which an Ambassador from the
King of Portugal made to him, to send people to
inhabit Malacca, that the Moors might be expelled
from it. In 1523 however some Portuguese Envoys
deputed to China were seized and confined at Canton,
and the Emperor offered to release and hear them
if the Portuguese would restore Malacca to its
King, who was declared to be subject to China.
Whether this pretension on the part of the Celestial
Empire was founded on the Mission sent there by
Mansur Shah, the former King of Malacca, or on the
connection which appears always to have subsisted
between China and Siam, does not appear. But the
Portuguese Government of Malacca never treated any
of the Malayan States on the Peninsula as subject to
Siam, with the exception latterly of Patani, They
never felt any hesitation, even at the time they
cultivated the most friendly relations with Siam, to
attack and chastise these States. In 1517 they
accepted the offer of a King of Pahang to pay
yearly tribute to the King of Portugal. In 1523
they laid waste Pahang and Patani in 1523, 1537
and 1683 they attacked Johore, in 1585 and 1603
they destroyed and subdued that State. In 1614*
they burnt the towns of Queda and Purlis, in
1613 a King of Pahang came to their assistance
with a force of 2000 men during one of the sieges of
Malacca by a King of Acheen, and in 1625 they
accepted the offer of a King of Perak to transfer to
Portugal the tributary payment which he had before
made to Acheen. Neither do the Dutch, after they
captured Malacca in 1642, appear to have treated any
of the States on the Peninsula as subject to Siam.
They early established factories at Johore and Perak
without reference to Siam, and blockaded Queda about


the year 1664*; and latterly they bound the Chiefs of
Rhio, Perak and Salangor© by Treaty to hold their
territories in vassalage of them. It is necessary to
state however, that from a period shortly after the
conquest of Malacca by the Portuguese to the year
1600 the Siamese were too much engaged in
other quarters to turn their attention to the Malay
Peninsula. In 1546 Siam was enaraged in wars
a O
with Laos. In 1548 Para Mandara, the Ist Burmese
King of Pegu, invaded Siam by a route passing close
to Queda and besieged the capital unsuccessfully.
In 1568 Siam was again invaded 1137 Chao Migrein,
the 2d Burma King of Pegu, who captured the
capital and rendered the Kingdom tributary. But in
1583 Siam revolted, and after frustrating repeated
attempts made by Pegu to replace her yoke, obtained
under Raja Api a decisive victory over the Peguers in
1599. Siam, after the ruin of Pegu, in 1600 is said
to have recovered her former power under the warlike
Raja Api, who conquered the countries of Cambodia,
Laos, Ligor, Tenasserim, Patani and several others.
Flores, who resided at Patani during the years
1612 and 1613, gives the above account of Raja Api’s
conquests, without naming the several other countries
that Prince subdued, but lie shows that an easy
and frequent communication existed at that period
between Queda and Patani, as some Dutch voyagers
had before found, and that Pahang was connected
with Patani. About the time of Raja Api, or shortly
after, the Portuguese complained against a Queen of
Patani to the King of Siam as her liege Lord, and
from the reign of that Prince the Malay States on the
♦ Darapier states that at Queda, Fulo Binding and other
places, where there was not sufficient trade to maintain
a factory, or convenient place to build a fort so as to
secure the whole trade, the Dutch used to send their
Guardships, which lying at the mouth of the rivers
deterred strangers from going there, and kept the petty
princes in awe of them. Vol. 2, p. 164, 173.


Peninsula appear to have begun to feel or recognize
in some degree the supremacy of Siam. The revolu-
tions which again occurred in Siam on the death of
Raja Api in 1605, and the occupation which was after-
wards found her by the revolt of Cambodia and Laos,
must have prevented the complete establishment of her
Dominion over these Malay States, for in 1613 we
find the kingdom of Johor, and six years after those of
Queda and Perak, conquered and laid waste by a King
of Acheen, The Portuguese however appear to have
assisted Rajah Api’s brother and successor the White
Prince, to recover several provinces which the Kings
of Ava and Pegu had taken from him. But two years
after the conquest of Queda by the King of Acheen in
1621, Commodore Beaulieu visited Acheen and the
Lancavy Island, from which last he opened a com-
munication with the King of Queda, and the Frecnh
officers whom he sent to the collected the follow-
ing intelligence, which is important as being perhaps
the first account that the authentic testimony of a
European traveller affords us of a connection between
Queda and Siam. The Commodore learnt that the
King of Acheen had carried off as captives
the former King of Queda with his children,
principal officers and 7000 of his people, and had
so completely ravaged and laid waste the country,
that the remaining inhabitants were reduced to eat
the leaves of trees, and were so terrified that they
fled to the summit of the mountains on the appearance
of the smallest boat, imagining all who landed in their
country to be either Achinese or their partisans,
and that the reigning King of Queda had lately
placed himself under the protection of the King of
Siam, who, it was said, had begun to send 2000 men
to protect him with a supply of some rice of which
the people were totally destitute. Between the
period of Commodore Beaulieu’s visit, and the arrival
of the first French bishops in Siam in 1662, little is
known respecting the history of that Kingdom,


excepting accounts of internal commotion, of the
cruelities of Chao Phasa-thong who reigned from 1627
to 1657, and of the manner in which Chao Narayana
established himself on the throne. But this last
Prince, soon after he assumed the Government in
1657, is described as having put himself at the head
of his army, defeated his neighbours who had invaded
his dominions, retained several cities which designed
to revolt within the bounds of duty, and reduced to
obedience, without much bloodshed, others which had
actually thrown off their subjection. What proceed-
ings he adopted with respect to the Malay States in
particular does not appear, but that Acheen acquiesced
in the protection which Siam had offered to Queda
against her in 1621, may be inferred from the circum-
stance of Chao Narayana having received a compli-
menttary Embassy from Acheen in the year 1668.
Twenty years after Dampier saw an Envoy arrive at
Acheen deputed by the same Siamese Monarch. M.
Chaurnont, the French ambassador to Siam in 1685,
learnt that Patani, Johor and Queda were tributary
to Siam, and in enumerating its provinces mentions
them and also Pra and Paam, Perak and Pahang.
M. Choisy, who accompanied him, also reported
Queda to be tributary to Siam in 1686, and
M. Tachard, in his first voyage to Siam notices
the Chiefs of J chore, Pahang and Patani as
tributaries ol the King of Siam. M. Ohaumont’s
successor, M. Loubere, in 1688 w r hen enumerating
the provinces ol Low r er Siam does not however include
Queda or Perak but only Johor and Patani, adding
subsequently, the Governor of Johor renders obedience
no longer, wdiile the Queen of Patani only sends to the
King of Siam every three years two small trees, the
one of Gold, the other of Silver. Kampfer who visited
Siam in 1689, immediately after the death of Chao
Narayana and usurpation of Petraatia or Petrarcha and
expulsion of the French from Siam, states that the
new r King assumed the title of King of Siam, Tenassari,


Sucketa and Porseluke, as also of Protector of Cambo-
dia, Johor, Patani and Queda. Kampfer, on his way
to Siam touched at Busut in the territory of Tringano,
the inhabitants of which town, he states, spoke both
Siamese and Malay. Petrarcha enjoyed his usurpa-
tion but for a short time, and the reigns of his two
sons, who died respectively about the years 1733 and
1748, are said to offer nothing worthy of notice, ex-
cepting internal dissensions and unsuccessful wars
with Cambodia and Cochin China. Captain Hamilton,
however, who visited the Malay Peninsula and Siam
between the years 1695 and 1720 states that Queda
though small and poor was honored with the title of a
Kingdom, that it was at that time independent but
that it was many years tributary to Siam, and
had thrown off the yoke in the long Pegu War,
that Perak was properly a part of the Kingdom
of Johore, the Dominions of which then reached
four or five leagues to the Northward of Patani,
that the Kings of Johore ever paid homage to
King of Siam by sending them a rose made of
sold in a golden box once in three years, and
o O
that the year 1719 happened to be the year that the
rose came, for he ( Captain Hamilton ) saw the mes-
senger that brought it to Siam. In 1748 the son of
Petrarcha’s second son, named Chao nal Padon, ascend-
ed the throne of Siam, and shortly after retired to a
Pagoda, whence he was called back in 1/ 59 when
Alompra, after subduing Tavoy, the Governor of which
had set himself up as independent, sent a force to
destroy Mergui and Tenasserim, and in 1760 invaded
Siam via Ligor, rendering that, and other parts of
Lower Siam subject to his authority. In 1761 the
Siamese army of Ligor appears to have recovered pos-
session of Tavoy and Mergui and in 1762 Chao nal
Padou again embraced the state of priesthood, abdicat-
ing the throne in favour of his brother. In the latter
G m
end of 1764 and beginning of 1765 Tavoy and Mergui
were retaken by the Burmese, who in the following


3'ear invaded Siam via Taniigdee and Tavoy, capturing 1
the capital on the 28th April 1765 (!), and rendering the
Kingdom tributary to Shembuan King of Ava. Chao
nal Padou’s brother the reigning king was killed, and
himself with his family carried captive to Ava. The
Burmese Army shortly after retiring from Siam, Phya
Tac assumed the reigns of Government, removed the
capital to Bangkok, and not only entirely liberated the
Kingdom from the yoke of Ava, but recaptured Ligor
and other Provinces, the Governors of which had as
usual availed themselves of the troubles with which
Siam was inflicted to set up their independence. This
Chief, who is commonly called the Chinese King
of Siam, caused himself about the year 1759 (!!) to be
recognised by Queda. Such was the nature of this
recognition that Mr. James Scott in 1785 reported
to the Governor General that Phya Tac had “ un-
real med ” the whole Malay Peninsula, and a French
missionary who visited Queda in 1782 states, not only
that Queda was at that time dependent on Siam,
but that it was peopled by Siamese and that the
Siamese language was more common than the Malay.
Phya Tac was killed on the 7th of April 1782 and
succeeded by his Chief Minister the Chak-kri. Shortly
after the army of Minderagi, King of Ava, invaded
and laid waste Ligor, Merdelong and other parts ot
Lower Siam, which were however soon recovered by
the Siamese. Phya Tac’s successor appears in 1786,
about the time the British Government formed an
Establishment at Prince of Wales Island, to have come
down to Singora in the vicinity of the Malay States,
and to have adopted measures for effectually securing
the supremacy of Siam over them, summoning the
King of Patani, Queda and Tringano to do personal
homage and laying waste the Country of the firsQ
for sending an unconciliatory reply. Mr. Light, the
founder of the Establishment of Prince of Wales
Island, states that no sooner had the Siamese recovered
the places they had lost, than they resolved to call


to account all the neighbouring States which had not
given the Siamese aid against the Burmese, and
that the King of Queda had avoided the storm by
submission. So appears the then King of Tringano
to have done.
In addition to the above details we may state,
that before the late irruption of the Siamese their
language was in general use in the Northern villages
of Queda, where the people had retained their ancient
religion and customs, only slightly modified by their
situation amongst the Malays. Many Siamese temples
are dispersed throughout Queda, and the sites of
others of ancient date now destroyed, or in a ruinous
state, are well known to the present inhabitants.
At a place named Manau or Compang Mannau near
the source of the Murboo river and close to Prince of
Wales Island, a Siamese temple exists, and the people
are said to be chiefly Boodhists directly descended
from the original inhabitants.
If then we follow the accounts of Native His-
torians, and even the Malay Annals, we shall find at
least that Siam had possessions on the Malay Peninsula
before the arrival there of the first Malay Colony from
Sumatra; if we receive the accounts of the early
European Travellers we must admit that most of the
States on the Peninsula recognised at different times
the authority of Siam. And, if we adopt any reason-
ing from analogy, we shall find it difficult to suppose
that these petty Malay States could have been suffered
to retain for so long a period as some of the officers of
Government of Prince of Wales Island maintain, an
unrestrained sovereign independence on the borders of
so powerful a kingdom as Siam. The token among
the Indo-Chimese nations of vassalage to a superior
state is comprised in the transmission to it triennially
of two small trees bearing flowers, one wrought in
gold, and the other in silver, the whole expense of


which does not exceed 1,000 Spanish Dollars. The
expense, although it is sometimes enhanced by the
addition of a sum of money and rich cloths, forms no
object for consideration, as the return made by the
superior State in presents is always of much greater
amount, but the obligation which this token involves is
undefined, and regulated only by the wants or caprice
of the paramount State, in requisitions at any time
for troops, boats, guns or provisions. The origin
of the custom is rather ingeniously accounted for
by the King of Queda, who declares that in early
times one of his ancestors happening to send a flower
of gold to the eldest son of the King of Siam,
a child, to play with, the present was construed
into a token of inferiority or homage, and the
custom thenceforth triennially exacted. But it is
rather extraordinary that the custom should prevail
among the other Malay States, and that the Countries
of Upper Laos and Ava as well as Siam and China
should be also well acquainted with it. The Chinese
who travelled from the Kingdom of Siam to China
reported according to Du Halde, that Mohang Kem-
aral was at that time tributary to Ava and that
it sent ambassadors yearly to the King of Ava to
carry this tribute, which consisted of two small
shrubs, one having its leaves and flowers of gold
and the other of silver. The King of Siam also was
accustomed to transmit such flowers to China, al-
though at present His Majesty is said to send only a
small quantity of each description of the produce of
his Kingdom. Ambassadors from Siam proceed an-
nually to Canton, and triennially to Pekin, not only
that the Junks which convey them may be exempted
from the payment of all imposts, but that the very
extensive and lucrative trade which the Court of
Siam maintains with the different ports in China, may
continue uninterrupted. The term tributary, with
its adjuncts vassal, liege lord &c. appear to have
been first introduced into India by the Portuguese,


whose proceedings towards many of the Indian.
Princes clearly show, that these expressions were
meant by them to indicate conquest, submission and
protection. Although the influence of Siam over the
Malay States may originally have been the effect of
conquest, yet that influence has been recognized by
the weaker states some times as a means of securing
her protection, as well as of purchasing an exemption
from threatened oppression on her part. Siam how-
ever does not appear to have divested these States of
the rights of Sovereignty, as with the exception of
Patani she has suffered their Governments, laws, cus-
toms and religion, widely different from her own, to
subsist entire, and this is the view which the British
Government has ever taken of the condition of the
Alliance between Siam and the Malayan States, con-
sidering the latter to possess so much of the rights of
Government and Sovereignty as to be capable of
entering into Treaties, and of even ceding a portion
of their territories. But though the British Govern-
ment, acting upon this principle, entered into an
Alliance with the King of Queda in the } r ear 1786
and deemed his permission sufficient to enable it to
form an Establishment at Prince of Wales Island,
still, nothing is more clear and indisputable in th©
whole histoiy of its intercourse with the Malay States,
than a steady and invariable determination on the
part of the Supreme Government of India not to be
led into an embarrassing participation in the interests
and concerns of either Siam or an}' of the Malay
States. Notwithstanding many applications from
almost all the Malay States to the British Govern-
ment to afford them protection against Siam or
against each other, b}* forming settlements in their
Dominions, and notwithstanding the repeated re-
presentations of the Local Government of Prince of
Wales Island in favor of Queda, the Governor General
in Council limited our interference within th©
bounds of amicable counsel and mediation, deprecating


any political connection with the Malay States and
considering an intercourse with them desirable so far
only as may be requisite for promoting and preserving
the Trade of the Commercial Posts established at
Prince of Wales Island, Malacca and Singapore.
Of late years however, the resources of Siam having
been improved by a long interval of repose, and
by the renovation of her commerce, she turned her
views towards establishing a more complete and
general control over the Malayan States on the
West Coast of the Peninsula. The King of Qaeda
was first directed to attack Perak. Umbrage was
soon after taken at the conduct of His Highness but
before Siam ventured to attack him the Siamese
Ministers made many enquiries of the Portuguese
Consul at Bangkok to ascertain whether this measure
would involve them in a war with the British Govern-
ment. The King of Queda was expelled from his
Dominions, and some time after the Portuguese Consul
was again summoned by the Siamese Ministers, and
narrowly examined respecting the claims of the British
Government over the States of Pei’ak and Salengore.
That gentleman assured the Mission that his con-
ferences with the Ministers convinced him of the
intention of the Court of Siam to extend its Domi-
ninion not only over Perak and Salengore, but over
Acheen also, and to impose Siamese Governments over
every one of the Malay States.
These views of aggrandizement on the part of
Siam the Government of Prince of Wales Island con-
sidered it indispensable for the British Government to
oppose and counteract, because if they were carried
into execution our Commercial Settlements of Prince
of Wales Island, Malacca and Singapore, which
depended on the neighbouring Malay States for their
supplies as well as commerce, would suffer the most
serious inconvenience. It was argued, that while the


Netherlands Government continued at Malacca their
presence, on the principles they acted * Siamese
encroachments on Perak and Salengore, that they had
transferred to us by the Treaty of the 17th March 1824
their rights and influence in this quarter. That unless
we undertook the task of protecting these Southern
Malay States and maintaining a continuous possession
of the Malay Peninsula the Siamese would assume it;
that the means of Siam had of late received still more
extension from the diminished power of their great
enemies the Burmese, and that, from her conduct to
Queda it was evident if she were suffered to over run
these Malay States, all trade and intercourse would be
destroyed, and the Malay inhabitants driven out and
forced into a life of plunder and piracy. These
arguments however, in the absence of all communica-
tion of the sentiments of the home authorities, could, not
move the Governor General in Council to depart from
the line of policy which the Supreme Government had
ever pursued with respect to the Malay States on the
Peninsula, and as was before shown in the instructions
given to him, the duties of the Envoy to Siam were
limited to endeavours to effect the restoration of the
King of Queda by an amicable arrangement, and to
secure every practicable degree of freedom and facility
to the trade and intercourse subsisting between the
British Settlements to the Eastward and the States of
Lower Siam. Yet, in deference to the views and senti-
ments of the Government of Prince of Wales Island the
question of Siamese supremacy over the Malay States
was mooted by the Envoy at Bangkok. He succeeded
in securing the safety of Salengore from Siamese en-
croachments.. disproving the right of Siam over Perak
and establishing the independence of its Government
and in procuring an engagement that the Siamese
shall not go and obstruct or impede the trade and in.
tercourse subsisting between British Subjects and the
States of Tringano and Kelantan. The Envoy further
did not quit Bangkok without repeatedly pressing on


the Siamese Ministers his belief, that the British
Government will not permit Siam to invade or oppress
the other Malay States in the same manner as she
had done Queda.
But it must not he concealed, that the great
objection to the British Government pledging itself to
afford such protection to these States, is the impos-
sibility of seeing how far such a measure may draw it
on. The weak and imbecile character and authority
of most cf the Malay Chiefs and constant quarrels
among themselves, the unsettled laws of succession in
their Governments which are a source of dispute on
the death of almost every Prince, the exaggerated
fears of the Malay inhabitants with respect to the
Siamese, and the restless and meddling disposition of
the latter, all conspire to render it highly probable
that interference on the part of the British Govern-
ment would involve it in extensive and complicated
political relations, bring on a rupture sooner or later
with Siam, and ultimately lead us to Bangkok, and to
a direct occupation of the whole of the Malay Penin-
sula. These last mentioned results would indeed be
certain were the Siamese Government made to relin-
quish its claims of superiority over these Malay States
on any other terms than by an amicable arrangement
and one b}" which its own interests would induce it to
abide. It is necessary to connect an account of the
proceedings of the Mission on this point with a
separate notice of each of these Malay States, which
may now be divided into the ten following, Lingen
and Rhio, Johore, Pahang, Rhurabo, Patani, Tringano,
Kelantan, Salengore, Perak and Queda.
The first Linga or Lingen and Riyou or Rhio, is
the remains of the ancient Government of Malacca,
which retired to Johore upon the conquest of Malacca
by the Portuguese, and after making repeated attempts
to recover its former capital, attempts which served


only to destroy its resources and ultimately to dis-
member its remaining Territory, removed its seat to
the island of Lingen and Bintang, the Chief Town of
which last is Rhio. About the year 1604 the Dutch
entered into a treaty with this State, the capital of
which was then at Johore, where they had before
established a factory, engaging the Chief to cooperate
in an attack upon Malacca. The Dutch Factory at
Johore was destroyed in 1613, when the King of
Acheen plundered and laid waste that city. Since the
early part of the century, the Bugis from Celebes
have acquired a large share in the Government of
Lingen and Rhio. Some of the same race repeatedly
attacked Tringano in the year 1719/20 and a colony
subsequently passed through Rhio to the Northward
and settled at Salengore whence some of them in
1770 came still further north and attacked Queda.
In 1783 these Bugis proceeded from Rhio and
Salengore, and laid siege to Malacca, whence they
were repulsed and the chief of Rhio slain, which pre-
vented Captain Forrest from forming a Settlement at
Rhio, for which purpose he had been commissioned by
the Supreme Government at the invitation of that
Chief. The Dutch shortly after proceeded from
Malacca and attacked Rhio, subduing the Bugis and
engaging the Sultan Mahomed Shah, by a Treaty dated
the 10th Novr. 1784, to hold the realm of Rhio in fee
as their vassal. In 1787 that Sultan reported to Mr.
Light that the Dutch had infringed all the Articles of
the Treaty, that a party of Illanon pirates from Min-
danao had attacked Rhio and driven out the Dutch,
and that he, the Sultan, had retired to Tringano, whence
he solicited the assistance and protection of the British
Government, In 1818 Colonel Farquhar under the
orders of the Government of Prince of Wales Island,
formed a Commercial Treaty with the reigning Chief
of this State, under the title of Sultan of Johore,
Pahang, Lingen and Rhio. In 1819 the Netherlands
Government of Malacca renewed its former r dations


with this Sultan, and established a factory at Rhio,
which was a dependency of Malacca until the month
of May 1824, two months after the treaty concluded at
London between Great Britain and the Netherlands,
when Rhio was placed in immediate communication
with Java. The 10th Article of that treaty cedes
Malacca and its dependencies to His Britannic Majesty.
The 12th Article stipulates that no British Establish-
ment shall be made on Bintang among other Islands,
a stipulation which could not have been necessaiy if it
were intended that the Chief of Bintang should remain
a vassal of the King of the Netherlands, and that the
Netherlands should continue in possession of Rhio, a
rival port in the immediate vicinity of Singapore. It
was of course intended that the British Government
should not occupy Bintang, but it is difficult to dis-
cover on what grounds the Netherlands found their
right of remaining there. Rhio had always been a
dependency of Malacca and was so in fact on the 17th
March 1824, the date of the treaty, the Bth Article of
which further expressly engages “ His Netherlands
Majesty not only to cede all his establishments on the
Continent of India, but to renounce all privileges and
exemptions enjoyed or claimed in virtue of those
Establishments.” The island of Bintang abounds in
Gambier which is extensively used with betel by the
inhabitants of Java and by all Malays. It is said also
to produce teak, while the port of Rhio is one of the
best to the Eastward.
Until lately the principality of Lingen and Rhio
embraced the whole of th? Malay Peninsula from
Muar in Lat 2° 10" north on the West, and from
Karaamang in Lat 4° 15" on the Bast Coast»
embracing all the Islands at the mouth of the
Straits of Malacca lying between the 2d degree
of North and the Ist degree of South Lati-
tude, as well as several islands in the China


Seas lying between the 104 th and 109 th degrees of
East Longitude as far as the Natunas. The Sultan
o
resided on the Island of Lingen, the Rajah Muda or
Heir Apparent with the Bugis at Rhio, the Tomongong
or Commander in Chief by land at Johore and
Singapore, and the Biudahara or Treasurer or High
Steward at Pahang. But upon a younger brother hav-
ing been proclaimed Sultan at Lingen, the elder
brother removed and joined the Tomongong of Johore
at Singapore. In 1810 the British Government entered
into a separate alliance with this elder brother, who
was proclaimed the legitimate Sultan of Johore, and
who ceded to us the Island of Singapore. Since that
date the islands South of the Straits of Malacca have
been under the protection of the Dutch, and those
lying to the North, as well as the Continental territory,
between the extremity of the Peninsula and Lat. 2°
10" on the west and Lat. 2° 15" on the east Coast,
under our protection, while the rest of the continental
territory extending from Sideli in Lat. 2° 15" to
Kamamang in Lat. 4° 15" continues under the Gov-
ernment of Pahang, which has long been independent,
altho’ the chief or Sultan w r as originally subject
to the State of Lingen and nominally styled its
Biudahara. Johore, when visited by the early Dutch
voyagers and even at the time of Dam pier and
Captain Hamilton abounded in pepper, the cultivation
of which has entirely ceased, and the whole territory
is now described as barren and thinly peopled.
The latter voyager, it has already been shown, includes
Patani and Perak within the territories of Johore.
He further gives an account of a Sultan of Johore
having been removed from his throne in 1708 and sent
by his people to reign at Pahang and Tringano, and
of this Sultan of Johore having established his son at
Pahang, and settled himself at Tringano, where Cap-
tain Hamilton saw him in 1719 much disturbed by his
rebellious subjects, and their allies the Bugis, who
threatened him with a fleet of 200 boats. In 1609 a


King of Johore appears to have complained to the
Dutch against the then Queen of Patani, for having
deprived his younger brother of his life, and of the
territory of Patani which belonged to him the King
of Johore.
The territory of Pahang, whose early relations
with Siam and the Portuguese have been before
noticed is also described by Captain Hamilton as
abounding in his time in pepper, of which 300 Tons a
year were exported, though if the inhabitants had a
market they could in five years time, he observes, be
made to produce 3000 tons. He also states that there
was abundance of gold dust found in Pahang river,
whence above 8 Cwt. had been exported some years,
and that he had himself seen lumps of gold found
there weighing 5 or 6 ounces each. At present tin
and gold are the principal products of Pahang, of
which last large specimens are still to be found. In
1719 the chief of Pahang was a son of the deposed
Sultan of Johore, who left him at Pahang on his
retiring to Tringano. The son, Captain Hamilton
observes, was endeavouring with only 5 or 600 men
to keep Pahang firm to his father, who held out that
town as capable of being made a place of great trade
if the English would settle in his country. Most
probably the Bugis at that time separated Pahang
from Tringano, and certainly all relations between
Siam and the States of Johore and Pahang, as well as of
Lingen and Rhio, appear to have ceased since the
introduction into them of the Bugis influence, nor
did the Siamese Ministers during their discussions
with the late Mission, advance claims of superiority
over any of these States. Yet it may be proper to
notice, that in November 1818, at the time Sir Stam-
ford Raffles was deputed to negotiate with Johore, the
Supreme Government deprecated collision with Siam,
considering the Chief of Johore as vassal to the
Monarch of that country. An overland passage across


the Peninsula exists between Perak and Pahang, but
the route is long and extremely difficult, occupying at
least two months, and it has of late years been
unfrequented.
Bhumbo is an inland state lying between Pahang
and Malacca. This as well as Nanning, which now
forms a district of the territory of Malacca, was
attacked by the Portuguese about the year 1584, when
the inhabitants of them were styled “ Menangeaboes ”
and considered subject to Johore. The same account
of them is given by Captain Hamilton, who describes
them in 1702 as a barbarous, savage people which
could never be civilized. A few years ago Sir Stam-
Baffles discovered that the Baja of Bhumbo and all his
officers receive their authority and appointments from
the State of Menangeabo in the interior of Sumatra,
and that the communication between these two States
is carried on in the Malay Peninsula through the river
Linge in the neighbourhood of Malacca and that of
Siac on the Sumatra side. Since our occupation of Ma-
lacca however, the copy of a treaty between the Dutch
and the Chief of Bhumbo has been discovered, making
over the sovereignty of that country to Malacca in the
year 1758. The Siamese Government is apparently
unacquainted with the existence even of this State of
Bhumbo.
The Malay Annals describe the City of Patani as
having been founded a few years before the arrival of
the Portuguese at Malacca, by Chao Sri Bangsa, a son
of the King of Siam, who had sent him to reduce a
Country named Cota Meliyei, the Baja of which was a
Moslem. The Siamese Prince, upon overcoming that
Baja, is said to have assumed the doctrine of Islam,
built Patani, and placed himself under Sultan Maho-
med of Malacca who granted him the ensigns of
Boyalty, the Nouhuts of Kettle drums. A brisk trade
and intercourse existed afterwards between Patani,
Queda and the Portuguese Government of Malacca


which derived a large quantity of provisions from
Patani. In the early part of the 17th century, both
the English and Dutch, as w 7 ell as the Portuguese had
factories at Patani, and the early voyagers of these
nations give accounts of the extensive trade, resources
and population of Patani at that time. But after the
Dutch involved the Queen with the Portuguese
Government at Malacca, the factories of both the Eng-
lish and Dutch appear to have been withdrawn, and
the country distracted with internal wars, which
frustrated an attempt made by the Government of
Fort St. George to settle a factory at Patani in 1678.
M. Ghaumont reports that the King of Siam had re-
fused to permit either the Dutch or English to settle
here, but that from the situation of the place, ex-
cellence of the port, which is the best on the Malay
Coast and the resort of Chinese and many other
foreigners, a more profitable establishment could be
formed at Patani than even at Siam. We have already
noticed the conquest at Patani by Raja Api, King of
Siam, and the devastation of the country by the Siamese
in 1786. In the year 1792 the Siamese appear again
to have laid it waste, putting to death its principal
people, and since that date the inhabitants are a.
mixed race of Siamese and Malays, which still
proves refractory occasionally as it did in 1810. Its
present limits are said to lie between the River
Sai or a little to the Southward in about Lat. 6° 20"
and Tana, Ch’hena, or Sehena in 7° 25" on the Coast;
and inland it is separated from Queda and Perak by
the great range of mountains running through the
centre of the Malay Peninsula. But this State has
long been divided into numerous and separate
chieftainships under the superintending authority of
the Siamese Governors of Ligor and Singora, through
whom the several Chiefs send triennial tokens of
inferiority to Siam. The following were named to the
Mission at Bangkok, Ch’hena or Tana, Tipha, Tani
or Patani, Jamoo, Benera and Sai or Nong-Sai on the


coast, and inland, Chene Jala, Nong-Chik, Toom,
Prawan, Raman, Roge or as named by the Malays
Leggeh, Datoo or Jering. Jaraoo only is under
Ligor, the rest under Singora. But in addition to
the foregoing, there appears to be several other petty
States in Patani, such as Pugit or Poorgit which the
Siamese attacked in 1786 and which was then
described as a small Province bordering on Purlis in
Queda, Belong and Kamoja, the Chief of which last
solicited in 1820 an alliance with the British
Government and cooperation in an attack upon
Siam. The country of Patani is still said to be very
populous and full of resources and the portion
bordering on Queda extremely rich in tin, 1000 peculs
of which were annually brought down the Murbow
River, until very lately, when the system of revenue
adopted by the King of Queda in his territories
put a stop to almost all intercourse between Prince of
Wales Island and the interior of the Malay Peninsula,
In the year 1818, the late Colonel Bannerman opened
a communication with the Punghalu or Chief of Kroh,
a tin district in the territory of Raman who offered
to send down the Muda River any quantity of tin
required at Prince of Wales Island, The King of
Queda however interposed and frustrated this attempt
to open a commercial intercourse, which promised
very great advantage. It was found that His
Highness had rented to Chinese Merchants residing
at Prince of Wales Island the exclusive privilege of
navigating the Muda, as well as almost every other
river in Queda and of conducting trade by that means,
not only with the inhabitants of Queda, but with those
of Patani and the interior of the Malay Peninsula
who were in no degree subject to Queda. Hie late
Mission to Siam made every exertion to correct such
a mischievous system of obstructing trade and in-
tercourse between two friendly States on the part of
an intermediate petty chief, and Article 10th of the
Treaty engages that an unrestrained trade and


intercourse by land and water shall exist between
Prince of Wales Island and Patani, while Article 13th
stipulates for the abolition of this system of farming
out the navigation of the Rivers in Queda, and for
the levying only of fair and proper import and export
duties upon the transit of merchandize. The Raja of
Ligor has also made application to be furnished with
a copy of the Customs duties and port regulations in
force at Prince of Wales Island, with an intention of
establishing similar rates and rules in Queda on the
fair principles of reciprocity.
The territory of Tringano is said to extend along
the East coast of the Malay Peninsula from Kamamang
in Lat. 4° 15" to the River Basut Buse or Bosset, in
about Lat. 5° 40", and inland it is separated from
Perak by the great central range of mountains. The
Malay Annals notice Tringano as being under the
Malay Government of Malacca, and the Eastern
boundary of Sultan Mahomed Shah’s territory, but it
does not appear in those times to have possessed a
separate Chief or Raja. In 1585 however, the Portu-
guese mention a King of Jringale as assisting in
the defence of -Tohore. In 1689 Kiimpfer on
his route to Siam touched on the East Coast of
the Malay Peninsula at Buse or Basut, which he says,
the inhabitants called Terchanu, most probably mean-
ing that that place was, as it now is, a part of the ter-
ritory of Tringano. In 1708 the chief of Tringano, as
we have before seen, was a deposed King of Johore,
who was afterwards, in 1709, disturbed by his re-
bellious subjects and by their allies the Bugis, as a
protection against whom he was extremely anxious ;
Captain Hamilton relates, that the English should
form a Settlement in his dominions, an offer to which
purpose he also made to the Dutch at Malacca, and to
the King of France in a letter forwarded by a French
ship which happened to touch at Tringano. Intimate
relations always subsisted between the Dutch Govern


merit at Malacca and Tringano, the Chief of which in
1783 complied with an application which the Dutch
Government of Malacca made to him for assistance in
its war with the Bugis. In 1778 Mr. Chapman while
proceeding as Envoy to Cochin China touched at
Tringano, when the brother of the then King ( the
King himself being absent ) spoke to him concerning l
the Company’s establishing a Factory at Tringano, a
proposal which Mr. Chapman afterwards heard has
been sent in a letter to the Supreme Government.
Mr. Chapman observes, “ This complaisance arises
from the King’s Apprehensions of an hostile visit from
the King of Rhio, and from a desire of extending his
territories by means of the Company’s assistance.
If it were thought worth while to settle in any part of
the Peninsula of Malacca, a more eligible situation,
than Tringano might be found. Some months in the
year this is a dangerous lee shore and inaccessible
to shipping. ” In 1787 and several following years,
the Sultan being threatened by the Siamese, who
summoned him to do personal homage to the King of
Siam, and made a requisition for 100 pieces of cannon,
repeatedly renewed his application to the British Gov-
ernment to form a Settlement in his Dominions.
The Mission to Siam touched at Tringano on its
way to Bangkok, as well as on its return. The Sultan
then reigning, named Ahraud, was Grandson to Sultan
Mansur Riayat Shah who had offered a settlement to
the British Government. He was described to the
Mission as having, about 18 years ago, succeeded his
father Zenalabden, who had reigned only six years,
and during whose time Kelantan, over which their
grandfather had placed a relation of his own, threw off
its dependence. Zenalabden was engaged in constant
wars with Kelantan, which at length turned to Siam
for protection against Tringano. Sultan Ahmud was
also described as a weak, infirm chief, during whose
time Tringano had declined greatly in population and


cultivation, almost all the Chinese and a great portion
of the other inhabitants having emigrated to Kelantan.
About 3000 peculs of pepper, 1200 peculs of tin from
some mines at Daon and Kamaraang, and a very large
quantity of coarse sugar, manufactured from the
cocoanut, with some coffee which has of late been very
successfully cultivated were said to form the present
exports of Tringano ; much of the trade of which with
Borneo and other parts has been transferred to Singa-
pore. The population was estimated at only 10 or
12,000 souls, and declared to be dependent on the
Siamese ports to the northward for their principal
supply of grain.
Kelantan is noticed in the Malay Annals as being
a more powerful country than Patani in the time of
Sultan Mahomed Shah, who ascended the throne of
Malacca about the year 1477, and who attacked Kelan-
tan for refusing to do homage to him. The Chief of
Kelantan is said at that time to have been Sultan
Secunder Shah, the founder of Malacca, but the names
of his children appear to have been Siamese, Orang
Kanung (!)-Chao-fa and Chao-buak. In 1542 the Por-
tuguese appear to have attacked some trading vessels
lying in the river of Kelantan, and little further can be
discovered respecting this territory until a very recent
date. It is melancholy however to observe, that this
State is the only one on the Malay Peninsula which
has improved and increased in importance since its
acquaintance with Europeans, and this result has been
owing entirely to the discovery of some valuable gold
mines which have attracted to Kelantan a large Colony
of Chinese and many of the inhabitants of Tringano.
The present limits of this territory are said to lie be-
tween Basut in Lat. 5° 40" and the River Sai or a
little to the Southward in about Lat. 6° 20" on the
coast, bounded to the west by some of the interior
Patani Chieftainships. It produces a large quantity
of pepper and gold besides tin, and its population is


said to be much greater than that of Tringano. Its
present Chief is said to be in no way connected with
the Royal family of Tringano. In consequence of a
civil war having arisen between him and his brother,
his territory is in a very divided and distracted
and many Siamese have established their residence and
influence in the country. In the estimate made in
March 1801 by one of the first Commercial Houses in
Europe of the quantities of pepper to be obtained in
the Indian Archipelago, it is stated “ at Tringano and
Kelantan, belonging to a Malayan Prince, may be had
about 2000 Tons per annum. The Europe Portuguese
ships often call at these ports on their way to China.’
Tringano is under the Siamese Governor of
Singora, and Kelantan under the Rajah of Ligor,
through which Chiefs they respectively transmit to
Siam the triennial token of inferiority. The past year
was the appointed time for most of the Malay States
to send the Boonga Mas to Siam, and the Mission saw
at Bangkok the Messengers from Tringano and some
of the jPatani States. In the year 1787 when the
Sultan of Johore and Pahang retired from Rhio to
Tringano, he styled the Sultan of the latter place the
Chief of his family and stated that he committed his
interests to the care of that Prince. The claims of
superiority on the part of Siam over Tringano were a
consequence of Tringano being a portion of Johore,
and the first modern Chief of it a Sultan of Johore,
who had before transmitted the Boonga Mas to Siam.
Sultan Mansur Riayut Shah of Tringano, in his
correspondence with Mr. Light between the years
1787 and 1792, admitted this ground of right on the
part of Siam, but resisted the King of Siam’s claim of
personal homage, declaring that “from the beginning
of time through all generations” the King of Johore
never did personal homage, but only sent com-
plimentary messages and the Boonga Mas. At the
time of Sultan Mansur Riavut Shah Kelantan was a


dependency of that State, although it does not appear
whether that Monarch obtained such possession by
conquest.* Calantan threw off its yoke about 20 or
25 years ago, upon some change of dynasty and
appealed to Siam for protection, an act of which it
has since had cause to repent, having of late often
solicited a connection with the British Government.
Before the late Mission visited Tringano and Kelantan
could be protected against Siam * without any
inconvenience or danger of collision with that Court
by the British Government entering into offensive and
defensive alliances with these States. But subsequent
information convinced the Mission that Siam is in
regular communication with these States, and that a
strong party in her interests exists in both of them ;
that the Siamese Ministers place a high value upon
this connexion of Siam with those States, and that the
British Government could not engage to take them
under its protection, without being involved in the
petty disputes between them, and in collision sooner
or later with Siam, some of the Chiefs or subjects of
which kingdom would still contrive to carry on intri-
gues with the inhabitants of those Malay States.
The Mission found, that the Chiefs of both Tringano
and Kelantan had accepted Siamese titles, and that
the present Government of Tringano feels some interest
in the safety of Siam may be inferred from its having
sent up to Bangkok, with so much expedition, and by
an express boat, the absurd intelligence which had
been brought to Tringano by a native vessel just
before the arrival there of the Mission, of an English
expedition equipping at Singapore against Siam.
Many of the Chief persons of Tringano spoke in con-
tempt of the meek and inactive disposition of their
Chief who had permitted their neighbours at Kelan-
tan to enjoy so long a repose.
The Mission however endeavoured, in pursuance
of the wishes of the Government of Prince of Wales


Island, to engage the Siamese Court expressly to with-
draw its pretensions over Tringano and Kelantan,
and the Envoy repeatedly declared his belief that the
British Government would not permit any forcible
interference with those States on the part of Siam.
But the Siamese Ministers refused to relinquish their
pretensions, or even to enter into any engagement
against the Siamese molesting those States on the
ground that the knowledge of such an engagement
would immediately incite Tringano to attack Kelantan,
from which nothing but the awe of Siam withheld
her. After much unprofitable discussion on this point
which was repeatedly urged on the Court of Siam,
the Envoy finding from- his instructions that the
Supreme Government was not prepared to undertake
the duty of affording to Tringano and Kelantan
complete protection against Siam, drafted and pro-
posed to the Siamese Ministers the 12th Article of
the Treaty. The Envoy conceived that the preserva-
tion of British trade and intercourse with Tringano
and Kelantan was the only ground upon which it
could ever be the policy of the British Government
to interfere in their favor, and that it would be
impossible for the Siamese to molest the Governments
of those States without interrupting or obstructing
our trade and intercourse, a procedure against which
that Article of the Treaty distinctly and carefully-
bound Siam. The Siamese Ministers did not in the
first instance admit the necessity of any such article,
stating that the trade and intercourse of British
Subjects were already sufficiently protected by the
other articles of the Treaty, which engaged “ all places
and countries subject to the Siamese,” but the Envoy-
declared that the British Government could not,
and would not allow Tringano and Kelantan to be
considered as subject to Siam in the same manner
as her provinces of Ligor and Singora, and that
a specific provision against the undefined preten-
sions of Siam over those States was indispensable.


The Siamese Ministers believed that the British Govern-
ment had resolved upon occupying the whole Malay
Peninsula and shortly after the arrival of the Mission
at Bangkok, they deputed an Agent to Kelantan
and Tringano ostensibly for the purpose of procuring
some Guns but with the real object of keeping those
States firm in their engagements with Siam. As the
12th Article contained a pledge on our part not to
take forcible possession of those States the Siam
negotiators were induced to acquiesce in it. The
Envoy, by whom this Article was not only drafted but
translated into the Siamese language conceived that
the terms of it would not preclude the British Govern-
ment from exercising hereafter at any time that its
policy or interests might require it, the right of direct
treaty and negotiation with Tringano and Kelantan,
and the right of opposing all forcible interference with
those States on the part of Siam, and some of the
principal men of Tringano, to whom the Article was
afterwards shown considered it as extremely advan-
tageous to their country. The article does not still
appear to the Envoy to be worded in precisely the
terms which his situation required. It does not com-
mit the Supreme Government to ulterior procedures,
which that authority had expressly deprecated, but
leaves the British Government at full liberty either to
wait and interfere hereafter, whenever the Siamese
encroachments upon Tringano and Kelantan shall ren-
der it indispensably necessary, or to ratify the Article
with an immediate declaration of its intention to
afford complete protection to Tringano and Kelantan
against Siam. But it is necessary to mention, that
the Government of Prince of Wales Island is disposed
to put a more unfavorable construction upon this
Article conceiving it as it stands, to bar at once our
right of opposing all forcible interference of the
Siamese with Tringano and Kelantan. The Siamese
Ministers did not appear to put such a construction
upon it, although they certainly preferred the terms of


it to one directed more openly against their pride and
consequence, because these terras appeared to them
not to authorize us to cut off all communication be-
tween Siam and Tringano and Kelantan, or to prevent
the transmission to it of the customary Boonga Mas,
measures which the Envoy had no authority to insist
upon, and no prospect of effecting without involving
the British Government in all those consequences
which have before been pointed out as the most prob-
able result of our taking the whole of the Malay States
under our direct protection.
The Mission found the Sultan of Tringano in the
last stage of consumption and learnt that His Highness
intended to bequeath his Crown to a younger Son, in
preference to the Elder, who was described as a bold
turbulent character, addicted to piracy, and who was
certainly of a most unprepossessing appearance. The
Sultan is since dead, and his brother the Rajah Muda
has assumed the Government, setting aside the preten-
sions of both his nephews. It is not probable that the
elder nephew will readily relinquish his claims, and
whether the struggle which will now take place, shall
be left to be determined by Siam, to which one party
will certainly appeal, or obtain the interference of the
British Government is a question that would have
demanded immediate solution, had the terms of the
12th Article of the Treaty committed the Supreme
Government to ulterior procedures.
The present State of Salengore, as was before
mentioned, was established by a colony of Bugis from
Rhio. The Malay Annals notice a Chief of Salengore,
who was subject to the Malay Government of
Malacca, but who does not however appear to
have been acknowledged as a Rajah. In the time
of Captain Hamilton Salengore and Parcelar, which
is now within the territory of Malacca, were little
frequented by Europeans, although noted for producing


great quantities of tin, in consequence of the trea-
cherous character of the inhabitants. Shortly after
the failure of the siege of Malacca which the Bugis
from Rhio and Salengore undertook in 1783, the
Dutch visited the latter place and established some
posts in it. The Chief had fled to Pahang, but in
July 1785 he returned and drove out the Dutch and
applied to the British Government to form a Settle-
ment in his Territory as a means of ensuring him
future protection against the Dutch. In 1786 how-
ever he entered into an accommodation with the
Dutch, and on the 29th July of that year concluded
a Treaty with them acknowledging his country and all
its dependencies to belong to the Dutch Company and
to be given by them to him. The present limits of
Salengore are said to lie between the River Burman
in about Lat: 3° 45" and the River Lingi situate a
few miles to the Northward of Malacca. Some pro-
fitable tin mines have lately been discovered in this
territory at a place named Lukut, a little to the
Northward of Cape Rachado. But this State is
reckoned as the least considerable of the Malayan
States in resources and population, and the habits
and character of the existing inhabitants are not bet-
ter than those of the time of Captain Hamilton.
Mr. Crawfurd observes that of all the Malayan
States on the Peninsula, Salengore labours under the
heaviest mala fama on the score of piracy, man steal-
ing, manslaughter and similar •peccadillos of the code
of Malay morals. There are strong suspicions also
that the Government of Salengore is connected with
the numerous piratical fleets which have long infested
the Straits of Malacca in* its neighbourhood, and parti-
cularly with a party of Illanon pirates from Mindano,
who have established themselves in the Straits.
Perak is noticed in the Malay Annals as a part of
the Malay Government of Malacca, and in the time of
Sultan Muzaffur Shah, who ascended the throne of


Malacca in 1334, a son of his Bindahara was named
Tuan Perak, and was appointed Chief of Calang, a ter-
ritory situate to the southward of Salengore, and now
under that State. Little further is known respecting
the early history of Perak, excepting that a native ot
that State, Manstfr Shah, succeeded in the year 1567,
by what means it does not appear, to have invited the
Achinese to make more frequent and eager attacks
upon the Malay Peninsula. In 1613 a King of Acheen
laid waste Perak, which continued to transmit to him
the Boonga Mas until the year 1628, when the Portu-
guese having broken the power of Acheen, the King
of Perak sent an embassy to the Portuguese Govern-
ment of Malacca, engaging in future to pay to it the
tribute which he had before paid to Acheen. This
tributary relation does not appear to have been trans-
ferred with the Conquest of Malacca to the Dutch,
whose factory at Perak is said by Captain Hamilton
to have been cut off and declared in an official account
by themselves to have been removed at the same time
that they withdrew from Acheen, under the juris-
diction of which, they then describe Perak to be.
About the year 1664 a Dutch voyager visited Perak,
the factory at which he mentions as having been late-
ly abandoned, in consequence of some differences oc-
curring between the Dutch officers and the inhabitants
of the Country, He farther describes Pulo Dinding,
an island off the coast of Perak, as being then unin-
habited, but containing most excellent water and lofty
trees, on the branches of which he took abundance of
oysters. The differences between the Chief of Perak
and the Dutch were then accommodated by the former
sending an Envoy to Malacca, and the Dutch appear
shortly after to have established a factory in Pulo
Dinding, so called by them and by all early voyagers,
from its lying at the mouth of a river of that
name, but the Malays know it by the name of Pulo
Pankour. In 1688, Dampier visited the Dutch Settle-
ment at this place, of which he gives a very interest


ing account, showing however that at that time the
differences between the Dutch and Perak had been
renewed. He describes the inhabitants of Perak as
bold and treacherous: and Captain Hamilton also
gives a very unfavorable account of their character,
stating “ The people are untractable and rebellious and
the Government anarchical. The country produces
more tin than any in India, but the inhabitants are
so treacherous, faithless and bloody, that no European
nation can keep factories there with safety. The
Dutch tried it once, and the first year had their
factory cut off. They then settled on Pulo Dinding,
an island at the mouth of the River Perak, but about
the year 1690 that factory was also cut off.” The
Dutch must have re-established their factory at Pulo
Pankour, as among the ruins of their fort on that
island an inscription is said to be still visible bearing
date 1743. But they appear to have again withdrawn,
and in 1783 Captain Forrest found the Chief of Perak
uneasy at the thoughts of the Dutch returning to his
country. In 1786 the Dutch Government of Malacca
bound the Chief of Perak as well as the Chief of Salen-
gore by Treaty establishing a factory up the river at a
place named Tanjong Putus, and engaging the Chief
to deliver to them all the tin produced in the territory,
at the rate of 10 Dollars per pecul. In 1795, about
the time that Malacca was occupied by the British
Government, a small force under Lieutenant Macalister
and Lord Camelford, then a Lieutenant in the Navy,
proceeded from Prince of Wales Island and removed
the Dutch from their factory.
The present limits of Perak extend from the river
Burnam in Lat, 3° 45* to the River Crean in Lat. 5
10* which last is also the boundary of the territory
ceded by the King of Queda in 1802 to the Govern-
ment of Prince of Wales Island. The character of the
existing inhabitants of Perak is by no means better
than that given of their ancestors and during the last


25 years the country has been ruined and depopulated
by misgovern men t, disputes with Salengore, intestine
wars and by the interference of Queda. Although
containing the most productive tin mines in the
whole Peninsula, and yielding at one time 9000 peculs
per annum, this territory now exports but a compara-
tively small quantity, while the inhabitants are
subject to the greatest distress and famine from the
neglect of cultivation. In 1801 Sultan Mansur Shah
the Second ascended the throne of Perak, and his
correspondence with the Government of Prince of
Wales Island, as well as his general conduct, shews
him to have laboured under considerable derangement
of intellect. In 1806 his neighbour the Chief of
Salengore took possession of the territory and pro-
hibited all intercourse between it and Prince of Wales
Island. After the Salengore Chief retired, the country
continued to be distracted with internal disturbances
until 1818 when the troops of Queda occupied it in
obedience to the orders of the Siamese Government
which had directed the King of Queda in 1813 to bring
Perak under the subjection of Siam and to enforce the
transmission of the Boonga Mas from the Chief of
Perak to the King of Siam. His Highness of Queda
had appealed for advice to the Government of Prince of
Wales Island, expressing his unwillingness to attack
Perak, but declaring that the claims and requisition of
Siam were founded upon the fact of Perak having
received a Chief from the ancient ro} T al family of
Siam, and of the Chiefs of Perak having tendered
the Boonga Mas to Siam until the Burmese invasion
and conquest of that kingdom in 1765. Without
referring to the circumstance of Perak having for many
years rendered the Boonga Mas to Acheen, of its hav-
ing placed itself at one time under the Portuguese
Government at Malacca, and of its having been
connected by treaty as a Vassal to the Dutch until the
1795 when the factory of that nation was removed
by a party from Prince of Wales Island, the Govern


nient of Prince of Wales Island not only credited the
King of Queda’s improbable tale of a right on the part
of Siam over Perak but acted upon it, advising the
Chief of Perak to submit to Siam and aiding the King
of Queda with the Munitions of War for the purpose of
subduing Perak. The Chief of Perak declined the ad-
vice tendered to him by the Government of Prince of
Wales Island and affirmed very truly as it has since
appeared, that there was not a single instance of Perak
rendering the Boonga Mas to Siam, and that he would
risk every thing rather than submit to such an un-
founded and unjustifiable aggression on the part of
Siam. The troops of Perak invaded Queda and after a
long warfare, in which the resources of Queda were
exhausted, and the country of Perak destroyed, the Raja
of Perak and his adherents were taken in the year
1818, and a regency appointed, by which the Boonga
Mas was transmitted to Siam through Queda. The
Rajah soon alter died, and his son Sultan Tajudm
succeeded under the direction of Queda, until the
year 1821, when the Rajah of Ligor having taken
possession of Queda sent a fleet of Boats and a party
of Siamese through the harbour of Prince of Wales
Island to occupy Perak. In the following year the old
chief of Salengore, Rajah Ibrahim, fearing the Siam-
ese, and naturally unwilling to admit of the approach
of a conquering and formidable power, made a sudden
attack upon the Siamese detachment at Perak, drove
them out taking possession of 40 boats with other
property belonging to them, and placing his nephew
Tuanku Hussein at the mouth of the Perak River, to
control the Government and trade of the country and
prevent the return of the Siamese. The preparations
which the Raja of Ligor made last year were designed
for the purpose of driving out Tuanku Hussein from
Perak, and of attacking Salengore, in retaliation for
the conduct of its Chief to the Siamese at Perak.
The Treaty which Captain Burney concluded on the 31st
July with His Highness of Ligor, engaged the Rajah


not to send any armament to Perak or Salengore,
upon condition that the Government of Prince of
Wales Island would remove Tuanku Hussein from
Perak and prevent Salengore from all further inter-
ference with that State, establish a proper boundary
between the two States and negotiate for the payment
of 2000 Dollars on the part of the Chief of Salengore
to the Raja of Ligore in compensation for the loss
sustained by the Siamese Chief and his followers in
the attack of the Siamese detachment at Perak in 1822.
The Agent of the Government of Prince of Wales
Island succeeded in procuring the consent of the Chief
of Salengore to all these points excepting the payment
of the 2000 Dollars, to any proposition for which,
the Bugis Chief resolutely refused to hearken,
although the arrangement was manifestly to his ad-
vantage, as his means were totally inadequate to resist
an attack from the Rajah of Ligor.
It should before have been mentioned that in July
and August 1818, with a view of meeting the pre-
sumed policy of the Netherlands, who were about to
re-occupy Malacca, the late Colonel Bannerman nego-
tiated Commercial Treaties with the Chiefs of Perak
and Salengore, engaging them not to grant to any
person a monopoly of any article of trade the produce
of their territories, and to extend to British Subjects all
the privileges and advantages which might hereafter
be granted at any time to the Subjects of the most
favored nations. In July 1819 the Netherlands
Government of Malacca notwithstanding, replaced its
former relations with Salengore, and proposed to re-
new also the old Treaty with the Chief of Perak, but
the Government of Java disapproved of these measures,
and cancelled the Treaty which had been concluded
with Salengore.
The Mission was surprised to find that the claim
of Siam over Perak was not explained by the Siamese


Ministers to rest upon any such improbable tale as
that which the King of Quecla had related to the
Government of Prince of Wales Island in 1814, nor
upon any argument that Perak was anciently a por-
tion of the territory of Malacca and Johore, which had
formerly rendered such token of inferiority to Siam,
but upon the fact that the old chief of Perak had
voluntarily applied to place himself under the pro-
tection of Siam, and that the reigning Chief of Perak
had deputed Envoys to the Rajah of Ligore, entreat-
ing him to send a force to Perak for the purpose
of removing Tuanku Hussein from the mouth
of the Perak River, and of relieving Perak from the
oppression of its neighbour Salengore. The fact of the
old Chief of Perak having tendered any such submis-
sion was manifestly false, as he was well known to
have preferred losing his Crown, but the fact
of the present Chief of Perak having applied to the
Rajah of Ligor for protection was unfortunately too
true, as at the time Captain Burney concluded
the Treaty of the 31st July with the Rajah of Ligor,
he met at Queda a Nephew of the Chief of Perak
and one of his Orang Caya or Nobles, who declared
that they had been deputed for this purpose, and
that the Chief of Perak had not solicited the aid of
the Siamese until after he had made an unsuccessful
application to the Government of Prince of Wales
Island against the tj 7 ranny of Salengore, The Envoy
satisfied the Siamese Ministers of the incorrectness
of the account brought to them of the old Chief of
Perak having sought the protection of Siam, but he
could not persuade them that the present Chief of
Perak had signified to the Agent from the Government
of Prince of Wales Island, who visited him last year,
that he had no desire of forming a connection with
the Siamese. The Ministers called upon the Envoy to
produce any public instrument on the part of that Chief
contradicting the declarations made to the Rajah of
Ligor by the Perak Envoys in Captain Burney’s


presence, as well as those made by some other Perak
Chiefs who had visited the Siamese, and the Ministers
apprehended, that it was the intention of the British
Government to take possession of Perak. After
much protracted discussion the Provisions of the
14th Article of the Treaty were agreed to, confirming
the preliminary engagement made with the Rajah
of Ligor, that no Siamese armament shall proceed
to, or settle at Perak, declaring the Chief of Perak
to be independent, and engaging in addition, as a
means of removing the siispicions of the Siamese as to
the cause of our interference in favor of Perak that
the British Government shall not molest Perak, or
prevent the Chief from maintaining a friendly cor-
respondence with the Siamese.
There is strong reason for believing that some of
the subordinate Chiefs of Perak had privately before
1814, invited the interference of the Siamese Govern-
ors of Ligor and Singora, against the misgovernraent
of the old Raja of Perak, and that at the present
moment these subordinate Chiefs are divided into two
parties ; the weaker party, opposed to the Salengore
interests and aware of its weakness, has called in the
interference of the Raja of Ligor, without the aid
of some of whose followers it has no chance of obtain-
ing its own ends in the Government of Perak. Some
weeks after the Mission had sailed from Prince
of Wales Island, the Government of Prince of Wales
Island discovered that the Siamese Escort which
returned with the Perak Envoys upon receiving the
intelligence at Bangkok, remonstrated with the Raja
of Ligor upon the continuance of these Siamese in
Perak and an [ambassador] was sent down from Bang-
kok immediately after the departure of the Mission,
directing those Siamese to withdraw. This measure
holds out some hope that the Rajah of Ligor will res-
pect the provisions of the 14th Article of the Treaty
although to preclude all chance of future interference


on the part of Siam over Perak, a public instrument
should be obtained from the Chief of Perak expressing
his desire of discontinuing all connection with Siam,
an instrument which he will be most happy to give
upon receiving a promise of our protection against
Salengore. Capt. Low has been deputed to Perak in
order to obtain such an instrument.
There is no instance of Salengore having ever
rendered the Boonga Mas to Siam, nor did the Siamese
Ministers advance any claim to this effect. The
Mission to Siam obtained confirmation of the in-
dependence of Salengore, and the 14<th Article of the
Treaty engages that that state shall not be allowed to
attack or molest Perak and that the Siamese shall not
go and attack and disturb that state. It is evidently
the interest of the British Government not to allow
Salengore to be over run by the Siamese, even upon
the condition of preventing that State from restricting
and disturbing the trade and government of its weaker
neighbour, Perak. The old Chief of Salengore died
very recently, and the Government of Prince of Wales
Island do not consider it necessary to call upon his
Son and Successor for the compensation stipulated to
be paid to the Rajah of Ligor. The principal argu-
ment used by the Mission at Bangkok for preventing
Siamese interference with Perak and Salengore was
founded upon j~the] cession of Malacca to the British
Government, a circumstance from which Captain
Burney had before successfully argued against the
Raja of Ligor detaching of his armament to those
States. The Siamese Ministers were distinctly told,
that the recent re-occupation of Malacca by us,
naturally brought the British Government into some
degree of political relation with Perak and Salengore ;
between which state and the Government of Malacca
there always existed a close alliance. That any
hositilities on the part of Siam against those States
could not possibly be regarded with indifference by


us, as we knew the inevitable consequence would
be to drive the inhabitants forth into a life of
plunder and piracy, and to destroy altogether the
trade and intercourse now subsisting between them
and Prince of Wales Island and Malacca that any
attempt at extension of conquest in that direction
by Siam would certainly disturb the harmony subsist-
ing between the British and Siamese nations. That
the British Government however has no intention of
occupying those States, or of engrossing their trade in
the same manner as the Dutch Government had
practised but that it is resolved upon supporting and
protecting the independence of their Governments so
far as may be essential to the commercial prosperity
of the British Settlements of Prince of Wales Island,
Malacca and Singapore. The King of Siam and a
majority of the Court of Siam are well convinced of
the power of the British Government to execute this
determination, and they were more ready to relinquish
their designs against Perak and Salengore, after
observing that it was not our intention to prevent
their continued occupation of Queda. The extensive
plan of conquest planned by the Wangna has ac-
cordingly been checked, and although we may not
make him retreat from Queda, he is satisfied of your
means and intention of preventing his advance to the
southward, and thus, one of the most important objects
connected with the Malay Peninsula, and desired for
so many years by the British Government to prevent
the extension of Siamese conquest to the vicinity of
Malacca, has been now, it is hoped, quietly and
satisfactorily accomplished.
As a means of checking the resort of pirates
among the numerous creeks and rivers in the territory
of Perak and of re-establishing the trade and prosperity
of that country as well as of watching and supporting
its independence against any future attempts on
the part of either Salengore or the Siamese, a small


post might be judiciously placed at Pulo Pankour.
The Government of Prince of Wales Island received
the sanction of the Supreme Government in the
year 1819 to settle a post on this Island, but
the King of Queda, under whose authority Perak
then was, declined to grant us liberty to occupy
it. No such difficulty will be made by the present
Chief of Perak, and it must not be concealed that
his weak and imbecile character and the factious
disposition of many of his Chiefs will'offer great in-
ducements to both Salengore and the Siamese to
interfere with his Government, For an account of the
situation and capabilities of Pulo Pankour reference
may be made to the early accounts given by Gautier
Schouten and Dampier, as well as to certain recent
accounts given by some of the Officers of the Govern-
ment of Prince of Wales Island.
Queda is the only Malay State for which the
Siamese have a distinct name, Mooung Srai, or Coun-
try of Srai. The Malay name is Kedah which is
unknown to the Siamese, and which the early Por-
tuguese wrote Queda, a word adopted by us without
reference to our different pronunciation. The high
mountain called by European Navigators Queda Peak,
is known to the Malays by the name of Jerai, which
is probably after the Siamese term Srai. The only
mention of this State in the Malay Annals is im-
mediately before the arrival of the Portuguese at Ma-
lacca. During the reign of the last King, Sultan
Mahomed Shah, a Rajah of Kedah, visited Malacca
and applied for the Ensigns of Royalty, the Noubut,
the granting of which on the part of the Sovereign of
Malacca is a proof that the Chief of Queda must have
been subordinate to Malacca, and then first recognised
as a Raja. After the conquest of Malacca by the
Portuguese, the Chief of Queda appears to have
maintained intimate correspondence with the expelled
Malay Government, and in 1607 the Royal families of


Pahang and Queda were reported to be nearly con-
nected by marriage. At that period the Dutch also
found a frequent and easy intercourse overland bet-
ween Queda and Patani, and through their intrigues
both these States were embroiled with the Portuguese
Government [of] Malacca. The Portuguese residents
at Patani were sent back to Malacca across the
country via Queda, and those resident at Queda
were also forcibly expelled, which proceedings
led to the Portuguese reprisals on Patani, and their
attack and destruction of Queda and Purlis in
1614. The limits of Queda have of late years
extended from the River Krean in Lat. 5° 10"
to the river Oopih near Teluk-lawns or Telavase in
Lat, 7° 5" on the coast while the great central range of
mountains separated this state from the territories of
Merdelong, Singora and Patani, towards which last
Pulai was the frontier town to the South East. In
former times the Northern boundary of Queda is said
to have reached so far as the river Trang—in Lat. 7°
15" and indeed upon the conquest of Siam by the
Burmese in 1765, the Malays under the Laxamana of
Queda possessed themselves for some time of the
Island of Junkceylon, whence they were afterwards
driven out by the inhabitants. Large quantities of
tin and pepper were obtained at Queda by the early
Portuguese and Dutch, but of late years the exports
have been confined almost exclusively to poultry and
paddy, of which last at least 2000 coyans per annum
were suplied to Prince of Wales Island. The conquest
of Queda by the King of Acheen in 1619, and the
protection which she sought from Siam, as well as the
nature of the relation subsisting between that king-
dom and Queda, as far as it can be traced from native
historians and the accounts of early European travel-
lers and voyagers down to the year 1783 have been
before noticed.
It is said at Prince of Wales Island, that the King


or Qaeda possessed various historical records which he
lost upon the invasion of the Siamese in 1821, and
that the history of the Chiefs of Queda cannot now be
satisfactory traced beyond the grandfather of the
present Chief. But in 1813, when this Chief applied
to the Government of Prince of Wales Island for advice
on the subject of the order which he had received to
attack Perak, he deputed two of his principal officers
as Vakeels who communicated to that Government the
following account of the origin and nature of the
relations subsisting between Siam and the reigning
family of Queda.
“ The present Chief of Queda professes himself to
be descended from a collateral branch of the family
which held the Siamese throne immediately antecedent
to the period of about 45 or 50 years back. At that
time his relation, the then reigning king, being
engaged in a war with the Barmans, his country was
subdued and himself taken prisoner. The conquerors
bestowed the country on a Burraan, who had not
however enjoyed his newly acquired dignity above a
few months, when the Siamese expelled him and chose
as his successor a native Siamese named Peeata
(Phya Tac). This Peeata proving a tyrannical king,
ungrateful for the partiality of his countrymen, he too
was after a few years cut off by an insurrection of his
subjects, and the vacant throne was seized by one of
the nobles named Chikree (Chak-Kri) who transmitted
it to his son, the present King of Siam.
In the time of Peeata was first advanced the
claim to the homage of Queda, which he, and after
him his successors on the throne of Siam, alleged to
have been implied by the transmission of the Boonga
Mas or Golden Flower, a custom which the Chiefs of
Queda admit to be of very remote origin, denying
however, that it had ever been exacted as a right
during the dynasty of their own kindred, or that it


was at any time regarded as a badge of subordination.
On the contrary, it is contended, that this gift
(which consists of two trees, one of gold, the other
of silver both bearing golden blossoms or flowers,
together with other articles valuing in all about
800 or 1000 Dollars) was always perfectly spontaneous
on their part. That it originated on the birth of an
heir to the first of the ancient race, who was elder
brother to the then reigning Baja of Queda, and was
designed, not as an offering to the King his brother,
but to the infant Prince. That it continued afterwards
to be transmitted on the occasion of every addition
to the Royal family, who however no more regarded it
as a token of acknowledged subjection or dependence
than the presents of an equal value, which are yet
sent to Queda in return, were considered as expressive
of an admitted inferiority on the part of Siam.
But unreasonable and unfounded in justice or
precedent as this requisition was esteemed by the Raja
of Queda ( the present Chiefs grandfather ) especially
as proceeding from a comparatively speaking low-born
usurper, it was considered a measure of indispensable
policy on his part, to appease so powerful a neighbour,
at what appeared then a cheap rate, rather than
by resistance to involve himself and country in
inevitable ruin. He therefore prudently judged it
expedient to acquiesce in the unjust demand of the
new King and the Boonga Mas has hitherto been
sent as prescribed to him, once every three years,
thus giving a sanction to the alleged right to his
fealty, and further sanctioning the still more grievous
exactions to which his successors ( but particularly
the present Raja) became subject as vassals of
Siam. The demands for Military and other services,
have of late years become unusually frequent and
severe, —about four years ago he was compelled to
equip and join his forces to those of Siam in an attack
upon Patani, a Malay State on the eastern coast


of the Peninsula, two years afterwards he was sum-
moned to the defence of Junkceylon when attacked, by
the Burmans, and now he is commanded, to Join in the
subjugation of Perak. But such services, though a
sufficiently vexatious waste of his own proper means,
for the attainment of subjects in which he has no
interest, he esteems a trivial grievance in comparison
with the enormous expense attending the supply of
the troops of his superior, and not his troops only, but
such of his other subjects as choose to honor Qaeda
with their occasional presence, with arms, ammuni-
tion, clothing, Provisions, conveyance, by sea or land,
&c. as their exigencies may require. The charges
thus incurred are stated by the Vakeels to have been
extremely burthensome of late, and it is in the dread
of such a demand on his slender resources, and to avert
if possible such a visitation as the passage of a Siamese
Army to Perak would prove, that their master has
now again addressed the British Government whose
power, he fondly hopes, may be some day exerted to
rescue him from this insupportable state of Vassalage.”
The above account admits the fact of a very early
connection subsisting between Siam and Qaeda, al-
though, as was before pointed out, the manner in
which it states the custom of sending the Boonga Mas
originated is improbable, and as the King of Siam,
whom the Burmese carried away as prisoner in 1765
was the Priest-King, Chaool Padou, it is difficult to
believe that the Grandfather of the present Chief of
Queda, a Moslem, was so nearly related to him. But
the Queda Vakeels had an object to gain, to persuade
the British Government to interfere in favor of their
master. It was necessary however to cite the above
account, as it induced the Governor General in Council
to declare that it left little room to doubt the de-
pendent nature of the relation subsisting between the
States of Queda and Siam, and that whatever might
have been the origin of the periodical tokens of


submission given by the former, there appeared to be
no ground for encouraging the King of Queda to
renounce his Vassalage tc the State of Siam, if indeed
any measures directed to that end could be justifiable
under the relation existing between that State and the
British Government.” Captain Forrest visited Queda
between the years 1782 and 1784, at which period
the King’s Merchant and Minister was a native of the
coast of Coromandel, who gave shelter and protection
to some miscreants who had out off an English vessel
and murdered all the Europeans in it. But some time
before that date, shortly after Phya Tac had made Queda
recognise the superiority of Siam, the Government of
Fort St. George attempted to establish a Settlement
at Queda, to which the Honble Mr. Monckton was
deputed. No accounts of the proceedings of that gen-
tleman are to be found among the records of the Govern-
ment of Prince of Wales Island, excepting in a letter
addressed to the Supreme Government by Mr. James
Scott from Junkceylon in October 1785, in which it is
stated that the old King of Queda was happy to dis-
solve the connection. This old King was the Grand-
father of the present King of Queda, and he died in
1778. During his reign he was disturbed by the
misconduct and rebellions of his brothers and nephews,
who took umbrage at his having nominated an illegi-
timate son by a slave girl to be his successor, and
some of whom brought up the Bugis from Salengore to
attack and burn Queda and Allistar in the year 1770.
This illegitimate son, named Sultan Abdulla Mah-
kurram Shah, eight years after he had ascended the
throne, acceded to Mr. Light’s application for a cession
to the British Government of Prince of Wales Island.
That the Chief of Queda sought a connection with the
British Government particularly as a means of protec-
tion, the conditions which he annexed to the cession of
Prince of Wales Island sufficiently establish. Some of
the Officers of the Government of Prince of Wales
Island maintain, that it was protection against the


Siamese, which the Chief was more especially anxious
to obtain. It was in the time of the father of Sultan
Abdullah that the Siamese had visited Queda, and yet
that old Chief appears to have rejoiced at the
departure of the English Agent sent to him, and a
report made by Mr. Light to the Supreme Govern-
ment at the time Prince of Wales Island was ceded
declares that the then King of Queda apprehended
some attack from the Dutch Government of Malacca,
which had just overcome Rhio, Perak and Salengore*
Mr. Light states : “ The Dutch at the beginning of
this War (with the Bugis) wrote to the Rajas of
Tringano and Queda for assistance, the former joined
but the latter declined excusing himself on account of
a war in Patani. This will account for the King of
Tringano’s reception of your letter and for the King
of Queda’s anxious desire to have the Honble. Com-
pany for his protector.” Whatever might have been
the intention of Sultan Abdullah in ceding Prince of
Wales Island, no doubt can be entertained after
perusing the replies which the Supreme Government
made to his demands, that that authority used much
precaution to avoid involving itself in the political
concerns of Queda. The Ist, 3rd, and 6th Articles
of the conditions required by the King of Queda
and the answers made to them by the Governor
General in Council, are as follows.
CONDITIONS required
by the King of Queda.
REPLIES of the Gov-
ernor General and Council
to the King of Queda’s
demands.
ARTICLE Ist.
That the Honble. Com-
pany shall be guardian of
the seas, and whatever en-
emy may come to attack
the King shall be an en-
emy to the Honble. Com-
This Government will
always keep an armed
vessel stationed to guard
the island of Pinang and
the coast adjacent belong-
ing to the King of Queda


pany and the expenses
shall be borne by the
Honble. Company.
ARTICLE 3rd
The Articles opium, tin
and rattans being part of
our revenue are prohibited
and Qualla Mooda, Pry
and Krean, places where
these articles are procured,
being so near to Pinang,
that when the Honble.
Company’s Resident re-
mains there, this prohibi-
tion will be constantly
broke thro’, therefore it
should end, and the Govr.
Genl. allow us our profits
on these articles viz.
30,000 Spanish Dollars
every year,
The Governor General
and Council on the part of
the English East India
Company, will take care
that the King of Queda
shall not be a sufferer by
an English Settlement
being formed in the Island
of Pinang.
ARTICLE 6th.
If any enemy come to
attack us by land, and we
require assistance from the
Honble. Company of men,
arms or ammunition, the
Honble. Company will
supply us at our expense.
This article will be re-
ferred for the orders of the
English East India Com-
pany together with such
parts of the King of
Queda’s requests as cannot
be complied with previous
to their consent being
obtained.
The Minute of the then Governor General in
noticing the King of Queda’s terms also observed:
“ The ostensible object of the King himself in making


the grant (of Penang) originated in the idea of sup-
porting his own independence by the protection of the
English, and his attachment to us will either be
strengthened or changed into animosity as that protec-
tion is granted or withheld. This protection however
cannot be effectually given without involving us in
disputes with the Burmah or Siamese, the latter of
whom are the most powerful.” The above replies and
observation were a sufficient indication of the desire
of the Supreme Government not to enter into any
engagement of protecting the King of Queda against
the Siamese. But shortly after Mr. Light took posse-
sion of the Island, the King of Siam came over to the
Malay Peninsula with a large force, and as we have
before seen, after driving out the Burmese from
Ligore, summoned the Chiefs of Queda, Patani and
Tringano to do personal homage. The King of Queda
was now of course anxious to obtain the protection of
the British Government against an attack with which
he was actually threatened by the Siamese. Mr,
Light made repeated applications in his favor to the
Supreme Government which at length in January
1788 informed him With respect to protecting the
King of Queda against the Siamese the Governor
General in Council has already decided against any
measures that may involve the Company in Military
operations against any of the Eastern Princes. It fol-
lows of course that any act or promises which may be
construed into an obligation to defend the King of
Queda are to be avoided. If however Mr. Light can
employ the countenance and inflaence of the Company
for the security of the King of Queda consistently with
those rules, the Governor General in Council has no
objection to his adopting the measure, strictly guard-
ing against any acts or declarations that may
involve the honor, credit or troops of the Company.”
The principles laid down by Lord Cornwallis in the
above extract have implicitly guided the conduct of
the Supreme Government in all its subsequent rela


tions and correspondence with Queda, from that date
until the present hour notwithstanding the constant
solicitations of the Chiefs of Queda and the repeated
recommendations of every Governor of Prince ot Wales
Island that the British Government should engage to
emplo}’’ its troops for the security of Queda against
Siam. Mr. Light mentions in a private letter dated
Ist Feby. 1787, that the Dutch had thrown as many
obstacles as they could in his way, that they had sent
an embassy to Queda, that the great men of Queda
were averse to the English settling at Prince of
Wales Island, and that when he arrived at Queda, the
Laxamana and officers raised so may difficulties that
he could hardly obtain permission of the King to
settle at Prince of Wales Island, but that in order
to begin as peaceably as possible he had signed an
agreement that he would give the King half of the pro-
fits arising from the sales of tin, opium, and rattans
until the letters from the Honble. Company should
arrive.” But we have before seen that the Supreme
Government in their answer to the 3rd Article of
the King of Queda’s conditions declined to make to the
King such conpensation as he had demanded for the
loss of revenue, which he would sustain by a British
post being formed at Prince of Wales Island. Mr.
Light was therefore very early involved in disputes on
this subject with His Highness, who was naturally
anxious to keep Mr. Light to his agreement, and who
appears even at one tihie to have complained to the
King of Siam against the English. After much dis-
cussion and repeated references on the part of Mr.
Light, the King of Queda finding that his demand for
a “ Settlement ” of this point, and not, as it has been
assumed, of the question of affording him protection
against the Siamese, remained unadjusted, at length
collected a force with the intention of forcibly remov-
ing the British Settlement, or at least of establishing
himself [at ] Prye immediately opposite to it. He
%vas attacked and defeated at that village by a small


party of troops sent over from Prince of Wales Island,
and the first regular Treaty between himself and Mr,
Light was then concluded on the Ist May 1792. The
first Article engaged that the English should pay to
him 6,000 Spanish Dollars every year, for as long as
they remained in possession of Prince of Wales Island
while the 2nd Article pledged him to permit all
kinds of provisions required for Prince of Wales
Island, ships, of war, and the Company’s Ships to be
bought at Queda without impediment or being subject
to any duty. During the latter years of the King’s
reign he was much vexed by the disputes of his large
family of nine sons, each of which aimed to succeed
him. He died in 1798 and his brother the Rajah
Muda of Purlis set aside the claims of all the children,
and assumed the Government, under the title of Sultan
Heaoodeen. In 1802 this Chief entered into a new
Treaty with the Government of Prince of Wales
Island, ceding to it a tract of territory on the coast of
Queda, between the rivers Muda and Crean a space of
about 28 miles and measuring inland from the seaside
60 orlongs or about 3 miles, which was named
Province Wellesley, and for which, the stipend to
be paid as long as the English continued in possession
of Penang and that ceded territory was raised to
10,000 Dollars - per annum. The 3rd Article of this
Treaty also engaged the Chief of Queda to permit
all kinds of Provisions wanted for Prince of Wales
Island, Ships of War and the Company’s Ships to be
bought at Purlis and Queda, without impediment, or
being subject to any duty or custom, Sultan Heaoo-
deen however was kept in constant disputes with his
Nephews whom he was unable to control, each of them
laid claim to part of the stipend paid by the British
Government and each of them was aspiring to power.
It has been supposed that the cession of Province
Wellesley was made by Sultan Heaoodeen in order to
to obtain the countenance and support of the Govern-
ment of Prince of Wales Island against his turbulent


nephews. In 1804 however he resigned the Govern-
ment in favor of his eldest legitimate nephew, Tuanku
Pangeran, the present King of Queda, who had just
returned from Siam, and now took the title of Sultan
Ahmud Tajudin Halim Shah. The history of the King
of Queda’s visit to Siam and of the resignation made in
his favor by Sultan Heaoodeen has not been fully dis-
closed in the account of the Malay Establishments com-
piled at Prince of Wales Island, in which it is merely
mentioned that Sultan Heaoodeen getting old became
weary of conducting the affairs of Government, which he
transferred by a “voluntary arrangement and resigna-
tion” to his nephew “Tuanku Pangeran,” who had some
time before proceeded to Siam, where he remained some
months to pay his respects to the Emperor and to
conciliate his good will. The fact is, Sultan Heaoo-
deen lived eighteen years after, continuing to exercise
some degree of authority at Purlis, and his resignation
in favor of Tuanku Pangeran was in consequence of
a peremptory order received from the Court of Siam
which at the same time appointed Tuanku Ibrahim
the Raja Muda. Tuanku Pangeran had joined the
Siamese Governor of Singora, who conveyed him to
Siam, where he received a Siamese title and regular
appointment to relieve his uncle in the government of
Queda. It was this secret intrigue on the part of the
present Chief of Queda, that made his interest prevail
over that of his uncle and numerous brothers, three of
whom afterwards, Tuanku Hand, Busnoo and Ibrahim,
resisted his authority and were made to submit to it
by means of force only. Immediately after the acces-
sion of the present Chief of Queda, Sir Robert
Farquhar, then Lieut. Governor of Prince of Wales
Island, noticed “ the conflicting authority at Queda of
5 or 6 brothers and an uncle all equally oppressive and
independent”, and proposed that the British Govern-
ment should give such a decided preponderance to
Tuanku Pangeran, the young king, of whom report
spoke more favorably than of the other Princes, “ as


might enable him to curb his brothers and give efficacy
to laws, for the security of the ryots.’' But after
learning the manner in which the present Chief of
Queda obtained the throne from his uncle whom we
had recognised, and whom we had found by the Treaty
of 1802 to be extremely well disposed to us, it is
difficult to conceive what ground of right or claim
Tuanku Pangeran has to look to the British Govern-
ment for assistance against those who placed him
on the throne, against his former friends and sup-
porters, who now charge him with not having fulfilled
the terms of his appointment. Without making any
further reference to the early connection subsisting
between Queda and Siam, it is evident that the man-
ner in which the present Chief appealed to the
Siamese, and obtained the ascendancy at Queda
established the full right of Siam over his territory,
while it is no less true that the dissensions subsisting
between him and his brothers who severally carried
on intrigues with the neighbouring Siamese Governors
invited a constant interference in the affairs of Queda
on the part of the Siamese, until they were finally
tempted to drive out the Chief and assume the direct
occupation of his country.
In consequence, it is to be presumed, of the
difference of religion, language and custom between
Queda and the neighbouring Siamese Governments,
quarrels had often occurred in former times between
their Chiefs, and Captain Hamilton notices an instance
in which a King of Queda fell at variance with a
Chief of Ligor and invaded his territories. Besides
the Government of Junkceylon, which has already
been mentioned and the southern boundary of which
is at a place called Pak-lao, a few miles from the
mouth of the Pungah river, there are three other
Siamese Governments in the neighbourhood of Queda
named by the Malays respectively Ligor, Merdilong
and Singora.


The first, Ligor, or as it is called by the Siamese,
Lakhon, is the most considerable Government extend-
ing from Pak-lao before mentioned to the river Trang
on the West Coast, and from Lat. 7° 40" on the East
Coast of the Peninsula. It has often taken advantage
of the wars waged between Siam and the great powers
of Ava, Laos and Cambodia, to set up as an indepen-
dent principality. The Malay Annals describe the
Chief of Ligor as having attacked the State of Pahang
in 1509 by order of the King of Siam, and we have
seen the authority of Siam replaced over Ligore by
Rajah Api, Phya Tac, and by his successor in 1786.
The Dutch early found Ligore to export large supplies
of pepper and tin, and established here a factory,
which appears to have been withdrawn about the
year 1664, and again established, as Hamilton notices
it during his voyage to Siam in 1719. It must have
been destroyed when Alompra took Ligore in 1759,
and some brick foundations said to be its remains
were shown to the late Mission to Siam. In addition
to tin, some iron, rice, elephants and a species of
ebony now form the principal exports of Ligor. On the-
confines of Merdilong also, a kind of Fustic is pro-
duced in great abundance. The present Chief is said
to be a posthumous son of Phya Tac, whose widow,
left pregnant at his death, was sent as a wife to the
former Chief of Ligor. The appearance of the Raja
Ligore denotes Chinese extraction, while a younger
brother was pointed out to the Mission at Bangkok,
as the undoubted offspring of the former Chief of
Ligore, being like him of a remarkably dark com-
plexion. The present Chief of Ligor is of the highest
Siamese rank, a Chao Pya, and invested with the
power of life and death. He is closely connected by
marriage with the King and Wangna, the former
having married one of his daughters, and the mother
of the latter is his niece, and the native Christians at
Bangkok always style him the King of Ligore. A
Siamese History of Ligor according to Lt.*—mentions


a Raja of Queda as one of the tributaries of that state
attending a King of Siam there. The communication
between Queda and Siam was generally conducted
through the Chiefs of Ligor to whom for many years
past, the kings of Queda paid 5,000 Dollars per
Annum on account of the King of Siam, who rented
to Queda for that sum the Islands contiguous to Junk-
ceylon, for the purpose of gathering Birds nests and
Beche de mer. The arrangement was highly beneficial
to Queda as the produce in those articles was said to
amount to 16,000 Dollars per annum. More of the
character and proceedings of the present Chief of
Ligor will appear hereafter.
Merdelong is most probably a Malay corruption
of the Siamese Mooung Tha loong (?) or Country of
Tha-loong, while the large island off the East Coast of
Malay Peninsula named Tatalam in European Charts
must be as Mr. Orawfurd observes a corruption of the
Malay Tana-tha-loong, or land of Tha-loong. The
early voyagers name this state Bondelon, probably
from the Siamese Ban Tha long, place or village of Tha-
loong. This territory lies between Ligor and Singora
extending on the West Coast of the Peninsula from
the river Plean below Trang to the river Oopeh, the
boundary of Queda. The inhabitants are described as
mixing in their character all the ferocity and predatory
habits of the Malays with the cunning and dissimula-
tion of the Siamese. The present Phya or Chief
of Merdelong being old and incapable of Governing,
was lately summoned to Siam for the purpose of being
removed and succeeded by the eldest son of the Raja
of Ligor.
Singora, or as it is named by the Siamese Song-
khla is a small Province lying between Merdelong
and Tana. In 1678 the Agent from the Government
of Port St. George upon failing at Patani, proceeded
to Singora, which he describes as a judicious place for


the establishment of a factory, possessing excellent
and cheap pepper, and the Chief pressing him to settle
there. In Captain Hamilton’s time Singora was sub-
ject to the jurisdiction of Ligor, between the Chiefs of
which two Governments much jealousy and difference
have always existed. The present Phya, a Chief of
Chinese extraction, was shortly after the occupation
of Queda by the Siamese sent up in chains to .Bang-
kok, for having shown some unwillingness to cooperate
in the execution of the Wang-na’s proceedings against
Queda. He was however released by the present
King of Siam upon his accession to the throne, and
by means of a large bribe paid to some of the Officers
of the Court, he was lately permitted to return to his
Government. He appeared to the Misson well disposed
to cultivate friendly relations with the Government of
Prince of Wales Island. Both Merdelong aud Singora
have of late been placed under the authority of the
Chief of Ligor. Not only bj 7 sea, through the Trang
and other rivers to the North of Queda, but by means
of overland routes from Purlis to Singora in 3 or 4
days, and from Lunga to Merdelong in 4 or 5 days,
the most easy communication subsist between Queda
and the above Siamese Government by which means
also a very useful commercial intercourse formerly
passed with Prince of Wales Island. The object
of the 10th Article of the Treaty now negotiated
was intended to renew and extend this overland
trade. But the Chiefs of these Siamese Govern-
ments have latterly been invited by the dissensions
and intrigues of the Royal family of Queda to
participate largely in the concerns and interests
of that Kingdom. In 1808 Lieutt. Governor Far-
quhar recommended that a letter should be addressed
by the Governor General to the King of Siam,
stating that such a letter might be attended with the
salutary effect of Ist, opening a communication and
forming a frendship between the British Government
and Siam, the knowledge of which would keep Ava in.


check and be of the greatest consequence in the
event of a rupture with that power; 2ndly, obliging
the King of Queda to keep his faith with us from a
knowledge of our influence with his Lord Superior ;
and 3rdly, Preserving the King of Queda’s country in
in peace from the King of Siam’s prevailing influence
over that Prince’s neighbours. This measure however
was not adopted, and in 1809 a fresh source of intri-
gues between the King’s brothers and the Siamese
Chiefs, and of Siamese interference with Queda arose
from the Burmese having taken possession of Junk-
ceylon whence they prepared to come farther to the
to the Southward. A large detachment from Siam
under Prince Krom Sak, the present Wang-na, and
the forces of Ligor, Singora and Merdelong came down
in the neighbourhood of Queda, whose Chief also was
summoned to join them with a large supply of men,
boats and provisions. His Highness complied with
this requisition and liis boats under his Bindahara
were said to have been principally instrumental in ex-
pelling the Burmese from Junkceylon in the year
1810. Heavy requisitions for additional supplies of
boats, men and provisions were afterwards imposed
upon His Highness, under the pretext of providing
against the return of the Burmese to the Southward.
In 1810 His Highness repeatedly solicited the inter-
position of the Government of Prince of Wales Island
and in December of the year appealed to the Governor
General himself, whose reply* was in effect following
up the principle of noninterference laid down by Lord
Cornwallis in 1788. The Government of Prince of
Wales Island in forwarding the King of Queda’s appeal
to the Governor General was obliged to make the
following admission. “On the death of the late Rajah
“ ( of Queda ) disputes arose relative to the succession
“ which were most unfortunately referred to the
“ King of Siam, who determined in favor of the now
“ reigning Prince, and appointed his brother Tuanku
“ Ibrahim Rajah Mooda, or Heir Apparent. This re


“ ference and the consequences which followed, have
‘ encouraged a derogatory and unprecedented interfer-
“ once of late, more immediate!}" urged at this moment
in consequence of the armies of Siam having been
“ hard pressed by those of the Burmans, and the
“ resources of that kingdom and those of its allies and
“ dependents being necessarily called into exertion to
“ repel the invasion of Junkceylon.” But about this
time, a brother of the King of Queda, Tuanku Busnoo,
privately acccused him of having opened a corres-
pondence with Ava, and in fact of having led to
the above visit of the Burmese to the Southward.
No charge could be more serious at the Court of
Siam, and unfortunately no charge is more readily
credited there against a distant Chief. The Phya of
Singora, we have before seen, had obtained the throne
for the present King of Queda, and he now conveyed
to Bangkok Tuanku Busnoo, in order to effect the
removal of the former and establish the latter brother.
The Raja of Ligor however, interfered in favor of the
King of Queda, who sent his Bindahara and Eldest
Son Tuanku Abdullah to Siam, under the conduct
of that Raja. The son performed homage before the
King of Siam, and the doubts which had been enter-
tained of the good faith of the Chief of Queda appear to
have been removed. It was during the visit of Tuanku
Abdullah to Bangkok that the Court of Siam first
entertained the project of subduing Perak, and in
1813 and order was sent down to the King of Queda
to undertake that measure. The proceedings con-
sequent to His Highness’s appeal for advice to the
Government of Prince of Wales Island have been be-
fore mentioned. The Supreme Government was again
guided by the principles laid down by Lord Cornwallis,,
in 1788, authorizing the Government of Prince of Wales
Island onty, should the measure appear advisable, but
which it did not, to depute a Mission to the Court of
Siam for the purpose of offering if possible the friendly
mediation of the British Government in the disputes


between that power and the Chiefs of Qaeda and
Perak. In 1816 the King of Qaeda received another
peremptory order from Siam to attack Perak, which
led to the invasion and destruction of that country
and to the detriment of his own means and resources.
In 1818 His Highness having received from Siam a
fresh requisition for supplies of grain and boats, again
appealed to the Government of Prince of Wales Island,
which deputed a Mission to him for the purpose of
ascertaining his real situation, and of assuring him a
safe asylum and protection at Prince of Wales Island
under any adverse circumstances. About this time,
the King removed from his Capital to a place up the
Murboo River named Pulo Tiga, which he fortified, and
where he secluded himself among his women. He had
for some years made a native of the Coast of Coroman-
del named Bapoo Kundoo his principal adviser, and
had alienated the minds of his Ministers and of most
of the Chiefs of the country. The Bindahara, who
was a remarkably intelligent native, was much dis-
satisfied, and he appears early to have foreseen the
consequences of his master’s misgovernment, having
repeatedly made private application to the Government
of Prince of Wales Island to ascertain whether it would
afford him an asylum on that Island should circums-
tances render it necessary for him to retire from Queda.
The King also showed no disposition to maintain
a friendly intercourse with the Government of Prince
of Wales Island, having imposed a duty of 16
Dollars per Coyan upon the exportation of grain from
Queda contrary to the stipulations in the 3rd Article
of his treaty, having opposed the opening of a com-
munication bstween Prince of Wales Island and
Patani and the interior of the Malay Peninsula, and
having declined to grant a small extension of territory
between the Muda and Murboo Rivers, or at least to
permit the establishment near them of some con-
venient posts, which were desired as a means of
extending and protecting the navigation of those


Rivers, and of preventing piratical fleets from taking
shelter within them, as they had long been accustomed
to do. Had the King complied with this last re-
quisition from the Government of Prince of Wales
Island, he is now himself convinced that his territory
so far at least as his Fort at Pulo Tiga, would have
been safe from the attacks of the Siamese.
His brother, Tuanku Amboar, however, now, went
over to the Siamese and accused the King to the Raja
of Ligor among other points “ with governing his
country so as to create great disturbances among the
Ryots ” and with “ having changed his place of
residence from Queda to Murboo, to be [ at] a dis-
tance from the affairs of the country intending to run
away to Siak.” The King was two or three times
invited to give the Raja of Ligor a meeting which he
evaded, and which appears to have first turned that
Chief into his enemy. He was afterwards repeatedly
ordered the Court of Siam and summoned to appear
there, or at Ligor, but His Highness evaded obedience.
The accusation of his being in secret correspondence
with the Burmese was renewed, and these discussions
with His Highness furnished the Wang-na and his
party at the Court of Siam with fresh motives and
arguments for imposing a more direct interference and
control over the Malay States. At length, in Fe-
bruary 1821, intelligence was received at Prince of
Wales Island from Siam, stating that a force of 6000
Troops was equipping destined to attack Queda, in
consequence of some remissness on the part of the
King to transmit the Boonga Mas to Siam. Notice of
this intelligence was immediately communicated to the
King of Queda who replied that “he had received
similar reports and that hearing some Siamese had
come to Settool and Lungu, he had sent a secret
agent there, who had returned with information that
several hundreds of Siamese had established themselves
at those places.” Settool and Lungu were in the


territory of the King of Queda, and nothing surely
can better show the nature of his Government and
authority at this time, than the manner in which lie
heard that parties of Siamese had come there, and the
steps which he took to ascertain the truth of such
information. The King in his reply to the Govern-
ment of Prince of Wales Island further admitted the
charge of remissness in rendering the Eoonga Mas,
a charge which with reference to the bad feeling that
had long subsisted between himself and the Siamese
he ought to have especially avoided incurring. He
attributed the delay however to the epidemic sickness
which had lately appeared in Queda.
On the 12th of November a fleet of Siamese prows
entered the Queda river under the charge of Chiom
Phya Ban, the present Commander in Chief at Queda.
Seeing the numerous threats which had lately been
held out against the Chief of Queda, and the informa-
tion which he actually possessed of the Siamese equip-
ping a force to attack him, it is surprizing that no
measures were taken by his ministers, who alone were
at Queda, the Chief himself being at Pulo Tiga, to
oppose or resist the Siamese fleet, the Commander of
which entered into a discussion with the Laxamana,
Bindahara and Tomongong of Queda, pretending that
to obtain a supply of rice was the object of their com-
ing. An opportunity however was soon taken of
surrounding these Ministers, two of them, the Laxa-
mana and Tomongong and several of the Malays were
killed on the spot, and the Bindahara, and subse-
quently the second son of the King of Queda, Tuanku
Yacoob, were made prisoners and put in irons.* The
* Note. The Bindahara on the route to Ligor.
The Malays assert that he was poisoned with a dose of
gunpowder dissolved in water. Tuanku Yacooh also
died last year, just after the Mission had seen him at
Ligor and the King of Queda believes that he also was
poisoned.


moment intelligence of these proceedings reached the
King at Pulo Tiga, a place which he has taken so much
pains to fortify, he and his adviser, Bapoo Kundu,
placed their women and treasure upon Elephants and
fled towards Province Wellesley. They were pursued
by the Siamese and some of the elephants conveying
the King’s sisters and their children and some treasure
fell into the hands of the enemy. At this time a very
small part}* only of the Siamese had entered the Queda
territory, the main force under the Baja of Ligor had
not come up—never therefore was a more ignoble flight
than the Raja of Queda’s, and no respectable Malay now
mentions it but with shame, acknowledging that had
His Highness but proceeded straight to Queda, or had
the Malays but possessed at that time a single ener-
getic Chief, the small party of Siamese at that Capital
could have been destroyed, and suitable measures
taken for defending the country against the larger
force advancing under the Raja of Ligor.
The King however came to Prye, whence his
application for an asylum at Prince of Wales Island
was of course instantly granted, with one understand-
ing only, that the British Government should not be
considered as pledged to deviate from the strict line of
neutrality which it had always observed in the dis-
putes between himself and Siam.
Immediately after the flight of His Highness from
Queda Mr. Crawfurd arrived at Prince of Wales Island
on his route as Agent from the Right Honble. the
Governor General to the Court of Siam. Every in-
formation was supplied to him, and he was sub-
sequently authorized by the Supreme Government,
still in the spirit of the principles laid down by Lord
Cornwallis, to employ the countenance and influence
of the British Government as far as the same could be
prudently and consistently afforded, towards reconcil-
ing the Court of Siam to the King of Queda, and


effecting his restitution on some better defined terms.
Mr. Crawfurd however was particularly directed not to
mix this subject with that which was the primary
object of his Mission. The Raja of Ligor, whilst
advancing towards Queda had forwarded a letter to the
Government of Prince of Wales Island couched in
threatening and unbecoming language, and evidently
intended to prevent the British Government from
affording protection to the King of Queda. This
letter received of course a suitable reply and a copy of
it was furnished to Mr. Crawfurd for the purpose of
being shown to the Siamese Ministers.
Mr. Crawfurd in his negotiations at Bangkok
opened the subject of the invasion of Queda by
admitting at once the dependence of Queda on Siam
stating that this point had been fully enquired into by
the Most Noble the Governor General of India, and
been conceded without hesitation. He explained to
the Siamese Ministers at the same time, that the
King of Queda was an old friend of the English
Nation, and that compassion for his misfortunes had
induced us to afford him an asylum. That we had not
enquired into the merits or demerits of his conduct,
but according to our custom had afforded protection to
an unfortunate Prince and a friend who had come
amongst us. That the King of Queda or any other
Prince in the same situation was at all times at per-
fect liberty to go pdiere he pleased. But that, we
considered it a point of honor, not to surrender him
under any circumstances whatever. The Siamese
Ministers admitted, though Mr. Crawfurd believes
with little sincerity, that the principle adopted by
the British Government was a liberal and generous
one, and could not but be approved of. But Mr,
Crawfurd found that the persons with whom he had
to negotiate were the very individuals who had recom-
mended the invasion of Queda and the Seizure of the
King’s person, upon an accusation of Treason for


alleged assistance given to the national enemy, the
Barmans. These individuals had already formed their
resolution against the Chief of Queda, and they were
desirous only of obtaining possession of his person. The
measure which the King of Queda had adopted of plac-
ing himself under the protection of the British Govern-
ment has served only to increase the suspicions and
animosity of the Siamese Court towards him, and Mr.
Crawfurd therefore judged it prudent and strictly con-
formable to his instructions to abstain from urging’
the subject to any length, lest; he might run the risk
of involving our Government by a further agitation
of it.
He succeeded however in satisfying the Siamese
Ministers of the impropriety of the language used by
the Raja of Ligor in his first address to the Governor
of Prince of Wales Island, and they assured him that
express orders should be sent to that Chief, and to all
other Siamese Officers to preserve the most guarded
eonduct with the British Authorities in their future
intercourse with them. The Raja of Ligor subse-
quently apologized to the Governor of Prince of Wales
Island, through Captain Burney, for having used so
offensive a style in that letter.
Mr. Crawfurd succeeded also in establishing a
point respecting which some doubts had existed at
Prince of Wales Island, —our right of sovereignty in
that Island and the territory on the Peninsula. The
right of the King of Queda to cede any portion of his
territory without the permission of his Liege Lord,
and hence the validity of the whole of Mr. Light’s
proceedings, were questioned. It was stated that it
was well known that the King of Queda had given
some umbrage to the Siamese Monarch by his first
grant of the Island, and that his liege Lord had also
disapproved, as His Highness had often declared,
of the last cession to us of the territory on the oppo-
site shore, while it was worthy of remark, that a King


of Siam had actually deputed an Agent in 1791 to
Captain Light to demand aid from Prince of Wales
Island in a war which His Majesty was then waging
against the Burmese. The fact of an undisturbed
occupation of the Island for nearly forty years, and
of its having been considered as a British possession
in numerous Acts of the British parliament, and in a
Charter of Justice from our Sovereign, ought certainly
have made it too late to allow the question of right
to be raised in any shape whatever. The British
Government also, as was before shown, never admitted
that Siam had divested the tributary Malay Chiefs of
the rights of Government and Sovereignty. But Mr.
Crawfurd reported, that the frequent and distinct re-
ferences nude to Prince of Wales Island throughout
his conferences with the Siamese Negotiators as a
British possession, left no doubt whatever upon his
mind that the Siamese looked upon our right of
Sovereignty in Penang and the territory opposite to
it, as not to be questioned, and that the right of the
Malay Prince to alienate a portion of his fief being
once admitted by the Siamese Court and a total silence
of 36 years, must be looked upon as a valid and
substantial admission of it. We may add here, that
shortly after the occupation of Queda by the Siamese
the Baja of Ligor ostensibly transferred the Govern-
ment of the Country to the retired Chief Sultan Tha
oodeen for the purpose of making through him a
demand of the Annual Stipend of 10,000 Dollars from
the Government of Prince of Wales Island. The Claim
however was distinctly disavowed, and it has never
been repeated. The Treaty negotiated by the late
Mission, in as much as it formally recognizes Prince
of Wales Island as a British Possession, must now set
at rest all doubts of our right of Sovereignty.
Upon the return of Mr. Crawfurd from Siam the
King of Queda, dissatisfied with the result of that
gentleman’s negotiations, expressed a desire of quitting


Prince of Wales Island for the purpose of proceeding
to Queda and recovering his territory by force. It
was pointed out to His Highness, that his means
were wholly inadequate to such an end, that he had
lost the aid of his principal Ministers and Chiefs
without whom any such attempt would be certain of
failure, and would lead only to a useless expenditure
of the lives of such of his subjects as might be induced
to join him, and that in case of his failure he could
not return to seek an asylum at Prince of Wales
Island without obliging the British Government to
deviate from the line of neutrality which it had ever
resolved upon maintaining in the disputes between
His Highness and the Siamese. The King finding
that the expression of his desire would not, as he-had
hoped, oblige the British Government to take some
more active steps in his support, then privately de-
puted some agents to Tavoy for the purpose of solicit-
ing the assistance of the Court of Ava. That power
readily met this appeal and with letters and
presents were promptly sent down to Prince of Wales
Island, in order to ascertain the real situation of
affairs ; but the declaration of war which was soon
after published by the British Government against
Ava, obliged these Burmese Envoys to return hastily
to Tavoy. It is necessary to mention, that the appli-
cation to the Burmese had been made by the King of
Queda without the smallest communication with the
Government of Prince of Wales Island which, the
moment it discovered the circumstance, sent notice of
it to the Rajah of Ligor, under an impression not only
that the approach of the Burmese to the neighbour-
hood of Prince of Wales Island would be extremely
inconvenient, but that the Siamese had some right to
be advised of the matter by the British Government,
which had repeatedly declared its intention of not
permitting the Rajah of Queda to disturb the Siamese
from under its protection. The knowledge of this
proceeding on the part of the King of Qneda fully


confirmed all the previous accusations against him of
holding secret and friendly correspondence with the
national enemy [and] is viewed at Bangkok as the
most heinous and as an inexpiable crime; it made
every Siamese there decidedly and irreclaimably hos-
tile to the King of Queda.
Since that date, His Highness and his subjects
have been unremitting in their endeavours to create a
misunderstanding between the Siamese and the British
Government. Reports after reports have been brought
of the Raja of Ligor preparing equipments for the
purpose of attacking Prince of Wales Island and some
of the very persons who have been the principal
informers in that island have gone also to the Raja of
Ligor with intelligence of the hostile intentions of the
Government of Prince of Wales Island, by which the
fears and suspicions of that Chief have been kept alive
to the same extent as the mistrust and jealousy of our
own Government, Of course, a very large portion of
the Malay inhabitants fled from Queda when they saw
their King abscond and the principal Chiefs killed or
dispersed, and it cannot be concealed, that the opera-
tions of the Siamese against Queda and the Lamava *
Islands were conducted with all the barbarity and
cruelty used by that nation in war; men, women and
children being massacred, made slaves or carried away
in that condition to the neighbouring Siamese Govern-
ments. But much of this barbarity and cruelty were
the results of attempts made by small parties of
Malays to draw out the Siamese from Queda, attempts
which ended only in “the destruction of the assailants,
and in increased persecution towards the remaining
inhabitants,” and in increased immigration into the
territory of Prince of Wales Island. The Government
there afforded every possible relief and protection to
these emigrants and a number of at least 12,000 Souls
were settled in Province AVellesley, and engaged in
the cultivation of lands allotted to them by Mr. Maingy


whilst superintending that Province with so much zeal
and credit. Many of the inhabitants of Qaeda how-
ever were of too idle and restless a character to settle,
and these have taken to a life of piracy and plunder,
and have been instrumental in preventing the establi-
shment of cordiality or confidence in the intercourse
between the Government of Prince of Wales Island
and the Rajah of Ligor. In the first part of this
Report, mention was made of the apprehensions excited
against the Rajah of Ligor at Prince of Wales Island
in 1822 and again last year. At both times Captain
Burney visited that Chief and could not find the
smallest grounds for imputing his equipments to secret
hostility against Prince of Wales Island. The Chief
showed himself to be too well aware of the means and
power of the British Government to venture on any
such measure. His preparations in 1822 were more
defensive than offensive, having been assured by some
who had visited him from Prince of Wales
Island, of the determination of the British Govern-
ment to restore the King of Queda by force. Last year
when this Chief deemed it prudent to stop upon find-
ing that his projected attack upon Salengore would
involve him with the Government of Prince of Wales
Island Captain Burney found that Malay informers
had again assured the Siamese of the intention of the
British Government to attack them at Queda. In fact,
both last year and in 1822 it was curious to observe that
the Siamese at Queda had been impressed with pre-
cisely the same apprehensions of an attack, as the
inhabitants of Prince of Wales Island. This state of
mutual doubt and apprehension had been entirely
brought about by the secret adherents of the King of
Queda and other Malays, and so convinced was Captain
Burney of this fact, that before proceeding on the Mis-
sion to Siam, he submitted to the consideration of the
Government of Prince of Wales Island that in case of
his failing to effect the removal of the Siamese from
Queda, no other arrangement, whatever might be th©


advantages held forth by it, could be carried into
full effect as long as the King of Queda continued
to live at that Island, and his friends and partisans to
exasperate the natural distrust and jealousy of the
Siamese.
Captain Burney anticipated a failure in the object
of restoring the King of Queda, because the Mission
was furnished with no equivalent to offer to the
Siamese, and because he had just before observed the
Raja of Ligor and the Siamese at Queda speak of our
old ally with great asperity and animosity. The Gov-
ernment of Prince of Wales Island however whilst it
fully admitted the necessity of a final decision one
way or other and acknowledged that no confidence
could subsist between it and the Siamese so long as
the King of Queda remained at Prince of Wales
Island, declared that it could “ only be under the con-
viction resulting from trial of the utter hopelessness of
success that we should ever allow ourselves to contem-
plate the abandonment of the cause of the King of
Queda.'’
Upon the arrival of the Mission at Bangkok we
discovered that the Court of Siam had taken a far
greater interest in the proceedings of the Raja of;
Ligor than what was believed at Prince of Wales
Island, that most of the principal persons at Bangkok
had shared in the plunder of Queda, and that besides
guns and other articles, about 1000 of the inhabitants-
of Queda had been sent up to be employed by the King,
Wangna and almost every Siamese Minister. In the
Month of February, the Envoy reported to the Govern-
ment of Prince of Wales Island, that the Siamese
Ministers were decidedly opposed to the restoration of
the King of Queda, that nearly the whole of the
Revenues of Queda, estimated to amount to 30,000
Dollars were sent up to Bangkok, and that the offered
annual Payment of 4,000 Dollars was too insignificant.


when compared with the profits derived by the Siamese
from the direct occupation of Queda. The Envoy
suggested therefore, that he should be authorized to
tender to the Siamese Ministers some other advantage,
besides an augmentation of the 4,000 Dollai’s per
annum proposed by the Government of Prince of
Wales Island. No such authority could be granted to
him. In March he reported to the Supreme Govern-
ment that by perseverance and in fact intimidation he
might ultimately succeed in rescuing Queda from
Siamese Domination, but that in such case he should
leave the Court of Siam much dissatisfied with the
British Government and with himself, while the enga-
gement into which he might prevail upon the Siamese
Ministers to enter, would be by no means so cordial or
so encouraging to our mercantile interests as one in
which Queda was not wrested from Siam. The Envoy
in his conferences with the Siamese Ministers used
every argument in his power to pei’suade them of the
justice, humanity and policy of restoring the King of
Queda. He pointed out the great mutual benefits
which such an arrangement would afford to both the
Siamese and English nations. The certainty of our
friendship remaining unbroken, and the security
which such a concession on the part of Siam would
oive to our future intercourse. He noticed the serious
collision which the Rajah of Ligor had nearly brought
on with the British Government by the armament
which he had lately collected at Queda, and the mis-
chievous proceedings of his Emissaries at Prince of
Wales Island, where the name and character of His
Highness the Envoy declared, were held in such terror
by the Natives and in such abhorrence by many of the
European inhabitants, that it would be impossible for
the relations between Queda and that Island to be
placed on a quiet and satisfactory footing so long as His
Highness or any of his family governed that terri-
tory. In fact, the Envoy during several conferences
with the Ministers, and in several memorials argued


flattered and even threatened without making any
impression. The Siamese Ministers objected most
decidedly to the King of Queda for having connected
himself with the Burmese, and done everything in his
power to injure Siam. They repeatedly assured the
Mission that the future Government of Queda should be
settled in such manner as to preclude all chance of
collision with the British Government and so as to
ensure the most friendly relations between that country
and Prince of Wales Island. They asked the Envoy,
whether he was prepared for the sake of Queda, to
reject all the other advantages which it was in the
power of his Mission to obtain in favor of the British
Government, and they declared that the King of Siam
would appeal to the Governor General himself and
point out the grounds upon which His Majesty found
it absolutely impossible to consent to the restoration
of the King of Queda.
The Envoy has recorded in his Journal on the
26th of May an opinion that if he had broken up the
conference w Inch he held that night with the Siamese
Ministers, and had prepared to quit the country, they
would have yielded the point rather than have per-
mitted him to depart. Without reflecting that this
Journal was only a record of his daily impressions,
that opinion has since been cited against the Envoy.
It is impossible with such an ignorant and conceited
Court as that of Siam to predict with any degree of
certainty, what would be its proceedings in any
particular contingency, but there is no doubt that
subsequent experience induced the Envoy to question
the accuracy of his opinion, and to perceive that the
whole of his instructions, as well as the circumstance
of two English merchants residing at Bangkok with
considerable property which he could not remove with
him, would have rendered it impossible for him to put
his opinion to the proof, without incurring a very
awful responsibility and heavy censure, had the issue


been contrary to that which he anticipated.
The Envoy foresaw that our abandonment of the
Cause of the King of Queda would subject him to
much personal inquietude on his return to Prince of
Wales Island, but he trusted that the authorities there
would admit, as they have done him the honor to
admit, the difficulty with which he had to contend,
from the impracticable character of the people with
whom he had to deal. The necessity of yielding some
points for the attainment of others, and the manifest
expediency of coming to some sort of understanding,
instead of quitting the Court of Siam, if not actually
hostile, at least on unfriendly terms. The Envoy also
believed, that the whole character of his Mission was
conciliatory, and that unless he could effect the res-
toration of the King of Queda by amicable negotiation
and make an arrangement to which it would be the
interests of the Siamese to keep, he had much better
concede the point. To restore the King of Queda by
means of intimidation only, appeared to the Envoy
inconsistent, not only with his instructions but with
policy, and on the following grounds. The great mis-
chief has already been done in Queda. The country
throughout is in the occupation of the Siamese. We
have publicly acknowledged their right of interfering
with it. The inhabitants have for the most part been
driven out, and many of them forced to a life of
piracy whence it will perhaps be impossible to
reclaim them, the principal Ministers and only
respectable Chiefs of the former Malayan Govern-
ment have been destroyed or dispersed. Some
of them have even been persuaded to join the
Siamese interests and petition the King of Siam, as
they did while the Mission was at Bangkok, against
the restoration of the King of Queda. Were the King
of Queda to return to his territory, we should be
required to assume the direct charge of his country, as
he does not possess a single respectable adherent


and as he cannot now be supposed capable of ruling'
the Kingdom which he misgoverned when supported
by all his Chiefs and his deceased Bindahara, Laxa-
mana, and Tomoongong. The jealousy and distrust of
the Siamese and of the Raja of Ligor would be greatly
increased and our commercial intercourse with Upper
and Lower Siam seriously obstructed, if not entirely
cut off. No good understanding could be established
between the King of Queda and the Siamese, and to
preclude the intrigues and designs of the latter we
should be obliged to fix a military force with His
Highness and to provide on the hills and forest of
Queda and on the confines of Ligor, Singora, Merdi-
long and Patani, against all those evils and dangers
redoubled, which are believed to threaten Prince of
Wales Island; whilst the Raja of Ligor and the
Siamese are in the immediate neighbourhood of that
Settlement, and of all our means of defence and
chastisement. The restoration of the King of Queda
in such a manner would, in fact, soon draw on the
British Government to Ligor, and even to Bangkok,
whilst the resources of that territory would not meet
a Hundredth part of all this expence.
The Envoy did not attempt to persuade the
Siamese Ministers, if they could not consent to the
restoration of the King of Queda, to appoint some
other member of his family, or at least to continue a
Malayan Government in Queda, because he saw that
the views and feelings of the Court of Siam were so
decided against foregoing the profit which it derives
from the direct occupation of Queda, that they would
only have selected some Malay, like Sultan Heaoodeen,
to be a mere tool in the hands of the Raja of Ligor.
Such a character would have been more afraid to
cultivate intimate relations with Prince of Wales
Island than a regular Siamese Governor, and to prove
the sincerity of his devotion to Siam would have often
acted in a more unfriendly manner towards British.


Subjects than what the occasion required.
The Envoy also did not attempt to obtain from
the Siamese Ministers any cession of additional terri-
tory on the Coast of Queda, because he saw that the
application would have been unsuccessful, the customs
and practice of the Siamese Court rendering any
formal cession of territory on their part most objec-
tionable and unprecedented, and because the Envoy
knew the policy of burthening ourselves with the
expense and duty of maintaining an additional tract
of terrritory on the Coast of Queda had been question-
ed by high authorities, and on one occasion decidedly
opposed by the Supreme Government.
But the Envoy saw the necessity of endeavouring
to engage the Siamese Court to afford the Malay In-
habitants of Queda proper treatment. From the
earliest time numbers of Malays have been found
among the population of the Capital of Siam, some of
them serving the King as soldiers and many engaged
as slaves and domestic servants among the Chiefs and
principal people. It has before been mentioned that on
the first occupation of Queda, 1,000 of the inhabitants
had been sent up to Bangkok. Shortly after the
Mergui captives had been released, the Mission found
that the Raja of Ligor had distributed about 150
Malays whom he had brought up from Queda, among
the principal Courtiers, who had been deprived of
the services of the Burmese. Although these Malays
are not treated with the same Inhumanity as the
national enemies of Siam, the Burmese being chiefty
■employed as domestic attendants and cultivators of
land, still the Envoy deemed it right to remonstrate
very seriously with the Raja of Ligor on this subject,
and to assure him that it would be impossible for the
British Government to view' with indifference this
species of slave trade, practised in the Dominions of
an old ally, and in the immediate neighbourhood of


Prince of Wales Island. The Raja promised to [dis]-
continue such removal of the inhabitants of Queda and
to keep him in recollection of his promise, as well as
to show to the Siamese, when acquiescing in their
direct occupation of Queda, the first part of the 13th
Article of the Treaty was drafted, engaging the Siam-
ese to take proper care of the country of Queda and of
its people.
The Envoy had some difficulty in persuading the
Siamese Ministers to relinquish the duty upon the
exportation of grain and provisions from Queda into
Prince of Wales Island, and principally in consequence
of the Governnnnt of Prince of Wales Island having
for so many years, as the Siamese declared, permitted
the King of Queda to levy such a duty, contrary to
the stipulations of his treaty. The mischievous system
of farming the exclusive navigation and trade of
the different rivers in Queda was also engaged to be
discontinued.
The Envoy, of course, made a point of effecting
the release of the King of Queda’s family and personal
servants who had been removed to Ligor and detained
there since the first irruption of the Siamese into
Queda. The Siamese Negotiators however made it a
point on their part, that the British Government
should engage that these released captives, the King
of Queda, and his followers should not be permitted to
attack or disturb the Siamese and as a further security
that the King of Queda should be removed from the
neighbourhood of Queda. The Envoy had before sub-
mitted to the Government of Prince of Wales Island,
which had entirely agreed with him, that no good
understanding could subsist between that authority
and the Siamese, so long as the King of Queda
remained at Prince of Wales Island, and the Envoy
therefore now conceived that he should be warranted
in affording to the Siamese Negotiators an unequivocal


proof of the desire of the British Government to
establish friendly relations with Siam, by conceding
this point without hesitation. Some alteration was
made in the terms in which the Siamese negotiators
desired to express this engagement, and both parties
fully understood, that such an engagement should
bind the British Government not to permit the King
of Queda and his followers to disturb or to plan
measures for attacking or molesting the Siamese, so
long only as those persons might be living under the
protection, at the expence, and in the territories of
the British Government. The Envoy however, in
anticipation of the feeling which such an engagement
would excite at Prince of Wales Island, took the
precaution of rendering 'it conditional only, inserting
a clause at the close of the 13th Article to allow the
Siamese to continue at Queda the export duty upon
grain, in the event of the authorities at Prince of
Wales Island being unwilling to enforce the removal
of the King of Queda from that Settlement.
Upon the return of the Mission to Prince of
Wales Island the King of Queda being naturally
dissatisfied with the result of the negotiations at
Bangkok, again expressed his desire of proceeding to
attack the Siamese at Queda. The Government of
Prince of Wales Island invited His Highness to
proceed to Malacca and at the same time called upon
him to be a party [to] the treaty negotiated by the
late Mission, and to make a formal and final renun-
ciation of all future claims on his Kingdom. There
was was surely no real necessity for offering His
Highness an option, or for calling upon him to be a
party to the Treaty. That His Highness is entitled
to every protection, and the most liberal provision
from the British Government is undeniable, but surely
our duty towards him is too rigorously viewed when it
is supposed to preclude our coupling this protection
and provision with such terms as may secure our own.


peace and tranquillity. Of course, His Highness is afc
liberty to refuse acquiescence to our terms and to
appeal for assistance to any Native or Foreign
European power. But the threats which he makes of
quitting Penang, and of collecting and arming his
dispersed followers to attack Queda, are now as they
were in 1823, merely made to try the British Govern-
ment. He and his advisers are aware of the folly and
utter hopelessness of attempting to execute such
threats. No Native power in the neighbourhood of
Prince of Wales Island is capable of affording him
efficient aid against the Siamese, and it is not very
likely to be the policy or interest of any European
power to interfere in his behalf and take possession of
such a territory as Queda. Unfortunately, His High-
ness has never been properly assured that the British
Government will not restore him by force, and his
friends at Prince ot Wales Island have assisted
him to make appeals to that authority, and have
buo3 7 ed him up with hopes of a restoration by such
means. He is even at this moment fully impressed
with a belief that the Supreme Government will be
persuaded to afford him adequate aid to recover his
territoiy, and without such aid he and all his followers
are well aware of the utter hopelessness of his cause.
It is quite natural therefore that no arrangement,
short of his restoration, will ever receive his acquies-
cence, until he be peremptorily assured of the deter-
mination of the Supreme Government not to employ
in his favor any other means than those within which
it has for so many years confined the interference of
the Government of Prince of Wales Island. But it is
high time that the question should now be decided
one way or the other.
In 1824 the Supreme Government determined
that the Political considerations which suggest the
attempts to effect the restoration of the Malay Govern-
ment in Queda resolve themselves into the following.


The British Government would unquestionably gain
by the measure in reputation among the Eastern
States. It would remove from the vicinity of Prince
of Wales Island and from a state of actual contact
with its Continental Territory a most troublesome and
unaccommodating neighbour, between whom and our
Government at Prince of Wales Island disputes are at
all times liable to break out. It would restore to
Prince of Wales Island those necessary supplies of
grain from which it is now cut off, and finally, it
would put a stop to the alarming increase of piracy
which has taken place in consequence of the flight
of the Malay population through dread of the Siamese,
and their addiction to predatory courses from wanting
the means of subsistence.
The Treaty now negotiated with the Siamese Gov-
ernment will, it is hoped, be considered as having at-
tained some of the above objects, and the establishment
of defined friendly relations with the Siamese, of free
trade and intercourse between Queda and Prince of
Wales Island, and of prudent provisions for the Settle-
ment of all questions relating to boundaries, refu-
ees, and military or Naval equipments, ought mate-
rially to reduce the chances of collision between the
Siamese and our Government at Prince of Wales
Island, while those who are aware of the real character
of the King of Queda and of the ignoble manner of his
flight from his territory, must doubt whether the
measure of his restoration would have much increased
the reputation of the British Government.'* But there
are other grounds upon which the Government of
Prince of Wales Island advocate the expediency of
restoring the King of Queda, Vizt., That Siamese
* Note. The Chief of Salengore in his communica-
tions with the Political Agent lately deputed to him
from Prince of Wales Island, declared that ‘‘the King
of Queda was a woman for making so poor a resistance
against the Siamese.”


supremacy over the Malay States has been taken for
granted and not proved. That no instance of acknow-
ledged or established dependency of the one, or
supremacy of the other has ever been produced, or can
be traced in the Malayan Annals. That the mere pre-
sentation of the Boonga Mas bears no such construc-
tion of dependence as has been put upon it. That
the protection of the British Government against both
Siam and Ava was the object for which the King of
Queda proposed the cession of Prince of Wales Island.
That the triennial presentation of the Boonga Mas
was the only connexion that subsisted between Queda
and Siam. That the encroachments and ruinous in-
terference of the Siamese were the consequence
of the King of Queda’s connexion with the British
Government, and that as there never occurred in
the Annals of India an instance of a Native Chief
suffering so severely from British connexion, so his
restoration becomes essential to the character and
reputation of the British Government. Finally that it
is the true policy of the British Government to keep
up the petty States now standing between us and the
Siamese, and to endeavour to relieve those which have
been subverted, so as to prevent our coming in contact
with that power in the neighbourhood of Prince of
Wales Island.
It was deemed absolutely necessary to trace in so
lengthened and perhaps tedious a manner as has been
done in this paper, the early history of the Malay Prin-
cipalities and the proceedings of the British Govern-
ment and of the Chiefs of Queda since our occupation
of Prince of Wales Island, for the purpose of en-
abling the proper authorities to determine how far
the above grounds upon which the cause of the King
of Queda is advocated at Prince of Wales Island are
correct and tenable. The opinions of Mr. Crawfurd
who resided for years at Prince of Wales Island,
and who possesses, in addition to his other great qua


lifications a knowledge of the personal character of the
present. King of Qaeda, may be here usefully adduced
in support of the proceedings of his successor at the
Court of Siam.
The next point upon which I have the honor to
submit my sentiments is the nature of the arrange-
ments which it may be useful or convenient to make
with the Supreme Government respecting the local
interests of Prince of Wales Island. Before entering
upon this topic I feel it to be my duty to offer it res-
pectfully as my clear and distinct conviction, that these
interests, however valuable otherwise, are of secondary
importance to those which have just been considered,
while in fact the most essential of them are virtually
secured by the establishment of the former.
Queda, before its occupation by the Siamese con-
tained from 40 to 50,000 inhabitants, and the Rajah,
by creating monopolies and by other means little
short of extortion realized an annual revenue of about
30,000 Dollars exclusive of the Stipend of 10,000 paid
by the British Government. The demand for grain by
the population of Prince of Wales Island was the
cause of a considerable-cultivation of rice in a few
favored spots along the banks of the rivers, but in
general the country is covered with an extensive
forest, and to such an extent that the population can
scarcely be computed to exceed 8 inhabitants to a
square mile. Queda is generally destitute of all those
commodities which give some commercial consequence
to the other States of the Peninsula such as tin, gold,
pepper, and other ordinary Malayan products.
It is almost superfluous to mention that Prince of
Wales Island with a strip of territory 20 miles long
and 3 broad, are portions of the Queda principalit} 1 ,
and that they owe their present culture and population
exclusively to British protection, being one dreary and
uninhabited forest when we obtained possession, it


is of importance here to remark, that since the Siam-
ese occupation a vast number of the Malays of Qaeda
have emigrated into the British Territories, trans-
ferring thither under more favorable auspices the
culture of grain, which was formerly carried on within
the Native districts for the supply cf Prince of Wales
Island, thus contributing already to render any con-
nection with that country less necessary to us.
From this rapid sketch it will perhaps appear to
the Government that the acquisition of supremacy of
Queda is not a matter of the first moment to us, nor
perhaps one calculated to ensure us any object ot
material value, that it may entail upon us, on the
contrary, future inconvenience and embarrassment,
and that while its relinquishment by the Siamese may
be a matter of considerable difficulty, to contend for it
on ours, may involve the sacrifice of objects of far
greater moment and utility.
These different points demand respectively some
explanation. The great inconvenience which has
been felt at Prince of Wales Island for the last 15
years and since the recovery of the Siamese power, has
arisen simply and solely according to my conception,
from the British power having come into accidental
collision with the Siamese Government at this weak
and detached point of Our Empire, and therefore in a
situation not calculated to impress the proud and
ignorant Court of Siam with the necessary respect for
our strength and i-esources. This delusion will be at
once dissipated by our permanent occupation of Tavoy
and Mergui, and by the great lesson of our strength
which the results of the Burman war will have taught
the nations beyond the Ganges, and which, by com-
manding their respect, will in future render all pallia-
tive and corrective expedients unnecessary.
In the reports which I had the honor to lay be-
fore Government respecting the Mission to Siam, I


offered it as my opinion that more advantage was
likely to accrue to us from a direct intercourse with
the Siamese than with the more uncivilized and less
industrious Malays, whose connection, although it had
lasted for near 40 years, has been productive of no
beneficial change in their own manners [and] no sen-
sible advantage to us, and I still continue to entertain
these sentiments.
It is however to be remarked, that the acquisition
of the supremacy, and without sacrifice, by no means
removes us from the vicinage of the Siamese or their
Political influence. They would still in such a case
possess the supremacy of Perak, reaching far to the
South of us, and of Patani to the east, while their own
immediate territory would bound us to the north, so
that they would thus in a great measure continues
nearly to surround ourselves and our feeble ally.
The inconveniences which I am led to apprehend
by our acquiring the supremacy over Queda arise from
the certainty of its becoming sooner or later necessary
for us to interfere in the affairs of the Native Govern-
ment. This principality is under our immediate
eye. The national character will be implicated in its
good or bad government, and that it will be ill
goveimed, and our powerful support to the Sovereign
employed as an instrument for the oppression of his
subjects, is what may reasonably be expected, not
only from the example of all former cases of a similar
nature, but from the barbarous character of the people
and the evil habits of their rulers. Such a state of
things might ultimately lead to the necessity of
assuming the direct management of the country, and
thus involve the the question of territorial extension
over a country destitute of natural resources, of singu-
lar poverty, and of which the sovereignty could serve
no purpose, but to involve us in a needless and
heavy expense.


Even in the personal character of the present
Raja of Queda we have nothing to hope should he be
restored, for it is admitted by his own friends that his
oppressive and rapacious conduct had long lost him
the affections of his subjects, that this encouraged
the invasion of the Siamese, and that it was in short
the principal cause which led to the loss of his throne.
The Raja of Ligor was implicitly bound and
actually obeying the orders of the Wangna and of his
party at Bangkok when he came into contact with
the Government of Prince of Wales Island and as his
son is appointed Governor of Queda and his followers
enjoy other benefits there, His Highness has of course
now a greater interest against the • restoration of the
Malayan Government. But nothing could be fairer or
more natural in him and his friends at Bangkok, than
to exert themselves, as they did most strenuously, to
counterbalance the failure of the Mission in this
Queda question by securing it success in all the other
objects from which they did not derive the same
immediate profit. The Envoy always experienced the
greatest assistance and relief in addressing an acute
and intelligent person like the Raja of Ligor, ac-
quainted with our customs and character, instead of
the vain, arrogant and ignorant Siamese Ministers, and
many of the communications of the Envoy were in
consequence made directly to the King of Siam
through the Raja of Ligor. This maintenance of
friendly communication with that Chief has been
condemned by the Government of Prince of Wales
Island, which declares that His Highness should, on
the contrary, have been held up to the Siamese
Ministers as a most troublesome neighbour to the
British, and as the person of all others most likely to
bring on a rupture between the two Governments.
But thus to attack or denounce the Raja of Ligor was
the best possible way of raising him in the estimation
of the Court of Siam and of encreasing his influence.


On two or three occasions the Envoy did apply very
strong language against His Highness, and although
it vexed the Chief at the time, the Envoy found that
such conduct on his part was afterwards matter of
secret joy to the Raja. Not he only, but every other
Siamese Chief dreads nothing so much as the imputa-
tion of cultivating intimacy with a European. Thoso
who privately gave the Envoy most assistance often
entreated him not to speak well of them to others and
sometimes before their superiors gratuitously aspersed
him. The Raja of Ligor lived in incessant apprehen-
sion of being charged with cultivating too great an
intimacy with the Mission. He on one occasion
traduced the Envoy to the Wang-na in the presence
of a person who reported it to the Mission, and whose
veracity we had no reason to doubt; and His Highness
was afraid to call upon the Envoy, or to allow
his family to visit that of the although at
Ligor the most cordial civilities had passed between
them. To hold His Highness up to the Court of
of Siam as a most troublesome neighbour to us, would
have tended only to strengthen his credit, and if
the Government of Prince of Wales Island is still
anxious to counteract and to destroy His Highness’s
influence at Bangkok, the Mission can recommend no
more certain mode than to draw him on at Queda,
into such close and friendly relation with us, as
he is disposed to maintain when distant from his
jealous and mistrustful Court. But no member of the
Mission or any officer who has ever seen the Rajah of
Ligor, can adopt the sentiments entertained against
him by the Government of Prince of Wales Island.
We may repeat here what was said in the first
part of the report. The Mission found the Court of
Siam divided into two parties, and headed respectively
by the King and Wangna. The King’s party is in-
telligent, moderate and really well disposed to cul-
tivate friendly relations with the British Government.


His Majesty was described to be favorable to our
wishes with respect to Queda. But the Wangna’s
party is characterized by the conceit, ignorance and
arrogance natural to the Siamese, and His Highness,
under whose special superintendence the southern
portion of the Siamese Empire is placed, and into
whose separate treasury are received all the revenues
of Queda, was most decidedly opposed to the restora-
tion of the Malay Chief of Queda. Every attempt
that we made to press this subject on the Court
irritated and exasperated His Highness, who, we heard,
sent down orders to fortify Queda, and who, on one
occasion, as we learnt from a source to which we
could not refuse credit, although we ridiculed the
intelligence at the time, proposed to the Ministers to
hang up the Envoy, for presuming to vex the Court
with representations concerning Queda, contrary to
the tenor of the Governor General’s letter to the King
of Siam and therefore, it was to be believed, without
any authority from His Lordship. The Wangna is an
important personage in the Siamese Government.
He is not only in special charge of the southern
portion of the Kingdom, but he is at the head of its
military establishment. He must be consulted by the
King’s Ministers on all public acts of His Majesty,
He has his own Court and Ministers corresponding in
number and duties with those belonging to the King,
and he receives one Third of the whole Revenue of
the kingdom. To render such a personage discontented
with our negotiations would perhaps have been only to
lay the foundation of a war between the two States.
The only treaty to be made with such a State as Siam
is clearly one which it will be her interest and advan-
tage to keep. By adopting a high tone, that is, by
intimidation, supposing such a mode of negotiation to
have been consistent with the instructions of the
Envoy, the Mission perhaps might have carried the
Queda question, but it would have carried nothing
else, and whether such a mode of accomplishing that


object would have been ultimately an advantage to the
British Government has already been shown. Sound
policy as well as the orders of the Governor General in
Council pointed out, that unless the Mission could
effect the restoration of the King of Queda by amic-
able negotiation, and make an arrangement by which
it would be to the interest of the Siamese to abide, the
point had much better be conceded.
The Mission had to make its selection to place
our relations with the Siamese either on a conciliatory
and friendly, or an unsettled and hollow footing.
Hence amicable, though at times rather importunate,
representations were all it considered itself justified to
make, and when these failed advantage was taken of
the influence of the party immediately benefited
by such failure, to render it less mischievous to our
interests, and to effect the other objects of our Mission.
Whatever might have been the real intentions of the
Rajah of Ligor when he was persuaded in the Treaty
concluded with him at Queda, to promise to assist
the Envoy towards accomplishing the views of the
Penang Government relative to the King of Queda,
there is no question that on his arrival at Bangkok,
he was obliged, like every other Provincial Siamese
Governor or Subordinate Chief, to adopt implicitly
and religiously the views and feelings of the leading
Members of the Court.
The primary and most important object of the
Mission to Siam as viewed by the Governor General
in Council was the maintenance of harmony between
two States which had suddenly come into contact,
whose armies were in contiguity, and whose subjects
of difference and dispute were so likely to arise and
become matter of hostile contention. The other
objects which the Mission was impowered to endea-
vour to attain at Bangkok, in the event only of cir-
cumstances proving favorable were an improvement in


our commercial relations with Siam, and the restora-
tion of the King of Queda. But respecting these
objects the Supreme Government observed “ we have
so little at present to offer in the way of equivalent
that we consider it vain to hope that any advantages
beyond those above specified can be gained bj’ negotia-
tion. Indeed, we do not very clearly perceive how the
Government of Siam and the Rajah of Ligor will ever
be persuaded to forego the profit which it seems they
derive from the direct occupation of Quedah, unless
we are prepared to tender Tavoy or Mergui as an
inducement.” The Honble. the Governor of Prince of
Wales Island had proposed the cession of a portion of
the coast of Tenasserim to the Siamese as the equi-
valent for the main object desired in the direction of
Prince of Wales Island, and during Captain Burney’s
Mission to Pungah, he had ascertained that the only
means of restoring the King of Queda would be to
make the general advantages to be derived by the
Court of Siam in other Quarters, outweigh the more
immediate views of the Wangna, and Rajah of Ligor,
unless we could offer to those Chiefs some more
equivalent compensation than the 4,000 Dollars per
annum proposed by the Government of Prince of
Wales Island. When therefore the Supreme Govern-
ment determined against holding out to the Siamese
any distinct expectation of our ceding to them the
Province of Tavoy or Mergui it virtually gave up the
Raja of Queda.
Those who will take the trouble of comparing the
account of the Malay States and of the conduct,
character and claims of the King of Queda given
in this paper, with that drawn up by an officer of
the Government of Prince of Wales Island, will find
that the latter omits all notice to be found in the
Malay Annals and in the reports of the early European
Voyagers and travellers of the ancient connection of
Siam with the Peninsula of Malacca, and of the former


condition of the Petty States on it, and he produces such
circumstances only as may lead the British Govern-
ment into a forcible interference in favor of the King
of Queda and into a participation in the concerns and
interests of Siam and the whole of the Malay States.
The Copy of the Malay Annals from which the
compiler of the “ Account of the very early Malayan
Establishments on the Peninsula of Malacca” has made
his extracts, appears to differ from that translated by
Dr. Leyden and edited by Sir Stamford Baffles in not
containing the following sentences : Siam in ancient
times “had all the regions under the wind depend on it,”
and “formerly Pahang was an extensive Country De-
pendent on Siam.” See pages 34 and 36 of that Account
and pages 121 and 135 of Leyden’s Malay Annals.
¥
The Government of Prince of Wales Island in-
structed the Envoy to Siam to secure the four following
points:
Ist. The restoration of the King of Quedah.
2ndly. The withdrawal of the Siamese from
Perak,
3rdly. The prevention of further conquests by
the Siamese over the Malayan States on either side of
the Peninsula. The consequent maintenance of the
independence of those States and exclusion of the
Siamese power from contact with the British Settle-
ments in the Straits ; and
dthty. The Establishment of a more free inter-
course and trade with the interior and Eastern side
of the Malayan Peninsula by means of the overland
routes and numerous rivers flowing into the sea in the
neighbourhood of Penang.
The Mission has certainly failed in the first, but
the second and fourth of the above-mentioned objects
have been fully accomplished and it was hoped that


the third point would appear to have been attained cont-
pletely as far as Perak and Salengore were concerned,
and partially as far as the British interests are in-
volved in the maintenance of the present Government
of Tringano and Calantan. The Government of Prince
of Wales Island however has been pleased to decide
that “ in all matters connected with the Malay Penin-
sula the Mission must be considered in some degree
to have failed and that the state of our relations with
our neighbours is not materially improved by the
result.”
(Signed) H. BURNEY Capt,
Late Envoy to the Court of Siam.
FORT WILLIAM
2d. December 1826.


To A. STIRLING Esqre.
&c. &c. &c.
Sir,
The Right Honble. the Governor General is al-
ready apprized of the arrival of Captain Burney the
Envoy to the Court of Siam, with the Treaty con-
cluded with that State, a copy of his voluminous
report having been transmitted to you with my letter
of the Bth Instant.
2. The Vice President in Council concurring in
the opinion expressed by the Honble. the Governor iu
Council of Prince of Wales Island in his letter of the
sth October that the Treaty should be ratified by the
Supreme Government, I am now directed to transmit
it herewith for the signature of the Governor General
in the event of its also receiving His Lordship’s con-
currence ; and to state that under all the circums-
tances detailed by the Envoy in his clear and very
able report, His Excellency in Council considers that
officer to have acted [with] great judgment and
address, and to have carried every point which, under
the circumstances alluded to, the Court of Siam could
be expected to concede.
3. When the Treaty shall have been returned,
ratified by the Governor General, the Vice President
in Council will lose no time in dispatching Captain
Burney (on the Brig Guardian retained for that
purpose) to Queda, where he is to exchange it with
the Rajah of Ligore’s son, who is to deliver to Captain
Burney the counterpart ratified by the King of Siam.
4. On the exchange of the ratified copies of the
Treaty at Queda, the Mission of Captain Burney, His
Excellency in Council presumes, will terminate. It
FORT WILLIAM 22d. December 1826.


appears desirable, however, that an Officer so well
acquainted with the Siamese character and language
should continue to be employed where those qualifica-
tions may be called into action, and as the Civil Com-
mission for the Tenasserim Provinces has applied for
farther aid in consequence of the departure of his
Assistant, Captain Briggs, from Mergui, the Vice
President in Council conceives, that it may be ex-
pedient to direct Captain Burney to proceed to
Mergui, and assume the Civil Charge of the southern
portion of the British possessions in that quarter
under the direction of the Civil Commissioner.
I have &c.
(Signed) G. SWINTON
Acting Chief Secy, to Govt.
Fort William
22d. December 1826.


FORT WILLIAM 1st June 1827.
Prince of Wales Island,
23rd. April 1827.
Envoy to Siam
To George Swinton Esqre.
Secy, to Government.
Sir,
I do myself the honor to report my arrival at this
settlement on the 16th Instant. I touched at Queda
on my passage from Tavoy, and learnt that the Rajali
of Ligor, with the cop}" of the Treaty bearing the King
of Siam’s Seal, is at Merdilong, where he has been await-
ing my return during the last two and a half months.
An express was immediately dispatched to him, and I
hope to meet His Highness at Queda or at Trang in
the course of 15 or 20 days and exchange the ratifica-
tions of the Treaty.
1 found the Siamese at Queda and the whole
country around in a state of great alarm at the
additional troops which had arrived here from Fort St.
George. The partizans of the Ex-King of Queda had
been most active in circulating a report that this force
had been collected for the purpose of attacking Siam,
and that the local Government was waiting only for
my arrival with the necessary orders from Bengal to
commence the attack. The consequence of this report
was, that the petty Ghulia and Chinese traders had
fled from Queda, and all trade in that country was at a
stand; whilst the Rajah of Ligor, with his son, the
Chief of '*• lerdilong, and the Chief of Singora, is now
collecting levies, and making preparations on the
frontiers of Queda in order to oppose the progress
of the expected attack from Penang. I have several
letters from the Rajah of Ligor entreating me in the


most earnest terms to explain to him the object of this
additional force and the cause of my long delay.
Upon my arriving and refuting these reports,
others of a more mischievous character were circulated
and propagated, in order to exasperate the animosity
of the King of Queda and his followers, and to inti-
midate me. It was said, that I had orders from the
Supreme Government to remove the King of Queda
from the IslaAd forcibly and that it was my intention
to take an opportunity of seizing his Highness’s person,
during an interview which I would propose to seek as
as a friend, I visited the Ex-King however, and I
hope convinced him of the utter groundlessness of
such a charge, and I am satisfied that if the expediency
and advantage of his removal be seriously urged on
His Highness, by the officers of this Government,
he will consent to proceed to Malacca. I have no
hesitation in adding, that the absolute necessity for
removing him from this Island appears to me now de-
monstrated beyond all doubt.
1 am happy to report that some late accounts and
letters which I have received from Bangkok through
Messrs. Hunter and Malloch, who have just come
down, and from Mr. Carlos de Silveira, convince me
that the Government of Siam is impressed with a most
anxious desire to cultivate a friendly intercourse with
the British Government. Every facility was afforded
to Messrs. Hunter and Mallock to recover their debts,
and the Government offered to them, as well as to
some Surat traders, the benefits of the treaty lately
concluded. In consequence however of their having
made their sales according to the old system, upon the
responsibility of the Government, they declined on
this occasion to take advantage of this liberty of free
trade. Mr. Carlos de Silveira, as he writes to me
himself, had been seized and imprisoned, principally for
having contracted debts beyond his means of payment.


and the King of Siam had ordered him to be deca-
pitated, when the Wangna and some of the Ministers
appealed to the treaty concluded with the British
Government, and declared that it was therein stipu-
lated that no European should suffer death for any
offence but murder. * * *
I do myself the honor to enclose copies of a cor-
respondence which has passed between the Secretary
to this Government and myself, and I trust His
Excellency the Right Honorable the Vice President in
Council will approve of the terms of my answer to
the question proposed for a distinct opinion from
me. In my humble judgment the question \vas un-
necessary, and in answering it 1 felt all the necessity
of steering clear of all points that might have drawn
me into a controversial correspondence.
I have &c.
( Signed )H. BURNEY Captain
Envoy to Siam.


To Captain Burney
Envoy to Siam.
Sir,
I am directed by the Honorable the Governor in
Council to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of
the 16th Instant reporting your arrival.
2. The Honorable the Governor in Council hav-
ing perused the letter from Mr. Secretary Swinton
dated 23d. February with its enclosures, has directed
me to make the following communication to you.
3. Of the expediency of inducing the Ex-King
of Queda to seek another residence, and of the effects
of his proximity to his late Kingdom, no doubt can
be entertained. Every effort should therefore be made,
and indeed has been already made, to prevail on him
to remove to Malacca under the protection of this
Government.
4. The Board adverting to the instructions ad-
dressed to you by Mr. Secretary Swinton, by which it
seems to be intended that the communication to the
Ex-Rajah should be made by you, requests that you
will take the earliest opportunity of communicating to
His Highness the decision of the Supreme Govern-
ment, as contained in the 4th Paragraph of the letter
to your address under date the. 23d February.
5. Should all arguments however fail to induce
the Ex-Rajah voluntarily to quit this Island, the
Honorable the Governor in Council presumes it is not
contemplated to resort to compulsive measures, and is
of opinion that it would be preferable to forego the
benefit of the corresponding provision of the treaty,
leather than to have recourse to actual expulsion.
6. From the general tenor of the communication
received from the Supreme Government it may be
inferred that the independence of Perak is to be sup-


ported against all attempts of Ligor, open or indirect;
but the papers contain no decided instructions on the
case. I am instructed therefore to refer this point to
you, and to desire that you will state distinctly your
opinion, whether it be understood that under the 14th
article of the Treaty this Government is to oppose
such attempts, either against Perak or Salengore, by
actual force,
I have &c.
(Signed) J. ANDERSON
Secretary to the
Government.
FORT CORNWALLIS
the 18th April 1827.


To
JOHN ANDERSON Esqre.
Secretary to Government,
Sir,
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of
your letter of the 18th Instant, and to state that I
have this day complied with the request of the Honble.
Board by communicating to the Ex-Rajah of Queda the
decision of the Supreme Government as contained in
the 14th paragraph of the letter to my address under
date the 23d February. His Highness gave me reason
to hope, that the measure of obtaining his consent to
proceed to Malacca or Singapore, may be accomplished
by the Honble. the Governor in Council directing the
officers, who may be in His Highness’s confidence,
seriously to reiterate the arguments, which prove a
removal as most advantageous to his own interests
under existing circumstances.
With respect to the point which the Honble.
Board has referred for a distinct opinion from me
“ whether it be understood under the 14th Article of
the Treaty that this Government is to oppose all
attempts of Ligor, open or indirect, either against
Perak or Salangore, by actual force,” I beg leave to
state, that that article gives us a right, but does not
make it our duty, to maintain the independence of
those petty States ; and as to the extent to which the
Honble. Board may exercise that right, a consideration
of the following points will, I hope, serve to determine.
The second article of the Treaty provides gen-
erally the course to be adopted, in the case of any
infraction of the treaty, or other cause of offence, on
the part of the Rajah of Ligor and the Siamese. In
an extreme but improbable case of menaced or actual
aggression against ourselves, we must, of course, reverb
to first principles of self defence. But in all other
cases, I conceive, a representation to Bengal ought to


precede the employment of actual force. More-
over, until a decision be received from the Home
Authorities of the question, which has been referred
to them, as to the degree of interference we ought to
use in favor of the Malay States on the Peninsula
it will, I presume, be advisable to refrain from the,
employment of actual force in this matter, or from any
measures calculated to commit the British Govern-
ment to ulterior proceedings.
No measures shall be left untried, when I meet
the Rajah of Ligor, to impress upon him the danger of
his engaging in any open or indirect attempts against
the peace and Government of Perak and Salangore,
and I trust that the same decisive declaration of the
sentiments of the British Government, which stopped
the progress of his armament in 1825, will, if it be
again made, again cause him to desist.
1 have &c.
(Signed) H. BURNEY Captain.
Envoy to Siam.


FORT WILLIAM 29th June 1827.
EXTRACTS from my Private Journal relative to
events which happened after the departure of Captain
Burney in July 1826, to the period of my quitting
Bangkok the 20th March 1827.
The Prah Klang was employed from 26th July to
the 30th Novr. 1826 at Paknam and Paclaat repairing
the forts, mounting guns, as they were sent down
from Bangkok where they have been engaged casting
them for the last 12 months, and driving piles from
the small Fort in the middle of the river at Paknam to
the opposite shore to prevent ships passing outside of
it, by which they would be subject to the whole fire of
the great guns from the large fort at Paknam. The
King, attended by about 100 Princes and men of rank,
proceeded to inspect the Prah Klang’s operations, and
returned the same evening seemingly highly pleased
with them. There are about 200 guns of various
shapes and sizes in the large fort at Paknam, and
nearly as many at Paclaat. The greater part of these
were cast at Bangkok, and from the number already
.burst in trying them ( 1 in 3 ) they are fearful the rest
will also burst, and are consequently extremely
anxious to procure a supply of Europe guns. The 18
small forts round the Palace grounds at Bangkok have
no guns mounted.
On the 18th September the brother of the Prah-
Klang Pya Si Phipad, acting in his absence at Paknam
called us to witness that the Nocqueadahs of the Surat
Brigs Harnoody and Naccerne wished to dispose of their
cargoes according as they had formerly done from a
fear of giving offence to their employers, as the new
treaty, they said, had not been known to them, altho
at the same time they were sure that a saving of at
least 4000 ticals each would have been made by abid


ing by it, besides ether advantages : Pya Si Phipad
and other Government officers then present expressed
their anxious desire to put the Treaty into effect in
the present instance, and made particular enquiries
of us whether any deviation, at present, from the
Treaty, would displease the Bengal Government, and
so fearful were they of this being the case, that they
required our signing a paper, specifying the wishes of
the Nocqueadahs to abide by the old Treaty which we
of course did, and at the same time explained to them,
that as the treaty had not been ratified by the Governor
General in Council there was no necessity for putting
it in force until it was. The Prah-Klang was also
very desirous when the bark, Mary Ann Sophia,
arrived in December to carry us away to get us to follow
the new Treaty, but as she had very little import cargcr-
and the duty on the export one having been previously
settled, it would not have suited us to have gone by
it.
It is a common saying at Bangkok when the
Nocquedah of a Surat vessel arrives that lie will be
sure to cry before he leaves, for the hard treatment
which he will experience, but the last year the} 7 had
enjoyed greater privileges, and tho’ not quite satisfied
on leaving, yet sufficiently so not to draw tears.
From what I remarked last year with regard to the
trade with the Surat vessels, and experienced myself
in many instances after the departure of Captain
Burney, I have reason to believe that a British Mer-
chant arriving with a cargo of suitable goods for the
Siam Market would be allowed to dispose of them
without undergoing all those difficulties to which they
Avere so much subject before, in being compelled to sell
to and purchase from the Government. Yet it cannot
be expected that all their ancient customs so long and
strictly adhered to should be given up at once. Time
and better intercourse may effect a change, and then
w r e may enjoy similar privileges to the Chinese in


being allowed to go up the Country to purchase goods.
These people carry on a very lucrative trade from
many part of China and Hainan, and as I know the
shop keepers to be generally a very honest well dis-
posed set of people I have no doubt when their fears
of us begin to abate, for at present they actually con-
sider us no better than Pirates, that 3 or 4 vessels
might be annually employed with valuable cargoes
amounting to 2,000.000 Ticals with much advantage
as the taste of the Siamese for European com-
modities daily increase. I do not hesitate to-
assert that there is no place to which I would sooner
venture a small capital than Siam, and its adjacent
parts, touching at Tringano, Calantan &c. on my way
thither.
Since the accession of his present Majesty to the-
throne, he has abandoned the idea of trading himself,
and it is only owing to the Prah-Klang and his
brother, Prah Si-Phi pad’s ambitious views, more
particularly those of the latter, that merchants have
met with obstacles in the freedom of trade. A British
Merchant finds besides the Native Christians * and
Chulias a very great annoyance. Of the former there
are 1000, and those I have always known to be the
dirtiest, laziest and most unconscionable villains,
uniting chicanery with prevarication, and to deal with
whom the British Merchant finds all his care and
* These people with exception of 5 or 6, are all very
poor, and support themselves entirely by fishing, and
whatever they do not use is sold to purchase rice which
is very plentiful and cheap. The Siamese themselves
have no aversion to any one differing from them in
religion, and the Court is formed both of Chinese,
Malays, Chulias, Bengales, Christians, Cochin Chinese,
Laos Ac. and many of them hold very high employments,
and are much beloved. 1 know several Chinese at
Bangkok who have become Siamese and cnt their tails
off. The Chinese immediately after their arrival adopt
the manners of the Siamese and burn their dead. Up-
wards of 2000 Chinese annually arrive from Bokira and
Hainan and a very few from Canton.


attention extremely requisite. They are so much
attached to the Government that they withhold all
information which they may in any way consider
detrimental to it. The greatest hatred of us prevails
amongst the other class ( Chulias ) from motives of
religion and they take great delight in doing us all
the mischief they can. The most of them are employ-
ed under the Government and as Shop-keepers.
The Siamese eat indiscriminately all kinds of food
used by Europeans. The Prah Klang’s family fre-
quently dined with us and conducted themselves
extremely well.
It is only with a great deal of perseverance and
patience that a British Merchant visiting Siam can
overcome the obstacles in trade, for the Siamese de-
light in dallying to gain advantages and put a person
off his guard, and if he is of a hasty and irritable dis-
position, and make use of any abusive or insulting
language, or offer to strike any of them, they will
immediately go away and put a stop to business for
several days, but by firmness and forbearance he will
more speedily succeed.
Tire result of the Burmese war has made a total
revolution in their ideas of the British power, which
from the reports of the junks from Penang and Singa-
pore they have hitherto considered as very trifling.
The conclusion of the Treaty has insured their respect
for the British Government, to please which appears at
present to be a very great object with them. After
Captain Burney’s departure their fears of the appearance
of British troops was so great, that all our attempts
to quiet them were unsuccessful. Their belief in as-
trology only adds to their timid fears, as they say it is
decreed and written in their Books that the English
will conquer Siam, and they think that it will
ultimately be the case. I was told after the departure
of the Mission, that a letter had been suspended to a


tree on the frontiers by some Peguers warning them
that the British had resolved on invading the country
immediately, and the masters of the Penang and
Singapore junks arriving at the same time this com-
munication reached Bangkok, confirmed the report,
by stating that a hostile fleet was ready to sail from
Singapore to attack them. This had caused the
greatest confusion, for they are naturally so credulous
that the Chinese take great delight in relating the
most ridiculous stories, which gains immediate belief,
a circumstance which these crafty people turn to good
account, by commanding privileges they would other-
wise find unattainable, as well as with a view of
inculcating a bad spirit in the Siamese against us, of
whom they are extremely jealous, and think we
encroach too much upon their trade. Any favorable
mention of us would not be credited. Their minds
have been so long biassed by false reports that to
attempt to contradict them, would be useless. A
stranger on his arrival is questioned about
the English. If his reply is in their favor, he is told
with apparent displeasure by the Government officers
that he is a friend of the English.
Even a short time before my leaving Bangkok, I
was interrogated by several of the Shop Keepers,
whether there was any truth in the general rumour of
which their officers constantly spoke. I did all in my
power to remove so dangerous a feeling, and told
them it was only the mischievous Chinese, who from
jealous motives made these false representations,
which appeared to please them much. On asking them
what they would do if attacked, they replied that they
would all run up the country, and which 1 believe
will be the case from their cowardly disposition, for I
have frequently seen one Burman beat off 3 or 4
Siamese, both on the river and on shore and take
what fish, rice &c, he wanted, which the Burmese
captives are allowed to do to a certain extent. They


levy a contribution of a few cowries from eacli person’s
boat, to which the Siamese as well as Chinese are
invariably obliged to submit. These poor creatures are
kept in heavy irons and constantly employed ditching,
building, sawing timber, brick making &c. and are
badly fed ; their appearance is consquently miserable.
So great an effect has the Burman War produced
on the minds of the Siamese, that since the middle of
August 1825 three War Boats commanded by Native
Pilots were ordered to cruize outside the bar and
report the arrival of all ships before they passed, and
the injunctions were so strict that any negligence only
led to the decapitation of the' Pilots. On our de-
parture from the Country we still left them cruizing.
About 2 months after the departure of the Mis-
sion we found it necessary to make sundry presents to
the Prah Klang, his brother Pya Si Phipad and 2d.
Prah Klang to regain their good will, which the pre-
sence of the Mission had somewhat abated. This
induced them to assist us in the disposal of our stock
of goods.
The Catin or great holidays which commence at
the new moon in October and last for 30 days, during
which time the King appears 6 or 7 days in visiting
the Pagodas and the Forts at Paknam and Paclaat.
The King however intends reducing the number of
days devoted to this festival as he thinks them too
great a waste of time which might be usefully employed
in the administration of Government and their various
callings.
On the 4th of November information reached
me by several people of the Siamese having partly
filled up the river at the mouth of the Meklong, leav-
ing but a small space sufficient to admit small vessels
only drawing 10 feet water and that they entertained
some idea of doing something with the bar at Paknam
to .prevent large ships getting over.


On the 11th November three small junks arrived
from Cochin China with cargoes of sundries, and
letters from that Government to assist the person in
charge in the disposal of his goods. The principal
attended by the Masters of the other two Junks and
twelve followers proceeded to wait upon the Prah
Klang, but before they had passed the outer gate of
his dwelling house were stopped and detained for 20
minutes, until a message from His Excellency told
them that he could not see them that night. They
returned seeming displeased, but without expressing
their disappointment. I mention this from its having
been rumoured that this petty Mission had arrived to-
claim assistance from the Siamese to quell a rebellion
in Cochin China to raise another King, but my
personal enquiries refuted this report.
In a conversation we held with the Prah Klang,
he asked us whether the French were slaves to the
English, but we told him to his great surprise that
slavery was against the British Laws. He then asked
us whether there had been as many as 40 men killed
at the Battle of Waterloo. We told him that nearly as
many thousand had been killed, at which he seemed
thunderstruck, and uttered an exclamation of surprise.
The King has within the last 8 or 10 months
erected an extensive shed covered with tiles about a
mile up the Bazar river, nearly oppposite the Prah
Klang’s house, in which I counted 136 war boats 60
feet long 7 feet broad in the middle and feet at the
stern, and capable of carrying about 30 men. A
similar shed has been erected a very little distance
in shore at Bangkok Noi river, nearly opposite the
Palace, about a quarter of a mile up, 100 boats
of the above description. Immediately above the
Palace and on the same side with it, the Government
have constructed smaller, but similar sheds to
the above along the banks of the river. Several
public buildings were also erecting by the Palace,


one of which was built a good deal after the English
style. The King has issued orders that all the
small buildings principally occupied by petty Shop
Keepers &c. near the Palace should be immedi-
ately pulled down, and that no person should in
future build there, who could not afford to erect a
handsome one.
On the 16th March 1827 a large fire broke out
near the Palace, by which upwards of 500 houses were
destroyed, amongst which was one of the Palaces of a
brother of his present Majesty. The Prince by this
accident sustained a considerable loss, but as customary
in the country, numerous presents were sent to him
from all quarters, and it is thought that he like many
others who have suffered in this way, will enrich
himself.
Another very large fire on the 19th March oc-
curred at his Majesty’s magazines in the Bazar river,
from a man having taken a light with him into it
which occasioned the accident. It caused an immense
explosion and I should think that not less than 1000
houses on both sides of the narrow river must have
been burnt down. The King, Second King and
Princes, with an immense crowd came to the spot, the
former to render what assistance they could, but as in
similar cases more confusion than regularity prevailed,
and nothing was done of any consequence. Phia
Phipad 2d PraKlang and one of the best men in the
country had his house completely levelled with the
ground, and lost a little boy at the same time, but saved
all his money which was said to be very considerable.
When we left Bangkok I did not hear of any
Burmese subjects of the British Government having
been brought prisoners to that place, and I am of
opinion that they Vvill not now renew a system so
inimical to their own interests, particularly under the
dread in which they labour of the British power.


The annual revenue of Siam is estimated at
millions of ticals, which is disbursed in the Payment
of Government Servants and maintaining the Princes,
said to be altogether about 2000, leaving but little
in the Treasury in which I am told the sum of
1,00,000 Ticals has never been exceeded. The expenses
incurred in the erection of Pagodas, Public Edifices
&c. are paid by contributions levied on the inhabitants
each according to his circumstances. A present sent
by Messrs, Morgan Hunter & Co. to His Majesty of a
quantity of iron railing was in consequence refused,
altho’ highly approved, knowing they would be obliged
to make a suitable return. They therefore purchased
it by the contributions of the people, each paying as
above from sto 40 peculs of sugar. Every merchant
and shop keeper is obliged to contribute towards the
object for which the others are taxed.
One of the principal people possessing 20,000 and
a shop keeper 10,000 Ticals would be considered rich.
The Prah Klang and his brother Pya Si Phipad are
amongst the richest in the country.
The interest of money in Siam is equal to 33 per-
cent. Per Annum.
A report got afloat after Captain Burney’s depar-
ture that the Governor of Prince of Wales Island had
seized upon Queda, which created great alarm at
Bangkok. This was owing to the report of the
master of a Chinese junk who said that an expedition
was preparing to start from Penang when he left.
Pasquel Martin a Native Christian who visited
Calcutta in the Guardian, said to have been sent by
tire Prah Klang to purchase diamonds &c. was, I have
been informed by good authority, no more than a spy
sent to ascertain the operations at different British
Settlements and report them accordingly on his return,
and the more unfavorable his reports are the more will


they be credited ; but he dare not say that he has seen
anything superior to what is seen in Siam.
A merchant visiting Bangkok ought never to
inform the Government or any other person what
description of goods he wants, but on the contrary
endeavour to mislead them, and continue purchasing
what he really wants as opportunities offer. This
measure will not only prevent the prices being raised,
but keep the Government officers from compelling you
to purchase from themselves, even if they wished it,
by desiring the shop keep3rs &c. not to sell the
description of goods he wants under a certain price.
The Siamese are the most contented quiet race of
people I have ever known, and seldom ever quarrel or
fight, and the climate being extremely fine they all
enjoy most excellent health. They are also very honest
and during stay amongst them of nearly 3 years,
few instances occurred of theft. They are however
greatly given to lying, and their mean low cunning is
beyond all description. One 'trait in their character is
their extreme fondness for their children, to whose
education they pay particular attention, and there are
but few amongst the Coolies who cannot read and
write, while most are even qualified to hold the highest
appointments in the country. The lower orders are
better and more civil than those of higher rank. All
pay the greatest respect to the aged, and do not
require so much crawling from them.
The Siamese had for a length of time wished for
our departure, as they are utterly averse to the re-
sidence of any English amongst them, from the idea
that they would report whatever occurred in it, there-
fore when they heard that we were on the point of
leaving they appeared evidently very glad but as
they wished to part with us on good terms their
conduct was extremely kind and civil, and even Pomat,
a natural brother of the Prah Klang’s who is one of


the most annoying persons about the Court, visited us
frequently and behaved very obligingly to us. Indeed
every one endeavoured to serve us as much as they
could, and on our departure we received a short com-
plimentary letter of six lines from the Prah Klang to
the House of Messrs. Morgan Hunter & Co. at Singa-
pore, which occupied him and all his department three
days to compose, and was afterwards submitted to His
Majesty, and the other Ministers before it was sent to
us. I only notice this here to give an idea of their
alacrit} T in transacting business. I am however con-
vinced, though we did all in our power to gain
their good feelings during the time we remained in
the country that they will never suffer any British
Subjects to live entirely among them again. Before
we left the Prah Klang, he expressed a desire to
obtain some Burmese religious Books, for which he
was going to send to Tavoy or Martaban. The Priests
were then engaged in a new translation of their sacred
books to present to His Majesty.
The Siamese have been casting a brass gun of 80
peculs, which had occupied, when we left, nearly 2000
men for two months, and it would take up two months
more to finish it. The Princes and most of the people
of rank were for some time busily employed in getting
bellows made for the purpose.
We touched at Tringano on our way from Siam to
Singapore on the Ist April last and when we landed
found several of the principal people ready to receive
us, which they did with much cordiality, and intro-
duced us to the Sultan who was also extremely kind.
He made many enquiries respecting the conduct of
the Siamese, and the Treaty concluded by Captain
Burney, expressing great pleasure with that part of
it which related to himself and his country, and seemed
anxious to know when it was the intention of the
British Government to invade the country, saying


that he as well as the Rajah of Kelantan would lend his
assistance with troops. We explained to him that it
was not the intention of the British Government to
attack or molest the Siamese but to be on good terms
with them. A captain of a trading vessel from Kelan-
tan informed me that similar enquiries had been made
at that place and that the Raja appeared equally dis-
pleased with the Siamese, and had said that he would
not in future pay any more tribute to them.
In Tringano there is Tin 2.000 Peculs
„ „ „ Pepper ... 4,000
v „ „ Gold dust and
at Kelantan ' „ Pepper ... 12,000 „
In accordance with a long established custom at
Siam, the King ordered the Prah Klang to see that
all who owed us debts should pay them before we left,
that his own should also be discharged, and that an
allowance should be made to us for any detention we
we might experience on this account.
The Siamese from the dread of a rebellion will
not keep up a standing array, but raise conscripts in
event of a war.
It is very difficult to ascertain the population of
Siam, but I have been informed that it amounts to
about 5 millions under following distribution.
Siamese, Laos, &ca. millions
Chinese H millions
throughout the whole kingdom. At Bangkok alone
there are 1,00,000 but the greater part are Chinese.
It were unnecessary to add anything more to a
place already so well known as Siam.
(Signed) D. E. MALLOCH.
Calcutta 14th June 1827.


OMISSION in the Extracts of my Journal.
The Prah Klang, a short time before we left
Bangkok had an elephant, which having become
white, was presented to His Majesty. This and the
manner he conducted the Treaty and the affairs at
Paknam and Paclaat had given so much satisfaction
that he will shorty be promoted to the rank of Chakri
or Prime Minister, and his brother Pya Si Phipad be
made Prah Klang. The present Prime Minister it is
said will be allowed to retire with superior rank and an
annual allowance.
(Signed) D. E. MALLOCH.








Printed for private circulation.
THE
BURNEY PAPERS
Vol. 11.
PART Y.
(February 1825 to October 1827-)
Printed by order of the Vajiranana National Library.
BANGKOK
1912.




To
The Honorable the Secret Committee of the
Honorable the Court of Directors.
Honorable Sir,
******
Para. 8. The Accounts from the Countries to the
South Bast of Rangoon continue to be most satis-
factory. An Embassy of Talliens (the ancient Pegu-
ers) who have long lived under the Siamese Govern-
ment, having been driven from their Native Country
by the cruelty and oppression of the Burmans, was on
its way to the Head Quarters of the British Force.
They stated that they came with the full sanction and
approbation of His Siamese Majesty, who, they de-
clared, was ready to act in conjunction with the
British, should such be our wish, by ordering a corps
of observation of Thirty thousand men, now stationed
upon the Burmese Frontier, to move upon any given
point in the enemy’s dominions. For the further
particulars of Ibis Mission and the proclamation issued
by Brigadier General Sir Archibald Campbell, we must
beg leave to refer to the Dispatches themselves.
******
We have &c.
AMHERST.
EDWD. PAGET.
JOHN FEN [MLL.
Fort William
25th February 1825.


To
G. Swinton Esq.
jSecretary to Government Political
Department.
FORT WILLIAM.
Mir,
Since the transfer of this Settlement to the
British Government, I have not considered it necessary
to trespass upon the time of the Right Hon. the
Governor General in Council with any observations on
its connection with the Malayan States on the Penin-
sula of Malacca, as I was at the time of my appoint-
ment, in full expectation of receiving thro’ the Govern-
ment ot Prince of Wales’ Island definitive information
on the subject, which I was aware had been referred to
the Supreme Government from thence in a special re-
ference to the gradual and increasing extension of '
Siamese Dominion in these parts.
2d. My attention has been recalled to it by the re-
ceipt of Dispatches from Penang detailing the progress
of the very overwhelming force with which the Rajah
of Ligore is preparing to attack Salangore, and if ac-
counts given of the magnitude of that force are, in but
a minor degree correct, it is certainly sufficient to
excite the greatest vigilance, not unmixed with ap-
prehension, as to its ultimate objects being far more
serious, than the subjugation of an inconsiderable and
decayed Malay State governed by a Prince, weighed
down with age and infirmity, and whose whole force is
reported not to exceed five or six hundred fighting men
both on land and at sea.
sth. Until I have the honor to receive instruc-
tions for my guidance I shall adhere to the general
tenor of the Supreme Government’s instructions to
the Government of Prince of Wales Island on the in-


vasion of Kedah. Any observations from me on the
general question of permitting the subjugation of the
Pen insula and its annexation to Siam as a Province,
must with reference to the ample information already
before His Lordship in Council, be quite superfluous,
and it has been this reflection which prevented me from
addressing you at an earlier period. Should the Chou
ih’a of Ligor commence actual hostility on any part of
the British territories, I shall proceed without delay to
commence such provisional arrangements with the
neighbouring states as their chiefs may be willing to
accede to for the promotion of the common cause and
for the safety of Malacca in particular; but in so doing
1 should be careful to make it clearly understood that
any thing done by me must depend altogether on the
future pleasure of the Right Honorable the Governor
General hi Council, acquainting them that I am not
vested with any power whatever to form Political
engagements.
I have &c.
(Signed) W. S. CRAOROFT
Actg. Rest.
Malacca the
18th June 1825,


To
The Honorable the Secret Committee of the
Honorable the Court of Directors.
Honorable Sirs,
In a dispatch to the address of the Honorable the
Court of Directors dated 30th January 1824, we
brought to the notice of the Honorable Court the par-
ticulars of a dispute which had arisen between the
Government of Prince of Wales’s Island and the
Siamese Authorities at Kedah, regarding the plunder
and murder of an inhabitant of the former Settlement
by subjects of the latter, and likewise the alarm which
prevailed among the native inhabitants of Penang, in
consequence of an apprehended invasion by the Rajah
of Ligor, who was very generally reported to be pre-
paring an armament to make a descent on the Island
for the purpose chiefly of destroying or carrying off the
Ex-King of Kedah residing thereunder our protection.
2. From the papers now laid before you. your
Honorable Committee will observe that those alarms
and reports have been of late revived with redoubled
force ; and that a flotilla of armed prows carrying a
considerable body of Siamese soldiers actually made its
appearance on the Kedah Coast jn may and June last;
ostensibly for the purpose of settling a dispute with
the petty independent Malay State of Salangore which
lies between Perak and Malacca. The Government of
Prince of Wales’s Island judged it necessary, in con-
sequence of the assemblage of so unusual a force in its
immediate neighbourhood and the apprehensions ex-
cited by it, to assume an attitude of preparation and
defence, and to remonstrate strongly with the Rajah of
Ligore on the subject of his proceedings, and in com-
pliance with the urgent application of that Government
we considered it a prudent measure of precaution, to
provide reinforcements both Naval and Military for
the settlement, consisting of one Regiment of Native


Infantry and a Vessel of War ; although we can scarcely
believe that the Siamese authorities ever seriously
contemplated so gross and daring an outrage as a des-
cent on Prince of Wales’s Island for the purpose of
carrying off by force the person of the Ex-King of
Kedah.
3. The correspondence to which we now solicit
the attention of your Honorable Committee, embraces,
besides the above subject, a discussion of the course of
policy which it is expedient for the British Govern-
ment to pursue towards Salangore and the other in-
dependent Malayan States in its vicinity, all more or
less directly threatened with invasion and total sub-
jugation by the Siamese Power. The Government of
Prince of Wales’s Island has stated very forcibly, and
we believe correctly, the evils and inconveniences
which must result to our interests as connected with
the tranquillity and prosperity of the Settlements of
Penang, Malacca, and Singapore from the impending
destruction of the friendly Malay States and the
establishment of the Siamese authority in their place.
The continued succession of alarms, irritation, collision
and angry discussions which have prevailed at Penang
and Kedah since the conquest of the latter by the
Rajah of In gore is certainly a striking practical illus-
tration of the prejudicial effects in a political point of
view, which such a change in the internal Government
of the Malayan Peninsula is calculated to produce. We
are besides assured that the supplies of provisions and
of valuable objects of commerce from the interior
upon which the prosperity of our Settlements in that
quarter much depends, will be completely intercepted
by the establishment of the jealous, arrogant and
monopolizing Government of Siam throughout the
Peninsula,
4. Concurring to a considerable extent in the
above view of the case, we still are not sat isfied that in
the existing state of our relations with the parties, we
should be justified in opposing by force of arms the


extension of the Siamese dominion over the Indepen-
dent Malay States, in order to avert these contingent
c 5
and prospective evils. At all events in the actual
conjuncture of affairs whilst our whole disposable force
is so fully occupied in Ava, we could not for a moment
contemplate engaging in hostilities with any of the
Siamese Chiefs, or pursuing a course which might com-
mit us to that extremity, unless under some peculiar
emergency, such as an actual attack of Penang by the
Rajah of Ligore. We have issued instructions accor-
dingly in the above spirit to the Governor in Council of
Prince of Wales’s Island and have enjoined that
Government to abstain from any further steps, beyond
the remonstrance which they properly addressed to the
Rajah of Ligore on the subject of his hostile movements
against the Independent State of Salangore, and the
declaration of their intention to refuse a passage to his
armament through the straits of Penang for the pur-
pose of attacking a friendly power in their neigh-
bourhood.
5. We trust that our proceedings on this oc-
casion will meet the concurrence and approbation of
your Honorable Committee. We beg to add, that we
shall feel thankful for any instructions which you may
be pleased to communicate for our guidance on the
general question of the policy to be pursued by the
Power holding the Settlements of Prince of Wales’s
Island, Malacca, and Singapore, with reference to the
designs of Siam against the States of the Malayan
Peninsula.
We have the honor to be, with the greatest
respect,
HONORABLE SIRS,
Your Most faithful,
Humble Servants,
( Signed ) AMHERST
E. PAGET
J. H. HARINGTON
FORT WILLIAM
4th September 1825.


FORT WILLIAM 9th December 1825.
To Captain H. Burney
Envoy to the Court of Siam.
Sir,
With reference to the personal communications
which had passed between yourself and me respecting
the negotiations at Perak and Salangore and the ques-
tion of Siamese supremacy over the Malayan States in
the Peninsula I think it right to apprize you that in
the month of July last I dispatched a trusty native
Agent with complimentary letters to the chiefs of
Pahang, Tringano and Kalantan and with instructions
to ascertain the present condition and circumstances of
each of those States. He returned to Malacca with
satisfactory replies from those Chiefs and with the
following information.
Patrang in no wise acknowledges the supremacy
of Siam nor have the Siamese yet disturbed its Govern-
ment. The Chief there is called Bendatrara or minis-
ter of the Sultan of Johore and Pahang and has ac-
knowledged a nominal dependance on that Sultan who
was recognised by the British Government antecedent
to the occupation of Singapore. It is now understood
that a formal abdication on the part of the Prince re-
ferred to of all influence on the continent has been
made in a treaty with the Netherlands authorities at
Rhio and that the Rajah of Pahang will consider him-
self independent without permitting, as my messenger
reports, the Sultan at Singapore or the Turn men gong
of Johore to come into the Rights abdicated by the
Chief of Lingin and Rhio.
Tringano is at present settled in its Government
under an old and very respectable prince who sends a
Bungamas to Soongora to appease the demands which
have been made on him by the Siamese for the last
fifty years ; the Sultan of Tringano was generally a


firm ally of the Dutch Government of Malacca when in
possession of its controlling power and extended ter-
ritory, hut there does not appear to have been a revival
of the ancient relations since the return of the Dutch in
1818. The old Sultan was most particularly civil to the
messenger I sent and expressed himself strongly in
favor of a close alliance with and even a dependence on
the British Authorities at this Settlement as he is
aware of the meditated subjugation of the Malay Pen-
insula by the Siamese of which nation there are several
said to be already settled in his Territory,
Kalantan is in a very directed* and distracted
state. The Rajah, between whom and his brother a
civil war exists, sends a Bunga Mas to Ligor. You
are aware that this is the chief who so earnestly
solicited the interference of the Government of Prince
of Wales Island three years, ago the reply to which
communication left him no path to pursue but that of
submission to Siam, which from the report of my mes-
senger, I learn he has made up his mind to ; many
Siamese are said to have established themselves at
Kalantan and the Chief appeared to my messenger to
be so much under their influence as to be afraid of ex-
pressing his real sentiments with respect to a closer
alliance with the British Government.
I have &ca.
(Signed) W. S. ORAURA FT
Acting Resident.
Malacca the
4th October 1825.'


FORT WILLIAM 25th Novr. 1825.
Singapore 8th of Octr. 1825.
To,
GEORGE SWINTON Esqr.
Secy, to Govt. in the Secret Dept.
FORT WILLIAM
Sir,
Having deemed it my duty previous to ray de-
parture from Prince of Wales Island, to submit to the
Honble. the Governor certain observations upon Mr.
Andersons Reports of his Mission to Salengore and
Perak, I do myself the honor to transmit to you en-
closed a Copy of my Letter.
My impression of the Views and Sentiments of
the Supreme Govt, is, that a good understanding should
be established with the Siamese, and that at any rale,
things should be kept quiet to the Last ward for the
present . According to this impression 1 have been,
and am acting, and believing that Mr. Andersons Re-
ports had an unnecessary tendency to aggravate the
unfavourable feelings, which already exist at Prince of
Wales Island against the Governor of Ligor, 1 en-
deavoured. bv the Letter ot which the enclosed is a
•Copy, to undertake the unpleasant task of moderating
the effect of that Gentleman’s representations. A reply,
which 1 have not seen, was made by him to my obser-
vations: audit remains for me only to hope, that the
Supreme Government will not adjudge me to have gone
too far. in my anxiety to prevent at the present
moment impressions against the Chief of Ligor being-
received. calculated only to keep alive angry feelings
and mutual jealousy and distrust.
Solicit the Right Honorable the Governor General
in Council to observe that it was the unfavourable


Monsoon, after all that prevented the Governor of Ligor
from directing his Boats to proceed to Perak and Salen-
gore outside of Penang, —a route which we possessed
no right to obstruct: and that my agreement with His
Highness was limited to securing such a right, as well
as the right of preventing him from passing a Force to
the Southward overland. —another route which we
could not have opposed. Having secured these, and
stopped the immediate extension of the Siamese Power
to rhe Vicinity of Malacca, of the undesirable conse-
quences likely to result from which the Supreme
Government expressed its conviction so far back as
1.814, 1 had hoped that Negotiation with Perak and
Salangore would have quietly foreclosed the operation
of Siamese influence in that direction, and have deprived
the Governor of Ligor. and every other Siamese ( hief,
of all opportunity of intermeddling in future with those
States in any manner. Pnless we bound the weak
Prince of Perak and his Chiefs to be true to themselves
and to their Country against Siamese interference, our
mediation, if appeared to me, would be of little advan-
tage. 1 showed in ray report of the Ist of August,
that the Governor of Ligor and his Master cousidei
Perak as a State tributary to Siam. No argument ort/
my part, nor indeed has Ills Highness the power to do
it, could prevail upon him to resign by express treaty
this claim of Siam over Perak.
Instead however of entering into some stipulation
on this point with Perak itself, it has been assumed
that the Governor of Ligor’s Agreement with me binds
him against interfering in any manner whatever with
Perak, if His Highness be thus held, that he has
signed away the Siamese claim of Supremacy over that
State, it is evident that Bang-kok will be the very last
place in the world t hat he will choose to visit. Vet
such a construction is put on the 3rd article of my
agreement by some of the Officers of the Government
of Prince of Wales Island and I am under much appre-
hension that declarations will be made by them, - calcu


lafed to excite the alarm and distrust of the Governor
of Ligor and to render him hostile to all my future
proceedings. I shall see such an event with much
regret, as 1 am daily more convinced that with a little
management His Highness may be made useful to ns
at the present juncture. He has but just forwarded to
Mr. Maingy through me, an open letter addressed to
the New Governor of Chimpohun, intended to pave the
way for a friendly understanding being established
between him and our officer on the Coast of Tenasserirn.
I beg leave to report that I have derived much
useful information from Mr. (Vac raft the Acting Re-
sident at Malacca, and that I am now receiving in-
struction from Mr. Crawfurd, who has thrown open to
me the great lights of his extensive knowledge and
experience with a liberality and kindness of which it is
impossible for me to express an adequately grateful
sense.
i propose quitting tin’s Settlement the day after
to-morrow.
J have <tca. &ca.
(Signed) H. BURNEY
Envoy to the Court of Siam.


SIAMESE NEWS.
In the commencement of the Borman War the
Siame-.se never thought that the English would be able
to Conquer the Country of the Burmans, but when Kan
Taum arrived, at Bang-kok, he brought with him 7 or
800 Prisoners, and reported that Rangoon, Tavoy and
Martaban were in the occupation of the English.
When the King heard of this, he called a Council of
his Ministers. On that Occasion he said to the Wang-
na ( called the Second King by the Portuguese ) “ the
Burmans with ten times our population have not been
able to resist tbe English they are now very near to
Siam and what shall we be able to do with onr small
force.” The Wangna replied, “ Siam has a numerous
people to defend the Country, and besides many
Chinese.” The Prah Klang was of the same opinion
as the Wangna. Kroma-Kun, and Kroma-Surin re-
mained silent, considering what answer they should
give. The opinion of the King was delivered in these
words. “ 1 think it right to continue in friendship
with the English by doing which I shall remain a King
and maintain possession of my Country. If I act
otherwise, 1 shall lose my Throne, be driven into the
forest ami become food for Tigers. The English will
never make war upon us without giving ns notice
thereof. We ought not to give them any opportunity
of troubling us. I know very well that we must be
ready to pay them such tribute as they demand. Then
onr Country will be quiet and we shall maintain our
Laws, onr Priests and our Cods for ever and ever.”
The Kings advice was approved by the following Man-
darines— Pet-Pechai-Kroma-Surin. and Chao-fa. All
the rest dissent.
The King of Siam sent three Armies to Martaban.
Everyone said that they were going to assist the Eng-
lish, but the Kings Orders were, that they should only
FORT WILLIAM 25th Now. 1825.


look on and keep neutial. The first Army consisted
of 3000 Native Siamese under the Command of the
Siamese General Susunah, The Second Army < onsis-
ted of 6000 Mons ( Taliens ) under the orders of Pia
Jotha*. The third Army consisted of 4000 Siamese
under the orders of Than Luhun. The first Army re-
turned to Siam, bringing with them Prisoners, Men,
Women and Children to the number of about 700
Souls. This was the Army of Pia Susunah. The
Second Army returned to Siam bringing 1150 Souls,
cultivators of rice. This was the Army of Ida Jotha.
Thirty Burraans arrived at Bang-kok with a letter
from the English General requiring the King to send
the Prisoners back to rejoin their families. The King
ordered his Mandarines to send some of the strongest
back immediately, but commanded that the remainder
should stay at Siam uni il the season of the rains should
be over. His orders to Pia Inathep were, to register
the stout men only who were able to travel during
the rains, and not the whole, because among them
were old men and children who might die from the
fatigue of the journey.
Pia Inathep addressed a letter to the King which
was seen by one of his Servants, who informed me of
its contents. It was to this effect “ Your Majesty has
commanded me to register the Names of the Prisoners
who are able to return to their Country during the
rainy Season. Those among them who are desirous of
returning are fit for your Majestys Service.” The King
answered that many people were receiving pay —that
there was little for them to do, and he had need of no
more.
Pia Inathep made out a list of 270 persons who
had tied from Martaban and Tavoy ten or twelve years
before. They all bribed Pia Inathep to insert their
* This Wiis the Chief with whom Colonel Smith nego-
dated, and whom 1 believe he calls Knii-Kuu, probably bis
Pegnan name or title.


names in the list, some to the extent of 200 ticals some
ot 100, some of 100, and soine of 80. Those who could
not pay were not allowed to quit Siam. The poor peo-
ple had no opportunity to complain to the King of tho-
rn justice of the Mandarines.
W hen Ida Inathep the Prah Klang and Pomate
are dead ( in the original when they are burned ) the
country will be free for the English trade. But as
long as they live it will be hard for the English to
carry on their commerce, tor these are against the
English.
I had a conversation with two Mandarines in
Bangkok who said they would be glad if the English
took possession of the Country, and that they would
rise in their favour with 18 or 20000 Men. 1 said
on must be patient, in time you will be under the
English.”
The King of Siam ordered a road to be made
between Pak-nam (the month of the Menam) and
Bangkok. The Wan g-na counselled him that the road
would be the loss of the City, for the English Troops
would advance by it. The King approved of his
advice, and directed rice to be planted on the road so
as to make it impossible.
The King lately gave orders that all the Forts and
200 War boats should be repaired, and this was effec-
ted at my departure from Siam.
Three days after the arrival of Pia Jotha at Bang-
kok, it was said that the King had given orders to
punish him. He was to return to Martaban, and there
have his head cut off in the presence of the English
(feneral. in two days more a report was spread that
he was dead, and all this is a great lie , for I can certify


that down to the moment of my quitting Siam, he was
iii good health and living quietly in his own house.
(True Copies and Translations)
(Signed) J. CRAWFURD
Resident.
Singapore
Bth Octr. 1825,


To GEORGE SWINTON Esqr.
Secy, to the Government
FORT WILLIAM
Sir,
The British Ship Caroline which left Bang-kok on
the 27th of August arrived at this Place on the 26th
Ultimo. By her I have received the three papers an-
nexed to this dispatch Yizt. a letter from the Prah-
Klang or foreign Minister*—a letter from Mr. Gillies,*
s and a translation of a Portuguese paper. Mr. Gillies
has himself arrived by this opportunity, as well as the
author of the last mentioned document which was
drawn out at this place at my request. The writer is
an European Portuguese who had resided several years
in Siam—who understands the Siamese language, and
who having frequented many parts of the Kingdom
has had necessarily better opportunities of observation
than any Englishman visiting the Country whether
officially or otherwise.
The different documents now laid before the Go-
vernment afford fresh proof of the wily and crooked
policy which so peculiarly characterizes the Court of
Siam. The conclusion which I am inclined to draw
from their perusal is of a similar tenour with that ex-
pressed in several of my recent reports, that the
Siamese have the utmost apprehension of the British
power—that under existing circumstances it is im-
possible to disabuse them on this subject while every
attempt made towards it is liable to be misconstrued
either through their excessive suspicion or ignorance,
and finally that the Court entertains the most anxious
desire to avoid all collision and even all political rela-
tion that might lead according to its own conception
to a rupture with the British Government.
PORT WILLIAM 25th Novr. 1825.


With regard to the seizure of Prisoners, this ac-
cording to both the Burman and Siamese nations ap-
pears to be the usual and habitual mode of warfare.
These captives are either retained as slaves or released
on the payment of a large ransom, and hence the strong
temptation to the practice. From all I can ascertain
there is no ground to believe that the Court has autho-
rized the seizure of the inhabitants of the provinces
under the British protection which appears to have
been the act of the inferior officers of the Neighbou-
ring Siamese districts. This temptation to such depre-
dations will continue so long as the extern ive frontier
of the Tenasserim province lies exposed as at present
and while our small garrisons are confined to the
Fortresses along the Coast. 1 make no doubt that the
Measures pursued by the Honorable Mr. Fullerton on
his arrival at Tavoy and Mergui will put an effectual
stop to the mischievous proceedings of the Siamese
Officers on the Tenasserim frontier, while the restora-
tion of the Prisoners will be quietly brought about by
the negociations of Captain Burney the Agent to the
Governor General to the Court of Siam.
J have the honor to report the arrival of Captain
Burney at this Place on the 6th Instant. 1 have fur-
nished him here with all the information and assistance
in my power and during his residence in Siam my
earnest and anxious efforts will be applied to aid and
support him during his negociation whenever oppor-
tunities may occur.
1 have &ca. &ca.
(Signed) J. CKAWFURI)
Resident.
Singapore
9th Octr. 1825.


To
file Honorable the Secret Committee of the
Honorable the Court of Directors.
Honorable Sirs,
******
•. Para. 5. On the proceedings of the annexed date,
is recorded a translation of a letter from the Siamese
Prime Minister addressed to the Officer Commanding
at Mergui*, couched in the most friendly terms, apolo-
gizing tor the acts of the local authority of the adjoi-
ning Siamese Territory in seizing some of the inhabi-
tants of Mergui, and stating that the officer in question
had been punished by imprisonment and removal from
his Government. Translations also of the Siamese
papers which accompanied Major General Sir Archibald
Campbell’s private letter dated the 6th August (an Ex-
tract from which was transmitted with our address of
the 2d ultimo) are recorded on the proceedings of the
annexed date. In these letters* the Siamese autho-
rities state that such of the inhabitants of Martaban as
had retired of their own accord, or been forcibly car-
ried a way into the territories of Siam, had received
permission to return to their homes, and they express
their earnest desire that a free intercourse and trade
should be maintained between the two Countries.
9. On the Consultation of the date noted in the
Margin, are recorded some dispatches* from the
Government of Prince of Wales Island in con-
tinuation of those already transmitted to Your
Honorable Committee with our address of the 23rd.
ultimo, reporting the success which has attended
the negotiations with the Rajah of Salengore.* Your
Honorable Committe will be happy to observe the
friendly tone of the letter from the Rajah of Ligore to


the Governor of Prince of Wales’ Island,* a disposition
on the part of the former which we have instructed the
Governor in Council of that Settlement to meet and
cultivate on his part.
******
We have &c.
AMHERST
COMBER ME RE
J. H. HARRINGTON
Fort William
27th October 1825.


FORT WILLIAM 27th April 1826.
To Captain Williamson
Deputy Political Agent with the Siamese
Auxiliary Army.
Sir,
1 am directed by the Commissioners in Pegu and
Ava to inform you that a Treaty was yesterday con-
cluded at this place with the negociators deputed from
the Court of Ava, the solemn ratification of which by
the King and Latoo is expected to arrive within fifteen
Days from yesterdays date.
Under these circumstances it is necessary that you
should direct the Commander of the Siamese Array (or
advanced Force if the Army itself have not entered
Peon) to suspend his advance until you shall receive
from the Commissioners intimation of the final con-
clusion ol the Treaty being careful at the same time to
apprize the Siamese authorities with whom you are
placed in communication that a special Clause has been
inserted in the Treaty by which they as the Allies of
the British Government in India are admitted to the
benefits of Peace if they think proper to avail them-
selves of them.
The commissioners desire that you will forward
a copy of this Letter to Captain Burney at Bangkok or
elsewhere with the utmost practicable Dispatch that
that Officer may be enabled to communicate the intelli-
gence above given without delay to the Court of Siam.
At the present juncture of affairs the Commis-
sioners deem it to be specially incumbent upon you to
use the utmost caution in all your communications
with the Siamese authorities so as not to implicate
Government by a pledge or promise of any description
positively given or implied. The Commissioners rely
with confidence upon your discretion and judgment to


avoid excit ing hopes in the minds of the Siamese or the
Taleen exiles which it may perhaps be found impos-
sible or highly inconvenient to gratify. By the terms
of the Treaty the four divisions of Arracan and the
Districts of Tavoy Mergui and Ye have been ceded
to the Double. Company but until the views and
wishes of the Right Double, the Governor General in
Council with respect to the Ultimate disposal of the
last mentioned Districts shall have been communicated
to the Commissioners it behoves them and all their
Subordinate Officers carefully to refrain from any act
that may by any means [be] construed into a pledge
binding upon the honor of Government. The Double,
the Governor of Prince of Wales’ Island being it is
understood shortly expected to arrive from the Tenas-
serim Coast, it is, the Commissioners desire me to
inform you, highly desirable that you should place
yourself in immediate communication with the Double.
Mr. Fullerton, as he it is presumed will be able to
furnish you with information with regard to the policy
of the Supreme Government at an earlier period than
Die same could reach you by the circuitous route of
this place.
■ I have &c.
(Signed) H. I). MA NGLES
Secretary.
()ffice of ('onimission
Camp Palamigoh
4-th January 1826.


FORT WILLIAM 13th January 1826.
Resident at Singapore
To G. Swinton Fsqre.
Pol. Dept. Secry. to the Govt.
Sir,
1 have the honor to report for the information of
the Right Double, the Governor General in Council
that I have received information from Siam by the
route of Singapore down to the 18th of November. I
have the honor to annex extracts of letters from the
Agent of a Commercial House at Singapore giving the
latest intelligence. It does not appear that Captain
Burney the Agent of the Governor General had arrived
at Bangkok down to the date above mentioned.
I have <fec.
(Signed) J. (drawtnrd—Rest.
Fort William
10th January 182b.


EXTRACTS of Letters from Bangkok.
October 4th.
“A messenger from Menam Noi" (the place
where the Menam begins to be navigable) “arrived
here last week to inform the King that three Rnglish
Officers and thirty Sepoys had arrived at that place on
their way to Bangkok. They told the Governor that
thev had letters for the King, and that they would
deliver them into no persons hands but his now. W hen
the King heard this he told the Messenger to go back
and ask what they wanted to say. and what were the
contents of the letters. The Messenger has not yet
come back, as it will at this season take 10 days to go
and 8 days to return. They talk here of going to war
with Cochin China to settle some dispute about ( am-
bodia. but how tar this may be true 1 do not know.
Captain Burney from Penang is expected here soon
with letters from the Governor General to the King
and to transact other business. This report is brought
bv a Siamese from Penang.
November 14th.
••I wrote the house on tin* Bth and 9th Instant
per this opportunity, and as the Nakoda is st ill here, it
affords me the pleasure of addressing you on a subject
which vou w ill naturally expect 1 should say something
about, that is. our future prospects in this country,
which are every day improving, and 1 think that it
would be a pity to withdraw the establishment just now,
especially after being at so much trouble and expence
as you have been in planting it. It has now taken
root and there is little danger of its dying away. On
its first arrival it had innumerable difficulties to sur-
mount which are now nearly it not all conquered. Ihe
native Merchants begin to know us and are not afraid
as formerly to come and buy if we had only suitable
goods to sell to them. The Prah-Klang himself seems
FORT WILLIAM I.3th January 1826


very willing to oblige us and when we have got him
on our side there is no danger of opposition from any
other quarter, even if any other person was inclined to
oppose us which I believe is not the case. He has
given orders to commence building-the promised house
for the residence of foreign Merchants which 1 have no
doubt will go on rapidly, and will answer our purpose
much better than the one we at present occupy, being
directly opposite to the Prah-Klangs-r—because the
people will then be at full liberty, or at least think
themselves so to come in and go out when they please
without fear of being seen, whereas a great many t hat
are willing to come and purchase, are afraid of doing
so for fear of offending or being seen by the Prah-
Klang, a circumstance to which they have still some
aversion, notwithstanding they are aware of the Govt,
having granted permission.”
( True Extracts )
(Signed) -I. CRAW PI Rl)—Rest.


To
H. D. MANGLES Esqre.
Secretary to the Commissioners iti Pegu
and Ava.
Sir.
1 have this moment received a communication
from Captain Burney, Envoy at the Court of Siam,
containing Extracts from his dispatch to the Hono-
rable the Governor of Prince of Wales Island, together
with a letter to Major General Sir Archibald Campbell's
address, and which I have forwarded under cover to
Brigadier Smelt at Rangoon to be transmitted to you
with as little delay as possible.
1 have also received a long letter from the Rown-
a-Hown which shall be forwarded in the course of to-
morrow, I have not yet had time to get it properly
translated, and being unwilling to detain Captain
Burney’s dispatch for a moment. 1 prefer sending it by
a future opportunity.
1 hope any cooperation on the part of the Siamese
with our troops will he now unnecessary, but if circum-
stances should occur to occasion a continuance ot
hostilities with the Burmese. Sir Archibald Campbell
need not, I think, calculate upon any assistance from
them during the present dry season. I think it is
pretty evident that the Rown-a-Rown is not autho-
rized by his Government to advance towards Martaban
until a further reference is made to it, and some pro-
mise made, or a hope held out of being put in posses-
sion of this place. 1 shall certainly avoid making any
promises whatever until 1 hear further from you.
1 have &c.
( [Signed ) M. WILLIAMSON
Captain 1). I*. A.
Maytaban,
28th -fa iy. 1826.


To
R. 1). .MANGLES Esqr.
Secretary to the Commissioners
in Pegu and Ava.
Sir.
Herewith you will receive the letter from the
Rown-a-Rown alluded to in my letter of yesterday’s
date, together with a translation* of the same into
Fnglish.
1 do not see any prospect whatever of the Division
under the Rown-a-Rown making any movement on
Pegu this season, even if a renewal of hostilities should
take place. He is himself represented to be extremely
anxious to advance by the Zemindars who have been
sent from this occasionally to his Camp : but the (Go-
vernment will not permit him until they receive some
satisfactory reply to their demand regarding Martaban,
the occupation of which place is deemed essentially
necessary by them, for the purpose of establishing a
Depot into which they could throw supplies of Stores
and provisions of all kinds for the use of their army.
We have a report here that the Honorable Mr.
Fullerton has arrived at Mergui, but no letters have
been received to corroborate it,
I have &c.
(Signed) H. WILLIAMSON
Captain D. P. Agent.
Martaban
20th -lanrv. 1 <S2(i.


FORT WILLIAM 27th April 1826.
Copy.
To Captain Henry Burney
Fnvoy at the Court of Siam.
Sir,
1 am directed by the Honhle. the Governor of
Prince of Wales’ Island to inform you that having ar-
rived at Mergui on the 13th Cltimo and made the
necessary enquiries respecting the hostages 122
Siamese detained until the return of the Inhabitants
carried away from Tenasserim by the Chief of Chim-
pohun he was concerned to find that they still remai-
ned in confinement with the exception ot 10 sent as will
appear in the enclosed Papers. To the letters sent by
Mr.. Maingy to the Prah Klang and to the Chow Pya of
Rigor no answer has ever been returned and the
Rouble, the Governor entertains serious doubts whether
the letters addressed to you by Mr. Maingy have reach-
ed their destination, Adverting to the circumstance
that the persons retained at Mergui had acted under
orders of their chief, considerations of humanity would
have induced the Rouble, the Governor to have at once
released the Prisoners and trusted to the return of the
Inhabitants of Tenasserim to the just and well groun-
ded representation to be made by you to the Court of
Siam had it not appeared that their release was ex-
pressly made the condition of the release of the
hostages from Mergui ; no reply having been received
and there appearing to be little prospect of any other
communication being more successful, the Rouble, the
Governor has not deemed it advisable to repeat Mr.
Maingy’s application, but 1 am directed by the Rouble,
the Governor to express his hopes that your application
for the recovery of the Men carried from under the
protection of the British Flag will at no distant period
be successful. The Rouble, the Governor trusts you


will along with this receive from Prince of Wales'
Island copy ol the Treaty af Peace concluded with the
Burmese Government by which it will be perceived
that the Province of Ye, Tavoy and Merge i are with
Arracan and dependencies ceded to the British Govern-
ment. Prom the letter received from the Commis-
sioners in Ava. it would appear that the Chief com-
manding the Siamese Porces has made a demand for
the transfer of the three iirst Provinces to that Power.
1 am directed to enclose copy of the Commissioners
Letter with the reply. Should the measure of the
transfer ultimately take place, which however must
depend on the future decision of the Right Honble.
the Governor General you will no doubt receive the
necessary Instructions from that high authority in
respect to the terms and conditions eventually to be
attached to*their cession.
1 have &c.
( Bigne I ) VV .K. Fullerton
Dopy. Secy, to (Jovt. with the
Hon hie. the (lovernor.
Ta\«»y
4th Peby. 1826.


Retention of Tavoy and Mergni,
* * * * * *
But whatever advantages might be ultimately
derived from the retention of these Provinces it is not
[ to ] be denied that the measure will place us in direct
contact with both the Burmese and Siamese Govern-
rnents with an accessible frontier on the North and
South and in their transfer to the Siamese it is pre-
sumable that advantages may be obtained in respect to
the tranquillity of our Settlements in the Straits in
return for them ; the contiguity of the Siamese to
Prince of Wales Island since the expulsion of the King
of Queda has been found very inconvenient, and as will
be known from recent communications that power has
evinced every disposition to extend their conquests
over the Malay States and place themselves in contact
with us at Malacca and Singapore, their removal from
Queda by the restoration of the King is attainable only
by negociation, but in respect to the views entertained
by them over Perak and other States of the Malay
Peninsula I have long made up my mind, after the
most deliberate enquiry and consideration, that the
Siamese Government have not and never had any
legitimate right or power over these States and con-
sequently that their abandonment of an unjust preten-
tion cannot require in return any concession on our
part; it must be admitted however that the cession of
the Provinces of Mergui and Tavoy on condition of the
Siamese withdrawing entirely from Queda and Perak
and abandoning all views of conquest on the Peninsula
would place our Settlements in the Straits out of con-
tact with that State at any one point and entirely
remove the danger of that collision which contiguity
of dominion may be supposed to produce, while such
concession ought to impress that nation with ideas of
our moderation which should dispel every doubt and
FORT WILLIAM 27th April 1826.


jealousy which seems to have all along operated in
their intercourse with us. There is one source of col-
lision so prominent and increasing that it would seem
almost necessary to make it the subject of express
provision and understanding with neighbouring States
on this side of India ; I allude to the pertinacity with
which they invariably insist on the return of Refugees
and the little ceremony they observe in violating our
territory on pretence of their recovery, the contiguity
of a British Settlement holds forth an asylum and place
of refuge for the oppressed of the surrounding nations,
while a sense of humanity and the reputation of our
Government forbids the Surrender of Fugitives except
on proof of moral guilt; disappointed despotism which
looks on disobedience and flight as the greatest of
crimes alike insists on their return ; disputes arise and
the risk of hostility is incurred. Moral and Political
considerations are here at variance. There can be
little doubt that these countries will be peopled by re-
fugees from the Siamese and Burmese possessions, the
cause of discontent will be frequent and the military
Force of the Provinces must be respectable ; the proxi-
mity of the Strong Post of Martaban if continued under
the Burmese authority would furnish additional
grounds for that measure. How far the avoidance of
that collision is of importance enough to counter-
balance the prospective advantages to be derived from
the retention of Mergui and Tavoy is a point which
• must rest for the consideration of the Right Honble.
the Governor General in Council on which 1 can hardly
consider myself authorized to give an opinion.
Considering the still existing dread and horror en-
tertained by the Inhabitants of these Provinces against
the Siamese, it would be necessary in the event of
their transfer to that state to ensure to the Inhabitants
by treaty the same Security which the Siamese Sub-
jects in their old possessions enjoy and to such of them
as are disposed the means of removing to the Burmese
or some of the nearest British Settlements; adverting


to the known policy and practice of the Siamese
Government it is to be feared that their first act on
gaining possession of these Provinces would be the re-
moval of the Burmese Inhabitants to a distant Pro-
vo rice and the complete breaking up of all the subsis-
ting Families and connexions amongst them, a measure
which their general aversion to Siamese Government
and proximity to the Grand Enemy of that nation
might even be asserted in some degree necessary for
its own security.
As I am ignorant how far it may be intended in
the event of the cession of these Provinces to the
Siamese to guarantee to them the continued posses-
sion against the attacks of the Burmese, it may not be
necessary to enter into any discussion as to the means
•of their maintaining themselves ; with Martaban in
possession of the latter and with so weak a frontier and
open access by Sea and the disposition of the Inhabi-
tants against them it seems to me scarcely possible
that the Siamese could long retain possession.
In case of the cession of these Provinces to the
Siamese the reservation of our Sovereignty over the
principal Islands now in our possession (King’s Island
•and Gomel) becomes a subject for consideration, those
with the Island of St. Mathews (which being South of
the confidential boundary line may be presumed to be
Siamese) are considered to afford the most convenient
positions for Marine Establishments; the latter is con-
sidered infinitely the best and might be obtained in
-exchange for the continental cessions.
Those Islands are covered with Forests, their pro-
ductive powers unknown and King’s Island and Gomel
-only Inhabited partially. They are at present of no
value, but on the other hand their retention would cost
nothing as there can be no necessity of forming an
establishment unless future events require it.
The retention would effect ually exclude European
Powers from a footing in the Archipelago; and would


afford the means in case of need of establishing a Port
for the refitting and general protection of onr Shipping
on this side of the Bay in the event of our withdraw-
ing from the continent, while insular possessions may
be supposed to be less likely to give rise to disputes
and collision.
(Signed) R. FULLERTON
Tavoy
14th Feby. 182 th


Governor of Prince ot Wales’ Island.
To the Right Honble.
WILLIAM PITT LORD AMHERST
Governor General in Council
PORT WILLIAM.
My Lord,
I have the honor to report my arrival at Mergui
on the 13th Ultimo. I am concerned to say the
Siamese Prisoners taken at Yaishew doni and detained
as hostages until the restoration of the Inhabitants ot
Tenasserim carried oif by the Chief ot Chimpohun re-
main still in confinement. No answer has been re-
turned to the letters addressed by Mr. Maingy to the
Prah Klang and to the chief of Ligor, nor lias any
communication whatever been received from Captain
Burney. 1 confess lam inclined to doubt whether the
letters addressed to him have ever reached their desti-
nation as these people no doubt acted under orders
from their chief. Motives of humanity would have
induced me to order their release and return to then-
own country and to have trusted to the restoration of
the Tenasserim Inhabitants to the just and well groun-
ded remonstrances of Captn. Burney, had it not appea-
red that that restoration was in these letters made the
distinct proviso under which the Siamese Prisoners
were to be released. Prom the little notice taken of
communications already made I did not think it right
to renew the subject but have addressed Captain
Burney on the occasion of a Sea Conveyance.
******
I have &c.
(Signed) R. FULLERTON.
Tavoy
14th Peby. 1826.
FORT WILLIAM 27th April 1826.


FORT CORNWALLIS The 20 April 1826.
To
W. E. FULLERTON Esquire
i
Deputy Secretary to Government
Prince of Wales Island.
Sir,
I am directed to transmit to you herewith, a letter
from the Right Honorable the Governor General, to
the address of the Rajah of Li gore, in reply to that
from His Highness which accompanied the presents
forwarded by the Government of Prince of Wales Is-
land in September last, also a Box containing presents
as per List accompanying—and to request, that the
Honorable the Governor in Council will be pleased to
cause them to be delivered according to their address,
in such manner as he may judge expedient.
2. Copies of the Translation of the Rajah of
Ligore’s letter (prepared with the aid of a Malay
Moonshee) and of His Lordship’s answer, are transmit-
ted herewith, for the information of the Honorable the
Governor in Council.
3. As there is no person at this Presidency who
could undertake translation of the Governor General’s
letter into the Malay ; and still less the Siamese langu-
age, I am instructed farther to request, that a Malay
version may be prepared at Prince of Wales Island, to
accompany the original, and to admit of its insertion,
the Khuritah, you will observe, has been left ope7i.
1 have &ca.
(Signed) A. STIRLING
Reran. Secry. to Govt .
Fort William
24 February 182(b


LIST OF PRESENTS.
A set of handsome Pink Topaz Jewellery consis-
ting of a Necklace, Broach, a Pair of Rings and a Finger
Ring in a Red Morocco Case.
A Pair of Double barrelled Pistols in a Mahogany
Case with Apparatus Lock and Key.
Two Musical Boxes.
A Pair of handsome Shawls one Red and one sky
blue.
Two handsome Diamond cut bottles with Gold
tops.
Two Pieces of Rich Kimkhaub.


From
HIS HIGHNESS
The RAJAH of LIGORE
Received October 31st 1825.
(Through the Medium of a Persian Translation.)
After Compliments.
With great satisfaction 1 address this letter to a
chief of such high renown, as the Governor General of
India, and I trust it will reach your Lordship in
safety.
it is my sincere and earnest desire to cultivate the
relations of amity and concord with the Supreme Go-
vernment and for years it has been the anxious wish
of my heart to establish a friendly intercourse, in order
that the people of this Country may proceed to Bengal
and carry on their traffic with perfect ease and security.
ft was my intention to have deputed an Agent to
wait on your Lordship, but delay occurred, in conse-
quence of my not being able to find a person acquain-
ted with the language of Bengal. 1 was not aware be-
forehand of Captain Burney’s visit to Calcutta, and did
not therefore write, but now I take an opportunity of
sending this letter through him and I trust to his
friendship for conveying it in safety. Should it be
your pleasure, the people of this Country will be de-
lighted to visit the Ports of Bengal, and to carry on a
trade with that country. Between the States of Siam
and Ava. War and enmity have ever existed. Should
the Burinan Country become permanently a part ot
the British Territories the people of Siam will be high-
ly gratified thereat.
The Country of Kedah has been from ancient
times, a dependency of Siam. The Rulers ot Siam
have always conferred the Chiefship of Kedah on whom-
soever they thought proper to select. Formerly the


Laws and usages of the Empire were in full force in
that quarter and the Rajahs were always faithful and
obedient, so that no disputes or disturbances occurred.
Some years since Tank® Bisnoo, the brother of Tanko
Bum moo, came to Siam, and represented that the
Rajah of Kedah was in correspondence with the King
of Ava, and was preparing to levy war against his Liege
Lord. The Ruler of Siam then issued a summons to
the Rajah of Kedah, to repair to his presence, that he
might receive good counsel. The Raja would not obey
the order, though often repeated, and continued to re-
sist it for five or six years ; At length, after commit-
ting this and many other offences, he retired to Pulo
Penang, where he took up his abode, and wrote again
to the King of'Ava, urging him to attack the Siamese.
The Burman King accordingly communicated fre-
quently with the Rajah of Kedah as is well known to
several Inhabitants of Pulo Penang. In the mean
time, the English, by the blessing of the Almighty,
took possession of the Burrnan Dominions, on which
the Rajah of Kedah became alarmed, and desisted from
his practices with the Government of Ava. The Rajah
of Kedah, continuing to reside at Pulo Penang with all
his brethren and relations next put abroad a false re-
port that it was the intention of the English Authori-
ties of Prince of Wales Island to make war against
Siam. During a long course of years I have never, in
any one instance, acted an unfriendly part towards the
English, How should Ido it now i The thing is im-
possible. If any person calumniates me in your Lord-
ship’s presence and endeavours to sow r dissent ion be-
tween the two states, by falsely ascribing hostile
designs to the Siamese, I request from your Lordship s
justice and magnanimity, that he may not be believed.
Captain H. Burney will explain all matters- to your
Lordship in detail, when he waits upon you. 1 as-
sure you that I will always act in such a manner as to
promote the friendship between the two States ; and 1
confidently trust that the connection between us will
mow become more intimate than ever, and that com


inerce will be extended. It is my sincere desire that
no interruption to our harmony and good understan-
ding should occur.
I send herewith two pieces of Cloth worked in
Cold, also a Vase with a Cover, a Kettle to warm water
in, and a Teapot, made in Siam, as a present for your
Lordship. Although these articles are of the most
trifling value, and are not at all worthy of your Lord-
ship, yet, as they are offered in the spirit of sincere
friendship, J. hope that they will be graciously accepted
for the donor’s sake. I have not just now had time to
procure any of the more rare and valuable articles
manufactured in Siam, but, please God I live, I will
hereafter send some of greater beauty and richness.
I trust that your Lordship will return a speedy
answer to this letter, in order that the people of this
Country may be encouraged to trade to Bengal.
This being the first letter which I have ever ad-
dressed to the Governor General of India, I beg, that if
any errors or inaccuracies in point of form occur, that
will be viewed indulgently.
( True Translation )
( Signed ) A. STIRLING
Persn. Secy, to Govt.
True Copy
( Signed ) A. STIRLING
Persn. Secy, to Govt.


To
HIS HIGHNESS the RAJAH of LIGORE
Date 24 February 1826.
I had great satisfaction in receiving your friendly
and agreeable letter, transmitted thro’ the Honble. the
Governor of Prince of Wales Island.
The sentiments of friendship and good will which
it expresses towards myself personally and the disposi-
tion manifested by your Highness to cultivate and im-
prove the relations of concord and harmony so happily
established between the Honble: East India Company
and the state of Siam, are peculiarly gratifying to me,
and are met by corresponding feelings and inclinations
on my part and that of the Supreme Government,
which we shall lose no opportunity of testifying.
Your desire to establish a secure and uninterrupted
Commercial intercourse between the two Countries, and
to encourage the resort of your subjects to the Ports of
Bengal, is a proof of your wisdom and enlightened
policy, and accords precisely with the views and wishes
of this Government. Let your Merchants and Traders
repair to this Country with the fullest confidence and
rest assured that they will experience a friendly recep-
tion, and meet with every just and reasonable facility
in carrying on their traffic with the people of British
India. Any information which you may wish to obtain
regarding Commercial Laws and regulat ions of this part
of the World, and the state of its Markets, will, 1 am
sure, be willingly furnished to you by the Governor of
Prince of Wales Island.
Your Highness has doubtless received full accounts
of the events of the Burmah War, and the brilliant
success which has attended the operations of our Array
in Pegu and Ava, notwithstanding the difficulties op-
posed to their progress, by the nature of the Country
and Climate. Adverting to the inveterate spirit of


hostility which the Burmese have always manifested
towards Siam, it is natural that you should regard with
satisfaction the overthrow of that arrogant and faithless
power, by a Government which sincerely desires to*
cultivate the relations of peace and good neighbourhood,
and to conduct a mutually beneficial commerce, with
all surrounding States. The explicit assurance on this
point contained in your Highness's letter is exceedingly
gratifying and satisfactory to me.
What you have written regarding the affairs of
Kedah, has been perused by me with deliberate atten-
tion. The necessity for any specific remarks there-
upon, on the present occasion, has been obviated by
the 6th and 7th Articles of the Preliminary Treaty con-
cluded between your Highness and Captain Burney on
the 31 July last, which I sincerely hope will remove
every difficulty, and produce such a Settlement of
Kedah affairs, as may prevent future discussion and
misunderstandings and secure the rights and interests
of all parties, on a permanent basis.
With respect to the rumours and accusatory state-
ments referred to by your Highness in the concluding'
part of your letter, I beg to assure you that the British
Government never lends an ear to calumnies, but com-
pares the acts of every one, with his professions, and
judges accordingly. If doubts at any time existed,,
your Highness's conduct in the late interviews with
Captain Burney, no less than the Language of your
present communication, must entirely remove them,
and restore the fullest confidence in your friendship
and good intentions.
The presents sent by your Highness have been re-
ceived by me in the spirit which prompted their offer,
and are highly valued, as tokens of your friendship.
I beg to return a few articles as specimens of the pro-
duce and manufactures of this country.


The correspondence thus auspiciously comrnenced
between us, will, 1 trust, be continued, and serve to
increase and cement our mutual friendship and
regard.
( True Copy )
( Signed ) A. STIRLING.
Persn. Secry. to Govt.


RESOLUTION of the Commissioners in Pegue
and Ava, Camp, Prome, 15 March 1826.
The Secretary laid before the Commissioners a let-
ter from Captain Williamson, Deputy Political Agent
at the Head Quarters of the Auxiliary Siamese Army,
dated from Martaban, 29 January 1826* with its en-
closure, being an original letter in the Burmese lan-
guage received by that Officer from the Rown-a-Rown,
with a translation of the same, running as follows.
General &c. &c. Ac. Rown-a-Rown, serving under
the great King of Keearouttra Dwarawaddee, Preserver
of the ten Commandments, full of Justice, Lord of the
white Elephant &c. &c. &c. is informed ( by the letter
brought by the Zemindar of Taka Twon ) that the
officers who were dispatched by him have been well re-
ceived, and supplied with every necessary. In a former
letter 1 am informed that should our troops advance to
Martaban, they also will be provided with Grain and
other provisions, and that you have forwarded the letter
sent by us to the General Commanding the British
Troops, and when an answer is received we will consult
together. We also understand from the purport of the
late letter, that the British General is desirous that we
should advance with as little delay as possible. This
letter was taken by the Zemindar of Taka twon to the
Egga Maha Thanadee padee ( Chief Minister ) at Bang-
kok, and in reply he states that the English and Sia-
mese are upon the most friendly terms, that they are both
enemies to the Burmese, and are conjoined in war
against them. Our enmity to the Burmese is of long
duration, and it is impossible to number the various
and repeated encounters that we have had with them ;
but with the English we are inclined to be on the
closest terms of friendship, and are extremely willing
to be called to their assistance, as we are perfectly ac-
quainted with the manner of Burmese warfare. There
still remain a number of Towns untaken by the English,
and without a large army it will be difficult to conquer


more ; but with such assistance as will be sent by us
every thing will be rendered easy. But, provided this
army be sent by us we have no place of depot, and al-
though it be said that provisions will be provided for
our troops, we cannot trust solely to such promises, as
it is difficult to procure provisions, the town and coun-
try not being under our control ; and it is a matter of
uncertainty whether we may be provided or not, and if
nob, every thing will go wrong. If Martaban and
Tavoy were placed under our directions, and Granaries
&c. &c. established, the Burmese contending against
our combined forces could not continue to exist, and
should the war continue until the rainy season, we
should be sufficiently supplied with grain in the Dis-
tricts of Martaban and Tavoy, whilst the English would
also have sufficient upon the Rangoon side ; and before
the commencement of the warm season there would be
a famine amongst the Burmese at which time every
thing would be easily gained. Our army is ready at a
moment’s notice, and if the English General be of the
same opinion with ourselves, we hope that a decisive
answer will be sent immediately.
r lhe Rown-a-Rown is at present, in consequence of
a late order, encamped at Darieh in the District of
Mac-na-nwar, Eight day of the encrease of the moon
Pyatho A Sekai-Thee Mahapyat with the Zemindar of
Taka-town is dispatched with this letter for the in-
formation of the British officer commanding at Marta-
ban, who will transmit the letter to the General Com-
manding the British Troops in Ava.”
The Commissioners taking this letter into con-
sideration, adverting to the tenour of the several com-
munications lately received from Captain Williamson,
more especially to his letters dated severally the 28
and 29 th of January* and the 14th February 1826,*
in which last-mentioned dispatch he states, as his de-
cided opinion “ that the division under the Rown-a-
Rown will not move towards Martaban, until they are
assured that the place will be given up to them,” and


referring to the general tone of Captain Burney’s letters
from Bangkok itself, where he possessed full means and
opportunity of informing himself thoroughly, with
respect to the disposition and policy of that Court,
which appears to be most timidly averse to committing
itself with the Burmese until the late contest should
have been decided by the complete triumph of the-
British arms, resolved that a letter in the Burmese
language should be addressed to the Rown-a-Rown to
the following effect.
“The British Commissioners write to the Rown-a-
Hown &c. &c. &c.
The British Commissioners have received the
Rown-a-Rown’s letter forwarded to them by Captain
Williamson, and have perused with satisfaction that
Chieftain’s assurances of his desire to cooperate with
the British forces serving in Ava. The British Com-
missioners have to inform the Rown-a-Rown that the
British Army advanced from Prome with an intention
of proceeding to the capital of Ava, and prosecuted its
march to Gandaboo, within 25 * dynes of the Royal
residence, having with the greatest facility taken every
Fort, and defeated and dispersed every army that op-
posed its progress. On their reaching Gandaboo, the
Commissioners were met by the Ministers deputed by
the King of Ava, who agreed to repay, as demanded,
some portion of the expences incurred by the British
Government during the war, delivering in part pay-
ment of the same, the sum of twenty five lacs of
Rupees, (or eighteen and three quarters lacs of tickals)
in Gold and Silver Bullion, and to cede in perpetuity
to the British Government the Provinces of Arracan.
Sandoway, Ramree. Cheduba, Assam, Cochar, Jinteea.
Tavoy, Mergui and Ye, as far to the Westward as the
Salvien River. The British Commissioners having thus
through the unaided exertions of the English Army,
and without any assistance whatever from the Rown-a-
Rown. accomplished every object that they had in


view, no longer require the advance of the Siamese Army :
and recommend, to the Rown-a-Rown that it be im-
mediately withdrawn. As one article in the Treaty of
Peace specially relates to the Siamese Government a
Copy thereof is enclosed for your information, and a
Copy of the whole Treaty * will be transmitted to
Captain Burney, the British Resident at Bangkok, for
the information of His Siamese Majesty.
“ In reply to that part of the Rown-a-Kown's letter
which relates to the Provinces of Martaban and Tavoy.
the British Commissioners have merely to inform that
Chieftain that according to the terms of the Treaty
lately concluded, the provinces of Mergui, Tavoy and
Ye, viz. all the country to the Eastward of the Salvein
River, will in future appertain to the British Govern-
ment in India, and that Martaban, to the Westward of
that River, will be restored to the King of Ava.
It was further resolved that a letter of Instruction
should be written to Captain Williamson with the Copy
of the above Draft, and that that officer should be direct-
ed to forward copies of the said letter and draft to Mr.
Commissioner Maingy and Captain Burney respectively,
with the greatest practicable dispatch.
( Signed ) Ross D. Mangles Secretary.
True Copy
( Signed ) R. D. Mangles Sery.


FORT WILLIAM 2d June 1826.
Mr. Maingy.
To Geo. Swinton Esqr.
Secretary to Government Poll. Department.
Sir,
1 have the honor to transmit for the information
of the Right Honble. the Governor General in Council
a continuation of Captain Burney’s Journal, which was
delivered to me a few days since by Mr. Leal, one of
his interpreters.
1 feel great satisfaction in reporting that Captain
Burney has succeeded in obtaining the release of 547
Burmese Men, Women, and Children, being the portion
sent to Bangkok of the Inhabitants forcibly carried
away from these Provinces by the Pya of Chimpohun
—of these 503 have reached Mergin', 12 have died on
the road, and 33 are missing. Captn. Burney having
placed Mr. Leal under my orders, and having forwar-
ded to me a Copy of an order in the Siamese language
which has been sent to the present Governor of Chim-
pohun by the Court of Siam, directing the release of
the captives* there, I have availed myself of Mr. Leal’s
Services, and directed him to proceed to Chimpohun
with the Siamese lately in confinement at Mergui, and
have furnished him with presents and letters to the
Pya of Chimpohun authorizing him to receive as many
of the Burmese Captives as he can obtain.
I have &ca.
(Signed) A. D. MAINGY Commissr.
for the Provinces of Mergui and Tavoy.
TAYOY the
24th March 1826.


( Copy )
Secret Department,
25th April 1826.
Minute by Mr. Harington.
******
10. With regard to the conquered Provinces of
Yeh, Tavoy, Mergui and Tenasseritn, ... it would
certainly not be inconsistent to allow the King of Ava
to redeem the Territory thus ceded by him, if he should
hereafter be desirous of doing so, by a gradual payment
of the second Crore of Rupees, not included in the fifth
article of the Treaty, and if this mode of disposing of
the Provinces obtained under the fourth article should
ultimately appear preferable to the retention of them
in our own hands, or a transfer of them to the Siamese.
But it seems to me in several respects, premature to
enter upon any immediate consideration of this ques-
tion, which may perhaps, with propriety, be left for
decision by the authorities in England.
12. In answer to a letter from this Government,
dated the 12rh November 1824 * the Secret Committee
observed, ( in Para ; 45 of their letter dated 3d. August
1825, already referred to as the last received from
t hem ) “We should not object to the transfer of
Mergui, or Tavoy, to the Siamese, if you could thereby
secure any of the desired objects of the Malayan
Peninsula, to which you refer in your letter of the 7th
Deer.* to the Government of Prince of Wales’ Island.”
t
13. With reference to the objects here adverted
to and with a view to check the Burman spirit of en-
croachment and conquest on the Coast of Tenasserim,


if we do not ourselves keep possession of the Provinces
ceded to us by the fourth article of the Treaty, it might
perhaps be expedient to relinquish to the Siamese such
parts of them as more immediately border upon Siam,
in exchange for what we require on the Malayan Pen-
insula, and such Commercial advantages as it might be
found practicable to settle with the Court of Siam, for
the future regulation of our trade and intercourse with
t he different sea ports of that Kingdom.
14, But unless the permanent possession of these
Territories, which have so often been a subject of con-
test between the rival states of Ava and Siam, were
guaranteed to the latter by the British Government it
seems doubtful whether so weak a power would be able
to retain them in the event of any future attempt to
recover them on the part of the Burmese ; and even if
lie could ensure their quiet occupancy by a Treaty of
Alliance with the King of Siam, unless he could as-
sure us, in return, of his establishing a system of
Government more favorable to the liberty and property
of the inhabitants, than what is described to have been
the systematic and cruel oppression hitherto exercised
by his officers towards the natives ofTavoy and Mergin'
( who consequently look upon subjugation to the Sia-
mese with terror and abhorrence) it would be impossible
on moral grounds to suggest a transfer to his authority
of those who have sought or may hereafter seek an
asylum from persecution within the limits of our new
acquisitions.
15. The obligation which we have virtually con-
tracted towards the inhabitants of those conquered
Provinces, forms indeed an obstacle to the restitution
of them to the Government of Ava, though not perhaps
( with due stipulations in their behalf) so strong as
that which opposes their annexation to Siam. On this
account 1 cannot but wish that it were consistent with


our policy to keep these possessions, or such of them as
on farther information may appear tenable and produc-
five, under the fostering care of a British Government.
******
( Signed ) J. H. HARINGTON
April 25th 1826.
A true Copy
( Signed ) G. SWINTON
Secy, to the Govt.


( Copy )
20fh April 1826.
Note by the Secretary.
With respect to the cessions on the side of Marta-
ban and the Tenasserim coast, the arguments ha\ing
reference to the defence of our frontier do not apply ,
but it appears to me that there are many other con-
siderations which strongly recommend their temporary,
if not their permanent, retention.
It is not, 1 believe, disputed that most if not all
the Provinces of Martaban, Ye, Tavoy and Mergui, are
rich and fertile, and would soon repay the expenses of
management, besides throwing open to British industry
and enterprise a vast held from which we have hitheito
been quite shut out. The possession of those Provinces
would give us the command of an extensive traffic with
Siam and the adjoining countries, with the advantage
of having free ports of our own at Tavoy and Mergui,
instead of being subjected to the vexatious imposts and
exactions of the Siamese practised at Bangkok.
% % * #• * *
But, independently of the above considerations. I
would beg leave to submit that we are in some measure
pledged to protect the inhabitants of the Martaban and
Tenasserim Provinces, and we could not suddenly
withdraw our protection without exposing them to the
eruel inroads of the Siamese on the one hand, and the
no less cruel Government of their former Masters on
the other. All the reports received from Captain
Burney shew that the Siamese and Burmese have been
in the constant practice of seizing every opportunity to
carry off the inhabitants of each others territories into
slavery, and it cannot be doubted that in the present
weak and distracted state of the Burmese Government,
the Siamese would commit the most cruel excesses in


those Territories which we might restore to Ava. A
better fate would scarcely await the inhabitants of the,
Provinces in question, if they were given up by us to
the Siamese in return for their consenting to the
restoration of the exiled Rajah of Qnedah ; for there is
too much reason to apprehend that the moment the
Siamese were placed by us in possession of any of the
Burmese Dominions, they would plunder and destroy
the country and make captives of the inhabitants, least
the Burmese should again recover strength to drive
them out as before.
*■ # # « # #
As regards the fear of collision with the Burmese
or the Siamese J would beg leave merely to remark
that it is tlie weakest power rather than the strongest
that should fear this contingency, and that it is more
onr policy to make those arrogant and semi barbarous
Governments dread giving us offence, than to avoid
cause of quarrel by retiring from their vicinity. The
Burmese I would fain flatter myself have got such a
lesson as will effectually restrain them from offering us
any serious affront in future, and the example will go a
great way with the Siamese who have unequivocally
betrayed to Cap. Burney the awe with which our power
has inspired them, and who will be submissive in pro-
portion to the facilities with which we can send an
army to chastise them. In this point of view I should
imagine that our possession of Martaban, Tavoy and
Mergui, so far from tending to embroil us in a quarrel
with that nation would materially contribute to over-
awe and keep them quiet, and thus mainly promote the
tranquillity of that portion of the Malayan Peninsula
where we are necessarily brought into contact with
them and their dependent states by our occupation of
Malacca.
Hopeless as the chance of success in any war with
the British Government must now appear to the Bur-
mese and Siamese, there can he little reason to appre


hend their seriously meditating such a design, and
consequently the force required for the protection of
our newly acquired territories cannot be very great.
But it appears to me to be ot the first importance to
keep up the impression we have established of the
superiority of our power, and nothing can so effectually
secure this as our continuing to hold what we have ac-
quired. Our retaining undisturbed possession of Bur-
mese Provinces which the Siamese have never been
able to conquer from the nation will speak a much
more intelligible language to the Court of Siam than
any remonstrance which we might have occasion to ad-
dress to it for unfriendly conduct, and in like manner
it will serve to remind the Burmese of their tolly, and
be a warning to them not to risk the loss of other and
more valuable possessions.
******
(Signed) G. SWINTON
A true Copy
( Sd. ) G. SWINTON
Secry. to Govt.


( Copy )
Minute by Mr. Bay ley.
* # * * * *
Two modes of beneficially disposing of these con-
quests [ the provinces on the coast of Tenasserim ] ap-
pear to have been contemplated, the first was the
transfer of them to Siam in exchange for certain terri-
torial and other advantages which were considered as
of great importance to the interests of Prince of Wales
Island and our settlements to the Eastward.
The second was the restoration of them to Ava for
a large pecuniary consideration.
If by the first mentioned arrangement we could
have obtained the Island of Junk Ceylon and the other-
objects above alluded to without guaranteeing to Siam
the secure retention of those Provinces, and without
involving ourselves in any defensive alliance with her,
1 should have thought the measure highly desirable ;
but there appears to me to exist insuperable objections
at present to the transfer of those Provinces to Siam,
even supposing the (Government of Siam to be disposed
to enter readily into our views. The concurring ac-
counts which we have received from all the local
authorities of the cruelties so long exercised by the
Siamese towards the inhabitants of those Provinces,
and of the hatred and dread which the latter so justly
entertain of the Siamese, would in my opinion pre-
clude us from being a party to any arrangement which
would now subject the inhabitants of Tavoy, Mergni
and Martaban to the dominion of Siam. We could
not I think by any stipulation secure them from those
acts of cruelty and severe oppression which they anti-
cipate if they are placed under the dreaded govern-
ment of Siam, and unless we are prepared practically
to enforce the due maintenance of such stipulations, the
transfer of the Provinces in question to Siam seems to


be irreconcileable with the paramount considerations
of justice and humanity.
The period may come when by a change in the
character of the Government of Siam or by the lapse of
years, the objections which now exist to such an ar-
rangement may be weakened or altogether removed,
and the interest of the British Government may be
consulted without sacrificing those of the people now
subject to our authority and entitled to our protection.
With regard to Siam the successful result of our
war with Ava cannot fail to produce a strong impres-
sion of our power and resources, and if we show by our
conduct that we have no intention of aggrandizing our-
selves at their expense, and that we are only anxious
to cultivate a friendly intercourse with them with a
view to the commercial prosperity of both countries, I
see no cause to fear any hostile attempts on their part
to disturb us.
The danger of future collision both with Ava and
Siam is chiefiy, J think, to be looked for in the pro-
bable frequency with which the subjects of those states
may take refuge in our provinces, and it will be very
desirable to define by treaty, the circumstances by
which our conduct on that point is to be regulated.
(Signed) W. H, BAYLKY,
May Oth 1 820.
A true Copy
(Signed ) (JKO, S WIN TON
Seery. to Oovt,


Copv. Triplicate.
To
The Honorable the Secret Committee of the
Honble. the Court of Directors.
Honble. Sirs,
******
Para. 3. We have also the honor to transmit by
this opportunity a copy of a dispatch from the Secretary
at P. W. Island dated 25th March last inclosing a con-
tinuation of Captain Burney’s report of his proceedings
at the Court of Siam, extending from the 22d Decem-
ber 1825 to the 15 February 1826, the details of which
are extremely interesting and throw much light on the
character and policy of the Siamese, and will materially
assist the judgment of your Honble. Committee in de-
ciding on the ultimate disposal of our acquisitions on
the Tenasserim Coast.
4. It will not fail to strike you on a perusal of Cap-
tain Burney’s report, that if the districts above adver-
ted to had been transferred to the Siamese when they
first came into our possession, there is every reason to
believe they would have been plundered and laid waste,
and the unfortunate inhabitants been seized and carried
off as slaves to Siam, It is satisfactory to observe, that
in their Correspondence with Captain Burney, the
Siamese Ministers distinctly disavow all claim of right
to the provinces which we have conquered from the
Burmese. In their note No. 15 appendix to Captain
Burney’s report the Siamese Ministers remark that
“ the Countries of Tavoy and Martaban which the Eng-
“ lish have conquered have become their possessions
” and the Siamese do not covet countries for nothing.
“ What were the boundaries of those Countries when
“ belonging to the Burmese, can be now the boundaries
“ of the English, and the Siamese do not desire to in-
“ fringe on the boundaries of the English. Do not let


“ Captain Burney be uneasy. The Governor General
“ of Bengal had deputed him to improve friendship and
“ commerce. The Siamese are extremely pleased with
“ what Captain Burney has come to perform and desire
“ that trade and friendly intercourse between the Eng-
“ lish and Siamese may become much greater than
“ formerly.”
5. In No. 18 of the Appendix the same Ministers
state to Captain Burney as follows “ His Majesty ha-
“ ving read the letter and understood its contents issued
“ the following orders. The country of Siam has from
“ the earliest times for more than 100 years been en-
“ gaged in war with Ava and we have never heard of
“ the whole race of our kings ever making a good re-
“ turn to the Burmese or of restoring any Territory
“ conquered. As to what Captain Burney thinks in
“ his active and zealous mind of proceeding to Marta-
“ ban and obtaining it for us, Captain Burney is very
“ kind and we return many thanks to him, but Marta-
“ ban is far from the country of Siam, exposed and not
“ connected with the Siamese Territories. To protect
“ and keep Martaban would be very difficult and the
“ inhabitants of Martaban would not be pleased because
“ the Siamese would be fighting with the Burmese.”
6. In the 6th paragraph of the appendix to Cap-
tain Burney’s Journal, paper A, No. 21, relating to the
progress of his negotiations with the Siamese Court,
that intelligent officer remarks that “ the intercourse
“ between the Siamese capital and Tavoy is much more
“ easy and capable of advantageous commercial results
“than that with Mergui. By embarking on the
“ Menam Noi, the passage between Tavoy and Bang-
“ kok may certainly be reduced to 8 or 9 days which is
“ very nearly the time formerly reported to Mr. Craw-
“ fin’d. Tavoy abounds in tin and other productions
“ and the country on its frontiers is rich in sapan and
“ teak wood while that on the frontiers of Mergui and
‘i 4 Tenasserim is stated to be poor, barren and thinly


“inhabited. No Commercial Treaty with Siam (Cap-
“ tain Burney states in the 9th paragraph) “ could prove
“so advantageous to British Commerce and shipping
“ as a settlement at Tavoy whence we could ensure at
.< all times a large share in the commerce of Siam with-
“ out being d pendent on the caprice ot a suspicious
“ and jealous Court.”
7. With respect to the nature of the frontier be-
tween the late Burmese possessions of Martaban and
Tenasserim, and the territory of Siam, Captain Burney
in paper B. of his Appendix states “ there is a moun-
“ tainous waste of several days journey on either side
“ of the frontier between the Siamese Dominions and
“ the Provinces of Tavoy and Martaban and the exist-
“ ence of this waste has ever proved the strongest de-
“ fence of Siam against Ava, whose population is far
“ superior to that of Siam in any military quality and
“ whose armies if they had not been obliged to carry
“ their own provisions over this tract would have cioss-
“ed it much oftener than they have done. It may be
“ considered good policy to keep up this tract of desol-
“ ation between the Siamese and any possessions that
“ the British Government may retain on the Coast of
“ Tenasserim as the intervention of a mountainous
“ waste may reduce the chance ot dispute and collision.
“ In any plan for ceding a portion of our conquests to
“ Siam two points would require to be considered.
“ First that she could retain the territory against even
“ the present reduced power of Ava, and secondly that
“ the inhabitants would readily receive their new
“ masters or at least not experience an undue measure
“of oppression. The Provinces of Tavoy, Mergui, tuid
“ Tenasserim are inhabited by a race of Burmese which,
“ judging from the conduct of the Siamese towards the
“ prisoners whom they brought from these Provinces
“ during the present war, would be certain of being
“ made slaves and of being treated with the utmost in-
“ humanity if transferred to Siam.”


8. Captain proceeds to remark that
“ a large portion of the population of Siam consists of
“ Peguers and of the descendants of Pegu emigrants
“ and Martaban which once belonged to Siam appears
“ capable of being made a post of considerable strength.
“ while it is inhabited chiefly by Peguers who have
•• been in extensive communication with their brethren
“ in Siam during the whole of the present war,
1). One objection (Captain Burney continues to
say ) “ against ceding Martaban to Siam is that by
•• bringing (he Siamese closer to the Burmese, we may
•• sow the seeds of more dispute between them, but it
“may be hoped that the British Posts of Tavoy and
“ Mergui would enable us to keep the peace between
y“ these Nations. The Burmese in their struggle with
r %m “ the English must have made a great advance in
4 “ military tactics, and in proportion as the terms of the
, r “ proposed treaty between us press upon them in the
“ North and West they wi 11 try to move towards the
“ South and East. Altho’ the Court of Siam is too
“ arrogant to admit it, yet there may be strong grounds
•• for believing that unless the Siamese are pledged 5 "
" the support of the British Government or put in
possession of some advantageous post on the frontiers
•• of Ava. the Burmese will have greater inclination and
ability than ever to find their way to Bankok from
•• Martaban which is the place where they formerly
“ collected their force preparatory to attacking Siam.”
10, Notwithstanding the declaration of the Siam-
ese Ministers that the possession of Martaban is not an
object with them, Captain Burney states in the paper
last referred to ( paragraph ten ) that “ the Court ot
“ Siam appear to put the chief value upon Martaban
“ and the offer of that Province would give the British
“ Government the best, perhaps the only cha'nce of.ob-
“ taming from Siam the whole of the objects it desires/
M. We have adverted in the preceding para-
graphs to some of the points stated in Captain Burney’s


report as bearing on the question relative to tlie dis-
posal of our conquests on the Tenasserim Coast ; l)iit
the whole report is well worthy the deliberate con-
sideration of your Honorable Committee previously
to your coming to a final resolution on the subject here
alluded to.
12. Before we conclude our notice of Captain
Burney’s report, we will make one short extract more
containing his opinion of the effect which the money
payment to us by the Burmese will produce ou the
minds of the Siamese. In paragraph 104 of his Journal
he states as follows. “ The Rajah of Figure asked me
and took down in writing the names of the different
" territories we are about to retain or return to Ava,
“ and seemed most inquisitive as to the sum of money
that the Burmese are to engage to pay us. This
“ payment of money, next to the possession of the
“ Burmese Capital, is the most unequivocal proof we
“ could give to the Siamese and every Indo-Chinese
“ Nation of the superiority of the British Arms over
“those of Ava.
# * % * » -is
We have Ac.
AM HKIiST
COM BKRM BK.K
J. H. H A RHJ NT;TON
W. B. BAYLKY.
Fort William
10 M;iv 1826.


■ TO THE HONORABLE THE COURT OF
»
DIRECTORS FOR THE AFFAIRS OF THE
UNITED COMPANY OF MERCHANTS OF
ENGLAND TRADING TO THE EAST INDIES,
i
LONDON.
Honorable Sirs,
# * * * * %
Para. 14. Although the Political Mission of
Captain Burney to Siam was made under the immediate
authority of the Right Honorable the Governor Gen-
eral in Council, yet as the part objects* which related to
the Malay States had reference to this Government
the Agent has from time to time transmitted to us
reports of his proceedings thereon, with copies of his
.journal. These Documents are recorded on the Con-
sultations noted in the margin to which we beg to refer
your Rouble. Court, should the same not have been
already laid before you through the Supreme Govern-
ment.
15. Lt does not appear to us after all that has
been done that the Siamese Court and nation are
sufficiently advanced in civilization and intelligence
respecting other states duly to appreciate the motives
which have actuated the British Government in all the
attempts towards conciliation and friendly in-
tercourse. A Minute recorded by our President in the
Secret and Political Department will shew the view
taken by us of the present state of affairs, and we hope
your Honble. Court will approve of the declaration
Captain Burney has been recommended to made in the


event of the Siamese Government declining l to accede
to his arrangements and desist from its projects of
warfare and conquest in the Peninsula.
* * * » # *
We have the honour to be &c.
(Signed) R. FULLERTON
W. A. CLUBLEY
R. IBBETSON
FORT CORNWALLIS
The 21st June 1826.


FONT WILLIAM Ist December 1826.
Translation of a letter from the Kx Rajah of
Kedah to the Honble. Robert Pullerton Ksqre. («ov-
evnor of Pulo Penang.
( After ('ompliments )
Whereas tlie Siamese seized my country by trea-
chery and they murdered a great many of my Chiefs,
being taken by surprize 1 was much alarmed and col-
lecting my family. 1 ran to Polo Penang because Cap-
tain Light formerly made an Arrangement with my
father, at the time he requested Pulo Penang that
assistance should be given against any enemies who
might endeavour to disturb the peace of Kedah.
Wherefore when the Siamese treacherously attacked
my country, 1 brought my children to place them
under the charge of Mr. Phillips, intending myself to
return to Kedah, in order to collect the Ryots and
drive the Siamese from (he country. Hut Mr. Phil-
lips would not allow me to return to Kedah, and
ordered me to wait here, promising to consider and
assist me. I assented to this, which appeared to me
very proper, for the power of the King of Lurope is
very great and an engagement also existed. I there-
vo O “
fore resolved to wait.
In the mean time the Siamese seized my sister
and my son, with their families and followers, when
endeavouring to effect their escape from Kedah to join
me. A great number of the better class of my subjects
also, male and female, were also seized by the Sia-
mese and conveyed to Siam. After that 1 repeatedly
requested the assent of Mr. Phillips to my removing
from Pulo Penang, but he did not like to let me go
and desired me to wait awhile, as he wished to obtain
directions from Bengal, which has caused me to wait
till the present time.
1 have received intelligence that my son 't akoob is
lately dead as mentioned in the letter which the Sia-


mese sent me ami which J gave to Mr. Anderson to
i rauslate, and shew to my friend. It appears to me
certain that my son did not die from any disease, but
by poison by the Siamese. I beg to make this known
to my friend and request he will take tlie circum-
stances herein mentioned into consideration. J beg
that with my friend’s assistance aiid the power of the
King of Europe and Governor General of Bengal, 1 may
lie enabled to return to Kedah. When by such aid I
may be enabled to return to Kedah, if I die im-
mediately afterwards, it will not matter; if my friend
have any friendship and compassion towards me, I
request that I may be enabled to return in a month or
t wo.
I have long waited to hear the intelligence of
Captain Burney’s Mission to Siam, but 1 have as vet
received no certain intelligence. Captain Burney pro-
mised to me when he called upon me prior to his de-
parture that he would return in four months; my only
reliance is in my friend, that through him 1 may re-
ceive the aid of the King of Europe and Governor
<leneral of Bengal.
Dated J 7th Dulkeda 1241 or 23d. June 1820.
(A true Translation)
(Signed) JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Translator to Govt,
Penang
26th -lime J82(1


FORT WILLIAM 20th October 1826.
TO G. SWINTON Esqr.
Secry. to Govt.
SIR,
I do myself the honor to transmit a Dispatch to
your address received a few days since from the Knvoy
to the Court of Siam.*
I have great satisfaction in reporting for the in-
formation of the Rt. Rouble, the Govr. Genl. in Council
that 631 of the Pegu and Burmese Prisoners noticed in
Capt. Burney’s Journal have arrived at Mergui. Pro-
visions and quarters have been provided for them and 1
shall lose no time in making arrangements for forward-
ing the Pegu Captives to their former houses near
Martaban.
I have &ca.
( Scl. ) A. D. MAINGY
Commissi*.
Tavoy The August 1826.


FORT WILLIAM 17th November 1826.
To G. Swinton Esqre.
Secry. to Govt. &c. &c. &c.
Sir,
I have already had the honor of transmitting to
yon the concluding portion of the Journal of my Mis-
sion to the Court of Siam, and I now beg to bring
under the consideration of the Supreme Government
copy of a letter addressed by me to the Secretary
6, t° Government* in reply to a communication
which 1 had received of the sentiments of the Honble.
the Governor in Council respecting the result of the
Mission.
-The orders which have recently arrived from
Bangkok and which are here known to have been
obeyed, for throwing open the trade in grain at Queda
and for withdrawing the small parties of Siamese
detained at Perak by the Perak Chiefs whom he had
escorted thither from the Rajah of Ligore furnish fair
proof of the disposition of the Siamese Court to respect
the provisions of the treaty lately negotiated, but an
unwillingness on the part of some of the officers of this
Government to relinquish a favorite policy or to over-
come their prejudices against the Rajah of Ligore
renders the task of establishing a good understanding
with the Siamese a most arduous and painful one to
me.
I have &c.
(Signed) H. Burney
Envoy to Court of Siam.
Prince of Wales Island
9th Octr. 1826.


Secret and Political.
To THE HONORABLE THE CO HUT OF
DIRECTORS FOR THE AFFAIRS OF THE
UNITED COMPANY OF MERCHANTS OF ENG-
LAND TRADING TO THE EAST INDIES
LONDON.
Honorable Sirs,
Para. I. With reference to the 14th loth and
16th Paragraphs of our letter to your Honorable Court
under date the 21st June last, we have now the honor
to report the return to this Presidency, on the 9th ot
September last of Captain Burney, Envoy from the
Right Honorable the Governor General, to the Court ot
Siam ; and we transmit by this opportunity our con-
sultations in this department from the 29th June to
the sth October inclusive, in which will be found the
Envoys reports, and a Copy of the treaty negotiated
with the Court of Siam.
2. We consider it unnecessary to enlarge in this
letter on the subject of the proceedings of the Envoy,
and the result of the Mission ; but request the particu-
lar reference to your Honorable Court to the Minutes
of our President, the explanatory letter ot Captain
Burney, and our letter to the Supreme Government,
recorded in the margin. We entirely coincide in the
view of the subject taken by our President in his
Minutes under date the 18th September and sth
(k-tober.
J. As the Political Charge of the Provinces
lately ceded to the British Government on the Coast of
Tenasserim has recently been vested in Sir A. Camp-
bell K. C. B. we have considered it proper from the
contiguity of these possessions to the Siamese States,
to transmit to His Excellency Copies of the Treaty and
the papers referred to in the preceding Paragraph, in
order that he may be fully informed of the proceedings
in this quarter, and the sentiments of this Government
in respect to Captain Burney’s negotiations.


4. Although we have, after a deliberate con-
sideration of all tlie circumstances, recommended the
ratification of the treaty by the Supreme (iovernmeni,
as the least objectionable alternative, and the most
likely measure for setting at rest present discussion,
we still incline to the opinion expressed in the loth
paragraph of our letter to your Honorable Court of the
21st June last, that the Siamese Court and Nation are
not sufficiently advanced in civilization and intelligence
respecting other states, duly to appreciate the motives
which have actuated the British Government in all the
attempts made towards conciliation and friendly inter-
course ; and from the unsettled and ambitious character
of the Rajah of Ligore, we cannot reasonably indulge
the expectation that we shall speedily be relieved from
the many inconveniences which this Settlement has
experienced, since the period of his subversion of the
Malayan Government of Kedah.
5. It is however, a satisfactory reflection, that
the measures adopted last year by this Government,
and which have been approved by the Right Honorable
the Governor General, have tended to arrest the pro-
jects of Conquest entertained by the Rajah of Ligore to
the Southward, and that the Court of Siam has
acknowledged the independence of the Malayan Princi-
palities of Perak and Salangore and engaged to abstain
from all future interference.
6. Captain Burney proceeded to Bengal on the
16 Instant, for the purpose of submitting his reports
to the Supreme Government, and receiving the orders
of that Authority respecting the ratification or
otherwise of the Treaty which he negotiated. That
officer proposes touching in the first instance at Quedali
to deliver letters and presents sent by the Governor-
General to the Chief of Ligore. and then at Tavoy for
tlie purpose of landing a few Burmans who were re-
scued from captivity at Bangkok.


‘ ■ We are in daily expectation of the return of
Captain Low who was deputed to Perak to notify the
measures in progress, and the negotiations pending
for securing the future independence of that State.
We shall take the earliest opportunity of transmitting
his report to your Honorable Court.
We have the honor to be,
with the greatest respect,
HONORABLE SIRS,
Your most obedient,
faithful humble Servants
(Signed) R. FULLERTON
R. IBBETSON.
Fort Cornwallis
The 16th October 1826.


FORT WILLIAM 24th Novr. 1826
To G. Swinton Esqre.
Secretary to Government Political Department.
Fort William.
Sir,
I am directed by the 11 on hie. the Governor in
Council to transmit for the information of the Right
Double, the Vice President in Council copy of a further
Letter from the Superintendent of Police dated the
9th Instant, reporting upon tlie equipments of the
Siamese in this neighbourhood.
2. lat the same time transmit enclosed copy of
a letter from Captain Burney the Envoy to Siam just
received from Queda. The Double, the Governor in
Council did not attach much importance to the
rumours of the equipments referred to when the first
report from the Superintendent of Police was received
nor would the subject have excited much attention
unless Captain Burney had stated in his former
reports that additional fortifications were ordered
from Bangkok.
1 have &c.
(Signed) JOHN ANDERSON
Secretary to Government.
Fort Cornwallis
26th Octr. 1826.


To the Honble. R. Fullerton Esqre.
Governor &c. &c. &c.
Honble. Sir,
The private Agent sent to examine the Setool
River has just returned. He was at that place font
days and quitted it on the sth Instant. He says there
are fifty prahus of the following sizes and descriptions
ready in that river and others equipping vizt.
15 of about 12 Kojins Burthen
20 ~ 8 ~
15 ~ 5 ~ 55
about 200 Malay workmen are employed in the equip-
ment of these boats and in preparing planks with loop
holes and other materials the same as at Purlis.
This man shall be dispatched as soon as possible to
endeavour and ascertain the force in the Prang Rivei.
It is however a difficult duty to execute, the Siamese
being very suspicious of persons going to these places
and very strict in their orders.
A Pirate force of about 20 sail is cruizing to the
northward of Setool, they made an attack on Lingoo a
short time since and burnt about 100 houses.
I have &c.
( Signed) H. CAUNTEH
Monday
9th Octr. 1826.
p. S. The Commander of the Blossom reports that
the Siamese at Kedah are building two very large
boats at that place, he thinks of not less than 20 or 25
Kyans Burthen.


To John Anderson Esquire,
Secretary to Government.
Sir,
1 have to make the following report to you for the
information of the Honble. the Governor in Council.
Shortly after the Brig Guardian had anchored
here yesterday evening the Governor of Queda’s
interpreter came off and I arranged with him the
ceremonial of delivering the letter and presents from
the Right Honble. the Governor General to the Rajah
of Ligore. Two state boats came to meet us at 9
o’clock this morning when the public letter and
presents were landed under a salute of 19 Guns from
the Brig and delivered to the young Chief with such
demonstrations of respect as appeared to me likely to
make an impression upon him and his followers.
In addition to the Buganda Muda and Oheom
Pyaban I was introduced to Pho Noat another of the
Rajah of Ligore’s sons. Upon questioning them con-
cerning the equipments said to be preparing at Purlis,
Setool and Khantannee, the young chief replied
“ you will not believe me if I deny the truth of what
you have heard at Penang, but I will now furnish you
with letters to the chiefs of those places and you may
go and satisfy yourself.” I declined to accept his
offer, but advised him to address the Honble. the
Governor and request that he may be pleased to send
a confidential native. servant to receive such letters
at Queda and go and examine the several ports at
which the warlike equipments are said to be pre-
paring, and this the young chief promised to. do
immediately. 1 explained however properly that the
Honble. the Governor had no objection to the Siamese
keeping up 50 or 60 boats and employing them
against the piratical fleets which now infest this
neighbourhood.
FORT WILLIAM 24th November 1826.


I then addressed a letter to the Rajah of Ligore
according to the tenor of the instructions communicated
to me in the J Ith para, of your letter No. 1418.
A contemptible baitiboo fence at one part of the
mouth of the river is the only addition which appears
to me to have been made to the fortifications at this
place since .1 was last here.
1 propose returning to the Brig and prosecuting
my voyage this evening.
I have &c.
(Signed) H. BURNEY Capt.
Envoy to Siam.
Queda
19th Octr. 1826.


FORT WILLIAM 1st December 1826
To
G. S win ton Ksqre.
♦Secretary to Government
Political 1 )epart inent
Fori William.
Sir, ■
I am directed by the Double. the Governor in
Council to transmit the accompanying - duplicate of a
Dispatch to tlie Right Hoiible. Lord Amherst Governor
General in Council* relative to Captain Burney's
Mission to Siam.
The original was lor warded per the Brig Guardian
which left this harbour on the Kith Instant, having
on board the Mnvoy and part of the Escort. Captain
Burney proj>osed touching at Kedah to deliver the
letter and presents from the Right Honble. tbe
(jovernor General to the Rajah of Ligore, and at
Tavoy to land a few Burmese whom he brought from
Bangkok.
1 have Ac.
( Sigm-cl) .JOHN ANDERSON
Been. to (Jovt.
Fort Cornwallis
the 2()t h ()ctr. I 82(».


To Captain Burney
Envoy to* Siam 1 .
Si r.
Bar : Ist, I am directed by the Honble. the'
Governor in Council to acknowledge the receipt of your
letter of the 9th Instant, with Journal and Treaty.*
The sentiments of this Government will be detailed at
length to the-Right Honble. the Governor General in
Council. In the mean time the Honble, the Governor
deems it right to convey to you the opinions
entertained on the Subfeet, as connected with the
Interests of the Malay Peninsula.
2d. d’he first Article without the specification ol
the countries admitted to be dependent or independent
is mere general declaration and not susceptible of any
remark,
3d. The 12tli Article respecting Tringano and
Kalantan appears to be worded with considerable
ambiguity, so as to leave to each party the right of
self construction. But the whole wording of the art icle
would seem to convey, by implication, the admission
of complete supremacy of Siam over these States, the
express disavowal of which was a main object of
the Government. The Siamese are bound not to go
and interrupt the Trade with Tringano, and the
British Government are bound not to go and attack
and molest that State, but whether the provision*
against the interruption of trade is meant to preclude
every sort of interference on their part, or to leave
them to exert it to the utmost, so long as trade is not
interrupted, does not appear. The terms being of
doubtful meaning, decision can only be conditional;
and if this article is understood to leave to the British
Government the right of direct treaty and negotiation
Fort William Ist December 182(5.


with these States, the right of opposing all forcible
interference of the Siamese and the right of affording
them complete protection, if such should hereafter be
determined on, then, the art icle appears unobjectionable;
it, on the other hand, it leaves undisputed power to
Siam, of exerting its supremacy, and precludes our
right of interference, then the article is in opposition
Jo that line of policy to which, for the present at least,
it was deemed by this Government indispensable to
adhere. Article 13th. This article refers to Quedah
entirely. From the length of time that has elapsed
timing which the Siamese have been allowed to remain
in possession of that country, this Government were
certainly not sanguine in their hopes of procuring
their removal without some signal concession in
another quarter. It is not to be denied however, that
the articles of the Preliminary Treaty with the Rajah
of Ligor gave some hopes of a favorable result, and
that Treaty appears to have been written by the Chief
himself, under the contemplation of the Rx-King’s
restoration. These expectations formed a strong
inducement, as connected with this Presidency, for
sending’ on the Mission, and although the necessity of
foregoing these expectations and dropping all attempts
in the* Kx-King’s favor on this occasion was con-
templated, the Board certainly were not p re]eared to
expect a stipulation amounting to nothing short of
the entire abandonment of the King, his dismission
from his last asylum, and our guarantee for his final
renunciation of all future claims on his Kingdom.
Having hitherto observed strict neutrality, and declined
assisting him against'Siam, it does not appear that
this Government is authorized to take an active
part against him, and become guarantee on the other
side, by pledging our faith to prevent his seeking
elsewhere that assistance which, we have, refused.
However desirable it might be, that the residence
ot the King should be at a greater distance from his
kingdom, it is evident that without his being a party


to the treaty, this (lovertime)d caitnot dictate to hint
his place of residence, he may indeed be required to-
11iiit our territory, and proceed elsewhere, it under the
circumstances in which he came here such a course
ran be considered right. Supposing-our interference
in Ids b 'half withdrawn, the Siamese could be entitled 1
to no further stipulation than the implied one already
admitted; I ha. so long as he remained under our
protection, no hostile attempts or preparations would
be made against them. By the treaty, as now con-
cluded. the Thief of Ligor has gained an advantage he
never before possessed, the virtual acknowledgment,
of a right, tacitly allowed, but never hitherto distinctly
admitted, and the Board cannot see in any part ot the
treatv a corresponding benefit to us, even though we
were disposed to accept any on such conditions.
Kverv argument will be used to induce the Lx-King
to reside at Malacca, because, under present circums-
tances. it is evident, that such is the best arrangement
that can now be made ; but, if he finally decides on
remaining, the Double, the (fovernor i,n ( otmcil cannot
reconcile to any principle of justice or right his forcible
removal, and cannot recommend the ratification ot a
treaty involving the necessity of such a measure. It
is obvious, indeed, that after the Kx-King quits
British territory, it would be quite impossible to pledge
ourselves against hostile attempts on Ligore.
Article 14th. 'Phis article is so far satisfac-
tory that it confirms the preliminary agreement
made in respect to Perak. It declares the King
independent, and being a treaty made by us, it may be
urged it gives us the right of supporting that in-
dependence. The insertion of provisions for sending
the Boonga Mas and for receiving certain persons in
a friendly way, completely betray the latent objects
of the Thief of Ligore; he has not probably the
slightest intentions of adhering to the spirit of that
article, and we may expect the exercise of every trick


which cunning and deceit can devi.se, to evade its
execution. That an independent Sovereign should
send and receive such persons as he pleases, and should
even send a silver flower to another Prince, if h e
pleases, requires no treaty, they are only found in the
one now before the Board to cover other plans and
intentions. It may be said, indeed, that the treaty
gives us the right to interfere more forcibly, but
what are the objects of treaties, but to come to
amicable understanding and prevent so disagreeable
an alternative ? A treaty to be executed by absolute
force is of a very negative advantage. The farther
measures connected with this article w ill lie stated
hereafter. The Board proceed to the further con-
sideration of the treaty.
G. All the articles affecting commercial relations
appear satisfactory, but the Board entertain so very
slight expectation of their being adhered to, that
they scarcely consider it necessary to dismiss them.
Those applicable to trade at Bangkok appear to place
our commercial relations there on a more favorable
footing. This was an object of negotiation suggested
by the Resident of Singapore, and one which never
appeared to the Board to be of much importance or
likely to be obtained. So little faith can be placed on
their provisions that the Board consider it would be
infinitely better for the merchants to receive the
produce of Siam and return their goods in exchange
* by the native junks frequenting Singapore, than to
risk their persons to insult, their property to plunder,
and the British Government to the necessity of
resenting it by going to war with Siam. The
tendency to extortion on the part of Siamese
Officers at Bangkok is more likely to be checked
by the forfeiture of the advantages resulting from
fair commercial intercourse, and self interest seems
more likely to induce moderation than any public
negotiation.


7. The Board now proceed to submit to you ;t
few general observations on t he progress of the M ission.
The several matters connected with the late war with
Ava, in which communication with Siam became
necessary, the Board admit to have been paramount
considerations, so long as the war continued.
8. The hopes of eo-o|>eration from Siam appear)‘<l
to have ceased, in some degree, before you proceeded
to Bangkok. To induce the Siamese force in the
neighbourhood of Martaban to advance in support of
Colonel Pepper’s Detachment, and to cover the attack
upon Tougoh, seemed, however, to l>e considered
bv Sir Archibald Campbell as a most important object,
and although every argument used by you proved
unavailing, it is but justice to notice your unremitting
exertions for that purpose.
9. In keeping them to neutrality at least, and
preventing those occurrences as likely to arise from
the proximity of the Siamese to the very weak force at
Martaban and the Tenasserim Coast, which might
if not checked, have produced rupture between the two
(Governments. your interposition has no doubt been
most usefully employed, and in the recovery from
slavery and misery of so many unhappy beings taken
awav from countries under the protection and control
of the British (Government, the cause of humanity has
been signallv promoted and one subject ot dispute
and contention between the two Governments removed.
While the Board therefore, gives you all due credit
for the patience, perseverance and temper, displayed
bv you under all the trying circumstances, inseparable
from negotiations with such a vain, arrogant and con-
ceited court, candour obliges them to confess, that in
all matters connected with the Malay Peninsula the
Mission must be considered, in some degree, to have
failed, and that the state of our relations with our
neighbours is not materially improved by the result ;
for this the Board can be at no loss to account. You


s( ‘cm all along 1o have relied prim ipalVv. oil the
influence of the ( liief of Bigore, in all your negotia-
tions. Now considering that the Rajah of Bigore was
the aggressor, and is now in actual possession of
'Quedah, deriving all the advanlages therefrom, that he
is, moreover, I he person directing all tin' interference
and aggression on the state of Perak and SaJengorc,
that he is by far Ihe most intriguing and ambitions
of all the Siamese Chiefs, if was not likely that Ids
influence would ever he exerted towards the completion
•of the objects in which this (Jovernment wore in-
terested. The very reverse might safelv have been
presumed. The counteraction and destruction of this
man's influence ought then fore to have been the
first object of your arrangements, he should have
been represented in his true Character, as a most
troublesome neighbour to the British, as the per-
son of all others most hkely to bring on a rupture
between the two Covernmeuts, instead of which
course you appear to have 1 consulted him and been
guided by him on several occasions. Von seem to
have made him the principal medium and source
of your most important communication ;. By such
a course bis influence has been much increased
instead of being diminished. He must now be viewed
as tlie only person fit to meet an European opponent,
either in war or diplomacy. Contrasting indeed the
success that has attended your endeavours in every
object wherein the interests of Bigoiv weic not in-
volved. with the failure in those which in any way
affected the views and intentions of that chief, it
cannot be doubted that he has been our main eiumy
at the Couit of Siam, and it must be a matter of regret,
that these Sett'|ement- have such a neighbour. It
cannot be doubted that In* will now return to Queda
with increased arrogance and presumption and with
extended views of conquest. Established as his influ-
ence now must be, the great portion of the military
strength of Siam w ill be at his disposal in the proseeu


tion of those views, and whatever that portion may
we may expect it to be situated not rainy miles from
this island. The Board cannot but anticipate there-
from much serious inconvenience, unless met by the
most steady and unremitting opposition. The Board
admit that at the time you proceeded on the Mission
and during the first part of its progress, objects con-
nected with the Burmese war were the most important ;
a conciliatory and temporizing policy was required
and if the prevention of hostilities with Siam could
have been ensured only by the abandonm mt of the
views of the Government, such would have been
viewed as a necessary sacrifice of local to general
objects of more importance, but after the Burmese war
had been brought to a successful termination, the
Board are of opinion, you might have assumed a higher
tone, and availing yourself of the impression produced
by that event, and of the alarms under which you
represent the Siamese to have laboured about that
time, the Board are disposed to think, that had you
seriously urged on the Court ot Siam all the objects
of your Mission (the restoration of Quedah included)
as essential and indispensable to the maintenance of
peace between the two states, every one would have
been conceded.
10. In closing these observations, the Board
must however in justice to you admit the difficulty
with which you had to contend, from the impractic-
able character of the people with whom you had to
deal: the necessity of yielding some points for the
attainment of others ; and the manifest expediency of
coming to a sort of understanding, instead of quitting
the Court, if not on actually hostile, at least on un-
friendly terms. As the Right Honble. the Governor
General will no doubt expect that the treaty should
be accompanied by the final and decisive opinion of
this Government on its merits, the Board will be happy
to receive from you such explanation as you have
to otter respecting the true intent and meaning of the


different provisions alluded to in the letter, as well as
your opinion in regard to the declarations which might
be made on ratification so as to remove the object ion-
rble part of the provisions, and leave the future
measures of this Government less shackled than they
seem to be by the letter of the treaty as it now
stands.
11. in reference to transact ions that have taken
place connected with your Mission and on which
further measures may be required. I am directed to
enclose copies of information given relative to the
affairs of Perak; from these you will perceive, there is
every reason to believe, that the treaty with bigore
had no sooner been executed on our part, and Pa’ah
Hussein removed, than the former Chief sent upwards
of 200 people, who in reality on tin* plea of demanding
the Boonga Mas. actually assumed the complete manage-
ement of the country; The .Rouble, the Governor
in Council refrained at that juncture from pro-
ceeding to measures which might have seriously af-
fected your negotiations and deemed it better to await
your return ; but as the Treaty on the Subject Perak,
now concluded, virtually confirms tin* former, it became
necessary to take some measures to counteract the
views of Ligore against that state. Of the real senti-
ments of the King of Perak the Rouble, tin* Governor
in Council entertains no doubt; his letters as well as his
communication with Mr. Anderson are sufficiently
clear on this point . That he should prefer connections
with, or in other words submission to bigore to in-
dependence under our guarantee, can scarcely be be-
lieved. Any appearance of doubt or disinclination on
his part, if such should appear, can now be ascribed
only to intimidation, produced by the artful machina-
tions of the Chief of Ligore. which it must in thediiM
instance be our object to countemct. For this purpose
Captain bow has been deputed to Perak, a Copy of the
instructions given him and of cither papers connected
therewith are now enclosed. On the receipt of inform


at.ion from Perak respecting the transactions above
alluded to, letters were written to the young Chief of
Ligore, also to his father. Copies of them are enclosed.
No notice whatever has been taken, and as it is indis-
pensable that the Chief of Ligore should be brought to
some explanation on these points, the draft of another
letter is enclosed, of which it is the desire of the
Rouble, the Governor in Council that you should be
the bearer as far as Queda. In presenting it to the
young chief for transmission to his father, as it is pro-
bable the latter will not have arrived, you will use
every argument to convince the young, Chief that
treaties and agreements are not made with a British
Government to be executed or not at the pleasure of
the parties. That the one respecting Perak must be
strictly performed. That he must abstain from any
interference whatever with Perak, that his sending
people there will render it necessary for us to do the
same and that the whole objects of the arrangement
must be destroyed. You will yourself address a letter
to the Chief of Ligore to the same effect. You will
easily perceive that the object in view is to retain all
things as they are, pending ultimate decision of
superior authority. The delivery of the letter and
presents from the Bight Rouble, the Governor General
was delayed in consequence of the absence of the Chief
from Ligore and the necessity of accompanying them
by some ceremony beyond their simple transmission ;
in the mean time the accounts above alluded to were
received, and the letter having been written on the
confirmation of a treaty which there then seemed reason
to believe the Chief himself had broken, doubts were
entertained as to the propriety of their delivery to the
Rajah until some explanation was received. As the new
treaty made at Siam confirms the other in respect to
Perak, and as it is still to be hoped the Chief will ad-
here to it, the Board do not think themselves at liberty
longer to withhold their delivery. It is intended there-
fore that you should carry them with you to Queda t (>


be jM.it into the hands of the young Chief. From
Quedah you will jtroceed to Bengal, transmitting by
some safe conveyance, the result of your proceedings,
of which you will of course make a full report to the
Supreme Government. The letter from the Supreme
Government enclosed contains the only subject not al-
ready noticed on the point. The Board are of opinion
that the payment of the 2,000 Dollars from the King
of Salengore need not be insisted on. The death of the
old Chief, and succession of another might give rise to
some new discussions, attended with much incon-
venience.
I have &c.
(Signed) JOHN ANDKKSON
Seen - , to (iovt.
fort Cornwallis
the 25th 'September 182b.


Penang J Bth September l’B2(i.
Mon irahle Sir.
In consequence of the report 1 had the other
dav made to me regarding the Siamese preparations
at Pnrlis, I sent one of our people well acquainted
with that place and many of the inhabitants there
to ascertain the truth or otherwise of what had been
rotated. This man has just returned and confirms the
former information. He says there are about twenty or
twenty live prahus ( ten of very large size ) in the
Pnrlis River, and that they are actively preparing
all kinds of things at Raugah where the Rajah of
Ligors son commands. Large quantities of rice and
paddy and gunpowder are already collected. About
4 or 500 large t hick planks with loop holes, some
hundreds of triangle stands for Swivels, and bundles
of bamboo spikes are also ready and stored in sheds
and (xodownsat this place, and were seen by my inform-
ant on Thursday last the 14th Instant. Sixteen of the
principal Malay men of Pnrlis are appointed Panglimas
to superintend and forward these matters, particularly
boats, sails, of which a considerable quantity are ready.
Similar equipments are said to be going on in the
Setool and Trang Rivers, but on much larger scab 1
than a) Pnrlis. particularly at Trang.
The Siamese give out to the Malays that all these
preparations are for defence against the English who
intend attacking them : the Malays however say it is
well known that the Rajah of Li gore is expected in
about two months, and intends to make an attack on
this Island, and that all these preparations are for this
purpose.
FORT WILLIAM Ist December 182(5.


llangah is a .town in the Purl is country situated
some distance up that river. One of the Rajah of
Rigor’s sons to whom the Government of this Country
has been confided resides at this place. At or near
the mouth of the river is another town called Kyang
where a Siamese officer commands under the orders of
the Chief of Ran gain
I am &c.
(Signed) R. GAUNT Eli,
To the Hon hie.
R, Fullerton Esqre.
Governor &c. &c, &c.


Proposed Agreement offered to the Ex Rajah of Quedah,
First. The King agrees to go and reside at a
place allotted to him within the limits of the Settle-
ment of Malacca.
Second. The King binds himself not to attack,
disturb or injure, nor permit any of his followers to at-
tack, disturb or injure in any manner the territory of
Quedah, or any other territory subject to Siam.
Third. The Government of Prince of Wales Island
agrees that the slaves, personal servants, family and
kindred of the late King of Quedah shall be released by
the Rajah of Ligore and permitted to proceed where
they please, and to join the King and reside with him
at Malacca if they desire it.
Fourth. The Government of Prince of Wales
Island agree to pay on account of the support of the
King and his family the sum of Ten thousand Spanish
Dollars or Sicca Rupees 21,050 per Annum.
Fifth. The Government of Prince of Wales Island
agree to allot a space of land to be occupied by the
King of Quedah and Dependants at Malacca not ex-
ceeding—Orlongs.
Sixth, The Government of Prince of Wales Is-
land agree to receive from the King of Quedah the
Reuse lately purchased by him and pay the amount of
the same, deducting the advance made on that account
still due.
Seventh. The Government of Prince of Wales
Island agree to furnish proper accommodation in a
suitable vessel for the transportation of the King and
his Family to Malacca.
Prince of Wales Island
the 15th September 1826.
FORT WILLIAM Ist December 182(5.


FORT CORNWALLIS the 19th October 1826.
To the Son of the Rajah of Ligore at Kedah.
I am directed by the Honble. the Governor of
Pulo Penang to acquaint my friend that he has duly re-
ceived the letters from the Raja of Ligore, brought by
his Lnvoys Koon Aksoru and Nai Niem who propose
making some stay here. 1 therefore dispatch this
letter by the Honble. the Governor’s directions to
apprise my friend that Captain Burney will proceed
from hence to Kedah in a few days.
(Signed) JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Translator to Government.
Pinang,
6th October 1826.


FORT CORNWALLIS The 26 October 1826,
Translation
.of a letter from the Ex Rajah of Kedah to the Hon bli-
the Governor of Pulo Penang.
( After compliments. )
The letter which my friend sent me has reached
me, and 1 understand all that is therein mentioned,
With respect to the proposed engagement relative
to my residing at Malacca, I have stated ray senti-
ments in my former letter, and I have well considered
tfie subject. I cannot conform to that engagement,
ior the object of my coming to Pnlo Penang was to
receive assistance from the English King of Europe
and the Company, to recover my own country ; for I
was well aware that the power cf the King of Europe
and the Company was greater than the Siamese, and at
present the English King of Euroj>e and the Company
are very faithful in adhering to every engagement,
and are very compassionate to all people, nor do they
like to see any dissension : This is what I have been
trusting to, and waiting till this day ; and L now again
beg ray friend will assist me in that manner, so that 1
may return to ray own country.
Dated 4th Rabialawai 1242, or sth October 1826.
( A true Translation)
(Signed) JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Translator to Govt..
Prince of W ales Island
The 9 ; October 1826.


Translation
of a letter from the son of the Rajah of Ligore at
Kedah to the Malay Translator.
(After Compliments.)
I make known to my friend that Captain Henry
Burney arrived with the letter and articles from the
Bight Honble. Lord Amherst, Governor of Bengal,
and a letter from the Governor of Pulo Penang, which
were sent to me to be forwarded to the Chow Pya of
Ligore. 1 received them according to the pleasure
of Captain Burney.
The letters and things from the Right Honble. Lord
Amherst, Governor of Bengal and Governor of Pulo
Penang, I have sent in Charge of Khoon Aksorn and
Nai Niem to be presented to the Chow Pya of Li gore.
When Captain Burney arrived at Quedah, he
mentioned to me that people at Pulo Penang were re-
porting that at Quedah, Purlis and Setool -many prows
and planks were preparing, but I told him that it was
not the case. Captain Henry Burney then desired me
to send a letter to the Governor of Pulo Penang, and
let him order some persons to examine and 1 will send
them on with orders to examine all the places and they
can afterwards return to report to my friends.
Dated 21st of 11th Month, Sunday.
A true Translation
(Signed) JOHN ANDKHSON
Malay Transr. to (rovt.
Penang
The 25 October 1826.
FORT CORNWALLIS The 26 October 1826.


FORT CORNWALLIS The 2d November 1826.
Tuesday 31st October 1828.
Rouble. Sir.
'The man sent to examine the 'Prang river return-
ed this morning having left that place six days ago.
Me reports that there are about 400 prahus of different
sizes at Khoontani, 870 of which counted by himself,
are ready for launching, and the others preparing with
all dispatch. He says there are also a brig and a small
schooner there ready. The largest class of these prahus
he thinks are about 10 Koyans burthen, of which there
are about 200—-the others are somewhat smaller vary-
ing from 8 to 5 Koyans.
Besides the prahus now at Khoontani, about 50
were equipped and dispatched to the Li ngoo river about
a month ago. most of which are now at that place.
At Khoontani they are preparing planks with loop
holes, swivel stands, and other materials, also stores of
grain as at Purlis and He tool, only on a much more
extensive scale.
There are assembled at Khoontani about 5,000
Siamese and Malays and oor 700 Chinese. The Rajah
of Ligore is expected there in a few weeks, and orders
have been lately received from him, forwarded from
Bankok to collect a store of Charcoal, Saltpetre &ca.
The man who gives this information was at
Khoontani eight days, and left that place as before
noticed six days ago. He knows Khoontani well hav-
ing been there before. He got up in a fishing boat
passing himself for a Lankawi trader who had touched,
there on his way to Pungah, to procure a supply of
rice and ot her necessaries; he would not under any
otheV circumstances have been permitted to proceed
up the river, the Siamese being very suspicious of all
strangers, and averse to allowing them to go up the


From the place where he took a passage near
the mouth of the river, they were eight hours ascend-
ing to Khoontani.
I have the honor to be &c.
( Signed ) R. GAUNTER
The Hon hie.
Robert- Fullerton Esqi\
Governor &e. &o. &e.
N. H. The preparations at Khoontaui are carrying on
under the orders of a Ligor Chief styled the Ghoom
Room or Chom Rom.


MINUTE by the PRESIDENT.
Referring to the letter of intimation just received
fiom Mr Gaunter, and to the one addressed by the
voung Chief of Ligor to the Malay Translator under
date the 25th October, I propose that Mi’ Gotlieb be
dispatched to Quedah in the Blossom with an appropri-
ate letter to the Young Chief requesting the necessary
powers being given to authorize his entering the
different rivers particularly at Trang-—to examine into
the truth of the reported armament there. The Young
Chief having made the offer there seems no objection to
our trying his sincerity. If Mr Gotlieb should be
permitted to proceed as far as Khoontani, some inform-
ation may be obtained respecting that river which
would be desirable. Mr Gotlieb should be directed
to communicate with Mr Gaunter on this subject and
proceed as soon as possible. Little instruction is
required—he will carry the letter to the Chief and if
the request lie promptly complied with he will proceed
on his investigation. Should any serious obstacles,
delays or difficulties be offered, it may be presumed
means are taking to defeat the object of examination
and in that case Mr Gotlieb may return. The whole
proceeding must be founded on the voluntary offer of
the Young Chief, and enquiry or investigation must
not be pressed should any objection be made or even
disinclination be evinced.
(Signed) R. FULLERTON..
2d, November 1820,


UKSOLVEI.) that Captain G.otlieb, the Assistant
to the Master Attendant, be directed to proceed on
board the Rouble. Company's Schooner Zephyr for the
purpose of carrying into effect the objects detailed in
the President's Minute and that the following- letter of
instructions be addressed to him,
b. lo
CAITAIN GOTLIKR,
To
I* 1 . («. (iotlieb Msqre.
Assistant to the Master Attendant.
Sir, I am directed to acquaint you that a variety of
.reports have lately been received of extensive equip-
merits ot prows at the Northern ports of Quedah, par-
ticularly in the Trang and Singorr rivers. At Khon-
tani, about 8 hours sail up the Trang river there are
reported to be about 400 Prows already equipped and
at Singoo about 50.
• 2d. The Honorable the Covernor in Council be-
ing desirous to ascertain the truth or otherwise of such
rumours has determined upon availing himself of the
permission lately received from the Son of the Rajah of
bigoi at Quedah who has consented to permit an
agent from this Government to examine the several
rivers, and I am accordingly instructed to desire that
you will make immediate preparations for proceeding
with the Schooner Zephyr on this service.
4. 'i on will deliver the accompanying letter to
the young Siamese Chief at Quedah and it is presumed
that he will appoint some person or persons, agreeably
folds professed intentions to accompany you to the
Northward. You will accordingly lose no time in
examining, the several rivers, particularly the Trang-.
and endeavour by every possible means to ascertain
the truth ot the reported armaments there.


4. It is expected that if you are permitted to
proceed to Khoontani, some information may be ob-
tained respecting the Trang river, which is very
desirable, as little is at present known regarding it.
5. You are requested to communicate with the
Superintendent of Police, who has lately been collect-
ing information on the subject referred to.
6. If the request contained in the letter to the
Siamese Chief be promptly complied with, you will
proceed on the investigation with as little delay as
possible; but should any serious obstacles, delays or
difficulties be offered, it may be presumed means are
taking to defeat the object of examination and in that
case you will return here. Enquiry and investigation
must not be pressed should any objection be made or
disinclination be evinced.
I am &ca.
(Signed) J. ANDERSON
Secretary to Government,
Fort Cornwallis
the 2cl. Novr. 182(3.


LETTER from the Malay Translator to the Son
of the Rajah of Ligore at Quedah.
1 am directed by the Honble. the Governor of
Pnlo Penang, Singapore and Malacca to acknowledge
the receipt of my friend’s letter dated the 25th of the
1 Ith Month, respecting having received the letter and
presents from Right Honble. the Governor General and
forwarded them to the Rajah of Ligore.
My friend also alludes to some reports which had
been circulated here relative to equipments of prows
&c. at the several ports in the Kedah territory and as
a proof of his good intentions desires that some
confidential person may be sent to examine the several
rivers. Although the Honble. the Governor gives
but little credence to such rumours, yet as my friend
has voluntarily evinced so gratifying a proof of his
good intentions and disposition to set at rest all float-
ing reports which might have a tendency to excite
uncordial feelings between the two Governments, the
Honble. the Governor has directed the bearer
Mr Gotlieb to wait on my friend and accompany such
person or persons as may be appointed to proceed to
the Northward, as well for the purpose of making an
investigation which will put a stop to any reports, as
to search for pirates, who are reported to be in that
quarter, which he will be the more readily enabled to
do by the friendly permission now granted by my
friend to enter and examine the several rivers.
( Signed ) JOHN ANDERSON
Malay Translator to Govt,
Pinang
‘3 Iwt Octr. 1826,


r IdTTHR from the Malay Translator to the Rajah
of Quedah.
1 have to acquaint my friend that I communicated
the contents of his note of Yesterday to the Honble.
the (loverndr and am directed to acquaint him in reply
that the Honble. the (Governor cannot, under present
e ire urn stances, give his assent to my friend's settling
his house and removing to the opposite shore, nor can
any loan be made to him. He desires me to add that
so long as my friend pleases to remain here quietly the
same protection which has hitherto been extended and
the same pecuniary allowance which has been granted
will be continued.
(Sigii ex I) .1. A N1) K KS( )N
Malay Translator to Government.
I’enang 2d Xovr. 1826.


FORT CORNWALLIS The 13th November 1826.
MINUTE BY THE PRESIDENT.
The Political Agency of Mr. Crawfurd, late Re-
sident at Singapore in respect to Siam, it is presumed
ceases with the annexation of that Settlement to this
Government; the communications with Bangkok
hitherto kept up from Singapore, must now therefore
be conducted by us. I propose therefore that we avail
ourselves of the complimentary letter lately addressed
by the Prah Klang to open our correspondence.
Situated as we now are, the practice of communicating
only through a subordinate Chief is liable to objection
and is calculated to lower ourselves in the estimation
of the superior state. It seems therefore indispensable
that we should adopt measures of placing before the
Court of Siam the true state of affairs in this quarter,
for it must be evident that so long as the Chief of
Ligore is the only channel, there can be but little
hopes of a faithful account being transmitted, and we
shall be subjected to all the inconveniences that must
necessarily result from a course of misrepresenta-
tions. I propose therefore, that a letter to the
following effect be transmitted to the Prah Klang.
( Signed ) R. FULLERTON
7th November 1826.


To
The Pya Klang
I Bangkok.
1 have the satisfaction to acknowledge the receipt
of your Excellency’s letter., brought by Captain Burney
and lose no time in replying to it, and expressing the
high gratification with which I have observed the
prospect of peace and harmony being established and
increased between the British and Siamese Govern-
ments. It is my anxious desire to maintain the most
amicable relations with the Government of Siam.
Captain Bnrney has proceeded to Bengal to procure
the ratification of the treaty lately concluded and the
terms of that engagement must, in the mean time,
form the rule to be observed. Any deviation there-
from will of course disturb (be expected harmony and
good understand!ng.
It is with regret that I am compelled to acquaint
your Excellency, for the information of His Majesty
the King of Siam, that we have cause to he dissatisfied
with the conduct of the Rajah of Ligore. His
Highness agreed with Captain Burney not to send any
persons to Perak and this Government agreed to re-
move fr m that Country the people of Salengore.
The engagement on the part of the British Govern-
ment was duly performed without delay, but the Bajah
of Ligore deviated from his engagement, and sent
agents, with a considerable numbtr of followers tb
Perak, and these per.-ons excited much confusion.
Desirous however of pre-erring amicable relations
with Siam. I abstained from any further measures
beyond remonstrance, trusting- in the honor and
justice of His .Majesty of Siam and the certainty of the


interposition of his authority. r l lie persons sent to
Perak, it is true, have lately been withdrawn, but
there is reason to believe that the Rajah of Ligore
meditates sending others there.
The late Treaty provides that the King of Perak
shall rule his kingdom in his own way, and that he is
not to receive any person into his country against his
consent. I have fully ascertained that he does not
wish any other state to interfere with him. and hence
it the Rajah of Li gore sends people to Perak to remain
against the consent of the King, the treaty will be
broken, and danger of disputes between the English
Government and that of Siam will arise. So long
however as the Chief of Ligore refrains from sending
people to Perak and from interfering in any way, this
Government will do the same, but treaties made must
be adhered to.
The charge of the British Settlements of Pnlo
Penang. Malacca and Singapore, and of the British in-
terests in this quarter have been committed to my
superintendence by the authorities in Europe. It is
therefore not only the Government of Pulo Penang and
the Chief of Ligore that will be involved in dispute In-
ane infraction of the treaty, but the British Govern-
ment and that of Siam, which ought always to be at
peace.
In order to prevent mistakes and misunderstand-
ing. J have considered it right and proper to com-
municate direct with the Court of Siam, and 1 enclose
a copy of the letter sent to the Chief of Ligore. It is
my intention to follow the same course in all future
cases, and 1 trust that His Majesty of Siam, duly ap-
preciating the motives which induce me to do so. will
favor me with the like communication and enjoin the


Rajah of Li gore to the most scrupulous adherence to
the treaty, and to the maintenance of Harmony, and a
good understanding with this Government, which
being so near for communication is always desirous to
be at peace with its neighbours.
1 remain
Your Excellency’s &c.
(Signed) R. FULLERTON
Governor.
P. W. Island
the 7tli Novr. 1826.


Bengal
Despatches Vol.
103, pp. 80-2.
( Para: I to 4; also 23 to
36 and 44,45 of General Let-
ter from Prince of Wales
Island, dated 31st July 1824 J
Discussions with the Siam-
ese Authorities of Kedah.
Suspected designs of the
Rajah of Ligore on Penang.
Negotiations for the restora-
tion of the Rajah of Kedah.
Mission of Lieut. Low to
Ligore. Measures adopted by
the Government of Prince of
Wales Island in aid of the ex-
pedition to Rangoon. A sti-
pend of 30 Dollars per Month
granted by the Government
to the family of the late Laxa-
mana of Kedah, who was put
to death by the Siamese.
oi. Bengal
Political Department.
OUK GOVERNOR GENERAL IN COUNCIL
at FORT WILLIAM
in BENGAL.
******
A NSW FK to ROLITIOAL LFTTFR dated
30tli dan nary 182 k
4.; also 23 to k We learn with satisfaction that
File suspicions entertained with respect
list July 1824 j to the designs of the Rajah of Ligore
ith the Siam- wt . re unfounded, and that an amicable
es of Kedah.
signs of the arrangement is likely to he concluded
° n Penan s* with that Chief for the restoration of
t* the restora-
jah of Kedah, our ancient Ally, the Rajah of Kedah, to
tout. Low to hi* dominions.
'es adopted by
tof Prince of - ,n. • , , ,
aid of the ex- Ihe negotiation which has been
ngoon. a sti- opened with Siam, for the purpose of
»rs per Month i , ■ • , , ...
» Government tuning the cooperation of that State
the late Laxa- against the King of Ava, will be eonsi-
su»me^^ S PU * dered with the general subject of the
Burmese War.
6. We do not object to the Stipend whieh has
been assigned to the family of the late Minister of
Kedah, it being equal in amount to that which had
• been granted to the family of his late Colleague the
Bindhara.
* * * * * *
Wf* are
our affectionate Friends
(Signed) C. A. ROBINSON
Ac. Ac. Ac.
LONDON
..the Bth Novr. 182(5.


i» January 25th. 1827.
To TEE HONORABLE THE COURT OF
DIRECTORS FOR THE AFFAIRS OF THE UNITED
COMPANY OF MERCHANTS OF ENGLAND
TRADING TO THE EAST INDIES,
LONDON.
Fonorable Sirs,
Para. 1. Our last letter in this Department was
dated the 16th October, and with, reference to the con-
cluding' paragraph of that dispatch, we have now the
honor, in transmitting our proceedings from the 19th
October to this date, to bring to the notice of your
Honorable Court the report of Captain Low,* who was
deputed to Perak, in order to notify the measures in
progress, and the negotiations pending with Siam tor
securing the future independence of that State. \\ e
have also to request the attention of your Honorable
Court to letters from Captain Campbell of His Majesty s
Ship Cyrene, and our Malay Translator.* together with
the Minute of our President thereon.
2. We have not yet received any reply from the
Supreme Government to our dispatches respecting the
late Mission of Captain Bunn yto Siam, referred to in
our letter to your Honorable Court under date the 1.6
October last.
3. Bv the Proceedings noted in the margin it
will be < bserved that we have had occasion to address
several remonstrances to the son of the Rajah of Figure
at Kedah,* relative to the dispatch o* another party of
Siamese to Perak, in direct violation of the treaty con-
cluded with Captain Burney. The Rajah of Perak lias
earnestly solicited our active interference but our Pre-
sident has recommended the observation on his part ot
an inoffensive line of conduct towards the Siamese
Authorities, and urged His Highnecs to abstain from


any act tending to provoke hostilities, pending the
ratification of the treaty, in which his independence has
been duly acknowledged, and his release from Siamese
control stipulated for.
4. We have had no communication recently from
the Rajah of Ligore; although we do not think it
probable that he will now resort to any open act
of violence or hostility, we have nevertheless con-
sidered it necessary to watch with due caution the
insidious and clandestine proceedings of this intriguing
Chief, the more especially as there seemed reason to
believe, from the reports of our Superintendent of
Police that a considerable force was re-assembling at
Trang and some of the Northern Ports, and we request
the notice of your Honorable Court, to the Minute of
our President, proposing the deputation of Mr Gotlieb,
the Acting Assistant to the Master Attendant, for the
purpose of examining the several rivers. The reports
of that gentleman will be found on the proceedings,
and it will observed lie was refused permission (as all
the former Agents of this Government have been) to
enter the Trang river, from whence the Siamese
Equipments formerly issued, at which place also their
principal preparations have been made, and to which
the reports of the Superintendent of Police chiefly
referred. Although we did not attach much import-
ance to these reports, under present circumstances,
vet we are of opinion they derived additional confirma-
tion from the decided opposition made by the Ligore
Chief to any exam illation of the Trang River, while
he permitted access to some of the others from whence
he had sufficient time to r< move any prows that might
have been assembled there as reported, and to disguise
the preparations which had been noticed.
o. In respect to Perak, the same want of good
faith which has characterised the Ligore Chief tor
several years past, still continues to mark his line of
proceedings. \\ Idle however, we shall deem it our duty


to defeat all attempts at any underhand evasion of
the provisions of the Treaty, we shall not fail to
continue the observance of as conciliatory a conduct
as possible towards the Siamese Authorities.
******
We have the honor to be &e.
(Signed) R. FULLERTON
Li. IRBETSON
Fort Cornwallis
The 25th January 1827.


FORT WILLIAM 23rd March 1827.
Envoy to Siam
Calcutta 9th March 1827.
To G. Swinton Esquire
Secretary to Government.
Sir,
I do myself the honor to transmit to you the
accompanying Digested Narrative of the Proceedings
of the lace Mission to the Court of Siam, in which
document I have introduced some additional informa-
tion respecting the early history of the Malay Penin-
sula, collected from certain old authors to whose works
I have had access at Calcutta. I have annexed a
Geographical Sketch* of the Kingdom of Siam compiled
by me from a great variety of native and European
Authorities.
J have &c.
(Signed) H. BURNEY
(Captain Envoy to Siam.


NA RK ATI VE of Captain H. HU RN E V T S MISSION'
to SIAM.
Calcutta 9th March 1827.
When the Supreme Government resolved upon
the measure of deputing- a Mission to the Gourt of
Siam, detachments of Siamese Troops were in the
immediate vicinity of Martaban Tavoy and Mergin’,
whilst the Br.tch Garrisons were confined within those
places, and were of too reduced a strength to afford
protection to the Burmese inhabitants in the interior,
large parlies of whom had been seized and forcibly
carried away by the Siamese. In order to prevent any
collision and embarrassment from such a state of
things, and referring particularly to the character of
the Siamese, a race so jealous and wholly ignorant of
the principles of international law, near whose posse.--
sions the War against Ava had suddenly brought uwr
Troops. it was judged advisable to communicate to the
Siamese Gourt in a public and conciliatory manner,
some knowledge of our ulterior views, and the acces-
sion of a new King to the throne of Siam was con-
sidered to furnish a good ostensible object for sending-
an Gnvoy to compliment and congratulate His Majesty.
The Supreme Government did not consider Siamese
co-operation in the Burmese War, as in any way
important or desirable, and the Envoy was directed
not to include an application for such aid in his nego-
tiations, further than a supply of draft and {Carriage
Cattle, if practicable and required. The Envoy was
instructed to offer the Compliments of the Right
lionble. the Governor General on the accession of the
new King, to assure His Majesty of our friendly dis-
position and desire to cultivate a good understanding
with the Court of Siam, and to afford the fullest ex-
planation on every point connected with the Burmese
FORT WILLIAM 23rd. Mar. 1827.


War; and further, to keep tin- Court of Siam well
informed of the progress of the War, and to persuade
it to release all inhabitants, who might have been
carried away by the Siamese, Officers from the
Tenasserim Coasts, since it fell into our possession.
At the same time the Envoy was empowered to
combine with the above objects, should circumstances
prove favorable, an endeavour to effect tin* desired
improvement in our commercial relations with Siam,
and to secure ('very practicable degree of freedom and
facility to our trade both in Upper and Lower Siam,
as also the restoration of the King of Queda to his
territories, on the terms and footing recommended, by
the Government of Prince of Wales .Island, namely.
His Highness of Queda to pay to the King of Siam a
certain sum in money, not exceeding 40(H) Spanish
Dollars annually, for the due payment of which the
Government of Prince of Walt's Island to be guarantee,
and His Highness to be liable to no further demands,
orders, or mark of subjection on the part of the King
of Siam or his Officers, unless perhaps to the triennial
presentation of the Ro<nynMns or Golden flower to
His Majesty. This last mentioned object has b -cn
very inaccurately termed and considered as the most
important part of the late Mission; audit becomes
necessary therefore to state distinctly, that the
character of the Mission was entirely complimentary
and conciliatory, and that the primary and most im-
pel taut object was the maintenance of harmony
between two States which had suddenly come, in some
degree, into contact, whose troops were in contiguity
and between whom subjects of difference and dispute
were so likely to arise, and become Matt er of hostile
contention.
The Envoy left Galcnfta in the Month of May
1825. and upon his arrival at Prince of Wales Island,
found the Native inhabitants there in the greatest
state of alarm, at some extensive equipments that the
liajah, or Siamese Governor of Ligor had collected at


Queda, for the purpose of proceeding to occupy t he?
State of Perak, which had been brought under Siamese
dominion in the Year 1818 by the King of Queda. and
to attack the Chief of Salengore, who had in 1822
driven out of Perak a party of Siamese, and had since
established his Nephew at the Mouth of the Perak
River to control the trade and Government of that
State. Cnder the sanction and instruction of the
llonble. the Governor of Prince of Wales Island, the
Rnvoy visited the Rajah of Ligor at Queda, and
on the 81st of duly prevailed upon .his Highness
to enter into a Provisional Treaty, agreeing to dismiss
his Armament, and leave his quarrel with the Chief of
Salengore to the mediation of the Honble. the Govern-
or of Prince of Wales Island, and engaging not to send
any force, by land or Water, to the Southward of
Penang, to accompany the Rnvoy to the King of
Siam, if that Officer would touch at Ligor on his way
to Siam.
The Mission consisting of Captain H. Burney as
Rnvoy, Captain H. Macfarquhar as his Assistant and
in command of the Escort, and Mr. Acting Assistant
Surgeon Harris, Sailed from Prince of Wales Island on
hoard the Brig Guardian, Captn. G. Sutherland,
on the 25th Septr. and after touching at Malacca
and Singapore, arrived at Tringano on t lie 17th Octo-
ber. Here it found the King of Siam’s Ship detained,
in consequence of a report having been brought, just
before, of an Rnglish expedition being under equip-
ment at Singapore for the purpose of proceeding to
attack Bangkok. The Mission arrived at Ligor on
the 28th of October. The severe illness of the Rajah
of Rigor's youngest and favorite Son, added to the near
approach of the adverse Monsoon, prevented His High-
ness from accompanying the Rnvoy to Siam by Water:
but he delivered to the care of that officer one of his
Sons, a Commissioner from Bangkok, and 17 of their
followers, with letters addresser 1 to the King and prin


cipal Officers of the Court of Siam, receiving in return,
Mr. Harris and Mr. Leal, one of the Envoy’s Interpre-
ters, whom His Highness engaged to bring with him
over land as soon as Ids son recovered.
The Mission left Ligor on the Bth of November,
arrived off the bar of Siam on the 20th and anchored
off Paknam, a village at the mouth of the Menam, on
the 28th. The Mission soon found, that all its
exertions would be necessary to conciliate the Court of
Siam, which had received the intelligence from
Lringano of an expedition being under equipment at
Singapore to attack Bangkok. That intelligence had
excited a strong sensation at the capital, had caused
the Forts of Paknam and Paklat to be hastily repaired
and strengthened, and had now led the ( ourl to tran-
smit very peremptory orders to the Chief of Paknam to
insist upon the delivery and deposit of the Huns of the
Mission Brig at Paknam. and to receive no excuse. It
has been an established custom of the Country, since
the French were driven out of Bangkok, for all foreign
Vessels to deposit their (funs at Paknam. before they
proceed to the Capital: but this regulation was not
enforced in the case of the Portuguese Consul, nor
against Mr. Crawfurd, who was detained at Paknam for
only 24 hours. The late Mission was detained 7 days,
during which messages daily passed between the
Minister and the Envoy, and Interpreters and other
Siamese Officers were sent down to discover the
real objects and personal character of the different
Members of the Mission. Anxious as the En-
voy was to conciliate the Court, he considered
that he should not be justified in doing that which
the Portuguese and the preceding British Mission
had refused to do, and he feared that a compliance
on his part would lead the Siamese Ministers to
.suppose, that the British (Government was courting
an alliance with Siam, and disposed to make sacrifices
and concessions to her, in consequence of the
Burmese War. The son, followers and letters of the


Rajah of Rigor were sent up to the capital, and their
influence joined to a decided communication on the
part of the Envoy, that if within 24 hours the Court
did not supply the Mission with Boats, or permit
the Brig to pass up to the Capital with her trims,
he should withdraw from the Country, induced the
Ministers at length to submit the matter to the King ;
who immediately ordered the Brig to be passed and
the Mission to be received with all honor and
distinction. On the 4th December the Mission Brig
was met at Paklat by a deputation with a Fleet of
War Boats, and eight or nine large State Boats with
Colours, Streamers and bands of Music for the purpose
of conveying the Governor General’s letter and the
Fnvoy to the Capital where they arrived late on the
evening of the same dpy.
The first discussions of the Envoy with the Phra
Klang and other Siamese Officers respected the
ceremonial to be observed at his presentation to the
King. Exertions were made by them for 2or 3 days,
to persuade the Envoy to agree to take off his Shoes,
and to perform the same prostrations as the Siamese.
Such degrading ceremonies Avere at length overruled,
and it was arranged that the Envoy himself should
deliver the Governor General’s Letter in the presence
of the King, that he should be accompanied by his
own Interpreters, and be permitted to read before
His Majesty a complimentary speech (a Copy of which
accompanied by a translation in the Siamese language
was at the same time to be laid before the King) that
in addition to the Members of the Mission, the Com-
mander of the Brig Guardian, and Mr. Robert Hunter,
a British Merchant residing at Bangkok, should be
admitted to the Audience and that the whole party
should be furnished with State Boats and suitable con-
veyances to take it to the Palace. It was agreed
however, that the Envoy and those who accompanied
him, should once perform a part of the Siamese mode
of saluting His Majesty, namely to join their hands


and raise them three times against the forehead, and
that the Envoy should not deliver the Governor
General’s letter into His Majesty’s own hand, in the
same manner as the French Ambassadors had formerly
done, but deposit it in a Gold Vase to be placed a few
paces in front of His Majesty. it is probable that the
Envoy might have arranged these points also in a way
more in conformity with European ideas of Court
etiquettes, but so earnest an appeal was made to him
not to shock the feelings ami pride of the Court by
omitting all Siamese Modes of Salutation, or approach-
ing close to His Majesty’s person whilst the first
Ministers of the Country would be lying prostrate at
a distance, that he deemed it prudent to take the
credit of making these concessions.
The Mission was introduced with great ceremony
to His Majesty the King of Siam on the I bill
Peer., and to His Highness the VVangna, or as he
is styled by the Native Christians of Bangkok, tie*
Second King, on the 18th, followed on both occasions
by hundreds of Boats and an immense concourse cl
spectators. A House was specially built tor the
accommodation of the Mission, a Boat with 10 Boatmen
was allotted and a Monthly allowance of 240 Ticals
from the King and 120 from the VVangna was granted
for the expenses of the Envoy s table. Bice and fruits
were often sent to the followers, and Siamese Dishes
regularly brought to the Envoy from the King and
VVangna; tokens of rival favor and consideration that
were said to excite the surprize and envy of every
Siamese who witnessed them. The Mission was next
introduced to Chao Krdm Menu Soorin and Chao Krom
Bak, the Princes of the Blood, placed at the head of the
foreign and Judicial Departments of the Kingdom and
the Envoy succeeded in being allowed to v isit the two
.principal ministers of the Country, Chao Phya Chakri
and Chao Phya Akha Mahasena or Kalohom, and several
of the subordinate Ministers, such as Phya Kray, the
Wangna’s Phra Klang. Phya VVisoot his deputy. Phya


Phiphut Kosa the deputy of the King’s Phra Klang,
Chao Phya Malm Yotha, the General who commanded
the Siamese Detachment near Martaban, and the
Governors of Ligor and Singora. Finding the Foreign
Minister, f'hao Phya Phra Klang unfriendly to the
Mission, and indisposed to repeat all its verbal repre-
sentations to his colleagues, the other Five Ministers,
with whom he forms the Privy Council of the Kingdom,
the Envoy opened a communication in writing in the
Siamese Language with those authorities, and prevail-
ed upon them to allow him to attend their meetings
and discuss and settle at repeated conferences
with the whole of them, the several objects of his
Mission. The Envoy obtained and audience of leave
from the King on the 17th July, and from the
Wangna on the 18th on the night of which day the
Mission quitted Bangkok charged with a Treaty ol
Friendship and Commerce, which the Envoy had negoti-
ated with the Ministers, and with a reply from the
King himself to the letter from the Right Honble.
the Governor General.
We have already mentioned the report communi-
cated from Tringano, of an expedition from Singapore
being about to proceed against Siam. After the
arrival of the Mission at Bangkok, the wildest and
most improbable tales respecting the hostile intentions
of the British Government continued to be brought
to Bangkok, by Peguers, Chinese, and above all, by
Malays, who reported that immediately after the
conquest of Ava the British Army was to move
against Siam, that a Fleet of 60 Ships full of Troops
had arrived at Mergui, and that another large fleet
was equipping at Prince of Wales Island ; and that
the British Government had resolved upon expelling
the Siamese from Queda, and taking possession of
that Territory and of every other State on the
Malayan Peninsula. The Mission was declared to
have no other object than to endeavour to extort the
consent of the Court of Siam to these last mentioned


measures, and the Establishment of a Factory and
Resident at Bangkok, and if unsuccessful to gather
intelligence respecting the Topography and resources
of the Country, and the best mode of attacking the
Capital. Fortunately, suspicion and true courage
are seldom companions, or the Siamese would have been
incited to have committed themselves, by attacking
the British Garrisons on the Coast of Tenaserim. By
patience and good hum aired and reiterated exertions
the Envoy succeeded at length in removing, in some
degree, the distrust and jealousy of the Siamese Court,
and in establishing communications with Mr. Com-
missioner Maingy at Tavoy, and with Captains Fen-
wick and Williamson at Martaban, through which
officers the Siamese Ministers were kept more correctly
informed ot the progress ot the War in Ava, at
the same time that the British Commissioners in
Pegu and Ava were fully apprized of the views, dis-
position and ability of the Siamese Government to
afford our army any kind of facilities. But the first
Measure that the Envoy had occasion to propose at
Bangkok, brought down upon the Mission the hostility
of almost all the Ministers and Subordinate Officers of
the Court. Viewing the inhuman treatment which
the Burmese prisoners from the Court of Tenasserim
experienced from their Siamese Masters, the Envoy was
induced to make great exertions to effect the immediate
release and return of these poor Captives, who had
been allotted as Slaves and gratuitous labourers among
the different Ministers and Officers, whose personal
interests therefore were strongly opposed to the
measure of releasing them. It was long before Chao
Phya Phra Klang could forgive the Envoy for having-
put a stop to a splendid temple which a party of these
Burmese was building for that Minister, and he re-
commended the Court to transmit an order to tin*
Hajah of. Ligor, prohibiting him from bringing over-
land from Ligor Messrs. Harris and Leal, who, as
above stated, had been left there. The order reached


the Rajah near Ch'hoomp’hon, and shortly after at
Pothiu in about J latitude 11° 1 O'. His Highness made
excuses for putting these Gentlemen into a small
boat, and forwarding them by water to Bangkok,
where they arrived three or four flays before His
Highness on the 31st of January. An allowance of
half a < hupah of Paddy a day. without any clothing or
habitation, was granted to the Burmese Captives,
while they were employed in the most servile and
laborious occupations. A great portion of them con-
sisted of women and children, and as they had been
brought to the Capital at an inclement season, and
over.the most difficult roads, some of them having
been first taken up from Martaban to Chieng-Mai,
and thence brought down, a great mortality had,
of course, occurred amongst them. At least one
half of them had died. It was impossible for tin*
British Mission to remain indifferent to such in-
humanity, and the Envoy m ide the strongest re-
monstrances against it, to the King, Wangna, Chakkri.
Kalahom, Phra K’hlang and every other Officer whom
he visited. As soon as he learnt that his representa-
sions had made an impression on the superior under-
standing of the King, and that the Ministers and
Subordinate Officers only were opposing him, he
adopted a higher tone and more strong and decisive
language, pointing out the necessity which would
exist for the British Government avenging the cruelties
committed on its Burmese subjects, and threatening
to quit the Country if they were not immediately sent
back. This forced the Ministers at length to acquiesce
but they did it with a very bad grace, sending at once
to the premises occupied by the Mission, upwards of
500 of the Men, Women and Children whom the Phya
or Govr. of Ch’hoomp’hon had brought away from
Mergui. No arrangements were made for supplying
them with food or clothing, and they had no shelter
while the Thermometer was so low as 58°, and many of
them were suffering from ChoUra Xlorbus and Small


Pox. At length. the Court was forced into supplying
provisions, and Junks for the conveyance of these poor
creatures to Bangnarom, whence in the Month of
March 547 Men, Women and Children were taken
across the Country to Mergui, undercharge of one of
the Envoy’s Interpreters. An Order was sent at the
same time to the Governor of Ch’hooinp’hun to release
and send to Mergui another party of 257 Men, which
had b -en detained at the former place.
The Ministers repeatedly declared that no other
prisoners remained, but in the Month of May,
the Mission discovered and forced them to ack-
nowledge a party of Peguers which Maha Yotha
had brought away from the vicinity of Martaban,
and several of which, from meeting with old
acquaintances among the Pegu emigrants in Siam
did not certainly experience so harsh a treat-
ment as the Burmese Prisoners had done, al-
though they were all equally anxious to escape
from the state of Slavery in which they were kept.
To affect the release of these persons the Mission had
to go through the same vexatious discussions as on
the former occasion, before the Siamese Court was
prevailed upon, in the latter end of June, to forward
in the same manner to Mergui, another party of 640
Men, Women and Children, under charge of another
of the Envoy’s Interpreters. The Mission subsequently
• effected the release of 8 more natives of Pegu, and
of five Native Christians, whom a party of Siamese
had seized five years ago on the Coast of Tavoy, and
the latter persons were brought away on board the
Mission Brig. Whatever therefore maybe the final
results of the late Mission to Siam, every Member
of it will feel great and lasting satisfaction, that he
was instrumental in rescuing upwards of 1400 of his
fellow creatures from a most intolerable Slavery.
The Treaty, which the Mission had negotiated
with the Siamese Ministers, provides in the first


instance for the maintenance of mutual friendship,
and for the settlement of all questions or disputes
likely to arise at any time, between the two nations
respecting boundaries and refugees. It makes the
following provisions for the future security of our
trade and intercourse with tlie Malay States on the
Peninsula of Malacca.
With respect to the History of Siam and of
those Malay States we may here only observe, that
if we refer to the Native Malay Annals themselves,
we shall learn that Siam, in ancient times, had all
the regions under the wind" (the phrase familiarly
employed by the Malays to denote their own countries )
dependent on it. and had possessions as far as Johor al
the extremity of the Malay Peninsula, before the
arrival there of the first Malay Colony from Sumatra
about the Year 1160, and further, that in the begin-
ning of the 15th Century, during some part of the
reign of Sultan Ala-Wa-eddou of Malacca, his Country
was under the power of the Siamese. If we receive
the accounts of the Early English Voyagers and tiavel-
lers, we must admit, that most of the States on the
Peninsula recognised, at different times, the authority
of Siam, and were reported to be tributary to her, and
if we adopt any reasoning from analogy, we shall find
it difficult to suppose, that these petty Malay States
could have been suffered to retain for so long a period
as is imagined by some, an unrestrained Sovereign in-
dependence on the borders of so powerful a kingdom
as Siam.
For the native accounts of the early Malay Estab-
lishments on the Peninsula of Malacca, we beg to refer
to Dr. Leyden’s Malay Annals, P. 9, 10, 73, 121, 135,
138. 314 and 319, and the Descriptions of Siam and
Malacca in Valentyn’s Great work P. 50, 2d. Part of
Vol. 3d, and P. 316 to 320 of Vol. sth. from which last
Marsden has cited the passages in Page 326 et *eq : of
his last Edition of the History of Sumatra, and for the


Accounts of Kiiropean travellers, we may refer to Eloris
in 1613, ('ommodore Beaulieu in 1621, Nieuhoff in
1662, and to Ohaumont, Tachard, De Choßy, La
Lou here, and Kempfer’s Descriptions of Siam from
1685 to 1680, and Captain Walter* Hamilton’s new
account of the East Indies in 1744. The earliest
authentic account of the Malay States which we
have been able to trace in any European author,
is contained in Ramusio’s Collection of Voyages,
printed at Venice in 1550—A Portuguese traveller,
Barbessa, who wrote an account of his travels in
1516. and another Portuguese who wrote upon it
“ A Summary of the Eastern Kingdoms, Cities and
People” describe Queda as being at that time under
the recognised dominion and active control of Siam.
One Siamese Viceroy ruled from Tenasserim to
Malacca, and another, named Viceroy of Lungar
(Ligorj from Pahang to the Siamese Capital. Some of
the officers of the Penang Government have ventured
to question the accuracy of Marsden, who describes
Malacca as having been under the power of the Siamese
in the beginning of the 15th Century, but Marsden
has taken the fact from Valentyn, who quotes the
native Histories, and who wrote his elaborate work
after passing a long and laborious life among the
people. Disputed claims of tributary or feudatory
relations have perplexed the British Government in
every part of India. Trippoo over Cochin, Coorg &c.,
the Peishwa over the Southern Jagheerdars and the
Gaickwar, and Scindiah and Holkar over the Petty
sates west of the Jumna. The Supreme Government
however never examined too narrowly into the rights
of possession, or the Origin of such claims, but rather
supported them until the issue of some war empowered
it to extinguish the claims, or transfer them to itself
with many advantages, no doubt, in favour ot the Petty
S i at es.
During the revolutions of the Siamese Govern


ment the Malay States have profited by hs weakness
to set up a transitory independence, but with the
settlement of that Government, its influence and autho-
rity have always lieen restored, and the tributary
token rigidly enforced. There is little chance now of
the Supremacy of Siam being disputed. Her resources
have been improved by a long interval of repose,
and they have recently still more extension from
ihe diminished power of her great enemy the Burmese.
The term “tributary” with its adjuncts “ Vassal,
Liege Lord” &ca. appear to have been first introduced
into India by the Portuguese, whose proceedings
towards many of the Indian Princes clearly shew,
that these expressions were meant by them to indicate
“ conquest, submission and protection. The token
among the Indo Chinese nations of Vassalage to a
superior state, is comprised in the transmission to it
trienniallv of two small trees bearing flowers, one
wrought in Gold and the other in Silver, termed by
the Malays Boonaa Mns dan Perak the wdiole expence
of which does not exceed 1 (>OO Spanish Dollars. 'The
expence,' although it is sometimes enhanced by the
addition of a Sum of Money and rich Clothes, forms
no object for consideration, as the return made by the
superior State in presents is always of much greater
amount. Hut the obligation which this token involves,
is undefined and regulated only by the wants or
caprice of the paramount state, in requisitions at any
time, for troops, guns, boats, or provisions. The
origin of the custom is rather ingeniously accounted
for bv the King of Queda, who declares that in early
times, one of his ancestors happening to send a flower
of Gold to the eldest Son of the King of Siam, a
Child, to play with, the present was construed
into a token of inferiority or homage, and the Custom
thenceforth triennially exacted. But it is rather ex-
traordinary, that the custom should prevail among the
other Malay States, and that the Countries of Cpper


Laos and Ava, as well as Cambodia, Siam and China,
should be so well acquainted with it. The Chinese
who travelled from the Kingdom of Siam to China
in 1652, report according to Du Halde, that Mahang
Kemaral was at that time tributary to Ava, and that it
sent Ambassadors yearh to the King of Ava to carry
this tribute which consisted of two small shrubs, one
having its leaves and flowers of gold, and the other of
silvt r.
Although the influence of Siam over the Malay
States may originally have been the effect of conquest
and the transmission of the Bean " Alas submitted to
as a means of purchasing exemption from threatened
oppression, yet that influence has been recognised
sometimes, as in the case of Queda in Iti2l against
the King of Acheen. and more recently of Calantan
against the Chief of Tnngano, by the weaker states
as a means of securing Siamese protection against
their more powerful neighbours. Siam however does
not appear to have divested these States of the rights
of Sovereignty, as with the exception of Patani, the
inhabitants of what * are now a mixed race of Siamese
and Malays, she has suffered their Governments, laws,
customs and religion, widely different from her own,
to subsist entire, and this is the view which the
British Government has ever taken of the condition
of the alliance between Siam and the Malayan States,
•considering the latter to possess so much of the rights
of Government and Sovereignty, as to be capable of
entering into Treaties, and of even ceding a portion, of
1 heir territories Hut though the British Government
acting upon this principle, entered into an alliance
with the King of Queda in the year 178b, and deemed
his permission sufficient to enable it to form an
e tablishment at Prince of Wales Island, still nothing
is more clear and indisputable in the whole
history of its intercourse with the Malay States,
than a steady and invariable determination on the


part of the Supreme Government of India, not to be
Jed into any embarrassing participation in the interests
and concerns of either Siam, or any of the Malay
States. Notwithstanding many applications from al-
most all the Malay States to the British Government,
to afford them protection against Siam, or against each
other by forming Settlements in their- dominions our
interference has been limited within the bounds of
amicable counsel and mediation. Political connection
with the Malay States has been deprecated, and re-
lations with them have been considered desirable, so
far only as may be requisite for promoting and preserv-
ing the trade of the Commercial posts established at
Prince of Wales Island, Malacca nad Singapore. The
great objection to the British Government encouraging
these States to throw off their connexion with Siam, it
indeed any measure directed to that end could be justi-
fiable under the relations existing between that power
and ourselves, is the impossibility of seeing how far
such a proceeding may draw us on. Indeed the im-
practicability of indiicing the haughty and arrogant
Court of Siam to wave pretensions so intimately affect-
ing its pride and consequence, as its claims of
superiority over these Malay States, the weak and
imbecile character and authority of most of the Malay
Chiefs, and constant quarrels among themselves, the
unsettled laws of succession in their Governments,
which are a source of dispute on the death of almost
every Prince, the exaggerated fears of the Malay in-
habitants with respect to the Siamese, and the restless
and meddling disposition of the latter, all conspire to
render it highly probable, that interference on the
part of the British Government would involve
it in extensive and complicated political relations,
bring in a rupture, sooner or later, with Siam, and
ultimately lead us to Bangkok, and to a direct occupa-
tion of the whole Malay Peninsula. That the British
Empire in Asia will ultimately extend over Siant is
perhaps certain, but whether those who are connected :


with our Establishments in Ihe Straits of Malacca
may not he urged by local views and feelings, to
accelerate, instead of making every exertion to retard
the growth of our power, is a subject worthy the con-
sideration of Superior authorities. With ever\ respect
and deference also towards the present Governor of
Penang, we may venture to submit, that he has
brought to the consideration of our Indo-Chinese
policy the comprehensive mind and extended views
required for t he Government of our immense territorial
possessions in India. Our duty and policy for several
years to come ought perhaps to be, to improve and
.secure what we have already acquired without making
any change in the system, which looked to our insular
possessions as factories or commercial posts only, de-
signed not for the local increase of revenue or political
importance, but for the purpose of introducing and
extending the consumption of the manufactures of
England and British India among the surrounding
Native States.
it is not intended by the foregoing remarks to
depreciate the character of the Honble. Company’s
Establishment at Penang, some of the ()ffi.eers of which
the writer of this account is proud of numbering
among his must respected friends. The whole of the
public Servants of Penang, Malacca, Singapore and
Bencoolen have lately been incorporated into one Esta-
blishment to be styled ‘-the Government of Prince of
Wales Island. Malacca and Singapore.” But that the
Honble. Company had no intention of changing the char-
acter of their possession in that quarter may be inferred
from the fact of their having ordered the abolition of
all Import and Export duties levied at those Settle-
ments. None of them could before meet the expense
of their maintenance, and the revenues of Penang,
during her -most prosperous days, tell short of her
charges by at least £4.000 per annum. it is but
natural t hat the Officers belonging to these Settlements
in the Straits of Malacca, should be urged to effect the


*■ Note. in 1662 Nieuhoff
describes Pahang as being
subject to the King of Siam
and as extending to Patani,
that is, including Tringano.
Hamilton, between 1708 and
1720 found Pahang a part of
Tringano, and in 1724 Valen-
tyn in a chart in his work
describes one state, Pahang,
from the frontiers of Johor to
those Of Patani.
same important changes there, as those which the
Company’s early Agents, according to Sir John
Malcolm, brought about in India. 14 The desire of
4 ’ promoting the Security and improving the prosperity
44 of their commercial Establishments first led them to
Political connexions. From that moment the Sub-
•• stance though not the form of their Government was
altered, and they were involved beyond the power of
■ 4 retracting in all the complicated relations of a
■ 4 Political State. The truth is. that from tlie dav
44 on which the Company’s troops marched one mile
4 • from their factories, the increase of their territories
•• and armies became a principle of self preservation. "
The Servants of the Company' had a great field open
for the exercise of their talents in India, and in the
early part of their History, the advancement of indivi-
duals to wealth and authority, depended, in a great
degree, upon the advancement of the Government,
which they served.
562 Nicuhoff To return to the Malay States—-Johor
ig as being
,ing of Siam and Pahang have long broken off their
3to Patani, connexion with Siam but Tringano is
3 Tringano.
jn 1708 and under the Siamese Governor of Singora.
ig a part of and Caluntau under the Rajah of Ligor.
n His work through which Chiefs they respectively
ite, Pahang, transmit to Siam the triennial token of
iof Johor to , . . * rn ,
submission. 1 he { hums ot supremacy
on ihe part of Siam over Tringano are founded on the
fact of Tringano having been a portion of Johor, and
the first .modern Chief of it a Sultan of Johor, which
State had before transmitted the Boovya Mas to
Siam, and on the alleged circumstance of a Chief of
Tringano having once appealed to Siam for protection
against the Buy is who have established themselves on
on some of the Islands at the extremity of the Malay
Peninsula. In the year 1720 Captain Hamilton was
at Siam when a Chief of Johor transmitted the
Boonga Max thither, and a Chief of Tringano in 1787-
when resting a claim of personal homage set up by a


% Note, see captain wai-
ter Hamilton's account in 1719
and 23 and Mr. Chapman’s
in 1778 of the Condition of the
Sultan of Tringano from the
attacks and threats of the
Lugie and their Chief at Rhio.
King of Siam, admitted that “from tin- beginning of
time, through all general ions the Kings of Johor sent
complimentary messages and the Boonga Mas to the
captain wai- K ing of Siam. '* Calantan was a depen-
ccount in 1719 ' r 1
r. chapman’s deucy ot Triiigano, but threw off its yoke
mditionof the about 20 or 25 Nears ago upon some
ano from the
meats of the change of dynasty, and appealed to Siam
Chief at Rhio. also for ]>l‘ot eetioil.
r rhe M ission touched at Tringano on its way to
Bangkok, as well as on its return, and learnt that
Siam is in regular communication with that State and
Calantan, that a strong party in her interests exists in
both of them, and that the Siamese Ministers place a
fhigh Value on the maintenance of this connexion.
The Mission further found, that the Chiefs of both
Tringa.no and Calantan have accepted Siamese Titles,
and I hat, in fact, the inhabitants of both these States
depend on the Siamese ports to the Northward for
llieir principal supplies of grain.
The I ’hivoy conceived, that the preservation of
British trade and intercourse with Tringano and
Calantan was the only ground upon which it could
ever be the policy of the British (Government to inter-
fere in their favor, and lie therefore persuaded the
Siamese Ministers to enter into an engagement by
the I2fh Article of the 'Treaty, that the Siamese shall
not obstruct or impede the trade or intercourse
•subsisting between British Subjects and the States of
Tringano and Calantan.
The present state of Saleiigore is a recent esta-
blishment by a colony of Bngis from Rhio, and the
Siamese advance no claims ot Supremacy over it. The
(Government of Saleiigore however is unquiet. In I77<>
it attacked Queda, in 1783 Malacca, in 180t> it took
.possession of Perak, and again in 1822 it drove out a
party of Siamese, which had been established at Perak.
This last measure was perhaps justifiable, as Saleiigore
had a strong interest in preventing' the approach to its


immediate vicinity of a conquering and formidable
power like the Siamese. But the Chief of Salengore
established a nephew at the Mouth of the Perak River
to control the trade and Government of that State,
and against this proceeding the Chief of Perak
appealed to the Rajah of Ligor, and deputed last year
a Mission to His Highness, consisting of some of the
principal Nobles of Perak. The preparations, which
the Rajah of Ligor then made, were designed for the
purpose of driving out the Salengore party from
Perak, and of attacking Salengore in retaliation
for the conduct of its Chief to the Siamese at Peiak,
and the Treaty which Captain Burney concluded on
the dlst July, with His Highness of Ligor, engaged
the Rajah not to send any armament to Perak
or Salengore upon condition that the Government of
Prince of Wales Island would remove the Salengore
party from Perak, and prevent Salengore from all
future interference with that state.
These objects were then accomplished by the
Penang Government under an engagement concluded
with the Chief of Salengore, and a paid of the 14th
A rticle of the Treaty now negotiated with Siam secures
on the same terms the safety of Salengore from Siam-
ese encroachments.
At the time that the Siamese Government directed
the King of Queda to subdue Perak, it was supposed
that Siam was asserting its claims ot supremacy
over the latter State, on the ground of the connexion
which had anciently subsisted between Perak and the
native Governments of Malacca and Johor. The Mis-
sion discovered however, that some ot the Subordinate
Chiefs of Perak had privately invited the interference
of the Siamese Governors of Ligor and Singora against
the Misgovernment of the old Rajah of Perak and the!
usurping influence of their neighbour the Chief of
Salengore. This intrigue, as well as the communica-
tions which had more recently passed between the
reigning Chief of Perak and the Rajah of Ligor. con-1


vinced the Siamese Ministers that Perak is n ally
desirous of maintaining intimate relations with Siam.
If however the Penang Government offer protection to
Perak against Salengore, there is no doubt that
the majority of the Perak Chiefs and particularly
the reigning Rajah, will he happy to discontinue all
further connexion with the Siamese. The return of
the Siamese to Perak will again produce a quarrel
between them and Salengore, the inevitable conse-
quence of which will be to destroy altogether the trade
and intercourse now subsisting between those States
and Penang and Malacca, ft is evidently therefore
the interest of the British Government to main-
tain the future independence of Perak, for which
the 14th Article of the Treaty with Siam stipulates,
and to prevent the Siamese from coming in contact
with Salengore. As there is no good overland
route from the Siamese territories to Perak and
Salengore, and as their principal communication has
always been by water, the Penang Government from
its situation will have no difficulty in seeing the pro-
visions' of the Treaty, with reference to those two
States, fully respected and adhered to by the Siamese.
An agent was sent to Perak by the Penang
Government subsequent to the return of the Mission
from Siam, and the following observations have been
submitted to the Supreme Government with respect to
that Agent’s proceedings. The engagement binding
the Chief of Perak not to hold any intercourse with or
receive Knvoys from the Siamese, the issuing of pro-
clamations against them, the removal of his Ministers
and Officers, “for having joined the Siamese party,”
and appointment of others, the claims to succession of
the Rajah Muda , or Heir apparent to the throne,
finally and publicly annulled, “for having seconded
the views of the Siamese,’” (an act the right and policy
of which may be questioned, in as much as the Perak
Monarchy is nol elective and the Rajah Muda with his
acknowledged many adherents will he only made more


troublesome than lie was) the recommendation to the
Rajah of Perak not to tax the Ryots, the plans for
establishing a regular Mercantile Agent at Penang, and
procuring School Masters from thence, the removal of
His Highness’s residence from his former abode to a
Spot nearer Penang, and provision made by a supple-
mentary engagement for the occasional residence with
him of a British Officer, the Cession to the British
Government by another Supplementary engagement of
the territory of Pulo Binding &ca. the whole directed
or done by a British Officer, with a Guard of Sepoys,
and with an expectation held out by him of a loan of
money and Guns and Warlike Stores, all these act-
will of course, irritate and excite the dissatisfaction
of the Siamese, and be received by them as an
infraction of the Treaty concluded at Bangkok.
When also it is considered, that all these acts have
been done with respect to Prince whose whole Annual
income is estimated at only ” 12000 Hs. may it not
be said, that the ablest Opponent to the favorite plan
of the Penang Government for taking the whole of
the Malay Peninsula under its protection, could not
have shown metre clearly and decidedly, than what
this Agent to Perak has done, the petty, complicated
and unprofitable transactions, which such a plan will
entail upon us. and the impossibility of seeing, until
we have actually embarked in it, how far interference
on our part with the Malay Peninsula States may-
draw us on ?
On the subject of Queda the Mission experienced
the greatest difficulties. The King of Queda who
ceded Prince of Wales Island to the British Govern-
ment was distinctly apprized that “ with respect to
protecting him at anytime against the Siamese. The!
Governor General in Council had decided against
any measures, that might involve the Past India
Company in rniltiary operations against any of tlu
Eastern Princes, and that the countenance or influence
of the Company could be employed for the security of


Queda far only as it did not involve their honor,
•credit or troops.’" It was subsequently decided, after
much investigation, that “there was little room to
doubt the dependent nature of the relation subsisting
between the States of Queda and Siam, and that
whatever may have been the origin of the periodical
tokens of submission given by the former, there ap-
peared to be no ground for encouraging the King of
Queda to renounce his vassalage to the State of Siam.’’
The King of Queda who ceded Penang died leaving
nine Sons, between whom disputes arose respecting
their separate authority, and the division of their
patrimonial property. Each aspired to power. The
Uncle put aside the pretensions of the wdiole, and
assumed the Government, but he found it a difficult
task to control his numerous nephews. The
eldest, the present King of Queda, went over to
the neighbouring Siamese Governor of Singora,
who conveyed him to Bangkok, where he received
a Siamese title and an appointment from the
King of Siam to the Government of Queda. The
order, with which he returned from Siam, inti-
midated his uncle to resign in his favor about the year
1804. Some of his brothers opposed this arrange-
ment by open force, and the conflicting authority of
five or six brothers and an Uncle, all equally oppressive
and independent, disturbed the Kingdom and produced
con-taut intrigues between some of the brothers and
the neighbouring Siamese Governors, who were invited
to interfere in the affairs of Country more and more,
until at length the King of Queda was driven from his
throne, and his territory occupied by the Siamese
under the Kajah of Ligor. The principal charge
against, the King of Queda was, that he maintained
friendly correspondence with the Burmese. About
the year 1.811 he refuted the charge by sending up
his Eldest Son and Bindhnra to Bangkok, to do hom-
age before the King of Siam, but when the charge
was subsequently repeated by another brother he


appeal’s to have taken no pains to disprove it. On the
contrary he adopted some measures calculated to con-
firm it, by removing from his Capital and fortifying
himself at a post nearer Penang, and by showing some
remissness in the transmission of the homxja Man
to Siam. .
Before the arrival also of the Siamese in Queda.
the King had alienated the minds of most of his
principal Officers and Subjects. Contrary ro the
Stipulations of his Treaty with the British Govern-
ment, he had imposed a heavy duty upon the exporta-
tion of grain from Queda to Penang, and by a
system of monopolies and other means, little short of
extortion, he had oppressed his own people, and put a
stop to all commercial intercourse between Penang
and the interior of the Malay Peninsula. For Bor 1
years before 1821, His Highness was threatened by
the Siamese, and in the beginning of that year, the
Penang Government communicated to him authentic
information, which it had received from Bangkok,
of a Siamese armament being under preparation there,
destined to attack Queda. His Highness, however,
appears to have made no counter preparations at his
Capital for preventing or resisting the approach of the
Siamese; and the moment he heard of their arrival
at Queda, he Hed to Penang from his fortified post
at Pulo Tiga. On the 12th November 1821, a small
party only of Siamese took possession of Queda,
killing the Lnscomava. I and many of the
Malays, and making prisoners of the Bindahara and
afterwards of 7 minko Yacoob the King ot Queda s
second Son, with several of His Highness’s Sisters,
Nephews and Women. At this time, the main body
of the Siamese had not come up, and every respectable
Malay of Queda now speaks with shame of the
ignoble flight of the King, and attributes the loss
of his throne to his own previous misconduct.
Just as the King had thus retreated from Queda,


Mr. (Vawfurd proceeded to Bangkok, where he endea-
voured, without success, to reconcile the Court of Siam
to His Highness, Upon the failure of this negotia-
tion, His Highi ess, most imprudently, opened a secret
correspondence with the Government of Ava, which
immediately met his appeal for succour, and deputed
some Knvoys from Tavoy to Penang in order to ascer-
tain the real State of affairs. The declaration of War
published by the British Government against Ava,
necessitated the return of these Knvoys to Tavov with
all expedition ; but the fact of this negotiation was
made known to the Siamese, and from that moment,
the King of Qneda lost every well wisher he ever
possessed at Bangkok, where this procedure on his
p. rt tended to confirm every previous charge that had
been made against him. of carrying on a treasonable
correspondence with the Burmese, and rendered the
whole Siamese Court irreconcilably inimical to him.
Since the time when the King of Qneda sought an
asylum at Penang, many of his subjects and partisans
have been most active in sowing suspicion and distrust
between the Penang (Government and the Rajah, of
Rigor. Some of the very persons who alarmed the
Government of Penang with reports of the hostile
designs and equipments of the Rajah of Rigor in 1822,
and again last year, are believed to have taken to His
Highness similar reports against the Penang Govern-
ment. It was impossible for any confidence or good
understanding to subsist between our Government and
the Rajah of Rigor, as long as the King of Queda
remained on such terms at Penang, and with reference
particularly to the relations between the Siamese and
the British Government being undefined and unset-
tled, it was deemed advisable to instruct the late
Mission to make one more effort to persuade the
Siamese to retire from Queda and from the vicinity of
Penang, and to restore the King of Queda to his
territorv.


Upon the arrival of the Mission at Bangkok, it
found that the Siamese Court was deriving revenue ot
80.000 Dollars Per annum from the direct occupation
of Queda and that the King of Queda had not a
single friend at Bangkok, whilst some of his own
subjects, and among others one of his own brothers,
now residing at Queda. were petitioning the King
of Siam against the restoration of his Highness.
The Envoy was furnished with no equivalent to offer
to the Siamese to induce them to retire from Queda.
and he early ascertained the correctness of the
following observation made by the Governor (.fenera.l
in Council to the Penang Government. “We do not
“ verv clearly perceive how the Court of Siam or the
Rajah of Ligor will ever be persuaded to forego
“ the profit, which it seems they derive from the
direct occupation of Queda. unless we are persuaded
to tender Tavoy or Mergui as an inducement/
But one part of the Envoy's instructions directed him
to take special care, not to hold out any distinct
expectation of our ceding to the Siamese any portion
of our acquisitions on the Coast of Tenasserim, and
Martaban was the only place which the Siamese Court
seemed to value, or desire to possess, and for which,
as the Envoy reported from Bangkok, it would
perhaps have been willing to exchange Queda. The
Envoy however used every argument and endeavour
in his power to persuade the Court of Siam to
meet the wishes of the Penang Covernment respec-
ting Queda. But he found the object unattainable
by any means short of actual intimidation, by which
it is possible that he might have gained tin's, but
he would have infallibly lost every other object of his
Mission, The mere measure of carrying the King of
Queda back to his capital would not be sufficient.
A Single Company of our Sepoys might have kept the
Siamese from coining there, and a single Company
might even now replace His Highness in his Capital.
But to reinstate his Highness contrary to the wishes


ol the Siamese, as between 1 hem no good understand-
ing can now ever exist, would impose on the British
(Government the necessity of supporting His Highness
there, and in fact, (as he is now without a single
minister or respectable Chief) of undertaking the
direct management of the country which as Mr.
Crawford has observed, is thinly populated, covered
for the most part with forest, and destitute of all
those commodities that give some commercial conse-
quence to the other States, of the Peninsula, the
principal portion of the 30,000 Dollars realized by the
Siamese being derived from the very heavy Export
duty upon grain, so unjustifiably imposed by the King
of Queda. Such a measure therefore would only
draw the British Government into the very course
of policy which it has studiously avoided in all its
intercourse with the Malay Slates on the Peninsula
of Malacca. The Mission saw at Bangkok that to
replace the King of Queda in his territory under any
arrangement which it would not be to the interest of
the Siamese to keep, would be only sowing the seeds
of future dissension, and as the primary object of
that Mission was entirely conciliatory, the Envoy
conceived himself not only justified in giving, but
even called upon to afford to the Siamese Court., some
unequivocal proof of the forbearance and moderation
of the British Government.
The question respecting the restoration of the
King of Queda was therefore conceded, and in return,
the Siamese Government engaged to release His
Highness’s family and personal servants, who were in
captivity at Ligor. to afford good treatment to the in-
habitants of Queda; to abolish the high duty levied
upon the exportation of grain from Queda to Penang,
and the system of farming out the exclusive pri-
vilege of navigating the different rivers in Queda. by
which all intercourse with the interior of the Malay
Peninsula had been long obstructed, and finally, to
permit a free and unrestrained trade and intercourse


between the British Settlements in the Straits of
Malacca and every contiguous Siamese province. As
the Export duty on grain at Queda forms the chief
source of profit to the Siamese, their engaging to rc -
linquish this gain proves the disposition of the Siam-
ese Court to make as large a sacrifice as it can, towards
conciliating the British Government rather than
submit to replace the King of Queda. But it must be
owned that the Envoy experienced the utmost difficulty
in prevailing on the Siamese Ministers to forego so
large a portion of the profit which they derive from
the direct occupation of Queda.
r l he Siamese Ministers, however, dwelt much on
the inconvenience of the King of Queda residing at
Penang, in the immediate vicinity of Queda, and
required in return a pledge that Bis Highness should
be removed to some other territory, and this pledge,
•referring to the possibility of the King’ of Queda being
unwilling to remove, was given with a condition, that
if it should not be fulfilled the Siamese at Queda should
be at libertv to continue the Export duty upon grain.
It was engaged also, that the British Government
should not permit the King of Queda or his followers,
as long, of course, as they continued to live under our
protection and at our expence, to molest the Siamese.
Although previous to the departure of the Mission
for Siam the Penang Government admitted the neces-
sity of a final decision one way or other, and acknow-
ledged that no confidence or cordiality can subsist
} )e | Ween j t an d its Siamese neighbours so long as the
King of Queda remains in his present situation, still
that authoritv now objects to insist upon His Highness
accepting our protection and stipend at Malacca. 01 m
any other part of our territory, where Ids presence may
not disturb our peace and tranquillity, ft is obvioush
good policy for the British Government to fulfil as
implicitly as possible, all the expectations held out lu
its Agent at Bangkok, and not to suffer the (. ourt of


Siam to entertain the smallest doubt of our good faith
and peaceable intentions, or of our professions of main-
taining the most friendly relations with the Siamese.
With the precedent furnished by Kingberring and the
Mug refugees, who were allowed to reside on the
frontiers of Ava, is there not every reason for believing,
that in the same manner, if the King of Queda and his
followers remain in the immediate vicinity of Queda,
their natural passions and resentments will he kept
alive, and will only serve to provoke the offended
pride and troublesome jealousy of the Siamese until
these conflicting causes involve the British Govern-
ment in hostilities? But on this point it is
necessary only for the Supreme Government to
communicate a decided expression of its sentiments
to the Penang Government and the Ex-King of Queda.
Get his Highness receive every consideration due to his
n •
misfortunes, and the most liberal provision and pro-
tection, but couple with these, as we have a right tc
do, such terms only as may secure our own peace and
tranquillity.
The Envoy rtvorded in his Journal on the 26th of
May an opinion, t hat if lie had broken up the confer-
ence which he held that night with the Siamese Minis-
ters, and had prepared to quit the country, they would
have yielded the point, rather than have permitted
him to depart. Without reflecting that this Journal
was only a record of his daily impressions, that
opinion has since been cited against the Envoy.
J.tis impossible, with such an ignorant and conceited
Court as that of Siam, to predict with any degree of
certainty what would be its proceedings in any
particular contingency, but there is no doubt that
subsequent experience induced the Envoy to question
the accuracy of his opinion, and to perceive that the
whole of his instructions from the Supreme Govern-
ment as well as the circumstance of two English
Merchants residing at Bangkok with considerable


property, which he could not remove with him. would
have rendered it impossible for him to have put
Ids opinion to the proof without incurring a very
awful responsibility and heavy censure, had the issue
been contrary to his expectations. Besides, it was
before well observed by the Supreme Government
to one of its high diplomatic Agents, it is in-
consistent with unalterable principles to menace a
measure, of which considerations either of expediency
or of justice, would preclude the adoption. \-he
Envoy could have wished to have awaited the result
of a reference which he made to Bengal from Bangkok,
but he found the delay would have been creative
of some inconvenience and much expense to the
public, and there was a necessity for him not to quit
Siam without coming to some understanding with
the Court. This subject cost the Envoy great per-
sonal anxiety and inquietude, for he well knew, as
the event proved, that any arrangement short ot the
full restoration of the King of Queda would dissatisfy
the Penang Government, and cut oft all hopes ot
further employment for himself under that Govern-
ment.
The British Government has surely nothing to
fear from the Siamese; and all it can reasonably
require from them is some share for its subjects in
the really valuable and extensive commerce of Siam.
Every Member of the late Mission is convinced, that
the present Siamese Government has nothing farther
from its wish or intention than to come into collision
with us. and that its existing sentiments, with a
little moderation, forbearance and management on
our part, may be improved into such benefits and
advantages in favor of our Merchants and I rade io
those only, who have visited Bangkok, can duly
appreciate. But the Supreme Government of British
India must rigidly exercise over subordinate authorities
the Political control vested in it by the British
Legislature.


The Rajah of Ligor in his proceedings against
Qaeda and Salengore, was acting under the immediate
orders of the Court of Siam. He has no independent
authority ; he is an officer subject to and implicitly
bound by the instructions of that Court. But pro-
vision having now been made by Treaty for defining
the relations between the British and Siamese Nations,
and for the settlement of all questions or disputes
that may be likely to arise respecting boundaries,
refugees, and Military or Naval equipments, some
hopes maybe entertained that the Penang Goveru-
ment will not, in future, find this Chief so restless
and troublesome a neighbour as lie has hitherto been
considered. He has already made application to
be furnished with a Copy of the Customs Duties
and port regulations in force at Prince of Wales
Island, with an intention of establishing similar
rates and rules in Qaeda, on the fair principles
of reciprocity, and his Son, the Governor of
Queda, has just permitted an Agent from the Penang
Government to visit some of the principal, rivers
in Queda, and satisfy that Government of the ground-
lessness of the reports, which Malays had again circu-
lated at Penang, of extensive warlike preparations
o-oino- on in those rivers. With respect however to
the Siamese ever attacking Penang, the Mission
entirely agrees with Mr. Crawfurd, that " there is just
as much chance of their marching an army to Cal-
cutta.” None but those who have never seen this
people, can suppose that their military means are more
efficient now than they were in 1(588. when a tew
Frenchmen defended Merg’ui against 12.000 Siame.se
during several weeks. Yet as an example of the truly
absurd tales brought by Malays to Penang and credited
there, concerning the hostile preparations and inten-
tions of the Rajah of Ligore, in 1825, we beg to
refer to the Paper of Intelligence collected in June
that year, by the Malay Translator to the Penang
Government, from a Malay named Che Ftam. who was


employed as a secret agent or Spy, and who appears
tu have discovered what kind of tales would best ensure
him a good reward.
The above arrangements, it is hoped, will tend to
secure every practicable degree ot freedom and facility
to our trade in Lower Siam. It now remains to detail
the measures which have been adopted tor improving
our commercial relations with Upper Siam.
Upon the accession to the throne of the present
King of Siam, he made a declaration that he was
determined not to be a Kin if Merchant, and not to
maintain any Monopolies, but to permit a general tree
trade. The exclusive Sale of Stick-lac, Sapan Wood,
Acpula Wood, ivory, Gamboge and Pepper which the
late King of Siam monopolized, was abolished, and the
collection of the duties upon those articles was farmed
out. The trade in those articles was made free : that
is, only when his Majesty has no supply of them for
Sale. Unfortunately, the King receives a great por-
tion of his revenues in kind. The Siamese troops,
when not otherwise engaged, are employed in Cultiva-
tion, and in cutting Timber and Sapan Wood .for
His Majesty. The people of Laos pay their tribute
in Stick-lac, Ivory, Benzoin and other articles. The
inhabitants on its frontiers send down cotton and
rafts of Teak Timber. The inhabitants of the Siamese
portion of Cambodia, send Gamboge, Aquila Wood,
Pepper and Cardamons. The Chinese, who farm the
collection of the duty upon Sugar, makes his payments
in that article. To get rid of all this produce, His
Majesty is obliged to become a Merchant, and his
Officers, of course, try to sell it for him on the
highest possible terms. All these Officers also are
allowed to engage in commerces.
Although the system of monopolies was in some
measure reduced by the present King of Siam, yet
the trade of British Subjects in Siam, had to contend


against two very great evils. The claims of pre-
emption exercised by the officers of the Siamese
Government, and an arbitrary and uncertain mode
of levying the duties and port charges. '1 he Phra
Khlaim- and his Petty Officers always endeavoured to
prevent the inhabitants of Bangkok from making any
purchases, until they' themselves had selected whatever
articles they pleased, and for which they would not
settle at once a fair price, but would keep the foreign
Merchant waiting day after day for a month or six
weeks, until they either forced him to submit to their
terms, or to lose the chance of selling his Cargo to
others to any advantage. No inhabitant of Bangkok
dared make any other offer for what the Phra Khlang
and his Officers desired to possess, nor could he sell any
article to the foreign merchant without the previous
permission of the Phra Khlang, which was never given
so long as that Minister or the King’s Merchant had any-
thing to dispose of. The foreign merchant could not
go to the Market unless clandestinely and at the risk
of losing his property- and bringing down most severe
punishment on the Siamese trader. He w-as, in tact,
completely in the power of the Phra Khlang. Next
to the Phra Khlang and his deputy, Phya Phiphnt,
which officer in the time of Kempfer was remarkable
for pinching strangers," the principal instruments
by which foreign trade was conducted on the above
mischievous principles, were Luang Keo Ayat or
Pomat, a natural brother of the Phra Khlang, Phya
Chula the King’s merchant, and Khun Kadsithi bis son.
The two last have acquired great ascendancy over the
mind of the Phra Khlang, and they are consulted by
him on all occasions. The father professes to be a
native of Persia, but is evidently a native ot the Coast
of Coromandel. It was his special duty to settle a
price for all articles required by the King from the
the European Merchant, a duty- he generally took
several weeks to execute, offering the merchant, in the
first instance, about 1/301 h of the value of his goods.


His son is the King’s mercantile clerk, and accountant
to the Phra Khlang, an office in which his shrewdness,
cunning and quickness, render him extremely necessary
and acceptable to the Phra Khlang.
The endeavours of the Envoy were, of course
strenuously directed towards correcting such a mis-
chievous system as is above described, and fairly
opening the market to the English merchant, to which
end he persuaded the Ministers to insert in the Treaty
negotiated with them, a clause in article 6th declar-
ing that “ British ‘merchants and the inhabitants of
the country shall be allowed to buy and sell with-
out the intervention of other persons ; a Stipulation
which is repeated in Article Ist of the Commercial
Agreement, together with the words " with freedom
“ and facility,” and that no import, export or other
“ duty shall be levied upon the buyers or sellers from
or to EnglislmSubjects.
On the arrival of the Mission at Bangkok, it
found that the trade of British subjects was charged a
general Import Duty of Eight Per Cent, heavy export
duties varying from 20 to 50 Per Cent, with a large
sum of Port and Anchorage charges, sometimes styled
measurement duty. The arrangement appears from
the authority of Hamilton to have originated in some
measure with ourselves in the Year 1684. That author
relates that the Siamese Envoys sent to France visited
London and there concluded a commercial Treaty with
our Nation. As this treaty was negotiated by King
Charles the Second’s Ministers, no notice or Copy of it
appears to exist among the records of the India ( <>m-
pany. It would, however, be satisfactory to examine
a copy of it, not only to learn the nature of its provi-
sions but to ascertain what authority the Siamese
Envoys possessed to execute such an Instrument. 1
Judging from such of the names of the
whom the King of Siam formerly deputed to Europe
as can now be traced, we should believe them tol


have been men of subordinate rank, and the practice
and habits of the Siamese Court must indeed have
experienced very great change, if to such Men or
to any Siamese Agents powers could be given to
enter into Treaties of Alliance. No Envoy who
might now be deputed by the Siamese Monarch
would dare to enter into any engagements, or
could perform any act which his Master would con-
sider it in any degree obligatory to ratify or confirm.
Captain Hamilton however declares that in 1718, a Mr.
Collett, Governor of Fort St. George, sent an Agent
to Siam to annul the Treaty of London, and to make
,a new one, detrimental to all subjects except those
employed by that Governor, The revised Treaty stipu-
lated, Hamilton states, that all British subjects that
had not Collett’s letter should lx? obliged to pay 8 per
Cent new Customs and measurage for their Ship, which
came to about £5OO for a Ship of 800 tons, to sell their
cargoes to whom they pleased, but the money to be
paid into the King’s cash that he might deliver goods
for it, at his own. prices, whether proper for their home-
ward markets or no. This account shows at least, the
fidelity with which the Siamese can maintain the pro-
visions of a treaty that may lie in their own favour, for
the vexatious system and heavy rate of duties of which
British Merchants have complained at Bangkok are no
more than what Mr. Collett appears to have introduced
in 1718. The European Merchant however generally
succeeded in evading the payment of a large portion,
nay a moiety of the Import duties. The export duties
were more strictly exacted and particularly on the prin-
cipal commodity, Sugar, exported in Ships. But the
measurement duty which was said to include certain
fees to the Master Attendant and Officers of the Bhra
Khlang, was regulated by no fixed rule. The charges,
in fact, were made by guess under the direction of
Had sit ill, and no statement of particulars was ever
given to the English Merchant, who was made to pay
the total communicated by Badsithi. Fpon the death


of the late King, an increased charge was made on ac-
count of the Wangna and his Officers, who were then
appointed. A new fee of 28£ ticals, and sometimes
32£ ticals, was demanded for a pass for every cargo
Junk, that the European Merchant might hire, and
the Governor of Paknam had lately increased his
fee from 80 to 124 ticals, without declaring by
whose authority or for what reason such increase
was made. The Original Siamese of the document
furnished to Mr. Crawfurd was shewn not to mean
an engagement on the part of the Siamese Govern-
ment not to increase the existing duties but a
prohibition only to its officers against committing
execution or extortion. It became therefore the first
object of the Mission to ascertain the precise rate
of this measurement duty, and the particulars of the
fees and other charges included under the head of
anchorage dues. After some discussion, the Phra
Khlang drew out himself and delivered to the Envoy
a list of the Port and anchorage duties levied upon
the Ship Hunter, which happened then to be at
Bangkok. A more absurd attempt to give a colour
to imposition was perhaps never made than what
this official account exhibited. In truth, it confirmed
all the previous suspicions of the Mission, that a small
portion only of the Charges was paid into the King s
Treasury, and that the rest was embezzled by the
Phra Khlang and his Department. The remedy for ;
these arbitrary and irregular imposts was to persuade
the Siamese Ministers to establish, in lieu of J
others, one simple impost in the form of a duty upon |
Tonnage or measurement, a mode of proceeding
which is conformable with the established mage of j,
the Indo-Chinese nations. If was seen that ie rl
Siamese would not credit any Registers or Papers o I
a Shij) denoting her Tonnage, and the Envoy caum
side red it prudent not to propose too great innovation®
at once, but to let them continue their own system I
of measuring the Breadth only of a vessel. Althoug^B


a vessel’s capacity to carry cargo does not depend
entirely on her length or breadth, it was believed
that any trifling inequality which might arise iu
practice from the adoption of this principle, would be
much more than compensated by the exemption from
vexatious interference, which it would secure, and
at all events that such an arrangement would enable
British Subjects to ascertain with some exactness, what
trade could be carried on advantageously with Siam.
The Mission was encouraged to hope that the King of
Siam would favor the arrangement, as he had, when
Prince Krom Chet, expressed his approbation of this
mode of making one chaige for the Vessel and her
Cargo, as practised in China, It was seen, however,
that the plan must be proposed under a considerable
reduction of the existing duties, not only that it might
become a benefit to our Merchants, who complained of
the exorbitance of the existing charges, but that it
might afford some counterbalance against the probable
mal-practices of the Phra Khlang’s Department, which
would attempt to add, in some way or other to the
amount stipulated however high might be the rate.
The following is a list of the amount of Import and
Export duties and charges actually paid by several
Vessels which have visited Bangkok during the last 4
or 5 years.
Brig Phoenix of 232 Tons and 4 Siamese fathoms
in Breadth Tcs. 11243
♦Schooner Mariana 12<J Do. Do- Do. . 6913
Brig Shannon 200 Do, Do. Do. 8821
Ship Caroline 450 Do. 44 Do. Do. 10157
Do. 2d time ... ... ... 12457
American Brig Siren 175 Do. Do. Do. 4340
~ Ship Liverpool Packet 400 Do. 4£ Do. Do. 11164
Ship Hunter 235 Do. 4 Do. Do. 8688.1.
The loss on the presents made to the King and
Officers of Siam is included in the account of Charges of
only the two first of the abovementioned vessels. The
American vessels with the exception of a few firearms,


visited Bangkok in ballast, none of the Ships imported
or exported more' than half a cargo. The duties upon
complete Cargoes would have nearly doubled the Sums
quoted above, as having been actually paid by those
vessels.
in addition to the data furnished by the foregoing
list the Mission ascertained, that the following amount
of Port Charges and duties was actually paid by coun-
try Ships in China in 1821.
Ships of 513 Tons Spanish Dollars 6406-57 or Tics. 10410
Ditto 412 Do. Do. 4775-50 or Do. 7785
Brig of 168 Do. Do. 3500 or Ditto 5688
and that the imposts upon our trade at Rangoon in
1820 were as follows :
A. general Import duty of 12 Per Cent.
An Export Duty on Timber of 1 Ditto
On all other Articles 5 Per Cent.
Port Anchorage and other charges 1512-50 TicaK of
25 Per Cent Silver.
The Envoy proposed therefore a consolidaled duty
of 1500 Ticals, for each Siamese fathom in breadth ota
vessel, and after much discussion with the Phra Khlang
and other Officers, the King of Siam was pleased to
order the ministers to accept this proposition with re-
spect to vessels visiting Bangkok in ballast, and to lix
3 700 Ticals per fathom for those arriving with an Im-
port Cargo. The Envoy found it necessary however,
to insist upon a clause being introduced into the Treaty
engaging, that “no Import, Export or other duty
shall be levied upon the buyers or sellers from or to
English Subjects.
The Charge for Pilotage in Siam is trilling: 24
Ticals for a Ship and 16 for a Brig and with
respect to the practice of making presents to the
Siamese. Officers, a practice which tended to conciliate
them, but the observance of which was, in some degree,
optional, the Mission found, that if the presents
made by an English Trader consisted of Muskets,
Cloths or other Articles, the Market prices of which


were well known, lie had a chance of receiving from
the King and Phra Khlang a fair return for them,
but if they consisted of watches, clocks or expensive
toys, a return of one quarter of their value only was
made. The presents were generally referred to Phya
Chula and his Son Radsithi to be appraised, and this
duty they performed so unfairly, as to induce the
Phra Khlang himself sometimes to double the price
fixed by them. There was a convenience however in
this system of presents, a convenience which our
merchants may perhaps still enjoy at Bangkok.
Whenever a European merchant possessed some com-
modity for which he could find no sale, and to re-export
which might not lie desirable, he tendered it as a
present to the King, Wangna or Phra Khlang. from
whom he was certain of receiving some return that
would at least prevent the merchant from suffering
a total loss.
By entering into a calculation of the Amount that
vessels of the breadth cited in the above list will now
have to pay, and comparing it with the several sums
they before actually paid, it will be seen, that with one
exception ( the loss on the presents made by the Com-
mander of which vessel is not known ) the new
arrangement possesses the advantage, not only of
fixing and regulating, but of reducing - the rate of
impost.
Ticals.
Phoenix paid 1 1 *245 would now have to pay 6800 at 1700
Per fathom
Marianna Do. 0913 Do. Do. 5950 @ Ditto.
Shannon exclusive of presents 8820 Do. 0900 @ Ditto.
Caroline Ist time Do. 10157 Do. Do. 7650 @ Ditto.
Caroline 2nd time Do. 12457 Do. Do. 7650 @ Ditto.
Siren (Ditto) 4840 Do. Do. 5250 @l5OO
Per fathom
Liverpool Packet Do. 11164 Do. Do. 6750 @ Ditto.
Hunter (Ditto) 8688 Do. Do. 6800 @l7OO
Per fathom


The greatest reduction, it appears, will take place
in the large class of vessels, but against them another
expence and disadvantage must be set down. The bar
at the mouth of the Menam obliges them to communir
cate with Bangkok, for the most part, by means of
Junks, the usual hire of which is about 24 Ticals Per
100 Piculs.
The Siamese Government have no idea of what is
called “ a free and unrestricted trade,” and an article
of a treaty with these words only, and without arrang-
ing* and fixing the Minutest details of Pox*t regulations
and rates of duties and charges, would have been a
dead letter. The Ministers also were so immediately
interested in their system of conducting foreign trade,
that any argument as to a less restricted trade proving
a mutual benefit to both nations, would have been en-
tirely lost upon them.
Independent of the jealousy and mistrust which
the Siamese entertain towards Europeans, the Siamese
Officers have discovered from Messrs. Hunter and
Malloch, who have resided at Bangkok for nearly two
years, that if European merchants are allowed to re-
main in Siam they will acquire too great an insight
into Siamese Mal-practices, and save other foreign
merchants that may visit Bangkok, from extortion and
imposition. The Siamese negotiators took great care
in drafting the 7th Article of the treaty, to reserve to
themselves the right and power of refusing the pri-
vilege of residence in Siam to British subjects.
The Mission had great difficulty, before it per-
suaded the Siamese Ministers to include Surat Mer-
chants and the Asiatic subjects of the British Govern-
ment, in the benefits conceded to commerce by the
treaty. Nothing can be more iniquitous than the
conduct of the Siamese towards the Surat Vessels.
The Phra Khlang and his Officers fix the price of :
every art icle of merchandize brought by those vessels,
and take and distribute among themselves, whatever |


* Note.
The following is a list of
the duties and Charges now
levied at Bangkok upon a
Junk of 4 Siamese fathoms
in breadth trading with the
Port of Canton and our Settle-
ments in the Straits of Malac-
ca.
Fresents .... 400
Measurement Duty . 1 20
Port Clearance . • 4CO
Phya of Paknam’s fee . 6
Oil For Do. ... 6
Additional measurement duty
of I Tical for every thumb’s
portion of the Cargo they please for the purpose of re-
tailing the same afterwards at a profit to themselves,
in additition to the usual Port charges and Import and
Export duties.
The trade of native dunks lietween Siam and
Penang and Singapore is conducted by private Chinese
Merchants at Bangkok ; and it is one to which the
Court of Siam is as yet indifferent, as a proof of which,
we may state that during the whole of the negotiations
of the late Mission, no attempt was ever made to
obtain any reciprocal advantage for that trade, or to
secure a pledge even that the present very moderate
duties and Anchorage Charges levied upon it at our
ports should lie continued. Indeed, in the midst of
the Envoy’s negotiations the Siamese ministers received
intelligence before him of the Penang Government
having on the Ist of January 182(1 replaced at that
Settlement all the Import Duties on the Produce of
Siam, the collection of which duties a former Govern-
ment had suspended, for the purpose of encouraging
the trade with Siam. These duties, however have
again been remitted by orders from the Rouble, the
Court of Directors. This indifference on the part of
the Court of Siam, an indifference under which the
trade lias increased and prospered, lias begun to
change and during the last two years many new
duties have been imposed upon the Chinese Junks
trading between Bangkok and the Straits
is a nst of Malacca.* So much have these
Charges now . .
kok upon a additional duties been increasing, that
is© fathoms |) ie Chinese traders before the departure
nq witH the . . .
d our Settle- of the Mission from Bangkok, petitioned
iitsof Maiac- t j ie Court to place their commerce upon
4.00 a fixed and more moderate system <>f
ty • 120 duties, in the same advantageous manner
4CO
fee ' 6 as the English had secured by treaty.
6 There is however no security for the
ii'cmentduty ■.lo’ 1
thumb’s continuance of the trade with Siam b\


breadth that may be in the
Junks measurement. There
arc 12 thumb’s breadths In a
span, 2 spans to a Cubit and 4
cubits to a Siamese fathom.
384 Kha Sinla or Charge to
meet the Expence of the
Stones used in fortifying the
Mouth of the Menam .... 120
Total Ticals 1536
y be in the native Junks, and at any rate it must
lent. There . ,■ . . , .
readths m a not be forgotten, that whilst our ships
i cubit and 4 can navigate at all seasons, those vessels
iese fathom. , , , .
r Charge to make but one voyage during the year.
ice of the Messrs. Hunter and Mai loch have lately
fy . m9 *2O been withdrawn from Bangkok by the
i ricais 1536 Firm with they are connected, and which
has at the same time withdrawn its Agents from
Penang, and other places. But those gentlemen are
decidedly of opinion, that much benefit may he derived
from the trade of Siam by making occasional visits
at Bangkok, and that such a course is advantageous
no proof can be more striking than that afforded
by the Surat traders, who notwithstanding all the
exactions and vexations of the present system, still
send a vessel annually to Siam. The Mission witnessed
the distress and extortion experienced by the Naklmda
of a Surat vessel in December 1825, and was much
surprised indeed to find him go again last year,
to pass through the same sufferings. Merchants
will of course judge for themselves as to the best
mode of trading with Siam, and the provisions
of the present treaty will at least supply them
with better data than they have hitherto pos-
sessed, for estimating the probable amount of
imposts to be levied at Bangkok upon their consign-
ments. That the present treaty will at once change
a system which has existed for centuries no one can
presume to hope. Most probably, wherever the
Kuropean merchant interferes with the speculations of
the Phra Khlang and his Officers who are unhappily
all traders, their influence will still be secretly and
powerfully employed against him. But as the present
Treaty was negotiated on terms of equality by the re-
presentations of the two nations, as it was not dictated
to the Siamese, as it was discussed and originally writ-
ten in their own tongue, and above all, as it is the
manifest interest and advantage of Siam to keep d>
there are many grounds for hoping that its provisions


will be generally respected and maintained by that
[ State ]. Whilst discussing the several articles of the
Treaty repeated attempts were made to inscribe the
different obligations in a more compressed form, to de-
clare at once that “ neither the Siamese nor the Eng-
lish shall intrude ’’ &ca. But the Siamese Ministers
objected decidedly to such a construction of the sen-
tences, stating that it would be contrary to the Siamese
Customs, and that it could not possibly render the
meaning of each article so clear and precise, as it would
be by putting down separately what each party en-
gaged. It was also indispensable that the version of
the Treaty into the English language should be made
as literal as possible, because it was well known that
the translation would undergo much examination at
Bangkok, and any omission or reduction of the sen-
tences in the original, which is a language verbose and
full of repetitions, would have been imputed by that
jealous Court to some evil intention that would have
tended to destroy the whole value of the Treaty. Some
of the Mission had acquired a tolerable knowledge of
the Siamese language, and had procured Dictionaries
and Grammars of it from those Native Christians who
understand Latin. We beg to add the following ex-
planations respecting some of the stipulations of the
Treaty. Captain Hiram Cox’s remark with respect to
t he Burmese is equally applicable to the Siamese. It
“ is a farce to talk of Treaties with this people in the
“ present state of their information for their ignorance
“ of their real interests is only to be equalled by their
“ pride and presumption, and unless L can open their
“ eves to their own interests in the tirst instance, and
“ impress them with a respectful awe of the English
“ power in the Second, my remaining, here ( Capital
“ of Ava ) will only expose the British Character to
“degradation, and subject my employers to unneces-
“ saw expense,"
The late war with Ava and the extensive scale iu
which it was conducted did certainly excite in the


minds of the Siamese Ministers a very high idea of the
magnitude of our resources, and impress them with a
respect, which they had never before felt for the charac-
ter of the British Government. The numerous discus-
sions also, which those Ministers had with the late
Mission, respecting the King of Qaeda and the petty
States on the Peninsula of Malacca, satisfied them, that
their own interests were concerned in offering some
concessions to the British Government, in order to
draw from it in return, a pledge of its moderation and
forbearance, and an assurance of its future peaceable
intentions. But should circumstances at any time
impose upon us the necessity of resenting any violation
on the part of the Siamese Government of the articles
of this treaty, there would not be the smallest necessity
for undertaking any extensive or expensive Military
preparations. Two or three small Cruizers, as pointed
out by Mr. Oawfurd, stationed at the Sichang Islands,
which possess a convenient harbour in sight of the
Mouth of the Menam River, could blockade that River,
intercept the whole foreign commerce of the country,
and enable us. in a very few months, to dictate our
own terms to the Court of Siam. This end might be
even more expeditiously attained, were the Com-
manders of the Cruizers to send up a communication
to Bangkok, stating their intentions of proceeding
to attack the City. The Siamese Government and
people are so well aware of the inadequacy of their
forts to prevent the execution of such a threat,
that a very few hours would bring an answer from
them, offering satisfaction for all our demands. 1"
the infancy of the British power in India, one or two
vessels from Madras appear to have been capable
of intimidating the King of Siam into conditions.
The King of Siam’s titles are not more absurd
than those of His Majesty of Persia “ whose saddle id
the Moon and whose stirrup is the new Moon, as
recited in the preamble to Sir John Malcolm’s Treat}
with that Monarch. Very few of the Siamese them


solves comprehend the meaning of the bald title?
of the King and Wangna, but every enquiry was made
of the most intelligent officers of the Court, accord-
ing to whose explanation the phrases at the head of
the Treaty were rendered into English,
The first part of the Ist Article of the Treaty is
not more particular than some of the old Treaties
between England and Spain and Portugal. To the
latter part an objection may be made, that it does not
specify the Countries to be considered subject to the
.Siamese, but the difference of opinion between the
Envoy and the Siamese negotiators, respecting the
subjection of the Malay States of [ ? to] Siam led to such
terms being here used, an might prevent that question
from being decided either way.
The 2nd, Article of the Treaty was believed to he
intended by the Siamese Negotiators as a security
against the Government of Prince of Wales Island
attacking the Rajah of Ligor at Qucda, and the
concluding clause, which would not have been neces-
sary with any state acquainted with the principles
of international law was added for the purpose of
preventing the occurrence of another such cause of
offence, as His Highness’s equipments had given to
that Government in 1825.
The 3rd, Article of the Treaty will, it is hoped,
sufficiently provide for the settlement of any disputes
which may arise respecting the boundaries of our late
conquests on the Coast of Tenasserim. But the great
extent of uninhabited mountain and forest between
that territory and the Siamese dominions, must pre-
clude all chance of such disputes for many years.
The 4th, Article of the Treaty is decidedly in our
favor, as more Siamese Subjects are likely to tly to
us, than British Subjects to seek protection in Siam,
The Siamese Laws make little or no difference
between Civil Offenders and Criminals, and an


article, engaging the mutual restitution of criminals,
would only have led to perplexing applications' tor
any slave that might have escaped into our territories,
or for any other person who happened to have offended
a Siamese Chief before joining us.
The Siamese Negotiators could not be persuaded
to make their part of the engagement in the oth
Article of the Treaty, nor the 9th Article, more clear
and definite, by specifying at once the particular
ports which they would not allow British Vessels to
visit. It was evident that the Siamese Government
desired to reserve to itself the power of preventing
British vessels from entering Chantaboon and other
ports, which they have not been accustomed to
visit, and indeed, it appears to be the object and policy
of Siam, in the same manner as with many other
States, to make the Capital an entrepot tor the whole
commerce of the country, and to discourage foreign
vessels from proceeding to the principal ports, or direct
to the places of growth, for their cargoes. The Siamese
Law of Debtor and Creditor gives the latter a right to
go himself and seize the former and imprison him or
any of his family, until the debt be discharged. If
however, the Creditor, when employed in apprehending
the debtor, strike him or any of his family, the debt
is immediately cancelled. Hitherto, whenever an
Lnglish trader complained to the Phra Khlang against
any person in his debt, he was asked why he had
trusted the party, and told to go himself and imprison
him. The Mission saw an instance of Messrs. Hunter
and Malloch detaining the person of a Prince for debt.
This system was, of course, liable to many objections,
and particularly as an attempt to seize a debtor might
often be the cause of a serious affray between the
foreign trader and the inhabitants of Bangkok. The
rules detailed in the Oth Article of the Treaty were
therefore substituted. The concluding expression, “it
will be the merchants own fault,” refers to the circum-
stance ot foreign traders demanding satisfaction from


1 lie King, for losses or irrecoverable debts, and as long
as the officers of the Phra Khlang’s Department pointed
out the persons to whom only the foreign trader could
dispose of bis goods, he had a right to look to the
Cfovernment for any losses that he might sustain by the
insolvency or misconduct of such persons. But the
proposed new regulations, as they allow the foreign
trader to buy and sell freely without the intervention
of the Phra Khlang’s Department will of course render
it incumbent upon himself, to take care with whom he
may deal. The Mission would recommend British
traders to give no credit, or at least very sparingly and
cautiously, as the Siamese are wholly ignorant of that
great mercantile virtue punctuality, and are besides
always very averse to part with money once come into
their possession.
The prohibition against the introduction of opium
into the dominions of Siam is of very ancient date,
although in some reigns it was not so rigidly main-
tained as it has been during the last five or six years.
'Turpin says in his History of Siam, vol. 2nd., page
262 that opium in Siam was positively contraband
and that the reigning king in 1771, had sentenced to
death several of his subjects, who had transgressed this
Law. The penalty of late years has been forfeiture
oP the opium with a fine of eight times the weight in
in silver, for all opium found with any person, and
sometimes, particularly at Queda, and in the Southern
Provinces of Siam, the boat and the whole of the
rest of the Cargo or property of a party discovered
introducing opium, have been seized and confiscated.
The clause in the 10th Article was intended at the
same time that the Siamese Ministers prohibited the
introduction of opium to fix the penalty of disobedience,
and on as low a scale as possible. Although the Mis-
sion learnt that opium could be easily introduced and
sold at Bangkok, it cannot recommend any British
trader to subject himself to the risk and personal
inconvenience of conveying such a commodity there.


The Siamese Ministers had been in the practice-
of opening all English letters that came into their
possession, and some dispatches of the Envoy were
so treated. Strong representations were made cf
the disgrace and heinousness of such a practice, and
the terms of the 11th Article are as far as the
Siamese Ministers could be persuaded to acquiesce
in this point. They took care to reserve to themselves
the power of still opening the letters of all Asiatic
Subjects of the British Government, on the plea that
the subjects of Ava might endeavour to transmit
incendiary letters into Siam through our territories
on the Coast of Tenasserim. The concluding clause
of the 13th Article was introduced, in consequence
of a small fee having once been charged to all
natives quitting Prince of M ales Island, which fee
does not now exist. The Original Siamese in the tenth
as well as in the 13th Article mentions that Ahek and
<• Cheen” or Chinese only shall be allowed to travel
into the interior of the Siamese territories, from our
possessions on the Coast of Tenasserim and to the East-
ward. “ Khek ” is literally a foreigner, but it is a
term generally applied to Malays and Natives of Hind
dostan ,* who are not descendants of Europeans. Ihe
Burmese are called “ Fhama A the Peguers “M< n,”
the Chinese “ Cheen ” Ch> k, and Europeans generally
“ Parana '' distinguishing the English by Anyktit,
the Portugue/e “ Fcrtukis ” and the Dutch “ Rotunda
The Americans are Merican, and all native Christians
are termed “ For uhis.” “ Khfk ” and “ Cheen "of the
original have therefore been translated into “ Asiatic
Subjects ” of the British Government not being Bur-
mese, Peguers or descendants of Europeans. ihe
Siamese Negotiators declared that the standing Eav»
of Siam, prohibiting Burmese or Peguers being ad-
mitted into the Siamese territories could not, for the
present, be altered, and that as a great portion of the
Burmau Country still belongs to Ava, the inhabitants
of which might try to gain admission into Siam with


our Burmese Subjects, or under pretence of being - such,
it was necessary that no person should be admitted
into the Siamese dominions from our Burmese con-
quests without being furnished with certificates or
passports.
The Siamese Negotiators also could not be pre-
vailed upon to admit Europeans or descendants of
Europeans into the interior of the Siamese dominions.
They have an idea, that the object of such persons
visiting the interior would be only to ascertain routes,
and make maps for purposes of future hostility, and
the Mission found it impossible to prevent or remove
this jealousy and suspicion. But after all the overland
trade between our possessions and the Siamese
dominions will be conducted, as it has always been,
only by Chinese, Malays and Natives of the Coast of
Coromandel, in the hands of which last mentioned
race, the ancient commerce between Mergui and Siam
was so extensive and flourishing. All British Subjects,
without exception, may of course proceed by Sea to
any Siamese port. The Siamese Government like
many others reserves to itself the power of prohibiting
the exportation of Grain and importation of firearms.
By the present I jaws of Siam, no Vessel can export-
paddy or rice without a Special license, and the
Siamese Negotiators, although they expressed their
readiness, in seasons of plenty, to permit British as
well as Chinese Traders to export supplies of grain,
still desired that the clause in the Ist Art icle of the
Commercial Agreement should be expressed as.it is, in
order to prevent British Vessels from coming to Siam
for the sole purpose of trading in grain, or from
claiming a right to export it. A Siamese fathom
measures 6 feet 6 inches of English measure, and a
Siamese Tical, as assayed lately at the Calcutta Mint
is worth One Sicca Rupee and about three annas and
a half. The Sicca Rupee is not current in Siam, but
the Spanish Dollar is very readily received by the
public officers, who have allowed sometimes the


Commanders of American Vessels to disburse their
Port Charges at the rate of 8 Selung* or 2 Tien h
Per Dollar, instead of at the usual Market Rate of
Selungs.
Every Government has of course a right to define
the terms upon which it will admit vessels into its
ports, and particularly as far as its capital. The
Siamese Government is extremely anxious to prevent
any vessel crossing the bar, until full information
be received at the capital of her size, character and
object, and few matters can give so much discontent
and dissatisfaction to the Siamese officers, as a Vessel
crossing the bar at once, and reporting her own
arrival at Paknam. The navigation over the bar is
not very difficult, and the Commander of the American
Ship, Liverpool Packet, found a Chinese fisherman to
engage to pilot his vessel over it. This man was im-
mediately after seized, and he has not been since heard
of. It is therefore particularly recommended to com-
manders of English Vessels who do not desire to be
subjected to inconvenience or difficulty in their future
commercial transactions at Bangkok, to conform as
strictly a possible, in the first instance, to the Port-
Regulations set down in the Commercial Agreement,
which are no more than what have always been in
force.
The custom, by which a vessel is obliged to land
her Guns at the Mouth of the River, must have been
introduced at the time the French Detachments were
driven out of Siam. M. Chaumont mentions having
been saluted by the Guns of English and Dutch vessels
lying above Bangkok, and of vessels at anchor off the
old City of Yothia having fired salutes in celebration
of the coronation of the Kings of England and Por-
tugal. La Lou here makes no mention of the custom.
The vessel in which Kempfer went to Siam does
not appear to have entered the River. But Captain
Hamilton, who visited Siam in 1719, mentions his


having been obliged to land and deposit his guns
at Bangkok, before his vessel proceeded to the old
capital Yothia. This regulation is enforced by the
Siamese, not only as a measure of precaution and safe-
ty, but as a security against a Commander leaving the
port with any of the inhabitants of Siam, or without-
discharging the whole of his Port Charges and duties.
It was tried without success to have this regulation
limited to the delivery at Paknam of all Powder on board
of British Vessels. Any urgent attempts to have the
Guns left on board during the state of distrust in which
the Mission found the Court respecting the views and
intentions of the British Government, would have been
of no avail, and would have served only to augment
the suspicion and fears of the Siamese, The Siamese
officers measure vessels inside between decks at what
they consider, often erroneously, to be the broadest
part. The space between the lining and outer plank of
the vessel is included, and if the measure cannot be
introduced there, an allowance is made for it. The
concluding clause in the 4th Article of the Commercial
Agreement refers to the fees recently levied of
and sometimes Ticals, upon every Junk hired for
the purposes of conveying the residue of a Cargo to a
Vessel that had been obliged to cross the bar before
her lading was completed. One of the greatest
difficulties experienced at Bangkok is the tedious and
procrastinating manner in which the Siamese conduct
business. They have no idea whatever of the value of
time and in no part of the world are the delays of
office more vexatious. This point was urgently
pressed on the notice of the Siamese Ministers by the
Mission, and one part of the sth Article of the
Commercial Agi’eement was intended to remind the
Phra Khlang of the inconvenience of keeping a
Commander of a British vessel waiting two or three
days for his Port Clearance.
The 6th Article of the Commercial Agreement
gave the Mission a great deal of trouble. The Siamese


Ministers first proposed to render all British Subjects,
without exception, liable to capital punishment and
whipping, for the commission of any offences with
respect to which the Laws of Siam have prescribed
such punishment. The Mission pointed out that
British Subjects are entirely ignorant of the Laws of
Siam, and possess no means of acquiring a knowledge
of them, that it would be much better to express in
this Article for what offences they should suffer death,
and that it was not our custom to whip the Comman-
ders of Ships, their officers or Merchants, but to
punish them by levying a pecuniary fine upon them.
The Ministers after some Argument, agreed to render
this Article more precise as to some of the penalties to
which British Subjects should be liable, but they then
declared that it did not provide for one offence which
in the ej'es of a Siamese is of much greater magnitude
than even murder, speaking disrespectfully of His
Majesty the King of Siam, a crime which is invariably
punished with death. The Mission observed, that it
did not possess the power of engaging that British
Subjects should be liable to capital punishment for
.such an offence, and that it was improper to suppose
for a moment, that any person should speak disrespect-
fully of so great and enlightened a Prince as the pre-
sent Monarch of Siam. After much discussion, this
difficulty was overcome, and it was finally settled that
the Right Honble. the Governor General should par-
ticularly caution British subjects visiting Siam, not to
show disrespect in any manner to the officers of Siam.
The Mission is obliged to acknowledge that British
subjects, who have hitherto visited Bangkok, have
found it extremely difficult to restrain the expression
of their opinions respecting the conduct and character
of the officers and people of Siam. Yet moderation
and forbearance on the part of a British Trader,
desirous of making a profitable adventure to Bangkok,
are indispensable, for the Siamese officers are vexed
and hurt by contemptuous and intemperate language


in t he same proportion as their conduct is ever provok-
ing it. We beg to refer here to the account given by
Captain Hamilton in 1720. of his narrow escape from
forfeiture of life, and of the whole of his vessel and
property, upon a charge of having only said, that
“the King of Siam had been imposed upon” as ex-
pression which was declared to be high treason.
( Signed ) H. BURNEY—Captain
Envoy to Siam.




Statement respecting Captain Burners
Mission to Siam
in 1825.




CONTENTS.
Origin and object of Mission to Siam
Captn. Burney appointed Envoy, Capt. Macfarquhar Asst,
Mr. Harris Surgeon
Instructions to (’apt. Burney
His arrival at P, W. Island—prevails on the Hajah of
Ligore to leave his quarrel with the Chief of Salengore
to mediation of Governor of P. W. Island
Arrival of the Mission at Bangkok and Treaty concluded
Release of Prisoners carried off from the Tenasserim Coast
Remarks on duties &&. formerly required from British
traders
Abstract of the Treaty with Capt, Burney’s Remarks
High sense of our resources entertained by the Siamese
Conduct of Capt, Burney in the Mission highly approved
■Observations as to the Ex-King of Quedah
Respecting future extension of British protection to the
States of Calantan and Tringano
Capt. Low considered to have exceeded his powers in
Perak—As to the Rajah discontinuing his connection
with the Siamese
The 14th Article of the Treaty prevents the Subjugation
of Salengore by the Siamese
Capt. Blarney appointed to the charge of the Southern
Provinces on the Tenasserim Coast—his allowances and
instructions
Gratification expressed to Siamese Minister at Capt,
Burney’s reception
Gapt. Burney recommended as Consul for Rangoon


MISSION TO SIAM,
Jn the Spring of the Year 1825, the Sup-erne
Government resolved to depute a Mission to the Court
of Siam. At that period of time detachments ot
Siamese troops were in the immediate vicinity ot
Martaban, Tavoy and Mergui, whilst the British
Garrisons of those places were of too reduced a strength
to afford protection to the Burmese inhabitants in the
interior, large parties of whom had been seized and
forcibly carried away by the Siamese.
In order to prevent any collision and embarrass-
ment from such a state of things, and referring par-
ticularly to the character of the Siamese, a race so
jealous and wholly ignorant of the principles of inter-
national law, near whose possessions the war against
Ava had suddenly brought our troops, it was judged
advisable to communicate to the Siamese Court in a
public and conciliatory manner, some knowledge of
our ulterior views ; and the accession of a new King
to the throne of Siam was considered to furnish a good
ostensible object for sending an Envoy to compliment
His Majesty.
The person selected as Envoy was Captain Henry
Burney, of the Bengal Military Establishment. Captn.
H. Macfarquhar was appointed Assistant to the Envoy,
and to command the Escort, and Mr. Harris to act as
Surgeon to the Mission,
The Supreme Government did not consider Siam-
ese co-operation in the Burmese war, as in any way
important or desirable, and the Envoy was directed
not to include an application for such aid in his
negotiations, further than a supply of draft and car-
riage cattle. The Envoy was to assure the King of
Siam of the desire of the Governor General to cultivate
a good understanding with the Court of Siam, and to
afford the fullest explanation on any points connected


with the Burmese War; and further to keep the Court
of Siam well informed of the progress of the War, and
to persuade it to release all inhabitants who
have been carried away by the Siamese Officers from
the Tenasserim Coast since it fell into our possession.
At the same time the Envoy was empowered to com-
bine with the above objects an endeavour to effect an
improvement in our commercial relations with Siam ;
and the restoration of the King of Queda to the ter-
ritories from which he had been expelled by the
Siamese Chief of Ligore.
The Envoy left Calcutta in the Month of May
1825, and upon his arrival at Prince of Wales Island
found the native inhabitants there in the greatest
state of alarm, at some extensive equipments that the
Rajah of Ligore had collected at Queda for the osten-
sible purpose of preceding to occupy the Malay State
of Perak (which had been brought under Siamese
dominion in the year 1818 ) and to attack the Chief
of Salengore.
Under the sanction and instructions of the Gover-
nor of Prince of Wales island, the Envoy visited the
Rajah of Ligore at Queda, and on the 81 July 1825
prevailed upon him to enter into a Treaty, agreeing to
dismiss his armament; and to leave his quarrel with
the Chief of Salengore to the mediation of the Gover-
nor. of Prince of Wales Island, lie engaged not to
send any force by land or water to the southward of
Penang, and he promised to accompany the Envoy to
the Court of Siam.
The Mission sailed from Prince of Wales island,
on board the Brig Guardian, Captn. G Sutherland, on
the 25th September 1825, and, after touching at Malac-
ca and Singapore, arrived at Tringano on the 17th
October and at Ligore on the 28th. The Raja of
Ligore, owing to the illness of his youngest and
favourite son, declined proceeding any farther by
water; but consented to allow Mr. Harris (Surgeon to


the Mission ) and Mr. Leal, the Interpreter, to aceom-
panv him by land to the Siamese Capital ; and sent
forward in the Mis'sion ship one of his sous, a Commis-
sioner from Bangkok, and 17 ot their followers.
The Mission left Li gore on the Bth and anchored
off the Village of Paknam at the Month of the Menam
river on the 28th November 1825. After some delay,
against which the Envoy remonstrated, the Mission
was received with due honor at Bangkok on the 4th
December.
On the 16th December 1825, the points of
etiquette having been adjusted, the Mission was
introduced with great ceremony to the King. Ample
provision was made for the accommodation of the
Mission during its stay at Bangkok.
The Envoy obtained an audience of leave on the
17th July 1826, and from the Wangna, or, as he is
styled by the native Christians of Bangkok, the second
King, on the 18th on the night of which day the
Mission quitted Bangkok, charged with a Treaty of
Friendship and Commerce, which the Envoy had
negotiated with the Ministers, and with a reply from
the King himself to the Letter from the Governor
General.
On Ids arrival at the Court of Siam the Envoy
found that the wildest and most improbable reports
respecting the hostile intentions of the British Govern-
ment had been disseminated by Peguers, Chinese and
Malays. By patience and good humoured expostulation
the Envoy succeeded in removing, in some degree the
distrust and jealousy which these reports had excited in
the minds of t he Siamese Ministers, who permitted him
to establish communications with the British Officers
at Tavoy and Martaban, by which means the Siamese
Court was kept more correctly informed of the pro-
gress of the war in Ava, while at the same time the
British authorities in Pegu and Ava were fully apprized


of the views, disposition and ability of the Siamese
Government to afford our Army any kind of facilities.
Having found the Foreign Minister, with whom
the negotiations were in the first instance conducted,
unfriendly to the Mission, and indisposed to repeat to
his colleagues, the verbal representations which were
made to him, the Knvoy succeeded in opening a com-
munication ill writing with the Siamese l) rivy Council,
and prevailed upon them to allow him to attend their
meetings, and to discuss and settle at repeated con-
ferences with the whole of them, the several objects of
his Mission.
Captain Burney’s efforts were primarily and
successfully exerted in behalf of the unfortunate
individuals who had been seized and carried off from
the Coast of Tenasserirn. They had been reduced to
slavery, and distributed among the different Ministers
and officers whose personal interests were therefore
strongly opposed to the measure of releasing them.
A small daily allowance of Paddy, without any
clothing or habitation was all that the poor captives
received for the most servile and laborious occupations.
Many of them had died from the effects of fatigue and
hard usage. Of the survivors, upwards of 1400 Men,
Women and Children were, through Captain Burney’s
instrumentality, rescued from a most intolerable
slavery, and restored to their homes.
Upon the accession to the throne of the present
King, he declared that he was determined not to be a
King-Merchant. He accordingly abolished many of
the Monopolies held by his predecessor: but the
circumstance of the revenues being to a great extent
paid in kind obliges the Government to dispose of
goods b} T sale. '
British traders were subject to two great evils ;
Ist the claims of pre-emption exercised by the Siamese
Officers who fixed very low prices upon articles im


f>orted ; 2d. The uncertainty as to the duties and
charges to which they were liable. The first mention-
ed evil is remedied b} 7 a clause in the 6th article which
provides that all merchants shall be allowed to buy
and sell without the intervention of other persons.
This privilege is more fully conveyed by the Ist Article
of the Commercial Agreement.
2d. With respect to duties and charges. Captn.
Burney, upon the authority of Captn. Hamilton’s
Account of the East Indies ( published in 1727 ) attri-
butes their high amount to a commercial arrangement
made by a Mr. Collet, Governor of Port St. George
who, in the \ , ear 1718,* persuaded the Siamese
t Government to impose those duties and charges upon ail
t British subjects, who were not employed by him.
Upon the same authority, Captn. Burney says, that,
in the year 1684, the Siamese Envoys, who were sent
to Prance, visited London, and concluded a Commercial
Treaty, which was annulled by Mr. Collet’s Agent in
1718. No notice or Copy of the supposed Treaty of
1684 appears to exist among the records of the East
India Company; nor can it be found at the State Paper
Office*
A large portion of the exorbitant charges levied
t upon trade went into the pockets of the Prah Klang
( Eoreign Minister) and his officers. The consolida-
tion of all these uncertain demands into one charge,
proportioned to the breadth of the vessel, will not only
be a great saving of trouble, but an abatement of the
amount which has been heretofore paid under various
heads by our traders.
The pract ice of making presents to the Siamese
Officers will probably be continued ; but as a return is
always made, a merchant who can find no sale for his
goods may obtain something in exchange by tendering
them as presents to the King or his Ministers.
The Siamese Government have no idea of what is
called '• a free and unrestricted trade.” They took ;;


great care to reserve to themselves ( Art : 7 ) the right
ami power of refusing the privilege of residence in
Siam to British subjects. The Envoy found great
■difficulty in persuading the Ministers to include Surat
Merchants, and other Asiatic subjects of the British
’Government in the benefits conceded to commerce by
the Treaty.
The trade of native Junks between Siam and
Penang and Singapore, is conducted by private
Chinese Merchants who make only one voyage an-
nually. Captn. Burney is of opinion that they will
probably be superseded by British traders who can
navigate at all seasons.
“That the present Treaty ( says Captn, Burney)
will at once change a system which has existed for
Centuries, no one can presume to hope. The influence
of the Prah Klang and his officers, who are all traders,
will still be secretly employed against our Merchants ;
but as the Treaty was not dictated to the Siamese,
but discussed, and originally written in their own
tongue ; and above all, as it is the manifest interest of
Siamese to keep it, there are many grounds for hoping,
that its provisions will be generally respected and
maintained by that nation.'”
The further remarks of Captn. Burney upon the
Treaty and upon the “ Agreement with respect to
English vessels.” will be most conveniently noted
against the several articles of which the following is
an abstract.


TREATY OF AMITY and Commerce between the
English Government, and the Government of Siam,
concluded by Captain Henry Burney at Bangkok, on
the 20th June 1826 ; and ratified by Governor General
Earl Amherst at Agra the 17th January 1327, and by
the Vice President in Council at Fort William in
Bengal.
Art. 1. The Contracting parties
engage to live in friendship, love
and affection and not to molest
any place, territory or boundary
belonging to each other.
2. Should any offence be
committed by the subjects ot
either party, the case shall be
carefully and fairly investigated
and the offender punished by his
own Government. If any arma-
ments should be fitted out by
either party in the neighbour-
hood of the other’s possessions,
the object of such armament shall
be declared.
3. Questions regarding boun-
daries shall be investigated by
Commissioners to be appointed
by each of the contracting
parties.
4, Fugitives shall not be pur-
sued and seized, but must be
demanded, it will be at the
option of the party in whose
territories they have sought re-
fuge to surrender them or not.
The terms here used were ex-
pressly designed to leave open
the question respecting the sub-
jection of the Malay States to
Siam,
The Siamese Negotiator's had
in view the security of the Rajah
of Li gore against an attack from
o o
Prince of Wales Island ; and the
Envoy wished to prevent the
occurrence of another such cause
of offence as the Rajah’s equip-
ments had given that Govern-
ment, in the year 1825.
The great extent of uninhabited
mountains and forest intervening'
between our Tenasserim Provinces
and the Siamese dominions, must
preclude all chance of dispute
for many years.
Siamese Subjects are more
likely fly to us, than British sub-
jects to them. They make little
or no difference between civil and
criminal offenders.


5. British merchants and
their vessels may have inter-
course and trade with any
Siamese country which h<>* mveh
merchandize. They shall be pro-
tected and permitted to buy and
sell with facility. Ihe customs
of the place will be explained to
them by proper officers, and must
be observed. The like privilege
to be granted to Siamese Mer-
chants and vessels trading to
Biit.sh ports on tin- same con-
dition.
The •Siamese desired to reserve
the power of preventing British
(Ships from entering Chanlaboon.
and other ports which they have
not been accustomed to visit.
Their object is to make Bangkok
an entrepot for the whole com-
merce of the country. ( See also
Art. <).)
6. Merchants arc to pay the
-duties on commerce, according to
tlie customs of the place. They
shall be allowed to buy and sell
without the intervention of other
persons. The assistance of the
respective Governments shall be
afforded to enforce payment of
debts due to merchants ; but it a
merchant shall, without due en-
quiry, trust a person who has no
property, it is his own fault, and
he must bear the loss.
»• If a merchant be permitted
to take up In's residence in the
country, and to build or hire
houses, shops or warehouses, he
shall be protected from oppres*
B * ol b and allowed to depart when
ho desires so to do, and to take
h's property with him*
The Siamese law gives tire
creditor the right to seize and
imprison the debtor- or any of his
family ; but it he should strike
the party the debt is cancelled.
When British merchants could
only deal with such individuals
as the Prah Klang licensed, they
had an equitable claim upon
Government for irrecoverable
debts : but as all intervention of
Government between buyer and
seller is now done away, the
merchant must endure the Joss of
bad debts.


8„ Vessels putting into port,
for the repair of injuries sustained
at sea shall be protected. Ihe
property saved from wrecks to be
restored on payment of salvage
to the owner, or in case ot his
death to his heir. It any Siamese
or English subject die in an I ng-
lish or Siamese country, whatever
property he have shall be de-
livered to his heir. It the heir
be not living in the same coun-
try, and should be unable to
come, he may appoint a person
bv letter to receive the property ,
the whole of which shall be de-
livered to such person.
9. If an English Merchant
should resort to a Siamese port
with which it has not been the
custom to have intercourse, it
will rest with the Governor of the
place either to furnish him with
a cargo, or not, according to the
quantity of merchandize at the
place.
10. The English and Siamese
mutually agree, that there shall
be an unrestricted trade between
them in the English countries of
Prince of Wales island, Malacca
and Singapore, and the Siamese
Countries of Ligore, Mirdelong,
Singora, Patani, Juukceylou.
Queda, and other Siamese Pro-
vinces. Asiatic Merchants of the
English countries, not being
Burmese, Peguers or descendants
See remark on Art. 5,
The Siamese Negotiators could
not he prevailed upon to admit
Europeans or descendants of'
Europeans, into the interior ot
the Siamese dominions. They
have an idea that the object ot
such persons visiting the interior
would he only to ascertain routes,
and make maps for purposes of
future hostility. But after all,
the overland trade will he con-
ducted, as it has always been, by


of Europeans, will be allowed to
trade freely overland , and by
itieans of the rivers. Asiatic
merchants, as above described,
desiring’ to enter into, and trade
with the Siamese dominions from
the Countries of Mergui, Tavoy.
Tenasserim and Ye. which are
now subject to the English, will
be allowed to do so freely, over-
land, and by water, upon the
English furnishing them with
proper certificates. But mer-
chants are forbidden to bring
opium which is positively a con-
traband article in the territories
of Siam, and should a merchant
introduce any. the Governor
shall seize, burn and destroy the
whole of it.
11. Correspondence of Euro-
peans shall not be intercepted or
inspected by the Officers of
Government.
12- Siam shall not obstruct
Commerce in the States of
I'ringano and Galontan, nor shall
the English molest or disturb
those States, upon any pretence
whatever.
Chinese, Malays, and Natives of
ihe Coast of Coromandel, in the
hands of which last mentioned
racetheancient commerce between
Mergui iand Siam was extensive
and flourishing. All British
vessels may proceed by Sea to
any Siamese port.
A former King sentenced to
death several of his subjects who
had imported opium. The pen-
alty of late years has been for-
feiture of the article and a line
of 8 times its weight in silver
Captn. Burney thinks that no
British trader shotdd subject
himself to the risk and personal
inconvenience of conveying such
a commodity to Siam.
The Siamese Ministers had been
in the practice of opening all
English letters that came into
n .
their possession and some dis-
patches of the Envoy were so
treated. They still reserve the
power of opening the letters of
Asiatics on the plea that the sub-
jects of Ava might endeavour to
transmit incendiary letters into
Siai’ti through our Tenasserim
Provinces.
See observations upon Article
14.


13. The Siamese engage to
take proper care of the country
and people of Qt.edu. The in-
habitants of P. V\ . Island and
of Queda shall have tiade and
intercourse as heretofore. The
Siamese shall levy no duty upon
stock and provisions, such as
cattle, buffaloes, poultry, fish,
paddy and rice which the inhabi-
tants of P. W. Island or Ships
there may have occasion to
purchase in Queda : " And the
Siamese shall 7iot farm the
mouths of rivers, or any stream
in Queda, but shall levy fair and
proper import and export duties.
When the Rajah of Ligore re-
turns from Bangkok he shall
release the slaves, personal ser-
vants and family of the former
(lovernor of Quedav The English
engage not to attack nor disturb
Queda, nor to permit the former
(iovernor or any of his followers
to do so. They also engage to
make arrangements for the re-
sidence of the former (governor,
at Malacca or in some other
place, and not at P. \\ . Island
or Perak or Satan gore, or any
Burman Country.” Should they
fail in this particular they will
not be entitled to the benefit
of the foregoing concessions.
The English will not prevent any
Siamese, Chinese or other Asiatic
inhabitant of P. W. Island from
going to reside in Queda if they
desire it.
'Plie ex-King of Queda is the
so)i of the King who ceded Pe-
nang to Oaptn. Light in the year
1786. The ex-King, in conse-
quence of a disputed succession,
took refuge with the Siamese
(Governor of Li go re, who conveyed
him to Bangkok where he was
kindly treated, and was raised to
the Sovereignty of Queda by the
appointment of the King of Siam.
By his misgovernment he alien-
ated the affections of his people;
and by his intrigues with the
Burmese, so exasperated the
Court of Siam against him, as
entirely to defeat every effort of
the Knvoy to procure his rein-
statement in power. The Lnvoy
■■ found the object to be unattain-
able by any means short of actual
intimidation, by which it is pos-
sible that he might have gained
this, but he would have infallibly
lost every other object of his
Mission.”
C’aptn. Burney strongly recom-
mends the removal of the Kx-
King of Quedah to some situation
where he will not have the means
of exciting disturbances in Queda,
or of provoking the pride and
jealousy of the Siamese.
This was introduced in conse-
quence of a small fee having been
charged to all Natives quitting
P. W. Island, which fee has since
been abolished.


14. The Siamese and Enedish
o
mutually engage not to interfere
in the Government of Perak.
The English shall not dissuade
the Chief from sending to Siam
the Gold and Silver* flowers
(Boonga Mas den Perak) as
heretofore ; nor shall they prevent
an amicable intercourse from
being carried on between Li gore
and Perak.
The English will not allow the
State of Sal'ingore to attack or
disturb Perak: and the Siamese
shall not go and attack or disturb
Salangore.
* NOTE. These sort of offer-
ings apear to have been common
in other Asiatic countries, in an-
cient times.
With reference generally to the
Malay States, Captn. Burney up-
on the authority of historical
works, observes, that they were
anciently under the dominion of
the Siamese; and that although
the Malay Chiefs had profited by
the occassional weakness of the
Siamese Government to set up
an independence, it has been
but of short duration. “ There
is little chance now ( he adds ) of
the Supremacy of Siam being
disputed.” The triennial offering
of gold and silver flowers occasions
an expense of about 1000 Dollars,
which, however, is overpaid by
the presents given in return by
the Court of Siam. But the ob-
ligation which this token of sub-
jection involves, is undefined and
regulated only by the wants or
caprice of the paramount state,
in requisitions for troops, Guns,
boats, or provisions.
Siam, however, does not ap-
pear to have divested the Malay
States of the rights of sovereign-
ty, as, with the exception of Pa-
tan i, the inhabitants are a mixed
race of Siamese and Malays ; she
has suffered their Governments,
laws, customs and religion, which
are widely different from her own,
to subsist entire.
Johore and Pahang have long
broken off their connection with
Siam, but Tring an ois under the
Siamese Governor of Singora,


and <\>l ntan under the Rajah of Li gore, through
which Chiefs they respectively transmit to Siam the
triennial token of submission. The Envoy conceived
i fiat the preservation of British intercourse with
Tringano and Calautan, was the only ground upon
which it could ever be the policy of the British Gov-
ernment to interfere in their favour, and he therefore
persuaded the Siamese Ministers to agree to the stipu-
lation contained in Article 12.
The present state of Salting or ft is a recent estab-
lishment by a colony of Bugis from Rhio, and the
Siamese advance no claims of supremacy over it. The
GovernmentofSalangore, however, is unquiet. In 1770 it
attacked Queda; in I 78# Malacca ; in 180G it took pos-
session of Perak, and again in 1822 it drove out a
party of Siamese which had been established at Perak.
The last measure ( says Capt. Burney) was perhaps
justifiable, as Salangore had a strong interest in pre-
venting the approach to its immediate vicinity of a
conquering and formidable power like the Siamese.
But the Chief of Salangore established a nephew at
the mouth of the Perak river, to control the Govern-
ment and trade of that State : and against this proceed-
ing the Chief of Perak appealed to the Rajah of I a gore,
and deputed last year a Mission to His Highness
consisting of some of the principal nobles of Perak.
The preparations which the Rajah of Li gore then made
were designed for the purpose of driving out the .
Salangore party from Perak, and of attacking Salangore
in retaliation for the conduct of its Chief tc the Siamese
at Perak ; and the 'Treaty which ('aptn. Burney conclud-
ed on the 81st duly 1.825 with His Highness of Li gore
eno-aged the Rajah not to send any armament to Perak
or Salangore. upon condition that the Government «>t |
P. \V. Gland would remove the Salangore party from
Perak, and prevent 1 Salangore from interfering m
future with that State. These objects were then
accomplished by the Penang Government, under an ■>


•engagement: concluded with tlie Chief of Salangore,
i'ukl a part of the 11th Article of the Treaty with
Siam, secures, on the same terms, the safety of
Salangore from Siamese encroachments.
The interference of the Siamese in the affairs of
Perak, was invited by a party hostile to the Rajah
on account of his misgovernment, If, Jiowever, says
Oapt. Burney, the Penang Government offer pro-
tection to Perak against Salangore, there is no doubt,
that the majority of the Perak Chiefs, and particularly
the reigning Rajah, will l»e, happy to discontinue
all further connexion with the Siamese. The return
of the Siamese to Perak will again produce a quarrel
between that State and Salangore, the inevitable
consequence of which will be to destroy the trade and
intercourse subsisting between those States, and
Penang and Malacca, ft is evidently, therefore, the
interest of the British Government to maintain the
future independence of Perak, for which the Ift h
Article of the Treaty with Siam stipulates, and to
prevent the Siamese from coming in contact with
Salangore. As there is no good overland route from
the Siamese territories to Perak, and Salangore, and as
their principal communication has always been by
water, the Penang Government, from its situation,
will have no difficulty in seeing the provisions of the
treaty with reference to these two States fully respect-
ed and adhered to by the Siamese.
An Agent was sent to Perak by the Penang
'Government, after the return of the Mission from Siam.
Upon the proceedings of that Officer, Capt n. Burney
makes the following observations : — u The engagement
binding the Chief of Perak: not to hold any intercourse
with or receive Rnvoys from the Siamese ; the issuing
•of Reclamations' against them; the removal of the
Rajah’s Ministers and officers for having joined the
Siamese parly; and the appointment of others; the
claims to succession of the Rajah Mu-da , or Heir am


parent to the throne, formally and publicly annulled
' ‘ for having seconded the views of the Siamese (an
act, the right and policy of which may be questioned,
inasmuch as the Perak Monarchy is not elective, and
(lie Rajah Muda, who has many adherents, may be
rendered more troublesome than he was) —the recom-
mendation to the Rajah of Perak not to tax the ryots ;
the plans for establishing a regular Mercantile Agent
at Penang, and procuring School Masters from thence ;
the removal of His Highness's residence from his for-
mer abode to a spot nearer Penang, and provision made
by a supplementary engagement for the occasional
residence with him of a British Officer; the cession to
the British Government by another supplementary en-
gagement, of the territory of Pulo Binding &c.—the
whole directed or done by a British Officer, with a
guard of sepoys, and in the expectation held out by
him of a ‘loan of money, and guns, and warlike
stores.—All these acts will, of course, irritate and
excite the dissatisfaction of the Siamese, and be
viewed by them as an infraction of the Treaty con-
cluded at Bangkok, When, also, it is considered that
all these acts have been done with respect to a Prince
whose whole annual income is estimated at only
12,000 Dollars, may it not be said, that the ablest
opponent to the favourite 'plan of the Penang Govern*
meat, for taking the vhole of the Malay Peninsula
under its protection , could not have shewn more
clearly and decidedly than what this Agent to Perak
has done, the petty, Complicated, and unprofitable
transactions, which such a plan will entail upon us,
and the impossibility of seeing until we have actually
embarked in it, how far interference on our part with
the Malay Peninsula may draw us on?”
The Siamese Ministers and Captain Burney having
settled the Treaty of Friendship above described,
entered into an “ Agreement with respect to English
vessels desiring to come and trade in the city of
Bangkok.'’


1. The traders of whatever
description must conform to the
Laws of Siam. They are not to
export paddy or rice. Fire arms
and ammunition imported by
them must not be sold except to
Ihe Government. If Government
do not require these articles they
must be re-exported. Other arti-
cles may be bought and sold by
the merchants without the inter-
vention of any other person. The
duties and charges shall be “ con-
solidated according to the breadth
of the vessel.” Vessels import-
ing cargoes to pay 1700 Ticals*
for each Siamese fathom f of the
breadth.
Vessels in ballast 1500 Ticals,
The export of grain is, however,
iri times of plenty, permitted by
Licence,
■S A Siamese Tical is worth One
Sicca Rupee 3$ Annas. 4 Selungs
make One Tical.
f 6 Feet 6 Inches.
2. Merchant vessels the pro-
perty of English subjects arriving
off the Bar, must first anchor ami
stop there, and the commander of
the vessel must dispatch a person
with an account of the cargo, ami
a return of the people,- guns, shot,
and powder, on board the vessel
tor the information of the Gover-
n°r at the mouth of the river,
who will send a pilot and inter-
prefer to convey the established
r egulations to the commander of
the vessel. Upon the pilot bring-
lng the vessel over the bar, she
aiust anchor and stop below the
ohokey which the interpreter will
Point out.
Captain Burney strongly re-
commends that no British vessel
should cross the bar at once and
report her arrival at Paknam,


3. After having been thorough-
ly examined, and having landed
her Guns, shot and powder at
Paknam, the vessel .will be per-
mitted to pass up to Bangkok.
4. After the vessel has been
again examined at Bangkok and
her breadth ascertained, the mer-
chants may buy and sell. If after
shipping he]’ export cargo the
vessel should be too deep to pass
the bar, no extra charge for cus-
toms shall be levied upon the por-
tion of her cargo which may be
taken down the river in boats.
5. Vessels to obtain a Fort
Clearance from the Prah Klang,
which will entitle them to receive
their guns Ac. at Paknam.
G. Merchants and I heir people
must conform to the Laws: they
must not speak offensively of, nor
treat disrespectfully any great or
subordinate officers of the country
on pain of punishment. Murder
will be punished with death.
Other offences, if committed by
the Commander or Officer of a
vessel, or a Merchant, by fine.
Inferior persons by whipping or
imprisonment. “If any person
at Bangkok oppress any English
Subject he shall be punished ac-
cording to his offence, in the
same manner/’
'l'liis caution appears to have
been introduced at the time when
the French were driven out of
Siam-
The Envoy vainly endeavoured
to limit the regulation to the de-
livery at Paknaxn of all gunpow-
der on board of British Vessels.
The Siamese Officers measure a
vessel inside between decks, at
what they consider, often erro-
neously, to be the broadest part.
A heavy fee used to be levied
upon every Junk hired for the
purpose of carrying the residue of
a cargo to a vessel that had been
obliged to cross the bar before her
lading had been completed.
The Siamese Ministers, at first
proposed to render all British
subjects, without exception, liable
to capital punishment, and whip-
ping for the commission of any
offences, with respect to which the
Laws of Siam have prescribed
such punishments.
To speak disrespectfully of the
King of Siam is held to be a
crime of much greater magitude
than murder, and is invariably
punished with death. Captain
Hamilton in the year 1720 had
a narrow escape from forfeiture of
life,, and of the whole of his


vessel and property upon a charge
of having only said that “the
King had been imposed upon,”
an expression which was declared
to be High Treason. The Envoy
had much difficulty in exempting
British subjects from liability
to that penalty.
Captain Burney observes, that
the late war with Ava, and the
extensive scale upon which it
was conducted, did certainly ex-
cite,in the minds of the Siamese
Ministers, a very high idea of
the magnitude of our resources,
and impress them with a respect
which they had never before felt
for the character of the British
Government. “ But (he adds )
should circumstances at any time
impose upon us the necessity of
resenting any violation on the
part of the Siamese Government
of the Articles of this Treaty
there would not be the smallest
occasion to undertake any exten-
sive or expensive military
preparations. Two or three
small cruizers, as pointed out
by Mr. Crawfurd, * stationed at
the Sichang Islands, which pos-
sess a convenient harbour in
sight of the mouth of the Me-
oam river, could blockade that
fiver, intercept the whole foreign
eommerce of the country, and
enable us, in a very few months,
to dictate our own terms to the
* in the report of his Mission
to Siam.


( ’onit of .Siam. This end might be even still more
expeditiously attained, were the Commanders of the
Cruisers to send up a communication to Bangkok,
stating their intention of proceeding to attack that
city. The Siamese Government and people are so well
aware of the inadequacy of their forts to prevent the
execution of such threat, that a very few hours would
bring an answer from them, offering satisfaction for all
our demands. In the infancy of the British power in
India, one or two vessels from Madras, appear to have
l**en capable of intimidat ing the King of Siam into
vi mditions.
it has l»een already stated that Captain Burney
prevailed upon the Rajah of Ligore to permit Mr.
Harris, Surgeon to the Mission, and Mr. Leal,* an
interpreter to accompany him by land from that place
to Bangkok. After having travelled about 200 miles,
the Rajah, in consequence of letters which he had
received from the Covernment, disapproving of his
having* taken those gentlemen in his suite, put them
into a small boat, at a place called Pothiu (Latitude
11 —10) and forwarded them by water to Bangkok,
where they arrived on the 31 January 1825, more
than eight weeks after the Envoy, and three or four
days before the Rajah reached that Capital.
Mr. Harris f drew up an itinerary of their
journey, which forms an enclosure in the Bengal
Secret Letter of the 2d April 1827,* but they had
reason to suppose that the Rajah had given them no
opportunity of seeing the proper route between
Li gore and Bangkok.
f Mr. I ,cal afterwards accompanied a party of
Burmese prisoners wlio were liberated at the instance
of the Envoy, and sent overland from Bangkok to
Mergui. He returned from Martaban to Bangkok up
the Uthran river, across the 3 Pagodas to the Mekhlong
and down the river. Mr. Leal has communicated the
topographical information which he acquired in this
route.


lu a Letter dated the 23rd February 1827,*
Captain Burney was informed, that the Vice President
in Council entirely approved of his conduct, and was
-of opinion that he had accomplished, in a manner
highly creditable to his judgment, talent and address
every object of his Mission which the Siamese Court
could be expected to concede. The Governor General,
in returning the Treaty, ratified, expressed his con-
currence in the sentiments of approbation with which
the Vice President in Council regarded the Envoy’s
proceedings, the result of which had placed the
political and commercial relations of the British
Nation with the state of Siam on a decidedly improved
footing.
With reference to Captain Burney’s efforts in be-
half of the Burmese captives, it is observed, that the
security and confidence which our new Bnrman subjects
on the Tenasserim Coast now feel, (as reported by Mr.
Maingy ) in consequence of their countrymen having
been rescued from the hands of their cruel and in-
veterate enemies, are the pleasing fruits of Captain
Burney’s success, which cannot fail to redound to the
fame and reputation of the British Government in
these countries.
The zeal and industry with which Captain Burney
acquired such a knowledge of the Siamese language, as
enabled him both to speak and to write it with facility;
and the favorable effect produced upon the mind of the
King when Captain Burney personally addressed him
in his own tongue, are noticed in terms of commend-
ation.
Having stated that the expediency of removing
the Kx-King of Queda to Malacca or some place distant
from the immediate scene of his former authority, it is
recognized by the Government of Prince of Wales Island,
as well as by the Government of Bengal, the Letter to
Captain Burney proceeds to say, "in requiring the King


of Queda to remove from Penang, it by no means follows,
ffrat lie thereby formally renounces his rights. On the
contrary, he may be informed, that the British Govern-
ment will not lose sight of the interests of its old friend
and ally, in the event of an opening hereafter occurring
at any time for effecting some general arrangement
with the Siamese, including his restoration to his an-
cient dominions*
It is indispensable however that he should be dis-
tinctly cautioned not to cherish any hope or expectation
that the British Government will employ in his behalf
any other means than those of fair and friendly nego-
tiation with the Siamese, and any hesitation on his
part to remove to such place of asylum within our ter-
ritories as considerations of policy may induce us to
point out to him, must naturally indispose us to take
further interest in his concerns, lie must lie warned
also, that so long as he and his family continue to en-
joy a stipend and protection from the British Govern-
ment. he must consider himself bound to abandon all
designs and secret machinations calculated in any
measure to molest or give umbrage to the Siamese, and
tending thereby to disturb the friendship and harmony
established between that nation and ourselves.
Opportunities, it is observed, may hereafter arise
for extending the protection of the British government
over the States of Gal ant an and Tringano, in the man-
ner desired by the Government of Prince of Wales
Island, should the Home authorities approve of such a
proceeding.
With respect to f'erak Captain Burney was in-
formed, that the Governor of Penang considers that his
Agent, Captain Low, had exceeded his powers, and had,
moreover, interfered in the affairs of Perak to an extent
which was never contemplated or desired. It is, how-
ever, probable that the Rajah will be induced to sub-
scribe such a document as will have the effect of satis-


King tlie Chief of Ligore of his desire to discontinue
liis connection with the Siamese.
The Vice President in Council is of opinion that
Pie 14th Article of Captain Burney’s treaty will enable
the Government ot Prince of Wales Island to prevent
the subjugation of Solanyore, by the Siamese, and to
■avert the inconveniences which would arise from the
nearer approximation of their dominions to our settle-
ment at Malacca.
Captain Burney was appointed with the sanction of
Cord Amherst, to take the civil charge* of the southern
portion of the British possessions on the Tenasserim
‘Coast, under the direction of Mr. Maingy. In his way
thither, Captain Burney was to touch at Prince of
Wales Island, and then to proceed to Queda in order
to exchange with the Rajah of Li gore’s Son, the
■ratified Copies of the Treaty.
If the Siamese should, as there was reason to
•expect, send an embassy to Calcutta, Captain Burney
was to accompany the Ihivqys.
The ordinary communications with the Court of
■Siam, which were formerly conducted by the Resident
at Singapore, are in future to be carried on by the
’Chief Political and Military authority in Tenasserim
who is to endeavour to forward his Correspondence
•overland.
Finally Captain Burney was directed <t« use every
■means to persuade Ihe Rajah of Tagore to establish
tlie most friendly and liberal trade and intercourse
'between Queda and the Settlement ot Prince of
Wales Island.
* His allowances we«e fixed at Sa. Rs. 1200 Per M.
besides his military pay


A Letter was addressed by Mr, Swinton to the
Siamese Ministers, expressing the gratification derived
bv the British Government from the conclusion of
the treaty, and their grateful acknowledgments for
the gracious reception which Captain Burney exper-
ienced at Bangkok. Mr. Swinton at the same time
notified the intention of Lord Amherst to answer the
King of Siam’s Letter. .
in the concluding part of the Memorandum re-
specting Ava, it was stated that the Vice President in
Council had recommended to Lord Amherst the
appointment of Captain Burney to be Consul at
Rangoon.


Apprehended Invasion of Prince of Wales Island
by a force collected by t he Siamese Chief of Ligore ; He
declares that it is destined against Salangore. Treat-v
negotiated by Captain Burney with the Rajah of
Ligore, for the mediation of the British Government in
settling his dispute with the Sultan of Salangore, &c.
So far back as the beginning of the year 1824,
the Supreme Government alluded to the alarm then
existing among the native inhabitants of Penang, in
-consequence of an apprehended invasion by the Rajah
of Ligore, who was reported to be preparing an arma-
ment to make a descent on the island, for the purpose
chiefly of destroying or carrying off the Ex-King ot
Quedah, living there under our protection. In the
months of May and dune 1825 an armament consisting
of from 200 to 300 Prows, capable ot carrying from
20 to 50 men each, actually made its appearance on
the Quedah coast, ostensibly for the purpose of settling
a dispute with the petty Malay State of Salangore,
which lies between Perak and Malacca, The Govern-
ment of Prince of Wales Island, in consequence of
the assemblage of so unusual a force in its immediate
neighbourhood, and the apprehensions excited by it,
judged it necessary to assume an attitude of defence,
and to remonstrate strongly with the Rajah of Ligore
on the subject of his proceedings. Although the
Supreme Government could scarcely believe, that the
Siamese authorities seriously contemplated a descent on
Prince of Wales Island, they nevertheless, in compliance
with the urgent application of the Governor in Council,
sent a reinforcement thither, consisting of a regiment
of Native In tan try and a vessel of war.
Mr, Fullertons, in a Minute dated the IBtb May
1825.* recorded his opinion as to the course of policy
which should be pursued towards the Malay states,
menaced by the Siamese ; w ho, being relieved from


the fears of (lie Burmese power, by our conquests
on the Tenasserim Coast, were evidently aiming at
the extension of their dominion over the whole of the
Malayan Peninsula.
Mr. Fullerton observes, that the interposition of
the Netherlands Government of Malacca, and the
treaties made by them with Perak and Salangore,
served as a barrier against the encroachment of the
Siamese on the western side of the Peninsula ; that
if the Ligore Chief should succeed in subjugating
those states completely, (over which Siam possesses
not a vestige of legitimate supremacy) we shall
have a long line of coast filled with hostile prows,
always on the watch to take us by surprise; and a
great increase of our defensive means will be required.
That, if they subdue Perak and Salangore, there
is nothing to stop them from spreading downwards
to Johore ; and that both Malacca and Singapore, as
well as Penang, would then be cut off from all access
to the interior, and the valuable productions ot the
Peninsula be intercepted by a power, whose com-
mercial policy imposes the most grievous restrictions
upon trade. He proceeds to say, that the whole
Malay race are averse to the dominion ot the Siamese,
and that any often and avowed support offered by
tfie British Government, would ensure the co-operation
of the whole of that population on the Peninsula.
He. therefore, recommends, that treaties offensive
and defensive, should be made with the petty
states of Perak. Salangore, Johore, Pahang, Tringano
and Kalantan; and their independence maintained,
so as to exclude the Siamese entirely from our
proximity. The formation of such treaties could
not. in Mr. Fullerton’s opinion, be considered as any
interference with the Siamese Government, which holds
over them no legitimate right of superiority, while to
us it would ensure all the advantages that could result
from act ual possession ; freedom of trade and unrestrict-
ed intercourse.


In a letter to the Rajah of Figure, dated 28th
April 1825, Mr. Fullerton says.*
■ Mr. Maingy, who had been deputed to demand of
the Rajah of Figure an explanation of the object of bis
military preparations, was courteously received by
that Chief, who, after considerable hesitation, ob-
served, that the King of Siam had directed him to
punish the people of Salangore for having attack id
some of his prows three years since, ( in 1822 y
On being more closely questioned, however, as to the
purport of the orders which he had received from Siam,
he disavowed having been furnished with any that
had particular reference to Salangore, but that he was
vested with unlimited discretion to punish any of the
Malayan States, and especially Salangore, that had
given so much cause for complaint, having most un-
provokedly attacked and plundered at Perak upwards
of 40 of his largest prows.
The Rajah of Figure, in reply to Mr. Fullerton’s
letter, wrote as follows :— *
Mr. Fullerton accordingly addressed the Rajah of
Figure on the 9th .June 1825.*
Mr. Cracraft, the Resident at Malacca, adverting
to the danger to which the Malay States of Salangore
and Rumbow were exposed from the threatened attack
of the Siamese Chief, mentions, that the late Dutch
Covernor of Malacca, Mr. Thyssen, had concluded
treaties with those States in the year 1819, but that
they were annulled by the Government of Ratavia. and
the Chiefs allowed to declare themselves independent.


Mr. Cracraft observes,* that the Rajah of Salangore
could, therefore, have no further claim than on the
generosity of the British Government ; but adds, —“ At-
the same time the subjugation of his dominions, and
their annexation to the Siamese Empire, would be
most injurious to the interests of this settlement, and,
from the best information 1 can obtain, the Netherlands
Government would not have admitted of any such con-
quest. Malacca, however diminished of late years in
territory, trade and population, is still looked up to by
the surrounding Malay States as the principal city ot
the Peninsula, and the proper barrier to interpose be-
tween them and any foreign power, which meditates,
as it is manifest the Court of Siam does, their universal
conquest and formation into a dependent province.”
On the 2d September 1825. the Governor General
in Council communicated to the Government of Prince
of Wales Island the result of his Lordship’s deliberations
respecting the policy which should be pursued towards
Salangore. The following is an extract from the letter
addressed to Prince of Wales Island. 7 '
Pending the reference to Calcutta, which occasion-
ed the foregoing instructions, Captain Burney was
employed by the Government of Prince of Wales
Island to communicate with the Rajah of Ligore on
the subject of his views regarding’ the Malay States.
Captain Burney was instructed * to offer the media-
tion of the British Government for the adjustment
of the Rajah’s disputes with the Chief of Salangore;
and to do everything to discourage any attempt to
subjugate the southern Malay States, but without
going so far as to pledge ourselves to open resistance.
“This,” observes Mr. Fullerton, "will be a delicate
part of the discussion. It is to be hoped that the
increase and disposition oi our military and marine
force will, of themselves, deter from the attempt.”


Captain Barney succeeded in persuading the
Rajah of Ligore to abandon his hostile designs upon
Salangore ; and concluded a preliminary engagement, *
subject to revision by the Supreme Government, and
by the Court of Siam. In his report to Mr. Fullerton,
Captain Burney says, “ I must avow that the
measures which you, Honble. Sir, have lately adopted
for augmenting our military and marine force, have
much facilitated my negotiations with the Governor
of Ligore. I fairly told him that a reinforcement of
troops was daily expected at Pinang from Bengal,
and that most probably, on my report of his conduct,
the question of peace or war would be decided. 1
will, however, in justice declare, that this Chief, who
was charged with a design of poisoning Captain Low
at Trang last year, and of cutting me off last February,
and against whom, even when I was last leaving
Penang, 1 was warned to be on my guard, treated me
with the greatest kindness and hospitality. 1 did nit
take any escort with me on shore, and after the
second day my followers were allowed to visit every
part of the town ofQuedah. 1 was permitted to go
wherever 1 pleased, and His Highness’s son, and His
Highness himself, on the last day. visited me without
form or ceremony.”
Mr. Fullerton, in a Minute dated the 3d August
1825, observes as follows.*
* * * * % «
Mr. Fullerton proposed to depute a person to
’ Salangore for the purpose of effecting the arrangements
stipulated in Captain Burney’s Agreement with the
Ligore Chief.
On receiving information of Captain Burneys
proceedings (which were concluded before the instruc-
tions of 2d September 1825 were framed) the Supreme
Government in a dispatch dated the 16th September
1825,* expressed their entire approbation of those
proceedings, which, they observed, were in general con


form it v with the views taken in their letter of the
2d September: the policy therein prescribed hemp;
quite consistent with every tiling that had been
arranged with the Rajah of Ligore ; the treaty with
whom would be forthwith ratified.
'The Letter from the Supreme (lovernment to the
Secret Committee of the 27th October 1825,* par 9,
refers to their consultations, for an account of the
proceedings of Mr. John Anderson, the gentleman who
was deputed by the Government of Prince of Wales
Island to the Rajah of Salangore, with whom an agree-
ment was concluded bearing date 20th August 1825.
The first article recognises and confirms the Commercial
Treaty negotiated by Mr. Cracrafb with the Rajah in the
year 1818: the 2d defines the boundary between
Salangore and Perak to be the river Beenam ; the
3d stipulates the recall of the Rajah’s nephew Rajah
Hussein, from Perak and his abstinence from any
future interference in the affairs of that State ; the
4th engages that Pirates shall not be permitted to
resort to the ports of Salangore ; and the sth that the
Rajah shall surrender criminals who shall seek refuge
in his country ; the Government of Prince of Wales
Island being bound to the like restitution of persons <>t
that description escaping from Salangore to Penang.
It appears from Mr. Anderson’s report, which is
dated the 26th August 1825,* that a recent period of
time. Perak was under the control of Salangore. The
Rajah’s statement respecting the affair of the prows for
the destruction of which the British Government un-
dertook to exact compensation, induced the Fnvov to
suspend that demand.
Mr. Anderson intimated that he was about to pro-
ceed to Perak: but we have not as yet received any
report of his proceedings in that country; but among
the enclosures in the Bengal Secret Letter of the 11th
September 1826.* is a letter from Mr. Fullerton to the
Rajah of Ligore complaining that a party of Siamese


troops were at Perak. deferring to a former remon-
strance on this subject. Mr. Fullerton says.*
*»#p p ' p
Captain Burney was, at the same time, instructed
to remonstrate with the Court of Siam against the con-
duct of the Rajah of Ligore; and. in case he did not
obtain redress, to quit Bangkok, first making a declar-
ation that the British Government does not admit the
right of Siam to exercise control or dominion, or to in-
terfere in the affairs of Perak or of the Malay States
south of Quedah and Patani; and that in exercising
such interference, or continuing it if already begun,
the Siamese will incur the risk of expulsion by the
British Government.
From Captain Burney’ Journal to the 18th May
1826, it appears that he had, after a tedious negotia-
tion. concluded a treaty with the Court of Siam.
His utmost efforts * failed to prevail upon that Court
to restore the Ex-King of Quedah to power. With
respect to the other Malay States, he says.*
At a conference on the 16th May.— #
The Supreme Government have not as yet brought
under the consideration ot the Secret Committee, the
proceedings of Captain Burney at the Court of Siam.
B. S. li. £ ? Bengal Secret Letter.]
Secret Department
March 26th 1827.


To
The Honorable the Secret Committee of the Hole
ble. tJie Court of Directors*
Double. Sirs,
##*###
Para. 3. Having' communicated with the Right
Honorable the (fovernor General on the subject of the
Treaty executed by Captain Burney and received if
duly ratified by His Lordship, to whom it had been
sent for that purpose, we directed the Envoy to proceed
without delay to Quedah where he is to meet the son
of the Rajah of Li gore and exchange with him the
ratified Copies of the Treaty as previously arranged.
4. We will not occupy the time of your Honor-
able Committee with a repetition in this place of the
Instructions with which we furnished Captain Burney
on his departure, but request leave to refer you to the
accompanying Copy of them which form a number in
the packet, expressing our hope that they will be found
to be in unison with the views and sentiments of your
Honorable Committee. We beg leave also to transmit
Copies of the Letters from the Deputy Secretary to
Government in attendance on the Governor General,
conveying His Lordships approbation of the zeal, ad-
dress, temper and ability displayed by the Envoy dull-
ing Ids negotiations, and expressing his opinon that
the results of the Mission have been in the main suc-
cessful. as placing the political and commercial relations
of the British Nation with the state of Siam on a de-
cidedly improved footing. The Governor General
having approved and sanctioned the manner in which
we proposed to employ Captain Burney’s services at
Mergin', alter he should have effected the exchange ot
the ratified Copies of the Treaty when his functions as
Envoy would cease, we directed Captain Burney ( a*


stated in his instructions above referred to ) to proceed
to the Tenasserim Coast, on the termination of his
Mission, transmitting to us by the hands of hifhlssistant
the Copy of the Treaty ratified by the King of Siam.
■X - * X- X- He X-
We have &c.
COMBERMERE,
W. B. BAYLBY.
Fort William
2d. Apl. 1827.


To
The Right Rouble
The Governor Genl. in Council
at FORT WILLIAM
in BENGAL
-a-*****-
Para. 17. Ihe manner of disposing of the ter-
ritories which you have acquired on the Tenasserim
Coast has been discussed with great ability by the
Members of Council, and we have derived from their
several Minutes much information, and many useful
suggestions.
18. The following appear to be the several
courses of proceeding which may be adopted
Ist, To restore the conquests unconditionally to
the Burmese.
2nd. To restore them to the Burmese in con-
sideration of an additional money payment, or of the
<*ession of Rangoon.
3rd. To establish an independent Government
under a Tallien Prince.
4th. To cede the possessions to the Siamese
Government, in return for some commercial privileges,
and for objects connected with Prince of Wales Island.
sth. To retain the newly acquired territories
under the British Government.
* * * * * *
25. The 4th suggestion originated in an opinion
that by the cession of these Conquests, or some of
them, to the Government of Siam, we might ensure
the active co-operation of that State in our war with
the King of Ava, and also secure certain advantages
on the Malayan Peninsula of much importance to our
newly acquired possessions in that quarter.


2t). Ihe first of these motives can have no opera-
tion now; the (Siamese did not co-operate actively with
us, and neither have nor pretend to have any claim
upon us.
27. Nor are the contemplated political advan-
tages to be obtained from Siam. It is now admitted
that the Government of Siam does not possess the
rights over Perak &c. of which we sought the transfer.
And in regard to Commercial privileges, it is probable
that the possession of the Ports of Tavoy & Mergui
will tend much more to the extension of our commer-
cial intercourse with Siam than any stipulation which
we could make with a specific view to that object.
You have, in fact, concluded a commercial treaty,
without the sacrifice of any part of your Territory.
28. And although we do not consider ourselves
bound, at all events, to retain these Provinces under
the British Government, we cannot disregard the In-
terests of the Inhabitants, and the probability of ex-
posing them to plunder and Slavery by a transfer to a
barbarous Government.
* * * * # +
dl. We have therefore only to direct, with re-
spect to all these acquisitions on the Tenasserim Coast,
as well as to Arracan, that you do not part with them
without authority from England.
* * * * * *
We are,
Your affectionate friends,
East India House,
London,
25th April 1827.
( Signed ) H. LINDSAY
„ J. PATTISON
„ GEORGE SMITH


M ajor General
Sir Archibald Campbell, K. C. H.
&c. &c. &c.
Commanding the Forces in the
Ceded Provinces.
Sir,
1 have the honor to transmit for your information
copy of a letter received this day from Mr. Blundell
ray assistant at Mergui reporting the arrival there ot
19 persons from Chimpohun, who had been carried ofi
by the Siamese in 1825. The release of these persons
at the present date when we had no means of even
tracing their existence will afibrd the Supreme Govern-
ment a very satisfactory proof of the impression which
Captain Burney’s humane and persevering exertions in
behalf of these captives must have left at Bangkok as
well as of the sincerity of the professions of the Siamese
Court to cultivate a friendly understanding with the
British Government.
I have &c.
( Signed ) A. D. MAING V
Civil Commissioner for the
Ceded Provinces.
Tavoy
6th April 1827.


To A. D. Maingy Esq re.
Civil Commissioner tor the Ceded Provinces.
Si r.
1 have the honor to inform you that the persons
as per margin, carried off from hence by the Siamese,
arrived here yesterday from Chimpohun. They state
that they were liberated fifty five days ago and have
been that time on the road. They are provided with
a pass but have brought no letter from the Rajah of
Chimpohun.
They state that between fifty and sixty persons
carried off before we took possession of this place
accompanied by seven women subsequently made
prisoners, who had formed connections with some of
the .men were sent to Bangkok a few days before they
quitted and that there remained not a single Burmese
in Chimpohun, who had been carried off at the same
time as themselves.
The whole party are natives of this place.
I haw &c.
( Signed ) E. A. BLUNDELL
Civil Commissioner for the Ceded
Provinces,
Mergui
•31 st March 1827.


Moelmyne 25th May 1827
(1. Swinton Lsqre.
&c. &c. &<*.
My dear Sir,
1 availed myself of the earliest moment to forward
your Official Letter to Bangkok with a short one from
myself, with a view 1o ensure its safe delivery. 1 was
induced to send Lieut. Leslie with it, as he is well
acquainted with the Burmese language and is person-
ally known to several of the Tallian Chiefs who came
here two years ago with orders to arrange a plan of
co-operation with our forces. 1 have every hope that
he will reach Bangkok from the three Pagodas.
Since writing the above. 1 sent the accompany -
ing communication No. 2 by a Siamese Chief who had
come to visit this place, altho’ the robbery in question
was not of a magnitude to require any serious notice,
yet 1 conceived it might tend to prevent a repetition
of any similar act by at once writing to the Siamese
authorities, assuring myself of their readiness to check
a transaction of the sort.
Believe me &c.
( Signed) ARCH I), CAMPBELL
p s. r rVie articles stolen were some Bees Wax',
Pepper, ami a few elephants’ teeth.


No. 1.
Major General Sir Archibald Campbell, Command-
ing the Ceded Provinces on the Coast of Tenasserirn
and Political Agent to the Governor General of India—
To their Excellencies The Six High Ministers forming
the Privy Council of the Kingdom of Siam.
I he accompanying letter having just come to hand
from Bengal I lose not a moment in transmitting so
important a document to your Excellencies, in charge
of Lieut, Leslie, one of ray own officers.
Having the honor to be appointed the medium of
communication on Political Matters between the two
Governments in this quarter, I have only to say the
pleasure it would afford me in the performance of those
Duties to cement by every means in my power the
happy understanding now existing between our re-
spective Countries.
1 have &c.
(Signed) A. CAMPBELL
&c. &c. &c.
Head Quarters
British Cantonment
at Moelmyne 16th
April 1827.


No. 2.
Major General Sir Archibald Campbell K. C B.
Commanding and in Political Charge of the Ceded
Provinces to the Northward and Eastward of the
Saluen River.—To their Excellencies the Six High
Ministers forming the Privy Council of the Kingdom
of Siam.
By the treaty of peace concluded at Yandaboo
betwixt the English and Burmese Nations the whole
of the country situated to the Eastward and Northward
of the Saluen River, hitherto subject or tributary
to the Court of Ava, was ceded in perpetuity to the
British Government and consequently the inhabitants
of those districts with their Property came under
ihe British protection.
It was therefore with pain that a report was made
to me that a person named Gnatuhee, styling himself
a Siamese Chief, with thirty men, accompanied by
live elephants, made lately an incursion into the said
ceded district and took by force from the poor in-
habitants of a village named Zamamevv the articles
enumerated in the enclosed list.*
Peeling as 1 do sensible that the conduct ot the
said Gnatuhee was an unauthorized act, or more
probably that of a lawless freebooter, 1 hasten in
either case to make the fact known to your Excel-
lencies, assured that you will give the necessary
instructions for the prevention of similar inroads into
the territories ceded to the British and that restitution
if possible may be made in the present instance to
the unfortunate sufferers.
1 lately had the honor of addressing you express-
ing the pleasure it would afford me in the performance
of my public duties in this Quarter to cement by
every means in my power the good understanding an


friendship so happily existing- between our respective
nations. In the sincerity of that declaration 1 now do
myself the honor of addressing your Excellencies
and to remain &c. &c. &c.
( Signed ) A. CAMPBELL
M. G. Commanding
the Tenasserim Coast &<*, &c.
British Station
at Moehnyne
Ist May 1827,


Translation.
Letter from tlje Chou Phea Akka Maha Sena tin.
Bocli A pain Peri bora Cromapahu Samuha Bra Cala-
honii Aeka Maha Sena thi Bode Minister of the War
Department to Major General Sir Archibald Campbell,
We make known that we received a letter from
1 lie Governor of Canbury on the 31st May 1827 inti-
mating that Lieut. Leslie, accompanied by a party of
twelve persons, is the bearer of a dispatch to this
capital, and that the above mentioned Governor afford-
ed that officer every assistance and transmitted to us
two letters, one from the Secretary to the Government
of Bengal, and the other from yourself. We were
apprised by the former that His Excellency the Govern-
or General of Bengal is well satisfied with the friend-
ship subsisting between the Siamese and English
nations and with the reception experienced by Captain
Burney from His Majesty and his Ministers ; also that
His Excellency and the Members of Supreme Govern-
ment have signed the treaty and delivered it to Captain
Burney for the purpose of exchanging ratifications at
Queda with the son of Phia Lacon, Governor of Ligor,
in fulfilment of Captain Burney’s promise. In the
letter from yourself it is stated that His Excellency
commanded you to depute a person in charge of the
letter to be delivered to us in consequence of its great
importance, and that you have accordingly sent Lieut.
Leslie. You also notify that His Excellency has
appointed you Governor of the Provinces ceded to the
English in the Burmese Kingdom and Political Agent
for the affairs of the two nations, enjoining you to
preserve and augment the friendship subsisting be-
tween the British and Siamese nations. The Ministers
have received this communication with extreme satis-
faction. The Secretary’s letter is very friendly and we
entertain the hope that in discharging the duties of
the post which you fill, you will increase the friendship
between the two nations. The Ministers were highly


gratified at the Secretary’s letter which Captain
Burney forwarded through Chou Pliia Bacon, and was
received on the 15th of April 1827 : that transmitted
hy you via Canbury is of the same tenor, and the
Ministers communicated the contents to His Majesty
who is well pleased with the Governor General and the
British Nation.
The Lieut, through whom you sent the Letters
remains at Canbury complaining of indisposition, and
as the journey is long, and the weather pluvious, the
Ministers have directed that he should continue there
and that every assistance be afforded him. I transmit
by the hands of Lecong, Captain, three letters—one
for the Secretary, and two to your address, to be
delivered to Lieut. Leslie.
Coung Siajuthaya 31st May 127.
( A True Translation )
(Signed) W. FOREST Y
Trans r.


Translation.
(setter from Chou Pin Ackaua Arena Seboor Apai
pere Bora Cromapahu Samua Fra Calahom Acka
Mahasena Thibodi ! Minister of the. War Department
to Major General Sir A. Campbell.
The letter which yon transmitted by Samung
Camansite Chai ma Apuri Pegu from Martaban to the
Ministers at his capital notifies that the Burmese have
ceded to the English the provinces on one side of the
Saluen river from East to North conformably to
the treaty concluded between the British and Burmese
Nations at Yandaboo, and that all the inhabitants of
those provinces are under the protection of the British
Government. The letter further intimates that it has
been represented to you by the inhabitants of one of
those districts that a Siamese Chief named Gurutchui,
accompanied by a party of thirty persons and five
elephants, plundered the inhabitants of the village
of Tamamen and you request the Ministers of this
capital to afford redress and restore the plundered
property to its owners, consisting of the following
articles, as Per list.
7 Pec ids of Areca Nut
5 do. of Cardamums
5 do. of Pepper
26 Elephants’ Teeth
1 piece of Raraanan Cloth
As soon as the Ministers were apprised of this circum-
stance, they evinced the greatest concern on account
of the friendship subsisting between the British and
Siamese Nations, and they immediately issued orders
for securing the person of Gurutchui.
We expect you will furnish us with more precise
information relative to this affair, as there is no officer
in Siam of that name, or it may perhaps be an error


on flie part of the interpreters. A further com-
munication is therefore expected from you with a
view to the adoption of the necessary measures for
inflicting condign punishment on the offender.
Krung Si Ayuthia 31st May 1827.
A true Translation
( Signed ) W. Foresty
Transr.


To
The Honorable the Secret Committee
of the Rouble. the Court of Directors.
Honorable Sirs.
*** * * i
Para. 12. In continuation of the subject of our
address under date the 2d. April last, we beg- to report
that Captain Macfarquhar, Assistant to the Envoy to
Siam, has returned to the Presidency with the treaty
by the King of that Country. For the details of
Captain Burney’s proceedings since he left Calcutta,
we beg to refer your Honorable Committee to the
Despatches from that Officer dated 23rd. April and
12th and 31st. May last. . Your Honorable Committee
will not fail to observe the alarm which has been
excited in the minds of the King of Siam, and the
Chief of liigore by the reports industriously circulated
by the followers of the Ex-Rajah of Quedah that
the British Government has determined to espouse
his cause and reinstate him in possession of his
Country, and we regret to observe that the augmented
scale of Military Establishments now forming at
Prince of Wales Island has seemed to confirm these
apprehensions. We have taken occasion to address
the Government of Prince of Wales Island on this
subject, and on the absolute necessity of confining the
public expenditure at that Presidency within the
narrowest practicable bounds with reference especially
to the present state of our finance, and we have re-
quested the Governor General to communicate, m
a direct address from himself to the Honorable the
Governor in Council his sentiments on the Subjects
adverted to in our Letter to that Government. f ()l ‘
the convenience of reference we transmit copies of our
correspondence with the Governments of Fort St.
George and Prince of Wales Island, and of the letter
to the Deputy Secretary in attendance on the Governor
General as numbers in the Packet, Amongst these


we would solicit the notice of your Honorable Com-
mittee to a paper received from Captain Burney
drawn up with advertence to the contingency of the
whole or a part of our possessions on the Tenasserim
Coast being transferred to the Siamese. Some curious
information regarding Siam will also be found in
the accompanying copies of papers received from a
Gentlemen, named Mallock, who had resided at Bangkok
for several years on the part of a British House of
Agency, and left it subsequently to the departure of
the Envoy from that Capital.
We have &c.
COMBERMERE
W. B. BAY LEY.
Fort William
6 July 1827.


TO THE HONORABLE THE COURT OF
DIRECTORS FOR THE AFFAIRS OF THE
UNITED COMPANY OF .MERCHANTS OF ENG-
LAND TRADING TO THE EAST INDIES
LONDON.
Honorable Sirs,
We have the honor to transmit for the informa-
tion of your Honorable Court enclosed Copies of a
correspondence which has passed between the Right
Honorable the Vice President in Council at Fort
William and this Government, relative to an article
which appeared some time ago in the Gazette of this
Island, commenting upon the Treaty lately concluded
by Captain Burney with Siam ; although fully sensi-
ble of the objectionable nature of the article in ques-
tion, and regretting exceedingly its having been
admitted into a paper published at this Settlement, we
must, nevertheless, express our belief that the person
who wrote it, ns well as the censor who passed it were
led into the error committed, from the extreme latitude
allowed to the Press at Calcutta, where almost any
subject, pirate and public, appears to be open to the
most free discussion without notice or can i mad version
from the ruling authorities.
2. Prior to the publication of the article in ques-
tion, the merits of the treaty had been most fully and
freely discussed in the several newspapers of Bengal,
and we are of opinion that the censor of the Press, as
well as the writer of the article alluded to, have adduced
arguments, not sufficient entirely to justify, but at
least to palliate their conduct on the occasion ; as it
is fully established that Captain Burney the Envoy to
Siam immediately on his return to this Settlement
commenced the discussion, and made the Gazette of
this Presidency the vehicle for conveying opinions
relative to the result of the Mission, which he "as
well aware were widely different from the sentiments


entertained hy this Government; while there was rea-
son to believe that many paragraphs in the Bengal
papers, reflecting upon the measures of this Govern-
ment, emanated from the same source,
******
We have the honor to be &c.
(Signed) R. FULLERTON
„ R. IBBBTSON.
Fort Cornwallis
The 6th August 1827.


TO THE HONORABLE THE COURT OF
DIRECTORS FOR THE AFFAIRS OF THE
UNITED COMPANY OF MERCHANTS OF ENG-
LAND TRADING TO THE EAST INDIES,
LONDON.
Honorable Sirs,
******
Para. 2. The treaty concluded by Captain Burney
on behalf of the Honorable East India Company with
the Court of Siam having been ratified by the Supreme
Government, that Officer returned to this Settlement
in the month of April last, and proceeded in the
early part of the following month to Trang to ex-
change the ratification with the Rajah of Ligore.
3. The Envoy to Siam having in several of his
communications to the Supreme Government reflected
upon our proceedings, and made some observations
equally unfounded and calculated to mislead the
judgment of the Right Honble. the Governor General
in Council, we have been under the necessity of
entering Ifco a very full detail upon several points
on which a rather hasty decision had been formed
from the representations of Captain Burney, and
although we have not yet received replies to several
of our' last communications, we entertain no doubt
that from the full explanation given, a more correct
opinion will be formed.
4. Some misapprehension having existed re-
lative to our requisition for some Draught Cattle
from Madras for artillery practice, a requisition
made at the recommendation of the Commanding
Officer of the troops, the Supreme Government took
occasion to call our particular attention to that
subject, inferring apparently that we were actually
engaged in extensive military preparations, calculated,
as surmised by Captain Burney, to excite the


fears and suspicions of the Siamese. The Right Hon-
orable the Vice President in Council took occasion at
the same time to urge the necessity (of which our pro-
ceedings prior to the receipt of that dispatch shew we
were fully sensible) of reducing every superfluous
expence. Copies of our revised lists of Establishments
at the three Settlements under our charge were sent to
the Supreme Government, and it is gratifying to And
that our explanation on these points has been consi-
(lered satisfactory.
******
8. While we have been endeavouring by every
possible means to preserve the most amicable under-
standing with the Rajah of Jago re ever since the
treaty was concluded, and to conform, as far as rested
with us to its several stipulations the Chief of Ligore has
been continuing to affect tear and suspicions of our
designs, accusing us, because a relief of the Bengal
troops by Madras took place, of meditating hostile in-
tentions, and these absurd surmises seem to have met
a ready attention from Captain Burney, who although
fully aware of their utter groundlessness, has continued
to dwell upon them in reports to the Supreme
Government. In order however to put a stop to all
such apprehensions, real or feigned in future, our
President has suggested to the Rajah of Ligore the
expediency of appointing some of his confidential ser-
vants to reside here who will keep him informed of all
proceedings, and with whom we may communicate
upon all matters of business, a proposal which has met
with the concurrence of the Supreme Government.
9. With the same disregard to truth and can-
dour which has all along characterised the proceedings
of the Rajah of Ligore, the emigration of the Malayan
inhabitants, the consequence of the persecution and
oppression of the Siamese authorities has been repre-
sented as arising from the apprehension of an attack
by the British Government, and the theme has been
echoed with undiminished force by Captain Burney.


10. A reference to the reports of our Superinten-
dent of Police and the Superintendent of Province
Wellesley prove whence the emigration arises, namely
from the continued practice of the Siamese authorities
at Quedah seizing numbers of the Malays, and sending
them as slaves to the capital; and in respect to the
assertions made by Captain Burney of a stoppage of
trade at Quedah at the period of his visit, and the
departure of Chinese and Chuliah traders from that
country, the reports of the Master Attendant, Superin-
tendent of Police and Collector give a clear contradic-
tion, for it is established and the fact is remarkable
that at the very period referred to by Captain Burney,
and for some months previous, the commercial inter-
course between this Island and Quedah had been
considerably greater than during a similar period of
several preceding years.
12. With respect to the boundary between
Quedah and Perak, it is well known that the Krean in
Latitude 5. 10 N. has from time immemorial been the
established line arid not Korow, and what renders the
present discussion more remarkable, the Krean is ex-
pressly stated as the Southern boundary by Captain
Burney himself in this Chart lithographed at Calcutta
about three years ago, and in several documents
under his own hand ; while it is so well known as
even to be so stated in Milburn’s Oriental Commerce:
In giving directions for the dispersion of a band of
pirates, the common enemy of mankind, and with the
sanction of the rightful Sovereign in whose territory
they had established themselves, we did not anticipate
and could not possibly have foreseen the chance of
objections in any quarter, especially from Captain
Burney or the Rajah of Ligore, and there appears to
ns good reason to believe that but for Captain Burney’s
interferences and his too evident desire to cast reflec-
tions on this Government, the subject would never
have been agitated by the Rajah of Ligore, nor obtruded


upon the notice of the Right Honorable the Governor
treneral ;it all.
10. in regard to Captain Low’s proceedings at
Perak, so much objected to by the late Knvoy to Siam,
it is true that he somewhat exceeded his instructions,
and we pointed this out to the Supreme Government
at the time, yet it must be acknowledged that his
proceeding's have mainly tended to give full effect lo
the only article of the Siamese Treaty which wc con-
sider of the smallest importance, namely, relieving
the Perak State in toto from Siamese control, and
opposing a barrier to the further subjugation of the
States on the Malay Peninsula, in the direction of
Malacca. There is no question that that article
(the 14th.) was never intended to be adhered to by
the Chief of Li gore, and but* for the prompt measures
taken in carrying into effect what appeared to be its
true intent and meaning, the independence of that
State has been secured, and with it that of Sa lan gore
also. On the inconsistencies and contradictions which
characterize the reports of Captain Burney on this
subject at different intervals during the progress of his
recent negotiations as Agent of the Governor General
it would be tedious to dwell. We have referred to
some of them in our dispatches to Bengal, and it may
be remarked that Captain Burney was as eager in
urging the very measure taken by Captain Low as he
has since been conspicuous in condemning it. The
motives which have produced so extraordinary a bias
in favor of the Rajah of Ligore can only be explained
by that officer himself.
lb The treaty having been duly ratified, we
have naturally been impressed with a full conviction
of the necessity which exists for giving effect to the
reciprocal obligations, as far as this Government, is
concerned. The point in which we have experienced
the greatest difficulty has been the contemplated
removal of the Rajah of Quedah to Malacca. Under


nil the circumstances of the relations of the British
Government with that Chief, much delicacy of
management lias been necessary, and our object has
been to e ideavour gradually ti reconcile He's Highness
to a measure which from the m inner in which he
received the lirst communication and from the forcible
objections which he has continued to urge against it,
we sought to bring about by persuasion, and without
exciting any unnecessary irritation in the mind of our
old Ally.
15. On the return of Captain Burney from
Bengal in April last, we considered that as he was
intimately acquainted with the views of the Supreme
Government and had been long acquainted with the Hx-
Bajah, he was the fittest person to communicate the
decision of Ihe Bight Honble. the Governor General in
Council, and to endeavour to mike arrangements for
llis Highnes.Cs removal. Our President being on the
eve of dejiarture for Malacca and Singapore, the Be-
sident Councillor was directed to afford every aid
to Captain Burney in effecting the arrangement.
Mr. Gaunter, the Superintendent of Police has also
been emjunvered to use his best endeavour- to persuade
llis Highness to remove, but these, united to our
own verbal communications as well as our President s
letters, we regret to say have been ineffectual up to
this date. We refer vour Honble. Court to our con-
sultations and the Minutes of our President in respect
to the measures now proposed to be adopted. We are
in daily expectation of replies from the Bight Honble.
the Governor General in Council to our several des-
patches and our enquiries as to what degree of force
may be used to effect the removal of the Bx-Bajah, and
in the event of his desiring to quit our protection en-
tirely rather than reside at Malacca, what course we
are to pursue. The confident assertion made by Cap-
tain Burney that the Bx-King would [iroceed to Malac-
ca if positively required by us so to do, seems to have
led the Supreme Government to issue the peremptory


orders for Ids removal, overlooking the possible or
rather probable contingency of his absolute refusal—
ami thus leaving us without orders on the case; and
we must either permit him to depart, we fear, to or-
gan i/.e means of attacking the Siamese territories
which we are now about by treaty to protect, or to re-
sort to the severe measure of making a prisoner of an
old ally who came here to seek personal protection;
and the orders of the Supreme Government whatever
they may be shall be punctually carried into effect so
far as we have the means.
♦ * * * * #
We have the honor to be &c.
( Sioiled ) R. FULLERTON
R. IBBBTSON.
J'Virt Cornwallis
The 21 st October 1827.








Printed for private circulation.
the
BURNEY PAPERS
Vol. 11.
PART VI.
(January 1826 to February 1831.)
Printed by order of the Vajirahana National Library.
BANGKOK
1912.




Fort William 5th January 1826.
Report on the Negotiations which have been
entered into by the Rajah of Perak by Captain James
Low, Agent to the ■ Honorable Robert Fullerton,
Governor in Council of Prince of Wales Island and its
Dependencies.
1. The substance of this paragraph* was explain-
ed to the Rajah of Perak, who expressed himself per-
fectly satisfied with the reasons which had induced the
Honorable the Governor to delay for a while to enforce
the performance on the part of the Governor of Ligore
of the terms of the treaty alluded to.
2. The Rajah was made acquainted with the full
purport of‘this paragraph* and the opportunity was
taken of impressing on his mind the necessity which
existed for his immediately adopting a firm and fear-
less line of conduct with reference to the States of
Siam and Salangore, and for his taking instant mea-
sures to restore quietness to his country, and to
inspire his people with confidence in his Government.
He was also given to understand that it would
.materially depend on himself whether such aid as the
British Government might afford to him hereafter
against his enemies should effectually avail him or
not; The Rajah expressed himself as being perfectly
aware that all his exertions would be required to
restore peace and order to his Government, which de-
sirable objects however he observed he could not hope
to effect without the interposition and aid of the
British.
3. the Rajah expressed his extreme aversion to
transmit the Bunga Mas or Bungah Perak, or any
other species of tribute to Siam or to any other native
power, and assured me of his determination to resist any
demands which might hereafter be made for such, as


Perak had always been independent before the Fate
interference of the Siamese and Salengorians. His
presentation on two occasions of the Bungah Mas
to Siam arose from his apprehensions that the Rajah
of that Country would in the event of his refusal
to transmit it send an army to occupy his country
and dispossess him of his Sovereignty.
4. In order to prove the sincerity of these
professions the Rajah of Perak particularly desired
that his determination as above stated should form
an Article of his Engagement with me.
5. The Rajah expressed a decided aversion to
receive any number of Siamese or of Salengore people
into his country, whose sole object should not be
trade, and declared that his utmost efforts if supported
by the British would be directed towards preventing
one or more persons from any one of these nations
from so entering his country. He also declared that
he fully resolved not to send any of his own people
into the Siamese or Salengore territories, either
with political or hostile views, and not to hold
any intercourse or permit his subjects to hold any
intercourse with these countries, which should not
be purely commercial. The Rajah made these his
resolutions to be included in the engagement just
alluded to.
6. The Rajah expressed his gratitude for the care
which had been taken of his interests by the Rouble,
the Governor in Council of Prince of Wales Island, but
he observed that he had no reliance on Siamese faith
since they had betrayed a total want of it on late
occasions, and that were the positive interposition
and aid of the British to be vouchsafed to him and a
party of British troops to be stationed in his Country,
he should then feel secure against the aggressions
of the Siamese, or molestation from any other quarter.
He was informed that the British Government


•entertained no wish to occupy any part of his
•country, provided the Siamese did not occupy or in-
terfere, but that should they enter Perak and interfere
with his Government lie might in that event implicitly
rely on the prompt and effectual aid of the British
in expelling them. Also in respect to Salengore,
that so long as with the assistance of the British the
Raja should maintain himself in independence of
Siam he would be protected against any armament or
interference from that State.
7. 'Hie Rajah on being informed that a written
document containing his sentiments on the various
points at issue was required by the Honble. the Gover-
nor, directed that one should be made out, and it was
afterwards delivered to me.
8. As the Chau Phiya of Ligore had glaringly-
infringed the Second Article of the Treaty entered into
between him and Captain PR Burney, by having sent
an armed force of three hundred of his troops into the
Perak Country, I did not hesitate a moment to enter
into a formal engagement with the Rajah and to
guarantee to him the assistance of the British against
any aggression or interference from Siam or Salengore,
provided he should maintain his independence of both
to the utmost of his means, and should perform
certain other stipulations which circumstances rendered
expedient. The Rajah exhibited the most lively degree
•of joy when this agreement was made out.
9 (jpon my requesting him to describe to me
the true state of affairs in his country he readily com-
plied. For those particulars which have respect to
the views and conduct of the Siamese as connected
with Perak, I beg leave to refer to another part of this
Report. The Rajah stated generally that almost all
the power and authority which he had formerly enjoyed
as King had been usurped by the Rajah of Ligore, by
his Detachment of troops cantoned in Perak, and by


those Perak Chiefs or Officers whom lie had corrupted
by bribes, and seduced from their allegiance, 1o
second his ambitious views' The consequence of such
a state of things was that his subjects paid no atten-
tion to his orders, and that they together with nearly
all of his remaining officers were so afraid of the
Siamese that they had withdrawn themselves from his.
service, and even withheld from showing him the com-
mon attention and respect they owed to him as their
rightful Rajah. The Rajah’s assertions were too
strongly borne out by obvious proofs to prevent my
doubting their truth.
10. It was therefore suggested to him that his.
cause might derive great advantage were he to - sum-
mon to his presence all his officers, whether disaffacted
or otherwise, and to select from among them such per-
sons as he should judge most capaple and willing to
co-operate with him in restoring his country to order
and tranquillity; besides it would be in some measure
a test of their fidelity, and also enable him while form-
ing a new Administration to visit with public marks
of disgrace those of his officers who had voluntarily
leagued themselves with the Siamese.
11. It seemed to me that were the Rajah to be
left as a mere pageant in the hands of a Siamese
faction, decidedly inimical to his person and govern-
ment, the views with the Mission had been sent might
be frustrated. Certainly in that case, the Chau Phiya
of Ligore would be supplied with the means of
maintaining an ascendency in the country without
appearing openly to interfere in its management.
It was therefore thought best that the Mission should
wait at Perak until the Rajah had got matters arranged
to his perfect satisfaction.
12. As the Rajah most earnestly and repeatedly
solicited my advice as to his best mode of procedure
at this juncture, I did not scruple to point out those
plans which seemed likely to conduce most to his


interests and future peace. Amongst these it was
suggested that he should issue a proclamation to his
.subjects enjoining prompt obedience to the orders
issued by him. and his Ministers by his direction, and
warning them against carrying on any intrigues with
the Rajahs of Siam and Salengore, on pain of severe
punishment, and the displeasure of his allies, the
British; and also, that when lie had assembled, all his
Chiefs and Officers he should administer to them
collectively a solemn oath of future allegiance to him
alone, and again separately to those persons who might
be selected for offices under his re-established Govern-
ment. As the Raja Muda or Heir Apparent and
several others of the principal officers of rank had, with
their adherents, been drawn over to the Siamese
interests, and had taken the oath of fidelity and
allegiance to the King of Siam, it seemed that the
Rajah would find a considerable difficulty in selecting
a set of trustworthy and competent officers. On this
point he was left chiefly to his own discretion,
(although he made a special request that I would
nominate them ) as it might be believed that he was
best acquainted with their, respective characters, and
as his situation now required from him the most
deliberate choice of Ministers. So considerable,
however, for some time was the perplexity in which
the Rajah found himself involved, that he hinted
an intention of giving up his country to the British
Government, which was of course promptly discoun-
tenanced.
13. When the Rajah Muda and the other officers,
with two or three exceptions, had obeyed the summons
of the Rajah, and were assembled at Allahan, the Raja
directed that the Proclamation before alluded to should
be read in their presence. The new list of Ministers
and Officers was then read. To each of these a solemn
oath of allegiance to the Rajah was administered by
the Imam. A similar oath was also taken by all those
officers present who had previously in any way been


employed under the Rajah’s Government, inclusive of
the persons who had intrigued with the Siamese.
14. The Raja Muda, or Heir Apparent, alias Raja
Laut, having been proved to have actively seconded
the views of the Siamese in respect to Perak, and hav--
ing thus acted perfidiously towards his Rajah and his
Country, his claim to the succession to the Government
tv as formally and publicly annulled by the Raja, and a
nearer relative of the Raja, named Rajah Chaulun, and
then holding the office of Bindahara, was publicly:
and formally declared to be the Heir Apparent or the
Rajah Muda Chaulun.
15. lam happy to observe that this desirable 1
change was effected without any resistance on the part
of Rajah Laut, although he had a number of adherents,
which circumstance might be attributed to the sudden-
ness and secrecy with which the Raja took his measures.
Care was afterwards taken by the Rajah that the maw
should in future be deprived of all power to disturb the
peace of the Country, and he adopted measures foC
securing Pauglim, a Bukit Gautang, and one or two
other refractory officers who had declined obeying his
summons, owing to their apprehensions that they
would be punished for having joined the Siamese
party, for being in the practice of abetting and
harbouring the pirates who have lately molested the
Native Traders to Penang, and for various acts of
peculation.
16. After the oath had been administered to all
parties, the engagement made with the Rajah was
read aloud, and the chief negociations were concluded.
The Raja manifested his high satisfaction by firing
a salute of Eleven Guns, and the compliment was
returned by three discharges of musketry from the
escort of Sepoys. The distracted state of the country,
and the insecurity the Ryots laboured under, seemed
to require that a greater degree of publicity should be
given to these proceedings than would otherwise have


been called for.
17. The liaja has now been inspired with a
degree of confidence in himself and in those Ministers
and officers newly appointed by him, to which he has
for several years past been a perfect stranger; and
sanguine expectations may be entertained that the
resources of his country will gradually improve, that
the fine river which fertilizes it will exhibit in a short
time along its banks an active scene of native trade,
and the long suspended industry of the ryot may
again be directed to the cultivation of an exuberant
s oil, on which the existence of the Perak people most
materially depend, and which cannot fail to prove
advantageous to Penang by opening to it a new
market for grain and other supplies.
18. To further the very desirable end of grain
cultivation, it was recommended to the Rajah to
refrain from taxing the ryots until they had recovered
from the difficulties in which the various invasions of
their country had involved them. It was with much
satisfaction that 1 perceived a manifest reluctance
on the part of the Rajah to levy a tax on the produce
of the soil, lie is indeed in several respects over-indul-
gent to the dispositions of the people, which partake
somewhat of indolence and caprice.
19. The Annual Amount of his revenue, which
under existing Circumstances might be collected could
scarcely exceed 12,000 Spanish Dollars, but were flie
tin mines worked extensively, his duty on their
produce alone would average, independent of an in-
crease from other sources, 12,000 Spanish Dollars
yearly. At present there are about three hundred
men at work in the various mines, which lie at the
sources of the small tributary streams falling from the
east into the, Perak liiver.
20. His Majesty has promised to give encourage-
ment to trade, and to facilitate the clearing out and


(departure of prows trading to Perak. As many of Ins
people have been in the habit of taking merchandize,
especially tin, to Penang, without paying the esta-
blished export duties, he has earnestly requested that
the Honble. the Governor in Council may detain any
prow or boat from Perak, the Nakodah or owner
ot which cannot show a Port Clearance from an
authorized public officer of His Majesty. To this 1
replied that in so far as respected any attempt to
evade the duty on tin as fixed by the King and Mr.
Anderson last yea»' I supposed that no objection would
be made to comply with this request; at the same
time it was recommended that His Majesty should
establish a regular Mercantile Agent at Penang which
would perhaps obviate much tedious correspondence.
21. The Rajah has also promised to prevent tlie-
importation into his country from any country under
the Government of protection of the British, of persons
who may be brought to be disposed of as slaves or
slave debtors. He has agreed to promote by every
means in his power the raising of grain and the
rearing of cattle and poultry in his country, for all of
which it is admirably adapted.
22. As a greater degree of ignorance of reading
and writing seemed to me to prevail in Perak than
amongst other Malayan people, I urged the Rajah to
have schools established and to commence by having
one fixed near his own residence. To these propositions
lie gave a ready assent, and expressed himself anxious
that some competent person might be obtained as a
schoolmaster from Penang. He was also advised to
send some boys to Penang to be educated.
23. The Rajah has requested that with the view
of enabling him to perfectly settle his country, and
defend it against his enemies, he may be favored with
the loan of money, and some guns and warlike stores
from the British, and has accordingly sent Envoys to
negociate this and other points.


24. The negotiations having been finally arranged
at Allahan, it was proposed to the King that he should
settle some plan of keeping open a regular and frequent
intercourse with Penang.
25. As a preliminary step his Majesty came down
the river, and I accompanied him to a village called
Kotah Lam hoot, which was fixed upon as his residence
for the future. Directions were given to build a house
for him there, and it may be expected that it will be
ready for his reception in about a month. This village
lies on the east bank and is connected with others,
forming in all about three hundred houses, which have
been built since the visit of the Envoy Mr. Anderson
last year —-a sign of returning tranquillity. The Rajah
expects that his subjects who took refuge in the woods
from Siamese oppression will speedily return to their-
houses.
26. It was also agreed t hat a stockade and a
battery should be constructed at the same spot, and
that two other defensive posts should be established
at Karnpong Raja Hassam, one on each side of the
river, to protect native trading prows which might
enter the river, and further that the superintendence
of these should be entrusted to the Luxamana of
Sbahbundar-
-2- At my suggestion, the officer in charge of
the Upper Districts lying on the banks of the river,
was directed to take speedy measures for opening a
road betwixt it and the Krean River, and for facilita-
ting the passage of troops along it. He was also
instructed to transmit to me by persons to be sent by
that route, and down the Krean River to the Bukit
Toongal Stockade, every possible information respect-
ing the nature of the intervening country. Should
■such a route be found practicable, and these are
■many reasons for supposing that it will, the Honble.
■the Governor in Council may be enabled to send
assistance on any emergency to the Rajah of Perak


both by land and water, and by the former
to effectually cut off the retreat of any body of
Siamese who may have passed down the River below
Rambie, since the route from Perak to Siam lies
along its north branch.
28. The Rajah declared however, that so long as
the pirates infested the sea coast the intercourse with
Penang would be subject to serious interruptions,
and proposed that for the mutual benefit of the native
Perak and Penang traders a British military station-
should be formed at the island of Pankaur, lying cloSe
off the mouth of the Perak River.
29. A conference was also had with the Raja
respecting the piratical prows which have lately done
so much mischief along the coast, and on the best
methods of destroying them, or driving them off; and-
I beg to offer the result of it, conjoined with my owtf
suggestions.
30. There can be little doubt but that several
Perak officers on the coast are in league with these
pirates, or at the least that they connive at their
proceedings. The Rajah has promised to exert himself
to have them seized, but as they have been long in-
dependent of his authority, owing to the mere shadow
of power left to him by the Siamese, he proposes to
take them by surprize the moment he has the means.
31. The pirates come from Rhio and other parts
of the Straits, and their chief haunts since the occupa-
tion of Krean, have been the rivers Laraot and Korow,
Trang, Sapatang and Bruwas, up which they can
proceed a considerable way.
32. The nature of the coast is such that no
piratical prows or boats can be pursued with success
unless by others similarly constructed and well
manned. By means of boats well armed and defended
with bulwarks and nettings the pirates might easily
be decoyed or overtaken.


33. In time the King may be able to lend an
active part in suppressing piracy, but at present he
has no money, armed boats, or guns, muskets or
ammunition, with the exception of a few old guns
without carriages which he employs to fire salutes.
His guns, stores and arms were carried off by the Rajas
of Kedah, Ligor and Salengore.
34. To manifest however, his extreme anxiety to
cooperate to the utmost extent within his power with
the Prince of Wales Island Government in extirpating
the pirates, the Raja has made a voluntary tender to
the British of Pulo Pankour and the other small
islands lying off his coast, and has urgently solicited
that if the Honble. the Governor in Council should not
deem it expedient to sen 1 an armed party into his
country for its protection he may still be induced to
establish a post on Pankour or some one of the other
islands contiguous to it. By this measure he observed
the pirates would in a manner be hemmed in betwixt
the new pod and that of Krean ; the importance
of Perak and its produce woidd be increased, and he
would himself feel secure of having assistance at
hand upon any sudden attack from the Siamese ; while
no armament could clandestinely enter the river,
and information of any event could be conveyed in the
quickest manner to Penang.
35. I did not hesitate in conditionally accepting
the documents by which the Raja cedes these islands,
because they are very useful with reference to the
objects just specified, and as the infringement, by
the Siamese of the 2d article of Captain Burney’s
Treaty with the Rajah of Ligor seemed to me to have
rendered the obligation contained in the last clause
of the first article.*
36. Beyond the plans here proposed, lam not
aware of any other which can with prospect s of success
be adopted for clearing the coast from pirates, unless
indeed the Raja of Salengore can be made a party in


the common cause, and be bound to aid it to the
utmost of his power. There is great reason to believe
that the pirates find purchasers amongst his people of
the property plundered by pirates, and the least that
can be required of him would seem to be that he
should be strongly bound down to prevent suspicious
prows entering the port and to secure all persons
importing articles without being able to exhibit proofs
that they were fairly obtained.
37. The Chow Phya of Ligor sent in the Month
of November 1824 to Perak a Siamese armed force of
two hundred men to relieve ('he Hat's party. They
were commanded by Sri Maha Jillelah ; stayed four-
months in Perak, and returned to Kedah. Another
Siamese force consisting of three hundred men under
Sangkhram * a Siamese officer, arrived in Perak in
the month of November 1825, immediately after the
negotiations with the Raja of Ligor. 26 of these men
were from Ligor and the remainder from Kedah, of a
tribe originally sprung from the Siamese proper, and
still professing the religion, and adhering to most of
the customs of that people. Consequently the Chow
Phya found it convenient to incorporate their dispos-
able men with his own army.
38. This armament had remained seven months,
when one hundred and sixty three ( 163 ) men return-
ed to Bead Quarters in Ligor or Kedah.
39. The remainder consisting of about one hun-
dred and thirty seven men stayed in Perak until the
7th of September 1826 when they suddenly set off to
return to Ligor or Kedah,
40. Their Chiefs repeatedly demanded the Buuga
Mas from the Raja of Perak and stated at the same
periods, that if he chose it, he might pay in lieu of it
an annual sum-of 1,500 Spanish Dollars.
41. The conduct of the Siamese while in Perak
was such as might be expected from an invading force.


They obliged the Raja to supply them gratis with rice
and other articles. They unceremoniously took away
some Malayan women from their families and they
levied heavy contributions on the already impoverished
ryots, of cattle, poultry, fruit and other articles.
42. The Raja informed me that no resistance
was made to these lawless acts, because it was appre-
hended that resistance would give the Ohow Phya a
plea for putting in execution his plans for entirely
subjugating the country.
43. The Raja delayed giving the Bunga Mas,
and finding grain latterly to grow scarce he declined
supplying any more to the Siamese forces, to which
circumstance he attributes their departure, as theii
inform'd him that they should return within three
months to receive the Bunga Mas,
44. The King furnished to me a statement ot
his losses and those of his people since the Raja of
Ligor first showed a disposition to interfere in the
Government of his country. The whole amount may
be rated at about 20,000 Spanish Dollars, of which
they have only received 1,720 Spanish Dollars ac-
cording to their account.
45. In order more fully to develop the views of
the Siamese with regard to Perak an abstract may be
here given of the letters which have been written since
the mont h of July 1825 by the Chow Phya of Ligore
or by his order to the Rajah of Perak.
46. The tone of these perhaps betrays even more
forcibly than their contents do the determination of
the Governor of Ligore and of (he Gourt of Siam to
reduce Perak if possible to a Province of their country.
47. In none of them is the Rajah treated with
the respect which his situation as rightful King of
Perak entitled him to. On (he contrary the Phya. by
by almost invariably addressing the Raja indirectly


through inferior officers, studiously aims at humbling
him to a resistless state of dependence on himself, at
the same time enhancing his own importance by an
assumption of, it may be supposed, unauthorized
Titles.
48. The Chow Phya on several occasions has
instructed the Rajah of Perak to act in a base and.
deceitful manner towards the Agents of the Prince of
of Wales Island Government and on one occasion he
has insidiously endeavoured to prepossess the Rajah
against the English by plainly informing him that
they are “ not to be trusted when their interests are
concerned, and that as they are in perplexity how to
act, he had better be guided by Siamese Councils.”
49. In respect to Perak affairs as connected
with Siam and Salengore, he generally conveys
erroneous impressions to the Raja; and on one occasion
quite misrepresents the tenor of several parts of the
negociations he had concluded with Captain Burney,
Agent to the Right Rouble, the Governor General.
50. By a letter under his own seal also he ac-
knowledges that he had sent a force of 12 officers and
300 men to Perak to remain there and assist it) the
management of that Country ; thereby open]} violat-
ing one article of the engagement, or Preliminary
Treaty concluded betwixt himself and Captain Burney.
51. On various occasions he assumes the right
to dictate the line of conduct which the Raja of Perak
ought to pursue, uses every art of intimidation, con-
joined to magnificent promises, to bend the Raja to his
views and frequently employs ambiguous terms to cover
or but half explain his own designs and to harass the
Raja’s mind with fear and doubt. And having so far
succeeded and made him almost believe that the
British had delivered him arid his countrymen over to
Siam, he j ounces on him with a sudden demand for
200 Bhars of Tin. equivalent to about 2,400 Rs., > n


order to pay for certain guns and muskets to be sup-
plied to him by a French ship and which he adds it is
his intention to send to Perak to be used there, or in
other words to secure the subjection of that state to
Siam.
52, Having positively interdicted the Raja from
acting on any occasion of moment without either con-
sulting himself by letter, or his agents personally,
and without keeping in view the interests of the
Siamese, the Chow Phya must have believed that
his duplicity would escape detection by the Honble.
the Governor in Council of Prince of Wales Island.
53. The letters here alluded to were given to
me by the Raja of Perak but the copies of the replies
made to them having been carried away bv his last
secretary (who left his service) and was dangerously
ill in the interior, he would only state generally that
they were of a nature calculated to avert if possible
the apparent impending entire subjugation of himself
and his country to Siam.
(Signed) James Low—Political Agent.
Perak, 27th Octr. 1826.
P. S. 54. Letters numbered 7, 8, 9, from
Aluang Pakdee to the Raja of Perak, copies of which
were delivered to me by the Malay Translator, and
the. originals of which 1 received from the King,
having been already translated by Mr. Anderson
Political Agent, and transmitted with his report last
year, and the translations having been perused by me
and compared with the original letters and found
correct, I beg therefore to refer to them. Transla-
tions of the subsequent letters will be found in tho
appendix.
(Signed) J. Low, Political Agent.


Abstract of the Ligorean Letters.
Loung Pakdee to the King of Perak—29th July 1825.
This letter is addressed by an inferior officer of
the Ligorean Chief to the King of Perak. Raja Muda
and Maha Munti, thereby degrading the King to the
state of a mere Governor of a Siamese Province.
Gives a magnificent string of royal titles to himself,
a mere Governor of a Province. Artfully represents
that the Siamese and English are on a most friendly
footing, and then couples it with the assertion that
magnificent presents were coming for his King from
Bengal. Hints that it was by a great amenity of
conduct, and application to him, that he delayed
sending 3,50b men to Salengore. Then states the
chief objects to be negociated regarding the Salengore
and Perak States, and fairly tells the Raja that the
English had no intention to interfere in his Govern-
ment, and that they had not only agreed ( the
Governor in Council at Penang) that Peiak should
be attached to Siam, but that it should continue to
pay as a perfect dependency, the gold and silver
flowers like other Provinces. The Raja is then told
to deceive Mr. Anderson by evasive conduct and
speeches. Promises great increase of consequence
and rank to the Raja from Siam, and that he will
represent matters at Court when he shall arrive with
Captain Burney. States that the armament has been
delayed tor the present. States that the Raja Kechil
Muda and Orang Kaya Besar had been sent overland
from Queda with a force of 200 men for the purpose
of joining with the Raja of Perak in the administration
of his Government.
Dated 29th July 1825.
lie doubts of the consistency of the Penang
Government, and represents it as quite at a loss what
Fort William sth January 1823,


to do respecting Salaugore and Perak affairs, adding
that it was not to be trusted when any advantage lay in
the way. Instructs (he Raja of Perak to tell a deliberate
falsehood to Mr, Anderson, in order to put a stop
to the negociations, and which falsehood would have
been afterwards taken advantage of to the aggrandize-
ment of Siam. Assumes to himself a power over
the Raja, and directs him to be guided by the Counsels
of Nakoda Mahomed, who is in the Siamese interest.
Endeavours to awe him into compliance by hinting
the displeasure of the Siamese Court, and prevents
him acquainting the British Government with any
event until the Li gore Raja shall have passed his
opinion upon it. After threats he comes to promises,
and tries to bind the Raja by hints of being allowed
to rule his country in greater splendour than
heretofore, but still, keeps him to the main point, that
all favor and power must reach him from Siam.
To Sultan Abdullah from Loung Fakdee.
States the arrival of Captain Burney and that he
had requested that the armament might be delayed.
States the objects regarding Perak and Salengom
Advises the Raja to tell his people to remain quiet,
and not to leave the country.
From the same to the Rajah and his Council.
Expects that the liajah will tell him all thaft
transpires on Mr. Anderson’s visit. Expresses his
apprehensions that his good intentions towards the
liajah will he frustrated by the arrival of Mr. Ander-
son. Reminds him how much it is his interest to
attach himself to Siam. Notices the arrangements
to be made with Rajah Hassan. and Captain Burney’s
Treaty. Directs the Raja and his Council to act
when in conference with Mr. Anderson agreeably to
Ins (the Bigorian’s ) wishes, to beware of mistakes,
and to argue stoutly ; to beware of entering deeply
into subjects proposed for discussion, to send Nakoda


Mahomed back soon, States having received a Kris.
In this letter from Loung Phiyaban. a Queda
officer, to the Rajah of Perak, it is stated that the
Raja of Ligor approves of the placing of the officers
as noticed in the Raja’s letter to him. Expects that
the Raja of Perak will be devoted to Siam and to him.
Says he has gone to Siam (the Ligorean)
From the Chow Ph\ 7 a to the Rajah of Perak.
Stales that he wants 200 Bhars of Tin to pay to
the Captain of a French ship for 20 cannons and /00
muskets. Tells the Raja that these guns and muskets
are for himself. Bids him get the tin within sor 6
months. Says he is on his way to Ligore. Dated
Monday 26th day of the Bth Month, year fowl.
Loung Bhakdee to the Rajah of Perak, 14th. Sept.
182"’.
After assuming to himself magnificent titles,
he states that the armament has been delayed, that
the Raja’s people were astonished at their appearance
and numbers. That Captain Burney had arrived with
presents to the King of Siam, and that negociationfl
had taken place at Queda. That the British did not
wish to have any thing to do with the Perak Govern-
rneht, because it belongs to Siam. States that Raja
Hassan was ordered out of Perak, and other particulars
regarding the disputes. States that the Raja Kechi
Muda. who is recommended to the Raja of Perak to
be Bandahara, goes over to Ligore to wait on the
Chow Phiya. and get matters settled here. Permits
the Raja Kechil Muda to be Raja Bandahara, and
directs other officers to be sent to Ligore to have mat
ters adjusted. Trusts that the Perak country will be
governed agreeably to Siamese custom. Requires al
important news to be communicated to him, and
that the Orang Kaya Besar should forbid a repeti-
tion of any thing improper, and instruct the people


in what is right, and moreover inspect the collec-
tion of the taxes under the Raja, who wilt receive
the tax on tin. Nakoda Mahomed or Raja Macotta
will collect the taxes under the Orang Kaya Besar
for the Raja. Outposts to be made at the place where
Raja Rassan lived and Raja Macotta will represent
the Laxatnana, henceforward, as he is old. If any one
acts contrary to the customs of Siam, in regard to its
dependencies, the said person shall be sent to the
Chow Phiya of Ligore to answer for his conduct, and
get advice.
And it is further stated, that 12 officers and 800
men had been sent to Perak to assist in the manage-
ment of the country and behave according to circum-
stance*. States that the Chow Phiya will return
from Siam, that he will wait on the King of Siam
along with Captain Burney, and their affairs having
been made known to the King of Siam, he will
promote those who merit promotion. The Raja of
Perak will be afterwards informed of the determination
of the Siamese Court. Cautions the Raja against
evil Councillors, and not adhering to Siamese customs,
if he desires to live hereafter in peace.
(Signed) James Low, Political Agent.


Engagement entered into betwixt His
Majesty Paduka Sri Sultan Abdullah Ma alum
Shah ibem Meuhoom Jmimal Oollah Supreme
and rightful ruler over all and every part of the
Perak Country and Captain James IjOW Agent
to the Honble. Robert Fullerton, (Governor of
Pnlo Penang, Singapore and Malacca on behalf
of the Hon. East India Company, whereof copies
have been interchanged and which is to be ever-
lasting us the Him and Vloon. Moreover it is a
token of lasting friendship and alliance to exist
betwixt the Honble. the East India Company
and the King of Perak, and betwixt the King
and the Honble Robert Fullerton.
Article First. His Majesty the King of
Perak of his own free will and pleasure hereby
engages that he will adhere to the stipulations
respecting the boundaries of Perak, and the
settlements of other points which were made
with the Rajah of Sal an gore by Mr. Anderson,
Agent to the Honble. Robert Fullerton Governor
of Pulo Penang &c. And also to all the stipu-
lations contained in the Engagement which His
Majesty made with the said Mr. John Anderson
dated the 20th day of Mohiirrum, Monday, in
\ the year of the Hejira 1241 all of which deeds
\ are hereby declared to be fixed and unalterable,
j Moreover His Majesty now engages that he will
/ not hold any communication or intercourse with
the Raja of Siam, or with any of his Chiefs
or vassals, or with the Rajah of Salangore,
or any of his Chiefs or vassals which may or can have
reference to political subjects, or to fhe administration
of his government, and the management of his country
of Perak. His .Majesty will not countenance any of
his subjects who may connect themselves with or
league or intrigue with the Siamese King, or with
any of his Chiefs or vassals, or with the Rajah of
The Chop
■C
or Seal of
the King of
\ Perak
('hop of
the Raja
Mud a
(/hop of
the Binda-
hara
' Chop of N
the Orang
K aya
Besar
Chop of
the Tamiln-
gong


Salangore or any of his Chiefs or vassals, or with
any other Siamese or Malayan people, by which the
country of Perak can in any degree or manner be
disturbed and the Government of His Majesty inter,
fered with.
Second. His Majesty the King of Perak will not
give or present the Bunga Mas or any other species
of tribute whatever to the Rajah or King of Siam
or to any of his governors or vassals. Nor will lie
give or present such to the Rajah of Salangore or to
any other Siamese or Malayan people, henceforward
and for ever. Moreover, His Majesty will not receive
or permit to enter into his country of Perak from
the Raja or King of Siam or from any of his governors
or chief's any ambassadors or armaments arriving at
Perak for the purpose of arranging political matters,
or interfering in any way in the affairs and
administration of the Country of Perak. In like
manner lie will not receive into his country embassies
or armaments sent by the Rajah of Salangore or
by any other Siamese or Malayan people. Nor will
he receive any party from any of the people, Rajahs
or Countries here specified into his country should
its strength even consist of no more than thirty men.
Nor will he allow the least number to enter Ids
country. But all persons of every country will as
heretofore have free permission to trade unmolested
to any port in the Perak Country provided they do
not interfere in its affairs. Should parties or arma-
ments of the description above stated arrive in the
Perak country from any one of the countries, or
Rajahs, Governors, or Chiefs, or people above specified
or should any of the said Rajahs, Governors or Chieis
league with subjects of the King of Perak in order
to disturb his country and interfere in any way in
his Government, then and in any such case or cases
liis Majesty will rely, as he now relies, and in
all future time will rely on the friendly aid and
protection of the Honble. the East India Company, and


of the Honble. the Governor in Council of Palo
Penang, Ac. Ac. to be manifested in such a manner
and by such means as may to them seem most ex-
pedient.
Thirdly. Captain James bow as Agent for the
Honble. the Governor in Council of Prince of Wales
Island, engages that if His Majesty the King of Perak
will faithfully adhere to and perform all and each of
the stipulations contained in this engagement as above
specified, then His Majesty shall receive the assistance
of the British in expelling from his country any
Siamese or Malays as above stated, who as also above
specified may at any time enter the Perak country
with political views, or for the purpose of interfering
in any way with the Government of His Majesty.
But if His Majesty shall fail to perform all and every
article of this his engagement binding on him then
the obligation on the British to protect him and to
assist him against his enemies will cease and he will
lose the confidence and friendship of the Honble. the
Governor in Council of Pulo Penang Aca. Aca. for
ever.
This Engagement which His Majesty has volun-
tarily and with great satisfaction entered into has
received as mark of its validity the Chop or Seal of
His Majesty, and the Signature and Seal of the Agent,
Captain James Low, together with the Chops of the
Ministers of Perak who are also parties in this engage-
ment with the Agent. And it is delivered to the
said Agent to remain as an ever enduring memorial
of alliance and friendship betwixt the King of Perak
and the British.
This paper written on the 18th day of October
1826 of the English year and on the 16th day of
Rubi-001-awul Wednesday in the year of the Hejira
1242.


Signature of the Agent
Captain James Low,
Seal of
the Honorable
Company.


Chop of
H. M, Paduka
Sri Sultan
Malema Shah
King of Perak
Supplementary Engagement of the Rajah
of Perak contained in a letter addressed by
His Majesty to the Agent Captain James Low
I
11
After Compliments,
rak
He who governs Perak, Paduka Sri Sultan
Abdulla Mah Alum Shah desires to make known to
his friend Captain .Tames Low, Agent to the Honble.
Robert Fullerton, Governor in Council of Prince of
Wales Island, Malacca and Singapaore, with relation
to the subjects on which His Majesty and the Agent
have already conferred.
First, That His Majesty will come down the
river to stay at Kotah loomoot, where he will build a
tort of proper strength, and assign a competent
number of soldiers for its protection and his own in
order that all enemies and pirates may be kept at a
distance and these men will be well armed and will
be maintained by His Majesty, as a standing force to
l>e at all times ready for defence and to obey his
orders ; and for the temporary accommodation of any
British Officer who may be sent to visit him His
Majesty will direct that a small house be built opposite
to his own residence.
Second, His Majesty will keep a prow always
ready to convey information of importance to Pnlo
Penang, and will further without delay take measures
for opening a communication overland betwixt the
Perak river and the Krean river and thence to
Penang.
Third, The Laksamana and the Shahbunda will
be forthwith sent down to reside at Quala Bidor at
the spot where Rajah Hussein formerly posted him-
self and these two persons will by His Majesty’s order
erect a fort there and will collect the population and
settle the country in that direction. And there
* Sic.


persons trading to Perak will be encouraged and
protected, according to ancient custom.
Fourth. His Majesty will speedily seize and
expel the head officers now residing at Koran, at
Laroot, at Nong, at Singkang and at Burwas, who
may have connected themselves with pirates or
robbers, and will give warning to the people there
that should they let pirates or robbers remain
amongst them and should any English come there
from Penang, the innocent might in that case
suffer with the guilty.
Fifth. All traders to all parts of Perak will be
cherished by His Majesty and their traffic will not
be delayed, but every means will be afforded for a
speedy settlement of accounts between buyer and
seller, and His Majesty will coerce any of his sub-
jects or others should their conduct require harsh
measures to come to a speedy settlement of accounts
with traders to Perak and to prevent their dis-
tressing such in any way.
Sixth. His Majesty the King of Perak will
drive out of his country any person convicted of
having carried off clandestinely or by force from
any British Possession any subject of or person
living under the British Government, and should
any person so carried off be discovered His Majesty
will detain that person and give information to the
Honble. the Governor of Pulo Penang in order that
such mischievous practices may be wholly prevented.
Seventh. When the country has again got
settled His Majesty will direct his people to sow
abundance of rice grain and rear as much poultry
and as many cattle as possible ; in order that his
people and those residing under the British Govern-
ment may receive mutual advantage.
Eighth. His Majesty intends to appoint and will
appoint a properly qualified person to superintend


the Collection of duties on Exports—such as tin
and other merchandize.
Should any trader, a subject of His Majesty,
arrive at a British port and not be able to show a
Port Clearance the same will be forfeited according
to custom.
Ninth. His Majesty wishes to establish schools
in his Country, and will be happy should his friend,
Captain James Low, assist him by sending a well
skilled schoolmaster from Pulo, Penang, and should
His Majesty send any child or children to Pulo
Penang to be educated in all the requisite branches
of knowledge, he hopes that such child or children
will be favorably received and treated.
All these things His Majesty agrees to with the
greatest satisfaction. This paper dated the 23rd
day of the month Rubheea-001-awal, on Wednesday,
or the 25th day of October in the year 1826.
( A true translation or copy )
( Signed ) James Low,
Political Agent.


Engagement of Paduka Sri Sultan Abdullah
\ Ma-alum Shah Son of the deceased Jummul
u_ \ Oolan, and Supreme Ruler over the Perak
h j country, made and delivered to Captain James
/ Low, Agent of the Honble. Robert Fullerton,
Governor in Council of Prince of Wales Island,
Singapore and Malacca, and which is to be
everlasting as the revolutions and endurance
\ of the sun and moon.
a of
/ The Sultan who governs the whole of the
X Perak Country and its dependencies has this
day in the month and year herein specified
given over and ceded to the Honble. the East
\ India Company of England to be under its
Government henceforward and for ever, the
)f* I
/ Pulo Binding and the Islands of Pangkor,
/ together with all and every one of the Islands
which belonged of old and until this period to
the Kings of Perak and which have been
hitherto included within the Perak State,
L y a because the said islands afford safe abodes to
the pirates and robbers who plunder and molest
/ the traders on the coast and the inhabitants of
the mainland, and effectually deprive them of
the means of seeking subsistence, and as the
\ King of Perak has not the power or means
i \ singly to drive these pirates away. For these
v reasons the King of Perak has of his own free
will and pleasure ceded and given over as
aforesaid to the Honble. the Bast India Com-
pany to be kept and governed by them and to
be placed under any one of their Governments as
they may think fit. To this deed as tokens of its
validity have this day been put the great Seal or
Chop of the Ruler of the Perak Country, Paduka
Sri Sultan Abdulla Ma-alum Shah, together with
the Chops of the Chief Ministers of His Majesty’s
Government This Deed is made and written this
X Chop \
of Sultan
Abdulah Mu-
alam Shah
King of
\ Perak X
/ Chop of \
the Raja Muda of
\ Perak /
Chop \
of the Raja
Bindahara of
Perak /
/ ( 'hop of
(he Orang Kaya
Besar of
\ Perak /
X Chop
of the
Orang Kaya
Tummongonl’
Sri Paduka
Raja


seventeenth day of Rubheea-001-awul, Wednesday
3 242 or the 18th day of October in the year 1826.
( A true Copy )
( Signed) Janies Low, Poll. Agent
to the Hon. the Govr. in Council
Prince of Wales Island.


Port Cornwallis The 2d November 1826.
Statement
of the Claims of the Rajah of Perak and certain
persons his subjects on the Chow Phya of Ligore,
commencing at the period of the Quedah invasion
and carried up to the present time.
( Here follow details of the claims, amounting
in all to Spanish Dollars 2530.25.)


Letter from Luang Pakclee to Sultan Abdullah, to
the Raja Mooda and Tuanku Maha Mantri, dated 20th
day of month Mohurrura 1241 year,, or 2nd August 1825.
( After Compliments. )
The Phya has received the Raja’s letter and under-
stood its contents, as well as what Nakhoda Mahomed
verbally communicated. When he, Nakhoda Mahom-
ed, went from Perak, he said that Mr. Anderson
would not have reached Perak yet ; the Chow Phya
now is apprehensive that the fulfilment of his good
intentions towards the Raja of Perak and of exalting
his name will be frustrated by the arrival of Mr.
Anderson in Perak. The Chow Phya of Ligore is
desirous of receiving the Raja of Perak under his pro-
tection and government, thereby augmenting his
dignity and exalting his name beyond precedent and
that he may rule his country in peace. The Chow
Phya desires that he may be informed of the nature of
of the subjects respecting which Mr. Anderson will
have proceeded to Perak. Nakoda Mahomed will
return in fifteen days to Quedah.
The ('how Phya has learned from Captain H.
Burney that Mr. Anderson will effect the expulsion
of Raja Hussain from Perak aud that he will settle
and fix the Birnam river as the mutual boundary of
Salengore and Perak. The treaty betwixt the Chow
Phya and Captain H. Burney- has been alluded to in a
former letter to the Rajah of Perak.
The Chow Phya desires that when the Raja of
Perak, the Raja Mooda and the Tuanku Maha Muntri,
together with the Laksamana are in consultation with
Mr. Anderson, the Raja of Perak will act in accordance
with the wishes of the Chow Phya of Ligore, as fully ,
explained in the letter now sent. The Raja of Perak
Fort Cornwallis The 2d November 182b'.


trmst be particularly cautious not to commit any mis-
take in his consultations with the English Agent, and
not to allow himself to be worsted in Council and
argument. He will abstain from entering deeply into
such subjects as may be proposed by Mr. Anderson for
discussion. Let the Rajah learn more fully all points
connected with pending subjects from Nakoda
Mahomed and then send back Nakoda Mahomed
quickly, with full information. A present has been
sent with this letter ; the Phya of Ligore received the
the Kris transmitted by the Raja of Perak by the
Bandahara.
( A true Translation )
(Signed) James Low Capt.
Political Agent.


Letter of Loung Pakdee to Sultan Abdullah, the
Raja Muda and the Tuanku Maha Muntri, who form
the Council for Perak affairs.
To these the following particulars are made known
by order of the King of the World, beneath whose
feet and slippers heads we prostrate, who is the Lord
and Master, the Chow Phya Sri Masookarat of illus-
trious descent, resembling the glorious sun, whose
power, wisdom and piety are conspicuous, who sits in
state upon the High and splendid throne of the Em-
pire of Ligore Seetamrat. That orders had been given
by the Chow Phya that a large party of Siamese
should proceed to Perak by land and water. The
Raja Kechil Muda and the Orang Kayabesar* who were
then in Queda and sitting in conference and saw this
army and were astonished at its appearance exceeding
everything hitherto known in Queda, observing that
if they went to Salengore or elsewhere, no person
could withstand them, the sight would be enough,
nor could any country near at hand oppose them, or all
countries in the vicinity ; And the Baja of Pulo Pe-
nang has sent Captain Henry Burney an Englishman
who is Envoy to the Rajah of Bengal with a present
to give to the Somdet Phra Phoothee Chau Yo Hooa
Paramesra Sri Ayoothaja, and Captain Burney met
the Chow Phya at Queda and entered into fitting
negociations agreeing that Perak was a country which
the English did not wish to have any thing to say to
in respect to its Government because it is one which
is dependent on and pays the golden Flower to the
King of Siam. And respecting the Raja of Salen-
gore who had gone hostilely to Perak it was agreed
that measures should be taken that he be
ordered out of that Country, And the boundary
of the Perak and Salengore countries has been
fixed at Soongie Birnam, as heretofore. And the
prows and gunpowder which the Raja of Salengore
took from Che Hat the said Rnja will repay, and
Captain Burney also asked the Chow Phya not to


go to attack Salengore. And Chow Phya of Li gore
perceiving that Captain Burney had coins to negociate
in a fair and honorable way he therefore stopped
the armament. All these matters have been noticed
in a previous communication. And the Raja of Perak
had sent Nakhoda Mahomed twice with letters to the
Chow Phya. the contents of which have been under-
stood, vist. That Rajah Bandahara had died, and
desiring that the Raja Kechil Muda should be made
Raja Bandahara, But the Chow Phya who is exalted
considers that it will be best that the Raja Kechil
Muda should go to wait on the Chow Phya at Ligore
to settle matters fairly. He however permits the
Raja Kechil 1 to be Raja Bandahara, and the Orang
Kaya Besar and Nakhoda Mahomed * will also go to
wait on the Chow Phya for the sake of settling
matters; for the Orang Kaya Besar is a man of
sense and experience, And Chow Phya has much
confidence in placing the Orang Kaya besar about
the Raja of Perak, and trusts that the Perak Country
will be governed in the same manner and according to
the same rules as are other countries which give
the Boonga Mas and perak to Siam, Whatever
Weighty matter mry require to be decided upon it will
be requisite that the Raja of Perak give intelligence
first to the Chow Phya. And whoever does evil in
the country and does not follow proper customs, let
Orang Kaya besar forbid a repetition of it, and
instruct people in their proper line of conduct.
And let the Orang Kaya besar inspect the collection
of the taxes and duties under the Raja of Perak,
agreeably to custom. Again, the tin of Perak will
not be exported by any other channel than the Perak
river as heretofore, and the taxes collected in the same
will remain with the Raja of Perak, And Nakhoda
Mahomed vizt. Raja Makota will collect the taxes,
along with the Orang Kaya besar, in order that the
proceeds may be applied towards the Government of
the Country.


And the Orang Ungrees have agreed that Raja
Htissein shall leave the Perak Country, and it is
therefore necessary that out posts should be established
(at the place where the Raja resided ) and that the
same should be strengthened, and settled. And as
the Laxamana is old, the Chow Phya directs that
the Raja Makota shall assist and act along with him
in every capacity connected with the duties ol
Laxamana for ever.
And it is requisite that there should be a strong
post at the place were Raja Hussein had fortified
himself for the purpose of co-operating with the Raja
of Perak and bringing affairs to a settlement.
If any one shall act foolishly or enter into
disputes and act contrary to the orders and customs
of the Court of Siam in respect to its dependencies
the said person shall be sent to the Chow Phya of
higore to answer for his conduct and to get advice.
And the Chow Phya has sent Aloung Pakdee
Songkhram Nai Khoot, Che Walam and Koon Lille-
cheen Nai Khoon thap Keeree woraeen Nai Keen (! )
who are Siamese officers and Sri Indra Dewa and Sri
Leila Phulawar and Raja Sattrya Warna and Raja
Dewa Sillia and Raja Awar Phalawan and Wan Yis-
noo, ( ! ) who are all Siamese and Malayan officers and
also three hundred men to accompany Raja Kechil
Muda and the Orang Kaya Besar by land to Perak.
And with the view that they may assist in the manage-
ment of the Country, and behave well to those
Who behave well, and the contrary to those who
behave amiss.
The Chow Phya intends to return from the Capital
of Siam after having gone there. And he intends to
wait on the King of Siam along with Captain H,
Burney who is the Envoy from the Raja of Bengal,
and also who bears presents. There the Chow Phja
will make all affairs well known to the King of Siam,


according to their degree and importance, and to raise
those who are to be raised as is usual at Siam and
that the future may be full of delight. When the
Chow Phjra shall have returned he will send a letter to
the Raja of Perak in order that whatever has been
ordained at the Court of Siam may be carried into
effect. The Chow Phya intends to assist the King
Perak, as a friend. Let not the Raja follow evil
counsel in his Government, but be guided by the old
custom and usage of Siam. In which case the Raja of
Perak will in all future time remain in peace.
Dated Saturday 13th day of the Increase IGtn
month in the year of the fowl 12415t year answering
to 14th October 1825.
( A true Translation )
( Signed ) James Low Captain,
Political Agent.


Letter from Loung Phyaban of Queda to Sultan
Abdul ah of Perak and his Officers, Raja Muda and
Paja Bandahara. Dated 12th Dalkhaida 1241 of
Heijira or Sunday May 1825.
The Baginda of Quedah desires to acquaint
Sultan Abdul ah, Baja Muda and Raja Bandahara that
he has received the letter brought by Panglima Cassim
from them, informing him that Sultan Abdullah,
Baja Kechil Tenga, Raja Muda and Raja Bandahara
intend to reside at Rattan Allah, and that the Rajah
has directed Orang Kaya besar, the Laxatnanna, the
Fumoongoong, Raja Makota, to reside at Rantan
Panjang and his officers to fix themselves at Kota
J umbut with the view to the more speedy settlement
of the country which is well considered. But the
Raja of Perak must be devoted to the King of Siam
and to his honorable officer the Chow Phya who
governs Ligor.
With respect to the scarcity of rice in the Perak
Country as noticed by the Raja, if the Raja will send
the prows formerly brought by Nakhoda Mahomed,
otherwise, Rajah Makota, to Queda he will receive
a supply of rice.
With respect to the letter addressed by the Raja
of Perak to the Chow Phya of Ligore, it will be for-
warded to the capital of Siam to which place the Chow
t hya has gone, and when a reply is returned it will
be sent to Perak.
( A true translation )
(Signed) Janies Low, Captain
Political Agent.


Fort Cornwallis the 13th Novr. 1826.
Translation
of a letter from the King of Perak to the Honble,
Robert Fullerton, Governor of Prince of Wales Island.
After Compliments.
Whereas ray friend has made known to me that
in respect to this country of Perak, with the asssis-
tance of my friend and the Honorable East India
Company, an Agent was sent to Siam, and it is
stated that the King of Siam has made an engage-
ment, securing to me the Government ot my own
country, in the same manner as ray forefathers
governed it; I am in consequence extremely pleased
and gratified by the kind assistance of ray friend in
all respects, and the arrangement is agreeable to ray
own wishes.
With respect to this country of Perak and all its
dependencies, it is my desire to govern it as King,
agreeably to former custom, and 1 do not wish to
have any connection with any Siamese or Malay
Chiefs to the East or to the West, nor will 1 permit
them to interfere further in the Government of this
my Country of Perak, or any of its dependencies.
And with respect to the tax of the Hoonga Mas &ca.
1 will not sent it any more to the Siamese Rajah, or
Salengore, or to any Malay Rajahs whatever tor the
time to come.
Moreover with respect to troops or Messengers
from any of the Siamese or any Malay Rajahs, it only
20 or 30 persons even arrive, 1 will not receive them,
nor permit them to interfere in any way in ray affairs
and I shall not send any armament or messengers to
any Rajah of Siamese or Malayan States as above
stated, for 1 require nothing from these Chiefs.


Any merchants or traders arriving from all coun-
tries who may choose to come and conduct themselves
with propriety, and trade as in former times, shall
meet with no obstructions or difficulties from me ;
they shall be at liberty to go and come, so long as they
evince no bad designs towards this iny Country. My
resources are but limited at present, but it is my in-
tention to repair the evils sustained by ray country
which was ruined by the Rajah of Quedah, the Raja of
Siam, and the Raja of Salengore ; and 1 am collecting
all the Ryots and inhabitants of the Country, who fled
to different parts in consequence of the disturbances
created by the above named Chiefs.
But in the event of the King of Siam, or any in-
forior Siamese Chief, or the Rajah of Salengore or any
other Chief of the Siamese or Malayan race, or any of
the Chiefs in the Perak Country concerting together,
or individually endeavouring to oppress me, and be-
coming enemies to my country, I rely upon my friend s
assistance to support me and protect my country and
subjects in every respect for the future.
The state of my country and the difficulties and
troubles in which I have been involved, have been
witnessed by, and fully explained to Captain James
Low, who was the bearer of my friend’s communication
to me. These particulars I make known to my friend,
with a sincere heart, of my own free will and accord,
in order that all my friends may be fully aware of my
sentiments.
Dated 16th Rabiul awul 1241 or 18th October
1826.
( A true translation )
( Signed ) John Anderson
Malay Tr. to Govt,
Pinang
The 3d Novr. 1826.


Translation
of a letter from the King of Perak to the Rouble, the
Governor of Pulo Pinang.
After Compliments.
I beg to represent to my friend that with refer-
ence to my anxious desire to defend this my country
of Perak and its dependencies from, enemies, I am very
deficient in funds and arms. 1 therefore send here-
with my brother the Rajah Bandaharra and the Orang
Kaya Besar as my agents to wait upon my friend,
together with ray son named Rajah Nga Petra, Datu
Laxamana and Sri Deiva Rajah to make my friend’s
acquaintance. I have directed my agents the Rajah
Bindahara and Orang Kaya Besar to beg assistance
from ray friend in money and arms, gunpowder and
balls, to distribute amongst my people, to protect the
Perak country in the interior as well as to seaward in
•case the Siamese should practise deceit and come to op-
press me. The disposition and cunning of the Siamese
my friend is no doubt well aware of, for my friend’s
understanding is perfect, and he well deliberates upon
and considers all matters. Whatever may appear best
in the judgment of ray friend to secure the tranquil-
lity of the Perak country, 1 request he will advise and
assist me in sincerity, for I have entire confidence
and. trust that ray friend will show favour towards me ;
for this country of Perak I regard as under the
superintendence or in the safe keeping of my friend,
and the Honble. English East India Company, who
must protect it, and superintend the Government of it
as it were an English state. My fidelity can never be
diminished towards my friend and the English East
India Company. I never can be disposed to place any
confidence in aiiy Siamese or Malay Rajahs. My trust
only is in ray friend and the Company, who I rely
upon protecting this country of Perak, agreeably to
the confidence that 1 have reposed.


1 have therefore to inform my friend that the
amount I require in the Perak country at present is
first 10,000 Dollars-—-Muskets 400 with an adequate
proportion of gun powder and balls. This even is
not quite sufficient, but it is my opinion that if more
is required 1 can request further assistance in these
respects. With respect to the 10,000 Dollars, the 400
muskets and the powder and balls which I now re-
quest, I beg they may be delivered to the Raja Binda-
hara and the Orang Kaya Besar, who are the bearers
of this letter, so that they may speedily return.
The 10,000 Dollars and the price of the muskets
and ammunition which I now request, will be a debt
on my part to my friend and my agents will execute
an engagement accordingly to be retained by my friend.
Por all other matters I refer my friend to my Agents,
and request he will settle every thing with them, and
1 will conform to my friend's desire. My brother the
Rajah Bandahara and Son Rajah Nga Petra are but
young men yet, and are but little experienced. 1
request my friend will therefore instruct them, so that
their understanding may be improved.
1 rely upon my friend's compliance with my
wishes in all respects above noticed.
Dated 18th Rubiel awul or 20th October 182b.
( A true translation )
(Signed) John Anderson
Malay Transr, to Govt*
Pinang
The 3rd Novr. 1826.


To the Kajali of Li gore.
In my letter of the sth October last I intimated
to my friend my regret that he had not sooner replied
to my former communication of December, as the
arrival of a favorable answer would have prevented the
necessity of my sending Captain Low to Perak to
enquire into the truth of the reports sent me relative
to the Siamese force haying gone to that country.
Captain Low has now returned, and as I find the
Siamese left the country some time ago and the
King is now in full possession of his authority, it is
unnecessary for me to say more on that subject.
I have only now to call the particular attention of
my friend to the articles of the treaty lately concluded
at Bangkok relative to Perak, that the King is to rule
his country his own way, that neither the English nor
the Siamese are to send troops there or interfere with
him. If the King chooser, of his own free will and
accord, to send the Boongah Mas he may do so. If he
chooses to receive a few people from my friend occasion-
ally he may do so. Independent kings do in these
•things as they please. Quedah and Perak are neigh-
bours and it is right and proper that friendship and
good understanding should subsist between them. It
is far from my wish or desire to interrupt it, but it be-
comes my duty under the Treaty to satisfy myself
whether the King of Perak was willing to send the
Booriga Mas or not or to admit Siamese into his coun-
try. I have accordingly ascertained that it is the wish
of the King to be left entirely to himself: without
'either the English, the Siamese, the Malays or any
-other State meddling in his affairs.
Fort Cornwallis The 13th Novr. 1826.


I must sincerely therefore call on my friend to
keep in his remembrance, that after this declaration of
the sentiments of the King of Perak, any attempt on
his part to interfere, whether by sending people there
or by an}' other means, will undoubtedly be considered
a breach of the late Treaty concluded between the
British Government and His Majesty of Siam, and
destroy the harmony and peace established thereby.
In making this declaration 1 must at the same time
assure my friend of my anxious desire to remain in
peace and friendship with the neighbouring States of
Ligore, and repeat at the same time that we have no
desire to occupy Perak, or interfere in the affairs of
the King and so long as the Treaty is duly fulfilled, so
long as my friend abstains from sending any persons
to Perak or exciting any interference, he may rest as-
sured of the like forbearance on the part of the British
Government. 1 have recommended to the King of
Perak to cultivate friendship and good understanding
with Ligore, as he will do with us. Various reports
having been in circulation relative to preparations of
prows in the Trang and Setul rivers, I directed Captain
Burney in his late visit to Quedah to mention the cir-
cumstance to my friend’s son, who immediately in the
true spirit of friendship offered to give an order to any
person we might wish to send to examine these rivers.
I have accordingly availed myself of so liberal an offer
and now send Captain Gottlieb to accompany the
proper {>eople to the Trang and other rivers.
( Signed ) H. Fullerton
Governor,
Sd. November 1826,


To the Rajah of Perak.
1 setter
from the Honorable Robert Fullerton, Governor of
Pnlo Pinang. Malacca and Singapore, to Sultan
Abdulla, King of Perak.
1 lose no time in acquainting my friend that I
have just received a report of the dispatch of 40 men
from Kedah to Perak, and as it is extremely desirable
that my friend should abstain from any proceeding
calculated to produce a rupture with the Rajah of
Ligore at present, I would recommend his not behav-
ing uncivilly to the party on their arrival, but to
inform them firmly and resolutely that my friend does
not wish them to stay. My friend may permit them
however to remain 10 or 12 days and present [them]
with a civil letter to the Rajah of Ligore; if they
persist in remaining my friend will lose no time in
reporting to me.
( Signed ) R. Fullerton
Governor.
Pinang
the 3rd Novi’. 1826.


To the Honorable
Robert Fullerton Esquire
Governor in Council
Rouble. Sir.
# * * * * *
3. From the complexion of the correspondence
which was confidentially entrusted to me by the King
of Perak, I w r as enabled to predict w 7 hat has since been
fully verified, vizt. the occupation of that Country by
a Siamese detachment immediately after the expul-
sion of Raja Hussein, in direct violation of the second
article of Captain Burney’s preliminary Treaty, making
this Government, as 1 foretold, his Agents in securing
quiet possession for a long period,* during which time
his Emissaries have been using every effort to corrupt
the principal officers of the King and have been exer-
cising control over his Councils.
4. The reports of v *r. Gaunter and Captain Low
prove that as soon as the Raja of Ligore had succeeded,
by the agency of this Government, in expelling Rajah
Hussein, scaring away the reported large fleet of prows
prepared to oppose him, fixing boundaries, and tying the
hands of Salengore, and just as he quitted Quedah, to
accompany Captain Burney to Bangkok under pretence
of using his influence to ratify the Treaty, a party of
about 300 men was dispatched to Perak, together with
a certain number of Chiefs, to aid in conducting the
affairs of Government, notwithstanding the stipulations
of the Treaty so recently concluded with Captain
Burney, and as you are aware, the party withdrew' only
tw'o months ago, but not till after repeated remon-
strances.
Fort Cornwallis The 13th November 18^6'.


5. Amongst the Six Perak Chiefs who arrived
here two days ago, is the “ Orang Kaya Besar,” fre-
quently mentioned by Captain Burney as an Envoy
from the King of Perak to the Rajah of Ligore, and he
as well as the brother and nephew of the King will
doubtless be able to afford you the most unequivocal
information on other points, upon which Captain
Burney has permitted himself to indulge in gratuitous
speculations, when assuming to himself so unusual a
privilege as commenting not only upon my proceedings
as a Temporary Political Agent, but as Malay Tran-
slator to Government, which office 1 have held under
three Governments with numerous recorded testimo-
nials of approval from all, while neither publicly nor
privately have they ever had occasion to notice a single
error or even omission.
I have &c. &c.
( Signed ) John Anderson
Malay Translator to Government;
P. W Island.
The sth Novr. 1826.


Minute by the President.
•
I have read and considered Captain Low’s report
on the affairs of Perak with attention. It is unneces-
sary to repeat the objects of his Mission and the conse-
quent instructions given. They were clear and distinct
Vizt. to explain to the King the nature of the protec-
tion that would be guaranteed to him by the Treaty
with Siam! That his independence was admitted.
That it rested with himself to send the Boonga Mas to
Siam, or to admit and receive the Siamese from Ligor
or not according to his own pleasure ! That by the
Treaty we were bound not to allow compulsion to be
used !
Captain Low was moreover directed to obtain from
the King, a declaration of his sentiments and decision
on this point, in siich shape as might be communicated
to the Chief of Ligore, and for the plain and obvious
purpose of at once putting an end to that course of
chicanery and underhand intrigues, which we knew
would be exerted to intimidate the King into apparent
assent to the views of Ligore.
The avowed and no doubt the real sentiments of
the King are such as might always have been antici-
pated, namely, that he should be left to himself inde-
pendent entirely of Salengore and Siam. 1 regret,
however, that Captain Low has not brought back
document, such as could prudently be sent to ihe Chi©
of Ligore, for however plainly and distinctly the rea
wishes of the King are expressed in the one intended
for that purpose, the terms are such as would, if t = ell
to Ligore, produce a degree of irritation which it
evidently our policy to prevent. It was not our desire to
Fort Cornwallis The 13th Novr. 1826.


excite or rather to increase the subsisting 1 animosity ;
but to break all connection with as little offence to the
Chief of L igore as possible. Captain Low has taken from
the King a document in the shape of an agreement,
whereby he binds himself not to hold intercourse
with the State of Ligore ; not to send the Boonga
Mas to Siam ; and not to receive any person from
Ligore. Such an Phigageraent was not required ;
partaking of the nature of a treaty it was not
within the powers of Captain Low to conclude or
within our own to confirm it. Its requisition formed
no part of Captain Low’s instructions; such indeed
seems now to be objectionable, since however voluntarily
given it is open to the imputation of contravening the
spirit of Captain Burney’s treaty at Bangkok, which
professes to leave the King entirely free to act accord-
ing to his own will and discretion. That a distinct
Treaty of Protection in favor of Perak would tend to
repress and put an end to all further attempts of the
Chief of Ligore is indisputable, but how far such
would now be consistent with the article, I must
leave to the decision of the Bight Honorable the
Governor General, on such explanation as Captain
Burney may be enable to afford, as to the Siamese
construction of that article.
An explanatory letter must now be addressed to
the King, and the persons suit here must be made to
understand, that such engagement was not required.
That he is at full liberty to act as he pleases. That
it is against compulsive measures only that we are
to guard. As to the information conveyed by Captain
Low, it is fully confirmatory of all previous reports. It
is very clear that the moment the execution of Captain
Burney’s Treaty opened the way, the Siamese to the
number of three hundred were sent from Ligore to
Perak, in direct breach of that Treaty. That they
remained there till lately. That partly by intimida-
tion, part ly by bribing the public officers and relations
of the King, they succeeded in establishing an influence


there, sufficient to place him in a state of thraldom.
That Captain Barney’s Treaty at Quedah has thus
opened the way for the furtherance of the views of the
Chief ot Ligore is therefore manifest.
'The letters submitted by Captain Low fully evince
the views entertained by the Chief ot Ligore. The
one intimating a contract with the Captain of a French
ship for 20 large guns and 700 muskets demonstrates
the ambitious projects of that Chief, The article of
the Treaty concluded at Bangkok on the subject of
Quedah, is exactly such as the Chief of Ligore would
himself have dictated, and the one respecting Perak
we may be well assured was only assented to under the
conviction that the objects we had in view would be
entirely defeated by the already established influence
of Ligore, the provisional articles attached to the
declaration of independence and so unthinkingly ad-
mitted by our Envoy, were evidently intended to cover
the underhand course to be pursued for the con-
tinuance of that influence and final subjugation of
Perak. In all this there is nothing surprising, such
being the common practice of all Native States. That
course of underhand deception has been counteracted
by Captain Low’s proceedings. And I can hardly be-
lieve that in opposition to the Treaty, the Chief of
Ligore will venture on more open and decided means of
obstructing the objects of the Treaty, nor can I believe
that if he were so disposed, that he would be supported
by his Superior the King of Siam who has now so
cided an interest in remaining at peace with the
British Government.
] have already expressed my conviction of the
expediency of direct communication with the Court
of Siam as we may be assured that the representations
of the Chief of Ligore will be far from correct. In
noticing Mr. Anderson’s letter of the sth instant
connected with this subject, I can only observe that
that gentleman’s view of the case is borne out by the


documents now produced, expressing at the same time
my regret that public difference of opinion should
be allowed to degenerate into personal altercation,
and that the personal allusion to Mr. Anderson
contained in para. 8 of Captain Burney’s report of
19th September 1825 should have given rise to
discussions in which the interests of Government are
no way concerned.
Captain Low has brought from the King of Perak
a grant of the island of Punker, one of the Bindings.
The expediency of establishing a port there has
undergone frequent discussion, and was on one occasion
sanctioned by the Supreme Government. The advant-
ages of a small establishment there for the prevention
of piracy are generally admitted, I annex a report
on that subject just received from Captain Campbell*
of his Majesty’s Ship Cyrene, but under present
circumstances, the permanent occupation of any part
of the Perak country might be objectionable; and
it is doubtful whether such would not be contrary to
the Article of the Treaty with the Netherlands
Government of 17th March 1824. I am of opinion
therefore that no steps should be taken on that
matter without the sanction of the Honorable Court
of Directors, unless the future perseverance of the
Chief of Ligore in his views against Perak should
render that measure indispensable.
( Signed ) R. Fullerton.
7th November 1826.


Fort Cornwallis, The 23rd Novr. 1826,
Translation
of a letter from the King of Perak to the Honorable
Robert Fullerton, Governor in Council, Pulo Penang.
( After Compliments.)
When my friend on behalf of the Honorable East
India Company sent an Agent, Captain James Low, to
Perak. I directed my Chief, named Sri Adika Rajah,
with the other Chiefs assembled to enter into an en-
gagement with my friend’s Agent, Captain James
Low. Fifteen days after Captain Low quitted Perak,
a messenger arrived from the interior and informed my
Chief, Sri Adika Rajah, that a party of Siamese was
coming to Perak, and that they had reached a place
called Pulo Gambuy There is reported to be 30 men,
the Chiefs named Naikot and Ambon Sack ; they
stated their desire to meet me ; but I directed my
people with my Chiefs the Tamungong and others to
proceed and meet the Siamese, and prevent them from
coming to meet me. I have directed them to return,
and if they refuse, I shall have recourse to force, and
there may perhaps be fighting.
Every thing respecting my circumstances and the
state of my country I have made known to Captain
James Low, my friend’s agent, because I rely upon my
friend with great sincerity, and expect that by means
of the last engagement between my friend and me 1
shall not be overcome.
Dated 10th Rabialakhir 1242, or the 11th
November 1826.
A true Translation
( Signed ) John Anderson
Penang Malay Translator to Government,
The 16th November 1826.


Letter
from the Malay Translator to the son of the Rajah of
Ligore at Quedah.
1 am directed to acknowledge the receipt of my
friend’s letter, of which Captain Gotlieb was the
bearer, and to express the satisfaction of the Honor-
able the Governor of Prince of Wales Island, Malacca
and Singapore with the proof of my friend’s cordial
disposition to meet his wishes, in permitting Captain
Gotlieb to visit Setool and Lingow. Such conduct is
the best evidence on my friend’s part of his desire to
preserve unimpaired the amicable relations now so
happily established between the British and Siamese
Governments.
While noticing this mark of my friend’s inclina-
tion to preserve a good understanding with this Gov-
ernment, it is with with great regret that 1 have
occasion to advert to a circumstance of an opposite
tendency. The HonbJe. the Governor has just
received intelligence of another party of Siamese
having again arrived in the interior of Perak. After
so recently receiving a communication from the Rajah
of Ligore, that directions had been sent to recall the
party from Perak, and being informed of their return, the
Honorable the Governor has received the late intelli-
gence with surprise and regret.* He cannot permit
himself to doubt that the party which has lately
arrived at Perak, has proceeded thither without any
orders from the Rajah of Ligore, and measures will
be taken for preventing their remaining. Their con-
tinuance at Perak would be a breach of [the] Treaty
concluded between Captain Burney and the Rajah of
Ligore last year, which has been confirmed also by the
Siamese Government at Bangkok.
It is expected, therefore, that if my friend has
been accessory to the dispatch of the party to Perak,


he will instantly recall them, by which disagreeable
consequences may be avoided.
(Signed) John Anderson
Malay Transr. to Govt.
Penang
the 20 Novr. 1826.


Fort Cornwallis The 29th November 1826.
TRANSLATION of a letter from the King of
Perak to the Honble. the Governor in Council of Pulo
Penang, Singapore and Malacca.
(After Compliments.)
I duly received on Sunday the 11th day of Ru-
bealakhir the letter from my friend which was brought
by Datu Sri Naru, which reached me in safety and I
received agreeably to former custom. I opened the
Seal and 1 unfolded the envelope, the letters glittered
like the morning Stars and I understood its contents.
But previously to the arrival of my friend’s letter, the
Siamese had arrived at Perak at a place called Pulo
Gambier. The party consists of 30 men and the
Chiefs are Nykot and Ambomsok ! 1 accordingly dis-
patched my Mata to acquaint my friend the Siamese
had expressed a desire to meet me, but not wishing to
have a meeting with these Siamese, I directed my
Chief the Orang Kaya Tamumgong and the Warriors
and people all to assemble and ascend the river, where
the Siamese are, to stop and not permit them to come
and meet with me, for I am afraid of these Siamese.
If they insist and use improper language, with the
assistance of the Almighty and relying with confi-
dence on my friend the Honorable the East India
Company, I will fight with these Siamese, and they
shall be considered my enemies. My friend is ac-
quainted with my circumstances and respecting the
country of Perak which were made fully known to my
friend’s agent Captain Low,
(Dated 12th Rabialakhir, 1241 or 13th November
1826.
(A true Translation)
(Signed) John Anderson
Malay Transr. to Govt.
Pinang
27th November 1826.


Fort Cornwallis The 18th December 1826.
Translation of a letter from Sultan Abdulla King
of Perak to the Honble. Robert Fullerton Governor of
Prince of Wales Island, Singapore and Malacca.
( After Compliments. )
1 beg to make known that I place very great trust
and confidence on my friend and the Honble English
Fast India Company, which will continue so long as
the sun and moon shall endure.
When I dispatched my letter by the Mata,
acknowledging the receipt of my friend’s letter by
Datu Sri Naru, 1 had not received the particulars
relative to the party of Siamese who had arrived, but
shortly after the departure of Datu Sri Naru, 1 con-
sulted with the Jang de pertuan Muda, the Rajah
Muda and Sultan Muda. The Jang de pertuan offered
to proceed up the river and stop the Siamese, and I
accordingly provided him with such arms as I had.
He reached a place called Sayong, intending to drive
away the Siamese, but they said they had brought
a letter from the Rajah of I ago re. The dang de
pertuan Mooda thereupon sent Tu Maharaja with a
letter explaining the particulars to me relative to the
arrival of the Siamese. I replied to the letter of the
Jang de pertuan Mooda and desired them to wait ten
or fifteen days.
My friend is fully acquainted with all my circum-
stances and having great reliance upon him, I request
my friend the Governor of Pulo Pinang, Singapore and
Malacca will send an Agent to Perak who will consult
and decide what is best to be done in all respects.
Dated 22d Rabialakhir or 23d November 1826.
( A true translation )
( Signed ) John Anderson
Malay Tr. to Govt.
Pinang
The 11th December 1826.


Port Cornwallis The 7th December 1826.
Letter
from the Honorable the Governor to the King of
Perak.
1 have duly received my friend’s letter of the 12th
of Rabialakhir and shall be very sorry to hear that my
friend has been under the necessity of engaging in
hostility with the Siamese party which lately proceed-
ed to Perak, of whose intended recall a report reached
me some days ago.
it is my anxious desire to preserve peace and a
friendly understanding amongst all parties and no
efforts have been spared by me to effect this desirable
object. My friend will entirely misunderstand the
intentions yf the negotiations which have passed
between this Government and Siam in respect to Perak
if he supposes that a breach between my friend and
the Rajah of Ligore is desired.. My desire has been
only to secure my friend’s independence and liberation
from all control either by Siam or Salengore, while
he is free to preserve commercial and friendly relations
with these as well as with other States.
The British Government seeks for no exclusive
privileges and desires to abstain from any control over
my friend’s affairs, either politically or commercially.
A free intercourse and trade is all that is expected.
Under these circumstances my friend will no
doubt see the propriety of my declining to meet his
wishes for a supply of money and arms. My Agent,
Captain Low, was not instructed to hold out any ex-
pectations on such points. A compliance with my
friend’s wishes in this respect, would be construed bv
the Siamese Government as a desire on the part of the
British Government to secure some undue advantages


or influence over Perak, contrary to the spirit of the
Treaty and adverse to the oft repeated declarations of
this Government.
It. will be satisfactory to me however to afford
every facility towards a free and unrestricted com-
mercial communication between Perak and the British
Settlements in the Straits, while I trust that my friend
being now through the intervention of the English
relieved from all interference, will be enabled speedily
to repair the evils which the Perak Country has suf-
fered for some years past.
My friend will, no doubt, be pleased to learn, that
by the spontaneous liberality of the Honorable Bast
India Company the trade of this port has for the
present been relieved from Import and Export duties.
(Signed) R. Fullerton
Governor.
Pinang
The Ist December 1826.


TRANSLATION of a letter from the Son of the
Rajah of Li gore at Qnedah to the Malay Translator.
( After Compliments. )
Whereas ray friend was directed by the Honorable
the Governor of Pulo Pinang, Singapore and Malacca,
to address a letter to me, I have to acquaint him
that I have duly received it by the Commander of the
Cruizer, and understood its contents. With respect
to what is stated relative to the Governor being
surprised that a party of Siamese again proceeded
to Perak, I have to inform him, that when the Chow
Pya ot Ligore recalled the party of Siamese who were
residing at Perak, the King of Perak sent some
presents, and now the Chow Pya of Ligore has sent
live Siamese with presents to the Rajah of Perak in
return, and they have been directed not to remain
but to return, so that there may be no deviation from
the Treaty. Let not my friend therefore entertain
further distrust in the matter —written on Friday,
( A true Translation )
( Signed ) John Anderson
Malay Trans, to Govt,
Pinang
The sth December 1826.


Letter
from the Malay Translator to the Son of the Rajah of
Li gore at Quedah.
I am directed by the Honorable the Governor to
acknowledge the receipt of my friend’s letter dated
Friday last the Ist instant, and to acquaint you that
the King of Perak is at liberty to receive the party
of Siamese or not as he pleases, but if they go into
the Perak Country or remain there without the con-
sent of the King, those who sent them must abide by
the consequences.
Being desirous of maintaining friendship, letters
have been written accordingly, but it the authorities
of Quedah and Ligore will persist contrary to the
injunctions in sending people to Pei’ak this Govern-
ment cannot answer for any thing that may happen.
( Signed ) John Anderson
Malay Transr. to Govt.
Pinang
The 7th December 1826.


Fort William 5th Jany. 1827.
Captain Burney.
Calcutta, 29th December 1826.
To G. Swinton Esqr.
Acting Chief Secretary to Government.
Sir,
I do myself the honor to acknowledge the receipt
of your Letter under date the 22d inst., transmitting
to me a despatch from the Secretary to the Govern-
ment of Prince of Wales Island dated 11th ulto.,
and calling upon me for any observations which I
may have to offer on the engagement executed by
Captain Low with the State of Perak as connected
with the subject of my negotiations at the Court of
Siam, and the Treaty concluded by me. Having
attentively perused the several documents comprised
in that dispatch, I now beg leave to submit the
following observations for the consideration of His
Excellency the Vice President in Council.
2. The 14th Article of the Treaty concluded by
me with the Siamese Ministers, inasmuch as it
stipulates that the Raja of Perak shall govern his
country according to his own will, leaves it certainly
at his discretion to enter into any engagement with us
or with the Siamese provided only that such engage-
ment do not lead to the chance of either party
sending at any time any force to go and molest,
attack or disturb Perak. It is but fair however to
ask, what would the Government of Prince of Wales
Island have said, had an agent from the Rajah of
Ligor gone to Perak and obtained an engagement
from the Chief there binding him in the same manner
as Captain Low has bound him, not to hold any
communication or intercourse with the British Gov-
ernment, or with any of its officers, which may


or can have reference to political subjects (to
distinguish between which and other subjects few
Native Chiefs, 1 fear, are competent) and not to
receive any British Officers or Envoys or permit
them to enter into his country for the purpose
of arranging political matter, or interfering in any
way in the affairs or administration of Perak. There
is no question that the Rajah of Ligor could have
obtained such an engagement by the employment
of very much the same kind of means as we have
used, that is, by offering the Perak Chief protection
against Salengore and his factious subjects, and by
holding out to him a hope of a pecuniary loan, for the
purpose of soliciting which I observe, a deputation is
sent to Penang by the Chief of Perak at the close of
Captain Low’s negotiations.
3. Captain Low’s Treaty with the State of
Perak contains no clause for subjecting the same to
the ratification or rejection of; the Supreme Govern-
ment and the 3d. Article engages that His Highness
of Perak shall receive the assistance of the British in
expelling from his country any Siamese or Malays,
who may enter the Perak territory with political
views, or for the purpose of interfering in any way
with the Government of His Highness, that is, 1
conceive, guarantees the possessions ot the Chief of
Perak. However eaty such an obligation may prove to
us, yet I fear one important question may arise,’and I
now submit it as having occurred to me some months
ago, upon reference to the 42d and 43d clauses of the
33d Geo. 111. whether such a Treaty as that concluded
by Captain Low, unless in a case of sudden emergency
or immediate danger, may not be a violation of law,
beyond the power of the Penang Government to enter
into or of the Supreme Government to ratify, without
express orders from the Home authorities.
4, i solicit the permission ot his Excellency the
the Vice President in Council to recapitulate here a


short review of the history of our relations with Perak,
At the time the Ex-King of Queda received orders'
from Siam to bring Perak under subjection he inform-
ed the Penang Government through his vakeels, that
Perak had received a Chief from the Royal Family of
Siam, and that it had rendered the Boonya Mas to
Siam until the revolution in that kingdom caused by
the Burmese invasion. Upon this representation the
British Government conceived that the pretensions of
Siam over Perak were founded in justice and ancient
rights and the Chief of the latter was repeatedly ad-
vised by the Penang Government, which even deputed
a Mission to him in the year 1818 chiefly for this pur-
pose, to acknowledge the supremacy of Siam and
transmit to her the Boonya Mas. The late Chief of
Perak however rejected this advice, declaring that the
paramount authority of Siam had never extended over
his country, and that that was the first demand of a
Boonya Max ever made from Perak by Siam. Through
the Military means however obtained by the Ex-King
of Queda from the Penang Government, his forces laid
waste the territor} 7 of Perak and in 1818 secured the
Chief. The Queda authorities removed him and ap-
pointed a Regency, which transmitted the Boonya Ma<
to Siam, and fully acknowledged the supremacy of that
State. In the year 1822 after the Rajah of Ligore had
taken possession of Queda he requested permission to
send a part of his force to Perak through the harbour
of Penang which permission the Penang Government
readily granted, still believing the correctness of the
representation received from the Ex-King of Queda’s
Vakeels in 1814 of Perak being a rightful tributary of
Siam, fn the same year the Rajah of Salengore who
had himself over-run Perak in 1806, made a sudden
attack upon the Siamese party at Perak and not only
put it to flight, but established a nephew Tuanku Hus-
sain, near the mouth of the Perak river, from which he
controlled the Government and trade of the Country,
levying a duty for the benefit of Salengore upon the


exportation of tin, the principal produce of Perak. In
the beginning of last year, during my Mission along
the Coast of Qaeda to Poougah, I ascertained and re-
ported to the Penang Government that the Bandahara
of Perak had appealed to the Rajah of Ligore for as-
sistance against Salengore and Rajah Hussain, that
another application had been very lately made accom-
panied with an offer to send the Boonga Mas to Siam
and that the Rajah of Ligore was then fitting out a
large fleet of boats to attack the Rajah of Salengore,
as well as to occupy the country of Perak. But refer-
ring to the unadvisable consequences likely to result
from the Siamese occupying those two States and
driving out their Malay inhabitants, I submitted at
the same time to the Penang Government my opinion
that the best and most easy mode of preventing the
Rajah of Ligore’s projected attack upon Salengore
would be, by the Penang Government at once prohi-
biting him and declaring its intention of protecting
Salengore, and that I believed such a declaration
might be communicated to the Rajah in a manner
calculated not only to stop him but to prevent an
actual breach between us. As soon as the Rajah of
Ligore had assembled at Queda the whole of his arma-
ment in May last year, the Honble. the Governor of
Penang refused him a passage through the harbour of
Penang and made such a communication to His High-
ness through Mr. Maingy, as induced him to pause.
His Highness, as 1 had anticipated, proved him-
self to be too well acquainted with our means
and character to venture to pass his fleet Smith-
ward contrary to our wishes. He had in some
measure been stopped and 70 of his boats had been
sent back to Trang. before I returned from Calcutta to
Penang in July. At this time it is necessary to ol-
serve, the Penang Government did not conceive itself *
authorised to prevent the Raja of Ligore from sendii g
any of his armament or force to Perak, by the passage
outside of Penang or overland. The Raja still had a


large body of men and 114 boats nl Queda; and upon
my visiting him I found a deputation at Queda from
Perak, consisting of the nephew of the Chief of Perak
and one of his principal nobles or Ornny Kayohesar.
who told me themselves, that they had come to the
Raja to solicit succour against Salengore and Tuanku
Hussain. 1 was assure i also that the Rajah had a
large force above Queda ready to be sent overland to
Perak. I hope I persuaded him of the evil conse-
quences likely to result from his sending this force to
Perak and I drew him into a provisional engagement
binding him to dismiss his armament and not to send
any cf it by sea or land to Salengore or Perak or to
keep any force in the latter country. There has been
some misconception respecting the 2nd Article of
that Treaty, The Penang Government assumed that
it pledged the Raja of Ligore against all interference
whatever with Perak. His Highness never meant any
such thing. I distinctly showed in my letter of the
Ist of August, which accompanied the Treaty, that the
Rajah of Ligore considered Perak as a Siamese Tribu-
tary. That 1 had denied it but had only been able to
waive the discussion, without settling the matter
either way. 1 could never have prevailed upon
him, and indeed he did not possess the power to
resign by Treaty all Siamese claim of supremacy and
interference with respect to Perak in the manner
assumed and acted upon by the Penang Government.
1 was only able to prevent, the force which he had
prepared, from proceeding overland to that Country
and destroying it, and to secure to ourselves the right
which we before Heither possessed nor were prepared
to exercise, of attacking any Siamese armament or
hostile force that we may find to the Southward of
Penang. 1 conceived it would be the future object of
our negociations at Perak and Bangkok to devise
means for precluding Siamese interference in the many
other forms in which it might be attempted. Ihese
sentiments were submitted by me to the Rouble, the


Governor of Penang in September last year, when ['
expressed my regret at the limited character of the
arrangements executed by our negotiator at Perak,,
and all my expectations that the Rajah of Ligore
would contrive to maintain his influence at Perak by
other agency than by that of unequivocal open force,
have been fulfilled. He sent shortly after he received
accounts of the proceedings of the Agent of the Penang
Government at Perak, a party of Siamese and Malays,
which was far too small to have exerted any influence
at Perak if the real state of the case had not been as I
had declared, and as Captain Low’s report has now
fully proved, that the Rajah of Perak is weak, his
Chiefs divided, and his subjects intriguing and open
to bribery. When I heard of this party being at
Perak, which I did at Bangkok, I remonstrated very
warmly against it to the Rajah of Ligore and charged
him with a breach of the Provisional Treaty, but he<
maintained that it was no breach, that he had never
intended to deprive himself of the right of main-
taining his influence at Perak by friendly means, or
to do more than to agree not to send to Perak any
force with hostile Intentions, or to keep such there }
that what he had now sent was only a temporary
deputation which he had a right to send, and no
armament or hostile force, and that it consisted only
of 20 Siamese besides Malays, principally inhabitants
of Perak. It is extremely hazardous to receive a
Malay’s account of numbers. The Siamese party at
Perak has been has been variously reported to amount
from 80 to 800 men including the Perak and Malay
renegades, and Captain Low I observe takes the
largest estimate terming the whole “ an armed force
of 300 troops.” It is well known that all persons in
the Malay States carry arms, and it would be madness
indeed to travel across the Peninsula of Malacca, or to
visit the Perak Country at any time without such
means of defence. Troops is a very inapplicable term,
as 1 personally know, to be given to such a party


which was sent from Li gore to Perak, The expres-
n sion in the 2d Article of the Treaty of Queda is
“ Angkat tn ” in the Malay and “ K ng Thah” in the
S “
Siamese language, and I translated it at the time into
®“ a force by land or uater .” But I must own that
” a force with hostile iutenti ns ” was understood by
both the Raja and myself, the 3d Article of the
*•
Treaty continuing to the Siamese a “free intercourse
with I’erak,” and some doubt may therefore be raised,
whether His Highness’s last party was sent in viola-
tion of his engagement. It should not be forgotten
too, that the Treaty of Queda was only a temporary
expedient to remove the- evil which was then im-
pending from the armament actually collected by the
Rajah. The whole of my negotiations at Queda were
directed to keep things quiet to the Eastward, while
the Supreme Government was engaged in Ava, and
until the disposition of the Siamese Court could be
ascertained. I explained to His Highness how-
ever at Bangkok, that the Penang Government would
most probably consider his deputation to Perak as
a breach of his Treaty, and send a force to expel
it. and the moment the Raja received a communica-
tion to the same effect from the Rouble, the Governor
of Prince of Wales Island, which he did not until
after the signing of the Treaty between the Siamese
Ministers and myself he sent down an order directing
the party to withdraw from Perak. It did so as
Captain Low reports on the 7th of last September.
There was a party of Siamese actually at Perak when
the Treaty of Queda was concluded between the
Raja of Ligore and myself,* The phrase in the 2d
Article, that no Siamese force shall “ settle in Perak ”
was directed to prevent the Rajah of Ligore from
keeping any force in that country and provoking
another attack from Salengore. Before the conclusion
of the Treaty of Queda the Penang Government had
no ground for insisting upon the removal of any
Siamese party from Perak, and as the Rouble, the


Governor justly observed at the time “ had the Chief
of Li gore proceeded by sea at a proper distance
from the Island we could have no ground for in-
terference and the same reasoning would apply to
an attack by land beyond our control.” My negotia-
tions at Queda gave the Penang Government these
grounds of interference and it is therefore surely
hard to declare now, that my Treaty at Queda has-
opened the way for the furtherance of the views of
the Chief of Li gore.
5. Before leaving Penang in September 1825 1
submitted to the Honble. the Governor my apprehen-
sions that the Agent who had proceeded to Perak
and Salengore had not raised up such a barrier
against Siamese conquest to the Southward as
might afford us a right and title wherewith to
oppose the Siamese in case the Court of Siam refused
to ratify my Agreement with the Rajah of Ligore,
1 regretted also that the Agent to Perak had not
brought away the originals of the letters, which had
been written to the Chief of Perak under the orders of
the Rajah of Ligore subsequently to the Treaty ol
Queda, as I conceived that the possession of those
papers would give us considerable advantage in any
future discussion with His Highness. At Bangkok, by
reference to paras. 156, 194, 196 and 199 of the
Journal of my Mission, it will be seen, I ascertained
that the Siamese claimed no such ancient right of
supremacy over Perak as the Penang Government had
been led to imagine and I fully succeeded, and princi-
pally from my own personal knowledge, in destroying
the grounds upon which they pretended to found their
first interference with that Country, namely that the
late Rajah of Perak had voluntarily placed himself
under Siam. These were surely important points to
gain, and that the Penang Government, at the time
of my quitting Penang doubted the practicability of
mv gaining even so much may be inferred from one
part of my instructions which stated “ it may be hoped


that if our negotiator cannot succeed in entirely
rescuing Perak from all subjugation, that it will here-
after be confined to the presentation of the Boomja
Mas only, and preclude entirely all further interference
with that State.” 1 disproved the right of Siam to this
Boonga Mas and destroyed her main pretext for inter-
fering with Perak. There was then a third point to
gain, and this 1 found it impossible to accomplish at
Bangkok. The Siamese Ministers maintained that the
present Rajah of Perak and his principal Chiefs desired
to be connected with Siam. 1 had no means of dis-
proving this pretext in the face of numerous letters
and communications from the Rajah of Perak and his
Chiefs and in the face of the Perak Mission which,
as it was pressed upon my notice, I had myself seen
at Queda whilst there in duly 1825. Although I
gave every credit to the statements contained in
the report from the Penang Agent to Perak, I could
not produce the same belief in the minds of the
Siamese Ministers. His Treaty with Perak they
said, would have provided against the continuance
of Siamese connexion if the Rajah had been desirous
of such a change, and the authenticity of the copies
of the Raja of Ligore’s letters to Perak were all
denied. That I went as far as prudence warranted
in endeavouring to prevent every future pretext for
Siamese • interference with Perak, will 1 hope be
evident from what passed between the Phra Khlang
and myself on the 30th May, as recorded in the 194
para, of my Journal. 1 had however repeatedly
declared that the British Government did not intend
to occupy Perak or fetter the independence of its
Chief and this declaration was dexterously brought
against me by the Siamese Ministers to obtain my
acquiescence to a clause, that if the Chief of Perak
desired to maintain his connexion with Siam, the
British Government would not prevent his doing so.
6. Next came the question how were the senti-
ments of the Chief of Perak to be satisfactorily


ascertained by the Siamese unless the British
Government would permit them to send a deputation
to the Country, a measure which 1 was told I had
assured the Raja of Ligore the Penang Government
considered to be the same as that of sending a
hostile force to Perak and a positive infraction of the
2d Article of the Treaty of Queda. I called upon
the Siamese Ministers to name the number of which
they would desire such a deputation to consist, and
they stated 4 or 500, but after much discussion 1
reduced it to 40 or 50, the number mentioned in
the 14th Article of the Treaty, and one i conceived
too limited to be capable of overawing the Government
of Perak. From my omitting to record all these
points in my Journal the Penang Government is
disposed to believe that I admitted this deputation
“ unthinkingly.” But had 1 recorded every thing
that passed between the Siamese Ministers and myself,
1 should have made my Journal ten times more
voluminous than it unfortunately is already.
7. I was satisfied that if the Penang Govern-
ment only assured the Raja of Perak protection
against Salengore he would break off all connexion
with Siam, and the moment therefore I returned to
Penang, 1 suggested to the Honorable the Governor,
the expediency of deputing an Officer simp]} 7 to obtain
a document from the Rajah of Perak declaring his
wish and determination to be, not to maintain any
such intercourse with the Siamese Court or Rajah of
Ligore as the} had asserted at Bangkok. 1 subse-
uently volunteered to proceed myself to Perak and
obtain such a document, observing that J knew exact 1}
what was necessary, but the Rouble, the Governor
decided that it was then too late, and stated that he
would give Captain Low such precise instructions as
would preclude all chance of misconception. ( aptain
Low appears to have acted entirely upon his vie'\
of the Treaty of Queda, without recollecting that that
engagement merged in the Treaty subsequently


concluded by me with the Siamese Ministers at
Bangkok.
8. Captain Low reports that the Raja of Perak
was “ a mere pageant in the hands of a Siamese fac-
tion,’ and that Chief himself solicits “ a party of
British troops to be stationed in his country,” and
declares, that he “cannot restore peace and order to his
Government without the interposition and aid of the
British.” If some such proceedings as those under-
taken by Captain Low had been adopted in Sept.
1825, my negotiations at Bangkok regarding Perak
would have been short and easy indeed.
9. 1 before found that the Rajah of Ligor’s
partizans at Perak had given him a thorough know-
ledge of every thing said and done by the agent who
visited Perak last year, and I have* of money and
guns and warlike stores from the Penang Government.
All these acts and proceedings are of course calculated
to excite the dissatisfaction and distrust of the Siamese
Court. When also it is considered that they have
been undertaken with respect to a Chief, whose whole
annual income is estimated to amount only to 20,000
Dollars, 1 submit that the ablest opponent to the
Penang Government, for taking the whole of the
Malayan Peninsula under its protection, could not
have shown more clearly and decidedly than what Cap-
tain Low has done, the petty, complicated and un-
profitable transactions which the adoption of such a
plan will entail upon the British Government, and the
impossibility of seeing before we have actually em-
barked in such a system of interference with the
Malay Peninsula States how far it may draw us on.
10. Although the Siamese, no doubt, will be
dissatisfied with the proceedings of our Agent to
Perak, I do not conceive that there' is the smallest
chance of their venturing into any quarrel with us
respecting this matter ; and the route overland from


Quedah or Ligor to Perak is so difficult, that thev
must look to the sea, where a single cruizer could stop
them, to pass any large force to Perak or to support
one there. I think however that a simple decla-
ration of our determination to maintain the inde-
pendence of the Raja of Perak, and to prevent all
political interference by the Raja of Ligor or the
Siamese, will be sufficient for alj the purposes worthy
our notice, and 1 would now beg to submit that the
originals of the three letters'which were written to
Perak after the Treaty of Qneda under the orders of
the Raja of Ligor (and which originals I observe
Captain Low' has now brought to Penang) should be
transmitted to Bangkok, with an a.I Iress from the
Secretary to the Supreme Government to the Six
Ministers, apprizing them that the circumstance of the
Rajah of Ligor having allowed himself to send such
communications to the Raja ot Perak, after signing a
regular Treaty with me, had decided this Government
upon extending to the Chief of Perak the protection
which he has solicited, and upon preventing the
Siamese from all future interference or political inter-
course with his count)y.
11. The statement of the Rajah of Ligor having
engaged with a French ship for a supply of 20 gnus,
and 1700 muskets within 6 months is an old story,
which w T as fabricated for the mere purpose of over-
awing the Rajah of Perak in a letter dated so far back
as September last year. I w T as at Ligor after that
date and satisfied myself at Bangkok of the utter
groundlessness of such a story.
12. 1 now solicit the permission of His Excel-
lency the Vice President in Council to submit a few
observations respecting our relations with the Siamese.
Having concluded with that extraordinary people a
treaty, which appears to me to secure every object
that is worthy the notice ot the British Government
and which it is manifestly the interest of the Siamese


Government to keep and respect, I feel a natural and
1 hope a laudable anxiety to see the relations which 1
have been the instrument of establishing, duly main-
tained and confirmed. On this service, as the
Penang Government has expressed so decidedly its
dissatisfaction at my proceeding, I cannot indulge
a hope of being emploj'ed under its orders. Rut 1
earnestly entreat the Supreme Government, if that
high authority shall determine to ratify the Treaty
concluded by me, to order such measures as may not
entirely leave the duty of seeing this Treaty main-
tained, confirmed and improved, in the hands of any
officer to whom every alleged breach of it on the part
of the Siamese will be a matter of triumph. I have
already had occasion to bring to the notice of the
Government the local feelings and prepossessions
which exist at Prince of Wales Island as connected
with the Ex-King of Queda, and the Siamese once
ventured last year to make an appeal on this point to
the Government of Penang, but I only involved ray-
>-elf in a most unpleasant personal discussion, to which
I regret to see some of the enclosures in the dispatch
from the Penang Government again reter. The
British Government, has surely nothing to fear from
the Siamese, and all it can reasonably require
from them is some share for its subjects in the
really* relations. By a reference to the 4th Article
of the first draft of the Treaty proposed to me by
the Siamese ministers (see Appendix No. 32 of my
Journal), it will appear that they desired me to
engage that “ the Government of Siam shall not look
“ to the small Provinces, but shall look for friendship
“ to the Countries of Europe and Bengal more than to
•“ other places. The Countries of Europe and Bengal
r ‘ shall not look to the small provinces, but shall look
for friendship to the Government of Siam more than
“to other places.” The object of this article was to
avoid all intercourse with the Government of Prince
of Wales Island and it is not necessary for me to


disclose all the opinions and feelings expressed at
Bangkok with regard to that Government. But I was
much embarrassed for some time with this subject,
which the Court of Siam seriously urged and at last, 1
evaded it by assuring the ministers that as the treaty
would be made in the name of the Governor General
and the King of Siam all discussions and communi-
cations respecting its provisions would naturally conti-
nue to pass between these two Supreme Authorities,
18. I beg to close this letter by citing what Mr.
Crawfurd has said on the subject of the Siamese an-
nexing Queda to their Empire,
“ Should the Siamese nation become our immedi-
“ ate neighbours, I may safely venture to assert from
what 1 have seen of it, that its power is just as little
“ dangerous as that of the Malays, Their neighbour-
“ hood may even be attended with some advantage,
“ which we could not derive from the poverty of the
“ latter and their still more barbarous and irregular
“ form of Government. The Siamese by being brought
'‘ into closer relation with ns will become better ac-
“ quainted with our charges and power, will be
'*■ rendered more dependent upon our friendship and
“ good edifices, and being finally brought to ap-
“ predate our forbearance and moderation, will learn to
repose a more complete confidence in us than their
“ jealousy and ignorance will at present admit of.’"
Such a state of things will improve and tend to lay
open the commercial resources which this fertile and
extensive territory is undoubtedly capable of affording.
1 have &c.
(Signed) H. Burney Captain.
J4. F. S. I beg to return herewith the original
dispatch transmitted in your letter of the 22d inst.
15. i trust it will not be considered dis-
respectful in me to solicit the particular notice of


His Excellency the Vice President in Council to the
circumstances of Captain Gotlieb’s deputation from
Penang to Queda in the hope of being able to disprove
the tales of warlike preparations in the Queda views,
with which the fears and hopes of reward of secret spies*
and it was finally arranged that he should apply for a
native confidential servant to be sent, as mentioned in
my letter to the Secretary to the Penang Government,
dated 19th October last. What the Chief afterwards
applied for I know not, as I see no copy of his letter in
the Penang dispatches. But Captain Gotlieb the
commander of a Ship, although now acting assistant
Master Attendant at Penang, is sent to the young
Chief and one article of this Agent’s instructions is to
obtain information respecting the Trang River, which
is stated to be very desirable, as that river bends to
within one or two marches from the Capital of Ligor.
Of course His Highness will view any attempt to
make an examination of it with the same feelings as
the Government of England would display at seeing
the French or any other Government in Europe, send
a commander of a vessel to make a survey of the river
Thames.
(Signed) H. Burney Captain
Envoy to Siam,


Fort William 12th January 1827.
Calcutta 4th January 1827.
To G. Swinton Esqr,
Secretary to Government,
Sir.
May 1 request you will do me the honor to bring
the following circumstances under the notice of His
Excellency the Vice President in Council.
Some of the Calcutta papers have published a
strange account of the Treaty concluded by me with
the Siamese Court on the 2Uth of June last, and
the account is calculated not merely to injure ray
public character, but to mislead public officers who
may not as yet have seen the original Treaty, or a
correct transcript of it. It is stated that the King
of Qneda was a prisoner with the Siamese and that
besides releasing him and accomplishing other points
a Treaty, concluded by me at Bangkok on the
15th of May which was ratified on the 17th, contains
the following engagements.
That every British born subject carrying with
him a certificate as such, and being licensed to trade
as merchant or mariner, shall have leave to transact
his own business without a licensed agent or broker
to control his transactions, that all such persons
who desire it shall have passports to trade and tx-avel
throughout the Siamese dominions, except in the
district of the newly discovered silver mines at Menam
Noi, but that no natives of the Burmese or Pegu
Country altho' subjects of England, shall under penalty
of death put their foot on the Siamese Territories nor
shall any'’ descendants of those people or of any 7 other
Asiatic connections, on any pretext or under any
colour of protection, be suffered to land in the
dominions of ths King of Siam.


The above account first appeared in the Calcutta
John Bull of the 11th of Sept, last year, apparently
from a correspondent at Amherst Town, and as it re-
sembles in some decree the curious draft of a treaty
O
proposed to me by the Siamese Ministers on the 1 Orh
of April, I believe it to be the production of some
person who had seen a part of my Journal which had
been about that time forwarded overland from Bang-
kok. But the Singapore Chronicle, omitting only the
story of the King of Queda having been a prisoner in
Siam, publishes this very account of the Treaty as an
original article, although evidently copied from the
Calcutta papers, and some of these again republish it
last month from that Chronicle, without perceiving
the identity. The facts upon which the 10th clause
of my Treaty was founded, of which the above is so
mischievous a version are these. The Siamese Court
have no objection to as man}' British born subjects
and descendants of Europeans or Burmese or Peguers
going to their sea ports by sea as may wish it, but
they refused to permit such persons to travel into the
interior and through the Siamese dominions. They
would allow none but “ Asiatic subjects of the British
Government not being Burmese, Peguers, or descen-
dants of Europeans ” to travel overland or by means
of the rivers from the Anglo-Burmese territory into
Siam, or from Penang into the provinces of lower Siam.
1 could not insist upon the Siamese Ministers throwing
open the interior of their dominions. They said that
British born subjects or Europeans and their
descendants can trade with Siam by means of
shipping and that such persons want to travel
overland and into the interior for the purpose
of making maps and surveys of the country, they
said that it is a standing law of Siam which
prohibits the subjects of Ava from admission into
any Siamese Country, on any pretence, and that
as a great portion of the Burmese Country still
belongs to Ava, the inhabitants of which might try


to gain admission into Siam for hostil© purposes
with our Burmese subjects, no Burmese or Peguers
could, for the present, a short time only, I hope, be
admitted into the Siamese dominions overland or
by means of the rivers. They agreed that all Chinese,
Malays and natives of the Coast of Coromandel and
pf Hindostan, ( not being descendants of Pluropeans )
bj> which class of persons indeed all the ancient
valuable trade between Mergui and Siam used to
be conducted, should be so admitted, but even these
the Siamese Ministers requested might be furnished
with pass ports from our officers at Martaban, Tavoy
and Ye. The Siamese Government had undoubtedly
a right to say whom it would admit into the interior
of its dominions. After repeated discussion with
the Siamese Ministers I was obliged to accept as
much as they would concede, and to leave to the
operation of time and of a better acquaintance with
us to remove the Siamese prejudices on this point.
There is however in the Treaty concluded by me no
such penalty of death, or indeed punishment for
unprivileged persons putting their foot on or landing
in the Siamese territories. Jf there is any invi-
diousness in the distinction British born subjects as
well as Anglo-Indians are included in it.
With respect to vessels and with respect to mer-
chants and traders going to the Siamese ports by sea,
no distinction whatever is made in the Treaty. All
British subjects whether Asiatic or European, or their
descendants or connections are equally at liberty to
enter on the same fixed scale of duties, and to all are
extended the same privileges of “ buying and selling
with freedom and facility and without the intervention
of any other person between them and the inhabitants
of Siam.” There is nothing also about being licensed
to trade as a merchant or mariner, or about the silver
mines at Menarn Noi, or about a British born subject
carrying with him a certificate as such. It is no wonder
that the Singapore merchants, judging, 1 presume,


from the accounts of the Treaty published in the
Calcutta papers and again in the Singapore Chronicle,
are stated to be of the opinion that my Treaty will be
of no advantage.
I have &c.
(Signed) H. Burney, Capt.
Envoy to Siam.


To George Swinton Esqr.
Secretary to Government
Sir,
I trust Government will observe that I have
endeavoured to regulate the whole of my disburse-
ments according to the strictest economy as directed in
the 6th para, of your letter of instruc ions of the loth
May 1825. The only point respecting which it may be
necessary for me to tender explanation is the excess
shown in the amount of presents purchased and de-
livered by me to the King and Court of Siam. But
my residence at Bangkok having been more protracted
than I had anticipated, and that residence entailing
upon the King and Wangna a monthly expense, I con-
ceived that 1 should be justified in procuring and
offering to them some more presents than what the
Government of Prince of Wales Island had sanctioned
in Mr. Secretary Cuppage’s letter of the 12th Septem-
ber 1825.
The amount of presents submitted for the sanction
of the Supreme Government in my letter to Mr.
Secretary Stirling of the 26th May 1825 was S. Rs-
-27,501, but that amount was exclusive of the Broad
Cloth which were proposed to be received from the
Honble. Company’s stores but were afterwards pur-
chased at Penang, nor did it include the presents to
be procured and given in the names of the Honble.
the Governor of Prince of Wales Island and of tl*B
Resident at Singapore.
The account of presents made and received m
return stands as follows :
Fort William 12th January 1827.


Purchased at Calcutta, see letter to Mr, Secretary
Stirling from Ca.pt. Burney dated 30
May 1825 ... ... ... 24,790.10. 6
Do. at Penang see letter from Mr.
Acting Secretary Ouppage to Captain
Burney of 12th Sept. 1825 3,738.—.
Do, subsequently 1,869. 7.
Sh. Drs. 5,407. 7.
or Sa. Rs. @’2lo-8 per 100 Spanish 11,384. 6,
Dollars Received in return from the
King and Court of Siam various pro-
ductions of Siam which realized at
Penang about Sa. Rs. 19,500. —.
Received from the King
and Wangna of Siam,
exclusive of rice &ca.
for the Escort and fol-
lowers a monthly allow-
ance on account of table
expenses of the Envoy
as carried to account Drs. 1,550.76 or
Sa. Rs. 3,264. 5.
Deduct... 22,764. 5.
Differences Sa. Rs. 13,411. 5. 6
1 have &c.
( Signed ) H. Burney Capt,
Envoy to Siam.
Calcutta
sth January 1827.


Fort William 23rd February 1827.
To George Swinton Esqre.
Secretary to the Government
Secret and Political Department
Fort William.
Sir,
1 am directed to acknowledge the receipt of your
dispatch dated 22d ultimo, forwarding the Treaty con-
cluded by Captain Burney with His Majesty the King
of Siam, and to return to you that instrument duly
signed, sealed and ratified by the Right Honorable
Governor General.
2. The Governor General will seize the earliest
moment to record his sentiments at length on the
principal points comprized in the voluminous reports
submitted to Captain Burney regarding his proceedings
at the Court of Siam, and on the questions of policy
discussed in the papers and correspondence received
from the Government of Prince of Wales Island
of dates as per margin. In the mean time I am
instructed to state that Lord Amherst entirely concurs
with the Vice President in Council in highly commend-
ing the zeal, address, temper and ability displayed by
the Envoy during his negotiations with the Govern-
ment of Siam. The Governor General further consi-
ders that the results of Captain Burney’s Mission have
been in the main successful, as placing the political
and commercial relations of the British Nation with
the State of Siam on a decidedly improved footing,
and at all events the Treaty negotiated by that officer
has in his Lordship’s judgment, secured every advan-
tage which could have been expected under the
instructions furnished to him by the Supreme Govern-
ment.


3. The Governor General approves and sanctions
the manner in which it is proposed to employ Captain
Burney’s services at Mergui, after he shall have effected
the exchange of the ratified copies of the Treaty at
Quedah, when his functions as Envoy to Siam will of
course cease.
I have &c.
( Signed ) A. Stirling
Deputy Secretary to the Govt.
In Attendance on the
Governor General.
Agra 17th January 1827.


FORT CORNWALLIS The 8th Feb. 1827.
Superintendent of Province Wellesley.
To John Anderson Esqre.
Secretary to Government
Fort Cornwallis.
Sir,
1 have now the honor to submit for the purpose
of being laid before the Honorable the Governor in
Council a detailed account connected with the
Proceedings adverted to in my letter to the Officer
Commanding the Troops dated 24th Instant.
Having received information of the numbers, the
plans and positions of the pirates on the banks of
the Kurow River, i determined from many considera-
tions to proceed and if possible drive them out.
And I trust that the manner in which they were
afterwards dispersed will prove a salutary lesson to
the Natives in our neighbourhood, and induce them
to adopt more settled habits. The following were my
chief reasons for proceeding in person. I was desirous
of ascertaining under whose influence the pirates
acted, of preventing them holding intercourse with
the people of the Krean and other Districts of
Wellesley Province, and of inspiring with greater
confidence the petty traders of the coast, who have
been lately so cruelly injured by these lawless bands.
Having driven the pirates out of their first and
second positions I advanced to Gudin’s Compong,
their chief position. Here they declined making a
stand, and Gudin being hard pressed chose to give
himself up ; but it was merely to gain time to carry
off his papers. These last I had previously seized.


and as I was not desirous of detaining him as a
prisoner but of driving him out of Kurow, I pretended
belief in the sincerity of his offer to go and bring in
one or two of the Chief Pirates. I still however
continued the pursuit of the party until 1 found that
Oudin and they had fairly fled amongst the jungle
of the interior, in which to follow them was im-
practicable.
Oudin in so far as I could discover, had 100
armed men under him, about 80 of these were active
pirates or robbers. Their plan of operation will be
apparent from the depositions taken before me of
persons seized at Kurow, and from what will trans-
pire on the examination of the prisoners sent by me
to the Police Office.
Their system independent of the positive evils it
inflicts threatens by the manner in which its emissaries
are diffused throughout the fixed population of the
Island and Wellesley Province, most materially to
operate against the efficiency ol the Police Establish-
ments of this Presidency.
With the dispersion of the Nakoda Oudin and his
party and their expulsion from Kurow, the Siamese
influence will in a great measure cease in that quarter,
and I need not advert to the advantage which the
southern part of Wellesley Province will derive from
that circumstance.
That the Rajah of Ligore has for many years past
supported and countenanced the Chief of a piratical
horde is a fact which cannot be reconciled to his
constant professions of amity towards the British
Government. It would be in vain to argue that he
must have been ignorant of the culpability of Nakoda
Oudin, for the Quedah petty traders have suffered
greatly by the depredations of his people, and we are
only left to suppose that His Highness deemed it a


sure and secret mode of annoying a Government
which he dared not to provoke hy overt acts.
Oudin openly disavowed, in my presence and that
of my detachment, the authority of the King of Pei-ak
his legitimate Prince, confessing that he owed
allegiance only to the Rajah of Ligore.
* * * * * *
I have the honor to be &c.
( Signed ) James Low Captn.
Acting Superintendent
Wellesley Province.
Province Wellesley
30th January 1827.


Fort William 2 February 1827.
Calcutta, January 31st 1827.
To Geo. Swinton Esqr.
Secretary to Government.
Sir,
Ido myself the honor to enclose a letter in the
original Portuguese language with a translation of the
same, addressed to me when quitting Bangkok by Mr*
Carlos de Silveira, who was deputed by the Govern-
ment of Goa as an Envoy to the Court of Siam about
the year 1820, and appointed Portuguese Consul at
Bangkok ;in which office he continued to act until it
was annulled in 1822, by an order from the Consti-
tutional Government set up for a time at Goa.
Mr. Crawfurd, in the Journal of his Mission, had
occasion to make the same acknowledgment of the
good offices of Mr. Silveira towards the British Gov-
ernment as I have submitted in the second part of my
report, in which I have detailed circumstances that
have led this gentleman to solicit the friendly inter-
position of this Government in his favour. 1 can bear
testimony to the accuracy of the representation con-
tained in the enclosed letter with respect to his present
situation : But the peculiar hardship of his case, 1
found, is, that the Government of Macao, under the
late Minister there, contracted a debt to the Siamese
Court, which will not permit Mr. Silveira or his secre-
tary to quit the country until such debt be discharged.
His situation is certainly highly injurious to the Euro-
pean character.
When receiving Mr. Silveira’s letter 1 let him
clearly understand, that 1 could not pledge my Gov-
ernment to notice it, but that I would submit it with
such declarations as were demanded by my gratitude
for the obliging attentions and zealous assistance which


I hud experienced from him, and that it must be left
entirely to the consideration of the Supreme Govern-
ment to determine whether the intimate friendly
relations subsisting between our two nations would
authorize his representation being brought to the
notice of his Government, with my testimony in sup-
port of its general accuracy, and in favour of his
character and conduct whilst these came under my
observation.
1 have &c.
( Signed ) H. Burney ( apt.
Knvoy to Siam.


Translation.
To Captain H. Burney.
Bir,
It is with extreme affliction that I employ my
pen to address you on the present occasion, and to
trespass on the valuable time which I know is inces-
santly devoted to affairs of the highest importance ; but,
Sir, you will excuse the inconvenience which I mav
cause in order that through your means I may obtain
some alleviation of the misfortune in which I find my-
self plunged in Siam, and I entertain the hope that
you will not refuse me a few moment’s attention to
listen to my statement.
You, Sir, during the period your commission
occasioned your stay at Bangkok, and from the inti-
macy with which you honored me, must be well aware
of my present circumstances, although [ have myself
communicated to you for your fuller information,
the purpose for which I came hither deputed by the ,
Vice Roy of Goa in 1820, the powers with which I
was invested by that Government, and the solemnity
with which I presented myself here to conduct
negotiations of great moment, and afterwards to
reside at the Court of Bangkok, as Consul General
of the Kingdom of Siam, having obtained the esta-
blishment of a factory ; and also the circumstance of my
having received in 1823, a communication, comprized
in a few lines, and in terms not very courteous, from
the provisional Government installed by the disorders
of a revolution which brought in its train prodigious
evils to the Portuguese nation in all its states and
dominions, and which was subsequently not only abo-
lished, but the oppositionists to the former legitimate
Government were covered with shame and dishonor.
Fort William 2 February 1827.


Although that administration reassigned its ancient
form of three hundred and more years since the first
Vice Rov of India, yet the instructions which I
received in 1825 were in unison with those of the
Revolutionary Government, notwithstanding my
having submitted upwards of 20 official dispatches to
the representative of the King my master, in the
capital of Portuguese India, in which I shewed by
reasoning the most conclusive, how dishonorable it
was to the Portuguese nation, and also to me as its
representative in this quarter (so recognized by the
Sovereign and people of the King of Siam, as you Sir
may have observed from the documents which I laid
before you) to remain here in a state of abandonment
since the receipt of a notice to withdraw from ray re-
presentative situation without any assistance to enable
me to depart from a country where there is no navi-
gation, or the least communication with the Portuguese
Dominions, which might facilitate the means of my
obtaining a convenient passage, and where I have to
release myself from some engagements originating in
the forsaken condition to which the Government of
Goa thought proper to reduce me, even without ad-
dressing an official communication* considerations of
civility to the Ruler of the Country with whom we
had renewed the closest friendship, a circumstance
which excited the greatest indignation of the Siamese
against me, and redoubled the cause of my affliction,
so that 1 am incumbent with an affair of the greatest
difficulty, and what is still worse without any resources
from any quarter, and finally being exhausted of all, even
of patience, constancy and resignation, allow me, Sir, to
have recourse to your influence as a respectable member
of the British nation united to the Portuguese by the
strictest ties of friendship in the hope that you will
address the Governor of Goa as an eye witness of my
present condition, not only to convince him of the
truth of the several statements submitted by me, but
also what yon have yourself seen, and thus to excite


those sentiments ot‘ honor which 1 am persuaded are
inseparable from all those who are deemed worthy of
the confidence of the Sovereign Power in the exercise
of public functions, and in the meanwhile you will
save the Portuguese from the disgrace, of being the
first to set the example of abandoning in so shameful
a manner one of their public Functionaries fas in my
case) in a seraibarbarous country ; .a fatal example this,
which must tend to degrade in the eyes of the Siamese
(so circumspect in regard to this point) all Christian
Nations whom they regard as one family, and they
imagine that all would be equally capable of a similar
act of inhumanity.
1 have been guilty of no crime, nor committed
the slightest fault which can merit in the smallest
degree the displeasure of my superiors as you must be
aware, Sir, from my correspondence, ( which I shewed
you ) with the Governments of Goa and Macao, and
therefore I do not think that I deserve this treatment
from the Government of Goa. You, Sir, will in no way
risk your honor by the exertions which you may make
in my favour, even to the extent of soliciting the
exalted interposition of the Governor General of
British India, apprizing His Excellency of all the
circumstances which have occurred, should His Excel-
lency deign from motives of benevolence to intercede
in any manner in ray behalf; as I am persuaded that a
representation from His Excellency will make a great
impression on the mind of the Governor of Goa, and
induce him to adopt a more liberal resolution in regard
to me, namely to extricate me from the embarrassed
situation in which I am placed, and afford me the means
of quitting this place, or to remit to me the amount
of the accounts which I have regularly transmitted
every year to the Royal Exchequer for the state of
India through the intervention of the Governor
General of Goa.
For this great favour which 1 earnestly entreat of


you, Sir, you will find me, on all occasions, disposed to
devote every moment of my existence to meet your
wishes, and promote the interests of the British
Nation.
I have &c.
(Signed) Carlos M. da Silveira
Bangkok the 25th
June 1826.
(A true Translation)
( Sd.) W. Foresty—Translator.


Fort Cornwallis The 8th Feb. 1827.
Minute of the President.
Having attentively read and considered Captain
Low’s Report of his proceedings in the Kurow
River, I now record the observations which occur to
me on the subject. The repeated and unceasing at-
tacks made by pirates on our trading prows, the mur-
dering and wounding, and the capture and carrying
into slavery of our inhabitants pursuing their trading
pursuits even from the shores of the Island, will be
found fully displayed in the various depositions made
at the Police Office within these few years. These acts
of atrocity having of late much increased, while every
attempt to suppress them by the use of boats in the
open sea has failed, it became a matter of necessity to
root out from their strongholds the gang [ of ] banditti
which had established themselves in the Kurow River
within the Perak Territory and little more than 20
miles south of our own boundary. The necessary in-
structions were given in consequence to Captain Low
to make arrangements for the surprise and dispersion
of the band. His report displays the success that has
attended his measures and 1 propose that the sense
entertained of his services on the occasion be duly
noticed, and as encouragement to the troops employed
under him, that the amount value of the captured
property be distributed amongst the party under his
command.
The report of Captain Low and the documents
submitted therewith sufficiently show the origin and
main source of these aggressions. Nakoda Oudin the
Chief of the pirates, is an emissary and servant of the
Chief of Ligore deriving Ids authority and means of
annoyance from him, and has been evidently placed
there to forward the insidious and underhand views


of that Chief against the State of Perak as well as
to distress in every way short of open violence the
inhabitants of the Island. These papers clearly evince
the underhand means resorted to by that Chief and
the necessity of guarding ourselves against progressive
encroachments, made under cover of unceasing
declarations of friendship. They moreover show in
strong colours what must be the result of the ex-
tension of Siamese dominion over the Malay States.
To suppress piracy by application of force in the open
sea against small boats whose motions defy pursuit
over flats and into Creeks to which our cruizers
cannot find access is quite impossible. Such can only
be done by the exercise of our influence over the
States amongst whom we are placed by inducing them
to aid in the expulsion of these disturbers and
destroyers of all trade ; that assistance we may safely
rely on from most on this coast, knowing as they
do we entertain no views of hostility against them,
on the contrary that the maintenance of their
independence, peace and tranquillity is essential to
the great objects for which those Settlements are
maintained, for the promotion and extension of our
trade. As it appears that all the rivers between the
Krean and Perak have occasionally been and are
liable to become receptacles for Pirates it becomes
necessary to use our influence with the King of that
Country, now independent, to aid in the expulsion
of all pirates that may hereafter seek shelter there;
I propose therefore that a letter be addressed to him
respecting Captain Low’s proceedings, inviting him
to aid and assist our-officers engaged in the destruction
of pirates by establishing at the most convenient
stations near the mouth of the river persons in whom
he can confide, with sufficient force to prevent any
doubtful characters establishing themselves in his
country and, provided Captain Low is satisfied that
confidence may be reposed in the parties so placed, I
see uo objection to occasional supply of Arms and


Ammunition to be used exclusively in pursuit of this
object and defence when required. The substance
of this letter should moreover be communicated to the
Agents of the Chief of Perak. It might also be
necessary to intimate to the Chief of Ligore the
knowledge we possess of his underhand proceedings.
Considering however the return of Captain Burney
with the final decision of the Supreme Government on
Siamese affairs, may be expected at an early period,
the communication may, for the present, be deferred.
( Signed ) R. Fullerton.
Ist February 1827.


Fort Cornwallis The 15th Feb. 1827.
Translation
of a Letter from the Rajah of Ligore to the Honble.
Robert Fullerton Governor of Pnlo Penang.
( After Compliments )
May my friend be informed that I have returned
from the capital (Bangkok) and have arrived at Kedah-
On my arrival I found a letter which had been forward-
ed to Kedah with presents from the Right Honble.
Lord Amherst Governor of Bengal, together with a
letter from my friend which I duly received according
to the rules of friendship and sincere regard.
Moreover with respect to the treaty which Cap-
tain Burney made at the capital he took away with
him one Copy, promising to return to Quedah and ex-
change it for another which was sealed at the Capital.
The Treaty duly sealed at the Capital I have brought
with me, and whenever Captain Burney returns to
Pulo Penang from Bengal with the Treaty which he
took to be sealed at Bengal, 1 shall beg to be informed
and I will bring the sealed Treaty to be exchanged
agreeably to the engagement with Captain Burney.
When the Treaty has been duly ratified, the affairs of
the Quedah Country and the commercial intercourse
will be conducted and established according to the
terms of that Treaty between the Siamese and English,
so that friendship will be promoted and may never
cease as long as the Earth and Sky remain.
I am now waiting for the intelligence of Captain
Burney’s return from Bengal and 1 now send Koon
Aksoon and Nai Neera to purchase some goods at Pnlo
Penang and I beg my friend to indulgently permit


them to return immediately so that no delay may take
place.
Dated Ist of 2nd. Month.
Pinang
The 7th February 1827.
A true translation
(Signed) John Anderson
Malay Transr. to Govt.


Fort William 23rd February 1827.
George Swinton Esqre.
Secretary to Government.
Sir,
I beg leave to submit to His Excellency the Vice
President in Council the expediency of explaining
to the Siamese Chief at Queda, through the Govern-
ment of Prince of Wales Island, the Cause which lias
prevented my returning to Queda so soon as the
Treaty concluded with the Siamese Ministers had
engaged me. For this purpose I have prepared the
enclosed draft of a letter, with accompanying transla-
tion in the Siamese language, that, if approved, the
same may be forwarded.
I have &c.
( Signed ) H. Burney Captain
Envoy to Siam.
Calcutta
10th February 1827.


Letter from Captain H. Burney to Phra Phakdi
Rorirak Governor of Queda. Calcutta 12th day of the
3rd. Month, Bth February 1827.
I have to acquaint my friend that the Right
Honble. the Governor General having proceeded on a
visit into the interior of the country, many days’
journey from Calcutta, I have not been able to see my
friend so soon as the Treaty concluded between Their
Excellencies the Ministers at Bangkok and myself had
engaged me to return to Queda. The Treaty and the
letters from His Majesty the King of Siam and from
Chao Phya Phra Klang have been forwarded to the
Governor General, and the moment His Lordship’s
answer is received 1 shall leave Bengal. I hope to see
my friend by the end of the 4th month, and beg my
friend will in the mean time communicate this infor-
mation to his father. Chao Phya Ligor, with 7ny best
respects.
(Signed) H. Burney.
Fort VV illiam 23rd February 1827.


Fort Cornwallis 26th Feb. 1827.
To Rajah of Li gore.
Letter
from the ilonble. the Governor of Prince of Wales
Island, Singapore and Malacca to the Rajah of Li gore.
I have duly received my friend’s letter by his
Envoys Koon Aksorn and Nai Niem, and congratulate
him upon his safe return to his own country. It is
satisfactory to me to be informed that my friend is
determined to adhere strdctly and faithfully to the
terms of the Treaty concluded by Captain Burney at
the Capital. That Officer is expected immediately
from Bengal, and L shall not fail to give my friend the
earliest intimation of his arrival.
(Signed) R. Fullerton.
Governor-
Finang
The 20th February 1827,


Fort Cornwallis the 18th April 1827.
To J. Anderson Esqre.
Secretary to Government
P. W. Island.
Sir,
Captain Burney being about to leave the Presi-
dency with the Treaty with Siam ratified by the
Supreme Government, I am directed by the Right
Honorable the Vice President in Council to transmit
to you for the information of the Honble. the Governor
in Council, the enclosed copies of the instructions
with which he has been furnished and of the other
documents referred to therein.
# * * * * *
4. With regard to the removal of the Bx-Rajah
of Quedah from Pinang to Malacca, His Excellency the
Vice President in Council trusts that immediate steps
will be taken for carrying this desirable object into
effect.
5. Relatively to the arrangement mentioned in
the 25th paragraph of the instructions to Captain
Burney 1 am directed to observe that it is by no means
intended to preclude any direct communication not of
a political nature when deemed necessary between the
Government of Prince of Wales island and the Court*
of Siam.
t>. Captain Burney has been directed to com-
municate with the Government of Prince of Wales
Island, previously to proceeding to Queda to exchange
the copies of the Treaty and the Honorable the Gov-
ernor in Council is requested to facilitate the means
of his repairing thither and of subsequently joining
the situation to which he has been appointed on the
Tenasserim Coast.
******
I have &c.
(Sd.) Geo. Swinton
Secy, to the Govt.
Fort William
23d February 1827.


To Captain H. Burney
Envoy to Siam.
Sir,
Your several dispatches... having- been under
the consideration of Government, I atn now directed to
convey to you the following- observations and instruc-
tions of His Lordship the Vice President in Council,
with respect to the several points which they embrace.
2. In reviewing the general tenor of your pro-
ceedings in the discharge of the important duties
confided to your charge, as Envoy to the Court of
Siam, the Vice President in Council is happy to ex-
press his entire satisfaction with your conduct during
the period of your residence at Bangkok and considers
you to have accomplished in a manner highly credit-
able to your judgment, talent and address, every
object of your Mission, which under the circumstances
detailed in your very clear and able Reports above
acknowledged, ‘ the Siamese ( hurt could he expected
to concede,
3. The primary object of the Mission from
the Supreme Government to the Court of Siam being,
His Excellency in Council observes, of a compliment-
ary and conciliatory nature, the manner in which
the ceremonial of your introduction to the King and
Wangna was arranged, and in which you obtained the
audiences of leave and the address from His Majesty
to the Governor General, as well as the visits which
you paid to the Princes and great Ministers to whom
it had not previously been the custom for foreign
Envoys to be introduced, is entirely approved. His
Excellency in Council also has not failed to notice
with sentiments of much satisfaction the great
Fort Cornwallis the 18fli April 1827.


advantage of your conferring directly with the Privy
Council of the Kingdom, and discussing and settling at
meetings with it the several points of negociation. The
temper and prudence likewise which distinguished
your proceedings during a considerable interval of time
when the Siamese Court, through ignorance and
jealousy, was induced to lend an ear to the absurd
rumours propagated by some mischievous and interested
individuals and to entertain serious doubts of our
good faith and intentions, are highly commended by
His Lordship in Council. The favorable impression
produced thereby on the mind of His Siamese Majesty
and his Ministers contributed no doubt, to the
apparently cordial and friendly feelings with which
the Mission finally received its leave.
4. With respect to that part of your negociations
that related to the hostilities in which we were . then
engaged with the State of Ava, His Excellency in
Council has adverted to the situation in which you
were placed at Bangkok in finding, that whilst your
Instructions from the Supreme Government interdicted
any application to the Government of Siam for the
co-operation of its troops with the British Army,
circumstances had induced Major General Sir A.
Campbell to invite the Siamese Court to fulfil its
promises and direct the advance of an auxiliary force,
and His Lordship in Council approves the endeavours
which under the supposed exigency you made on that
occasion to promote what yon understood to be the
wishes of the British Commander. His Lordship in
Council also commends the pains which you took to
afford the Siamese Ministers full explanations with
respect to the nature and progress of the Burmese War,
and to prevail on them to send accredited Agents to
meet the British Commissioners in Ava and Pegue
for the purpose of settling at the Seat of War all
points connected with the conduct of it and relating
to mutual boundaries.


5. Hie caution and firmness with which you
met the demands of the Siamese Court for the uncon-
ditional surrender of Tavoy and Martaban and the
care which you took to avoid holding' out any expecta-
tion of our ceding to the Government of Siam any
portion of our acquisitions on the Coast of Tenasserim
are entirely approved.
6. The success of your negotiations with the
Siamese Court for the release and return of 1400 Bur-
mese and Pegue Captives who had been carried off bv
the Siamese Detachments from the Province of Ten-
asserim, after that country had come into our posses-
sion, is peculiarly gratifying to His Excellency in
Council, who has viewed the persevering exertions em-
ployed by you to effect that humane and desirable object
with much approbation. The security and confidence
which our new Burman Subjects on that Coast now
feel as reported by Mr. Maingy, the Civil Commissioner,
in consequence of their countrymen having been thus
rescued-from the hands of their cruel and inveterate
enemies, are the pleasing fruits of your success, which
cannot fail to redound to the fame and reputation of
the British Government.
7. With respect to the Treaty concluded with
the Government of Siam. 1 am directed to observe
that it has received the sanction and approbation of
Government. The first article being a general engage-
ment of mutual friendship and forbearance requires no
remark. The Second is considered to contain prudent
and judicious provisions for the settlement of any cause
of complaint on either side, and the concluding stip-
ulation for declaring the object for which any armament
may be collected by one party in the vicinity of the
other must operate advantageously in the future in-
tercourse between the Government of Prince of Wales
Island and the Raja of Ligore. The third Article
establishes as reasonable a plan as could have been ex-
pected from the Siamese for the settlement of all doubts


regarding mutual boundaries. The fourth Article ap-
pears to provide in a very judicious manner for the
adjustment of all questions regarding refugees from
either state, leaving it optional with either party to
surrender the refugee. The Vice President in Council
concurs with you in opinion that the conclusion of any
direct stipulation with such a Government as that of
Siam for the mutual surrender of refugees might have
proved a source of embarrassment to us.
8. V\ ith respect to the commercial objects en-
trusted to your negociation as provided for by the sth.
6th, 7th, Bth, 9th, 10th and 11th Articles of the
Treaty and the special commercial agreement annexed
to it, 1 am directed to observe that you appear to have
collected much useful information respecting the de-
tails of the existing system of levying duties and
regulating foreign trade at Bangkok, and His Ex-
cellency in Council approves of the manner in whicli
you avail yourself of that information to urge and
persuade the Siamese Ministers to define and fix as far
as possible the charges and regulations applicable to
British trade and shipping. The terms by which in
lieu of numerous and arbitrary exactions one simple
impost is in future to be levied on the commerce at
Bangkok v'v/A. 1,700 Ticals per each Siamese fathom
in breadth on a vessel carrying an import cargo, and
1,500 Ticals per fathom, if she visit Siam in ballast,
are entirely approved. His Excellency in Council is
induced to hope that as the whole Treaty was original-
ly written and discussed with the Siamese in their
language, and is one which is so obviously the interest
of the King of Siam to maintain, the several provi-
sions in favor of our merchants and shipping will
be generally respected and fulfilled by the Siamese
Government.
9. The conditions on which the Siamese Monarch
has offered in the 7th and Bth Articles of the Treaty
to permit the residence of British Subjects in his


territories and to admit our vessels to trade with
other ports of the Kingdom in addition to those
hitherto visited for that purpose, do not it is true hold
out much encouragement to European Merchants, but
more perhaps could not be expected for the present
from the jealous fears of that Court.
10. The Siamese Government lias objected to
Europeans, Descendants of Europeans, Burmese or
Peguers travelling overland and into the interior of
the Siamese Dominions. On this point lam directed
to remark that with advertence to what you have
stated in explanation thereof in your letter of the 4th
January last, His Excellency in Council is satisfied
that you coni 1 not have insisted upon the Siamese
throwing open the interior of their Dominions con-
trary to their own inclination. His Lordship in
Council trusts that for the present the terms of the
Treaty will suffice, as it admits Europeans and their
descendants into the Siamese Ports by Sea on an
improved footing and permits all other Asiatic Subjects
of the British Government not being Burmese or
Peguers to travel into the interior of Siam from our
Settlements in the Straits of Malacca and the newly
acquired possessions on the Tenasserirn Coast.
11. The Vice President in Council has not
failed to notice the advantage of the stipulation in
regard to the clandestine introduction of opium into
the territories of Siam contrary to its established laws.
By that stipulation the penalty is confined to confisca-
tion only instead of a fine as heretofore of eight
times the weight of the article in silver or forfeiture
of the whole of the property of the trader and
sometimes even of his life. The Vice President in
Council trusts that the above and other provisions
in the Treaty will give every practicable degree of
freedom and facility to our trade both in upper and
lower Siam, and in time effect a great improvement
in our commercial relations with those countries.


12. Relatively to that part of your negcriations
which concern the local interests of our Settlements
in the Straits of Malacca, the Vice President in
Council regrets that any difference of opinion should
have prevailed between the Government of Prince
•of Wales Island and yourself, but is happy to observe
that, that Authority has done justice “to the
■“ difficulty with which you had to contend, from the
** impracticable character of the people with whom
“ you had to deal, the necessity of yielding some
points for the attainment of others, and the manifest
u expediency of coming to some sort of under-
*i standing instead of quitting the Siamese Court if
not on actually hostile at least on unfriendly
*' terms.”
13. With respect to the 13th Article of the
Treaty the Vice President in Council deems it due to
you to declare that he is by no means surprised at
your failure to accomplish by negociation the
restoration of the Ex King of Queda, a point to
to which the Government of Prince of Wales Island,
in particular, attached so much importance, since
independently’’ of your not being empowered to
tender to the Siamese an equivalent for the profit
which they derive from the direct occupation of that
country, the pride and resentment of the Chief officers
of the Siamese Court were evidently strongly' excited
against the Ex Raja by r his clandestine overtures to
their inveterate enemy the Burmese in 1824, while
residing under our protection at Penang, When the
Supreme Government expressed its hope that the
Siamese Monarch might be induced to reinstate the
Ex-King of Queda in his hereditary dominions, it
never contemplated the accomplishment of this object
but by means of a reconciliation to be effected
through the good offices of the British Government
between him and the Court of Siam, The employment
of any' menace therefore, on your part, to enforce
compliance with our wishes in favor of the Ex King


of Quedali would have entirely changed the ground
of negotiation and have been at variance with the
conciliatory objects of your Mission to the Siamese
Court,
14. The Vice President in Council however
concurs entirely in the sentiments of the Honble. the
Governor of Prince of Wales Island expressed in his
Minute of the 24th September 1825 both as to the
necessity of coming to a final decision on one way
or other, with respect to the question of the restora-
tion of the Ex King of Queda and as to the
certainty that no confidence or cordiality can
subsist between the Government of Prince of Wales
Island atid its Siamese neighbours so long as that
individual continues to reside at Penang. His Excel-
lency in Council therefore is happy to find that
the Honble.' the Governor of that Settlement admits
the propriety under existing circumstances of using
every endeavour to persuade the King of Quedah
to remove to Malacca or some place distant from
the immediate scene of his former authority and
the Vice President in Council hopes that immediate
steps will be taken for carrying this desirable
object into effect. In the opinion of His Excellency
in Council the residence of the Ex King at Penang
must tend to keep alive the hopes, the passions and
resentment of himself and retainers, and furnish to the
Siamese not unreasonable grounds for distrust and
jealousy of our intentions with regard to Queda. thus
exposing to the hazard of interruption the friendly
relations and understanding which it has been the
object of the Supreme Government to establish with
the state of Siam, In requiring the King of Queda
to remove from Penang it by no means follows that
he thereby personally renounces his rights. On the
contrary he may be informed that the British Govern-
ment will not lose sight of the interests of its old
friend and ally in the event of an opening hereafter
occurring at any time for affecting some general


arrangement with the Siamese including his restora-
fcion to his ancient dominion, it is indispensable
however, that he should be distinctly cautioned not to
cherish any hope or expectation that the British Gov-
ernment will employ in his behalf any other means
than that of fair and friendly negoeiation with the
Siamese, and any hesitation on his part to remove to
such place of asylum within our territories as consider-
ations of policy may induce us to point out to him,
must naturally indispose us to take further inteiest in
his concerns. He must be warned also that so long
as he and his family continue to enjoy a stipend and
protection from the British Government, he must
consider himself bound to abandon all designs and
secret machinations calculated in manner to
molest or give umbrage to the Siamese and tending
thereby to disturb the friendship and harmony estab-
lished between that nation and ourselves.
15. Adverting to the strong and repeated injunc-
tions of the Honorable the Court of Directors against
any extension of our relations to the Eastward, His Ex-
cellency the Vice President in Council approves of your
having cautiously avoided to commit your Government
to ulterior procedures by any of your acts at Bangkok.
Should the circumstance of our more intimate connec-
tion with the Malay Peninsula consequent on our
establishment at Malacca or any other causes, induce
any change in the views of the Home Authorities in
that respect, ample opportunities may hereafter offer
tor extending protection of the British Government
over the States of Kalentan and Tringano and thereby
relieving them from Siamese supremacy in the manner
desired by the Government of Prince of Wales Island,
in the mean time the Vice President in Council per-
suades himself that the trade and intercourse of British
Subjects with the two petty States above mentioned
will be sufficiently secured by the 12th Article of the
Treaty.


16. The Vice President in Council is fully
aware of the peculiarity of your situation at Bangkok
in negociating with respect to the State of Perak
under the circumstances of the Raja and Chiefs of
that Country having been in such close communica-
tion with the Raja of Ligore, and a strong party,
headed by the heir apparent of Perak, being devoted •
to the interests of the Siamese. His Lordship in
Council however is happy to observe that the Govern-
ment of P. W. Island considered the 11th Article of
the Treaty so far satisfactory as it confirms the pre-
liminary agreement made by you with the Raja of
Ligore in respect to Perak. With respect to tha re-
cent proceedings of Captain Low, subsequently deputed
by T the Government ot Prince of Wales Island to that
State, His Excellency in Council agrees in opinion with
the Honorable the Government of Penang, that that
officer had exceeded his powers and ha 1 moreover
interfered in the affairs of Perak to an extent which
was never contemplated or desired. An Extract of
your letter of the 29th December last, relative to
Perak will be transmitted to the Government ot P W.
Island and His Excellency in Council entertains a
hope that a Document may still be procured from
the Rajah of Perak in the manner suggested by you
in the 7th Paragraph of your letter above adverted to,
and be forwarded to the Rajah of Ligore and Court of
Siam for the purpose of satisfying them of the desire
of the Perak Chief to discontinue his connection with
the Siamese.
17. With regard to Salengore, the Vice Presi-
dent in Council approves of the terms by which it is
relieved from all molestation in future on the part ot
Siam, and trusts that the provision of the 14th Article
of the Treaty will sufficiently enable the Government
of Prince of Wales Island to accomplish so important
an object connected with the Malay Peninsula, as that
of preventing the extension of Siamese conquest to
the vicinity of Malacca. His Excellency in Council


further hopes that the 1 Oth Article of the Treat\ will
open and secure to the inhabitants of Prince of Wales
Island and Malacca the valuable trade with Patna
and with the interior of the East Coast of the Malay
J eninsula overland, and by means of the numerous
rivers in that quarter. The importance of this trade
has frequently teen brought to the notice of the
Supreme Government by the Government of Prince
of Wales Island.
18th. His Excellency the Vice President in
Council has noticed with much approbation the zeal
and industry with which you acquired a knowledge
of the Siamese language and were thereby enabled
not ordy to converse but to conduct a correspondence
in writing with the Siamese Ministers who were
thus led to disclose in so new, interesting and unequi-
vocal manner their character and real views and
feelings in the letters and original drafts of Treaties
with which they furnished you. The advantage also
was great which your knowledge of the Siamese
tongue afforded you of discussing and settling the
several Articles of the Treaty and of inscribing
them in the first instance in the language of the
Siamese negotiators, nor is the favorable effect to be
overlooked which was produced in the mind of His
Majesty when you personally addressed him in his
own tongue.
19. His Excellency in Council has also noticed
with sentiments of much satisfaction the very favorable
report you have made of the aid you derived from
your assistant Captain Macfarquhar and of the good
conduct of the Acting Assistant Surgeon Mr. Harris,
Captain Sutherland Commander of the Mission Vessel
and of the orderly behaviour of the Soobadar and
Sepoys of the Escort. With respect to certain in-
dividuals of the last named class, who volunteered to
convey your dispatches overland from Bangkok to
Martaban and Tavoy you have already been apprised


that their conduct has been brought to the favorable
notice of His Excellency the Commander in Chief.
His Lordship in Council has also remarked with
approbation the praiseworthy conduct ot Messrs.
Hunter and Malloch British Merchants residing at
Bangkok who afforded you the useful information
mentioned in your Report. The good offices and
friendly aid of Mr. Carlos de Silveira, the Portuguese
Consul at Bangkok are also acknowledged and as yon
are aware, have at your recommendation, been made
the subject of an address from the Vice President
in Council to the Government of Goa.
20. Having thus adverted to the principal topics
of your Report which appeared to require particular
observation, I am now directed to state to you that the
Treaty which had been forwarded for the signature of
the Right Honorable the Governor General has been
returned duly ratified and has also received the signa-
ture of the Vice President in Council. By the
accompanying copy of a letter from the Deputy
Secretary in attendance on the Governor General you
will observe that His Lordship proposes to seize the
earliest moment of leisure to record his sentiments at
length on the principal points comprised in your
Reports and on the question of policy discussed in the
papers and correspondence from the Government of
Prince of Wales Island. His Excellency the Vice-
President in Council awaits therefore the promised
communication from the Governor General previously
to replying to the questions of general policy discussed
in the correspondence above referred to from Penang,
but it will be satisfactory to you to learn that Lord
Amherst has been pleased to express his concurrence
with the Local Government in highly commending the
the zeal, address, temper and ability displayed by you
during your negotiations with the Government of
Siam, and has declared that he further considers t hat
the results of your Mission have been in the mam
successful as placing the Political and Commercial Re-


Nations of the British Nation with the Stale of Siam
■on a decidedly improved footing and that at all events
the Treaty negotiated by you has in His Lordship's
■judgment secured every advantage which could have
been expected under the instructions furnished to you
by the Governor General.
21. VVitJi advertence to the concluding paragraph
of Mr. Stirling’s letter above quoted, lam directed
to inform you that it bad appeared desirable to the
Vice President in Council that an Officer so well
acquainted as yourself with the Siamese character and
language, should continue to he employed where those
qualifications might be called into action and as the
Civil Commissioner for the Teuasserira Provinces, had
applied for further aid in consequence of the departure
of his Assistant Captain Briggs, His Excellency in
in Council proposed to the Governor General that on
the termination of your present Mission, you should
■be directed to proceed to Mergui and assume the Civil
charge of the Southern portion of the British posses-
sions in that quarter under the direction of Mr.
JMaingy.
22. lam now directed to acquaint you that the
arrangement above adverted to is to take effect.
After touching at P. W. Island where the Brig Guar-
dian is to be discharged, and communicating with the
Honorable the Governor in Council of that Settlement
to whom a copy of these instructions will be forwarded
for his information yoxi will proceed to Queda and ex-
change with the son of the Rajah of Ligore the stipulated
Copies of the Treaty. You will then deliver to your
Assistant Captain McFarquhar the Copy of the Treaty
ratified by the King of Siam and instruct hint to ret urn
to this Presidency without delay, while you will your-
self lose no time in proceeding to Mergui and placing
yourself under the Civil Commissioner. His Excel-
lency in Council trusts that the knowledge which
you have acquired of the past history and condition


of the territory on the Coast of Tenasserira ami of
the views with respect to it as well of this
(fovernment as of that of the Rouble, the Governor
of Penang - and your acquaintance with the persons
and characters of the Members of the Siamese Govern--
raent, together with the mass of information you
have collected on the constitution and topography
of that country and the character and habits ot the
people will enable you to afford the most efficient aid
to the Civil Commissioner in the performance of
whatever duty he may consider it most advantageous
for the public service to employ you upon. Your
Services- are also to be held available to the Senior
Commissioner Major General Sir Archibald Campbell
who is vested with the charge of our political relations
in that quarter. It is not improbable indeed, that
you may lie required to meet and accompany the
Mission which the King of Siam has proposed to
depute to Bengal, and which although it is not the
wish of the Vice President in Council to encourage
by any solicitation on our part, may if spontaneously
sent be attended with good effects in promoting a
more intimate and friendly intercourse with that
jealous and suspicious Government,
23. In your capacity of First Assistant to the
Civil Commissioner you will be authorised to draw
an allowance of Sicca Rupees Twelve hundred per
Mensem exclusive of your Military pay. This allowance
will commence on the exchange of the ratified
Treaty with Siam when your personal allowance and
other expenses connected with the Mission to that
Court are to cease.
24. With advertence to the last mentioned topic,
I am directed to take this opportunity of apprising'
you of the sentiments of the Vice President in Council
with regard to the future conduct of our relations
with the Siamese Government.


25. The intercourse between Singapore and
Bangkok being either conducted by Junks which it is
understood sail only at stated seasons or by a few
square rigged Vessels that occasionally go up to the
Siamese capital, where they are liable to be detained
for an indefinite period, communication by such means
cannot be so certain, regular or expeditious as that
which may be conducted between Siam and the
British possessions of Tenasserim. This indeed has
been satisfactorily proved by the fact of your having
yourself while at Bangkok, regularly and safely
communicated with our officers at Tavoy, Mergui and
Martaban. Under these circumstances the duties
heretofore performed by the late Resident at Singapore
in his capacity of Agent to the Governor General
with the States to the Eastward ( which office ceased
with the abolition of that Residency on its late
footing) will as far as relates to Siam be now con-
ducted by the Chief Political and Military Authority
in Tenasserim. You will take an opportunity
therefore of communicating this arrangement to the
Rajah of Ligore through his Son, whom you are to
meet at Queda. The Governor General will on his
return from the Western Provinces make a suitable
reply through the channel of Major General Sir A.
Campbell to the letter from His Majesty the King
of Siam of which you were the bearer. In the mean
time I have been directed to address a letter in the
terms of the enclosed draft to the Siamese Ministers,
the original of which letter you will observe is to
be conveyed by you for the purpose of being forwarded
through the Rajah of Ligore to Bangkok and a
duplicate will be transmitted through Major General
Sir Archibald Campbell who will be instructed to
take that opportunity of opening a direct correspon-
dence with himself.
26. Should the Rajah of Ligore be himself at
Quedah on your arrival there, His Excellency in
Council trusts that it is superfluous to impress on you


iiow desirable it is that you should use every means
of persuading him to establish the most friendly and
liberal trade and intercourse between Queda and
the Settlement of Prince of Wales Island. You will
avail yourself of your intimacy with that Chief to
advise him to cultivate a cordial good understaning
with the Government of Penang and shew at all times
the same readiness as it appears his son has lately
done in disproving the Reports that may be raised
against him by his enemies of his being employed in
hostile preparations. You will warn him against
engaging in any secret design or intrigue calculated to
disturb the peace and* government of Perak and
Halengore, and you will encourage him to establish
the same duties and regulations aifecting trade and
intercourse at Quedah as may be in force at Prince of
Wales Island. With this view you will be pleased to
apply to the Government of Prince of Wales Island for
a List of Custom and Port Regulations at Penang and
deliver it to His Highness, reminding him of his
promise to you to arrange these matters on terms of
perfect reciprocity, which cannot fail of proving highly
advantageous to his own Interests,
I have &c.
(Signed) Geo. Swinton
Secy, to the Govt
Council Chamber
28d February 1827.


George Swinton Esquire Secretary to the Supreme
Government of British India in the Secret and
Political Department, to their Excellencies the Six
High Ministers, forming the Privy Council of the
Kingdom of Siam.
1 am directed to apprise your Excellencies that
the Right Honorable Lord Amherst, Governor General,
being on a tour in the Upper Provinces, has bemi the
cause of some dela}’’ in the ratification of the Treaty
which Captain H. Burney negotiated with your Ex-
cellencies. That instrument however, pledging both
our nations to the most sincere friendship and amity,
has now been duly signed and sealed by the Governor
General and the Ministers of the Supreme Govern-
ment, and pursuant to the stipulation contained in
the. last part of the 14th Article, Captain Burney is
about to return with it immediately to Queda in order
to exchange the ratifications with the son of Raja of
Ligore. The Governor General will take an early
opportunity of addressing His Majesty the King of
Siam, and in the mean time I am directed to tender
to His Majesty through your Excellencies the cordial
acknowledgements of His I.ordship for the dis-
tinguished and very gracious reception which his
Envoy Captain Burney experienced at Bangkok.
That Officer has also brought to the notice of this
Government the very kind and gratifying attentions
bestowed upon him by His Highness the Wangna, by
Prince Krom Meun Surintonraksa, and by Chao Pya
Prah Klang and your Excellencies and I hope that
the friendship which has now been settled and fixed
by Treaty been the English and Siamese Nations may
be matured,and improved to the mutual benefit of both
our Countries, and particularly of our merchants and
Port Cornwallis the 18th April 1827.


traders. Your Excellencies may rest assured of the
continued desire of the Supreme Government to main-
tain and cultivate on all occasions the most friendly
understanding with your Court. 1 proposed to send
one copy of this letter through the Rajah of Li gore
and another to Martaban, whence Major General Sir
Archibald Campbell, the Governor General’s Political
Agent, will take an opportunity of forwarding it to
your Excellencies overland in order that the earliest
intelligence may be received by the King ol Siam of
the ratification of the Treaty concluded between flis
Majesty and the Honble. the English East India
Company.
1 have the honor to remain with sentiments of
high respect and consideration.
Your most obedient &c.
(Signed) Geo. Swinton
Secry. to the Govt.
Fort William
23d February 1827.


Fort Cornwallis 7th March 1827.
Correspondence between the Rajahs of
Li gore and Perak.
Translation ot a letter from Aluang Packdi .him
to Sultan Abdullah of Perak.
The Chow Pya of Ligore, entertaining towards
Sultaun Abdulla the greatest kindness and regard, and
having a great favor towards him, has directed me to
send this letter to'Sultaun Abdullah to say that the
Chow Pya being as yet only acquainted with Sultaun
Abdullah by name and never having yet had a personal
interview or conversed with him considers it very
desirable if he could meet the Rajah of Perak for once
so that friendship may be promoted and he may
obtain a good name at the Capital. Will Sultaun
Abdullah therefore come for once to meet the Chow
Pya of Ligore—will he or not? Nevertheless let
him consider what may be most proper and when
he has decided let him send me a reply by Aluang
Packdi Songkram when he returns so that I may
know. If however he ( Sultaun Abdhllah ) cannot
come, do not let him be suspicious. The Chow Pya
will not be angiy, but it appears extremely desirable
that he should come for once. This is made know
to Sultaun Abdullah so that he may consider, and
if he can come it will be very good for him and he can
proceed to the Capital to present himself before the
great King. This letter is written in the spirit of
love and regard.
(A true translation)
(Signed) John Anderson
Mala}’ Tr. to Govt.
Pinang
the 3rd March 1827.


Translation
of a letter from Aluang Packdi Jutu to Sultann
Abdullah, the Raja Mooda, Rajah Bandahara and ali
those who are concerned in the Government of
Perak.
Whereas the Chow Pya ot Ligore has commanded
me to inform you that he proceeded to the Capital, and
the letter which the Raja ot Perak sent to Kedah was
torwarded to the Chow Pya at the Capital. The con-
tents of that letter are understood. What the Rajah
of Perak states in respect to making arrangements for
the Government of his country and becoming the slave
and tributary of the great King of Siam, with true
sincerity, is very proper.
Now the Governor of Bengal sent Captain Henry
Burney with articles respectfully to present to the
King of Siam and desiring to establish friendship be-
tween the English and the Siamese, greater than
before. The Governor of Bengal sent Captain Henry
Burney as the representative of his person to the
Capital, and requested that an engagement of friend-
ship might be made. Captain Burney accordingly
made a Treaty in the presence of the Ministers at the
Capital, requesting that the English and Siamese
might be on friendly terms. Many other particulars
are stated in the Treaty. The English therein say
that they will not send an armament to annoy and
disturb Perak, and that they will not permit Salen-
gore to attack or disturb Perak, and they begged that
a Siamese Army might not be sent to Salengore.
The English are afraid that, the Siamese will attack
and take Salengore. Aluang Packdi Songkram and
the Panghulus and ryots Siamese and Malays who
accompanied the Brother of the Rajah of Perak and
who remained for a while at Perak having been
returned to Kedah in consequence of the English sup-
posing that the -Siamese were concerting measures for


attacking Salengore and the scarcity of provisions at
Perak, the Chow Pya of Ligore now sends Omboora
Back with some Silk Cloths and other Cloths to give
•to the Rajah of Perak, the Rajah Mooda, the Rajah
Bandahara and the other Chiefs as a trifle on this
occasion, and to serve as a token that the Chow Pya
has a friendly regard towards and recollection of the
Raja of Perak, A list of these articles accompanies
this letter.
Moreover when the Chow Pya was returning from
the Capital, the great King expressed a great favor
towards the Raja of Perak with sincerity and the Chow r
Pya of Ligore has therefore sent some sugar and rice
in a prow belonging to China In, proceeding from the
Capital to Pulo Pinang and which will call at Perak
and deliver these articles to the Rajah of Perak,
Omboora Sack, Nai Kot and Che Walim will therefore
remain * at Perak these articles which the Chow Pya
of Ligore has sent by a prow to the Rajah of Perak,
agreeably to what is before stated in this letter.
A true translation
(Signed) John Anderson
Malay Tr. to Govt,
P. W. Island
The 3rd March 1827,


Translation
of a letter from Sultan Abdullah, King ot Perak, the
Jang-de-per-tuan Mooda, Raja Bandahara and assem-
bled Chiefs to Fackdi Jutu.
We request you to represent to the Chow Pya of
Ligore that the letter which he sent by the Envoys
Amboom Sack Nai Kot and Che Walim has duly reach-
ed us, and we received it, and the presents according to
custom. We also fully understood all the contents
and we made arrangements for the Government of our
Country to become tributary to the Great King of
Siam with sincerity. In this we made no variation.
It is started in the commands of the King of Siam,
that a friendship has been established with the Gover-
nor General of Bengal, and a good understanding has
been effected between the English and the Siamese
which intelligence is extremely gratifying to us, and
we rejoice to hear a Treaty has been made.
Moreover when Captain Henry Burney returned
from the Capital, the Governor of Pulo Penang
addressed a letter to us, informing us of all particulars
respecting Captain Burney’s proceeding, to Siam. It
contained many points as stated in the letter from
the Chow Pya of Ligore. With respect to the
Chow Pya sending Aluang Packdi Songkrarn and the
Siamese and Malayan ryots from Kedah to accompany
our brother, they remained some time after their ar-
rival and superintended the Government of Perak and
finding that grain was very scarce they returned
to Kedah. Soon after the Chow Pya sent some silk
and other Cloths which were brought by Amboom Sack,
these we received with a sincere heart, and the Raja
Mooda, Raja Bandahara and the other Chiefs also
received their presents with due respect. Further in
respect to the Sugar and rice stated to he sent in
China In’s prow, it is not arrived. Amboom Sack, Nai
Kot and Che Walim remained a long time, but it did


not arrive, wherefore these persons returned and will
make known all particulars to the Chow Pya.
A true Translation
(Signed) John Anderson
Malay Tr. to Govt.
Pinang
The 3d. March 1827.


Translation
of a letter from Sultan Abdullah, Raja of Perak, to
Aluang Packdi Jutu,
I beg you will respectfully acquaint the Chow
Pya of Ligore that I have duly received your letter in
which you state that he wishes to mnet with me, so that
I might obtain a good name and in order that I might
proceed to present myself before the Great King at
tire Capital, I have fully understood all that is therein
mentioned, i should be very happy to meet with the
Chow Pya of Ligore, and I once intended to have
waited upon him for the purpose of adjusting many
matters, and if the Chow Pya would be happy to see
me, mjr gratification in seeing him would be ten times
as much. But the great King of Siam has come to an
understanding with the Governor General of Bengal
and established a friendship between them, and the
Governor of Pulo Penang sent me a letter by his
Envoy, Captain James Low, informing me that this
Country of Perak is included in the arrangement, and
that the Siamese should not come any more to Perak.
Wherefore I do not think it necessary to proceed
myself to wait on the Rajah of Ligore, for I am poor
man. This 1 beg respectfully to make known and 1
beg the Chow Pya will forgive me. Moreover with
respect to the three pieces of silk and other Cloths
which the Chow Pya sent me I have received them
with sincerity. And the Raja Mooda, Raja Bandahara,
Tuanko Maha Mantri, Orang Kaya besar, Tumungong
Laksmana, Raja Makota and Sri Adeka Rajah have
each received a piece of Cloth.
farther the Chow Pya refers to an elephant
which was caught by Sri Adeka Raja and which was
six cubits in height (his tusks being small and about
the length of his proboscis) and the Chow Pya
directed me to take care of him and to tame him. It
is true there was such an elephant as referred to in the


Chow Pya's orders, and when Sri Adeka Raja caught
him he reported it to me. I directed that the animal
should be well taken care of and granted an allowance
for the pui’pose, for it was my intention to send him
to the Chow r Pya. About a month after the elephant
was caught however, he fell sick and died. At that
time Aluang Packdi, Songkram and Nai Kot and Che
Walim at Perak, and when these persons
returned, I begged them to represent the circum-
stances to the Chow Pya of Ligore.
A true translation
(Signed) John Anderson
Malay Tr. to Govt.
Pinang
The 3rd. March 1827.


Fort William 9th March 1827.
To G. Swinton Esqre.
Secretary to Government in the
Secret Department.
Sir,
I beg leave to transmit herewith certain speci-
mens of cloths in common use at Bangkok, and of
woods the production of Siam together with an
account of the same marked A. and B. Perhaps
His Excellency the Vice President in Council may
consider it useful to forward such specimens to
Europe.
I have &c.
(Signed) H. Burney
Captain Envoy to Siam.


No. 16. Account of some descriptions of wood, the production of Siam.
No. Names. Remarks.
1. Mai Sak or Teak 2d. and 3d. quality. From Raher g,
Kampheng Phichit and Phichai. The
first quality has a slight tinge of green —
the worst kind of teak comes from
Phitsanulok, and is known from being full
of cracks, and easily splintered,
2. Mai Fang or Sapan From Menam Noi and Bangnarom on the
<. frontiers < f Tavoy and Tenasserirn. Used
for Dyeing, and [is] exported in immense
quantities to China.
3. Mai Dam Dong or
Black Dong.
4. Mai Takhien Hin
or Stony from the
grain of the wood,
it is said running
unevenly.
5. Mai Takhien Thong
or Golden, from its
colour.
6. Mai Fradu Horn
or Smelling.
7. Mai Fradu Som or
Some.
From the Islands of Chantaboon &.ca.
much taken to China and said to be the
interior or heart of a large tree, trum
which when dried, this kind of
is taken out.
From Bangpakhong and Rayong —cut into
planks and much used for building the
Hainan Junks.
From Chanlaboon &ca. used for paddles
and for building the large state boats.
From Bangplasai, Jiuheng and nun-Khang
cut into large broad planks and exported
to China Used for tables and furniture.
From the same places as the Fradu Horn ;
and for junk building, and the keels of
boats.
8. Mai Teng rang From Kanboori &ca. used for timbers and
piles of houses.


9. Mai Rang, From Bangplasoi &ca. on the East coast
of the Gulf of Siam, used for anchors
and rudders of junks.
10. Mai Inthanin From Chantaboon. A large tree and for
junk building for the sides as well as
timbers.
11. Mai Tabek From Saraboori and Pechaboori, used for
oars and paddles, and flooring of houses.
The generic term Mai or Wood is, according to the idiom
of the Siamese language, added to the name of each species.
( Signed) H. Burney
Captain Envoy to Siam.
Calcutta
sth March 1827.


No. Name.
Usual
Price.
Worn by what class.
1. Pha Poom, or flowered
cloth
11 Ticals
Officers of the rank of Chao
Phya and Phya. The form-
er often use a pattern with
large flowers.
2. Pha CP hung Poom or
cloth with flowered
border. ( ! )
11 Ticals
Officers of the rank of Phra
and Looang.
3. Pha Khomen. or Cam-
bodia Cloth
14 Ticals
In use only with Chiefs of
Cambodia, and with Native
Christians at Bangkok who
wear pantaloons of this Cloth,
4. Pha Mooning, or Purple
cloth.
6 Ticals
Kings Pages and Nai or
Centurions The centre part
of this cloth is often of a
green color.
6. Pha Ta Dole 1'hven or
Cloth marked like Hen-
na flowers.
| to I
Tical
Lowest classes of both sexes.
6. Pha Let JVga or cloth
marked like Sesamum
seeds. When the spots
are red it is called Pha
Let Nga deng.
Do.
do.
7. Pha Khio Kram or
Greenish blue cloth.
When the color is
green it is called Pha
Khio Koie. ( ! )
Do,
do.
■8 Pha Lai or Pha
Horn The first name
is applied to the dress
of women, the second
to that of men. Both
sexes however wear the
same and it is imported
from China to a great
extent annually.
7 Ticals
Account of Specimens of Siamese Cloths in common use in Bangkok.


Remarks.
These cloths are worn round the waist with the
ends tucked up between the legs and fastened behind
in the same manner by both sexes. Coarse Surat
Chintzes of the dimensions of these cloths are much
worn by the lower classses, English chintz dresses by
the letter classes and by their women. The Princes
and Principal Chiefs, on festivals or days of ceremony,
wear Surat and Benares Khimkhaubs and gold cloths.
No person of a subordinate rank to a Phya can wear a
Pha Puom , and in the presence of the King none but
Princes can appear in Chintz. With a mixture of silk
or worsted and cotton the manufacturers in England
might probably fabricate cloths of these dimensions
and patterns at much lower rates than what these gen-
eral Iv sell for at Bangkok. But every care must be
taken not to introduce any great innovations. The
texture should not be thin, and the borders, parti-
cularly, should be at the ends of the cloth and not at
the sides; the latter pattern will prevent the sale of
the finest manufactures. A Siamese tical, as assayed
lately at the Calcutta Mint, is equal to 1 Sa. Re. and
about annas.
This Chinese Crape is universally worn. It is
generally of a white or black colour among the men,
and of an orange, green or white among the better
class of the women and of black among the lower class.
It is often used, particularly by the lower orders and
by the inhabitants of the Southern Provinces, of only
one breadth, instead, of as this, two breadths joined,
'flie Women usually throw it carelessly over the should-
ers like an English lady her scarf. The men wear
it round the waist as kind of band, excepting in very
cold weather when it is placed over the shoulders,
provided the party be not in the presence of a
superior, before whom the crape is always tied round
the waist. The Princes and Principal Chiefs often, in
cold weather, wear long Indian shawls round the


•upper part of the body. Perhaps cheap English
plain or worked muslins of the dimensions of the
■crape, and of half its breadth, could be substituted for
this dress. A square shawl or scarf would not be
received even as a present at Bangkok.
(Signed) H. Burney Captain
Envoy to Siam.
Calcutta
7th March 1827.


Fort Cornwallis the 26th March 1827.
Translation
of a letter from Sultan Abdullah, King of Perak,, to the
Rouble. R. Fullerton, Governor of Pulo Penang,
Singapore and Malacca.
( After Compfirnents.)
Whereas ray brother the Raja Btndahara and!
Drang Kaya besar, and my son whom I deputed to
wait on m3 7 friend experienced great kindness and
assistance in all respects from my friend, L beg there--
fore to return my sincere thanks to him. With res-
pect to the muskets and ammunition and the money
which were delivered to my brother the Rajah
Hindahara and Orang Kaya besar, m3 7 accredited'
Agents, and the kindness of my friend in sending
them by a Cruiser; 1 beg to inform him that they
have all reached me in safety, and I have received all'
the articles as follows with great satisfaction and
gratitude for my friend’s assistance. The following,
articles are mentioned in ray friend’s letter which
I acknowledge —viz. 2()0 muskets complete, 2 casks of
Gunpowder, 500 bundles trail cartridges, 1000 musket
flints, Cash 5500 dollars for purchase of arms, a ketch
and prows to protect the Perak country. All these
articles have been received, the money short only
what was paid for the ketch and prows which have
also reached me.
Moreover with respect to wiiat my friend states
respecting Korow and Nackoda Gudin, and his having
given full powers to Captain Low and the Commanders
of Cruizers to destroy the pirates in the several rivers
in the Perak Country, I am extremely pleased to learn
my friend’s determination, for it is my desire that this
Country of Perak should be under the protection of
(die Honble. English Company, 1 will accordingly


also prepare and send some people to search for and
expel the pirates from every part of the Perak Ter-
ritory, and my people will co-operate with my friend’s
cruizers. The result of the enquiries which lam now
instituting, respecting the pirates, I shall communicate
to my friend, through Putek Ababakar.
Moreover with respect to Nakoda Oudiu, the
Agent of the Rajah of Ligore, he is very partial to
conniving with pirates who come from other quarters,
and with all the evil disposed people in the Perak
Country and they concert together to commit mis-
chief in the Perak Country. The proceedings of
Nackoda Gudin and the other people who have been
committing mischief in Perak have been such, that if
they were my own children, I shall wish to see them
destroyed and I shall accordingly direct my people to
co-operate with my friend’s men. It is reported that
Nackoda Gudin is still at Korow and therefore let my
friend send some people to attack them from seaward,
and I will dispatch a party in land, so that all these
bad people may be expelled and in order that the com-
mercial intercourse may be free and uninterrupted.
Farther 1 enquired of my brothers who were my
Envoys to my friend, concerning the Siamese and this
Country of Perak and they informed me that ray
friend has declared the Siamese and people of Salen-
gore shall certainly not be permitted to proceed to
Perak and disturb the peace ot the Country.
Dated 11th Shaban 1242 or 10th March 1827.
A true Translation
(Signed) John Anderson
Malay Transr.
Penang
The 21st March 1827.


Fort Cornwallis the 3rd. April 1827.
Translation of a letter from the Ex Raja of Quedah
to the Honble. the Governor of Pnlo Penang.
(After Compliments)
. Whereas on Monday last the 28th of this month
Shaban, 1 received intelligence that in the News
Paper was contained all Captain Burney's arrange-
ments and Treaty with the Siamese which my friend
formerly showed me. It is also reported that all
Captain Burney s proceedings are approved by the
Governor General of Bengal and that he intends to
adhere thereto. When 1 heard this intelligence, I
was exceedingly distressed, for I formerly addressed
several representations to my friend requesting that
they might be forwarded to Bengal, in which all the
circumstances of my case were set forth. I have
always placed confidence in the English Company that
an Engagement made with them would not be broken,
which expectation has induced me to remain so long
here, relying that 1 should experience favor and assis-
tance agreeably to my solicitations, but the late
intelligence is very unexpected, and I am in conse-
quence much distressed. There is none in whom 1
can place reliance but my friend, that he will assist
me by sending to the Governor General the letter
which I requested to be forwarded on the 15th of
Saafar, for in that 1 have fully explained all the
circumstances of my situation, in order that the
Governor General might be informed and if
the Governor General having been fully informed of
my case is not disposed to grant me the assistance of
the English Conpany and to conform to all former
engagements, 1 can ordy consider it my fate. What
can 1 say more? But 1 request to remove from Pulo
Pinang and to go and seek a place to consider of my
circumstances. 1 only beg the Company and Governor


General of Bengal and my friend will not interfere in
case I should be able to retake my Country Kedah and
not to oppose any persons who may be disposed to
assist me in recovering my Country. J have great
confidence that ray friend will comply with what I
have above mentioned.
Dated 29th Shaban 1242 or 28th March 1827.
A true translation
(Signed) John Anderson
Malay Tr. to Govt.
Pinang
The 29th March 1827.


Letter from the Honorable the Governor to the
Raja of Kedah.
I have duly received my friend’s letter and in
reply have to acquaint him, that I have not yet
received any communications from the Right Honor-
able the Governor General respecting the Siamese
Treaty, but Captain Burney is expected here soon
from Bengal, and I will duly communicate all par-
ticulars to my friend on his arrival.
( Signed ) li. Fullerton
Governor,
Pinang
4th April 1827.
Fort Cornwallis The 3d April 1827.


Fort William 6th July 1827.
Extract from the Penang Gazette dated the 7th
April 1827.
in our paper of the 24th ulto. we published the
Siamese Treaty lately concluded, and we confess that
entertaining as we do a high opinion of the talents
of the negotiator, it has occasioned us very great
disappointment. To instance the first four articles.
It is surely not necessary to establish by Treaty this
self-evident axiom, that one State shall not “ molest,
attack, disturb, seize or take any place, territory or
boundary subject to the other.” If it were wished
to prevent all future cause of quarrel the “ places,
territories or boundaries subject” to each, that the
other might think there was a right to interfere with,
should have been specified and declared by the Treaty.
Before the late War the Burmese laid claim to
Bengal. At some future day the Siamese may do
the same without any infraction of this Treaty, to
Tenasserim. The manner in which disputes about
boundaries are to be settled is liable to the same
objection. There is nothing defined in it. The
English and Siamese officers may “ write letters to
each other and meet and discuss ” as directed by
Treaty, but they may find it impossible to agree
and who then is to give way? Surely the course
would have been to have appointed immediately
Commissioners to mark out the boundaries of the
two States wherever (hey come in contact. Our objec-
tions to the 4th article are the same. Why declare
by Treaty that the two nations “must not intrude,
enter or seize any persons from the territories of the
other?” It is an insult to our national character, to
suppose that we should be guilty of such lawless acts
ourselves, or submit to them from others ; and if the
♦Siamese are so ignorant of what is due from one state


to another as to attempt such acts (they have done so
once we believe), they should be told that with us they
are not permitted, that they would repeat them at
their peril and that they might expect as a conse-
quence, that Bangkok would be blown about their
ears. This is the only tone, we are persuaded (and
the experience of India, since the first day of the
establishment of our power confirms the opinion) that
is likely to succeed with such barbarians. It was
optional before, as it is now, for one State to give up
fugitive subjects of the other ; where then is the use
of the 4th article ? We really think that the sth 6th
7th and 9th Articles also might be expunged from the
Treaty without our interests, or the Siamese, being in
any way injured: certainly the provisions they contain
of importance might be comprised in four lines.
But what shall we say to the 13th Article? When
the Mission first proceeded it was rumoured, and we
certainly hoped it might prove true, that one object of
it was to obtain the restoration of the King of Quedah,
a measure to which we stood equally pledged by every
consideration of fairh and good policy. We afterwards
heard that Captain Burney had x’equested the Rajah of
Ligor, the usurper of Quedah, to accompany him, and
that he depended mainly on his influence at the Court of
Bangkok for the favorable termination of his Mission.
It was certainly not the Rajah’s interest to restore
Quedah. It was evident that no cession to the
Siamese in any other quarter would benefit or
reconcile him to the arrangement. Our hopes there-
fore vanished, and we reluctantly came to the conclu-
sion that the rumour had no foundation. But we
confess that we were not prepared to see ourselves
made the Rajah of Ligor’s tools, to be made his in-
struments for persecuting the unfortunate King. It
is we suppose, known to all our readers, this Island
was obtained from Quedah on a stipulation that we
should defend that State from all enemies. This
article, it is true was not confirmed by the authorities


in England; but it, is equally certain tHat this stipula-
tion alone induced the King to give it up, and that he
might and would have obtained those terms from the
Dutch or French if we had not forestalled them. It
is equally well known that since the lawless usurpation
■of his territory by the Li gore Rajah, he has obtained
•an asylum on this Island : and this asylum, by the
13th Article of Captain Burney’s treaty, we pledge
ourselves to remove him from. We even engage to
prevent his making any attempts to reinstate himself
in his dominions, his right to which we cannot ques-
tion without invalidating our own title to this island.
And for this breach of faith and hospitality, what are
we to receive ? The Commercial Articles are, we
suppose, the best that could be obtained, but unless a
British Resident is permitted at Bangkok to receive
and enforce the complaints ©t our merchants, we fear
they will be attended to only as far as suits their own
convenience. Were it otherwise our objections would
remain in full force, but as it is, it seems to us that
we have broken those ties that ought to be most bind-
ing on that we have bartered our national
faith and good name for a Free Trade in Paddy with
Quedah, which we ought to, and shall shortly be inde-
pendent of, and for some Commercial Articles, on a
piece of parchment with a bit of wax dangling to it,
which, granted by such a nation, we can look on as
little better or more binding than so much waste
paper. How far we have any right to bind the King of
■Quedah from attempting the recovery of his Dominions
we will not stop to discuss, but we challenge any person
to produce from the many cases that abound in Indian
History, one which reflects more dishonor on the British
name, than our treatment of the King of Quedah, from
our first connection with him, when we obtained the
Island under false pretences, to its termination by
Captain Burney, when we drive him from a place given
to us by his father, and guarantee the remaining
possessions of his family to their usurper.


In these remarks we mean nothing disrespectful
to Captain Burney. As we before observed, we have
the highest opinion of his abilities : we appreciate the
difficulties of his situation, and the intractability ot
the race he went to negotiate with. We wish he had
had a more favorable field for the display ol his
diplomatic talents; and we do most devoutly wish, if
other terms were not to be obtained, that no Treaty
had been made.


CAPTAIN H. BURNEY’S Observations upon an
Article published in the Penang Gazette o t tlie 7th
April 1827.
An Article has appeared in the Penang Govern-
ment Gazette of the 7th of April last commenting on
the political parts of the Treaty lately negotiated
with Siam by Captain H. Burney.
There is no objection to any person discussing the
merits of that instrument, provided only that he will
have the candour to hear both sides of the question ;
but whilst the Calcutta Government Gazette confines
itself to an exposition of the commercial parts only
of the treaty, the Penang Government Gazette is
allowed to publish whatever any one has to say
against the Treaty and nothing else. The grounds
on which the Commercial Articles are founded, as
they have been published in the Calcutta Gazette,
have satisfied every reasonable person of the advantage
of the Treaty so far. The Penang Gazette is now
silent as to “the Envoy having only obtained .the
“ promised reduction of a few ticals,” to which in an
article on the 30th of December last, it had limited
the success of the Mission. It now turns to attack
the political parts of the Treaty ; but we can refute
the observations of the writer in that Gazette with
very little trouble.
He remarks that “ the Ist Article of the Treaty
was unnecessary, as it is a self-evident axiom that one
State shall not molest, attack, Ac. any place, territory
or boundary subject to the other, and that to prevent
all future cause of quarrel, the places, territories
and boundaries subject to each, should have been
specified and declared.” The Ist Article is the same
as that in almost every Treaty ever made, a mere
Fort William 6th July 1827.


weneral declaration establishing mutual peace and
friendship, and its style is not more verbose than what
characterises the same article in many treaties between
European states- Did the writer in the Penang"
Gazette ever see such an article specify and declare
every place, territory and boundary subject to either
party? and how long would the article have been had
every one of ours, as well as of those belonging to the
Siamese, been inserted in it ? Not one could have been
omitted without leaving “future cause ot quarrel. r
Hut the writer says, that in the same manner as the
Burmese, before the later war, laid claim to Bengal the
Siamese may without any infraction of thm Treaty
lay claim 1o Tenas.serim-” We presume that it was
expected that his readers at Penang would believe this
assertion, without examining the treaty themselves.
Does not the 10th Article expressly declare, that “the
Countries of Mergui, Tavoy, Tenasserim and Ye are
now subject to the English , ' and does not the same
article carefully recognize Penang, Malacca and Singa-
pore as British possessions? What other territory is
there belonging to us, which lies in contact with the
Siamese dominions, and which is likely to become a
future cause of quarrel from the Siamese advancing
claims to it?
To the 3rd Article the writer objects, that it
“defines nothing, that the English and Siamese officers
may write letters to each other and meet and discuss,
as directed by the Treaty, but they may find it im-
possible to agree.” But does not the article declare,
that the persons so deputed “shall settle the mutual
boundaries so that they may be ascertained on both
sides in a friendly manner? If the Siamese Ministers
could have been prevailed upon to admit British
Officers into every part of their boundary and territory,
“Commissioners” might no doubt have been “appointed
immediately to mark out the boundaries of the two
state wherever they come in contact.” 'This service
however, would have been a difficult and tedious one,


amidst the mountainous and desolate waste of many
miles’ breadth, which formed a kind of neutral
territory between the Siamese and the Burmese
dominions on the Coast of Tenasserim, and before the
work could scarcely have begun, most probably the
decision of the Horae Authorities against retaining
this territory would have arrived and put a stop to the
salaries and labours of our Commissioners &c.
The 4th Article, the writer in the Penang Gazette
declares, 11 is an insult to our national character,
supposing as it does, that we would intrude, enter or
seize any person from the territories of another.
In the first place we may ask, was Nakhoda Oodin’s
village up the Rozan River, where an officer of the
Penang Government lately, not only intruded, entered
and seized several persons, but where he laid waste
and burnt every thing he saw, within our territory?
Besides, is it a proof of ignorance or unfairness to
judge of the provisions of a Treaty made with such a
nation as the Siamese, and avowedly drafted and
discussed in their language, according to the principles
of international law, as they have been fixed and
recognized among European States? What a civilized
nation like ourselves may consider as superfluous or
unnecessary, a people like the Siamese deem objects
of vital importance; and we know that an engagement,
from such a conquering and advancing power as we
are, not to intrude into, molest or meditate evil
against the Siamese territory or Government was
considered by the Siamese Ministers as the niosl
valuable part of the Treaty. They looked upon this
engagement as the only advantage which they had
obtained, in return for all that they had conceded to
our trade. The writer in the Penang Gazette further
states, “it was optional before, as it is now, for one
state to give up fugitive subjects of the other, and
where then is the use of the 14th Article? But does
not the experience of what passed tor so many years
between us and the Burmese Government respecting


the Mng refugees, prove the advantages of having this
option to give up well understood and fixed by a direct
stipulation? and are not the terms of such a stipulation
entirely in our favour, inasmuch as more Siamese sub-
jects are likely to run into our territories, than British
Subjects to go and seek the protection of the King of
Siam. But it is against the 13th Article of the Treaty
that the writer directs his whole force. He calls this
article, which conditionally engages for the removal of
the King of Queda from the immediate scene of his
former authority, “a breach of faith and hospitality,”
“a barter of our national faith and good name for a
Free Trade in Paddy with Queda” and declares, that
“we stood equally pledged by every consideration of
faith and good policy to restore the King of Queda.
These are the terms he applies to a public instrument,
approved of and ratified by the Supreme Government,
which of course has seen and heard everything that
can be said on both sides of this question.
In regard to the King of Queda, the first question
ought to be, is the petty state of Queda really tribu-
tary to Siam? We answer that the Malay Annals
themselves acknowledge, that the Siamese had posses-
sion of the Malay Peninsula as far as Johor at its
extremity, before the first arrival of the Malayan
colony from Sumatra? and that Siam, in ancient times
- had all the regions under the wind * dependent on it.
Several other Malay historians declare the same, and
add as shown by Valentyn and repeated by Marsden in
s his History of Sumatra, that during part of the 15th
century Malacca itself was subject to the Siamese.
Every European traveller and voyager, from the first
discovery of these countries down to the year 1782,
when a French Catholic Mission was settled at Queda
and only four years before our occupation of Penang,
all the French embassies to Siam, declare that most of
the Malay States, but particularly Queda, were depen-
dent on Siam. Commodore Beaulieu in 1621 shows,
that the then King of Queda applied to Siam for


protection against the King of Acheen. Not an hun-
dred years ago a Siamese from Bangkok, named Phra
Boromophothisat Srat, was the King of Queda, and the
present King of Queda himself acknowledged to the
Penang Government in 1814, that he was descended
from a collateral branch of the family which held the
the Siamese throne before the conquest of Siam
by the Burmese in 1767, when the King and Royal
Family of Siam were carried away in captivity to Ava,
where the rightful heir to the throne of Siam is now
said to be living in the humble capacity of a druggist.
The very naipe of the principal mountain in Queda,
Cherai or Jera> , is taken by the Malays from the
Siamese name for the country, 'l'krai or Srai, whilst
remains of Siamese villages and religious and other
edifices are still to be seen in many parts of Queda,
particularly at a place called Campong Mannow in
the immediate vicinity of Penang.
The writer in the Penang Gazette says, that Pe-
nang was obtained from Queda on a stipulation, that
we should defend that State from all enemies, and that
the King of Queda might have made the same bargain
with the Dutch.” So far from this being true, it is
well known that the fear of the Dutch Government
of Malacca, which had just before taken possession
of Perak, Salengore and Rhio, was one of the principal
causes of the old “ King of Queda’s anxious desire
to have the Honble. Company for his protector and
that the Governor General in Council refused to
engage further than “to keep an armed vessel
stationed to guard the island of Penang and the coast
adjacent belonging to the King of Queda,” distinctly
apprizing him, as it has been repeated almost annually
to his successors, that the British Government would
not interfere in his disputes with Siam or any of
the Eastern Princes. We have not a shadow of a
ground for driving the Siamese out of Queda, and
restoring the King by force of arms ; and no one can
deny this when it is further known, that the presen


King of Qaeda went up to Bangkok, performed
homage before the King of Siam, and received from
that monarch a Siamese Title and his appointment I<v
the Government of Qaeda,- with which lie returned
and superseded his uncle. A disputed succession to
the throne was referred to the King of Siam and
decided by him in favor of the present King of Qaeda,-
who, several years after, sent up his eldest son and
principal Minister to Bangkok, where they also per-
formed homage before the King of Siam.
We do not deny however that the King of
Queda, in consequence of the long and inti mate
connexion which has subsisted between him and
ourselves, is entitled to every protection and pecu-
niary support for himself and his followers which the
Penang Government has the means of granting to
them. But if we have not an unquestionable right to
couple this protection and pecuniary support, with
suc h conditions as may secure our own peace and
tranquillity, we had much better resign Penang to
the King of Queda, and refrain from spending any
more money upon that Settlement. It is evident that
as long as he and bis followers continue to reside at
Penang, in daily sight of their former homes, the most
nnneighbourly feelings must exist between the Sia-
mese and them; and that they must naturally enough
strive every thing in their power to provoke a war
between us and that nation. All these stories of the
Siamese preparing to attack Penang, which have
during the last four or five years been the cause of so
much alarm to the inhabitants of that Settlement
originated with the King of Queda's partisans. How
tong are the inhabitants of both Penang and Queda to
be kept in t his state of ferment?
Many persons at Penang have been led to suppose
that it is intended iu a certain quarter to persecute
the King of Queda, to desert him and to remove our
protection from him. How far this is true may be


seen by the terms which are now offered to Ilia
Highness. If he will consent to remove from Penang
to Malacca, Singapore, or any other British territory,
he shall be assured of every protection and considera-
tion , he, and as many of his followers as desire to
accompany him. shall be afforded every accommodation
and facility to remove, and as large grants of land at
their new residence as they may require; and his
stipend shall be increased from oOG Dollars per month
which he now receives to 1000 Dollars per inonih,
being 2000 Dollars per annum more than what
we are engaged to pay to him for the occupation
of Penang.
It is hardly necessary for us to take any notice of
what the writer in the Penang Gazette says respecting
the Rajah of Ligor. The Envoy endeavoured to carry
that Chief along with him in the negotiation of certain
points, which were under the immediate jurisdiction
of that individual, and respecting which, it was well
known, that the Court of Bangkok would be ex-
clusively guided by his reports and opinions. That
‘‘‘Usurper”, as he is called however, is an officer
entirely subordinate to the Siamese Court under
special orders from which he invaded and now keeps
possession of Queda. It was expected that the war
with Ava would have furnished the Envoy with some
equivalent to offer him, in return for Queda; but
when this expectation was disappointed, the Envoy
was obliged to accept as much as he could obtain, and
he saw that tin' only Treaty which ought to be
made with such a people as the Siamese, was one
which it should be their own interest to keep and
respect. The Raja of Ligor afforded the Envoy most
important aid on every point excepting of course on
that in which his own interests were concerned, and
for which he could be offered no return. But does
not the conduct of the Penang Governmeiit itself now
prove the advantage and policy of obtaining the hearty
•acquiescence of the Chief local Authority to any


arrangement,- the eompletetion ot maintenance of
which may depend upon such authority ? Had the
Envoy been deputed to Siam without any reference to
the opinions and wishes of the Government, it would
have loudly complained of a diminution of its lcc»
influence and authority ; and now,- because an arrange-
ment has been made which does not include the whole
of its wishes, it is displeased and dissatisfied, and we
own we are more afraid of a violation of the Treaty
on the part of our Officers than on that of the
Siamese.
Some late letters from Bangkok prove in a most,
gratifying manner the respect which the Siamese
Ministers are disposed to show to the Treaty. The
benefit of its provisions was offered to Messrs. Hunter
and Malloch, and to the Surat Traders of the past
year. Every facility was afforded to Messrs. Hunter
and Malloch, when they were leaving the country,
to realize their outstanding debts ; and all the acts of
the S amese Court proved a sincere anxiety to main-
tain the most friendly relations with the British Gov-
ernment. The Treaty was even appealed to in favoui
of the Portuguese Consul, who had given some serious
offence to the Court, for which the King ordered him
to be decapitated. The Wangna and Prince Krnm
Mean Soorin, as the Portuguese Consul himself writes,-
produced the Treaty, and argued that by its provisions
the Siamese Government was restrained from inflicting
on a European Capital punishment for any other
offence than murder.
The 6th Article of the Commercial* Agreement
was intended of course to be be limited to Europeans
being British Subjects but the Siamese consider all
Europeans as of one family and c iste , and are aware of
Ibe very intimate connexion which has always sub-
sisted between the Portuguese and our nation.
(Signed) H, Burney.


Fort, Cornwallis the 18th April 1827.
Letter from the Honorable the Governor to the
Raja of Ligore.
1 have duly received ray friend’s letter mentioning
his safe arrival at Merdelong which I am happy to
hear. In reply to my friend’s enquiry, J have to
acquaint him that accounts have been i-eceived of
Captain Burney’s departure from Bengal for this place,
and his arrival may be daily expected. I shall not
fail accordingly to give ray friend the earliest notice
when Captain Burney reaches this place.
As to the rumours which my friend refers to, it
may scarcely be necessary for me to say they are
altogether groundless and I am happy to find that my
friend has too much good sense to give any credit to
them. The late arrival of troops is in consequence
of the relief of Bengal by Madras troops for the
Settlements in these Straits, and the British Govern-
ment in this quarter do not contemplate any hostilities
with neighbouring States, with which on the contrary
it is their anxious desire to remain at peace and to
encourage the most friendly intercourse.
( Signed ) R. Fullerton
Governor.
Pinang
The J 2th April 1827.


Translation
of a letter from the Chow Pya of Li gore to the Honble.
R. Fullerton, Governor of P. W. Island, Singapore and
Malacca.
(After Compliments.)
I have to inform my friend that the letter which
he sent me by Koon Aksorn and Nai Niem ray two
messengers reached me in safety. It is mentioned in
O v
my friend’s letter that whenever Captain Burney
arrives from Bengal, ray friend will send intelligence.
I have arrived at Merdelong sometime and wait lor
Captain Burney who has been long in returning.
Many people have been reporting that Palo Pinang
is going to attack Qaeda, but the impression in
my mind is that there is no truth in the report, for at)
engagement has been made with Captain Henry
O o
Burney, which he has taken with him to Bengal, and
that engagement provides that friendship and a good
understanding shall prevail between the English and
Siamese. The rumours therefore I do not credit. I
now send Koon Aksorn to wait on my friend to com-
municate all my wishes and to settle every thing so
that friendship may be prolonged.
Moreover some time ago, viz. in the 11th Month,
some people reported at Pulo Pinang that prows and
planks were preparing in the Country of Quedah under
the Siamese Government, and my son at Quedah
sent a letter to ray friend requesting some agent to be
sent to examine, but the report proved to be unfound-
ed and my friend’s suspicion ceased to exist. These
sort of reports arise from some people who are inimical
to the Siamese, and who wish to excite a difference be-
tween the English and the Siamese. My desire is with
sincerity and truth to promote the wishes of the Right
Honble. Lord Amherst, Governor General oi Bengal,
Fort Cornwallis the 18th April 1827.


and to extend the trade and intercourse by which
friendship may be prolonged with the Right Honble
Lord Amherst, Governor General of Bengal. If any
persons inimical to the Siamese bring my friend
reports, do not give them credit but enquire of me
first. I am now waiting for Captain Burney and
when he arrives at Pulo Pinang I request he will
speedily send me a letter so that I may be informed
without delay. Whatever the Right Honble. the
Governor General may direct through Captain Burney
1 will endeavour to arrange and settle according to
the desire of the Right Honble. Lord Amherst,
Governor General of Bengal, and establish a per-
manent friendship.
Dated 26th of 4th Month.
A true translation
( Signed ) John Anderson.
Malay Transr. to Govt.
Pinang
the 13th April 1827.


Brig Guardian, Off Penang
16th April 1827.
To J. Anderson Esquire
Secretary to Government.
Sir,
1 beg to report my return to this Presidency with
the Treaty with Siam ratified by the Supreme Gov-
ernment. I have forwarded directly to the Honble.
the Governor the Sealed Dispatches entrusted to ray
charge, and I enclose herewith a Packet to your
address under a flying seal together with copy of a
correspondence that passed at Tavoy between the Civil
Commissioner there and myself, respecting the 2000
bags of rice, which were shipped at Calcutt a on hoaid
the Mission Brig, and for which Mr. Maingy made a
public requisition.
1 touched at Queda for a few hours, and learnt
that the Rajah of Ligore with the Copy of the Treaty
bearing the King of Siam’s seal is at Merdelong,
where he has been awaiting my return for the last two
and a half months. An express was immediately
sent off to him.
On board the Brig Guardian is a Bombardier of
the Madras Artillery who is proceeding to Fort St.
George on a Sick Certificate and who was received at
Tavoy at the request of the Commanding Officer there.
A Month’s Notice of discharge, as required by
the terms of the Charter Party of the Brig Guardian
and as directed to be given in your letter No. 1414 of
the 29th of last September, was communicated to her
Commander on the 13th of last Month.
I have &c.
(Signed) H. Burney Captn.
Envoy to Siam.
Fort Cornwallis the 18th April 1827.


Minute by the President.
I kave perused the voluminous documents deliver-
ed in by Captain Burneyv They require but little
notice or remark as my sentiments on the whole pro-
ceedings of the Mission are already recorded and
remain unchanged. 1 make for the hJnvoy all due
allowance for the difficulties he had to encounter, 1
give him all credit for partial success, but adhere to
the opinion already given that as regards the main
objects of this Government the Mission has completely
failed. In respect to Perak it is perfectly true that
Captain Low exceeded his powers. That he went
further than was contemplated, further than this Gov-
ernment could under the circumstances of the time
have warranted ; the Treaty made b* r him could not
and was not confirmed and all necessary explanations
have been given to the King of Perak as to the causes
which opposed that confirmation ; but while we admit
all this we must admit also that but for the vigorous
measures pursued by Captain Low, the whole object of
that part of the Treaty must have been completely
destroyed. The Article of the Treaty professes to leave
the King of Perak at full liberty to admit or reject
any political connection with Siam ; it is perfectly
well ascertained that even from the time of the
signing the Preliminary Treaty at Queda the Paja
of Ligore had been directing his utmost efforts to
defeat by underhand means the object we had in view.
Parties had been sent to Perak in direct violation
of his agreement to overawe and intimidate the King.
■every person around him even to his own sou had
been corrupted by the emissaries of Ligore, he was
surrounded by the Agents of that artful and ambitious
Chief, and virtually prevented from availing himself
■of the provisions in his favor. It is therefore as (dear
Fort Cornwallis the 18th April 1827.


as the light of t he Sun at noonday, that unless Captain
Low had taken the measures he did in removing the
corrupt hirelings of Ligore and placing around the
King persons untainted by the poisonous principles
infused by that Chief, the Article of the Treaty must
have been a mere nullity, fcr however he really felt
towards us, the King, situated as he was, could have
had no option and must otherwise have been con-
strained to throw himself into the hands of the Chief
of Ligore. In going the length he did we must admit
Captain Low took upon himself great responsibility,
but I think we must admit also that his measures
have secured the # object of the Treaty, for, from their
executions alone can the independence of that Chief be
said to commence. Documents more than one of the
nature alluded to in para. 16 of the letter to Captain
Burney of the 23d. February 1827 * and in his report
of 29th December 1826* para, 7, have been obtained.
They are clear and decisive as to the wish and desire
of the King. Other transactions have recently come
to light displaying the views and intentions of the
Chief of Ligore towards Perak as well as the under-
hand manner of carrying them on. It is perfectly
ascertained from documents, the authenticity of which
cannot be disputed, that a notorious pirate by name
Nakoda Gudin has been established in the Korow
River within the territory of Perak, by Die authority
and commission of the Chief of Ligore; with the aid
and protection afforded by this agent of Ligore our
inhabitants have for the last year been plundered,
murdered and sold into slavery in considerable num-
bers, and it was only after all other means had failed
when the ultimate measure of of the actual dispersion
of the gang was carried into effect, that the origin and
mover of these atrocities was discovered. Such tran-
sactions are quite enough to induce the necessity of
attention on our part to the proceedings of Ligore, and
to warrant distrust of professions when facts are at
variance.


From the general tenor of the eommnnication
now received it may be inferred that we are to support
the independence of Perak against all attempts of
Ligore open or indirect, but the papers contain no de-
cided instructions on the case. I propose therefore
that this part of the subject be referred to Captain
Burney and that he be required to state distinctly
his opinion whether it be understood that under
the * Article of the Treaty we are to oppose
such attempts either against Perak or Salengore by
actual Force.
Of the expediency of inducing the Ex King of
Queda to seek another residence and of the effects of
his proximity to his late Kingdom no doubt can be
entertained. Every effort should be made and has
indeed been already made to prevail on him to remove
to Malacca under our protection, and the decision of
the Supreme Government as contained in para. 14
of their letter to Captain Burney should be com-
municated to him. But as this forms a part of the
instructions to that Officer it is probably intended
that he should make the communication. But if all
arguments fail, it is not I presume contemplated to
resort to compulsive measures and I confess I should
think it preferable to forego the benefit of the corres-
ponding provisions of the Treaty rather than have
recourse to actual expulsion, neither indeed would
such suit the real interest of Ligore. So long as
the Ex King resides under our protection that Chief
has our guarantee against attempts at recovery, but
whenever he quits our protection, our responsibility
ceases, and however improbable it may at present
appear that the Ex-King should find others powerful
enough to assist him, yet no eastern government is so
firmly established as to be secure against sudden re-
volutions. The whole race of Malay are sufficiently
exasperated against Siamese dominion to take the first
favorable opportunity for throwing it off. That they
have not attempted it ere this is to be ascribed in some


degree to the idea they entertain of the subsisting
friendship and consequent support which the Siamese
would receive from the British Government, an opinion
deduced from our long continued acquiescence in the
progressive aggrandisement of that Nation and our
scrupulous forbearance even when the interest and
existence of one whom they viewed as an ally were
involved.
( Signed ) R. Fullerton
\7 th April [ 1827 J.


Fort Cornwallis May 1827.
P. W. Island 3d. May 1827.
To the Honble. H. Ibbetson Esq.
Resident Councillor
P. W. Island.
Honble. Sir,
I beg leave to report to you that 1 received letters
yesterday from the Rajah of Ligore, replying to the
communication which I transmitted to him from
Quedah on the 15th Ultimo, requesting me to give
him a meeting on the River Trang, for the purpose of
there exchanging the ratifications of the Treaty wit h
Siam. As the Messengers of His Highness declare
that he is already come down to Khuntannee, I lost no
time in making an offer, subject to your approval, to
the Commander of the Guardian, which Brig is about
to proceed to Calcutta, for her to touch with Captain
Macfarquhar and myself and our followers at Quedah,
Trang and Tavoy, and afterwards to convey Captain
Macfarquhar from the last, mentioned place to Calcutta,
for the Sum of Spanish Dollars Fifteen hundred.
With reference to the instructions from the Supreme
Government, requesting this Government to facilitate
the means of my repairing to Quedah, and subsequent-
ly joining the situation to which 1 have been appointed
on the Tenasserim Coast, I beg to enclose the original
of the letter from the Agents of the Commander of
the Guardian, and to submit tor your consideration
and sanction the terms of this provisional arrange-
ment, which 1 am assured is extremely moderate
for this season of the year, during which the Coast
of Tenasserim is a lee shore, considered particularly
dangerous from the want of accurate charts.


May 1 beg also that the proper Officers of this
Government may be directed to furnish me with
copies of the Port and Commercial Regulations now
in force at this Settlement, in order that J may
communicate a knowledge of the same to the Rajah
of Ligore, pursuant to ray instructions from the
Supreme Government.
I have &c.
(Signed) H. Burney


Fort Cornwallis the 26th July 1827.
Pinang 10th May 1827,
To George Svvinton Esqre.
Secretary to Government,
Sir,
1 beg you will do me the honor to bring under
the consideration of His Excellency the Vice President
in Council the following circumstances.
Upon my return to this settlement from Fort
William, I observed an article had been published in
the Pinang Government Gazette of the 7th of April,
commenting in very inaccurate and mischievous terms
upon certain parts of the Treaty which I had negoti-
ated with the Siamese Court, Although I felt
indignant at being held forth to the public in a
Gazette, avowedly “ published under the authority
and patronage of Government ” as one who had con-
cluded a Treaty, some of the provisions of which are
“an insult to our national character ” and have
“ bartered our national faith and good name ”, yet 1
was unwilling to engage in any controversial corres-
pondence with the Local Government and confined
myself therefore to preparing a vindication of my
character.
Having however subsequently gathered from a
conversation with the Honble. the Governor that he
had been pleased to speak to the Censor of the
Government Gazette for having allowed such an article
to appear in it, I endeavoured to trace out the author
and upon remonstrating on the subject with Mr. Cox,
the Editor and Printer of the Gazette, he some days
after addressed me a letter, disclosing that Captain
Lake of the Madras Engineers and Inspector General
of Plans, Estimates and Works at Penang was the
writer of the article in question.


I submit that it was highly unbecoming in an
officer of Captain Lake’s standing, distinct line of
service, short residence to the Eastward, and absolute
ignorance of all points connected with the History of
Siam and the Malay States, and of our relations with
those Countries, to allow himself to pass any opinions
upon the late negociations with Siam, after he was
aware too that the highest authority in India had
ratified and directed the publication of the Treaty.
Yet he writes the most intemperate and disrespectful
opinions in the character of the Editor of a Newspaper
and he employs his immediate subordinate, Lieutenant
Hodge, the Executive officer acting under his orders
at Pinang to cause such opinions to be published in
a Government Gazette. Had I not been shown the
original manuscript which to the best of my knowledge
and belief is in the handwriting of Captain Lake L
should truly have considered him as the last person
at Pinang either qualified or inclined to criticise the
Treaty with Siam, and 1 owe it in justice to him to ovv n,
that 1 cannot attribute his conduct to any disagreeable
personal feelings towards myself as we have been on
terms of civil intercourse.
Viewing his conduct however as connected with
political considerations I am obliged to report that 1
have reason to believe the publication of such opinions
in the Pinang Government Gazette has encouraged the
partizans and advisers of the Ex King of Queda to
thwart and counteract the wishes of the Supreme
Government as to his removal from Pinang and that
in my humble judgment, if the Supreme Government
desire to cause the provisions of the Treaty with Siam
to be duly maintained and to prevent the Officers of
the Pinang Government from wantonly interfering
with political details which are vested by the Legisla-
ture exclusively in the Governor General in Council,
some notice should be taken of Captain LaKe s pio-
cedure, as far as the same may be done without expos-
ing the Printer of the Pinang Gazette to the loss


which he deprecates in his letter to rae. The Press at
Pinang is private property depending for its support
upon the public advertisements and. a small monthly
stipend from the Pinang Government, and a sense
of the obligations which Mr. Cox considers he owes
me was the principal motive that urged him to
disclose to me all the circumstances connected with
the publication which I have now thought it my duty
to bring under the consideration of His Excellency
the Vice President in Council.
I have &c.
(Signed) H. Burney Captain
Envoy to Siam.


Fort Cornwallis May 1827,
Pinang 12th May 1827.
To the Honble. R. Ibbetson Esqre.
Resident Councillor.
Honble. Sir,
The Young Siamese Chief of Qaeda having com-
plied with a recommendation from me that he should
send over to Pinang. before my departure, the Queda
State prisoners, and a party of seventy persons,
consisting of the sisters, nephews, nieces and personal
friends of the Ex King of Queda, having arrived last
night, I took an opportunity this forenoon, after His
Highness had seen these people, to call and again
press upon him the expediency of his complying with
the wishes of the Supreme Government as to his
removing into some other British Territory. Ihe
reply of the Ex King confirms my previous opinions
that to carry this desirable measure into effect, it is
only necessary for this Government to make some
decisive communication tc His Highness.
I beg leave to add, that 1 embark on board the
Guardian this day for the purpose of proceeding to
Traang, to exchange the ratifications of the Siamese
Treaty with the Raja of Ligore.
I have &c.
(Signed) H. Burney Captain
Envoy to Siam.


Brig Guardian off the
Coast of Trang 29th Mav 1827.
To the Rouble, R. Ibbetson Esq,
Resident Councillor.
Honble. Sir,
Having delivered to the Rajah of Li go re the
Treaty with Siam ratified by the Right Honble. the
Governor General in Council, and received in exchange
the counterpart of that Instrument bearing the Seal
of the King of Siam, and being now about to proceed
to my destination on the Coast of Tenasserira, 1
beg to forward for the information of the Government
of Penang the following narrative of ray proceedings.
1 landed at Queda on the l4th and had an in-
terview with the young Chief, who showed every
desire of establishing the most friendly and liberal
trade and intercourse between Queda and Penang.
He informed me however and the intelligence was
confirmed from other sources, that the Ex King of
Queda’s partisans, during the last three or four
months, had nearly ruined Queda by the reports and
tales which they had sent and taken thither of the
determination of the Penang Government to attack
that Country. The most extensive emigrations had
taken place, particularly from the northern districts
of Queda; and as the petty Chuliah and Chinese
traders also had taken alarm, all commercial as well
as agricultural pursuits had been for some time at
a stand.
Owing to very adverse weather the Brig Guardian
did not arrive off the district of Trang until the 21st,
when the Commander finding it unsafe to enter the
channel between Pulo Telibon and the Mouth of the
Fort Cornwallis May 3 827.


Trang River, or to lie close to the western side of
that island, proceeded with the vessel and anchored
to the eastward of an island name Palo pappan,
situate about 10 miles west of Pulo Telibon, in an
excellent harbour which has nine fathoms of water
close to the shore and in which a vessel can be well
sheltered during the present south west monsoon.
Early on the 24th we left the Brig in some
large war boats which the Rajah of Ligore sent out,
and late on the same evening we arrived at a place
called Khao Rachhasi or Lion Hill, a mile below
the village of Jansoo or Kbooan Phaya Nak and
about 8 miles above the Mouth of the Trang River,
where the Rajah of Ligore is making a nev\ settle-'
uient, and where he had prepared accommodations
for himself and us. On the 26th he permitted us
to make an excursion up the River and to visit
Junsoo and Khooan Tank I saw the former village
in 1825 and than gave an account of it to the
Homble. Governor in Council. But I was now an-
xious to make a close inspection of Khuntanee or
rather Khooan Tani, to which I was prevented from
advancing in 1825, and which 1 believe no British
Officers had hitherto been allowed to visit. It is
about 18 or 20 miles above the Mouth of the Traang.
1 was much disappointed. Instead of finding it a
large village, with a respectable population and
abundance of means for enabling the Rajah of Ligore
to make the extensive military and naval equipments,
which the reports of Malays had so often described
at Penang, we could see only about 50 boats drawn
up under sheds and several unserviceable ) the Ex;
King of QuedaL brig and pleasure boat, the former
quiet decayed and the latter hastening into the same
condition ; about 30 or 40 straggling houses, with
200 Siamese and Malay inhabitants, and 10 or 11 poor
Chinese, residing at a place called Kem dam, a little
below some rising ground, which is styled Khooan or
Mount Tani. Not a vestige of any recent warlike


preparations could we see, not a chip of wood, and in
fact with the exception of 8 or 10 good English 18
pounders which were taken at Queda, Khooan Tani
hag neither the appearance nor the capability of be-
coming the great Naval Arsenal and Depot which the
Malays had reported of it. We were allowed to walk
about arid see every part of the place. On our return
the Rajah of Ligore frankly owned that his objection
to am r British Officer visiting Khooan Tani proceeded
from his apprehension that the British Government
might be tempted to take advantage of the miserable
and really defenceless condition of the place, to go up
and attack it, and thence invade his territory of
Ligore.
To the above I may add that although the River
Traang, in spring tides, has from 2 to 3 fathoms of
water as far as Khooan Tani, and a small boat may
ascend it several miles above that place, yet it is in
general full of shoals, with several large islands, and
intricate channels towards the mouth, and the bar at
the mouth not navigable for a large boat excepting at
high water. It is further unapproachable from the
southward even tel boats of any burthen, as a reef
runs between the south end of Pulo Telibon and the
main, whilst to the northward the channel is narrow
and the navigation unsafe for large ships. Yet some
of the early European voyagers noticed this place under
the name of Tarangh, as being resorted to by vessels,
whose imports interfered with the trade carried on
towards the Gulf of Siam, and particularly from
the factory which we then had at Patani. Of late
years, with the exception of some elephants and rice,
and a little tin occasionally exported by the Rajah of
Ligore to the Coast of Coromandel, Traang has been
scarcely known to the merchant. Still the country
is by no means unworthy of his attention, for the
neighbourhood abounds in tin ore, and the forests
are full of that beautiful black wood termed at Penang
the Siam wood, and of a species of fustic called by


the Siamese Klak yielding an excellent yellow dye.
Several Chinese have lately been encouraged to
cultivate pepper, and were a cordial good understand-
ing but maintained with His Highness of Ligore, L
am convinced that a very profitable commercial
intercourse might be established between Penang and
Traang, by means of small square rigged vessels and
Native Boats, and the old overland trade with the
interior and eastern countries re-opened. Khooan
Tani is at most but 5 days journey from Ligore.
With reference to the points to which, in the
26th paragraph of my instructions from the Supreme
Government, my particular attention was directed, in
th e event of my meeting the Rajah of Ligore, I beg
to acquaint you, that during the four days I resided
with His Highness, 1 had ample opportunit}’of ex-
ecuting the orders of Government. I furnished His
Highness with a translation and full explanations .of
the different Port and Revenue Regulations in force at
Penang, and he repeated his promise that he would
arrange these matters on terms of perfect reciprocity,
and endeavour to introduce in Queda. as far as Siamese
prejudices would admit of it the same rules and regula-
tions in every particular, as well as the same facilities
to trade and intercourse as exist at Penang.
1 advised His Highness, in the strongest terms,
to cultivate, a cordial good understanding with the
Government of Penang and [ to ] show at all times the
same readiness as his son at Queda had done in dis-
proving the reports that may be raised against him by
his enemies of his being employed in hostile prepara-
tions. His Highness gave me every assurance which
could be desired on these points, and one proof of his
sincerity, by permitting myself and three gentlemen
who accompanied me, to visit and inspect Khooan
Tani, immediately upon my making the application.
But His Highness repeatedly declared that as long as
the Ex King of Queda continues to reside at Penang,


he is convinced every means will be still employed to
sow suspicion and distrust between the Government of
Pinang and himself, and as fast as one report is dis-
proved another will be invented. It is unnecessary
for me to recite all the mischief that His Highness
asserted the Chinese and Ohutia as well as Malay
traders from Penang had done in Queda, and the con-
tiguous Siamese States during the last three or four
months. They had declared again and again that the
Treaty with Siam had been rejected by the Governor
General upon the recommendation of the Government
of Penang, and that the English had resolved upon
hostilities against Siam, and upon attacking Queda
and Bangkok at the same time, with a fleet of 80 ship
full of troops and 2 steam vessels, which were being
collected at Penang. His Highness attributes all
these mischievous reports to the presence of the Ex
King of Queda at Penang and in fact to the active
agency of that individual and his followers.
I duly warned the Raja of Ligore against engaging
in any secret design or intrigues calculated to disturb
the peace and government of Perak and Salengore.
His Highness appeared much discontented with Captain
Low’s negotiations in Perak, full accounts of which
had been forwarded to Ligore by some of the very
officers of the Government of Perak. His Highness
declared and gave me some reason to believe the
fact. He asserted that not the slightest reliance could
be placed in any thing that the King of Perak or the
persons about him may engage, but that as we had
taken advantage of the 14th Article of the Treaty with
Siam, which stipulates that the King of Perak shall
govern his country according to his own will and
pleasure, to make that Chief annul the whole of his
engagements with the Siamese, the latter cannot now
he clearly saw, interfere with Perak in any manner
without coming into direct collision with us. But His
Highness is most vexed at Captain Low’s attack upon


and destruction of Kurao, and tie- appeared much
perplexed what course to pursue to make his grievance
known to the British Government. I saw Nakoda;
Oudin, who signified a desire of proceeding to Bengal
and submitting his complaint to the authorities there,,
against which step I of course endeavoured to dissuade
him. The Raja of Ligore maintains that Kurao is the
last established boundary between Perak and Qaeda,
and that this fact, as well as those of Nakoda Oudin
having been made Chief of Kurow in the first instance
by the Ex King of Queda, and of his having been con-
firmed only in that situation by His Highness of
Ligore when the latter took possession of Queda, is
very known in Queda and Perak. The Raja
of Ligore therefore considers the attack of Kurow as
a violation on our part of the Siamese territory, and
an infraction of the 2d Article of the Treaty with
Siam.
Nakoda Oudin and the Malay Servants of the
Rajah of Ligore assert that Kurow was many years
ago considered by Queda as the boundary between
himself and Perak, and this assertion received some
confirmation from the letter which the late King
of Salengore addressed to the Penang Government
in 1806, when he conquered Perak, which Country,
he then declared was his “ from th« River' Kurow
to Betung Bras Basah.” They further assert that
at the time the late Bindahara of Queda conquered
Perak, he and the Chiefs of Perak expressly settled
that Kurow should be considered as the boundary
between their respective countries, and this assertion
also receives some confirmation from the intelligence
which appears to have been collected on this subject
by Mr. Crawfurd, who in an account of the Malay
States published in March 1825, represents Kurow
as being the then boundary between Queda and
Perak. The fact of Nakoda Oudin having been first
settled at Kurow by the Ex King of Queda has


been proved to me by letters from the Ex King
■expressly acknowledging it. Nakoda Oudin vehe-
mently denies the charge of having abetted or har-
boured pirates, and engages, if the Government of
Penang will give him an opportunity and confront
-him with his accusers, he will prove the falsehood
of their statements and depositions.
Referring however to what Mr. Light had re-
ported, and to the chart which Mr, Lindsay had
made of the neighbouring coast soon after our first
occupation of Penang, I assured the Rajah of Ligore
that the River Krean and not Kurow was always,
and must now be, considered as the true boundary
betweeen Perak and Queda, and that if he sends any
person to the Southward of the former river, he will
displease the Government of Penang, and probably
provoke a war between the English and the Siamese.
After some trouble I persuaded His Highness to
make Nakoda Oudin draw out a statement of his case
arid to refer it to the consideration and justice of
the Government of Penang, and at the same time
to request the Honble, the Governor to make en-
quiry and ascertain whether the Krean or the Kurow
is the proper boundary between Perak and
His Highness expressly engaging on this last point,
to abide entirely by the decision of the Honble.
the Governor. The Rajah however insisted upon
being allowed to make known to the Supreme Gov-
ernment what he termed the great concession which
he is willing to make, in order to cultivate a good
understanding with the Government of Penang, and
to avoid all possibility of the friendship now estab-
lished between the Siamese and English being in-
terrupted in any manner.
In conclusion I beg to enclose a Return of the
Relatives and followers of the Ex King of Queda
who were realeased and sent to me at Penang by


the young Chief of Queda on the 12th Instant.
Three or four more persons have been subsequently
released and sent over to Penang.
I have &c,
(Signed) H. Burney Captain.
Envoy to Siam,
[The enclosed Return includes 5 principal
sons, 23 children 'and 42 servants and followers,
making in all 70 persons,]


Fort Cornwallis June 1827.
Letter from the Honorable Robert Fullerton,
Governor of Prince of Wales Island, Singapore and
Malacca, to the Raja of Quedah.
I have to acquaint my friend that having received
a communication from Captain Burney, relative to
the release and arrival at Penang of my friend's
relatives and dependents who have been so long
retained as prisoners by the Rajah of Ligore, in con-
formity to the stipulations of the treaty made at
Bangkok, it now becomes indispensably necessary that
the reciprocal obligation on our part should be
fulfilled by my friend’s making immediate preparations
for icmoving to Malacca, at which place the necessary
arrangements are making for my friend’s being
accommodated and settled in a suitable and proper
manner.
Directions have been given to the Honble. Mr.
ibbetson, the Resident Councillor, to prepare a suitable
vessel, for conveying my friend to Malacca, and I
rely that I shall speedily receive accounts of his safe
■arrival at that station.
(Signed) R. Fullerton.
-Singapore
The 28th May 1827.


Extract from the Proceedings of Council, Secret
and Political Department.
Singapore tire 29th May 1827.
Read the following copy of a letter addressed to
the Resident Councillor at Prince of Wales Island by
Captain Burney Envoy to Siam, reporting the return
of the relatives and dependents of the Ex-Rajah of
Quedah from Ligore and urging the removal of His
Highness from Prince of Wales Island.
The Board regrets extremely that Captain Burney
has not stated the express terms of the communication
made to, and the reply received from the Ex Rajah
of Quedah which has led to an opinion and expectation
so much at variance with those to which our former
communications gave rise. As the execution of this
painful duty with all its responsibility will rest with
this Government, it would have been satisfactory if
those particulars had been communicated.
The Right Honble. the Vice President in Council
having however by Mr, Secretary Swinton’s letter
dated 23d February last* (paragraph 4) intimated the
desire of the Supreme Government that immediate
steps should be taken for carrying onto effect the
removal of the Ex Rajah of Quedah from Prince of
Wales Island, the President proposes transmitting to
the Rajah, through the Resident Councillor the
following letter.
( True Extract)
( Signed ) John Anderson
Secry. to Govt.
Fort Cornwallis June 1827


Fort Cornwallis The 16 August 1827.
Brig Guardian off the District of Trang
31st May 1827.
To George Swinton Esquire
Secretary to Government
Fort William.
Sir,
I do myself the honor to report to you, that I
have exchanged the ratifications of the Siamese Treaty
with the Rajah of Ligor and have delivered to rap
Assistant, Captain Macfarquhar, the Copy of that
Instrument bearing the King of Siam’s seal, for that
officer to convey the satne to Fort William, agreeably
to the instructions which 1 had the honor to receive
from you. I addressed a Report of my proceedings at
Trang to the Honorable Mr. Ibbetson, the Resident
Councillor at Penang, and I beg to enclose herewith
a copy of that report for the information of His
Excellency the Right Honorable the Vice President in
Council. I now solicit permission to submit a few'
additional remarks.
2. On the subject of Perak 1 regret that the
intelligence which has come to my knowledge is by no
means satisfactory. As I anticipated, I find some of
the very Officers of the Government of Perak, who are
now about the person of the King of Perak, have
attempted to keep up a secret correspondence with the
Siamese, and have forwarded to the Rajah of Ligor
detailed accounts of all Captain Low’s proceedings at
Perak in October and November last. The Rajah of
Ligor has promised upon his return to Ligor to send
me the original letter from the Perak Officers as w r ell
as some letters previously addressed to him by the
King of Perak.


3'. There is, I think, an important omission in
t e report of both the gentlemen who were sent to
the King of Perak by the Penang Government. It
relates to the personal character of that Chief. He
is described to me by many who have seen him, as
a poor, weak, ignorant creature, scarcely able to
read or write, and of so facile a disposition as to
be the tool of all who may be near him, and parti-
cularly of some mischievous Hajis, who direct his.
conscience and actions. The Ex-King of Kedah
himself described the King of Perak to me as ‘
or an idiot. It cannot be necessary to point out
to the consideration of the Supreme Government
that the personal character of the Chief in a despotic
and uncivilized State like that of Perak, must con-
stitute the only guarantee for the faith and good
conduct of its Government, and for the maintenance
of its public engagements.
4. I am not unmindful however of the expe-
diency and policy of preventing the Siamese from
extending their influence over Perak, and every
exertion was made by me to impress upon the Rajah
of higor the danger of his interfering in any manner
with that State, or of his encouraging its unprincipled
officers to maintain a secret correspondence with
him. That His Highness saw the truth of what
I urged, and that he was sincere in his assurances
of abiding by my advice will I trust, be apparent
from his having engaged to send me the letter lately
addressed to him by the Perak Officers, and from
his having agreed to submit the question of the
boundary between Kedah and Perak to the arbitra-
tion of the Honorable the Governor of Penang
5. But lam convinced the more we interfere in
the internal Government of Perak the more shall
we be involved in unprofitable, expensive or embar-
rassing political relations. The Penang Government
has lately advanced to the Rajah of Perak a loan in


money and arms to the extent of about 5000 Dollars.
I fear there is little chance of repayment of any por-
tion of this loan, and the manner in which it will be
applied may be inferred from the proceedings of the
King of Perak’s Agent who came to receive this loan,
and who, it is asserted, squandered a large portion of
the money in the purchase of a clock, some jewels and
other baubles, before he quitted Penang to return to
his master. It is the active part which Captain Low
has taken in the internal affairs of Perak and in
assisting that poor Chief to bring his territory and
subjects under his authority which appears to me to
have led that officer into the questionable proceeding
of attacking and destroying Kurow, a place which,
even if the Siamese had no claim upon it-, is far inland
and beyond our jurisdiction This proceeding has
given to the Siamese some caxise to tax us with a
breach of the Treaty, in the very last article upon
which I had hoped we should ever have been charged.
6. 1 believe pirates may have found shelter at
Kurow, because 1 know that there is not a river in
the Mala} 7 Peninsula in which piratical boats may not
occasionally be found. But I have seen so much
falsehood and inconsistency in the statements and
depositions of Malays when they have a purpose to
serve, particularly against the Rajah of Ligor and the
Siamese, that 1 am disposed to give no credit what-
ever to the documents with which the Penang Govern-
ment has been furnished, to prove that Nakoda Oudin
had harboured or abetted pirates at Kurow. The man-
ner in which after he found his settlement and property
destroyed, he came over to Penang and regularly
reported himself to the proper officers of Government,
and when he found them unwiling to hear his com-
plaint, his putting himself into the hands of a lawyer,
Mr. Bacon, in order to appeal to the Court of
Judicature for redress proves at least Nakoda Gudin’s
own confidence in the justice of his case. It is
perhaps to be regretted that he was not permitted to


avail himself of the Court, of Judicature at
for cross examination there would have been, and
indeed would now be the only test whereby the truth
or falsehood of his accusers'could appear,
7. I trust that His Excellency the Vice Pre-
sident in Council will approve of the terms to which
I have brought the Rajah of Ligor to agree for having
his claims to Kurow as w?ll as Nakoda Gudin’s
complaint adjusted. Nakoda Gudin’s petition ot
course exaggerates the extent of his loss, and is like
everj 7 production from a Malay inconsistent in several
points. The enclosed report from me to Mr. Ibbetson
details the grounds upon which the Siamese claim
Kurow as the boundary between Perak and Quedah
and with such a case as the Rajah of Ligor appears
to have, I hope his acquiescing to abide entirely
by the decision of the Honorable the Governor of
Penang will be considered as creditable to His
Highness’s character, as it must be satisfactory to us
o 1
to see how sincerely desirous he is of cultivating a
cordial good understanding with us.
8. The River Kurow is said to be from 18 to 20
miles to the Southward of the Krean, and there is an
obvious advantage in persuading the Siamese to con-
sider the latter as the boundary of Quedah, because
the stream is contiguous to our territory of Province
Wellesley, and the Siamese there would be more under
the observation of the Penang Government and less
likely than from Kurow to be tempted to interfere
with the Government of Perak.
9. Conceiving that it was highly important for
the Supreme Government to possess some information
regarding the Rajah of Ligor, which should not be
liable to the suspicion even of partiality, I took an
opportunity of introducing to His Highness, as well as
to his son at Queda and to tha Ex-King of Queda at
Penang, Mr. T. Millet of the Bengal Civil Service, and


as tins gentleman accompanied me on shore at Trang,
and daily saw the Raja of Ligor there, I hope His
Excellency the Vice President in Council will receive
the evidence of so impartial and independent a Wit-
ness, in respect to the character and disposition of Bis
Highness, and compare it with the opinions which' my
personal acquaintance of the last 5 years has led me
to form and report to Government
10. The Rajah of Ligor informed me that he
had sent his son, the Governor of Merdilong, express
to Bangkok with the letter which you addressed to
the Privy Council of Siam and that he would himself
proceed thither immediately in order to present His
Siamese Majesty with the Copy of the Treaty ratified
by the Governor General in Council, and xo concert
arrangements for the deputation of a Siamese Embassy
to Bengal. His Highness also informed me that a
difference has lately occurred in some of the principa-
lities of Laos, particularly at Vien chann, situate in
about Lat. 18° on the great Cambodia river, called by
some European authors Lanchang and by the Dutch,
who sent a Mission to it in 164 d when it was the capital
of Southern Laos, Winkjan,
11, In the course of conversation one day his
Highness asked me what the British Government
proposed to do with the ceded territory on the Coast
of Tenasserim, and in order to try him 1 replied, that
as the expense of retaining it is great, the Governor
General contemplated restoring it to the Burmese.
He did not appear at the time to notice my reply,
but that it made an impression he afterwards con-
vinced me by sending an express messenger to follow
me to the vessel with a note of which this is a
literal translation.
“What Captain Burney said that the Governor
“of Bengal in consideration of the great expence of
“the countries of Tavoy and Martaban will restore


‘'them to the Burmese, is this true or not? I wish
“to know for certain and to submit the matter to
“the King of Siam, that His Majesty may be posi-
tively inform* d. Further I wish to ask and know
“if the Governor of Bengal does not desire to retain
“the countries of Tavoy and Martaban, which for-
“mely belonged to the Siamese, and if the Siamese
“require them, do you think those countries will be
“given to them or not? send and let me know.
“ And now my friend is going away in haste I
“ have no time to think. Desire Captain Macfar-
“quhar, if he can enquire of the great officers in
“Bengal respecting these countries of Tavoy and
“ Martaban to see and do so. Whatever the great
“officers in Bengal may say, send me a letter and
“let me know. When my friend understands what,
“is said in this letter, let him send word to me
“by Luang Chihang Klang.” (the bearer of the
note.)
12. The above note confirms what I had the
honor to report in the Ist part of the report of
my Mission dated 2nd. December last, as to the real
but secret desire of the Siamese to obtain a portion
of territory on the Coast of Tenasserim.
13. The Rajah of Ligor expostulated much with
me upon the disadvantages of the Ex-King of Kedah’s
continued residence at Penang, and upon this point
His Highness has certainly taken high ground by first
fulfilling his part, of the conditions of the 13th article
of the treaty, in releasing the Ex-King of Quedah’s
relatives, abolishing the export duty upon grain, and
directing the immediate introduction of our com-
mercial regulations into Quedah.
His Highness has entrusted to the care of Captain
Macfarquhar a Letter addressed to the Right Honor-
able the Governor General, with a few presents.
In conclusion, I hope I may be allowed to repeat my


acknowledgments for the important and cordial aid
which my Assistant Captain Macfarquhar has afforded
me on every occasion, and to recommend him
earnestly to the notice and protection of our liberal
■Government.
I have &c.
(Signed) H. Burney Captain
Envoy to Siam.


Substance of a letter from the Rajah of Ligor to
the Right Rouble, the Governor General.
( After Compliments. )
Be it known to ray friend that on Friday the
15th day of the sixth decreasing Moon in the year
Turtle of the Animals, in the year 1189 of the Siamese
Era, and year 1827 of the English Era ( Friday 28th
May 1827 ) Captain Burney and Captain Macfarquhar
bearing the Treaty ratified in Bengal and a letter
addressed by Geo. Swinton Esquire to the Six High
Ministers forming the Privy Council at Bangkok,
reached me and I received them with regard, great
respect and friendship, exchanging with cordiality
the Treaty bearing the Royal Seal of the Six Great
Ministers with Captain H. Burney who delivered it to
Captain Macfarquhar to be taken to Bengal. The
Treaty which Captain H. Burney has brought to me I
will convey to Bangkok. And now I desire to cherish
and cultivate friendship towards my friend and I
have prepared some Siamese Articles and given them
to Captain Macfarquhar to present them to my friend
and to the great Officers in Bengal who have sealed
and signed the Treaty, that these may for the present
serve as tokens of regard. Moreover I will now
represent something with truth and sincerity for
the information of ray friend. During the interval
Captain H, Burney had not returned with the Treaty,
the King of Quedah and his people who are living
at Penang thought and spoke calumny in order to
excite distrust between the Siamese and English,
saying that Captain Burney will not return with this
Treaty, and that the English were coming to attack
Quedah. The people who were living in Quedah were
disturbed and alarmed and unable to trade or seek
their livelihood. The Affairs of the Country were in-
terrupted. Captain Macfarquhar is aware of all this,
let my friend ask him. All my wish is that the
English and Siamese may be connected in friendship


as long as the Heaven and Earth last. And I
desire with truth and sincerity to do every thing
according to the Treaty and I have sent Tuanku
Jamjarn, the brother of the King of Quedah to
Penang to Captain Burney who has delivered him
to the King of Quedah. 1 have fulfilled the Treaty
without evasion on any point, and with respect to
the King of Quedah, if he continues to live at
Penang he will think and speak calumny so that
the English who dwell at Penang may distract the
Siamese, the affairs of the Country be interrupted,
and the inhabitants rendered unfit to trade and seek
their livelihood. Let ray friend order the King of
Quedah at once to go and live in another Country.
There will not be men to calumniate, and Penang
and Quedah will be able to improve friendship and
be able to have trade and intercourse with freedom
and facility. As to the followers of the King of
Quedah calumniating the Siamese, and stating that
they are preparing boats in order to make war upon
Penang, this is positively not the case. The Siamese
have no wish whatever to do evil to the English,
they think only of friendship. I have let Captain
Burney, Captain Macfarquhar, Frederick Millet Esq.,
and Captain Sutherland, the Commander of the
Ship, go and see Quedah and Trang in every direc-
tion that they may be perfectly satisfied. Let my
friend require of these four gentlemen that he may
be thereby informed of my sincerity. I observe
that Penang and Queda are close to each other. I
desire that the English who dwell in Penapg may
entertain a great regard for the Siamese. Captain
H. Burney has brought to me the Port and Commer-
cial Regulations of Penang: the Siamese and English
customs are not similar in every particular; whatever
portion may be practicable and proper 1 will desire the
people of Quedah to adopt, so that the traders of
Penang and of Quedah may have intercourse and trade
with equal freedom and facility. The English Subjects


who visit Quedah I will protect and cherish as far
as possible. Let the English protect and cherish
to the same extent the people of Quedah who visit
Penang, so that an advantageous friendship may be
maintained between those countries which are con-
tiguous, and the regard between the English and
Siamese may continue to augment. Further, I think
perhaps my friend does not know with certainty the
former history of Quedah, and I will communicate it
for the information of my friend. Quedah has been
dependent on Siam for a long time, during many
years. In ancient times when the Siamese were Chiefs
of Quedah, they sealed with red colour. When the
Siamese Dynasty expired and Malays became Chiefs
they sealed with red in the same manner as the
Siamese and not with Black Colour as all the other
Malay Countries do. Every Malay who has been Chief
of Queda was dependent on Siam and they all sent the
Gold and Silver flowers to Siam from the earliest times
down to the Grandfather and father of the King of
Quedah. They were established from Siam and re-
ceived from thence the symbols of authority, and they
had names given to. them in the Siamese Language
also. Upon the death of the father of the present
King of Quedah, who was the Tuanku Pangeram,
the latter went to Bangkok, and performed homage
before the King of Siam. His Siamese Majesty ap-
pointed Tuanku Pangeram to be Chief of Queda.
His brother Tuanku Mora and Tuanku Busnoo went
to Bangkok and complained that the Chief of Queda
was acting irregularly and holding correspondence
with the Burmese, the enemies of the Siamese.
His Siamese Majesty summoned the Chief of Quedah,
to counsel him not to do any thing contrary to custom.
Formerly the Chief of Quedah was accustomed to
wait upon His Siamese Majesty, but when he com-
mitted fault he refused to go. He was summoned 4
or 5 times. He was contumacious and would not
go, violating the laws. His Siamese Majesty ordered


the Chief of Quedah to be seized and brought, that
if possible he may be counselled not to do any thing
that may be a fault or crime against the laws. The
Chief of Queda then went and resided at Penang.
And this is the History of Queda, if 1 desired to
recite the whole it would be much longer. I have
selected and recited some points that my friend may
be informed of the same. Furthermore there is a
matter respecting Nakoda Godin, a servant of mine
who has had some difference with the people of
Penang. Nakhoda Godin lias made a petition to me.
I have sent a letter enclosing Nakhoda Godin’s
petition to the Governor of Penang that he may
arrange this matter, according to friendship and
propriety. 1 have made copies of my letter and of
Nakhoda Godin’s petition and given them to Captain
Macfarquhar to take and explain, that my friend may
learn how I conciliate the Governor of Penang in
order that the friendship between the English and
the Siamese may not be destroyed, but be cemented
and prolonged.
My true heart sends this explanation with sin-
cerity. If then my friend who is great and governs
Bengal understands what is said in this my letter, 1
beg my friend see the road of improving friend-
ship and send a letter to let me know.
Letter written on Monday the 3d day of the 7th
decreasing Moon in the year 1189 of the Siamese Era»
Year Turtle of the Animals ( 28 May 1827 ).


Fort William 17th August 1827.
Translation
Letter from the Chow Phaya Akamaha Sena Thibodi
AphajaPhiri Bora Krornphahu Sarnuha Phra Calahome
Akamaha Sena Thibodi Minister of the War Depart-
ment in the city of Krung Si Ayuddhya to G. Swinton
Esqre. Secretary to the Government of British India.
Your letters to the Ministers of this Kingdom,
through the medium of Captain Burney who delivered
it to the Governor of Queda, which came via Li go re,
and the other through Major General Sir A, Campbell
from Martaban, notify that you had received the
commands of His Excellency the Governor General
of Bengal to communicate to us that the Treaty of
firm friendship between the Siamese and English
nations concluded by Captain Burney was signed
and sealed by His Excellency the Governor General
of Bengal and the Members of the Supreme Council,
and that Captain Burney had been deputed to ex-
change it for the instrument which remains at Queda
in the Possession of the son of the King of Ligor,
conformably to the stipulation in the 14th article.
You further state that His Excellency has been highly
gratified at the reception which Captain Burney
experienced from His Majesty, His Highness the
second King, the Prince Kromamun Surin Tharak
and the other Ministers and that His Excellency
trusts that this friendship between the two nations
may ever continue to flourish. The Ministers have
understood the whole of the contents of your
letters, and are equally desirous of maintaining the
existing relations. They also made known to His
Majesty the contents of the said letter who was
pleased to observe that His Excellency manifests
an ardent desire to establish permanent friendship
between the British and Siamese nations, and that in
regard to the conclusion of the Treaty, His Excellency


has evinced that he is worthy of the station which
he so ably fills in India. The friendship between
the two nations shall be lasting and the Siamese and
British merchants shall carry on their commerce
freely. The Ministers of Siam offer their acknowledge-
ments to His Excellency and express their confidence
in the English nation, and their hope that the friend-
ship between them may continue so long as Heaven
and Earth shall endure.
This letter goes via Martaban through Major
General Sir A. Campbell for G. Swinton Esqre., who
will communicate its contents to His Excellency the
Governor General of Bengal.
Krung Si Ayuddhya, 31st May 1827.
( True Translation )
( Signed ) W. Foresty—Translator.


Fort Cornwallis the 26th July 1827.
To Captain Burney
Late Envoy to Siam.
Sir,
i am directed to acknowledge the receipt of your
dispatch of the 10th May last, bringing to the notice
of Government an article published in the Pmang
Gazette commenting on the Treaty lately concluded by
you with the Government of Siam.
2. The Vice President in Council considers the
article in qiiestion to be highly objectionable as com--
meeting in very improper and disrespectful terms on
a Treaty ratified by the Supreme Government in India,
and regrets that it should have been allowed to appear
in the Pinang Gazette which it is understood is subject
to the revision of an Officer of Government, as Censor
of the Press. The Honorable the Governor in Council
of P. W r . Island will accordingly be requested to
call on the Censor for an explanation of the grounds
on which he was induced to pass the article in
question, and to take such notice of his conduct as he
may deem fit.
3, In like manner the conduct of Captain Lake
will be brought to the notice of the Honble. the
Governor in Council of Fort St. George with a request
that he will be pleased |o take such notice as he may
deem proper of so extraordinary and reprehensible a
proceeding,
I have &c.
(Signed) Geo. Swinton.
Secretary to the Government.
Fort William
6th July 1827-


Fort Cornwallis The 16 August 1827.
To Captain Burney
Late Fnvoy to Siam.
Sir,
Vour Dispatches of the 23d April* and 12th f
and 31 Mayf last have been under the consideration
of the Right Rouble, the Vice President in Council,
by whom I am now directed to communicate to
you the following observations and instructions in
reply.
2. A copy of tliis dispatch has been transmitted
to the Right Rouble, the Governor General who has
been requested to communicate in a direct address
to the Governor of Prince of Wales Island his senti-
ments on the general line of policy to be pursued
in regard to tlie Malayan States and the Govern-
ment of Siam. In the mean time I am directed
to acquaint you that the tenor of your reply to the
letter from the Secretary of Government of Prince
of Wales Island under date the 18 April is considered
by the Vice President in Council to be entirely
judicious, and the sentiments which it conveys on
the questions proposed to you have the full concur-
ence of His Lordship in Council.
8, It is highly satisfactory to the Vice Presi-
dent in Council to learn from your Dispatch now
under acknowledgment that the Court of Siam has
shown every disposition to cultivate a friendly
tercourse with the British Government as manifested
in the instances cited by you. His Lordship in Coun-
cil trusts that the alarm which had been excited
among the Siamese at Kedah and throughout the sur-
rounding country in consequence of the additional
troops which had arrived at Penang from Fort St.


George has been allayed by the pains which you took
to remove from the mind of the Rajah of Ligore the
suspicions he had not unnaturally entertained of
some hostile movements being in contemplation on
our part.
4. This dispatch relates to the terms on which
the Brig Guardian has been taken up by you for the
service therein mentioned. Your proceedings in that
respect are entirely approved.
5. Ihe conduct of the young Chief of Quedah in
complying with your recommendation to send over
the relations of the Ex-King to Penang is highly
satisfactory and the Vice President in Council is
happy to observe that on your pressing upon the latter
Chief the expediency of his removing to some other
British territory, as suggested by the Supreme
Government his reply confirmed your previous opinion
that to accomplish this desirable object it was only
necessary for the Government of Prince of Wales
Island to make some decisive communication to him
regarding it. His Lordship in Council trusts that
the Honorable the Governor in Council will have
followed up your suggestion to this effect.
(J. Your report of your proceedings relative to
the exchange with the Rajah of Ligore of the ratified
copies of the Treaty with Siam is very satisfactory.
7. With regard to the affairs of Perak and the
particular questions of Kurao and the complaints of
Nakhoda Oodin, the Vice President in Council entirely
approves the judgment and address manifested by you
in persuading the Rajah of Ligor to agree to an adjust-
ment in the manner proposed. His Lordship in
Council from all he had yet learnt, is fully disposed to
concur with you as to the impolicy of our interfering


with the internal government of Perak, but on this
subject lie awaits a communication of the sentiments
of the Right Honorable the Governor General. His
Lordship in Council would have wished that until
this had been received,. the Government of Prince
of Wales Island had abstained from furnishing arms
and making any pecuniary advances to the Rajah
of that country, a considerable portion of which appears
by your statement to have been squandered by his
Agent at Penang. The Vice President in Council
under the circumstances stated by you, regrets that
the apparently questionable proceeding of the attack
on Kurao by Captain Low should have afforded a
handle to the Siamese to tax us with a breach of
the Treaty, but His Lordship in Council trusts that
as the Rajah of Ligor has consented to abide by
the adjustment of the Honorable the Governor of
Prince of Wales Island, every endeavour will be made
by that Government to satisfy the Rajah and the
Court of Siam that nothing is further from our in-
tention than any encroachment on the possessions
of the Siamese or any infringement of the stipula-
tions of the Treaty so solemnly contracted between
the two states.
8. The Vice President in Council rejoices to
observe that the Rajah of Ligor has afforded the
most conclusive proof of his friendly disposition, and
his confidence in our justice and good faith by at
once fulfilling his part of the conditions of the 18th
article of the Treaty in releasing the Ex King of
Kedah’s relations, abolishing the export duty upon
grain and directing the immediate introduction of our
commercial negotiations with Kedah. The Rajah’s
letter to the Governor General has been forwarded
to His Lordship, who will, no doubt, avail himself
of the opportunity of expressing in his reply, the
gratification he has derived from these instances of
the Rajah’s friendship.


9. The testimony borne by you to the import-
ant and cordial aid rendered to the Mission by your
late Assistant Captain Macfarquhar is highly credit-
able to that Officer and has not been overlooked
by His Lordship in Council.
1 have &c.
(Signed) Geo. Swinton
Secretary to Government.
Fort William
(5 July 1827.


Fort William 16th November 1827.
I 1 rom the Honorable Robert Fullerton, Governor of
Prince of Wales’s Island, Singapore and Malacca to
the Rajah of Ligore.
I have lately received a letter from my friend
covering a petition from a person named Nakhoda
Godin the late Penguin at Korow. It has astonished
me much that my friend should have any doubts
respecting the southern boundary of Quedah, which
has long been well known to be the River Krean.
In every map and account of these countries compiled
since the period that the British Government has
been acquainted with them, the Krean is stated to be
the boundary and for my friend’s further satisfaction
1 send him a copy of a map prepared by Captain
Burney two years ago, in which the Krean is noticed
as the established boundary between the states of
Quedah and Perak. On this point therefore so well
ascertained and now for the first time questioned it
will [not] be necessary to enter into discussion.
In respect to Nakhoda Godin it may only be
necessary to observe that the neighbourhood of this
island had long as my friend is aware, been infested
with pirates. Numbers of trading vessels were
captured close to the harbour, supplies were at one
time almost cut off, subjects of the Government were
murdered, wounded or carried away and sold as slaves.
It was found that Korow within the Perak territory
and claimed as such by the Rajah was the stronghold
of these daring marauders, that a strong band of
pirates was there established and that Nakhoda Godin,
as the Chief, not only set the authority of the King
of Perak at defiance, but participated in the plunder,
purchased the slaves, supplied the pirates with arms,
ammunition and opium and in fact afforded every


possible encouragement to the pirates residing with
him. Numerous depositions to this effect are on re-
cord' at the Police Office. The dispersion of such a
band of pirates became indispensable to the security of
Native Traders and the safety of the lives of the sub-
jects of this Government. On the attack which took
place by the cooperation of the liajah of Perak,
Nakhoda Godin tied and some time after had the
audacity to come to this Settlement where he was of
course, in consequence of the several depositions made
against him previously, seized by the police and sub-
sequently sent to my friend with the expectation that
he would have met with a punishment due to his
crimes. I cannot consent to hold communication with
such a person as Nakhoda Oodin and can only regret
that my friend has not adopted a different course of
proceeding.
It has been reported to me that a notorious pirate
and robber named Fakir Sail) (the associate of the
pirate Nya Marrid who was nine months ago tried and
executed here ) is at present in confidential employ
under my friend. A re wad of 100 Dollars was some
time since offered for the apprehension of Fakir Saib
and several attempts have been made to seize him
during the last two yeai’s. As he is a notorious offen-
der and there are many serious charges against him,
1 have to request that my friend will cause Fakir Saib
to be seized and sent hither agreeably to the terms
of the Treaty.
Penang ( Unsigned )
The 12th July 1827.


Fort Cornwallis the 18th July 1827.
Translation of a letter from the Rajah of Ligore
to the Honble. R. ihbetson
(After Compliments.)
May my friend he informed that Captain Burney
and Captain McFarquhar arrived and met me at
Trang and exchanged the Treaty. Captain Burney
and Captain McParquhar praised my friend and I
am very desirous to establish a permanent friendship
with my friend. 1 was anxious to have prepared
some things for my friend’s acceptance, but the time
will Hot admit of my doing more than sending him
at present a Cup as a small token in the mean
time.
Moreover the Homble. R. Fullerton Governor of
Pulo Binang, Singapore and Malacca sent me a letter
with Nakoda Gudin, which I have replied to. Everv
thing is therein mentioned and if the Governor has
not returned, the letter may be delivered to whom-
soever it may be proper to deliver it and as Koon
Aksorn the bearer of it is ignorant of the customs
I request my friend to assist him and point out the
proper course in that respect.
A true translation
( S'gned ) John Anderson.
Malay Transr. to Government,
Pinang
The 12th July 1827,


Translation of a letter from Ex Rajah of Kedah
to the Honorable Robert Fullerton Governor of Pulo
Pinang Singapore and Malacca.
(After Compliments.)
I have to inform my friend that on Saturday the
12th Dulhijah 1 received my friend’s letter respecting
the return of some Members of my family who were
sent by the Siamese and my friend desires me to
conform to the Treaty which Captain Burney made
with the Siamese, directing me at the same time to
remove and reside at Malacca. On this subject prior
to my friend’s departure, he urged me to proceed to
Malacca, and 1 mentioned all the circumstances
which disinclined me to reside at that place. I also
explained everything fully in the letter which I
addressed to my friend, relying upon the assistance
of my friend. Now however my friend sends me a
letter ordering me to go to Malacca, but I cannot
by any means reconcile my mind to proceeding to
Malacca agreeably to the engagement of Captain
Burney who has conformed to the will of the Siamese.
Moreover were I to go and reside at Malacca or
any other place, my confidence in the assistance of
the Company would be at an end, the Treaty between
the Company and my father would be lost, and I
should be considered a very wicked man in being
driven away by the Company to Malacca, according
to Malayan customs (or notions) I should be disgraced.
When I came to Pulo Pinang, I relied that the
Company would assist me and adhere to the Treaty
made between Mr. Light and my father. This ex-
pectation has induced me to remain thus long at
Pulo Pinang, for I believed that the Company would
Fort Cornwallis the 18th July 1827.


never break any engagement, and whatever was pro-
mised by them would always be adhered to. . I was
also aware that the power of the Company was much
superior to the Siamese, which let me to entertain
the hopes above referred to. I still have great com
fidence in the justice of the English Company, the
Governor General and all my friends to relieve me
from the order to remove to Malacca or any other
place, and if the English Company do not wish to
assist me according to the engagement of Mr, Light,
the Agent of the Company, with my father, I request
that I may be permitted to quit Pulo Pinang and
follow my fate, according to what may be destined
by the Almighty. 1 trust my friend will assist me
by complying with my wishes above expressed. If
not, it will be better for my friend to put me to death
at once, so that the name of the Company and my
own may be celebrated in all parts of the world.
With respect to Malacca, I could not consent to
remain one day there and I cannot proceed thither.
I have only to present many compliments to my
friend.
Dated 14th Dulhijah 1242,
(A true translation)
(Signed) John Anderson
Malay Translator to Governments
Pinang
The 12th July 1827.


Minute by the President.
f have read with attention Captain Burney’s letter
to Mr. Ibbetson, dated 11th June last,* as to the
rumours supposed to be circulated by the Emissaries
of the King of Queda and their effects. I can only
express my wonder that Captain Burney should make
such frivolous matter the subject of a public com-
munication. The real intentions and actions of this
Government are, 1 am convinced, just as well known at
Quedah and Bangkok as at Penang itself, and neither
at the one place nor the other do I believe the Siamese
ever expected an attack. If they had. Captain Burney
would probably have made a better Treaty. Silly
rumours will always be circulated whether the King of
Quedah is here or elsewhere, but it is alike an insult
to the understanding of the Chief of Ligore, as well
as the Members of the Government to suppose that
any public act would be founded thereon. That
emigrations from Quedah have taken place there is no
doubt, at least 16,000 of the inhabitants of Province
Wellesley are emigrants from that country. The
emigration arises from the severity of the Siamese
Government and the ease and security afforded by ours,
and that its extension is only prevented by watching
and occasionally seizing the wives and families of the
Malays every one knows ; but this has nothing to do
with rumours and reports alluded to. Of the present
state of Trang River, which Captain Burney adduces
as interring that no preperations ever were made
there, it is enough to say that we have sufficient proof
on that point. Good care was taken to prevent Captain
Burney proceeding there (and for obvious reasons)
on his first visit ; the Raja of Ligore is not a man
to be taken unawares and is too experienced a
carpenter to leave the tools and his chips for the
Fort Cornwallis The 18th July 1827.


inspection of Captain Burney; but it is to be sincerely
lamented that Captain Burney in settling one point
of discussion should have allowed another to be started
on which he had no authority whatever to com-
municate—the boundary of the Quedah Country—on
that subject I never before heard a doubt expressed.
Captain Burney always gave himself out as possessed
of extensive knowledge of the Geography of tin*
Malay Countries, and we have a Map of his own
making wherein the Krean is expressly set down as
the boundary between Quedah and Perak ; doubts
are now started on this point and these points afford
not the first instance when the past opinion of
Captain Burney gave way to present objects. Whether
Nakhoda Godin was first placed at Kurow by the
King of Quedah or whether that King ever declared
the Kurow River the boundary is of little consequence.
Captain Burney knew well that if either was (lorn*
it was at the time when the King of Quedah was
compelled by the Chief of Ligore to attack Perak,
was acting without means of opposition under his
immediate directions and control : the acts of the
King under such circumstances were those of the Chief
of Ligore himself. That he should now quote them ■for
his own purposes, is perfectly consistent with his
usual policy, and that Captain Burney should attach
any weight to them is only further proof of the com-
placency with which every assertion of that Chief is
received by him. Of the conduct of Nakhoda Oo.lin, 1
think it safer to judge by the depositions given at
the Police Office, than the assertion of the Chief of
Ligore, or the belief of Captain Burney. That the
shores of this island were infested with pirates for
nearly a year, that prows, junks and fishing boats
were plundered, their crews murdered and wounded,
and that upwards of 70 of our inhabitants were sold
into slavery is sufficiently notorious. That they were
carried in the first instance to Kurow is established by
the evidence of some who escaped, of others who in


most barefaced manner were sent to this Island to
procure opium to ransom their relatives from captivity.
That Nakhoda Ootlin came out himself as a pirate does
not indeed appear, but it is proved that the three
heads of the pirates were his servants. That he
shared the plunder, that he furnished the pirates with
arms, provisions, and, to use the Malay term of
extensive favor, gave them wives, is als'o proved. That
he was the Panghulu or head man is admited by the
Chief of Ligore himself as well as Captain Burney, and
as such he was bound to repress instead of encourage
such acts of outrage. To the best of my recollection
all the papers connected with this transaction were
shown to Captain Burney and if so he has much to
answer for in giving any countenance whatever to
Nakhoda Oodin in leading the Rajah of Ligore to
believe that a British Government would ever parley
or compromise with the murderer of their own sub-
jects. That the Rajah does entertain the expectation
of such is evident from his letter, not a very respectful
one. If Captain Burney entered at all into this discus-
sion he should at once have set down in the most
decided manner any such pretensions, instead of open-
ing the door for further useless and vexatious discus-
sions. Annexed is the reply which 1 propose should
be sent to the the Chief of Ligore.
(Signed) 11. Fullerton.
14th July 1827.


Fort William 17th August 1827.
A party of Siamese accompanied Lieutenant
Leslie back to Moelmyne, as the bearer of a letter
from the Siamese Government, I believe to your
address now sent, as well as two letters to myself,
written in Portuguese as well as in the Siamese langu-
age, from the Siamese Minister at War in answer to
letters sent by me from hence, copies of which 1
have already transmitted to you.
Lieutenant Leslie on his return was confidentially
informed by some of the Tallian Sirdars in the
service of Siam, that a serious insurrection had broken
out in some of the Lower Provinces of that kingdom,
headed by a near relation of the King. That their
General, the Roan Roan with a large force had been
sent to repress it; that already some fighting had taken
place, and expressed an opinion, that if it assumed
To G. Swinton Esqre.
&c. &c. SiC.
Sir,
I have the honor to inform yon that Lieutenant
Leslie, whom I had sent with letters to their Ex-
cellencies the Six Ministers at Bangkok returned
here about ten days ago, having proceeded as far as
Canboori, a short distance from the Siamese Capital,
when he was unfortunately laid up by fever, which
gave a plausible pretext to the Governor of Canboori
to prevent his proceeding further, which will be seen
by the Lieutenant’s notes of his journey, that with a
sketch of his route from the three Pagodas to Can-
boori accompanies this letter, and if joined to Lieut.
Scotland’s* from this to the three Pagodas will afford
a tolerable accurate information on a tract of country
hitherto but little known.


such a height as afforded any prospect of success the
Tallians would join the insurgents in a body, in
hopes it might afford an opportunity of liberating'
their families to enable them to return to these
/ Ceded) Provinces to settle on their native soil.
They told Mr. Leslie that this event was the cause of
his not being allowed to proceed to the capital, for
fear of our being made acquainted and take advantage
of it and attack them in their trouble. The latter
part may f>e true, but 1 think it equally probable
to be only a made up story as an excuse for stopping-
him at Canboori in consequence of their alarm from
the military preparations and equipments going on
at Penang.
1 have &ca.
(Signed) A. Campbell—Major (ient.
Moelmyne
14th July 1827.
P. S. I am sorry to find front Mr. Leslie that
notwithstanding the exertions of Lieutenant Colonel
Frith while commanding at Mergui, anti afterwards
followed up, with great energy by Captain Burney,
that numbers of the old inhabitants of these Provinces
are still detained captives in Siam.
(Signed) A.


To Major General Sir A. Campbell G. 0. B. and K. C. T. S.
Commanding the Forces in Tenasserim.
Mil-,
1 have the honor to inform you that 1 this
morning arrived from Canbooree, an extensive town
within two days march of Bangkok to which place I
was most anxious to proceed in order to deliver in
person the letter entrusted by you to my care. But
being unfortunately taken unwell at Canbooree, the
Governor of that place, on the plea of being extremely
anxious for my recovery delayed my departure for
a considerable time even after my health was perfectly
restored and I found myself under the necessity of
delivering up my letters to him with a request that
he would forward them to the Ministers at Bangkok.
J was not allowed to enter the stockade of
Canbooree but on the whole I was treated with the
greatest civility ami attention, I made several re-
quests to be permitted to return by land, stating that
my reason for wishing to do so was because it was
the most expeditious mode of travelling in consequence
of the rapidity of the stream (at this season of the
year ) which leads from Kadiengtesing, but the
Governor [said] that his anxiety for my health would
not permit him to allow me to proceed in any manner
but by water, which would be the most comfortable
although perhaps a slower mode of travelling.
Having received answers to the letters forwarded
by the Governor to Bangkok with others from himself,
I again expressed a desire to return by land, but
meeting with the same reply as had been previously
made to my request, 1 commenced my return by water
on the 11th of June and arrived at the three Pagodas
oil the 26th of that month.
Fort William 17th August 1827.


I beg leave to send accompany.ng a sketch of
the route over land from the three Pagodas at
Kadiengtseiug * (or the first Siamese Chowky j and
another from thence to Canboree by water, but
being prevented by certain circumstances from being
so exact in my observations as I should have wished
to have been, the latter is drawn out from recollection,
and notes taken whilst travelling. I sincerely hope
that they may meet with your approbation and that
the few notes accompanying the chart may be the
means of proving that no exertion was left unattempted
by me to gain permission to proceed the whole
of the way to Bangkok, as well as to gain every
possible information with regard to the route and
nature of the country both by land and water from
Kadiengtseing to Canboree.
I have &ca.
(Signed) J. F. Leslie —Lt. 13
Regt. M. N. I.
Molemyne
3d July 1827.


Major General Sir A. Campbell G. C. B. and K.
C. T. S. &ca. &ca. having entrusted to my care two
letters addressed to their Excellencies the Six Minis-
ters at Bankok, I commenced my journey to that
place on the 17th of April 1827.
Passed 3 Pagodas and travelled over excellent
roads for two miles when came to the food of a very
high and precipitous hill. Road here becomes ex-
tremely bad and continues so far 1£ miles when it
improves, but thick bamb >o jungle on either side for
miles more, when I halted on right bank of Thounkla
River, which is 30 yards broad, shallow and rapid, with
a few huts on left bank uninhabited. The hills about
here are inhabited by Kareens 6 miles.
Proceeded through a more level country, and an
excellent road might, be formed with very little
difficulty from Thounkla to Alantaywhen* I halted
on the banks of the Alantay River, which is shallow,
rapid and about 30 yards broad. A few huts at this
place. Met by a party of Tallians, two of whom
instantly proceeded to Kadieng-tseing to give in-
telligence of my arrival. Easterly dh-ection all day
8 miles.
A small party arrived from Kadieng-tseing to say
that i might advance as soon as convenient. Started
instantly, and proceeded through thick bamboo jungle,
road extremely hilly and bad. Crossed a small space
of open ground which is nearly half way to Kadieng-
tseing 8 miles.
Bamboo Stockade here occupied by Tallians. The
river at this place describes a semi-circle. Surround-
ing country hills. Commanding officer very anxious
that I should deliver over my letters to him but after
a great deal of persuasion promised to furnish me with
Fort William 17th August 1827.


canoes on the 2d of May to enable me to proceed on
my journey. The Tallians are very dissatisfied with
their condition and appear very anxious to throw
ofi the yoke entirely. They are seldom allowed to
visit their families and the common men receive
no pay.
Started in canoes steering considerably to the
westward all day, river very shallow and rocky hills
on each side 8 miles.
Several rapids, canoes withheld by means of ropes
fastened to the stern. Bamboo jungle to the water’s
edge. Easterly all day 10 miles.
Passed two waterfalls as laid down in chart and
remains of hutting on left bank. Easterly inclining
a little to the Southward all day
13 miles.
River deeper, steering east. Put up at remains
of hutting on right bank. Kareen village near here.
16 miles.
Bamboo jungle to water’s edge. Steering south
21° west. Passed cocoa nut tiees on left bank.
Steering south 21° east. Passed two waterfalls and
one mile further on is Menan noi. Bamboo stockade
here occupied by Tallians situated on left bank, a
creek empties itself into main river here from right
bank. Two small pagodas on right bank of said
creek. Cocoa nut and plantain trees here. There is
a road from hence to Tavoy 15 miles.
Commanding officer very desirous of detaining
me until he should forward intelligence of my arrival.
Proceeded in evening. 1 mile beyond Mee-nam-noi
on left bank saw remains of a stockade. Plantain
trees here. No rapids 8 miles.
Passed through similar country and arrived at Ta-
ta-koo, a small bamboo’ stockade on left bank. Pro-
ceeded for two miles when I was stopped by an officer


from Canbooree, who wished me to deliver over my
letters to him and to return to Ta-ta-koo, and wait
until the Governor’s pleasure should be made known.
Insisted on proceeding as far as next stockade, where
I would wait for an answer 17 miles.
Similar country. Arrived at Luk-thoun, a bamboo
stockade on left bank. Here abouts are the “ tien-
nyit” trees, which yield a fine crimson or carmine dye.
As no answer was received 1 insisted on advancing.
Jungle on each side. River deeper and no rapids',
arrived at remains of stockade on left bank, where
I met another officer who had come to demand my
letters, saying if given up we would proceed together.
Not choosing to do so, .1 was detained until they
should inform the Governor of Canbooree that unless
allowed to proceed 1 should take my letters back
with me 10 miles.
12 o’clock, no answer arrived, wished to proceed,
requested me to wait one day more. Received letters
allowing me to proceed which we did on the 18th
passed through less hilly country and halted at a
hamlet on right bank. Siamese preparing dye here :
a creek joins the river here from right bank ‘...
8 miles.
Similar country, no rapids. Halted at huts on
right bank. Siamese preparing dye here also
8 miles.
Started and in about one mile steering due north
passed by a very high hill on right bank, and 9 miles
further is Canbooree 10 miles.
Large and populous towns on left bank of river
which flows past the town in a north easterly direction,
and another river empties itself into the main one
above the town running from north 21° west. Wooden
stockades fourteen fef't high, well built. Chinese
make great quantites of sugar here, excellent tobacco


L _J
cultivated and prepared here. Severe attack of fever,
anxious to return bjr land, but could not persuade
Governor to allow me to do so. Left it on the 11th
of June for Moelmyne bearing letters in answer to
those taken by me.
( A True Copy )
(Signed) 11. Ware—Poll. As.st.


The Treaty of Bangkok has, in my judgment,
placed the relations, both political and commercial, of
the British nation with the State of Siam on an
improved and generally speaking satisfactory footing,
ani I see no reason whatever to doubt the disposition
of the Siamese to adhere to the terms of that engage-
ment, and to perform their share of its stipulations.
The result of the late war in Ava has, I feel satisfied,
impressed the Court of Siam with just and adequate
notions of our power, resources and military superior-
ity, and hence I must regard as entirely void of
foundation, the speculation, that any danger is likely
To the Honorable R. Fullerton Esqr.
Governor in Council of Prince of Wales Island.
Sir,
Having received from the Presidenc} r a Copy of
Captain Burney’s dispatch of the 31st May, reporting
the exchange of the Ratified Copies of the Treaty con-
cluded at Bangkok between the Siamese Government
and the Honble. East India Company, and also a letter
from the Rajah of Ligore to my address, with copy of
the dispatch from the Vice President in Council to
your address of the 22d ultimo, regarding military pre-
parations at Prince of Wales’s Island, I feel myself
called upon to communicate to your Board my views
of the line of policy which it is incumbent on us to
pursue towards Siam, under the relations established
by the results of Captain Burney’s Mission, and at the
same time to state, unreservedly, my sentiments on
certain proceedings decribed in the correspondence of
your Government of dates as per margin, to which my
attention has been particularly drawn by the letter
from the Rajah of Ligore, and which appear to me to
demand the most serious notice.
Fort William 17th August 1827.


to result hereafter to the Seltlement of Prince of
Wales Island from the proximity of the Siamese on the
Malay Peninsula, or from their cherishing any hostile
and ambitions projects which it can be necessary
to provide against, on our part, by assuming an
attitude of defiance and warlike preparations. In
point of fact, we have, 1 imagine, far m ire reason to
apprehend inconvenience from the extreme dread of
our power, opera'ing on a timid and suspicions race,
so as to impede a free and liberal commercial inter-
course between the subjects of the two nations, than
from the existence ot opposite sentiments ; and I hold,
therefore, that our main, and indeed our only rational
object of policy hereafter in relation to the Siamese,
should be to endeavour to allay their jealousy of our
ultimate views, and to derive from our connection
with them every attainable degree of commercial ad-
vantage by practising in our intercourse with them
the most forbearance, temper and moderation both in
language.and action ; by striving to cultivate a friendly
understanding with the Court and its Provincial Gov-
ernors in our neighbourhood ; and above all, by faith-
fully and scrupulously observing the conditions of the
Treaty which fixes our future relations.
3. Entertaining these sentiments, J cannot but
observe with regret, the tone which pervades all the
correspondence of your President with the llajah of
Ligore, the disposition uniformly manifested to put
the most unfavorable construction on all his actions,
and to ascribe to him unfriendly, and even treacherous
motives; to regard him, in short, as a dangerous
neighbour and inveterate foe, whose ambitions and
hostile projects are to be checked only by the most
steady and unremitting opposition on vonr part. The
effects of this spirit on the conduct of your subordinate
officers have been very strikingly displayed in a
late instance which I shall notice particularly below,
and it seems to me manifest, that whilst encouraged
and persevered in no confidence or good understanding


can be expected to arise between the two nations,
and our intercourse with Siam will continue to be
characterised, as heretofore, by mutual asperity, dis-
trust, and irritating controversy and collision.
4. The warlike attitude and military prepara-
tions of your Government, which have attracted the
notice of the Vice President in Council, as referred to
in the letter dated 22d ulto..* doubtless have their
origin in the views which you have formed of the
• inimical purpose and dangerous projects of the Rajah
of Ligore, and the duty which you conceive to be
incumbent on }’ou of opposing to them the most
steady and unremitting counteraction. Unable to
concur in the correctness of such views, I cannot think
that any expensive equipments, or increase of military
establishments at Penang are to be justified on the
score of reasonable apprehension of danger from
abroad, while the inconvenience they occasion, excit-
ing the fears and keeping alive the jealousy and
alarm of our neighbours constitutes a very serious
argument, in point of policy, against their adoption.
Hut a still more weighty objection is to be found in
the outlay which they involve, at a moment when it
is imperatively necessary that the whole of the Indian
Presidencies should unite in one common effort to
retrench superfluous expenditure, and to augment its
sources of revenue by every fair and practicable
■means. Your Hoard will doubtless have received
information from the Vice President in Council, in the
territorial department, of the state of our finances,
and the absolute- duty imposed upon the Supreme
Government to withhold funds for any expenditure,
the necessity for which, to conduct the affairs of
Government, cannot- be -.satisfactorily demonstrated
after the most • rigid and unsparing scrutiny; and I
feel confident that you will take measures for reducing
your military establishment in every branch to the
lowest possible scale ; due allowance being of course
made for the provision of garrisons at Singapore and


Malacca, and any additional disbursements necessarily
arising out of the annexation of those Settlements
to your Government.
5. No measure will tend more effectually to
quiet the alarms of the native population under your
Government and to prevent the recurrence of these
rumours of hostile design and threatened invasion on
the part of the Siamese, which have so often
distui bed the peace and tranquillity of the Settlement,
and caused expensive Military preparations on both
sides, than the removal of the Ex King of Queda
from the position which he at present occupies, in
the immediate vicinity of his lost dominions and
surrounded by hundreds of his refugee subjects, who
will never cease to cherish the hope of his restoration,
and to practise every means in their power for
accomplishing it, so long as he continues at Prince of
WaleS Island. In considering the situation of this
unfortunate Chief, and determining on the measures
which we shall be justified in pursuing towards him,
two points appear to me clear and undisputable ;
Ist. that we are entitled by every principle and usage
of the law of civilized Nations, to fix the abode of
a political refugee who seeks shelter within our
territory, at whatever place we deem proper and con-
venient, every practicable degree of regard being
of course paid to his feelings and wishes ; 2d, that so
long as he resides under our protection, it is our
positive duty to prevent his making use of that
residence for the purpose of carrying on hostile
intrigues and machinations against a neighbouring
friendly power. Independently however, of these
considerations, the Treaty of Bangkok farther imposes
on us an obligation to remove the Ex King from the
immediate vicinity of Queda, and we are bound in
honor and good faith to fulfil this pledge, as the
Siamese have punctually 7 performed their share of
the Engagement, both in releasing the relations and
servants of the Ex King, and in removing the pre


viously existing duties on the export of grain, cattle
and provisions. Malacca appears to be a convenient
and unobjectionable situation for the future residence
of the above personage, and the liberal arrangements
which your Board propose to make for his accommoda-
tion at that place, together with the augmentation
of his stipend from 6,000 to 10,000 dollars, which
may be made one of the conditions of his ready
concurrence, (although it ought not to have been
tendered without the previous sanction of the Gov-
ernor General in Council ) will in fact greatly improve
the condition of this Chief, and wholly relieve the
British Government from any charge of neglecting the
interests or disregarding the feelings of its ancient
and unfortunate ally in the present arrangement.
I request therefore that no farther time may be lost
in effecting the removal of the Ex King of Quedah
to Malacca, at the public expense, and under the
express directions of the Supreme Government of
India.
6. Having attentively considered the 14th Article
of the Treaty of Bangkok, more particularly as it re-
gards the petty Malay State of Perak, I am compelled
to think that your Honble. Board has taken a view of
our rights and obligations, under that stipulation,
which the terms of it do not warrant, and that you
have founded thereupon proceedings neither strictly
justifiable in themselves, nor properly within your
competence as a subordinate Government.
7. The Article in question provides simply that
the Rajah of Perak shall govern his country according
to his own will 5 that he is at libertv to render homage
fo Siam if he likes 5 that the Rajah of Ligore may
send parties of men not exceeding 60 into his country
with friendly intentions; that neither the English
nor the Siamese are to attack, molest, or disturb
Perak, and that the State of Salengore will not be
allowed to attack or oppress Perak.


8. The wording of the Treaty, obviously and
very judiciously, leaves it optional with the British
Government, according to its own view of the case,
to interfere or not in the event of the Siamese
disturbing or attacking Perak or Salangore, and the
engagement being between the East India Company
and the Government of Siam, it rests clearly with the
Supreme Government to determine the measures pro-
per to bo adopted and the cognizance to be taken
of any infraction of the stipulation by The Rajah of
Ligore or other Chiefs of the Siamese Nation.
9. Adverting to this consideration, it is with
some surprize that I observe your Board in the in-
structions to Captain Low of the 18th* September
last, empower that officer to assure the King of Perak
that he may rely on the assistance of the British in
expelling any Siamese, who may proceed to Perak
contrary to his wishes, thus affording, to say the least,
a gratuitous and possibly embarrassing pledge; that
the promise of protection against Salengore, the neigh-
bour most dreaded by the Rajah, is declared to depend
on his maintaining himself in independence of Siam,
by the assistance of the British Government; and
that your secretary in his letter of the 18th April*
' deliberately asks the question from Captain Burney,
whether the Government of Prince of Wales Island
is authorised to oppose by force , any attempt, open
or indirect, of the Raja of Ligore upon Perak or
Salengore.
10. It is my duty distinctly to remind your
Honble. Board, that it rests with the Supreme Gov-
ernment alone to determine, on an explicit report of
all the circumstances of the case, whether any pro-
ceeding of the Siamese is, or is not, a violation of
their Engagements with the East India Company, and
what measures it may be incumbent on us to pursue,
if it shall appear that any positive stipulation has
been infringed; and that all acts or declarations of


your Government, pledging the Supreme Government
to the adoption of any specific course on any question
whatever of foreign relations, are unwarranted either
by the Law or Usage according to which the political
affairs ot the British Nation in India are administered.
At the same time, I trust I need not assure your Hon-
ble. Board of the unfeigned disposition which exists,
on my part, to conform to advice and attach
the highest value to the suggestions of your local
information and experience on every question pro-
perly falling within your cognizance.
11. The proceedings of the Agent deputed by
you to Perak are received by me with sincere regret,
and I fear furnish just ground of offence and remon-
strance to the Rajah of Ligore and the Siamese.
12. It is distinctly stated, that a strong party
existed in Perak, who were favorable to maintain
a connection with Siam and that this party, termed by
Captain Low a Siamese faction, was headed by the
Rajah Mudah or Heir Apparent, and all the principal
Chiefs who exercised the real powers of Government,
and in whose hands the Rajah, apparently a person
of weak intellect and imbecile character, was a mere
pageant. The first step taken by Captain Low was
to bring about a sudden and complete revolution in
the Government; to cashier the Raja Mudah, and to
place a party in power, which the Siamese must
doubtless consider an English faction, in lieu of that
which desired the Siamese connection. A Treaty
is then negotiated with the Raja, in which the State
of Perak engages to the British Government to hold
no future political intercourse or connection with
Siam, and is promised in return, assistance and pro-
tection, provisions as wanton and unnecessary, if it
be true that the legitimate Government of Perak
prefers the English to the Siamese connection, or
rather desires to be independent of both, as they are
indiscreet and wholly unauthorized by the instructions


with which the Agent was provided. Such an
Engagement could not ot course be approved by your
Honble. Hoard. its requisition, as the President
justly observes, in his minute of the 7th November.*
formed no part ot Captain Low’s instructions, whilst
he failed to procure any instrument or document, as
desired by those instructions, of a nature which could
be shown to the Siamese in proof that the Raja
desires to be relieved from any dependence on Siam.
13. It appears to have escaped consideration,
that the Siamese and the Raja of Ligore were, to say
the least, as much warranted in sending Missions to
Perak, to ascertain the wishes of tne Raja regarding
his future relations and to use every fair means of
presuading him to adhere to his connection with Siam,
as we were to depute Captain Low for such pur-
poses ; and that Captain Low’s escort of forty dis-
ciplined and regularly armed sepahees, supported by
a Company’s Cruizer, formed to the full extent as in-
fluential and formidable a body as the 300 followers of
the Raja of Ligore, concerning whom so much has been
said. Our Mission succeeded in expelling the Siamese
party and establishing in power those who will natur-
ally be disposed to adhere to the English interests, yet
no complaints are raised against the proceedings of
the British authorities by the Siamese, whilst on our
part, the Raja’s conduct is stigmatized as marked with
duplicity, treachery, underhand counteraction, and
determined hostility, and is appealed to as convincing
proof of Siamese bad faith, and utter neglect of the
obligations of Treaties.
14. Improper and censurable as I must deem
the proceedings of Captain Low at Perak, his subse-
quent attack upon Kurao, which form a subject of
remonstrance in the Raja of Ligore’s letters both to
myself and your President, appear to me still more
deeply culpable, the more especially as it plainly in-
fringes the 2d Article of our Treaty with Siam.


15. There is evidence on record to show that
Kurao had for some years been considered the boundary
between Queda and Perak, and that Nakhoda Oodin
was first settled at that place by the Ex King of
Queda. That he subsequently received a commission
from the Raja of Ligore and was considered one of the
Siamese officers after the conquest of Queda is not
denied, and in fact forms one of the chief grounds of
accusation against the man.
16. In the instructions issued b} your Board to
Captain Low on the 21st* September, it was observed
that piratical prahus were supposed to frequent the
Kurao river and were even stated to have established
themselves within the territory of Perak. He was
enjoined therefore to make the above the subject of
particular communication to the King of Perak, to
discover if possible the haunts of these plunderers, and
to suggest the best means of putting an end to their
audacious 'proceedings.
17. Upon what information, or what conception
of his powers and the nature of the service in which
he was employed, Captain Low acted, in venturing
to proceed far inland to attack a place acknowledging
the authority of the Raja of Ligore, no where
appears; for it is to be observed, that the depositions
adduced in support of that procedure, were taken
subsequent to the assault from “ persons seized at
Kurao,” It is alleged that the Chief of the place,
Nakhoda Godin, sheltered pirates, but even admitting
satisfactory proof to exist of this fact, it is quite
indisputable that under the 2d Article of the Treaty,
and indeed according to the laws of all civilized
nations, his conduct should have formed the subject
of representation and remonstrance to his own Govern-
ment, If that Government refused redi’ess, the
question of the proper course to be pursued would
then have naturally attracted the grave and deliberate
consideration of your Board and of the Supreme


Government. It is too plain however, from the tenor
of Captain Low’s report of the 31st January, that in
his estimation the main offence of Nakhoda Oodin
consisted in his acknowledging allegiance to the Raja
of Ligore and disclaiming any connection with Perak,
and that the real object of the attack was that “by
the dispersion of Nakhoda Oodin and his party, and
their expulsion from Kurao, the Siamese influence
would in a great measure cease in that quarter.”
18. The remonstrance addressed to us by the Raja
of Ligore on the above subject must not be disregarded,
and I consider that the British Government is bound
by every consideration of justice good faith and
policy to institute a full and formal enquiry into
the proceedings of the officer who - attacked Kurao,
a place acknowledging the authority of Siam, without
any sanction whatever from his own Government, as
well as the extent of property destroyed and loss of
life inflicted on that occasion ; and a heavy personal
responsibility will, 1 fear, attach to Captain Low,
unless he can furnish a far more satisfactory ex-
planation on the subject than the papers now before
the Supreme Government contain. I request there-
fore that Your Rouble. Board will call upon Captain
Law for a detailed explanation of the grounds on
which he acted in the above unfortunate affair, and
also that you will give a full, and I need not add
an impartial hearing to the complaint of Nakhoda
Oodin and to the statements of any witnesses whom
he may bring forward to substantiate his grievances.
It will be proper also to apprize the Raja of Ligor
of the steps in progress for investigating the above
matter and affording redress, if it shall appear to be
due. In the mean time I feel it an obligation of my
public duty to request that Captain Low may be
suspended from all political employment whatever,
and I would further suggest to your Honble. Board
the expediency of your abstaining in future from the
deputation of any missions connected with political


objects to the States on the Malay Peninsula, or
elsewhere without obtaining the previous concurrence
of the Supreme Government.
1 have &c.
(Signed) Amhersfc,
Meet.ut
The 23rd. July 1827,


Fort William 16th November 1827.
Letter from the Honorable R. Fullerton, Governor
of Prince of Wales’s Island, Singapore and Malacca,
to the Raja of Ligore.
It having been frequently represented by Cap-
tain Burney that ray friend still continues to entertain
doubts respecting the intentions of this Government
towards him and has apprehensions for which there is
no ground whatever, and being anxious to prevent all
possibility of further doubts, fear, and misunderstand-
ings, I am induced to recommend that my friend will
send one or more confidential Envoys to reside at this
Settlement Such person or persons will be treated
with all due respect, and all communications will be
made through him or them. They will have an
opportunity of observing the pacific proceedings of
this Government and it is to be hoped that an end
will thus be put to all further suspicion on the part of
my friend and the friendship and good understanding
now subsisting between the Siamese and British Gov-
ernnment be strengthened and prolonged.
(Signed) R. Fullerton
Governor.
Penang
The 26th July 1827.


Port Cornwallis The 10 August 1827
READ a letter to the Honorable Court of Direc-
tors dated 6th Instant, with the following enclosure.
* * * * * *
The Bengal Chronicle* thinks we have not dis-
tinctly made out the right of the Siamese to Queda
and that if it suited the British interest or policy the
Penang Government would have as good a right to drive
the Siamese out as they have to be there. To discuss
the origin of territorial rights might perhaps be dan-
gerous: if closely examined there are few that would
not be found to originate in force. If however pre-
scription goes for anything against the intrusion of a
third party, ws should think that the Siamese have
the same right to keep us out of Queda that we should
have to prevent the intrusion of the French or any
other European power into those States of India which
are under our protection. There is no doubt that pre-
texts fur war might be found in the one instance as
well as in the other, and if the possession of the Malay
Peninsula be worth a contest we should have little
difficulty either in drawing the Siamese out or in
finding a justification for our conduct when it is
accomplished.
The question however is not whether the Siamese
have a right to the Malay Peninsula, but whether
peace and friendship can be maintained with them, if
we interfere with what they have long been accustomed
to consider as their own. A conviction that they
could not, led to that article of the Treaty which has
given so much offence to the Penang politicians ; those
who recollect the expense of the Burmese War, will
perhaps be satisfied that it was wiser to relinquish all
interference with territories to which, whatever may
be the pretensions of the King of Queda, we could not
have the shadow of a claim.


-The Calcutta Chronicle says, “If therefore it be
tnie ( and it cannot be denied ) that the stipulation of
protecting him against all enemies was the induce-
ment to the King of Queda to give up the island of
1 enang to us we do not see how far the mere fact of
hi® having once acknowledged the supremacy of the
King of Siam is to justify [us j in acknowledging the
usurpation of the Baja of Ligor &c. Now so far from
this being correct, we deny that any such stipulation
as protection against all enemies was ever made to the
King of Queda by the British Government. We have
already stated that a distinct refusal was originally
given (and almost annually repeated ) to interfere in
any disputes with Siam. The Calcutta Chronicle has
taken the unfounded assertion to the Penang Gazette
as proved, and reasons from it that our Government has
been guilty of a breach of faith. Mr. Canning himself
could not make out the casus foederis here, there was
no guarantee of the integrity of the Ex-monarch’s
dominions, nor any promise of protection except
against other European Powers, and it is rather an
extraordinary mode of argument to insist that the
existence of a stipulation to protect against all enemies
cannot be denied without offering the slightest attempt
to prove an assertion which involves the whole question
of breach of faith and to which we bad given a distinct
and positive denial. The King of Queda had dearly
no claim upon our Government except for personal
protection which he had received most completely, and
it may surely choose in what place and manner it is
most convenient to afford that protection.


Fort Cornwallis The 16 August 1827.
Minute of a Conversation with the Ex Rajah of
Kedah at the Council House on Monday the 13th
August 1827.
Present
THE HONORABLE the GOVERNOR
R. Ibbetson Esquire
Secretary to Government and Malay Translator.
The Honorable the Governor referred to the letter
received from the Ex Rajah of Kedah a few days ago
and expressed his regret that His Highness had not
come to a determination to proceed to Malacca ac-
cording to the desire of the Supreme Government.
The Governor also again, as at the former interview,
assured the Rajah of every attention being paid to
his comfortable accommodation at Malacca and that
his annual allowance would be encreased to 30,000
Dollars and an extensive tract of land allotted to
him. The Rajah replied that it appeared the Com-
pany were not disposed to assist him in the recovery
of his kingdom; all he requested was to be permitted
to quit this place and proceed where he pleased, that
no pecuniary consideration could induce him to take
up his abode at Malacca, that his sole object in coming
here was to solicit assistance which the late Governor
Mr. Phillips had promised and that it was entirely
owing to Mr. Phillips’ frequently requesting him to
remain and assuring him that the Supreme Govern-
ment would effect his restoration, that he was induced
to remain so long. The Rajah also stated that Cap-
tain Burney, on his arrival from Bengal and prior
to proceeding to Siam, assured him he was deputed
by the Governor General to effect his return to his
own country and he was induced at that officer’s


suggestion to write a letter to the Siamese Govern-
ment; that he never supposed Captain Burney was
impovvered to give up his kingdom to the Siamese
by Treaty. The Rajah added that he would be dis-
graced in the eyes of all the surrounding Malay States
if he removed to Malacca, and he again entreated the
Governor not to be offended with him when he stated,
that he could not feel disposed to proceed to Malacca,
and he again requested permission to depart from
this Island and follow his fate. The Governor after
again expressing his anxious desire that the Rajah
would proceed forthwith to Malacca intimated that
His Highness might return home, and that he should
again hear from him a few days hence, urging the
Rajah to reconsider the matter carefully, for this was
a point upon which the Government must be urgent,
in order that all chance of collision and difference
with the Siamese may be avoided.


Fort. William 17th August 1827.
To the Rouble. the Governor in Council
Prince of Wales Island.
Honble. Sir,
We have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of
your dispatch under date the 18th ultimo.
2. We beg leave to express our sincere thanks
for the prompt and full explanations which you have
been pleased to afford us on the subjects adverted to in
our letter of the 22d June,* and we feel satisfied
that with the knowledge now possessed by your
Honble. Board of the State of our present financial
embarrassments, no exertions will be spared by you
to introduce the most rigid economy in to all depart-
ments of your Government, and to avoid all increase
of expense not of an indispensable nature. We dc
not consider it to be within our province to institute
any comparison between the rates of pay, allowance
and equipments of the Madras troops, Military Staff
&c. now on service at Prince of Wales Island, including
the subordinate stations of Malacca and Singapore,
and those of the troops and Staff formerly sent from
this Presidency. We may allude, however, to what
is stated by your Board with respect to the style of
equipment of the Madras force as being probably
beyond what the local situation of Prince of Wales
Island requires, and we are happy fo observe, that you
propose to recommend to the Madras Government
the reduction of whatever may be found to be siiper-
fluous. We should hope that amongst these may be
included the train of Field Artillery, which is
considerably in excess of what used to be furnished
from this Presidency With reference also to the
communication recently made to your Board by the
RighfnHonble. (he Governor General respecting the


course of policy to be pursued towards the neighbour-
ing States, and to the little danger to be apprehended
from any attack on their part or that of the King of
Siam, we should imagine that the Field Artillery
equipment of bullocks might be entirely dispensed
with, by which a very considerable saving would be
effected.
3. We regret that any expressions of ours should
have led your Honble. Board to misapprehend our
meaning as to the military preparations of which we
spoke, and to conceive that our observations on that
subject were founded on private reports. If your
Honble. Board will be pleased to refer to oiir letter to
your address, you will perceive that the source from
which we drew our information was the letter from the
Government of Fort St. George acquainting us with
your requisition for Gun Bullocks sufficient for a field
battery of Eight fi Bounders with their limbers and
waggons complete. In transmitting to us the docu-
ment in question the Government of Madras had
observed that presuming that the measure,of equipping
a Battery of Eight 6 Pounders with bullocks Ac.
complete had the concurrence of the Supreme Govern-
ment, it had sanctioned the suggestion of its com-
missary General for giving effect to the requisition.
As we were wholly unapprized of your intention to
maintain the Field train at Prince of Wales Island, we
naturally concluded that your Honble. Board had
determin d on augmenting your military force with
advertence to local considerations, such as eventual
collision with the Siamese, the anticipation of which
indeed, in 1825, had induced you to apply to this
Presidency for Military reinforcements.
4<. The*explanations contained in your letter now
under acknowledgment have shown us the cause of
the application to the Government of Fort St. George,
namely, your being principally guided by the opinion
of the officers commanding with a view to the


maintenance of Ihe efficiency of the force as sent
from Madras, and being unwilling that any deteriora-
tion should take place while the troops were at your
disposal, and we are happy to observe, that previously
to the receipt ot our letter of the 22d June, you had
countermanded the dispatch of the additional number
•of carriage cattle required.
5. We are happy also to observe by your Pre-
sident’s Minute that you do not propose to keep up
the Held Train to the extent originally contemplated,
and as no Gun Bullocks we believe were formerly
maintained at Malacca and Singapore, we are not
without hopes that they may still be dispensed with
at those stations. In any sudden emergency, if cattle
sufficient to move the field pieces at Malacca and
Singapore could not be procured, the local authorities
would doubtless feel themselves to be warranted in
compelling the Native population to afford their
temporary aid.
6. We cannot conclude this dispatch without
expressing our concern that your Honorable Board
should have thought proper to place on record such
severe reflections on the character of a public officer
employed in Political Missions under the authority of
|.he Supreme Government and whose meritorious
services in that capacity have obtained for him the
repeated acknowledgments of the Governor General in
Council. Captain Burney, your Honble. Board is fully
aware, has always represented the alarm excited at the
Court of Siam and in the mind of the Chief of Ligore
to have arisen from exaggerated reports of military
preparations at Prince of Wales Island, the real
nature and extent of which could not be accurately
known to them, while the explanations offered would
not be readily believed by such a jealous and suspi-
cious people as the Siamese. Concurring as we
do with Captain Burney in opinion as to the evil
effects to be apprehended from the appearance even


ot Military equipments, at such a time, while the
Biame.se Court have just witnessed the result of our
attack on the dominions of Ava, and are still doubtful
of our ulterior designs with respect to themselves,
we feel that the arrival of the Madras troops at Prince
of Wales Island fully equipped for Field Service,
with a train of Artillery such as had not before ac-
companied the relief of troops from Bengal, was
unfortunately but too well calculated to confirm the
apprehensions of that timid and distrustful Govern-
ment, and to shake any confidence which the ratifi-
cation of the Treaty and the assurances of the local
British Authorities might otherwise have induced it
to place in our good faith. We trust, however, that
the tenor of your President’s last letter to the Rajah
of Ligore and of the communications which have been
mado to the Court of Siam direct from this Govern-
ment will have the desired effect of quieting its fears,
more especially as the removal of the Ex-King of
Queda from Prince of Wales Island under the recent
instructions of the Governor General will afford it a
palpable and satisfactory proof of our sincere desire
to cultivate with it the most friendly understanding
and good will.
7. A copy of this correspondance will be trans-
mitted to the Government of Fort St. George.
We have &ca.
(Signed) Combermere
„ W. B. Bayley
Fort William
17th August 1827.


Fort Cornwallis The 23 August 1827.
To John Anderson Esquire
Secretary to Government
Prince of Wales Island.
Si r,
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of
your letter of the 14<th Instant, transmitting enclosed
by direction of the Honorable the Governor in Council,
reports from the lute Envoy of Siam addressed to the
Supreme Government and Resident Councillor at this
station, and stating, that as these have reference to my
proceedings as Envoy to Perak and at Korow I might
take the opportunity of submitting such explanation
as I should think necessary in reply to the observations
of Captain Burney.
1 beg now respectfully to submit the following
remarks.
Para. 1. Captain Burney states that my engage-
ment with the Raja of Perak does not contain any
t clause subjecting it to ratification by the Supreme
Government.
This was an inadvertent omission although the
necessity of such a ratification was of course perfectly
understood.
2. With respect to the actual number of Siamese
stated in my report to have been in Perak while
negotiations were pending betwixt Captain Burney
and the Siamese Government, he observes that it is
extremely hazardous to receive Malayan accounts of
numbers, forgetting that Nakoda Oodin a Main nan
pirate is afterwards allowed by him full credence for
his statement against the Government and against me
Hut this remark is of very extensive application in the
Past and may with equal propriety be pointed at the


Siamese, If in the one case an object was to be gained
by exaggeration, it was as manifestly the interest of
the Siamese to underrate the strength of the party.
My statement of the number of the Siamese and
Malayan Siamese, or Samsaras, who left Perak just
before I reached it, was mainly computed from passages
contained in letters from the Governor of Ligor, or
written by his order, to the Rajah of Perak. From
the letter quoted in the margin we find that a Siamese
force of three hundred men under an officer called
Pakdee Song-Khram were sent to Perak. Surely a
much smaller number than this might have sufficed to
• guard a simple deputation, and it is in my opinion equal-
ly unprofitable to argue that because twenty or twenty
six only of the party were real Siamese, they were
therefore too weak to have exerted any influence at
Perak. The Samsams are Siamese in every respect
but in name, as any one may be convinced of by
examining those who are settled under the Penang
Government, and we have yet therefore to learn that
mercenaries are less dangerous people with arms in
their hands than their employers. The force alluded
to were quite equal to the task of subduing Perak,
without other support, and especially at the period
alluded to when the Raja’s adherents had scarcely a
serviceable musket in their possession. But the
dimensions of the village which the Siamese had built
during their stay on the banks of the Perak river and
which I inspected on my way up would have sufficed
in absence of every other proof to convince me that
the accounts of the Rajah and his people of their
strength by no means exceeded the truth.
In reality however it did not rest on their number
exceeding twenty that mischief was to be apprehended.
That number alone, backed by the internal Siamese
faction which then unhappily rent the Perak Country
would have been quite sufficient to have overawed the
Rajah and to have made his very personal existence
seem to depend on cautious simulation and unmeaning


professions of respect for the Ligor Government.
Open force on the part of the latter need not have
been resorted to. The very threat or insinuation of
such being ultimately employed, conveyed through a
Deputy or Emissary to the Rajah, would have met
every end of Siamese ambition then and have ensured
its future success.
While the Rajah continued subject to undue
Siamese influence every public act of his must in my
opinion be considered as having been vitiated and
annulled.
If the strong and decisive expression of his hatre I
of the Siamese (a) which the Rajah made use of in
the presence of two other European gentlemen, myself,
and his own officers, was not consonant with his real
sentiments, he must possess a greater tact at dis-
sembling than Captain Burney will allow him to have.
It has been considered that I exceeded my instruc-
■ tions in making a treaty with the Rajah of Perak.
Along with my instructions I received a copy of
Captain Burney’s treaty of [ ? with] Quedah, and it was
by reference to the infraction of its 2d. Article “that
“ no Siamese force by laud or water shall proceed to
“ Perak or settle in that Country” that my proceedings
were in a great measure regulated. I only now
request the indulgent permission of the Rouble,
the Governor in Council to plead that I was led on
bv an extreme solicitude to act up to what then
appeared to me to be the spirit and prospective scops
of my instructions and that I was not only actuate 1
bv a desire to see the Rajah freed from thraldom
under a faction stimulated by anticipated advance-
ment under Siamese rule and reinstated in his sovereign,
rights, but to render such ass'stance as might
serve to check the progress of Siamese conquest
in the direction of Malacca, an object which the


Para, 17 Letter
of the Sec. to
the Supreme
Govt, to Capt.
Burney dated
23 Feb. 1827.*
* Copied
from this
voi. Sec ante.
Capt. Burney’s
letter to the Sec.
to the Supreme
Govt, dated 29th
Dec. 1826, para. 4.
Capt. Burney’s
letter 31 May
1827 paras I & 2.
Supreme Government lias deemed of so much im-
portance.
Captain Burney himself seems to have entertain-
ed the opinion that no common degree of interference
would suffice to keep the Siamese from a Southern
course, for he distinctly expressed his “apprehension
“ that the agent (Mr. Anderson) who had proceeded
“to Perak and Salengore had not raised up such a
“barrier against Siamese Conquest to the southward
‘as might afford us a right and title wherewith to
“oppose the Siamese” in case of their having refused
to ratify his Agreement with the Rajah of Ligor.
1 am not aware that the agent had instructions to
take strong and definite steps for the purpose, and
therefore believe that he would have much exceeded
his powers had he done what I was deputed to ac-
complish afterwards.
1 was fully impressed during my negotiations
with the conviction that nothing short of an engage-
ment of the nature of that made with the Rajah of
Perak would be effectual in quieting his mind, in
quelling the faction that aimed at his destruction,
and in shutting the Siamese within their own bound-
ary for the future.
It was all along clear that the Siamese had a
strong party in Perak, and it now rests with the
Governor of Ligor himself, whether the party shall
not secretly indulge in treasonable hopes of counten-
ance from him at any future period.
If he is really so solicitous as Captain Burney
represents him to be to avoid all interference in
the Perak Government his true and only line of
conduct must be to inform the party alluded to that
he will hence forwsyd hold no correspondence with
them. It is greatly to be wished that not only
inclination, but a belief that by good faith he is best
consulting the interests of Siam will urge him to


exert himself in maintaining unimpaired the friendly
relations now so happily established betwixt the Court
of Siam and the British Government.
The assertion of the Governor of Ligor reported by
Captain Burney that neither the Rajah of Perak or his
adherents are to be relied on for the performance of
engagements is a gratuitous and personal one, which
may be well excused as coming from a man who is
writhing under the mortifying feeling of disappointed
ambition, and is decidedly inimical to that Prince,
i regret however to observe that the King of Quedah
should have allowed himself to utter the bitter sarcasm
against the Perak Rajah reported by Captain Burney,
although no person can for a moment doubt that he
is a biassed witness, inasmuch as he was a party, and
it is to be suspected a willing one, to the attack on
Perak in 1818, under directions from Siam. The
King ought to recollect that the Rajah of Perak
might well retort on himself an epithet so applicable
to the manner in which he lost his own country.
'I must conscientiously declare it to be my belief
that the Rajah of Perak is an uprightly minded man,
and that he is animated by a most earnest desire, to
fulfil his engagements with the Penang Government.
Captain Burney has animadverted in rather, in
my opinion, hasty terms on the small loan which
was given by Government to the Rajah. Robbed
as he had been by the Salengorians and the Siamese
it is natural that he should desire a few articles
of comfort. But it consists with my personal
knowledge that the deputies who accompanied me
brought with them a quantity of tin, the proceeds
of the sale of which were I suppose quite adequate
to defray the cost of the petty supplies grudged
apparently to them by Captain Burney, and the larger
quantity of this metal which besides antimony the
Perak country produces ought to obviate the ap-
prehensions of Captain Burney that the loan is not


likely to be repaid.
The charge of incapacity brought by Captain
Burney, from report alone, against the Rajah has
gained some colour from the events of the last few
years.
That he long laboured under the disadvantages
of having but few faithful officers, and of being beset
by many mischievous ones, may have been apparent
from my report. But it will have appeared from
the same that when the occasion offered itself he
made vigorous efforts to unfetter himself, and to
secure as competent and responsible Ministers as the
state of his Country admitted of.
It may be true that the distractions which so
long disturbed Perak, did, by precluding the Rajah
from the exercise of his rightful authority reduce
him to a condition of political weakness, and personal
inaction. It would indeed have demanded the ex-
ercise a more reflecting and energetic mind than
he possesses, or I will venture to say can be found
within the whole range of Malayan Princes on the
Peninsula, to have combated the adverse and perilous
circumstances under which he was during so many
years a sufferer.
Indolence, the natural result of deprivation of
power, and at all times the besetting fault of Malays,
is more to be imputed to him than incapacity.
But it ought not to be forgotten that Malay
Princes are guided like those of other regions by the
Councils of their Ministers, which guidance counter-
balances in some degree the inconveniences which
want of talent in themselves might create, and we
may safely pronounce that so long as they show a
strenuous desire to fulfil their engagements, to the
performance always of which their Ministers are
equally and solemnly pledged with them, we shall


not gain any thing by an over strict scrutiny into
their individual capacities. This may perhaps appear
a satisfactory mode of replying to the question put
by Captain Burney—what guarantee have we for the
performance of engagements on the Rajah of Perak ?
But it might be met with the trite maxim, that a
weak state hemmed in by others more powerful than
itself will generally, if left to its own free choice,
throw itself under the protection of that one which is
best able to defend it. It is fair also to infer that
if Perak shall in future be totally freed and exempted
from all foreign interference, she will at the same
time get rid of faction, and then gradually regain her
level amongst the Petty States on the Peninsula.
I proceed now to the subject of my proceedings
at Korow.
* That the Governor of Ligor should feel displeased
with me for having attacked the pirates at Korovv,
who it is evident have received his countenance by
the attention their Chief Nakoda Oodin has met
with at Ligor, is nc cause of surprise to me. While
he could quietly maintain a footing in a quarter free
from the intrusion of strangers and unapproachable
by the Rajah of Perak’s subjects on account of the
notoriously lawless and desperate characters of its
Chief Nakoda Oodin and his gang, he would always
have been enabled to avail himself of any change in the
aspect of his political relations with the British for
furthering his ambitious aims in the direction of
Malacca and would have been sure at the outset of
gaining the ready services of at least one hundred
well armed and hardy pirates and a fleet of boats.
It is the last thing which I should have expect-
eci at t he hands of Captain Burney, that after having
, _ &
expelled a horde of pirates from the vicinity of
p e nang which had become too bold and too destruc-
...
five to R* s native trade to be longer patiently endured.


ami after having been honored by the' public ap-
probation of this Government for the service, any
statement of the pirate Nakoda Godin should for
an instant have been listened to by him. 1 must
confess too that I cannot perceive how he could
consistently with his public capacity take so active
a part in a subject which, as it had reference to
pirates in the Perak Country only, became thereby
properly cognizable by the Rajah of that country
alone, in communication if he chose with the Prince
of Wales Island Government.
Taking this subject in its broadest light and
bearings and under the liberal acceptation which its
parallel has borne in Europe (I allude to Algiers)
and admitting for the sake of illustration that the
Korow river did not belong to Perak but to Siam,
I trust that I am right in asserting that the neigh-
bouring state or states whose subjects suffered from
the cruel depredations of the pirates that river shelter-
ed, had a just right to adopt any means for their
destruction.
It is well known to this Government that the
numerous and audacious piracies which during a series
of years have been committed on this Coast havo
frequently been made subjects ot representation to the
Siamese authorities, and that I was once myself made
the personal channel of remonstrances to the Siamese
Chief of Quedah and Phoonga respecting them.
But these representations never seem to have had
any good consequence. I do not believe that the
Siamese had either the means or the spirit to co-operate
in clearing the Coast from pirates, and that they
have shown the utmost remissness in keqhng pirates
and notorious characters out of their rivers cannot be
questioned. In support of the last assertion I beg
permission to draw the attention of Government to a
very recent instance which in my situation as con-
trolling the police in Wellesley Province I considered


it my duty to report —that of the notorious pirate
Pakeersaib, for whose apprehension a warrant was
long ago issued, and a reward offered, being then
living openly in Quedah and enjoying the ostensible
protection of its Siamese Chief.
But the claim now started and advanced by the
Governor of Ligor to Korow as an integral part of
Quedah is unsupported. Krean has ever been con-
sidered the line of demarcation betwixt the States of
Quedah and Perak and any occasional occupancy of it
by the possessors of the former was the result of
superior power, not right.
However Captain Burney may have helped to
hamper the question by doubts, } 7 et it is plain from
his own admissions, and from his own map of the coast
( which was lithographically printed at Calcutta ) that
the above is the true state of the case. By what
specious mode of reas ming then may I ask, is a
relinquishment by the Governor of Ligor of an
untenable and unfounded claim to be construed into a
generous concession and act of friendly condescesion
on his part towards the British Government and
deserving suitable acknowledgments.
I confess 1 cannot see, either, how the Governor of
Ligor can prove that tlm Rajah of Perak, whose people
zealously co-operated with me in attacking the
pirates, had not a right to whatever he chose at Korow
without consulting him.
Captain Burney lias been pleased to ascribe my
attack on Korow solely to a desire to assist the Perak
Rajah, forgetting that however desirous I. might have
been to do so. yet it could only have been, as it was
accomplished, ulteriorily to the instructions to root
out the pirates directed to me by the order of this
Government.
The character of Nakoda Godin is of such not-
oriety at Penang and the demonstrations of his guilt


so numerous and glaring, that I can scarcely credit
but that had Captain Burney consulted the records
of the Police Office at that Island he would never
have ventured to lend him his countenance. Captain
Burney says (letter 31 May 1827 para. 6) that he
disbelieves the depositions against Godin because he
has seen much falsehood and inconsistency in the
statements and depositions of Malays, forgetting
that Godin is himself a Malay and that consequently
his implicit reliance on all that man has said is
plainly and in open terms contradicting his own
reasoning, it such it can be termed. It may well be
asked (if Captain Berney’s disbelief is well founded)
how Nakon Godin is to support his statement unless
by the falsehoods and inconsistencies of Malayan wit-
nesses. But the proofs do not rest on oral testimony
only, although if but one twentieth part of what
depends on the latter were proved against him in
a competent Court he could not escape banishment
for life. His own papers seized by me at his haunt
bear ample testimony to his delinquency. They show
that whenever a piracy was committed within the
jurisdiction of Penang or just beyond it, the friends
of the parties who were carried off invariably addres-
sed a letter to Nakoda Godin making an offer of
ransom, which having been agreed to, the parties
were privately conveyed to a retired part of the
coast and delivered up.
Such however could only happen where the pira-
tes met with no resistance from those they attacked,
for otherwise they put them to death. At his haunt
I found several small prows which were discovered
to have been pirated from British subjects, and I
rescued from slavery at Nakoda Godin’s a man who
had been forcibly carried away from Penang by one
of his gang. 1 may also observe that Ta-eidin,
Nakoda Godin’s own son who lived with him, is a
more notorious pirate even than his father, and that
a warrant for his apprehension has lately been issued


(on a serious charge) from the Police Office. Besides
the large body of evidence already deposed against
him there are 1 believe on a moderate average fifty
persons residing in Penang in Wellesley Province,
who did they see any reasonable prospect of obtain-
ing redress, would forthwith prefer their complaints
against him. The very circumstances of no piracy
having been committed close to Penang since the
attack on Korow is a negative proof of no small
weight against him. But the fact is that as Nakoda
Godin is not amenable to the Court of Judicature
of Penang for crimes committed beyond its Jurisdic-
tion, and as those of which he has been personally
guilty are perhaps chiefly of this description, we can
easily account for his audacity in coming to Penang.
His boldness since has no doubt been matured by
hopes of what he calls redress and justice to be
obtained through the intervention of the Governor of
Ligor and Captain Burney.
The property captured from the pirates (consis-
ting principally of arms and boats) with the loss of
two Sepoys and many wounded, was under the autho-
rity of the Government sold by public auction, and the
proceeds, about two hundred and seventy Dollars, were
divided amongst the Sepoys and other armed men who
had cheerfully supported the privations and fatigues
incident to the two expeditions. The statement of
Godin therefore of his loss of property is little
deserving of attention, particularly in consideration
of the lawless manner by which it was acquired.
It has been exaggerated beyond all bounds, and it
has come to my certain knowledge that he deposited
his most valuable effects in Penang and then encouraged
his gang to hold out to the last.
1 beg in conclusion to be permitted to offer a
very few remarks on the reports which have by Captain
Burney’s account been propagated in Penang and
Quedah tending to irritate the Siamese against the
Penang Government.


I will not pretend to state whether the King of
Quedah ought or ought not to he charged with having
assisted in spreading these reports. My situation
certainly gave me reason to know that until the Treaty
received the final ratification of the Supreme Govern-
ment many absurd and injurious reports were brought
by boats and prows from Quedah which I should
have thought must have been rejected, by natives
even, upon the least reflection. But my experience
induces me firmly to believe that the inveterate feeling
which still rankles against the Siamese in the
breasts of the Quedah Malayan population, joined to
the acts of designing Ohuliahs and Chinese may
unfortunately, and quite independent of the King, be
expected for some time to come to prove fruitful
sources of such reports. What men wish tor they
cannot always be prevented from expressing a hope
to possess, and by fabricating dangerous reports the
Malays of Quedah in some measure seek their revenge,
and thus retaliate on their conquerors from whom
they deserve anyhow to be freed.
But whatever apprehension the Siamese may have
expressed 1 am inclined to think and believe that they
really felt little. 1 received constant information
from Quedah of the state of affairs there, and nothing
that I could learn countenanced the belief that people
were flying from Quedah under tear of an attack from
Penang. On the contrary, from what we know of
their habits and characters, the classes of natives
alluded to by Captain Burney were the least likely
to be afraid of the British. During the whole of the
period alluded to and up to this day the native trade
betwixt Penang and Quedah has been uninterrupted,
excepting by the pirates previous to their destruction
at Korow. Frequent interchanges of friendly acts
have passed betwixt the young Chief at Quedah and
myself, his people having had free ingress to Wellesley
Province, while an unceasing trade in Cattle (during
the last two years) has been kept up betwixt the


Honble. Company’s subjects in the Province and the
natives of the Siamese Provinces of Daloong and
Patani. This friendly intercourse I have cultivated
and am still cultivating with success, and everything
now wears the aspect of peaceful times.
1 now respectfully solict the indulgence of Govern-
ment for the length of these remarks in consideration
of the manner, not devoid of asperity, in which
Captain Burney has deemed it not beneath him to
become the channel of conveying very grave complaints
against me from the noted pirate Nakoda Godin to
the Supreme Government and to the Government of
Prince of Wales Island, and which, as I am at a loss
to reconcile with any just or recognized public principle
1 can only ascribe to private feeling.
(Signed) James Low Captain •
Late Envoy to Perak.
P. W. Island
17th August 1827.


To John Anderson Esquire
Secretary to Government
Port Cornwallis.
Sir,
With reference to the numbers of emigrants from
Quedah and their expected increase, and the advantage
which would be derived by settling them as cultivators
immediately on their arrival instead of permitting
them to wander about in quest of a precarious
livelihood, 1 have the honor to solicit the sanction of
Government to my advancing small supplies of grain
to those who may show a ready disposition to take
land on lease securing the repayment in the crops.
2. I beg to enclose Depositions taken by me
several months ago, and a report just received from
the Constable of Teluk Ayer Tawar District, which
will serve to point out the probable extent to which
Emigration from Quedah is likely to proceed and the
causes of it.
3. lam happy to be enabled to report that the
leasing out of land proceeds without hardly any
intermission,
I have &c.
(Signed) James Low Captain
Acting Superintendent Wellesley
Province.
Province Wellesley
20 August 1827.
Fort Cornwallis The 28 August 1827.


Extracts from Depositions.
Brahaiu a native of Alloastir in Quedah, states
that the Siamese Chief there exacts now one half of
the gross produce of the rice fields, besides frequent
exactions which are not paid for, and independent of
12 Gan tongs of paddy as the tax on each house.
Che Aris, native of Bukit Penang, in Quedah, on
being asked what taxes the Siamese levy, states that
they take one half of the grain produced on the fields
and that fhej exact fruit and provisions at any period
which suits their convenience.
Haddee, a native and agriculturist of Quedah,
states that the Siamese take one half of the gross
produce of the fields and exact Grain and provisions
and fruit at other times according to their pleasure
1 hat besides there is a regular tax on each house of
12 Gantongs of paddy, which they compel the women
to beat out. If they don’t, the husbands or male
relatives are beaten.
Brahan, Che Aris and Hadee are asked if there
are any other exactions. They state that there is the
usual “ Gindang” or fax for the Rajah’s Great Drum.
Each house pays according to the wealth of the owner,
the poorest pay 3 pice or one “ Kindirree ”, houses
with a wooden stair a rupee, houses inhabited by
women only who are poor one Kindirree.
Deposed before me this 2fi day of April 1827,
(Signed) James Low Captain
Acting Superintendent Wellesley
Provinpe.
Fort Cornwallis The 23 August 1827.


Report of the Constable of Teluk Ayer TaWar-
Translation.
Shaik Madar begs leave to report to Captain Low
that a man from Quedah, named Pootih, had fled with
his four children into this district because the Siamese
people take the children of the people of Quedah and
send them to Siam, and he wishes to stay in the
Company’s territory.
Moreover Pootih states that numbers of people
are desirous of flying from Quedah, and settling in
the Company’s territory, because the Siamese take
their children. Your servant has sent Pootih to
wait on you.
20 August 1827,
(Signed) Shaik Madar.
A true Translation
(Signed) James Low, Captain
Acting Superintendent Wellesley Province,..


Translation of a letter from the Ex Rajah of
Kedah to the Honorable Robert Fullerton Governor of
Pulo Penang, Singapore and Malacca.
(After Compliments.)
[The first para, merely reiterates objections to
going to Malacca.]
Moreover Captain Burney went and made an
engagement with Siam intending to send me to re-
side at Malacca without my knowledge, and when
Captain Burney came from Bengal to proceed to Siam
he stopped at Pulo Penang and called upon me at
my house. • He then informed me that he was directed
by the Governor General to proceed to Siam, to
negotiate with the King of Siam and request back
my country of Siam and the release of my sister and
children, that the Governor General intended to return
them to me, and Captain Burney x’equested me to
write letters to all the Chiefs at Siam. I was much
pleased to hear the words of Captain Burney as
above stated, and 1 accordingly wrote 5 letters to
the Chiefs at Siam, which were delivered to Captain
Burney to be conveyed there. It appears that Cap-
tain Burney proceeded to Siam by the desire of the
Governor General of Bengal to be the bearer of the
wishes of the Governor General; when the King of
Siam therefore did not comply with the desire of the
Governor General of Bengal, for what reason did
Captain Burney comply with the wishes of the King
of Siam in a manner very improper and tending to
lower the opinion of the power of the English King
of Europe, who has always been famous from the
most remote times? When Captain Burney returned
from Siam he again came and called upon me at my
house. He then for the first time informed me that
Fort Cornwallis The 23 August 1827.


lie had begged my sister and children from the
Siamese to return them to me, and he desired me
to remove from Pulo Penang and go and reside at
Malacca. I replied to Captain Burney that I was
entirely averse to complying with the arrangement
which proposed my residing at Malacca, and why did
he make a treaty with the Siamese after his own will
and without informing me before proceeding to Siam,
for the country of Quedah is my own country, descen-
ding to me from my ancestors? It is not a Siamese
country and how could he go and make an engagement
with Siam respecting ray country without ray
knowledge and how should I conform to such an
engagement? Such was the answer I gave to Captain
Burney on every occasion when he met me, such
was the nature of my discourse.
Now Captain Burney reports to the Governor
General Rajah of Bengal that I spoke to him in a
manner as if I wished to go and reside at Malacca and
I am astonished at Captain Burney that he should
go and tell - the Governor General of Bengal words
which I never spoke. When I came to Pulo Penang
it was not to seek quiet or refuge for myself here, I
came only relying upon the treaty qf Mr. Light, the
Agent of the English Company with my father, when
the English Company requested Pulo Penang from ray
father.
During the time Mr. Phillips was Governor of
Pulo Penang, how often did I request to quit this
place, but Mr. Phillips told me that the Governor
General of Bengal was disposed to assist me and
frequently advised me to remain here until my friend’s
arrival to take chai’ge of the Government and since
that 1 have been led to expect assistance.
Now again Captain Burney has made arrangement
with Siam desiring me to go to Malacca, but I present
compliments to the English Company and Governor


General Rajah of Bengal and all the Council and all
my friends and beg to state that it is not agreeable to
me to conform to Captain Burney’s negotiations with
Siam and therefore request to make preparations for
quitting this place Pulo Penang, for my heart is
impressed with a conviction that the proceedings of
Captain Burney are evidently oppressive to me, for is
it customary with the English Company that one
person may go and make an engagement for another
person’s country without the consent of the owner
of that country, and is it usual for one merchant to
sell another man’s goods of his own accord and without
the consent of the owner of the goods ? Such are
the proceedings of Captain Burney and every person
who knows them will decide whether they are good or
bad. To this day I have great reliance upon the
English Company and Governor General, Rajah of
Bengal and Council and all my friends that 1 shall be
permitted to depart from hence, for 1 have been
waiting a long time here and according to Malayan
notions it is a great disgrace that I have remained
so long.
Dated 27th Mahurrum 1248 or 20th August 1827
A true Translation
(Signed; John Anderson
Malqy Transr. to Govt.
Penang
21 August 1827.


Fort Cornwallis The 29th August 1827.
John Anderson Esquire
Secretary to Government.
Sir,
In answer to your letter of the 16th Instant I
have the honor to state for the information of the
Honorable the Governor in Council that I am not
aware of any Chinese or Chulia traders from the
Kedah country having fled from there at the period
referred to and taken refuge here. Neither did 1
hear of any cessation of commercial intercourse at
that time between Kedah and this Island. A few
months ago however, obstructions and impediments
to the trade of Kedah were reported to have arisen
in consequence of the Siamese authority there mo-
nopolizing the export of grain, which it is said is
still done in a great degree, but with a few exceptions
to particular and favored individuals. Extortions and
oppression were also complained of by the Siamese
Authorities at Setul, Purlis and Lingoo, which in-
duced about two hundred of the Ryots or poor in-
habitants of these places to quit and come to this
island in the Months of March and April last.
Among them was the Chinese Captain or Head
Chinaman of Lingoo. Whether any have come into
Wellesley Province I cannot say.
I have &c.
(Signed) R. Gaunter
Superintendent of Police.
Police Office
25th August 1827.


To His Excellency
The Right Honorable Stapleton
Lord Combermere G, C. B.
Vice President in Council
My Lord. FORT WILLIAM.
* * * * #
2. The representations of Captain Burney re-
lative to the fear of the Siamese are already refuted
by the best of all proofs, the admission of the Ligor
man himself that he never believed the rumours made
so much of by Captain Burney, magnified apparently
with his usual object of making difficulties in order
to ensure to himself credit for overcoming them.
We believe the whole of their fears to have been
entirely fictitious. Had the circumstances stated by
Captain Burney really taken place we must in the
nature of things have heard of them, and the replies
to our letter on the subject from the Police Office
will show that such reports had no foundation on
facts. From these it appears that no emigration of
Chuliahs or Chinese (or cessation of trade) took place
in consequence of the alarm of our preparation, but
in consequence of the oppression and violent proce-
edings of the Siamese themselves the Malay inhabi-
tants were as usual quitting the country. As to the
trade and communication with Quedah the report of
the Master Attendant shows aii increase instead of
a diminution of the prahus and junks trading to
Quedah.
3. So much has been said privately as well as
publicly of the additional number of troops at this Pre-
sidency, it becomes necessary to state that but little
addition has been made to the troops, nor have the
late arrivals at any one time exceeded those of the 65
from Bengal. During the process of relieving the
Fort Cornwallis the 29th August 1827.


25th. the member ot troops on I he island amounted fV>
not less than 1960 men and yet we heard nothing of
these alarms, even after the Bengal 25th had left
this, there remained nearly 1500 men more than we
have now. If the relief of the troops is to be dispensed
with in deference to the fears of the Siamese, the
business of Government must be entirely suspended.
Were we not now accustomed to the inconsistencies
of Captain Burney, it would appear to us extraordinary
that that gentleman should now dwell so much on
the supposed increase of our military force, when he
himself long since gave his decided opinion that an
augmentation of the Military and Marine forces at this
Presidency would be absolutely necessary in the event
(the very one he has been instrumental in bringing
about) of the Rajah of Ligor permanently annexing
Quedah to his territory “and such a-powerful and
jealous nation as the Siamese coming into immediate
contact with this Settlement.” These were the
opinions of* Captain Burney in his report of 29th of
May 1822,'* since which the means of the Rajah,
Military and Marine, as well as his political influence,
have, by the management of Captain Burney, been
much encreased. To prevent the circulation of reports
is beyond our power, how indeed can such be pre-
vented when the Government of Siam itself bestows
favors on those who bring false reports of our pro-
ceedings and thus pays a premium for misinformation.
4. We must again express our surprize that
Captain Burney should make the idle tales of the day,
fit only for a Bengal Newspaper, the subject of a
public address and found on them conclusions so
injurious to the Government under which he has lately
been serving.
5. Captain Burney we perceive persists in his
assertions of the facility of inducing the King of
Quedah to remove to Malacca. Captain Burney was
left bj r our President in full power to effect that


arrangement and certain we are he found every
■assistance from the Resident Councillor, and if the
matter was so very easy, we regret that he did not
himself succeed better. To the desultory and irres-
ponsible observations of Captain Burney on this point,
we have only to oppose our most solemn declaration
that every possible means have been tried, every
argument used, to induce the Ex King to go to
Malacca, and we are now compelled to give it as our
■decided opinion, that although he will quit this island
it required, nothing short of actual force will induce
him to go to Malacca, It must be obvious that we
can have no motive for keeping him here; we have a
much greater interest in his removal than Captain
Burney can have; we originally proposed it ourselves,
always have and still continue to think it the best
•arrangements, and if the loose assertions of such a
person as Captain Burney be taken in preference to
our declaration, we can only regret that the latter is
found of so very little value.
b. The Ex King has been all along buoyed up
by expectations of assistance from us, the reservations
under which these assurances were given “by amicable
arrangement only with the Siamese” he has never
understood, and in the last conversation we had with
him, he positively asserted that Captain Burney on
taking leave of him when proceeding to Siam, ex-
pressly ,told him he was going to obtain his restoration
to his kingdom. In respect to the final arrangement
lor his removal, we can only await the orders of the
Right Honorable the Governor General in Council,
which will certainly be most punctually obeyed.
7. (up tain Bumey we perceive has artfully enough
endeavoured to connect the political arrangements of
Captain Low at Perak with the attack on the pirates
in the Korow River, and a trifling supply of arms,
for the purpose of enabling the King of that country
to assist in their expulsion ; whereas in truth they


had no possible connection with each other. The
attack on Korow would have taken place, even tin/
Captain Low had never visited Perak. Captain Bur-
ney has stated in his usual rambling style “It is
“the active part which Captain Low has taken in
“the internal affairs of Perak and in assisting that
“poor Chief to bring his territor3 r and subjects under
“ his authority which appears to me to have led that
“officer into the questionable proceeding of attacking
“and destroying Korow, a place which even if the
“Siamese had no claim upon, it is far inland, and
“ beyond our jurisdiction. This proceeding has given
“to the Siamese some cause to tax us with a breach
“of the Treaty in the very last article upon which
“X had hoped we should ever have been charged.”
This is strong language, yet divested of all its artifi-
cial colouring to what does it amount ? A gang of
pirates have been plundering vessels, robbing along
the coast and carrying the plunder to Korow, a
village of which Godin is the Chief. Their haunt
was discovered, they were attacked and dispersed,
40 miles beyond the limits which Captain Burney
himself assigns to the Kedah territory. The attack
was made with no view of hostility to the Siamese
who had no concern in the country, nor had it any
reference to or connection with political relations with
them, and yet Captain Burney argues on the act as
affording to the Ligor man some cause for taxing
us with a breach of the Treaty. When people require
pretexts it is easy to find them, the question is
whether the cause, the pretext or ground of accusation
be just. If this be a true one of that description
Captain Burney himself must answer, for it was his
authority which in our judgment fixed the boundary,
and the Krean river we affirm to have been the
*
original boundary of Quedah and Perak, expressly
mentioned as such in repeated authentic documents
and we never before heard a question of doubt started
on the subject nor would such have been started


how but to serve a particular purpose. Captain
Burney lias always professed himself well acquainted
with these matters. Map making has been a favour-
ite and we have reason to know not an unprofitable
pursuit. But the attack on the Korow river took
place in the month of January, no complaint was
ever made to us by the Ligor man, we never heard
it noticed until Captain Burney himself reached
Quedah in April. The conclusion is irresistible that
he himself from his illjudged compliance with
every wish of that Chief gave rise to the complaint,
and there are other reasons for believing that but
for him it would not have been started, and we must
again repeat our decided opinion that when made,
such should have been at once resisted and set at
rest instead of being allowed to be thrown down as
another bone of contention between this Government
and the Chief of Ligor. The benefical result of the
dispersion of the pirates at Korow has been sufficient-
ly evinced in the complete cessation of piracy since
that measure was resorted to. That Nakoda Oodin
was the aider, abetter and protector of the gang is
indisputable, and as to his character it appears by
our records that this man was a professed pirate five
years ago and was so represented by the Chief of
Ligor himself in his letter to Mr. Phillips, the then
Governor, in July 1822.
8. Captain Burney in one part of his letter
observes as an argument against the attack on the
pirates that Korow is beyond our jurisdiction, in an-
other part he regrets that Nakoda Oodin was not al-
lowed to plead in the Court of Judicature, No pirates
are admitted within the jurisdiction of this Court,
and for a. noted pirate, one of the common enemies of
mankind whom we are bound to destroy to be allowed
to appear in a Municipal Court against an Act com-
mitted in a sovereign capacity beyond its jurisdiction
is a novel idea certainly. Had this Court possessed


Admiralty jurisdiction Nakoda Oodin must have ap-
peared before it in quite another character, and we
have no doubt that a sufficient number of competent
witnesses would have appeared to ensure his condem-
nation. If the rivers on the Malay Peninsula abound
with pirates the sooner they are destroyed the better,
and there could not be a more appropriate commence-
ment of that necessary work than at Korow. Ihe
regular course on such occasions is to require the
State protecting pirates to disperse them. If unwill-
ing, or as in the case of Perak, unable it is our duty
to assist them and do it ourselves. We are bound by
the Treaty of 17 March .1824 to co-operate with the
Netherlands Government in the destruction . f pirates,
and the Straits of Malacca is the portion of sea we
must be expected to protect.
9. Of Captain Burney’s proceedings relative to
Perak and Nakoda Oodin we have already stated our
sentiments, and in stronger terms certainly tl an we
should have thought of doing could we have anti-
cipated that that gentleman’s view of the case would
have been so readily adopted by your Honorable
Board. Captain Burney in exchanging the Treaty
had no authority to enter into new negotiations on
any point with a Native State without communication
with us, nor were we aware that the relative situation
in which Captain Burney stood to this Government
authorized his commenting and animadverting on our
proceedings, and we must add and with sincere regret
that we never contemplated that on points so nearly
connected with the interests of this Presidency and
bearing so directly on our public conduct, any deci-
sion would have been formed on the mere reports of
Captain Burney without affording us the means of
explanation, and we hope and trust that your confi-
dence in us does not rest on the slender tenure of
co-incidence of our opinion with the ever-changing
sentiments of Captain Burney. To enumerate the
endless contradictions and inconsistencies in the


writings of Captain Burney would require more time
for us to write and probably more time for others to
read than could well be spared, but when any come
in our way they may as well lie noticed. To the argu-
ments used by Captain Burney in July 1827 we
oppose the reasoning of that gentleman in September
1825.
10. But Mr. Anderson apprehends that this
chief still meditates interference with the Government
of Perak—“ of course he does and wdl continue to do
so until we avail ourselves of the power which we
“ now p 1 ssess of entering into such an alliance with
“ Perak as may preclude Siamese interference alto-
“ gether. I distinctly showed in my report of the Ist
« of August that the Chow Pya considered Perak as
“ a Siamese territory —that L had denied it and had
“ only been able to wave the discussion without
“ settling the matter either way. My agreement
“ however was so drawn out as to afford our agent at
*< Perak the means of precluding hy exoress treaty
“ w ith its Ghiff the inter!erence of the Chow Pya of
“ Ligor with the countiy and government of Perak
“on any pretence . At Queda I could never have
“ prevailed on the Chow Pya to resign by Treaty, all
“ Siamese right of supremacy over Perak. I con-
“ tented nivself with preventing the force which he
“ had prepared from proceeding to that country and
“ destroying it, and with securing to ourselves the
“ right of attacking any detachment of Siamese armed
“ men or boats that we might find to the Southward,
“ and 1 conceived it would rest with our negotiator
“ at Perak to devise means for precluding Siamese tn-
“ terference in the many other forms in which d may
“be attempted. Unless therefore some further mea-
“ sures than those adopted by Mr. Anderson be
“ concerted with both Salengore and Perak it is
“ manifest as that gentleman fears that the whole of
“ his labors will especially benefit the Chow Pya of
“ Ligor only, and that His Highness will have mode


us ie agents in securing to himself an easy and
nndisturhei control over the Government of Perak .
The Chief of, that country is evidently surrounded
by factious Chiefs and intriguing subjects and unless
we engage with him by Treaty not to admit
of Siamese interference with his Government, the
emissaries of Ligor will of course continue to alarm
and direct him, and the Chow Pya of Ligor seek to
establish Siamese control thro 1 their Agency.”
11. Now be it remembered the Preliminary
Treaty with Ligor in respect to Perak has been con-
firmed and we now find Captain Burney condemning
the very measures of Captain Low which he before
pointed out as the only course that could prevent His
Highness of Ligor from " making us the agents in
securing to himself an easy and undisturbed control
“ over the Government of Perak.” The plain and
simple matter of fact is that the Chief of Ligor never
intended to adhere either to the Preliminary Treaty
made by himself or that with his Master of Siam. He
calculated on the underhand and indirect means
resorted to as sufficient to defeat both, by preventing
the King of Perak from taking advantage of the
Articles in his favor. The active measures pursued by
Captain Low, all in strict almost literal conformity to
Captain Burney’s view of the case above quoted,
counteracted his plans, placed the King of Perak in a
state of independence and gave effect to the only one
article of the Treaty of which this Government entirely
approved.
12. Captain Burney argues much on the im-
policy of interfering in the internal affairs of Perak.
We agree with him entirely in respect to Perak as
well as every other neighbouring state, but we main-
tain that no such interference has taken place beyond
what became necessary and indispensable in conse-
quence of the 14th Article of the Treaty. Captain
Burney has always argued much on the advantage


of that article, as giving us the power of preventing
the Siamese from encroaching on Perak, and if it
amounts to prevention we admit the advantage would
be great. To give it the effect of prevention was the
sole and only object of our interference and to that
extent only have we exerted it. Captain Burney on
his return from Bangkok waited on our President
as he said, for the express purpose of pointing out
the necessity of sending some person to Perak for
the following purposes. Ist. to explain to the King
the grounds on which he would now stand in con-
sequence of the Treaty, to explain that he was at
full liberty to continue or to break the then sub-
sisting connection with Ligor. 2d. if such was his
desire or intention to obtain from him a declaration
to that effect. 3d. To effect the removal of the
Siamese reported and known to have been at Perak.
It was our anxious wish that Captain Burney should
have gone himself on this Mission, but this he
declined on the plea of his desire to go to Bengal
forthwith. Other arrangements were made. Captain
Low was appointed to the duty, and after all was
sent led then for the first time Captain Burney ex-
pressed his desire to go. Captain Burney to the best
of our President’s recollection read in his presence
the instructions given to Captain Low and said they
were clear, distinct and could not be mistaken. Cap-
tain Burney then expressed his anxiety to be em-
ployed in order that he might expel the Siamese
and leave rhe King at large to form his own opinions.
Captain Low accordingly went and found the King
certainly in a deplorable state. The party of Siamese
had indeed retired and for obvious reasons. The
Chief of Ligor had all along asserted they never had
been there, and their being found there would in
some degree have effected his claim to veracity. But
the King was surrounded by persons in the interest
of Ligor, corrupted and bribed and artfully placed
there. Captain Low remained with him until he had


remove/! all suspected servants, placed arround hint-
self men that he could trust and had declared in
decided terms his desire to break the connection
with Ligor and be as the Treaty contemplated, in-
dependent of Siamese and English “to rule his
country his own way.” Here was the full extent of
our interference, and to that extent Captain Burney
himself must have proceeded had he adhered to the
intention expressed. Whether he could have done
so 1 cannot say, nay, more, we are prepared to
admit that had Captain Low explained to, us the
real situation of the King of Perak we cannot pos-
itively say that we should ourselves have authorized
his interfering so far. It is possible we might
have viewed it as a hopeless case, and foregone
the great benefits held forth by .Captain Burney
as resulting from this part of the r lreaty rather than
enter so deeply into the internal arrangement of
another State, but however this might have been, one
thing is clear, that had not that interference taken
place to its full extent —in other words had not the
King of Perak been completely disentangled from
the trammels of Ligor, that article of the Treaty must
have been a nullity, and never could have prevented
the Siamese from overrunning Perak, and it is cer-
tainly rather unreasonable that Captain Burney should
first claim all the credit for the preventive article, and
then object to the course of measures which alone gave
it effect.
13. As further ' proof of the inconsistencies of
Captain Burney as well as to show how little right he
has to argue against interference with the Native
States, let us refer back to his proceedings when first
appointed Agent to the Siamese States. He went
from this to Quedah. The Chief of Ligor would neither
meet him then nor allow him to cross the country to
Ligor nor even permit him to go up the Trang River.
For the latter there there was a good reason. The
Rajah’s armament was then in full progress. Captain


Burney then went to Poongah ; we earnestly request
reference to his writings from thence. The Chief of
Poongah was there held up as the only person through
whom a negotiation could be carried on for the restora-
tion of the King of Queda with any prospect of suc-
cess, he is represented as a friend ofthe King, as an
enemy to the Chief of Ligor, as the person who had
gained much by our occupation of Mergui and Tavoy
and consequent security of Salang ( or Junk Ceylon )>
while on the other hand the Chief of Ligor is de-
nounced as a faithless and ambitious character, as the
man of all others the most likely to oppose instead of
promoting our views being himself in possession of
Quedah. Captain Burney arranges with the Chief
of Poongah to proceed with him to Bangkok and that
Chief engages to supply elephants to carry him across,
and on these promising grounds Captain Burney was
sent to Calcutta to make his report. He then ad-
dresses to the Supreme Government a Memoir repeat-
ing even in stronger terms the substance of his reports
to us. He then returned with full powers and creden-
tials to proceed to Bangkok in the manner proposed
by himst If and recommended by us. In the mean time
the Chief of Ligor had prepared a large armament far
beyond the avowed object of any other ostensible
one but an attack on the island. The measures taken
had induced him before Captain Burney’s arrival to
send away a part and Captain Burney was permitted
to visit the Chief carrying with him no other instruc-
tions than to repeat the former injunctions made by
Mr. Maingy to dismiss the rest of the armament and
proceed back himself to Ligore. No sooner however
does Captain Burney meet the Chief of Ligor than
Poongah and all that passed there is forgotten and
Captain Burney comes back with a Preliminary Treaty
binding the Chief of Ligor to withdraw his armament
and abstain from sending any force to the Southward
and binding us to expel Tuankoo Hussain from Perak
and to mediate differences between Ligor and Saleng


g'ore. For the making of this Preliminary Treaty he it
remembered Captain Burney had not a vestige of
authority from us, nor had we been previously con-
sulted could we have given it. It was quite contrary
to our policy to commit ourselves to any decided act.
We expected by following the course that had success-
fully put a stop to the expedition to prevent further,
encroachment until we were favored with the senti-
ments of higher authorities. The strong and manifest
objections resulting from so direct an interference in
the affairs of the neighbouring states would of itself
have induced us to pause before we authorized so
decided a measure. When indeed the Treaty was
made there remained no alternative. We must either
have acted on it, or by refusing the mediation al-
lowed the Chief of Ligor to pursue his projects against
the Southern States. The former seemed the least
objectionable course, nor do we deny that we were
guided, we fear we must now say misled, by the
specious promises of the Chief of Ligor and the
assurances of Captain Burney, in both of which we
placed unfortunately more reliance than after events
have proved they deserved, and to the sudden and
unhappy change of sentiment and deviation from the
first intended course by Captain Burney do we ascribe
the failure of this object of the Mission. Here then
arose and from the act of Captain Burney himself
the first and most decided measure of interference.
In conformity with that Treaty Tuankoo Hussain
was removed, and no sooner was that done than 300
Siamese occupied Perak, established a ruinous in-
fluence in the Council of that State, bribed and
corrupted the servants, and intimidated the King
from deriving any advantage from the stipulations
in his favor. The interference of Captain Low be-
came as already explained indispensable, a necessary
and unavoidable measure to prevent our being made
the instrument of promoting instead of counteracting
the ambitious projects of the Chief of Ligor. Cap


tain Burney is therefore the last man that should
argue against interference with a native state. His
own act brought on the first. His reasoning onlv
betrays the predominating influence of the Chief of
Ligor over his mind, and his unqualified devotion
to the interest of that Chief. The interference was
in his judgment right and proper in removing Tuan-
koo Hussain and opening the way for Ligor, but
decidedly objectionable in the enforcement of the
reciprocal obligation and as the only means of main-
taining the 14th Article of the Treaty.
14 We are quite at a loss to conjecture upon
what principle Captain Burney can reconcile to him-
self the contradictions which appear in his reports
relative to the line of policy to be observed in respect
to Perak, for in his Journal at Bangkok (Para. 37)
he gives it as his decided opinion that “The British
“Government having thus been instrumental in the
“destruction of Perak, it will now perform no more
“than an act of common justice to protect Perak and
“prevent the Siamese replacing over that State the
“yoke which the Rajah of Salengore assisted it to
“throw off.”
15. Considering it Just to Captain Low, whose
proceedings have been animadverted upon with so
much asperity by Captain Burney that he should
have an opportunity of submitting such explanation
as he might deem necessary, we submitted to that
officer copies of Captain Burney’s late reports, and
we have now the honor to enclose a copy of his
reply, to which we request the particular attention
of your Honble. Board.
To prevent as he states a suspicion even of part-
iality on his part towards the Rajah of Ligor, Captain
Burney it appears introduced Mr. Millet, a Bengal
Civilian, to the Rajah of Ligor, his son and the
Ex Rajah of Quedah, and hopes His Excellency will


receive the evidence of so impartial and independent
a witness in respect to the character and disposition
of the Rajah of Ligor, and compare it with the
opinion which his personal acquaintance of the last-
five years has led him to form and report to Gov-
ernment.
16. The personal character of the Rajah of Ligor*
and the Ex Rajah of Quedah must of course be widely
different being of different nations and habits, and
speaking a different tongue, the former in prosperity,
the other in adversity. Captain Burney in this, as
in several of his other reports, lays much stress upon
his long personal acquaintance and intimate friend-
ship with the Rajah of Ligor, but it appears that his
two visits in 1822 to that Chief at Quedah were of
a very short duration, and up to the period of his
meeting His Highness again in August 1825, it is
presumed there was no correspondence between them,
for none is upon record. It the inference intended
by Captain Burney to be drawn of the Ligor Chief
is that the testimony to his character has always been
favorable Captain Burney must have forgotten some
of his past opinions. We could point out several
expressions in Captain Burney’s reports in proceeding
to Poongah of a very opposite tendency. In one of
his letters he states: “I do not set myself up as an
‘‘apologist for the Chow Pya of Ligor, who I believe
“possesses much ambition and all the arts and cun-
“ ning with which that passion is usually connected
“in the breasts of Native Princes,” and of the Siam-
ese Chiefs generally he observes (vide Journal para.
71) “1 have found indefatigable lying forms so es-
sential a part of a Siamese statesman’s duty that
“it is impossible to give credit to any of their asser-
tions unsupported by proof.” What circumstances
have produced so striking a chance of sentiment as
to the disposition of the Chief of Ligor it remains for
Captain Burney to explain. It may not be irrelevant
also to advert here to the state in which Captain-


Burney found the Quedah country on his visit in
January 1825 under Siamese rule. ‘‘Quedah (says he)
“is at present in a very wretched condition; most
“of the houses are in ruins and the appearance of
“the inhabitants denotes poverty and disease. The
“young Chief himself although attired in fine silk
“and with handsome jewels, has his arms and legs
“covered with itch.” As far as regards the state of
that country we may add to this a more recent report
received from Captain Low, whereby it appears that
the most grievous exactions are made from the in-
habitants of Quedah, and even their children seized
and sent to Siam. In our former reports we gave
infinite credit to Captain Burney on the score of
humanity in recovering so many Burmese captives
from the Siamese; from that credit we are concerned
to be obliged to make a considerable drawback when
we advert to other paragraphs of Captain Burney’s
report, from which we are led to conclude that an
equal number of Quedah Malays were consigned to
slavery in exchange, and if as we fear may be the
case the Malay children seized and sent to Siam
are sacrificed to slavery in further exchange and to
secure the support of other Chiefs to the immediate
interests of the Chief of Ligor, an additional ground
of regret is afforded at the failure of Captain Burney
in rescuing entirely that Country from Siamese domi-
nion, and its inhabitants from the misery inseparable
therefrom,
17. We cannot refrain from expressing our opi-
nion that Captain Burney has rather prematurely
opened to the Chief of Ligor the subject of the con-
templated cession of the province of the Coast of
Tenasserim to the Siamese. It is a subject which
we should not have alluded to at present had it not
been officially placed before us. We trust however
it will be remembered that the restoration of the
King of Quedah and consequently the abandon-
ment of that country by the Chief of Ligore was


one of the reciprocal stipulations recommended by
this Government, and after all that has passed it
can scarcely be necessary to observe that the Chief
of Lig or is just the last person that should have been
thought of as a confidential agent in such an arrange-
ment and we are of opinion, founded on past ex-
perience, that Captain Burney would of all others be
the most unlikely person to bring such negotiation to
a successful termination. Captain Burney in formerly
discussing the subject of the probable transfer of
our conquests on the Tenasserim coast to the Siamese
forcibly remarks (in his Memoir dated ‘6 May 1825)
“ still the more territory we cede to the Siamese the
“ more of human misery I fear we shall unavoidably
“ create.” Happy indeed would it have been could
we have redeemed from that state of misery a popula-
tion so long and so intimately connected with us as
that of Quedah has been.
We have &c.
(Signed) H. Fullerton
„ R. Ibbetson.
Fort Cornwallis
The 27th August 1827.


Fort Cornwallis The 13th September 1827.
Minute by the President.
I have perused the letter lately received from the
Right Honble. the Governor General of the 23d July
with sincere regret and concern, mitigated however
by the reflection that it was written on the representa-
tion of Captain Burney alone, and without having
heard the explanation we had to offer on the case.
The observations of Captain Burny addressed to the
Right Honble. the Vice President in Council having
been submitted to us it became a duty due to ourselves
to explain wherever these representations either mis-
stated or perverted facts and reasoning to our
prejudice, and this has already been done, under
ignorance certainly of the sentiments of His Lordship
and contemplating that no final decision would pass
until our explanation had been received. 1 can only
now regret that the opinion we have expressed should
have proved unfortunately so much at variance with
those entertained by His Lordship. I shall confine
myself here to as brief a recapitulation as may be
consistent with the last explanation I have to offer on
the various subjects discussed.
THE SUPPOSED MILITARY PREPARATIONS.
On this point I am still at a loss to guess from
whence such a report originated: no orders were given
for such by us, no circumstance occurred to render
them necessary unless the directions arising out of the
reported war with France, and almost immediately
countermanded gave rise to them, which on comparing
dates I can hardly suppose to be those alluded to.
The Madras troops have been landed and the Bengal
troops embarked, the distribution of the former amongst
the three Settlements has been made. 1 know of no
other military arrangements that have taken place.


f he Madras troops indeed instead of coming as troops
have hitherto come from Bengal entirely on the foot-
ing for Garrison duty have arrived as a Fields Force
equipped for active Foreign Service. It is not im-
possible that this circumstance may have given rise
to the rumour of Military preparations being in pro-
gress, but to all this 1 can only answer, that we
were not aware that they would have come so equip-
ped, and all we could do has already been done,
as will be observed by my minutes, that is to propose
to the Madras Government the reduction of the sup-
erfluities. it is not for us to interfere in the internal
regime or arrangement of the Madras Army or to say
what shall constitute the efficiency of the force: All
we can say, we have said, that it should be equipped
for Garrison duty and not Field Service.
THE ALARM OF THE SIAMESE.
On this part of the subject I must beg to repeat
my conviction and belief that no such fears were
entertained. The stir created by the landing and
shipping so many troops might have given rise to
them, but considering that an Envoy of Li gore was
present during the time, that he brought a letter
from the Chief intimating his entire disbelief of the
reports in circulation, that that letter was replied to
in free and full explanation of the measures in pro-
gress, I cannot think that any such fear really existed.
The cessation of trade, the emigration of the Chu-
liahs and Chinese asserted by Captain Burne}' have
been disproved by official documents signally unfor-
tunate for that gentlemen’s intelligence, as they un-
luckily for him, show an increase instead of any
abatement of commercial intercourse at the very time
he wrote his report.
The sentiments expressed by His Lordship in the
2d, del and 4th paragraphs of his letter are exactly
those I have myself entertained ever since the success-
ful conclusion of the Burmese War, whatever risk of


disputes, insults or aggression might have existed
before that event, while our troops were quite in-
adequate to the common duties of the place, while the
Siamese were insensible to and quite ignorant of our
power, I have never doubted that such risk was
•entirely at an end, and the assumption of a menacing
attitude with the view of imposing terror or alarm
on the Siamese never entered into my contemplation.
The appearance of such, as above explained, must
have arisen from circumstances which have entirely
escaped our observation. In settlements so far re-
moved from the other Presidencies it has always been
my opinion that our Military Force should be on a
more respectable footing than it was before and during
the Burmese War. The number is now at the
strength I always contemplated as necessary, and the
number admitted to be such in the letter of the
Supreme Government of the 10th September 1825,
It is indeed exactly the force directed by the Honorable
Court, two Regiments of Native Infantry with an
adequate portion of Artillery. It requires only to
place them on (he same footing as to establishment,
'Garrison instead of Field Force, as were the troops
formerly employed here, but if deemed more than
necessary we shall be prepared to reduce it accordingly.
As to my opinion of the character of the Chief of
Li gore, that has been determined by experience and
•attentive observation of his actions rather than of his
words. Ido not entertain of him a different or a
worse opinion than that which thirty-five years ex-
perience of public duty in ‘ India has led me to form
of every Native Chief, I rely more on their fears,
than their good faith, but whatever my own opinion
may be I must beg to assure His Lordship that such
will never interfere with the maintenance of those
amicable relations and friendly intercourse which the
public service requires I regret exceedingly the
style of communication which public duty has com-
pelled me to adopt towards that Chief since my arrival


PROCEEDINGS RESPECTING PERAK ARISING
OUT OF THE 14th ARTICLE OF
THE TREATY WITH SIAM.
On this point 1 must beg to express my concern
at the misconception under which I have acted. The
Treaty stipulated the independence of the King of that
country ; adverting to the importance attached to the
article by Captain Burney, and to the benefits to be
derived from it, it certainly did occur to me that we
were interested, and bound to prevent its execution
being forestalled, and its objects defeated by the
underhand proceedings of the Chief of Ligore. In
this belief 1 was fully borne out by Captain Burney
himself, who tendered his services to carry into effect
the very measures afterwards intrusted to Captain
Low, and to which no objection was ever urged. I
hold in my possession indeed a written document
from Captain Burney to show that in his opinion the
eventual pledge of our protection to Perak, the re-
moval of the leaders of the Siamese party and very
decided measures were necessary on the occasion. 1
must here revert to the main and primary objects of Cap-
tain Burney’s Mission as far as this Government were
concerned. By the restoration of the King of Queda
it was hoped to throw the Siamese authorities back-
here, no one could be more anxious than I have been
that a more conciliatory and amicable tone of cor-
respondence should commence. I had hoped that
the ratification of the Treaty would have terminated
all irritating discussion and the disappointment at find-
ing a new source of contention raised by Captain Burney
in his last visit, has led me to use more asperity in
my remarks on that transaction than the case perhaps
required; I must hope however that the proposition
contained in my letter to the Chief of Ligore dated
26 July 1827 * will lead to a better understanding
and the establishment of perfect harmony between us.
If that proposition be acceded to, every new and
existing difficulty will be removed.


to the distance at which they originall} 7 stood ; failing
in that it became the next object to prevent their
coining further south. By the independence of Perak
alone could that be effected and I considered myself
warranted under the treaty to take the measure which
seemed to rue indispensable for that object. 1 can
ordy here repeat my regret, at my own misconception,
in having been thus instrumental in giving effect to
the Treaty to an extent beyond what was strictly
intended. Perak is now completely independent and
in the extension of trade and co-operation in the
destruction of piracy we are reaping as regards that
state the advantages looked to as the expected result
from the general independence of the other states on
the Malay Peninsula. In due conformity however
with the principles of policy laid down, I shall be
cautious in future in avoiding any interference what-
ever with the proceedings of Ligore, in reference to
Perak, further than a report to the Supreme Gov-
ernment of such proceedings as may come to our
knowledge affecting the interests of that state.
THE ATTACK ON THE PIRATES IN THE
KOROW RIVER.
On this point explanation has been given, but
much misconception still appears to remain. Its re-
moval is necessary for the exculpation of an officer
acting under our own orders. It becomes indispen-
sable to repeat that the attack on the pirates did not
arise out of the political transactions respecting Perak,
and was not an act of Captain Low in prosecution
of or any way resulting his Mission to Perak.
It was a measure adopted more than three months
after and on certain communications from the police
department in consequence of a long continued course
of piracy carried on by persons lurking in that river.
We now enclose the copies of all depositions and of
our proceedings which will show that Captain Low
was not at first intended to be employed alone but


in conjunction with other Military and Marine offi-
cers and the reasons which afterwards induced his
employment by himself. He acted on the occasion
by the express orders of this Government. The papers
now transmitted and the numerous depositions deliv-
ered at the Police Office for more than a year prece-
ding will show that the measure had no connection
with any political points under discussion, nor was
such thought of at the time. Nakhoda Oodin ha.l
indeed been mentioned in some of these depositions
as the Pangulah or Head Man of that place, and more
particular!} in the deposition given before me per-
sonally by one Mahomed Hassan, a native of Queda,
but the attack was intended generally on the pirates,
whatever they might be, and was not directed indivi-
dually against Nakhoda Oodin, nor indeed was the
decided part he had taken in their protection perfectly
known until after the attack. It has never been as-
serted that Nakhoda Oodin himself engaged in any
act of piracy, but he supported, maintained and shared
the spoils of the principal pirates whose names are
mentioned in all the depositions. The whole of the
coast, of both sides of the Peninsula is skirted by
a deep track of mangrove, jungle and swamp such
exactly is Korow. The lands above it where they rise
into solid footing are at this moment and have
always been in the undisturbed possession of Perak,
as far as the Krean, the Northern boundary. An
officer of Perak by name Ohe-man was originally the
Pungaloo, He was attacked and driven up the river
by a Siak pirate of the name of Twanko Song Poteh,
who was succeeded by another Siak pirate, Nakhoda
Oodin. Korow therefore formed no part of the
Quedah dominions but is a mere piratical post seized
like other by force from its own sovereign, the King
of Perak, whose means were inadequate to expel the
gang without our aid. Pirates take post up several of
the rivers in the same manner and thence carry on
their marauding practices. Korow, within 30 miles


of this Island, was for them a very convenient, for ns
a veiy destructive position. Unless dispersed when
discovered piracy can never be effectually eradicated.
Similar measures, and similar expeditions have been
repeatedly fitted out by this G >vernment, they are
indispensable to the security of the petty traders,
whose dealings form in the aggregate the material
portion of the trade. The maintenance of the Marine
Establishment at these Settlements is expressly in-
tended to prevent the regular formation of piratical
bodies of that description ; several more are known to
exist in the rivers between Salengore and Malacca,
and between the latter and Singapore. Our Marine
Establishments being complete I certainly contem-
plated the adoption of decisive measures all along the
coast of the Malay Peninsula, whenever the States
within whose limits they were, either refused or were
unable to break up such combinations themselves, but
if the course hitherto pursued and proposed to be con-
tinued is deemed objectionable, it becomes necessary
to pause and consider of some other expedient. Had
the of the Chief of Ligore claiming a right
to the Korow country ever suggested itself, of course
a communication to him would have been made as
well as to the King of Perak ; but we found nothing
whatever on our Records to warrant even a doubt on
the subject. The communications on the occasion
passed therefore between us and the King of Perak,
and are now transmitted with this dispatch. The
Krean and not the Korow river has invariably been
stated as the boundary in every map, chart, and
report. The letter alluded to by Captain Burney as
having been written by the King of Salengore twenty
years ago can scarcely be considered as any authority,
for it rested with the King at that time to claim any
part or the whole of the country, and if he claimed
on'y as far as Korow, he probably knew the little
value of the tract between that River and the Krean,
the lower part of which except to Perak can be of no


nse to any one. To Perak indeed it is most advan-
tageous, the river dividing into innumerable creeks
through swamp and jungle, which afford them secure
refuge and retreat on any notice of attack. The
publication of Mr. Crawford alluded to I never saw,
nor should J probably have attached much confidence
to a newspaper article ; but had either of these docu-
ments come under notice at the time, our pro-
ceedings would have been affected, because under
the circumstances in which we stood to the Chief
of Ligore, His Lordship may be assured the most
scrupulous attention would have been paid even
to possible contingencies, but holding in my posses-
sion a geographical sketch of the Siamese states com-
piled by Captain Burney himself dated 10 April 1825
and signed officially as Political Agent to these states
in which the Krean is distinctly stated as the “ Sou-
thern boundary of Quedah ” J should probably as 1 do
now have considered it as an indisputable authority,
supported as it is by the reports of the public officers
employed on this island. Captain Burney himself in
his letter to Air. Ibbetson and his communication to
the Chief of Ligore then reported, seems to admit
distinctly that the Krean was the boundary, and if so,
it is somewhat extraordinary that he should start the
idea that an attack on pirates so many miles beyond
it was an infringement on the Quedah territory. That
letter certainly conveyed to me the very first doubt
1 ever heard raised on the case, and it is certainly
singular that while the high and more valuable part
of the territory remains undisputed in the possession
of Perak that the question should rise as to that of
use onlyto pirates. If our information and autho-
rities have unfortunately misled us on this point it
must be to us a matter of most serious regret that
we have inadvertently afforded grounds for so serious
a charge as the infringement of the articles of a treaty
and on the territories of another state, one of the very
last acts we should be willingly guilty of: That


property was plundered, captives seized and carried to
Korow, will, I trust, be admitted as indisputable, after
perusal of the numerous documents in the Police
Department, preceding as well as subsequent to the
attack. These depositions however show but a small
portion of the mischief. Many sufferers do not think
complaint of any use, the means of recovery of loss
not being within reach, and here I may ask, did
Nakhoda Oodin or his principal, the Chief of Ligore
( if he was so ) ever take any steps to interrupt these
practices ? None that we know of. Did either the
Chief of Ligore or the Pungula Nakhoda Oodin ever
communicate to this Government the proceedings
going on ? Certainly not. Did the Chief of Ligore
ever notify to us that Nakhoda Oodin was his public
officer? No ! what conclusion then could we come to
but this, that the acts committed had the sanction or
at least connivance of both r That tiie character and
conduct of Oodin was so well known that his principal
did not dare to acknowlege him. It never certainly
occurred to us that the clandestine and unacknow-
ledged extablishment of an agent of Ligore within the
territory of Perak could establish in the former any
right over the country of the latter, nor could we
imagine that the constant importation and sale of
plundered property, the seizure of captives, their sale
into slavery or their ransom could go on habitually at
the very place where Nakhoda Oodin was the head
man without his knowledge, and certainly these
circumstances afforded strong corroboration tc the
depositions subsequently taken.
It is much to be regretted that Captain Burney,
before he so warmly adopted the views of the Chief of
Ligore, and took up so decidedly the cause of Nakhoda
Oodin did not communicate with the authorities on
this island and obtain authentic information on the
whole subject, the absence of which and the report
written under that deficiency have produced so com-
plete a misconception of the whole object and intern


tion of the attack on the Korow pirates. I left this
for Singapore a few days after Captain Burney’s
arrival with the ratified Treaty, and had no time to
enter into particulars, but I certainly intended that he
should and concluded that he had seen all the deposi-
tions and proceedings respecting Nakhoda Oodin. It
has always been my practice to communicate to him
every document connected with the subject of his
late Mission, and it has l>een his, and with all pro-
priety, to require their production, nor can 1 well
account for the misinformation under which he
appears to have written his report of the 31 May
1827,* respecting- that affair. I have acted on the
occasion under the following impressions.
First. That the Krean was the boundary be-
tween Quedah and Perak, that Korow being many
miles to the south of the Krean was within the Perak
and not the Quedah territory.
Second. That all the piracies, murders and rob-
beries reported in the various depositions now sent
were committed by pirates coming out of the Korow
river, and there sheltered and protected. That the
dispersion of the gang was indispensable for the
termination of a course of robbery and violence
destructive to the trade as well as to the lives and
properties of our subjects, and discreditable to the
Government. Judging of the future intentions of the
Chief of Ligore from my own knowledge of his past
proceedings, I do not deny that I considered his
unavowed establishment of Nakhoda Oodin at Korow
as intended to further some ulterior views he might
have on the Perak country ; but I must distinctly
declare, that an eventual and distant contingency
could never in my opinion have warranted the use of
actual force in counteraction; That such would not
have been resorted to even to oppose an open and
direct aggression on Perak itself and therefore that an
attack on him or his forcible expulsion on such con-
siderations alone never entered into my contemplation,


and that ( as will appear by the papers connected with
the subject ) the dispersion of the pirates was the only
object in view. The orders now received respecting
Nakhoda Godin are certainly replete with difficulty
and embarrassment, We are directed to admit him
to a hearing and to confront his accusers, the order
being positive must be obeyed. Notice must there-
fore be sent to the person to appear and as we are
bound to hear all he has to urge, so must we endea-
vour to collect again the witnesses who have formerly
deposed against him, and that will I fear be a matter
of much difficulty, as they are mostly inhabitants of
other countries. 1 annex draft of a letter to the Chief
of Ligore on the subject.*
i-
In respect to the orders for the removal of the
Ex-King of Quedah to Malacca I regret that we have
not yet received a reply to our reference how far we
are to exercise our discretion in permitting him to
depart from our territory should he desire to abandon
our protection; but as we may soon expect the Has-
tings Frigate, and as it is evidently the desire and
direction of the Supreme Authority that he should at
all events be removed, measures may than be taken
to enforce his removal in a vessel which will afford
accommodation for his family and followers.
The Right Honble. the Governor General has
further directed that Captain Low be not employed
again in any Political capacity. His present employ-
ment in charge of Province Wellesley can hardly be
said to be of that description, nevertheless as it neces-
sarily brings him in contact with the frontier and
the subjects of Quedah, it may be necessary to enjoin
on his part particular caution in his intercourse or
communication with the generally disorderly inhabit-
ants posting themselves on the frontiers, and directing
him to report on all occasions to the Government
before he lias recourse to any measures calculated to
give offence to the Quedah authorities. As Assistant


to the Superintendent of Lands his services will for
a time at least be required on this island. The con-
stables and police officers on Province Wellesley
will be directed in virtue to make their reports to the
Police Office in George Town,
The injunction of the Right Honble. the Governor
General to abstain from any future Political Missions
will on my part be scrupulously observed, and I must
here take leave to offer some retrospective observations
on those in which I have had any part.
I took charge of the Government in 1824, with
the determination of having nothing to say or to do
with Siam itself or any of its dependent states, or
those of the Malay Peninsula. I considered it to be
our object of policy to avoid rather than seek any
contact or communication with them whatever ; I have
unfortunately been led away from the determination
by the altered circumstances of the times. The
application received from Sir A. Campbell in Septem-
ber 1824 to endeavour to induce the Siamese to
assist in the war against Ava led to the first attempt
at communication. The occupation of Mergui and
Tavoy by our troops and their supposed contiguity to
the Siamese Chiefs in that quarter seemed to point
out the necessity of some direct communication. The
uncertainty as to the course likely to be pursued by
the Siamese Government itself during the war render-
ed some means of obtaining an insight into their
views and sentiments indispensable, and this object
under the idea of using the intermediate agency of
Chiefs on our frontier, led to Captain Burney’s ap-
pointment as Agent to the Siamese States; other
objects of local interest were no doubt involved ; the
restoration of the King of Queda, our ancient ally,
had ever since his expulsion been considered an
object in which the political interests of this island
as well as the reputation of the British Government
were deeply involved ; negotiations had been opened


with the Chief of Ligore by my predecessor to effect
that restoration, that object therefore formed a main
inducement for continuing Captain Burney in that
course of further negotiation. In consequence of the
favorable prospects held forth in progress of that
officer’s proceedings through the means of the Chief
of Pungah, Captain Burney was sent to make hia
report to the Supreme Government which induced the
determination of setting on foot the Embassy to . Siam
itself. In the mean time occurred the armament at
Queda by the Chief of Ligore; whether such was
really intended against this island must now re-
main a matter of speculative opinion only; it was
certainly however much too extensive for the object
avowed, the attack on Salengore. Its destination
probably depended like that of other simultaneous
preparations in the neighbouring states, on the event
of the war. An armament so very near us certainly
first led me to an attentive revision of the Political
Records and a deliberate consideration of the relations
in which we stood to the Siamese and Malay states
around us. The impolicy of allowing the former to
overpower those states and thereby to place themselves
in immediate contact with all our settlements in the
Straits seemed to me to be clear and obvious and I
considered myself bound to prevent such a contingency
as far as it could be prevented without involving
ourselves in actual hostility, pending reference then
made to the Honble. Court. Had I found on the
Records of this Government any decided opinions of
the Home Authorities, such as would have satisfied
me that they considered our interference a greater evil
than the one apprehended in the extension of Siamese
dominion, I should of course have adopted another line,
I should have allowed the Chief of Ligore to pursue his
objects of conquest and permitted his flotilla to pass
through the harbour. Perak and Salengore, and proba-
bly all the Southern States would, in that case, have
long ere this been completely under Siamese dominion.


Ignorant of what might be the views of the?
Honble. Court on such a contingency it became my
sole object to ward off for a time an occurrence, which
it completed must have made the evil irreparable. To
that end all my measures were directed and they have
so far proved successful; the further spread of Siamese
dominion has been arrested by the attitude assumed.
In the first instance we may be assured by that only,
tor without the demonstration at least of actual means,
any reasoning, arguments, or even treaties would be
of little avail with a native state. Next followed
Captain Burney’s preliminary arrangement with Ligore,
out of that arrangement arose the Mission of Mr,
Anderson, and out of the confirmation of that arrange-
merit by the 14th article of the Treaty arose the
Mission of Captain Low to Perak, the object and
nature of which I have already explained. It will
thence I trust appear that no Mission has ever been
deputed during my Government, except such as imme-
diately arose out of a course of proceeding adopted by
Captain Burney and subsequently sanctioned by the
Supreme Authority and to my conception required for
the advancement of public interest. The objects of
such Missions no longer exist, and 1 gladly revert and
with full confidence of their strict propriety to the
principles on which I set out; That the less political
discussion or intercourse we have with neighbouring
states the better ! It will be to me a lasting source of
regret that the aberration from these principles has
brought upon me the only censure from Superior
Authority 1 have ever met with during thirty-eight
years service, and I trust His Lordship will be assured
that nothing short of positive instructions from
Superior Authority will ever induce me to resort to
any such Political Missions again.
(Signed) R. Fullerton,
Fort Cornwallis
The 4th Septr. 1827.


Fort Cornwallis The 2d November 1826.
To
John Anderson Esquire
Secretary to Government
Prince of Wales Island.
Sir,
I have the honor to enclose for the information
of the Honble. the Governor in Council, a report
of the result of my negociations with the King of
Perak.
The Hon. Company’s Cruizer Antelope, on which
I embarked, together with the Schooner Zephyr,
reached the Perak river a few days subsequent to our
leaving Penang, and I am happy to observe that
the cordial exertions of Captain Elevon, Commander
of the Antelope, both that vessel and the Zephyr were
carried much higher up the river than had been
anticipated, thereby obviating much trouble and delay
in forwarding the Mission to Allahan, the present
residence of the King.
His Majesty with his retinue came down to meet
me at Bunder, and was received with due honors,
the Escort saluting him with three volleys of muske-
try. The Mission reached Allahan the 10th day. His
Majesty saluted me with fifteen guns, and treated me
otherwise with every mark of attention and respect.
Captain Elevon, and Mr. Assistant Surgeon Frith
of the Bombay Establishment favored me with their
Company. To both of these officers 1 feel particu-
larly indebted, the former affording the most cheer-
ful and ready assistance with his men and boats,
and the letter at my request, as there was no
medical person with the Mission, most cordially
supplying medical aid to it and to the escort.


The great anxiety the King feels to regain his
independence induced him to expedite the negotia-
tions, but some delay arose from the distance which
the principal disaffected Chief had to travel after
having been summoned to the King’s presence.
1 have &c.
( Sd. ) James Low Lieutt.
Political Agent.
Prince of Wales Island
2d October 1826.


Fort William 16th November 1827.
To the Honble. R. Fullerton Esquire
Governor in Council of Prince of Wales’s Island.
Honble. Sir,
We have had the honor to receive your dispatch
.of the 6th September last, («) in reply to the letter
1 from the Right Honble. the Governor General dated
’ 23d July. (2)
2. The previous dispatches from your Honble.
Board to His Excellency the Vice President in Council
and from your Secretary of the several dates noted in
the margin, relating to the affairs of Ligore and Perak,
have also been under our consideration.
3. By the documents which accompany your
dispatch of the 6th September it now appears that the
attack made by Captain Low on Kruow was not con-
nected with the political arrangements for the negotia-
tion of which that officer was deputed to Perak, but
originated in special instructions furnished to him
by your authority. Captain Low therefore stands
acquitted of the serious responsibility which, in the
absence of the necessary information regarding the
transaction in question, and under the inference
unavoidably arising from the papers before transmitted,
the Governor General was led to consider as attaching
to him. The former orders issued regarding that
officer are in consequence revoked.
4. The evidence of the piratical habits or at
least of the harbouring and abetting pirates and par-
ticipating in their lawless gains, which has been ad-
duced by your Board against Nakhoda Godin unques-
tionably affords strong persuraption of the guilt of that
person and it is much to be regretted that this was
neither forwarded for the information of the Supreme
Government, nor even alluded to in the correspondence


npon which the view taken in the Governor General’s
letter of the 23d July of the proceedings against
that person, was founded. But for the still unsettled
relation in which Korow stands towards the States
of Queda and Perak with regard to the question of
jurisdiction, the example which was made of that
nest of pirates would have been entirely satisfactory.
5. We are fully satisfied of the entire conviction
entertained by your Board that Korow was a portion
of the Perak territory, when with the consent aiid
approbation of the Rajah of that country you resolved
on chastising the pirates who had so long infested
the neighbouring coasts. But [with] reference to
the still undetermined question of right it is to be
regretted that any plea was afforded to the Rajah of
Ligore to complain of an aggression on his alleged
territory and dependents, and it would have been more
fortunate if previous to resolving on the extreme
measure entrusted to the execution of Captain Low,
a distinct intimation had been made to the Ligore
Chief of the proofs you had obtained against Nakhoda
Oodin and his associates, and of your intention to
root out the pirates who infested the Korow river,
accompanying such communication with an invitation
to him to assist in their effectual suppression.
6. it is true that as you were entirely unaware
of any claim on the part of the Ligore Rajah to Korow,
and of Nakhoda Oodin being stationed there under his
authority, and never entertained a doubt that Korow
was a portion of the Perak territory, you could
not have considered it necessary to invite the
Ligore Chief to cooperate in an attack on parties
not residing within his jurisdiction, more especially
as his entering the territory of Perak to assist in
seizing and destroying the pirates would not have
been agreeable to the Rajah of Perak. We cannot
however divest ourselves of the impression that the
Perak Rajah was not ignorant of the fact of Nakhoda


Oodin s holding Korow under the authority of the
.Rajah ot Ligore, nor or that Chief’s claim to the
j)lace in question, and of its actual occupation for
some years past as a part of the Queda (State.
<. With respect to the Map of Captain Burney,
in which the Knan River was laid down as the
southern boundary of the Queda State, it is sufficient
to observe, that that officer must be supposed to
have made it so, to the best of his belief, founded
on all the information he could procure, but although
such authority would justify the presumption that
the fact was as assumed by him and acquits you of
an intentional act of aggression on the territory of
a neighbour, it is evident that if the Rajah of Ligore
should succeed in proving his right to the country
between the Krean and the Korow, the British Gov-
ernment is answerable to him for the error into which
it has fallen,
8. We trust therefore that the Rajah of Perak
ean produce conclusive evidence of Korow being a
portion ot Perak, but should the Rajah of Ligore still
assert a claim to it as a part of Queda, no time should
be lost in inviting him to come forward to disprove
the right which Perak has so long been considered
to possess to all the country lying to the southward
ot the Krean. You will at the same time impress
on the Ligore Rajah the right which all nations
possess to seize and punish pirates wherever they may
be found. Your having acted on that principle in
authorizing the attack on Korow renders it necessary
that this tone should be assumed with the Rajah of
Ligore with a view to justify your sending troops into
a territory which he asserts to belong to Queda, but
having already made so severe an example of the pre-
sumed pirates, we do not consider it expedient that you
should require him to punish Nakhoda Oodin for past
transactions, although in truth the justification of
Captain Low’s proceedings can only rest on the pre


established fact that Nakhoda Oodiu and his associates
were pirates, and therefore obnoxious, to be treated as
such. It will be proper to warn the Ligore Rajah
that as he claims Nakhoda Oodin as a dependent, the
British Government must look to him for taking
effectual measures against the renewal of piratical
practices on the part of that individual, and that in
the event of his failing to do so, and of farther com-
plaints being brought against Nakhoda Oodin for acts
of piracy, the British Government will be compelled to
employ the means at its command for putting down
those who by universal consent are deemed a common
enemy.
9. Nakhoda Oodin should at the same time be
apprized of the conclusive evidence which has esta-
blished his guilt to your conviction, and be informed
that unless it ia in his power to disprove satisfactorily
the charge brought against him, his present petition
for compensation of the loss alleged to have been occa-
sioned by the attack and plunder of Kurow will be
dismissed. He should moreover be warned of the con-
sequences of his returning to his former lawless habits.
10. We do not deem it necessary to enter farther
into the question of Captain Low’s proceedings at
Perak, as, with advertence to your President’s minute
of the 4-th September last, we are satisfied that your
Honble. Board is now fully apprized of our views and
sentiments with regard to the policy to be observed
towards Siam and the petty states of the Malay
Peninsula.
11. With regard to* the Ex-King of Queda we
conclude that before this time you have carried into
effect the instructions conveyed in the Governor
crabs letter of the 23d July for his removal from
Prince of Wales’s Island. Should you have consented
to ids proceeding to Siack or Belli, instead of Malacca,
it will no doubt have occurred to you to warn him in


explicit terms that on proof of his attempting at any
future period to collect followers at either of those
places with a view to attempt the recovery of Queda>
or of his abetting or being privy to the equipment of
any piratical expeditions from thence against the
Siamese or Malay States on t%e Malay Peninsula he
will at once forfeit the provision he now enjoys from
the British Government, and will subject himself to
such further marks of its displeasure as the nature of
the case may require,
12. Should he have conformed to the wishes of
the Supreme Government and consented to reside at
Malacca, he may be assured that so long as he con-
ducts himself in a proper manner, abstains from
engaging in intrigues directed against the Siamese,
■and having for their the recovery of his former
Dominions by force, he will continue to envoy the
the favor and protection of the British Government,
but that a contrary course on his part will infallibly
entail on him the less of the provision which he now
■receives.
We have &ca.
(Signed) Amherst
„ W. B. Bayley
>, C. T. Metcalfe.
Fort William
16th Novr. 1827^


To
[ The Honorable the Secret Committee
of the Honorable the Court of Directors.
Honorable Sirs,
* * * * * ' *
Cara. 23. With regard to the Ex-King of Queda
we have stated to the Government of Prince of Wales’s
Island in our Letter above referred to, of the 16th
November last, that we conclude the Governor in
Council has carried into effect* the instructions con-
veyed in the Governor General’s Letter of the 23rd.
July, for his removal from the Island. Should he
have been permitted to retire to Delli or Siak on the
East Coast of Sumatra, instead of Malacca, we have
suggested to the Government of Prince of Wales’s
island the propriety of warning him, in explicit terms,
that on proof of his attempting at any future period
to collect followers at either of those places, with
a view to attempt the recovery of Queda, or of his
abetting or being privy to the equipment of any pira-
tical expeditions from thence against the Siamese or
Malay States on the Malay Peninsula, he will at once
forfeit the provision he now enjoys from the British
Government, and will subject himself to such further
marks of its displeasure, as the nature of the case may
require. We have added, that, if the Ex-Rajah shall
have conformed to our wishes, he may be assured
that so long as he conducts himself in a proper man-
ner and abstains from engaging in intrigues against
the Siamese, he will continue to enjoy the favor and
protection of the British Government, but that a con-
trary course on his part will infallibly entail on him
the loss ot the provision which he now receives.
******
We have &c.
AMHERST
W. B. BAYLEY
C. T. METCALFE.
Fort William
20th February 1828,


i. To
THE HONORABLE THE COURT OF DIREC-
TORS FOR THE AFFAIRS OF THE UNITED
COMPANY OF MERCHANTS OP ENGLAND
TRADING TO THE EAST INDIES,
LONDON.
Honorable Sirs,
**#•***■
Para. 4. Having received a further communica-
tion from the Supreme Government respecting our
course of proceeding with the Ex-Rajah of Quedah, in
which we were informed it was not deemed advisable
to attempt the forcible removal of that Chief from this
Island, we have intimated to him, in the most decided
manner, that while he persists in declining to retire
with his family to Malacca, Slack or Delhi, all pecuniary
assistance and allowances will be withheld, and he
will forfeit all claim to the future consideration of
the British Government.
5. In the several communications we have
authorized to be made to the Ex-Rajah, we have been
guided entirely by the principles laid down by the
Supreme Government. We regret however that all
our arguments for the voluntary removal of the Ex-
Rajah have as yet been in vain. He has received no
allowance whatever since December 1827: nor will
he be granted any by this Government while he
remains here.
6. Every necessary precaution has been taken
to prevent the Ex-Rajah proceeding to Quedah, or any
of the places interdicted in the treaty, and we have
been in communication with the Siamese authorities
on that subject, as well as in respect to measures for
checking piracy, which still prevails extensively in
the vicinity of this Island. A notification has also
been issued, strictly prohibiting all persons from


selling vessels or arms and Ammunition to the
Ex-Rajah of Quedah or his immediate followers and
dependents, and reduced as he now is, it is not by any
means probable that he will make any attempt to
regain his authority at Quedah by force. A vigilant
watch will however be kept over the Chief, in order
that the provisions of the treaty made with Siam
and ratified by the Supreme Government may not be
infringed on our part.
******
We have the honor to be &c.
(Signed) R. FULLERTON
„ R. IBBETSON
Fort Cornwallis
The 24th October 1828.


'• To
THE HONORABLE THE COURT OF DIREC-
TORS FOR THE AFFAIRS OF THE UNITED
COMPANY OF MERCHANTS OF ENGLAND
TRADING TO THE EAST INDIES
LONDON.
Honorable Sirs,
******
Para. 2. We regret that it is not in our power
to report the departure of the Ex Rajah of Quedah
from this Island. He lately expressed a desire to
proceed to Perak ; but this we of course positively
prohibited, being at variance with the treaty with
Siam. Every means short of actual force have been
used to induce the Chiefs departure for the East Coast
of Sumatra or Malacca.
3. It is satisfactory to report that the Perak
Country being now entirely relieved from Siamese
interference, the commercial intercourse is encreasing,
and we continue to receive from the Chief of that
Country assurance of his desire to cooperate in the
suppression of piracy along the coast. Some of his
Chiefs lately recaptured a small junk which had been
taken by pirates in the close vicinity of this Island
on the passage from Quedah, and every assistance was
rendered to the sufferers.
******
We have the honor to be &c.
(Signed) R. FULLERTON
„ JOHN ANDERSON
Fort Cornwallis
The 24 November 1828.


To
GEORGE SWINTON, Esq re.
Chief Secretary to Government
FORT WILLIAM
Sir,
I have the honor to transmit replies to certain
questions put to me by the Right Honorable the
Governor General during his visit to this Coast, they
have been made in communication with Major Burney
to whom I have again to express myself much in-
debted for the benefit of his information.
I have &c.
(Signed) A. D. MAINGY
Commissioner in the
Tenasserim Provinces.
TAYOY
the Bth A pril 1829.


Ist, Is the nature of the
country which forms the boun-
dary between our territory and
that of the Siamese, and others
west of the Kingdom of Ava, of
that difficult and unaccessible
nature, as to render unlikely the
incursion of considerable bodies
of plunderers ? Have you any ap-
prehension of the tranquillity of
the country being disturbed by
such externa] and irregular
attacks, to which the Chiefs of
the Country from whence they
may come are not parties ?
Bth If it were determined to
relinquish the Provinces on the
Tenasserim Coast, they might be
ceded in part or in whole to the
Siamese for an equivalent either
in money or territory. If again
Masters of the Provinces, what
might probably be their conduct
to the inhabitants now under our
protection ?
Ist. Those who have travelled
between the Tenasserim Pro-
vinces and the Siamese Territory
to the Westward and Southward
of Moulmain describe the Country
to be of the most difficult and
inaccessible nature. Nothing is
known of the frontier to the
Northwest of Moulmain. Incurs-
ions on the side of Siam are most
unlikely. There is not the
smallest chance of the Siamese
disturbing the tranquillity of
these Provinces and indeed, if
ever that nation become trouble*
some, one or two cruizers sent
to the mouth of the Menam,
would bring the Court of Siam
to its senses, in the same manner
as the Government of Fort St,
George brought it in the infancy
of our power in India. On the
side of Ava, however, to the
Eastward and W of
Moulmain, there is every chanc®
of the continued incursions of
plunderers and freebooters.
Bth. The conduct of the
Siamese to the inhabitants of
these Provinces during the late
War, and their conduct in Quedah
and more lately when they
occupied Southern Laos, render
it most probable, that the first
thing that nation would do, in
the event of Tavoy and Mergui
being ceded to them, would be.


9. Supposing Amherst and
Maulmain which do not pay
their expences to be ceded to
Ava, and Tavoy and Mergui
which do, to be retained, could a
a boundary be found which would
present less danger of interfer-
ence and collision than the Saluen
River ?
Kb Altho J it evidently the
policy of the Siamese, being the
weaker power, to have a strong
to seize and drive into Siam ail
the Burmese inhabitants they
might find there. Perhaps the
same measure would not be
adopted with respect to the
population of Amherst and Moul-
main because it consists chiefly
of Talains, towards whom the
Siamese do not bear the same
inveterate feelings as they do to-
wards the Burmese, and because
the force that would be sent from
Bangkok to occupy the ceded
territory would be composed of
Maha Yothas Talains, many of
whom would find relatives and
old friends among the population
of Moulmain. In either case
however of cession either to Ava
or to Siam, very few of the
habitants of any portion of these
Provinces would be disinclined l
to follow the British force within
whatever spot it might desire to
confine itself.
9th, 10th & 11th. The advan-
tages of ceding Amherst and
Moulmain to the Siamese would
be Ist that the population within
that tract would not be likely to
suffer so much as the inhabitants-
of Tavoy and Mergui would do
under the same circumstances i
and 2dly that we should free
ourselves from the difficulties of
protecting so long and trouble-
some a frontier as the River
Saluen now is, extending from


intermediate power, closing every
avenue to the approach of the
Burmese, the object might still
be gained by leaving us Amherst
Province, and by their obtaining
Tavoy and Mergui.
Would they be willing to give
upforthis consideration Junkcey-
lon or Queda, and to allow the
return to Amherst of the 28,000
Talains, who have been by them
transported to Siam ? Probably
with this addition, the revenues
of Amherst might be greatly aug-
mented.
11. Is it not likely that Siam
would agree to any terms we
might propose if made aware
that the alternative would be the
restoration of those Provinces to
the Burmese P
Lafc. 16° at Amherst to the frou*
tiers of China. No range of
mountains exists to the South-
ward of the Saluen which could
be selected as a boundary, but
most of the streams which fall
into the sea in this direction take
their rise among the frontier*
hills of Siam* We might esta-
blish one of these streams, the
Kyouk-padown, which falls into
the sea near Kalagyon, as the
line of demarcation between the
Siamese and our territory, and
between this line and the Ye
River, we might leave the country
desolate and waste, removing the
very few inhabitants now resid-
ing in this interval to the South-
ward of Ye, and keeping up thus
a space of jungle and waste
between ourselves and the Siam-
ese. The disadvantage of ceding
Amherst and Moulmain to the
Siamese would be, that we should
bring the Siamese in close con-
tact with the Burmese, and lead
to the renewal of all that cruel
system of warfare and desolation
which formerly prevailed between
these two nations. The number
of Taliens in the Kingdom of
Siam, has been variously estimat-
ed, from 40,000 to 20,000 Souls.
A great portion of these Taliens
voluntarily emigrated into Siam,
from the oppressions of the
Burmese. They have now mar-
ried and intermarried in Siam


and they form so important and useful a portion of
the population of the country, that Major Burney is
of opinion, it would require almost as many miracles
to persuade the Court of Siam to consent to their
coming and joining us, as the King of Egypt required
before he could be prevailed upon to permit the
departure of the Israelites from his Country. There
is no doubt however, that many of these Taliens
would be most happy to leave Siam, and place
themselves under our Government, could they be
accompanied by their families.
There is some difference of opinion in the Court of
Siam as to the policy of obtaining any territory on the
Coast of Tenasserirn, and Major Bumey doubts whether
that Court would sacrifice any thing or be willing to
give us any other territory, in exchange for any portion
of the Tenasserirn Provinces. He doubts also, whether
the threat of restoring the territory to the Burmese
would have much or any effect. Yet, as the King of
Queda refuses to quit Penang, as his continued resi-
dence there will prevent any good understanding
between ourselves and the Siamese in that quar-
ter, as some persons are of opinion that his restoration
to his kingdom will increase the fame and character of
the British Government, and as some explanation is
due to the Siamese for the King of Quedah not remov-
ing' from Penang—upon these grounds, Major Burney
would recommend some negotiation to be opened with
the Court of Siam overland from Amherst, quietly and
without any expense, Mergui was longer than any
other place on this Coast a portion of the Siamese
Empire, to which it is still conveniently joined.
Under all circumstances perhaps that Province could
be best ceded to the Siamese, engaging only that the
inhabitants should be at liberty to remove higher up
into our territory, where there is an abundance of
room for them. The Palan river, which flows from
the Siamese hills into the Sea in Latitude about 12°
59 r could be established as the boundary between the


Siamese and our Province of Tavoy. By having a
post at Mergui the Siamese could maintain good and
correct knowledge of all our proceedings on this Coast,
respecting which their suspicions and fears are now
so often excited; and Major Burney is of opinion,
that the occupation of Mergui by the Siamese might
render that post an outlet for some portion of the
commerce of Bangkok into the Bay of Bengal, and
lead to the resort into our tei’ritory of some part
of the large Chinese population of Siam. The cession
of Mergui would only deprive us of the Sapan forests
up the Tenasserim River.
(Signed) A. D. MAINGY
Commissioner in the
Tenasserim Provinces.


To
the honorable court of directors
FOR THE AFFAIRS OF THE UNITED COM-
PANY OF MERCHANTS OF ENGLAND TRA-
DING TO THE EAST INDIES,
LONDON.
Honorable' Sirs,
******
4. It is observed by the Acting Resident Coun-
cillor in his letter under date the 25th February that
“The Siamese have a very small force at Quedah and
this, it is supposed, offers a great temptation to attack
by some of the most desperate refugees, assisted by
pirates from other quarters. A question naturally
arises whether the British Government is to be ex-
pected to guarantee the present possession of Quedah
in the tranquil possession of the country and guard
the coasts as formerly engaged with the Malayan
Government and whether the Siamese should not be
bound to keep up a sufficient force for their own
protection as well as to cooperate against the numerous
pirates infesting this neighbourhood, as the Malayan
Chief did in former years. This Government has
been called upon by the Siamese Authorities at Quedah
to prevent any infringement of the treaty and to
keep the numerous Malayan refugees in order, and
this has been done as far as possible; but the best
precautions will sometimes not avail and we are
burthened by an encreased expence in maintaining
armed vessels, additional police &ca. to keep such a
disorderly mass of refugees in check.” The measures
taken by the Acting Resident Councillor were approved
of on tlie return of our President from Malacca.
5. The Ex-Rajah of Quedah has not, we regret to
observe, shown any inclination to remove to Malacca,
and while he remains here, there is little doubt that
he will endeavour by the aid of his numerous relations


and adherents to harass the present possessors of
his late kingdom. His son, brother-in-law, and
nephew are the leaders of the parties which have made
some feeble and unsuccessful attempts upon the
Siamese posts at Purlis and Quedah. It is but just
however, to the unfortunate Chief to observe, that he
denies in very positive terms, all participation in the
proceedings of the Chiefs alluded to and he has
expressed his entire inability to control them. Indeed,
there are grounds for believing that these Chiefs
having no visible means of subsistence, are in some
degree driven to desperation, intent only on plunder
and utterly regardless of the ultimate result as con-
cerns the Ex-Rajah.
******
We have the honor to be &c.
(Signed) R. FULLERTON
„ R. IBBETSON
Fort Cornwallis
The 21st April 1829,


27 July 1829.
, TO THE HONORABLE THE COURT OF
DIRECTORS FOR THE AFFAIRS OF THE
UNITED COMPANY OF MERCHANTS OF ENG-
LAND TRADING TO THE EAST INDIES,
LONDON.
»****&
HONBLE. SIRS,
Para. 4. Considerable inconvenience has been
experienced from the continued residence of this Chief
at this Island, in consequence of the impossibility of
preventing his relations and dependants carrying on
acts of piracy in the neighbourhood and a sort of
depredatory war with the Siamese at Quedah. On
this head several communications will be found on the
consultations now transmitted upon which we do not
deem it necessary to enlarge further at present. We
would however beg attention to the opinion of the
Advocate General of Bengal on several points of im-
portance as connected with the Ex-Rajah of Quedah.
5. It will be noticed that we have had occasion
to propose to the Rajah of Ligore that Commissioners
may be deputed by him in order to mark out with preci-
sion the boundary line between the Honble. Company’s
possessions called Province Wellesley and the Siamese
Territory, as provided by the treaty made by Captain
Burney (Article 3d.).
We have the honor to be &c.
(Signed) R. FULLERTON
„ R. IBBETSON
Fort Cornwallis
The 27 July 1829.


TO THE HONBLE. THE COURT OF DIREC-
TORS FOR THE AFFAIRS OF THE UNITED
COMPANY OF MERCHANTS OF ENGLAND
TRADING TO THE EAST INDIES,
LONDON.
Honorable Sirs,
* * * * * *
Para. 59. Your Honble. Court will perceive on a
reference to the Resident Councillor’s diary that the
Ex-Rajah in defiance of every remonstrance, took up
his residence in Province Wellesley. At the time of
his first going there, little fear was entertained of
his attempting to interfere with the Siamese subjects
in Quedah or our own in Province Wellesley»
Subsequently however letters from him to -his former
dependants were intercepted and forwarded to us by
the Siamese Authorities. At first we considered that
giving warning to the Ex Rajah to desist from such
acts would have been sufficient, and we clearly pointed
out to him the impropriety of such conduct, and
desired that he would immediately return to his
residence at Prince of Wales Island, as he was awaken-
ing the suspicions of the Siamese, who from his
residing so close to the Quedah territories had become
alarmed. The Ex-Rajah still however continued
pertinaciously obstinate, and as reports were in circula-
tion that armed parties of Siamese had appeared on
our frontier for the purpose of watching his movements
which were afterwards found to be true as reported
by the Superintendent of Province Wellesley, we
deemed it advisable to order a party of troops over to
prevent his escape, and to give confidence to our
inhabitants there who had become alarmed on the
appearance of the Siamese parties.
60. Your Honble. Court will perceive that the
Ex-Rajah in order to deceive the people of Quedah has
mentioned that he is supported by this Government,


which tended more to alarm the Siamese, and we have
to beg your Honble. Court’s notice to a proclamation
which was issued explanatory of the situation the
Ex-Rajah stood with this Government, and warning
persons from believing or giving him any assistance.
We have every reason to believe that the proclamation
will prove quite satisfactory to the Siamese Authorities,
and convince them of the anxious wish of the
British Authorities to act up to the terms of the treaty,
and to prevent as far as possible the escape of the
Ex-Rajah of Quedah.
61. The removal of the Ex-Rajah to Province
Wellesley has been duly reported to the Right Honble.
the Governor General in Council.
******
We have the honor to be &c.
(Signed) R. FULLERTON
„ R. IBBETSON
Fort Cornwallis
the 13 February 1830.


To THE HONORABLE THE COURT OF
DIRECTORS FOR THE AFFAIRS OF THE
UNITED COMPANY OF MERCHANTS OF ENG*
LAND TRADING TO THE EAST INDIES,
LONDON.
Honorable Sirs,
******
Para. 30. In our General Letter of 13th February
we took occasion to draw your Honble. Court’s atten-
tion to the Proceedings of the Ex-Rajah of Quedah,
who by removing from his residence on this Island,
and proceeding to reside on the opposite coast (Pro-
vince Wellesley) against all the remonstrances of the
authorities here, had roused the suspicions of the
Siamese Government as to the wish of this Government
to depart from the terms of the treaty entered into
with them. Finding the Ex-Rajah obstinate in his
own views, we deemed it expedient to refer the subject
to the Supreme Government, and we have now only to
request your Honble. Court’s perusal of the answer
received to that reference.
31. The Supreme Government in consequence
of the distressed situation and circumstances of the
Ex-King has been pleased to overlook his misconduct
in opposing the wishes of this Government, and has
ordered us to offer him the alternative of removing to
Malacca on 10,000 Dollars per Annum, with the pay-
ment of all arrears due him from the date of the
cessation of his allowance, or if he still persists in
remaining at Penang to sanction the payment to His
Highness of a stipend of 6,000 Dollars per Annum.
32. The duty of negotiating with the Ex-King
lias been deputed to Captain Low and Mr. Nairne,
and they have been instructed to press particularly
the acceptance of the first of the offers held out to
him. We are not as yet enabled to report to your


Honble, Court the result of their conferences on these
important points, but we have every reason to believe
that the Ex-King will receive the proposal for his
removing to Malacca with a decided negative. In
this case, and on his removal to Penang, which by the
orders of the Supreme Government is imperative, pro-
per means will be taken for informing him of the
consequences which he may expect to result to himself
and his adherents and followers, from any further
attempt at political interference with the Siamese
authorities.
******
We have the honor to be, &c.
(Signed) R. FULLERTON
„ R. IBBETSON
Fort Cornwallis
the 30th June 1830.


( Copy.)
To
G. SWINTON Esqre.
Chief Secretary to Govt.
FORT WILLIAM.
Sir,
******
Para. 4. I have already reported my having re-
ceived a very friendly communication from the Siamese
Governor of Raheng, who sent a deputation to me by
order cf the King of Siam, inviting our traders to
visit his territory. I intend, should His Lordship in
Council approve of my doing so, to depute an officer
to Raheng, being convinced that many advantages are
likely to result from the interchange of friendly
visits with the neighbouring Chiefs, from whom we
may ultimately succeed in procuring all the Cattle
required for the European Troops at Maulmain.
******
6. Our occupation of the Tenasserim Provinces
has effectually checked the system of Man Catching
that formerly prevailed to so dreadful an extent to the
Southward between the Burmese and Siamese. Many
years however must I fear elapse ere our interference
will be attended with the same humane result in put-
ting down the like horrible system of border Warfare
between the Burmese and Inhabitants of Laos.
I have deemed it my duty to address the Minis-
ters of Siam regarding the captures alluded to by
Doctor Richardson, but more especially with reference
to the six Inhabitants of Maulmain now in Captivity
at Bangkok. I have demanded their immediate
release and have sent some of their relations to
Bangkok to point them out, in order that every sub-
terfuge for detaining them may be removed. I have
also claimed the Burmese whose release had been


ordered by the King of Siam upon Major Burney’s
requisition at Bangkok, and who are now described
by Doctor Richardson as being in captivity at Zemmai ;
and 1 have further made an appeal in favor of the
Caliens who were seized after they had received a pro-
tecting pass from Sir Axxdiibald Campbell, but unfor-
tunately for them prior to their having entered our
Territory.
******
I have &c.
(Signed) A. D. MAING Y
Commissioner in the
Tenasserim Provinces.
Moulmain
The 4th August 1830.


Home Series,
Miscellaneous,
vol. 677.
Reports the release and
return of the Eight Inhabi-
tants of Moulmain detained
at Bangkok.
Forwards translation of
a letter from the Siamese
Ministers regarding the Tali-
ans in captivity at Zemmai
and communicates the arrival
at Moulmain of the thousand
head of cattle from Northern
Laos.
To
George Swinton Esqre.
Chief Secretary to Government
FORT WILLIAM.
Sir,
release and j have sincere pleasure in reporting
jn detained for the information of the Rouble, the
Vice President in Council the Return
msiation of Station from Bangkok of the
he Siamese
ing the Tali- Eight Captives, Inhabitants of Moulmain,
rat zemmai a u uc ied to in my letter to your address
js the arrival
he thousand of the 6th August last,
>m Northern
I beg to enclose a translation of a letter addressed
to me by the Siamese Ministers, who apparently
evince no desire to oppose the release of the Tahans
now in captivity at. Zemmai. It shall be my utmost
endeavour to procure their immediate deliverance
from slavery. I am about to dispatch some of our
principal natives to Zemmai for the purpose of identi-
fying the two hundred and twenty five unfortunate
persons who were seized after having received a
protecting pass from Sir Archibald Campbell.
It will be satisfactory to Government to be
assured that great advantage has already been derived
from Doctor Richardson’s Mission to Zemmai. Within
the last two months we have received from Northern
Laos upwards of one thousand head of cattle and have
information of as many more being on their way to
Moulmain.
I have &c.
(Signed) A. D. MAINGY
Commissioner in the Tenasserim Provinces.
Moulmain
The 3rd February 1831.


I lllli SIAMESE MINISTERS (Thee-Au-Yout-
ta-ra, Dwa-ra-wad-du Zau-Byen-ya, Agga-Maha-Thai-
na-de-pudde Woongies*) intimate to Anthony De La
Combe Maingy, the Governor of Moulmain, Tavoy,
Mergni and Tenasserim, that the eight men who went
from Moulmain for the purposes of trade, and who
were apprehended by the Lau Bo Mhoo of Zemmai
have been released and sent as far as Tha-ba or
Karian Creek. They are Gna Shway Poo, Gna Pa-
fhee, Gna Shway Moun, Gna-Shway-tsoo, Gna Moung,
Gna Shway 80, Gna-Yan-geyn, and Gna Shway Chan,
who were recognised by Pa-la-goo-wo at Bankok. As
the above persons belong to the English Chief, who
has sent a letter to demand them, an order has been
issued to allow these eight men to return to their
homes. This has been done in support of the friend-
ship existing between the English and Siamese.
Fhe eight Burmese now released namely Gna 80,
Gna Shway 0, Gna Yan Gyen, Gna Pa thee, Gna
Moun, Gna Roo, Gna Shway Moun, and Pan Pan
Moun, were apprehended by the Chiefs of Zemmai
and sent to the Golden City.
According to the above List, some of the names
do not correspond with the names sent from Moulmain,
and on these eight men being questioned, seven of
them state that they are inhabitants of Rangoon City
and belonged to the late Meay-dai-Mein , the other
that he is an inhabitant of Shway Gyene City and
had gone to Moulmain to trade. These eight men
are not Taliens, but Burmese, of which we have every
conviction, and notwithstanding, as Anthony De La
Combe Maingy has sent a letter to demand them
containing expressions of friendship and good will,
they have been allowed to return to their country.
Should they however on their arrival at Moulmain not
remain under the English Chief, but be allowed to go
to the Burmese, it will be as if Antony De La Combe
Maingy aided and countenanced the Burmese. The


Burmese and Siamese are enemies and at war with
each other.
As to the twenty eight men together with one
Gna Pein, a Talien, and two hundred and twenty five
inhabitants of Myne-Raw-Ra-ret, who were taken to
La-Boung and for whom a demand has been repeatedly
made within the last three months, they were ap-
prehended by Byen-Ya-Bhiyie, and Byen-Ya*Phat ,
Chiefs of the frontier towards the Burmese boundary.
At the conclusion of the war between the English and
the Burmese, the Burmese had to cede to the English
Moulrnain, Ye, Mergui, Tavoy and Tenasserim,
Between the English and the Siamese there has always
existed a treaty of friendship and consequently orders
have been sent to Zemmai , La-Gaun, and La-Bouny ,
and to the different Chiefs to apprehend Burmese Sub-
jects only, and not to seize any persons belonging
to the English Chief.
The twenty men under Gna Pein, and the two
hundred and twenty five inhabitants ot Myne-Kau-Ru-
ret apprehended and taken to La-Boung city and said
to belong to the English Chief, were inveigled by
Dan-Ban- Win, the late Chief at Wen Mien, an
inhabitant of Zemmai, who was Chief over the
Karyans of the District of Zemmai. It was during
the war between the English and Burmese that the
above mentioned two hundred and twenty five men,
after being inveigled by Daw-Ban- Win, were settled
at La-Boung. It was during the time of one Moung
Pai (a Bo) that Gna Pein, and his family also
settled at La-Boung. Addresses have been sent by
the Chiefs of La-Goun, La-Boung and Zemmai stating
that the two parties namely the two hundred and
twenty five men, with Gna Pein, and twenty eight
others, are not men belonging to the English Chief.
The Names mentioned in the List sent by the
English Chief do not correspond with the names sent


by the Chiefs of La-Boun, La-Goun, and Zemmai.
The Ministers therefore are not satisfied that the
men claimed by the English Chief actually belong
to him
La-Boun, Zemmai and La-Goun, being distant
from the Golden City, it is difficult to learn all that
takes place in those Cities. Some of our Head Men
are now sent to Moulmain in search of Gna Pein,
an inhabitant of Myne-Rau-Ra-ret, and should he be
met with and that it be proved that the men claimed
by the English Chief are his subjects and that they
are willing to return to him, the} 7 shall be released
and made over to him.
His Majesty the King of Siam has no desire to
detain any persons belonging to the English Chief.
The Man whom Antony De lia •
Combe Maingy appointed and sent to the Golden
City has been detained in consequence of the roads
not being passable dnrirtg the rains, but now that
the rains are over the eight Burmese are delivered
to Pa-la-goo-roo and Byen-Ya-The-De-Thu-han, Byen-
Ya-Thu-ha-Rajah-Tha-Mien-Dthan-Byet, and Byen-Ya-
Thoo-re-ya-chat accompany them on their return to-
Maulraain—-of this we now send information.
Dispatched in the year 1192, on Monday the
I’ifth of the Waning of the Moon Aa-Dau.
The letter from the Siamese Ministers is written
in the Burman Language.
A true Translation
(Signed) A. D. MAINGY
Commissioner in the Tenasserim Provinces.








