

THE SPEAKING DEAD:
A SERMON
PREACHED IN HYNDLAND CHURCH, MARCH 23, 1884,
ON THE OCCASION OF THE DEATH OF THE
REV. JOHN SERVICE, D.D.,
REV. CHARLES STRONG.
LATE MINISTER OF THE SCOTS CHURCH, MELBOURNE.
WITH APPENDIX,
Containing Remarks by Rev. W. L. Macfarlan, Lenzie ; Rev.
Dr. James Brown, Paisley ; Rev. Dr. Cunningham, Crieff;
Bev. W. Muibhead, Wigtown ; and Extbacts fbom
the “Glasgow Herald” Newspaper.
Re-published by Request.
MELBOURNE: M. L. HUTCHINSON,
Glasgow Book Warehouse, 15 Collins Street West.
GLASGOW: HUGH HOPKINS, 85 RENFIELD STREET.
1884.
ONE SHILLING.




SERMON




THE SPEAKING DEAD:
A SERMON
PREACHED IN HYNDLAND CHURCH, MARCH 23, 1884,
ON THE OCCASION OF THE DEATH OF THE
REY. JOHN SERVICE, D.D.,
REV. CHARLES STRONG,
LATE MINISTER OF THE SCOTS CHURCH, MELBOURNE.
WITH APPENDIX,
Containing Remarks by Rev. W. L. Macfarlan, Lenzie ; Rev.
Dr. James Brown, Paisley ; Rev. Dr. Cunningham, Crieff ;
Rev. W. Muirhead, Wigtown ; and Extracts from
the “Glasgow Herald” Newspaper.
Re-published by Request.
MELBOURNE: M. L. HUTCHINSON,
Glasgow Book Warehouse, 15 Collins Street West.
GLASGOW: HUGH HOPKINS, 85 EENFIELD STREET.
1884.




THE SPEAKING DEAD
« By faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice
han Cain, . . . and by it, he being dead, yet speaketh.”—
xi. 4.
The writer of this epistle endeavours to lead men from
Moses to Christ by establishing a connection between
the old and the new, and showing how Christianity is
a development (to use a modern word) of the ancient
religion of Israel. He would have men pass thus,
easily and naturally, without any violent break, from
the Word of Moses to the Word of Christ; from the
sacrifices of dumb animals, to the sacrifice of Christ’s
holy will; from the High Priest ministering within the
vail, to Christ the High Priest appearing now in the
presence of God. And so also he endeavours to
establish a vital connection between the character of
God’s true people in former times, and that of true
Christians under the new covenant. After all, he
seems to say, men in olden times were justified in much
the same way as men in the present. The form under
which they received the truth was different. They were
still moving about among shadows and imperfect
images of the truth, but those ancient heroes, to whom
you look back with such reverence as the friends and
favourites of Heaven, were what they were in virtue of
their faith. And Christianity is only the fuller


development of this same principle of faith. Abel,
Enoch, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and all the great
cloud of witnesses that compass the Christian about,
were men of faith in, fidelity to, a true and righteous
God. Hence it is that they can be held up as patterns
for the encouragement of the Christian. They were his
fore-runners pointing to a more perfect day, to promises
whose fulfilment was for them afar off. By faith they
lived and sacrificed, suffered and died. And by faith
the Christian still lives and is accepted of God. The
Old Testament and the Hew are, therefore, essentially
one. It is only a shifting form that distinguishes
them. The difference between them is that between the
infancy and the full-grown manhood of the same great
principles. The Christian might be tempted to ask,
u What have I to do with Old Testament worthies ?
Old things have passed away. Hot only earth but heaven
also has been shaken, and only those things which can-
not be shaken remain.” To this our author replies,
“ These old worthies once ran the same race as that
which you run now. They are examples of the same
spiritual life. They were witnesses, a cloud of wit-
nesses, to the principle of faith in a righteous God.
See that you come not short of them with your fuller
light. Run your race as they ran theirs. Walk by
faith as they also walked in the early morning of the
world.” This writer, you see, tried to heal the breach
between Christianity and Judaism, between the rigid
Jewish Christian who reduced Christ to the level of a
Jewish Rabbi, or a Messiah after the flesh, and the
free, perhaps sometimes scornful and contemptuous
Christianity of Gentile Christendom, which wished to
break altogether with Judaism, and to fling the past


aside as useless. He was something of a Christian
philosopher. He had what would now be called a
philosophy of history. That is to say, he tried to link
all history together, so as to make out of it one con-
nected chain reaching from the dawn of time to his own
age. He tried to show in his own Jewish way, that
amid all changes, even the great change from the law
of Moses to the spirit and truth of Christ, there had been
always one religious principle by which God’s people-
had been animated whether called Jews or Christians.
And that principle he designates faith—faith in a God
of righteousness and faithfulness. Behind outward
forms this lay concealed as the germ and root of all. It
is this thought which gives meaning to the text.
u What have we to do,” it might be asked, “ with Abel ?
Abel did not know Christ nor the Christian’s God. We
in these latter days, cannot conceive almost of the con-
dition of mind which led a man to offer up an animal
in sacrifice. We cannot imagine ourselves doing as
Abel is said to have done.” The reply is, “ You and
he are connected by a religious principle. He moved
in the twilight, you in the mid-day, but both of you
have come near to God in the same way—through faith
and sacrifice. Abel is, therefore, an example for you.
Long dead, he yet speaks to you, across the ages, of
that faith by which he offered to God a more acceptable
sacrifice than Cain.”
Here is a very grand and subtle thought struck out
by this writer in his own somewhat Rabbinical style of
quoting Scripture and interpreting the Old Testament.
In all ages that by which men have come to God has
been not the outward forms of their worship, often
childish enough ; not the outward forms even of their


■deeds ; but the inward spirit of faith, which clings even
amid temptation and trial to truth and righteousness,
and to God as the true and righteous One. Wherever
this pinciple can be discovered, even in an elementary
form, there is the germ of the Christian life and
character, there you may behold, even in such an one
as Abel, a Christian before Christ. It has been and is
this which has linked and still links any soul to God.
“By faith Abel offered unto God a more acceptable
sacrifice than Cain, and, by his faith, he being dead, yet
speaketh.”
Passing, however, from this preliminary thought of
■the unity of the religious life in different ages, let me
•direct your attention more specially to two simpler and
more practical truths suggested by the text.
1. In the first place, Reflect on the Immortality
■of Human Influence. We are constantly being
reminded that nothing dies. What seems to perish
only passes into another form. Heat is transformed
Into motion, and motion into heat. The sands which
the rivers sweep away go but to form fresh sandbanks in
the ocean depths. That which the raging fire seems to
devour, has passed into the atmosphere, or lodged in
minute particles on the earth. The grass and flowers
sink back before the breath of approaching winter
Into the bosom of their mother earth, but the same
forces are at work for ever. Nature will not let
the rotting leaves and blades be lost. After winter’s
necessary sleep she will deck the plains again with
vernal youth and beauty. Since this old world
began to revolve we have no reason to suppose
that a single particle of matter has been anni-
hilated. It is a thought to make one dizzy. Nothing


in the material universe is lost, and the present form of
things has sprung out of the forms which went before.
And when this old earth has rolled round for the last
time and vanishes, it may be as scroll, swallowed up
perhaps in some central fire, and astronomers, if astro-
nomers there be, in some far off sphere record the
disappearance of a star, the old forces that have held all
together so long shall not be dead. They shall only
have passed into new forms—new suns, new stars.
And when we leave the region of material things and
enter that of ideas we find that a somewhat similar law
holds good. Ideas do not die. They live on in
human history. They seem, perhaps, to pass away
and vanish like fuel in a consuming fire. But like the
fuel they have only passed into another form—they
have gone to make up the atmosphere of thought,
and will yet descend, like the rivers drawn up into the
clouds, in refreshing and revivifying showers. Take,
for instance, the thoughts which Greece and Rome
gave to mankind. Greece has for centuries been
almost out of the list of nations, and all her great
poets and philosophers and statesmen have long since
crumbled into dust like her magnificent temples and
porticoes. Rome, once mistress of the world, is only
now, after centuries, lifting up her head again, lill
within the last few years, she has been rather a city of
the dead than an abode of the living. Men have
sought in her relics of dead gods and heroes, not the
temples of a living God and a living humanity. And
yet, my friends, being dead, these ancient cities speak.
The language, the literature, the whole mental atmo-
sphere of modern Europe, and even of the world, are
full of Greek and Roman thought; and but for the


latter the former could never have been what they are.
What was that great movement known as the Revival
of Letters, but in part at least the resurrection of
Greece and Rome in the poetry, the philosophy, the
literature and culture of Europe ! The old world rose
again ; the old Roman and Greek thought became in-
carnate again in English, and German, French, and
Italian scholars. Read our own Spenser, or Milton,
or Shakspeare, and see how the buried world, which
had been for ages as the dead men’s bones in the
prophet’s vision, revived once more clothed in living
flesh and blood.
Or take another illustration borrowed from the
sphere of more specially religious ideas. The religion
of Israel is in one sense dead, in another sense it is
still alive. We have long left behind us the religion
of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob. Jerusalem is no
more. The law and the prophets—where are they ?
Sacrifices and priests, the gorgeous temple worship
—where is that old religious world, once as real as
ours, with its Christian ministers and churches? Pales-
tine, the land of promise, the joy of the ancient
Hebrew, the favoured of Jehovah, the centre of the
whole earth to which, in the prophetic vision of the
Hebrew seers, all nations were beheld flowing up—
what is it but a waste which only the adventurous
and curious traveller from the West explores ? And
yet, brethren, that, in so many respects, grand old
religion, is not dead. It is risen again. The Spirit of
Jesus breathed upon it. It was caught up into Christ,
and, lo ! the former things passed away, and all
things became new ! The box was broken, but the
precious ointment filled the house with its fragrance.


The religion of Israel, the true ideas which were-
wrapped up in Hebrew forms, have passed into the
religious thoughts of us Western peoples, and have-
mingled with our laws, our literature, our philosophy,
and theology. Though dead, old Israel still speaks to us
and through us. He is part of the religious atmosphere
which we breathe to-day within the walls of this Chris-
tian church. Our hymns, and prayers, and sermons are
moulded and flavoured by the old faith which glowed in
the inspired hearts of priests and prophets three thou-
sand years ago. Thus, all history is really the history
of ideas, which are constantly like butterflies breaking
their chrysalis forms, and flying away with a fresher
and more beautiful life. Ideas do not die. They seem
to have disappeared. The old language and phrases in
which they were couched pass away. The myth, the
legend, the parabolic or symbolic form, the historical
envelope through which God and Truth are revealed,,
are left behind ; but the true thought lives on, expands?
mingles with other thoughts, is fertilized by other
thoughts, and animates new frames.
And what is true of nations and of history in general
is true also of individual men. Their ideas, so far as
they are true, do not die. The individual is called to
leave this earthly scene ; but his thought lives on, and
by it, he being dead, yet speaketh. What a role great
personalities have played in history! Every great
movement concentrates itself more or less in a person.
Hence we have such great names studded over our
books of ancient history as Moses, Solomon, Buddha,
Confucius, Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle. And the time
would fail us even to name the chief men of more
modern times whose strong personality has given


force and expression to great ideas. The his-
tory of the world is in a true sense
the history of great men. The ideas of which we have
been speaking are nothing until they find a lodgment
in the living heart and mind, which we call a person.
The greatness of individuals consists, it is true, in their
being fit instruments to reveal ideas—in their power of
receiving and of communicating the true, the beautiful,
the good. Hence the greatest men have always felt that
truth was not theirs—that of their own selves they could
do nothing, and that it was God who wrought in and
through them. But as persons without ideas, so ideas
without persons, are dead, being alone. It is as true to
say that history is the history of persons, as to say that
it is the history of ideas. The idea slumbers until
some heart and will lays hold of it and sends it forth to
feed mankind. Gravitation without Newton would be
nothing. The Beformation thought without Luther
were still sleeping in the study of philosophers or un-
practical mystics. What were Christianity without the
living, loving heart of Jesus to send its life-blood puls-
ing through the world? It is often said, Jesus of
Nazareth taught little that was absolutely new. In the
writings of the Rabbis, in the sayings of Greek sages,
in the ancient books of India you will find parallel
sayings to His. It may be so. To a certain extent it
is so. And it is well that it should be so, for it shows
us that our religion has a root not in Jewish thought
only, but in the human heart and mind. It shows that
it is in harmony with the best and noblest thoughts
and aspirations of the past. But without Jesus Christ,
without that great personality, would Christianity ever
have been ? All your collection of Rabbinical, Greek,


or Indian teachings does not give you the “ Religion of
Jesus ” any more than a bundle of bones and sinews
and brain tissue, and all the organs of the human body
gives you a living, thinking, loving man. And had
there not arisen a Paul of Tarsus to embody the living
gospel of Christ still further—to set it free from the-
Judaism with which perhaps even a Peter or a James
would have choked it, and to give it forth in its fulness
and freeness to the Gentile world, what would Christian-
ity have been ? It would have been a beautiful idea
strangled at its birth. And so still, brethren, the time
for personalities, great and small, has not gone past.
It is true we do not live in the twilight when every
bright star seemed a sun. Ideas have spread and
taken possession of multitudes. The time has come
when all, even the humblest, may be a prophet, the-
interpreter, the revelation of Divine ideas. It may be,,
therefore, more difficult than in earlier ages to shine.
But we still need the great personality, and the small
one also. Is it not the case, for instance, that we of
the present day often look for the appearance of great
God-sent men, who shall interpret to us all the longings
and thoughts of the age, and breathe into the modern
world the breath of a new inspiration ? We ask for
great personalities in whom new light and truth and the
old Christian love shall be so united that the new may
live in the old and the old rise again in the new.
And we demand the small personality too. The light
is wider. It needs more lenses to concentrate it more
lamps in which to set it. Every man is beginning to
reflect the light more and more in his own way.
What does Democracy mean? It means, if it
means anything at all, that ideas once the property


of the few, have filtered down into the minds
of the many, and that everyone is waking up to
feel his right, his responsibility, in relation to these
ideas. Every man and every woman is demanding
to be regarded more and more as a personality.
And, therefore, the power of personality, so far
from diminishing, is increasing. Just as nature
tends always to increase the number and variety of
forms through which she expresses herself—from a
single seed bringing forth a thousand leaves, from one
germ a million insects, all instinct with life, dancing
in the sunbeam or floating in the diamond drop of dew
—so the idea tends to spread itself out in endless per-
sonalities, in teeming millions, through whose lips it
speaks, through whose eyes it looks, in whose hearts it
beats. Personal influence is still as much a power as
ever. “No man liveth to himself.” We may fancy
that in the obscure life there is no influence. Hid
away from the world, cultivating in secret its little
corner of a vineyard, it may be inclined to ask : Of
what use am I ? Were I to-morrow to drop out of
existence, what would it matter ? You are a fellow-
worker with God, it may be replied. You may be the
bearer, the interpreter of ideas which never die. In
your little personality there lies a secret power, a power
with which, with reverence we say it, God could not
dispense, a power to make ideas live, to send them forth
to others. You are the pebble dropped into the lake,
without which the waters had not been stirred—without
which, though it may have disappeared in the abyss
and all above the spot be calm, the ripples would never
have gone rippling on to the encircling banks. Be
you a common labourer, or a housewife engaged in the


little affairs of household management you may be the
centre of influences which, were you omniscient, you
might detect running through many other lives, as the
chemist can detect the presence of a subtle element
where the common eye is blind. According to the
force of your personality, you put in motion thoughts
which die not. You think your words, and acts, and
character have been lost. But it is not so. Like the
hairs of your head, they are numbered. Like the gases
from the grass which is cast into the oven, they have
passed into the atmosphere which others breathe, and
taken their place in the chain of human history. They
have gone to form a link in your own personal life.
They have gone to live in your sons and daughters, in
the circle of your friends, in the tone of your country.
Thus, brethren, may each and all be said to be the
bearers of immortal influences, because we are the
bearers and interpreters of ideas which do not die.
This is at once an inspiring, comforting, and sober-
ing thought. It is inspiring , for it assures us
that our labour is not in vain ; that the good men
do lives after them. It is inspiring, for it reminds
us that, however humble and obscure we may be, we
are bearers of the same great thoughts and ideas
which make the greatest man. The undying spirit
of heroes, prophets, poets, philanthropists is in us as
the brilliant lightning storm is in the tiny spark. It
is comforting, for it reminds us that though the little,
temporary, partial form in which ideas find expression
in us be destined to dissolve, the ideas themselves will
grow and expand, and find new forms for themselves
from age to age. It is a sobering thought, for it reminds
us that the evil which we do lives after us also ; that


we wield an instrument of death as well as of life, and
that the streams of light and truth may be rendered
muddy and polluted by us, so that those who come
after will loath to drink them. Being dead all yet shall
speak—speak to and through those who come after
them.
11. Consider now, in the second place, That the best
and holiest Influence which all can leave behind is that
of Faith and Sacrifice. By faith Abel offered unto
God a more acceptable sacrifice than Cain, and by it he
being dead yet speaketh. There are many noble influ-
ences which one may leave behind him wherewith others
may be enriched and elevated. What an influence, for
example, have such men as Socrates, Plato and Aris-
totle, and the pre-Christian poets of Greece and Rome
left behind them ! Our Christian thought and litera-
ture still bear their image and superscription. What a
subtle secret force goes out from a Dante or a Shake-
speare ! What a power of ideas incarnates itself in
a Rubens or a Raphael ! What a high calling of God
to be an original thinker, to whom the inner
the idea, the meaning of the world unfolds its Divine
mystery ! What royal honour of king’s courts to be
compared with that bestowed on those on whose
thoughts generation after generation feeds ; over whose
inspired writings the students of a coming age shall
pore ; round whose works of sublime art thousands shall
gather ; by whose glowing imagination, expressed in
line or colour, the young and old of many lands and
many ages shall be touched and fired ! What a privi-
lege to be a Galileo or a Newton, a Columbus or a
Washington, opening out to men new worlds of scien-
tific thought, new worlds of enterprise and industry,.


new homes of happiness and peace ! These are great
and noble influences to leave behind us. Or, again,,
even though the gifts of intellect and imagination and
practical genius be not so great, and no such soaring
heights be possible ; to leave behind the influence of a
sound common sense, of a healthy, well-developed
nature ; to leave behind the honest work of a trades-
man, not flimsy but honest, the expression of the work-
man’s own honest character; to have instilled into one’s-
family a taste for literature or art, so raising them
above many of the temptations of life; to have left
one’s children beyond the reach of poverty ; to have
given them the blessing of a good education—to have-
left behind even such commonplace influences is worthy
of a man. Well would it be for society if such legacies
were oftener left to it than they are. More to be desiredi
are they than gold, yea, than much fine gold.
But while the legacy of such influences as those of
which we have spoken is a noble one, there is yet
another, apart from which even the highest of these in-
fluences seems defective and cold—the influence of a
Divine inspiration such as glowed in the bosom of Jesus.
Was not his calling the highest—to touch the great
human heart with never dying thoughts of a Heavenly
Father ; to wake in human souls the hunger and thirst
after a better righteousness than that of Scribes and
Pharisees ; to be the uplifter of the fallen, the healer
and Saviour of men, the inspirer of an ideal of goodness,
purity, and love which shall never die so long as man is
man ; which lives on in the art, the poetry, the philo-
sophy, the literature, the social life of the best and fore-
most races; which has coloured our thoughts and
moulded our character, and hung before us as a guiding-
B


star through earth’s dark and cloudy night ! Here is
nn influence which, while it imparts a Divine glow and
beauty to the highest art, poetry, philosophy, and litera-
ture, can yet be wielded by the humblest man or woman ;
a sun in the spiritual firmament shedding warmth and
light on towering peaks and the modest nestling flower
—the warmth and light of genuine human feeling,
human aspiration, human ideals of love and duty ; of a
Divine Humanity such as Christ created.
It may be said, Christ’s high calling is not ours ;we
■cannot be Jesus Christ. To which ws answer, Why
not ? Why cannot each man in his measure be Christ ?
Is not the old idea of the Christian life this, “ I live,
jet not I, but Christ liveth in me ?” Is not this the
idea which is constantly presented to us in the Lord’s
Supper ? Is not this the idea of a Christian Church,
that it is an incarnation of the Lord the Spirit—the
Body of Christ the Hew Man, the Son, the Brother.
The same undying influence which Jesus left upon the
world should be perpetuated in the Christian nation,
the Christian church, the Christian individual. Of
Christians, as of their Master, it is said that they are
the light of the world. The same spirit of faith in
righteousness and love as Divine, the same surrender of
self to a better and holier Will than one’s own little
individual desires; sometimes the same painful sacrifice
which we find in Jesus, are still demanded of Christ’s
follower. The same light which shone in the eye of
Jesus when He prayed, when He took up little children
in His arms, when He spoke forgiveness to the penitent
woman, when He spoke the parable of the good
Samaritan, when He looked on self-righteousness and
hypocrisy, shines from the eye of the Christian church


or Christian disciple worthy of the name. And when-
ever such marks of Christianity are found, there is the
undying influence of Christ; there is the voice of Christ
still sounding across the ages ; there is Christ risen
again, and speaking to the hearts and consciences of
men ; there is Christ taking to Himself His great power
and reigning.
A true, loving, Christian heart, brethren, has an in-
fluence which never dies. Even though no great work
be done, and but few words spoken, it is wonderful how
its influence sinks, like the rain and dew, into the soil,
and fertilizes all around. One good, true life lived in
the spirit of Jesus—in the spirit that is of faith in
righteousness—of sacrifice for what is Christlike, of
unselfish desire for the fulfilment of God’s will and
other’s good—has a wonderful power, a power of which,
perhaps, he who influences, and they who are influenced,
are almost unconscious—a power to create the atmos-
phere in which men breathe, to elevate society, to heal
the soul. Long after the good parent has passed away,
long after the calm and patient sufferer has gone to
rest, long after the lips of kindness and charity that
brought hope to the fallen and spoke forgiveness to the
penitent, are sealed in death, their influence shall
endure. They being dead shall yet speak. Ideas never
die, and the grandest and noblest ideas are those of
faith and sacrifice, by which Abel is said to speak,
though dead thousands of years ago.
What is your influence, brethren ? You are passing
away quickly. God will soon call you to give up your
stewardship here. What will you leave behind you to
your children, to your friends, to your church and
country ? What shall we inscribe by anticipation


upon your tomb ? Shall it be —“ Born such or such a
date, ate, drank, made money, did no one much good,
died such or such a date, is not much missed, leaves
nothing to anyone but some coin which he could not
take with him” ? Or shall it be—“ Lived a noble life,
made society sweeter and purer wherever he went, did
what he could to bless the world, was the friend of the
friendless, was a faithful parent, an unselfish citizen, a
lover of God and man, and leaves behind him the bless-
ing of all who knew him” ? Ah ! whatever else you
leave, strive to leave this, the undying influence of a
Christ-like life. Leave that, and however poor, you leave
the world infinitely richer than it was. It is the best
legacy you can leave to your children and to the world—
better far than the gold and silver which often proves a
curse to him who gives and him who takes. Let it be
with you as with Abel, and a greater than Abel. Let
your faith and sacrifice still live on in the world long
after you are gathered to your fathers.
We think much of what is before us, of the life to
come in which we hope—“ more life and fuller,” —with-
out which earth seems darkness and chaos. Let us
learn to leave that meanwhile in the hands of the
Heavenly Father, and think more seriously and earnestly
than we do of what we shall leave behind us, of what
being dead we shall speak to those who are to come
after us.
“ Then sow for the hours are fleeting,
And the seed must fall to-day :
And care not what hands shall reap it,
Or if you shall have passed away
Before the waving corn-fields
Shall gladden the sunny day.”


“ HE BEING DEAD YET SPEAKETH.”
Your thoughts, my brethren, I know are lingering
mournfully and affectionately around the memory of
a dear friend and pastor whom you cannot fail to think
of as one who has left behind him an immortal in-
fluence of truth and love. He was the bearer and
interpreter of immortal ideas —the bearer and inter-
preter alike in his teaching and in his personal
character of that ideal of truthfulness and sincerity,
goodness and affection, faith and charity, which we
have said can never die so long as man is man.
Your late pastor’s mind was not perhaps, of the
distinctively philosophical type. His thoughts ran
more in a concrete and practical groove. He was not
a learned critic of the schools, nor was he a man of
science in the strict sense of the term. But he was
possessed of an intense mental activity, a wide in-
tellectual sympathy, and a rare culture, and he had a
nature touched to finest issues with a breath of origina-
lity and genius. His mind was the meeting place of
many streams of thought and interest which, through
the channel of his wide sympathies, flowed in con-
tinually upon him from the study of books, from his
own daily experience, and from intercourse with living,
thinking men and women. To all the great questions
of the day, scientific and social, he was thoroughly alive,
especially in their relation to religious thought # and
practice. The traditions of the past had no dominion
over him. He was a man of the present and
of the future. His mind seemed to be ever at work.
Strange analogies, unexpected, sometimes startling,
contrasts were constantly suggesting themselves to his
imagination. Even the quaint and often grotesque


humour which sparkled in his eye, and rippled over
his bright face, and played continually round his con-
versation, revealed a brain never at rest, ever searching
into the hidden meanings of life. He was an inspirer
and quickener of thought, because thus himself a
living mind, a fearless lover of the truth. No one
could come under his influence, whether in the pulpit
or in the pleasant hours of social intercourse—which
those who were privileged to enjoy his intimate friend-
ship will not soon forgot—without receiving an intel-
lectual fillip. No one can read his sermons without
having his mind widened and his intellectual sympa-
thies broadened. Often miserable and depressed by
reason of bodily weakness and pain, hampered by
poverty, sorely tried by domestic sorrow which filled
his sensitive soul with agony ; often perplexed and
troubled by the baffling problems of human life, by the
sin and suffering which he was called on as a friend
and minister to witness, and by those painful ques-
tionings which will sometimes cast their shadow over
even heroic minds in this age of inevitable change, and
in this life where all see as in a mirror darkly and know
but in part—he yet did not turn back from the pur-
suit of truth. His face was to the rising sun.
Often suspected and misunderstood, denounced and
dreaded, in danger at times of “the judgment,” he
remained true to the last to his intellectual convictions,
deeming them a sacred trust, and pursued his way in
search of fuller light, fearlessly casting aside what he
believed to be antiquated and to be no longer a help
but a hindrance to morality and faith. But not only
was our dear friend distinguished by mental vigour
and originality ; he was distinguished also, pre-


eminently, by the life and activity of his moral and
spiritual nature. This revealed itself alike in public
and in private. Whatever you might think of some
of his speculative opinions and theological conclusions,
you could not know him without feeling that here was
an intensely genuine man. This was the great
charm of his life, and character, and preaching. It
is often hard for a minister to be a man. Placed on a
religious pedestal, expected to have unlimited powers
of prayer always on shortest notice at command, forced
to speak continually on religion, hemmed in by pro-
fessional tradition and etiquette, and hampered by set
phrases and the conventional language of the pulpit,
accustomed to speak without being contradicted, his
very dress different from that of other people, invested
from his youth with official authority and importance —
it is no easy thing for him to be himself, to be perfectly
natural, perfectly genuine. The temptation is great to-
be artificial, affected, professional, to sink the man in
the ecclesiastic, the special pleader, the theological par-
tisan, the popular preacher, or the weekly exponent of
use and wont. But your late pastor was, while a
minister, every inch a man. There was about him no
priestly, clerical assumption, though, like his Master
of old, he spoke with authority. He was no profes-
sional advocate of a creed, no salaried official, no intri-
guing Church politician, no perfunctory writer of ser-
mons, but a genuine hearted man, who spoke out of
his own heart to you in private, spoke every Sunday in
the pulpit with conviction, and with a fixed purpose of
impressing some truth upon the minds and hearts of
his hearers. Cant of all kinds, miming ritualism and
affected Anglicanism, trimming liberalism and schem-


ang conservatism found in him their natural foe.
Against them he turned the polished but sharp arrows
of satirical wit and humour. For everything mean
and tortuous he had a supreme contempt. Yet, with
all his moral enthusiasm, which could sometimes pour
itself out in withering words, there was a depth of
kindness and gentleness which are sometimes wanting
from such strong natures. Tenderly affectionate in his
own house, he was tender and sympathetic also outside
the family circle. Pain and sorrow found in him a
gentle friend, who could stoop to lowly offices of kind-
ness. “ Dr. Service’s goodness and kindness,” writes one
from his old parish of Inch, who loved and venerated him,
u have been inexpressible, and in more than one great
sorrow, he has been to us more than our nearest kin. It
seems hard as yet to realise that he will come no
more among us, brightening our dwelling as no
other friend ever did. Our friend was so little of the
ecclesiastic and so much the father of his people. By
his geniality, frankness, and universal kindness to all,
especially the suffering and poor, irrespective of denomi-
nation, he had endeared himself to everybody before he
had almost time to settle in his new parish.” Those of
us brethren, who knew the man, and who have ourselves
experienced his gentleness and goodness, know that
these words are not the mere exaggerated language of
high-strung emotion.
Dr. Service was distinctively a spiritual man. That
mind was in him which was also in Christ Jesus. Even
when he felt himself forced to relinquish much which has
hitherto been deemed essential to Christianity, if not to
religion, he clung tenaciously to a spiritual faith—faith
in love and righteousness like that of Christ, as the


anchor of the soul, as the revelation of the Divine,
as the life and the light of men. His sermons
are full of the teaching that goodness like that
of Christ is itself blessedness —that religion is not
a means of escaping from eternal torments and gain-
ing a sensuous heaven, but that it is in itself an end,
a blessed life of the heart and soul and mind. “If
God is a bug-bear,” he writes, “ what is your life ? To
have a religion, and that not something which lightens
up the world, and life and death, and things present and
things to come, with the smile of the Eternal Friend-
ship, but which sits heavily upon all natural joy, and
darkens the misery of man’s few and evil days upon the
earth with the suspicions of years of evil without end
beyond—this is punishment. What other gain or
reward, or happiness, on the other hand, would you
desire, than the religion of Christ—to love righteousness
and truth and goodness with all your heart and soul and
strength and mind, and to believe that God who ia over
all and is the Beginning and the End of all, is all that
you love ; to pity and believe in a pity which compre-
hends all that lives and breathes ; to wish for the good
of all men in this world and the next, and to trust in
the Almighty to whom that good must be precious ;
to feel that our little life is not bounded by endless
realms of chaos and old night, but is islanded in the
deep of the Eternal Charity and Kindness ; to doubt
and yet more to trust ; to feel that much is the mystery
of man’s existence and God’s ways, but that to live and
breathe is to hope good, ay, abundance of good, for all
that live and breathe from the Source and Fountain of
life and all our gladness. What other reward, gain,
happiness, would you have than that ?


Salvation meant to him salvation from our own sin
and selfishness. Hell was to him alienation from God—
the hell of selfishness. The only true inspiration, he
declared, was that of the truthful, loving soul; the only
authority that of truth ; the only divinity that of a
Divine humanity; the only Church, the society of
Christ-like souls united in the aims and spirit of Jesus.
This was the “ Gospel of the kingdom of God,” which
you must often have listened to, and which he has so
forcibly preached in “Salvation Here and Hereafter ” —.
that remarkable volume of sermons which, in the
honesty of his heart, he published in order, I know, to
make clear to others his position in the Church, leaving
it to the Church to declare whether he had gone be-
yond the bounds of toleration, or not. Dogma, ritual,
heaven, hell, salvation, revelation, the Church, all are
spiritualised, regarded in relation to, in the light of, the
spiritual nature of man—the spiritual being to him the
essential and the eternal. It will thus be seen that the
letter of the Kirk’s traditional beliefs and forms hung
very loosely about your minister. He held in the Kirk
of Scotland somewhat the same position as did the
late Dean Stanley in the Church of England. Indeed
the family likeness between the two men was very
marked. People said he did not preach the Gospel,
but his sermons were full of evangelical feeling. Some
said he was destructive and negative ; but besides the
destruction and negation which he was doubtless in part
forced to by his own honest nature, and which he be-
lieved were necessary in the interest of the Church and
of religion, the teaching which we find in these
published sermons contains a very positive element, a
very tangible Gospel which, if we could receive it in all


its power and fulness, would make a new heavens and a
new earth, and fill bur lives and our churches with
sweetness and light. A simple Gospel it is, but it is
the simplicity of beauty and of truth. Some people
turned away from him as having no message for them.
But there were others who found in his teaching the
water of life, the freedom of the Spirit, the grace and
truth which came by Jesus Christ. To such, at least,
he was an Apostle.
Dear brethren, let it not be, it cannot be, in vain that
such an influence as that of your beloved counsellor and
guide has breathed around you. Live as he would
have had you live, whose earnest voice has so often
spoken to you of Christlike goodness, heroism, and
charity ; and, as a church, seek to be more and more
a spiritual society, the true Body of Christ, caring less,
and less for money, machinery, ecclesiasticism, and more
and more striving to carry out the high aims of “ The
Church Beneficent,” which he has so eloquently set
before you in his sermons. “He being dead yet
speaketh.” Behind him, he has left the immortal
influence of true thoughts and rich ideas, the noble
influence of a moral and spiritual life. Be it yours to
be the bearers of that influence, the perpetuators of all
that was true and good in him you loved so well. The
large-minded, large-hearted pastor, the genuine man,
the lover of righteousness and truth, the gentle and
unselfish friend, the foe of all hypocrisy and superstition,
the preacher of a spiritual faith, hope, and charity, the
kindest of husbands and fathers, speaks to us to-day*
alas from the dead, that we too as individuals and
churches may speak to others alike in life and in
death.


APPENDIX.
On Sunday, 16th March, the Rev. W. L.
Macfarlan, of Lenzie, occupied the pulpit of Hyndland
Church, and held a short devotional service. The rev.
gentleman concluded by making the following reference
to the late minister :—You are all aware of the sad
circumstances in which we are met. In these circum-
stances it would neither be in consonance with your
feelings nor with mine that any address of the nature of
an ordinary pulpit discourse should be delivered in this
place. Nor would it be fitting that, so shortly after
the death of our friend, while none of us have had time
to recover from the shock which the sad tidings of yes-
terday morning occasioned us, I should deliver a funeral
sermon. Next Sunday a more fitting tribute to his
worth than any which while our grief is so fresh and so
imperfectly realised, I could pay, will be paid by one
whose knowledge, whose love, and whose eloquence will
enable him adequately to speak of the pastor you have
lost. 1 cannot, however, allow you to separate to-
day without saying a few words concerning my friend,
your minister, whose death we are so unexpectedly called
on to deplore. The subject of the discourse which
I had intended to address to you was u Wise in-
dependence of public opinion.” By such independence
jour minister was distinguished in no ordinary degree.
His nature was a sensitive and a sympathetic one, and he
craved for the sympathy of those with whom he came in
contact, and no doubt, valued their good opinion. On
the other hand, no man more resolutely than he refused
to submit himself to that yoke of bondage to fashion,
conventionality, and dull routine, in subjection to which
so many pass their lives. The liberty to think for him-
self, to speak out, and to act out his convictions, he ever
claimed for himself. He claimed this liberty for him-
self ; he wished others to claim it for themselves, be-
cause he believed that the world would grow wiser and
better just in proportion as the number of its inhabitants


who, trusting in the Divine enlightenment of the mind’
and spirit of man, refuse to subject themselves to the
dictation of their fellowmen, is increased. He was
sure that their religious teacher at all events is most
helpful to his fellowmen who in the regions of thought
and belief is most independent of them. He was sure
that he could only attain the truthfulness and manli-
ness which would make him strong for the service
of others —that he could only retain the peace of mind
which would leave him at leisure for the service of others,.
when he lived in the spirit of the noble utterance of
Paul’s —“ To me it is a very small thing that I am
judged of you or of man’s judgment.” From the-
judgment of his neighbors, which he did not, with the
aristocratic pride of a Coriolanus, despise, but in wise
independence of which he lived, our friend has passed.
He has gone from the world, leaving himself and his
work to that Divine judgment to which his whole life,,
we may say, was an appeal. He has gone to where,
beyond the confused talk of this world, there is
peace. Yet even here the judgments which are-
pronounced on him in his absence will be for the
most part kindly. As a man none can speak but
good of him. His purity of thought and feeling,
his simplicity and sincerity, the cheerfulness with
which he bore the severe trial of delicate health,
his consideration for the feelings of others, his
ready sympathy, his bright intelligence, his playful
humour, his satire even, which had in it no touch of
malevolence, made him one of the most loveable of
men. While there can thus be but one estimate, we'
may say, of our friend himself, there may be various
estimates of his work as a religious teacher. There are
some to whom his fresh, unconventional, untraditional
way of dealing with religious questions seemed strange
and startling. There are others to whom his outspoken
utterances were refreshment, reinvigoration, the quick-
ening of a fuller life. The work on which, as our friend
while he was yet among us knew well, these divergent


judgments were pronounced by his contemporaries, he
has left to the judgment of futurity. What he cared
for was not contemporary approval or applause, but
abiding influence. This he has secured. In influence
for good which will abide, he has, I am sure, his exceed-
ing great reward. There are many here to-day, there
are many scattered abroad throughout the world, who
have to thank Dr. Service for purer aspirations Rewards
the Divine, for kindlier impulses towards the human,
for larger conceptions of the good and acceptable and
perfect will of God, for the resolve to follow more
steadily after all things that are pure, just, honour-
able, for the re-awakening within them of the Christian
spirit, for some growth into Christ’s likeness. He lives
in those whom he has thus influenced for good ; he
lives in God, the source of all good. I leave you now
to the thoughts of which I know your hearts are full.
May God bless the sad event which seems so inscru-
table to us, and bring good out of that which we cannot
but regard as an evil, the untimely removal of a
minister of His Word, whose noble qualities of head
and heart fitted him for singular usefulness in an age of
religious unrest like that through which we are passing.


At the close of a lecture on the “ Parable of the
Wicked Husbandmen,” on the forenoon of Sunday,
23rd March, in St. James’ Church, Paisley, Dr. Brown
said :—This subject which came to me this week in
ordinary course, fitted well with the thoughts which
have been filling my mind and heart since Saturday
last, when I had tidings of the death of one of my
earliest and dearest friends, whose voice you often
heard from the old pulpit. The distinctive position of
Dr. John Service among the religious teachers of our
time was that he was utterly free from officialism. He
was not one of the husbandmen who cling to the vine-
yard, and find their inheritance in religious privileges
and forms of doctrine or worship. He was emphatically
one of God’s servants, whose calling is to make the
demand for fruit. He was eager for the end in religion,
for judgment, mercy, faith. In uttering the message
that it was given him to speak, he never paused to ask
whether his utterance squared with accepted theories
or conventional beliefs. His words welled up direct
from his pure and loyal heart, which cared not one jot
for any worldly consideration. He would speak the
truth as it revealed itself to him, let who would impugn
it. I felt, as on Tuesday I helped to lay him in his
grave in Campsie churchyard, that we might have
said, as Morton said over the grave of Knox, “ Here
lieth he who never feared the face of any flesh!”
Nor was his utterance that of ill-considered bold-
ness. Most of us probably differed from him in
much that he said ; and, perhaps, in his imperious
demand for fruit, he failed to see the value of some
things we believe to be essential to the production of
lasting fruits of righteousness ; yet he had rarest
insight into spiritual truth. As an interpreter of


Scripture, he was quick to get through the letter into
the spirit, where he found and revealed the throb of
life. As a public teacher, his place will be ill to fill.
He was no mere iconoclast—these are common enough.
He opened windows in heaven to men to whom
other windows had become opaque. He helped many,
for whom old landmarks had been swept away, still tu
believe in God and Christ and in the Kingdom which
is righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost.
He taught men who but for him might have had no one
to teach them, that it would profit them nothing though
they should gain the whole world if they lost their own
souls. To those of us who had the privilege of his
friendship, his death creates a blank which never can be
filled. I have not known a brotherlier, a more utterly
unselfish human soul. His words as a public teacher
were often scathing words ; his heart was a deep well
of tenderness and love. Though for a quarter of a
century he had a constant struggle with disease, and
with other ills besides, the sunlight never died out of
his life, and he carried it with him wherever he went.
Many a dark corner it has gladdened, many a drooping
spirit it has cheered. He was guiltless of ambition, or
he might easily have filled a larger place in the public-
eve ; but he will certainly be remembered when promi-
nent ecclesiastics are forgotten, and his writings will be
read when other literature more sought for now has
passed out of sight ; for he did not concern himself
with the grass that withereth and the flowers that fade
—he cared only to speak that word of the Lord which
endureth for ever.


At the close of a sermon on the text, “ I would not
live alway,” delivered in St. Michael’s Church, Crieff,
on Sunday, 16th March, the Rev. Dr. Cunningham
made the following allusion to the death of Dr. Service.
—lt was on Sunday morning last I heard of the death
of my friend—my eminent and honoured friend—Dr.
Service. I felt that one of the greatest lights of the
Church had suddenly gone out. You all knew Dr.
Service. It is not long since he spent the greater part
of a summer here. You have not yet forgotten the
remarkable sermon he preached to you. I know it
remained like a nail fastened in a sure place, in the
memory of all who were capable of appreciating such
original and striking thought and language. Few men
could speak with the freshness and force of Dr. Service.
I have never known a man with more simplicity of
character. Everything with him was perfectly natural,
not a trace of assumption, pretentiousness, or anything
artificial. He was simply what he was, but I hardly
know anything higher or better that he could be. And
what keenness, what earnestness was in his eye when he
got into conversation on any subject whicn interested
him, and everything connected with pure and undefiled
religion interested him, everything connected with
human happiness and hopes! He hated bigotry, he
despised cant, he could not endure that the traditions
of men should be put in the place of the Command-
ments of God. Gentle as a child in his usual habits of
speech, he waxed scornful, and almost fierce, when he
had to encounter any form of priestcraft, fanaticism, or
intolerance. I heard him preach only once (would I
had heard him twenty times !), and what an on-
slaught he made on some; of the religious idols of our
country and of our day, bitting out to the right and the
c


left—a very iconoclast—a champion for the truth
against every form of falsehood, however fair or fashion-
able it might be. Always of delicate health, he has
been taken away in the full maturity of his power;
but he had already made his mark, and his religious
teaching will tell upon the Church of the Future.
Salvation here and hereafter are his.


On Sabbath, 23rd March, the Rev. W. Muirhead, of
the West U.P. Church, Wigtown, after discoursing on
the text—“ The righteous are in everlasting remem-
brance”—made the following remarks regarding the
late Dr. Service : —One who was partially known to
many of you, to a few of you more intimately, has
unexpectedly passed away. More than once in this
place he wisely and tenderly addressed you. For
seven years he lived near us here, for five years after
that in Glasgow ; and only a week since, worn with
toil and thought, with pain and sorrow, he passed into
the last sleep, and his voice in this world will be
heard no longer. He is fallen, overwearied, as in the
night, when it was hardly more than the mid-season of
day. For us the ever-changing life picture is become
finished, unchangeable. Suddenly, he, who was one of
us, has laid aside the time-garments and put on the gar-
ment of eternity, but only the more sacred a possession
do we now hold him in the wide home of the Eternal.
So unassertive, simple-hearted, plain, he who thus
walked about our streets and the country roads of Inch,
was in Scotland one of the most remarkable men. Of
the men of genius in his native land he undoubtedly
was one. Within the Church—among the ministers of
the Scottish Church—one here and another there
may be found who is highly distinguished ; but pro-
bably her greatest minister is gone, now that the
place that once knew him knows him no more for
ever. His was a mind of the rarest order, penetrative,
wide-reaching, luminous, piercing through the tradi-
tional, the artificial, the fantastic to the reality that
lay beneath, and lighting up as with sunshine the
deep things of the spirit of man. And along with
princely powers of intellect, his, too, was a heart the


tenderest and most faithful. There, often did wretched-
ness find solacement, the sorrowful in their desolation
companionship and hope, and they that were wandering
in perplexity and darkness the peace and light as of a
home. Him, then, you will justly remember, now that,
alas ! he will come no more amongst us, as one of the
noblest natures ; a man of genius, genuine in the best
sense of that word, unpretentious, of a fine simplicity,
to whom fanaticism, bigotry, and intolerance were
repulsive ; a lover of God and man. So unobtrusive,
natural, without a trace of affectation, he came and
went, that to numbers, who look merely at the surfaces
of life, he might seem hardly more than an ordinary
man ; but his influence is written in many lines into the
thought and feeling of our district already, and it will
be written deeper yet; and amid the whirl and Babel
noises of Glasgow, his voice still sounds, and will long
sound as a guide in the direction of what is pure and
true, as an inspiration to purposes of good. Further,
as a minister of Christ, this is to be said of him. Like
the Master whom he served, he discerned the God-like
in nature and in human life. Apart from the testimony
of any record, he felt himself encompassed by Divinity.
Nature to him was full of the Divine Presence ; and
that Presence, he knew, dwelt as in a shrine in the soul
of man. 0 Lord—so he wrote on a summer’s day, as
he saw God’s presence everywhere, and man’s hesita-
tion in proclaiming it—
Oh Lord, could we but see Thy hand,
How cunningly in every land
It decorates the year - r
The countless blooms that bloom along
The hedgerows, and the linnet’s song
That thrills the listening ear.
Would teach us then what teachers now
Hardly for fear of blame allow,
Regarding truth Divine ;
That needs but common earth Thy skill
The world with light and love to fill,.
And glory which is Thine.


And so it was no marvel then,
When thou didst speak to ancient men,
And what they heard they told :
Forth from the soil of human thought
Truth at Thy word its harvest brought—
Its harvest manifold.
So he wrote. His mind was unentangled, clear ; his
heart was pure ; he saw the Divine in the midst of
nature ; but he saw it more in humanity. And thus,
seeing that in man there was something that was
Divine, “ some spark of a eelestial fire,” he saw as a
consequence that religion was an element in the nature
of man, even as of human nature morality is an ele-
ment ; and according to him all forms of religion were
essentially of one great family. Thus the unit of all
faiths was an article of his faith. But that which he
specially loved, in which he found continual strength,
and stay, and to advance which he toiled in thought and
and word and deed, as comparatively few have toiled,
was the Gospel of Christ. And the gospel which he
constantly preached, which he delighted to preach, and
which everyone who knew him expected to hear him
preach, was the gospel of love and duty, the fatherly
nature of God, the brotherhood of men, truth, honour
sincerity, peace in the sphere of the inward spiritual
life, rest in the sense of the eternal mercy. This gospel,
in season and out of season, with magical eloquence,
with profound thought, with ever-widening power, and
a fascination of manner seldom excelled, he kept on
preaching. Pity for the needy and the poor, sympathy
for the desolate and wretched, mercy to the wandering
and the lost, the imitation day by day of Christ—the
centre of all his teaching—love to God and man, having
a human heart which was all the prophets and the law
—that was the gospel in words beautiful, simple,
familiar, which he spent his life in preaching, believing
it to be the gospel everlastingly: the same gospel es-
sentially as was preached by Christ Himself in the
Galilean towns ; at heart the very same. In direct-


ness, freshness, unforgetableness, similar. The glad
tidings of Christ in the language of the nine-
teenth century. Hope, too, an ever-buoyant, Chris-
tian hope, for the future of humanity possessed his
spirit; hope that in after ages this world would become
a nobler world ; the human race be more Divine, more
humane—that is to say, more beneficent, moral, reve-
rential, sympathetic ; the rich and the poor meeting
more together in thought, purpose, and feeling, for the
Lord was the maker of them all. Forward he glanced
in faith in hope to a time, however distant it might be,
when much that now falsely lifted its head as Chris-
tian would be brought down, when the idols of religion
in our land and in all lands would be abolished, when
the grace and truth, the sweet reason and mildness of
Jesus of Nazareth would be everywhere recognised, and
would everywhere prevail. That he taught such a
gospel in a time when it was perilous to preach it; that
from the first he had the intellectual clearness, the
spiritual discernment to see it; the courage in the face
of danger and opposition, and the ill-opinion of the
ecclesiastic to be faithful to it, is his best title to be long
and worthily remembered. High-gifted, but lowly
minister of Christ, the man who has done more, though
with but few appointed years and feeble health to do it
in more, perhaps, than any other preacher in Scotland
of his time—in preserving the Christian Church from
deadness and decay, in keeping it from going to ruin,
in bringing his countrymen back again to the love and
admiration of Christianity, as eighteen hundred years
ago in Galilee our Lord himself proclaimed it. These
few words, then, associated with the departure from this
world of a noble and beloved friend, I have spoken; this
little tribute of honour to him in this place. Now rests
the ever-thoughtful workman from all his labours here
beside the village where his life began. To stand there
in the country churchyard as was laid beneath the sod
the silent form from which had fled that noble nature,
that bright intelligence, that spirit so affectionate and


tender, to see by loving bands these flowers strewed
upon his grave, was to feel that his loss had made in
many hearts a blank that is irreparable. There, in the
Scottish valley, he is laid, below the shadow of the fells
he climbed in boyhood, where first his life began.
Could we each and all of us do our little task, be it
what it may, as honourably, as devotedly, and un-
selfishly as he did his greater ; could we show in daily
life as he showed forth that love to God and man,
which is the fulfilling of the law, then should we know,
as he knew and felt certain, that “ blessed are the mer-
ciful, for they obtain mercy,” that “blessed are the pure
fn heart, for they shall see God.”


From the “ Glasgow Herald ” Newspaper,
17th March , 1884.
In the grey light of Saturday morning one of the
most remarkable men of Scotland passed unexpectedly
away. Both within and outside of the Churches Dr.
Service, the late minister of Hyndland Established
Church, was widely known as a writer and a preacher.
But though it was devotedly attached to him, his
congregation was a small one, and he seldom
preached away from home. Indifferent to criticism
and careless of fame, he troubled himself little about
what the world said or thought of him, and kept
the even tenor of his modest and independent way,
without attracting perhaps the widest public notice.
But no more grievous loss could well have befallen
us than the death of such a man in the fulness of
his powers, and, should he become better known to
his countrymen by works which we hope he may
have left in a state to bear publication, that loss
will be far more sadly and generally felt.
John Service was born in Campsie, 51 years ago.
His father was employed in the late Mr. Dalglish’s
print works, and the boy grew up where the memory
of “ Norman’s ” father was still fresh, and under the
teaching and inspiration of Robert Lee. In the
chivalrous intrepidity of his feeling and thinking, he
often reminded us of that noble-minded leader in
forgotten controversies ; but he cared little or nothing
for Presbyteries or Church questions, he had no turn
for forensic oratory, and he smiled sadly at the
great annual pitched battles won and lost in Edin-
burgh over the serious trifles of the religious world.


Lee was essentially an aristocrat and an ecclesiastic,
with all the virtues and graces of aristocracy and
ecclesiasticism. With perhaps less scholarship, but
with finer and broader cultivation, Dr. Service was
always at heart a man of the people, with the
people, and for the people.
Probably the most powerful intellectual and moral
impulse of his youth came to him when he was a
student at Glasgow College, from the wonderful and
widely-gifted man of genius who then taught astro-
nomy in the University, and who inspired all who
were so fortunate as to know him personally with some
spark of his own philosophic and philanthropic and
religious enthusiasm. After many of the consider-
ings ” and uncertainties which still trouble high-strung
youths, Service saw that his mission in life was to be a
teacher of religion. His first ministerial duty was in
Hamilton, where he is still affectionately remembered.
On account of his health, which was always delicate, he
accepted a call to Hobart Town, in Tasmania, where he
spent four years, and two years afterwards in Aus-
tralia. On returning home he acted for some time as
assistant in Anderston Parish Church, under the Rev.
Charles Strong, lately minister of the Scotch Church in
Melbourne. Twelve years ago he was called to the
parish of Inch, in Wigtownshire, from which he was
called five years since to take charge as first minister of
the new congregation in Hyndland Road. His singu-
larly powerful novel, “ Hovantia,” which ran through
Good Words during his incumbency in Inch, gives a
wonderful picture of the inner life of a little country
parish crossed by the currents of larger interests, and
seen as only the eyes of a man of genius could see it.
There is the quickest and surest insight into the hard and
unlovely conditions under which the life of the country
poor drags out its painful length from cradle to grave,
and the most vivid recognition of those flashings of
nobler nature and those revelations of Divine possibili-


ties in the humblest and least educated, which are shot
like threads of gold through the homespun web of
everyday existence. The little book of sermons, i( Sal-
vation Here and Hereafter,” which he published
towards the close of his ministry at Inch, was perhaps
even a more striking proof of his nature and quality.
He felt it a duty to hunself and to his Church, to make
a more public exposition of the Christian teaching he
was trying to give his country people. The book at
once arrested an attention and admiration both here
and in England such as no single volume of Scotch
sermons has recently challenged or secured. Many felt
that its teaching was dangerous to traditional beliefs,
but those who felt this most felt also that if it was free
and fearless in its theology, it was at heart and in
truth deeply religious.
When Dr. Service came to Glasgow, it was to con-
tinue the same teaching in a wider sphere. Liberty
and religion were his watchwords, and only his own
congregation and those who occasionally heard him preach
in the High Church or in the College Chapel, where he
drew larger audiences of young men than any one but
the Principal, knew how his powers were growing, his
nature deepening and broadening, and his teaching
becoming at once more independent and more religious.
He had learned to look life and death, man and God, in
the face, in love and without fear. The passion at his
heart, the passion to say or do something to turn the
hearts of others to “ consider the poor,” burned clearer
and stronger in him every day of his life. His later
teaching was essentially the same as that of the Master
whom he served, Pew preachers of modern times, or
indeed of any time, have reminded their hearers as
constantly as he did of the sermons that were preached
on the hillsides of Palestine two thousand years ago. It
was this “ Galilean gospel” that he preached con-
tinually, with the same burdens and the same refrains,
warm with all the love and pity and scorn and passion


ate indignation of a nature embracing and at the same
same time understanding all sorts and conditions of
men The central figure to which he always came back
was the figure of Christ. The lesson he never tired of
urging on his hearers was that “ imitation of Christ,
which has done so much, and yet, perhaps, considering
all that there was to do, so little to transform the worl .
It was his to see, and few men were as able to ma-e
others see the pathos, as well as the comedy of human
lives His humor darted and glowed round and among
the perpetual subjects of his teaching—man’s aims and
hopes, his duties and his future, his miseries and his
greatness, like the lightning that illumines the darkness
of a summer night, and makes plain the essential nature
and relationships of things that have become common-
place in the familiar day. Though he never attracted
great crowds, there was not, for a cultivated audience,
so fascinating a preacher in all Scotland. Standing
aside from theological and ecclesiastical controversies,
breathing a clearer air, he seemed to see farther and with
surer insight into the tendencies of living thought and the
religious future of mankind. It is our frequent misfor-
tune in Scotland not to know the treasure we have m such
a teacher till he is with us no longer Should it be found
possible for something at least of his later work to be
given to the world, we shall certainly recognise the wealth
we have missed in the unexhausted possibilities of
a life which was growing clearer and stronger and fuller
till its unexpected close. His congregation and his
personal friends know that their loss is
Those who speak without reserve all the truth that is in
their hearts, who differ widely from prevailing views,
and who have constantly to discuss questions touching
men’s highest hopes and their deepest fears, must count
on awakening dislikes and alarms m the minds even of
sincere and good men. But in spite of the star lmg
distinctness with which he always expressed whatever
he felt himself constrained to say, there were very few
who feared or disliked Dr. Service. It was hardly pos-


sible for anybody to misunderstand him—it was impos-
sible for those who knew him only a little not to love
him.
From the “Glasgow Herald,” March, 1884.
The following tribute to the late Dr. Service has
been communicated to us by an intimate friend:
Death has taken perhaps the finest and most original
certainly the most dauntless, religious teacher of
the West of Scotland, in whom the Church will miss
a unique type—that of a man who knew the world
well, and yet was not of it, who, saturated with the
spirit of Christ, has been for half his comparatively
brief life preaching a new, or rather reviving an old
Christianity. Under the shadow we can only speak of
him in stammering words. The mists of fresh bereave-
ment must be allowed to lift themselves slowly from
our memories of the most genial, and yet the truest of
friends. We recall him, over thirty years, as one of
the brightest of our college contemporaries, marked
even, then as through life, by much of that apparent
inertia which is the frequent accompaniment of some
forms of genius ; but already in occasional essays, at
social meetings, in rural walks, exhibiting that quiet
and lasting quality as distinct from the restless activity
ot “all the talents”; throwing out jets of a humour
which delighted the discriminating, and was a terror
to the foolish. Passing creditably, but without aca-
demic distinction, for he was careless of prizes, through
the Quadrivium of Humanity and the Trivium of
Divinity, he was, during the period of his licentiate,
e “P;?y e(i as sub-editor to “ Mackenzie’s Dictionary
ot Biography.” He left on several of the pages of
is publication marks of his literary power, and was
. means by his sharp wit, of dismissing or curtailing
incompetent contributors, which served as an exercise
ground tor the students who gave the best literary and


intellectual promise of their time. At the next stage
of his career, we find him as an ordained minister at
Hamilton. During this period he married. On grounds
of health, already giving indications of weakness, Mr.
Service went with his family to Tasmania, between
which and Australia, in the exercise of ministerial
duties, gathering new circles of friends, and acquiring
experiences of the romance of life, afterwards utilized,
he spent six years. Back in Scotland, and adrift on
the sea of letters, he wrote some of the most careful and
incisive reviews that have appeared in the columns of
the Herald, but he was too severe a thinker to have a
ready pen, and could only write when the spirit moved.
Nor, in preaching on trial, would he condescend to
humour his congregations by breadth of plati-
tude exalted by strength of lung. Mr. Service was
in danger of submersion ; when, in the latter days
of patronage, the Earl of Stair detected his worth,
and appointed him to the charge of the parish of
of Inch. There he remained for several years a
retired stpdent, enriching his already well-laden mind
with the classics of England and Germany ; a model
pastor, endearing himself to his flock, like George
Herbert, by numberless acts of kindliness ; by virtue of
his perfect courtesy and independence, at his ease in
castle and in cottage alike, associating with friends
from whose minds the remembrance of rambles and
drives, made vivid by flashes of pathos and wit that
never failed, will never fade. This period gave birth to
his two most considerable works, the romance of
“Novantia” (in Good Words), which afterwards appeared
(1875) under the title of “Lady Hetty,” and was re-
viewed in these columns. A medley of the author’s
experience in Hobart Town and by the shores of Loch
Ryan, its graphic sketches, wise saws, and dramatic
situations, afford matter to stock a dozen ordinary
novels ; but some mismanagement in the plot restricted
the range of its appreciative admirers, though it was
translated and received with approval by our more


analytic neighbours abroad. The volume of sermons
entitled “ Salvation Here and Hereafter” attained a
wider popularity, and carried the name of the author
over the borders to England, where the book was wel-
comed and esteemed. It is on the whole the most
remarkable published record of the Scotch pulpit that
has appeared during the last quarter of a century.
Allured, by a cordial invitation, and induced by con-
sideration for the welfare of his family, whom he had
himself been educating in the old manse on the isolated
lake peninsula, Dr. Service, who had about this time
accepted the degree of D.D. from his University, re-
migrated to Glasgow as minister of the West-end
church of Hyndlands, in the discharge of the duties of
which he remained till his death.
The eustom of judging a man from the impression
left by his personality and work during the later years
of his life is, in the case of Dr. Service, more than
usually fair ; for in them were gathered up the results
of his varied experience, the mellow harvests of his
thought. The edge of his intellect was never dulled by
lassitude ; the sword of his righteous warfare grew
sharper by use ; the grasp of his almost apostolic love
became more comprehensive and more close. The com-
paratively few intimate friends of a man whose modesty
and physical weakness prevented the circle from being
greatly enlarged, can alone appreciate the loss of his
social charm. To them the absence of the winning
smile, the cordial grasp, the congratulation in good
fortune, the almost personal share his nature con-
strained him to take in every crisis of sickness or
sorrow, cannot be translated into words. Their testi-
mony to their loss must remain in their inexpressible
sense of an irreparable blank in their lives. I am
privileged to select the following sentences from the
tribute of another teacher of our time, of a genius and
faith, though not always identical, closely akin to his
own-


“ Glasgow has lost one of those influences that
work with little noise or outward show. To the
larger public he was comparatively little known,
but no one who came in contact with him failed
to carry away an impression of that clear and marked
individuality which stamps itself on the mind
like a living force, in contrast with the blurred
images of ordinary acquaintanceship. His simple
manliness, his unaffected cordiality of soul, his
fellow-feeling for the poor, the oppressed, and
even with the morally diseased, his ever fresh inte-
rest in all things of the intellect and the spirit, his
freedom from every shade of superstition, his intole-
rance of pretence and obscurantism, rescued as it
was from any suspicion of bitterness by the kindly
touch of a humorous sympathy that held nothing
human alien—when shall we see these things again,
and how shall they who have seen ever forget them?
Humour, indeed, is one of the first words that come
to our lips when we speak of Dr. Service. His was
a humour that, mingling with all his words and
.actions, could not be kept out —if he ever thought
to keep it out—of his sermons. But in his hand it
never seemed incongruous there ; for it was a humour
springing from that keen sense of the littleness of
things great and the'greatness of things little in human
life, which it is a mark of a great teacher to realize.
Unassuming, even unceremonious in bearing, he pro-
duced, nevertheless, an impression of inner refine-
ment, of magnanimity, and purity of mind, which
only grew with growing acquaintance. There was, on
a superficial view, very little of the cleric about him ;
he had long emancipated himself from most of the
dogmatic forms which seem to many to be identified
with Christianity ; yet there have been few men more
truly filled with the spirit of Christ. His indiffer-
ence to theology, in the technical sense, rendered only
more striking his direct view of the lessons conveyed,
and his spiritual reception of the life recorded in the


Gospels. With this there had grown up in him an
intense conviction of the un-Christian character of much
of the structure of our modern social life—a convic-
tion which was only not socialistic because he did
not readily accept any outward nostrum for the cure
of our social diseases. He had next to no value
for the shows of life ; his feelings were for the many
rather than for the few ; if he could be unjust, it
was toward the ecclesiastical politician and the priest
who made much of his office. But no one who had
even casually attended his church could fail to be
impressed with the deep devotional spirit which was
expressed, perhaps most conspicuously, in his prayers.
And he had, above all, as many can testify, the dis-
tinctive gift of a Christian pastor, the healing touch,,
the gift of consolation, which made him ever welcome
in the house of suffering.”
We have little to add to the foregoing, which bears
witness to Dr. Service’s belief in the teaching of one
whom he, as fully as the most orthodox confessor of
faith, regarded as our Lord. On the surface of his
sermons, there played a humour, often as subtle as that
of Lamb, often as incisive as that of Sydney Smith—a
satire as trenchant as that of Carlyle against every
shade of insincerity. Beneath, alongside of the most
searching criticism of what is commonly called the
supernatural, there was what might be thought an
almost supernatural faith in the perfectibility of man-
kind, and in the sufficiency of a trust in an over-
ruling Providence. He had seen and encountered as
much of the worry and weariness and vexation of the
world as most of his fellows, but his trust never wavered
in the continuous progression of the race towards that
assimilation with the divine which he held to be its
destiny. Morally he was the most charitable of pure-
minded men. Hot Swift himself spoke with more
savage force against quacks and smooth-tongued
rogues and the conscious vendors of cowardly com-


promise. But, as with his Master, his hatred of
vice never maimed his compassion for the vicious. He
was wont, to the verge of reasonable tolerance, to attri-
bute even their worst errors, not to an evil star, but to
ignorance and the unhappy environments, of what he re-
garded as even now only a dimly dawning civilization, a
faint promise of that perfect Socialism, towards which, in
the faith of his constantly spiritualized Darwinism, he
held the whole creation moved. This charity of judgment
was carried almost to an extreme in his dealing
with the vices of the poor. To u sins of blood in all
ranks he was amply tolerant, while his indignation was
roused as much against deliberate traduction or invete-
rate malignity as against consistent selfishness or
triumphant fraud. We know not on whom, whether as
a man or teacher, original thinker or independent critic,
the mantle of Dr. Service is likely to fall ; but we find
some comfort in our loss that he has been allowed to
leave his mark on his time without molestation from his
fellows, who while differing, often widely, from his
speculative views, have been almost unanimous in respect
for his genius and admiration for his character. While
narrow sectaries are pursuing, banishing, and would fain
be burning for differences on some tea-cup controversy
on the authenticity of a text, it remains an honour to the
National Church of Scotland that she has been proud to
shelter, unscathed, within her folds so brave a thinker
and so free a spirit.
“ Quis desiderio sit pudor aut modus
Tam cari capitis 1 ”


REV. JOHN SERVICE, D.D.
18th March, 1884.
Through the arrest of Death, that overpaid
The debt of Nature, ere the claim was due,
We took our brother, where the hills in view
Frown o’er the dear lonian Cross whose shade
Falls on the grave of “ Norman,” and there laid
The untimely victim, and our dearest friend ;
And laid him hopefully ; the earthly end
Of a sweet soul that never was afraid,
But lived with joyaunce through the vale of tears,
And common gloom and circumstance unblest;
For even as he lived the hallowed years
Brought him nearer to the Eternal Breast
To which he clung for ever as his rest,
With love that grows and never disappears.
Now he is buried, and we go away,
And leave him deep in soil of kindly earth—
To think of all the brightness and the mirth
That made a Christian life so loved and gay.
The flashes of his eye, the constant play
Of loving humour, and the subtle gleam
Illuminating every common theme
With genius, and with wisdom’s perfect ray,
We think, too, of his teaching, clear and sure,
On the great heavenly truths before us spread
In undogmatic loveliness, to lure,
Even as his Master did, the souls unfed
And fainting for the lack of spiritual bread.
But he is gone, and we are left so poor.


RA.E BEOS., Printers,
35 Elizabeth Steeet North,
MELBOURNE,




