

T DEI IE
TOURIST’S AID SPORTSMAFS GUIDE
TO THE
iipplanii Kdn
SURIM«®W§ iISMfSTCf,
SPECIALLY COMPILED FOR
J. BLACKWOOD HOWIE
SECOND EDITION.
SALE
PRICE SIXPENCE.
m htffF p/w/jot ppi^rm-
Owner* of f!u- KtcamerN “ Tanjil,” “llairiiMlalc,”
iind Mu rail,”
M. L. HIITOHINSOjV, Agent, 15 Collins-st. West, Melbourne.
Printed and Published for “ The Lakes’ Navigation Company,
Limited,” at The Gippsland Mercury Office.


onnfl,
iliiug
ESTABLISHED 1854,
J If 8 ll f
Corner of Queensbarry and Madeline-streets,
CARLTON,
OIR .A.T
a. qesas t s a. sow s ®,
RECENTLY OPENED,
CORNER OF SMITH AND PEEL-STREETS,
COLLINGWOOD.
m’ Customers residing in the Country can be promptly
supplied at SMITH-STREET PRICES by sending
their Orders by post, accompanied by Bank Draft or
P.O. Order, payable in Melbourne.


JTafees’ |J alligation Compim,
MIhCZTIEID
m■ ■in
REGULAR COMMUNICATION
WITH
PAtaES'fiiLE, SAIBiiSALE,
ROSHERVILLE,
LAKES’ ENTRANCE, TARIBO,
The favourite steamers “Tanjil” (Captain Larsen),
“Bairnsdale” (Captain Neilson), and “Sarah” (Captain
Macartney), are now running regular trips to all the
above places.
For Time-table see advertisements in Ary an and local papers.
MEALS AND REFRESHMENTS AT MELBOURNE RATES,
mm PTFPHf/P- ?*9-
Head Office: RAYMOND-STREET, SALE, which has
Telephonic Communication with the Wharf, Latrobe
Bridge.
N. B. • —Parties visiting the Lakes will find it to their
advantage to obtain dateless return tickets for train and
steamer, which can be had at the Railway Station, Prince’s
Bridge, or of Mr. M. L. Hutchinson, 15 Collins-street West,
the Melbourne agent, from whom all information can be had.


(Under the Distinguished Patronage of His Excellency
the Marquis of Hormanby, Governor of Victoria.)
oicisws SA»s f
Proprietor.
EVERY ACCOMMODATION AND ATTENDANCE FOR VISITORS. COMMERCIAL
AND SAMPLE ROOMS FOR GENTLEMEN.
Coaches run io and fro between 'Trains and Steamers and
the Hotel.
Shooting Parties can receive the most reliable information, and
Guides, on application to the proprietor.
DOGS FOR SHOOTING PARTIES.
Hampers for Excursion, Shooting, & Pishing Parties.
tmm iitost smarts
In connection with the Hotel are the largest and most con-
venient in the locality.
SADDLE HORSES, BUGGIES, COVERED COACHES, AND CONVEYANCES FOR
PRIVATE FAMILIES FOR HIRE,
At a moment’s notice, and on the most moderate terms.
EXPERIENCED GROOMS AND CAREFUL DRIVERS.


CLUES’
lifm'i) , § ait A GettingJst a.b Icjj ,
S 3 3E_h ' ?
AT fii etHB HOTEL,
OR AT HIS BRANCH ESTABLISHMENT,
3^- A,itavcoitd-Street Sorth.
Special Arrangements for Tourists, Sportsmen,
and Anglers.
R««S FOR 8HOOTn« PARTIES.
«39s@8mgse®3&
OUST
HORSES AND BUGGIES OF EVERY DESCRIPTION,
COACHES, CARRYALLS, DRAGS, FAMILY CARRIAGES*
COVERED VEHICLES, and SADDLE HORSES,
At moderate charges.
Reliable information to Sportsmen and Anglers. Experienced
Drivers and Guides. Strict attention and civility.
Telegrams promptly attended to. Cabs meet every
Train and every Steamer to or from Bairnsdale and
the Lakes. Orders left at the Club Hotel will have
every attention.
J. CLUES, Proprietor.


dipping tips.
ea s=3
g J- G. PETTIT, g
S VICTORIA BREWER?
e ® -n
l_l I ARTESIAN WELL. | ' C- .
p?d3 UJ | g j
a. j*■ • -•-- •' — m r~»~7
G t, rn 1 TRADE MARK. -n l , /
E °@ ©
W> YORK STREET, SALE.
. o
THE TRADE AND PRIVATE FAMILIES
SUPPLIED.


MRS. THOMAS’
LATROBE BRIDGE, SALE,
(Under the Patronage of His Excellency the Marquis of
Rormanby, Governor of Victoria; Sir John Goode
and other Distinguished Visitors.)
The Hotel was expressly built for the Accom-
modation of Tourists, Sportsmen, and
Anoders.
o
THE PREMISES ARE REPLETE WITH EVERY CONVENIENCE FOR VISITORS.
PRIVATE APARTMENTS FOR FAMILIES OR SINGLE GENTLEMEN.
The Hotel is near the Latrobe Wharf, whence
the Lakes’ steamers depart, and is also in the very
centre of the best Shooting and Pishing grounds in
the district.
HAMPERS FOR PICNIC, SHOOTING, FISHING. OR EXCURSION PARTIES.
BOATS FOR HIRE. FISHING TACKLE. FRESH BAIT,
CABS FROM SALE AT ALL HOURS.
wihsties, spirits, & ales
OF THE BEST BRANDS.
STABLING.
8. THOMAS,
Proprietressj


myphmA |rtlcrcuvii t
sjl£e ? mvTmm.
Published every Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday.
Has fully three times more bona-fide Subscribers
than any other paper published in Gippsland.
It has been appointed the legal paper for the advertisements
of the Borough of Sale and Shires of Avon, Mafl’ra, Rosedale,
and Traralgon. It has also been appointed the paper in which
to publish Government advertisements, including the land
applications to be heard at Sale, Rosedale, and Traralgon Land
Boards.
The Mercury is the acknowledged advertising medium for
the whole district. Its politics are Liberal and Independent,
and it encourages every legitimate movement tending to correct
abuses and to promote the social and moral elevation of the
people.
A uthorlmJ Agents for receiving Advertisements—
Messrs. GORDON & OOTCH,. London, Sydney, and
Melbourne;
Mr. G-EOROE STREET, London.
HENRY LUKE,
Proprietor.




H ate' (f ntrmuc iVotcU
CUNINGHAME,
(LAKES’ ENTRANCE,)
Has the best accommodation for Tourists to the
Gippsland Lakes. The house has 36 rooms, and
can accommodate 45 visitors. It is admirably
situated for visitors to the Entrance, and has a
large balcony from which grand views can be
obtained of the principal features ot the Entrance
and the Ocean.
The Telegraph Office is within a few yards of the main entrance
to the Hotel.
The Hotel is on the main road to Bruthen, Buchan,
and the Snowy River.
Coaches for Visitors to Lake Tyers, the Tern Tree
G-ullies, and other picturesque spots in the
vicinity.
BOATS fresh from Melbourne for the use of Visitors.
FRESH BAIT EVERY MORNING. SADDLE HORSES.
All Information Supplied to Excursionists.
■WITTES, SPIUITS, JYHLIBS
Of the best brands.
T. LAUGHTON,
Proprietor.


T ZEE IE
TOURIST’S AID SPORTSMAN’S GUIDE
TO THE
fipplanii %iln
SyUMUTOifiS COUNTRY.
SPECIALLY COMPILED FOB,
Jfffi ywf? miPWP?
Ownm of Hii' Sti'iimi'is “ Tinijil,” “ Itairnsdulo,”
mill “ Sarali,”
J. BLACKWOOD HOWIE.
SECOITD EDITIOU.
M. L. HUTCHINSON, Agent, 15 Colli asst. West, Melbourne*
SALE :
Printed and Published for “ The Lakes’ Navigation Company,
Limited,” at The Gippsland Mercury Office.
PRICE SIXPENCE.


GOFTE^rTS
Introductory 1
Sale 4
Drives around Sale - - 8
Punt-lane .... 9
To the Lakes - - - 10
Bairnsdale - - - - 14
Australian Mutual Provident
Society
Mr. W. M. Black
Miss A. Bourke
Mrs. L, Bryant
Mr. J. Clues
Mr. E. Cornell
Mr. L. Day
Mr. T. Duggan
Messrs. English, Peck, & Co.
“ Gippsland Mercury ”
Mr, E. Hill
Messrs. L. Jensen & Co.
Lakes’ Navigation Co.
Mr. D. Lamb
Mr. T. Laughton
Mr. A. Murray
Mr. 11. O’Reilly
Mr. C. Petersen
Me. J. Ct. Pettit
Mr. W. H. Rayner
Mr. Roberts
Mr. Roadknight
Mr. Stow
Mrs. S. Thomas
The following Business Addresses will be found amongst
the Advertisements—
Messrs. Little & Treloar
Messrs. W. M‘Culloch & Co.
Drives around Bairnsdauk - 15
To the Lakes’ Entrance - 1G
To the Tambo - - - 20
Bruthen - - - - 21
The Back Lakes - - - 22
Conclusion - - - - 23
Messrs. Permewan, Wright & Co.


M 3355 /F/OCOS
Jhe pippsLAND Jakes' J^ountej.
UR introductory remarks may be brief, as we do not
m'jJ) conceive that there is any great necessity to enlarge on
the benefits which accrue from a trip to the magnificent Lakes
of Gippsland and the surrounding country. To tourists from
other parts of the colony—in fact, from the other colonies of the
Australian Group—and more especially to those whose business
necessitates their confinement to offices and warehouses, such a
series of trips as we propose to offer are of incalculable value as
a means of resuscitating and restoring wasted health and
■energy. It must not be imagined that, in such a small compass
as we are confined to, anything approaching justice can be done
to the ever-varying scenery of the Lakes and Rivers, or to the
various points of beauty and interest inland from the principal
towns in this the Garden of Victoria. Our principal object is
to place visitors in possession of such information as will enable
them to make a complete tour of the Lakes’ country, to point
out the most picturesque spots, to inform them as to hotel and
coaching accommodation, and where they can ascertain all
particulars as to sporting and fishing in the various localities.
To artists, the natural beauties of the scenery of the Lakes
and Rivers will commend themselves, and we will, without
further introduction, proceed to the more important business of
this Guide. All information as to the best means of making
the trip from Melbourne can be obtained from Mr. M. L.
Hutchinson, 15 Collins-street West, and at Sale from Mr. R.
Stellwag, secretary, at the Lakes’ Navigation Company’s office,
Raymond-street.


The Company’s steamers—Tan jil, Bairnsdale, and Sarah, which
have been specially fitted for the comfort and convenience of
passengers—run in connection with the Gippsland Railway, and
in order to give every opportunity to tourists to make the
Lakes’ trips as cheaply as possible, and to give them plenty of
time to visit every locality of interest, dateless tickets to
Paynesville, Bairnsdale, Rosherville, and the Lakes’ Entrance,
per rail and steamer, available for return at the pleasure of the
excursionists, can be obtained at Prince’s Bridge Station, Mel-
bourne, for £2 12s. 6d. first class, and £2 Is. second class.
Trains leave Melbourne morning and evening, and stop at
Warragul, about half-way, for sufficient time to permit pas-
sengers to obtain refreshments. During the journey, which-
occupies a few minutes under six hours, many pretty fern-tree
covered spots are passed, and glimpses are obtained of the high,
ridges and peaks of the Gippsland Mountains. Agricultural and
pastoral country is the principal feature of the latter part of the.
journey, until the trains arrive at
S -A. L HI
Where cabs are in readiness to convey passengers to their hotels.
Sale is the oldest municipality and the principal town in Gipps-
land. It is situated on the River Thomson, and is the centre of
a large agricultural district. The borough was proclaimed on
the 10th August, 1803, and was extended on 24th December,
1873, from its original area to seven square miles. The popula-
tion of the borough is about 4000 and of the district 23,000.
The streets of the town are laid out north and south and east
and Avest, are cleanly kept, and where the most traffic is the
footpaths are laid down with tar pavement and properly kerjjed
and channelled. Sale can also boast of shops and warehouses,
with displays quite equal to many more pretentious establish-
ments in Melbourne. There are many places of interest in the
town, which we may mention seriatim. The Artesian Well in
Macalister-street is perhaps one of the most important. Many


years ago various schemes were discussed by the Municipal
Council to obtain a constant supply of pure water, but the
-expense of conducting it from points several miles up the rivers
prevented any one of them being carried into effect. After
much consideration the Borough Council decided to sink an
■artesian well, as from the nature of the country and its
proximity to the mountains there was every reason to suppose
■that a supply of pure water could thus be obtained. Effect was
.given to their decision, and eventually a stream of pure water
was obtained at a depth of 231 feet. The water rose through a
pipe of only two inches in diameter to a height of 43 feet from
the surface of the ground, with a daily supply of 43,000 gallons.
From this source the town is supplied with water, and by means
'of pipes the street channels round the principal block of the
town are continually flushed. The total cost was £2BO IGs.
♦Opposite the well is the Victoria Hall, a handsome structure
built by the Sale Public Hall Company at a cost of £4400,
including furniture, stage, scenery, piano, &c. It is capable of
seating 1000 persons. The Government buildings comprise the
Post and Telegraph Offices, Sub-Treasury, Survey Office,
Courthouse, and Lock-up; also a new Gaol, which, however,
has not yet been quite completed. The State School is
in Raymond-street, midway between the Artesian Well
and the Public Offices, but it is intended to shortly erect a
larger and more commodious building on the Market Reserve,
-one of the highest points of the town. The Lake Guthridge,
which was recently formed, is at the east end of the business
part of Foster-street, and it is into that sheet of water that the
overflow from the well finds its outlet by way of the street
•channels. Some 500 young trout-fry were recently placed in
the Lake, and it is anticipated that ultimately they will find
their way into the rivers by Flooding Creek, which runs past its
southern end. On the eastern side of the Lake the Public
Gardens are beautifidly situated and well laid out. The walks
■are much frequented and the grounds are well cared for. The


gardens were planted some 10 years ago by the townspeople, and'
the trees, which were judiciously placed, form beautiful vistas,
while the shade they afford is very welcome during the summer
months. Recently a large number of valuable ornamental
trees, shrubs, &c., were added to the grounds. The Gippsland
Hospital is situated at a short distance from the gardens, and is
an imposing structure, surrounded by well laid out grounds.
The institution contains 50 beds, and is supported by private
contributions. There is also a Mechanics’ Institute and Free
Library, plentifully supplied with the principal journals of the
colony, as well as with illustrated papers —colonial, English, and
American. The library contains about 3000 volumes, comprising
light literature, historical works, and valuable works of refer-
ence. It also possesses a museum, in which there are many
specimens of minerals and other objects of interest. The other
halls are the Temperance, Masonic, Manchester Unity and!
Grand United Orders of Odd-fellows. There are three banks,.
Australasia, Yictoria, and National, and, recently established, a;
branch of the Savings Bank, which has been so far very success-
ful. The churches are the Church of England, Presbyterian,
Wesleyan, Primitive Methodist, Baptist, and Roman Catholic..
The newspapers are The Gippsland Times, published on
Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays, and The Gippsland'
Mercury , published on Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays.
The reserves are large and well situated. The Friendly
Societies’ Reserve is next to the Public Gardens; the
Agricultural and Caledonian Reserves adjoin each other on
the north-eastern part of the borough, and the Cricket
Ground on the east side. The latest addition to the town
is the Municipal Gasworks. They are erected on the bank of
Flooding Creek, at the south end of Raymond-street.
The foundation-stone was laid on the 24th of May, 1881
the gas was turned into the mains on 27th October, and the
general illumination of the town was effected on the 29th
October, when the results were eminently successful. We now


come to the hotels, of which there is a goodly number. The
Club is in Foster-street, and is commodious, comfortable, and
in every way suited to the requirements of visitors. Mrs. L.
Bryant, the courteous proprietress, can afford every information
to tourists who desire to have a day’s sport with the rod or the
gun. Mr Clues’ principal stables are at the rear of the
hotel, where coaches or buggies and saddle horses are to be
obtained, and he will also inform visitors where enjoyment
is likely to be had by sportsmen or picnic parties. The
Criterion, at the corner of Macalister-street and York-street,
has a commanding appearance, with all the conveniences of
a first-class establishment. In connection with it is a livery
stable, where visitors can obtain conveyances of all kinds and
saddle horses for excursions to the country. The obliging
landlord, Mr Lamb, will give every information as to the best
means of obtaining a capital day’s shooting. Ammunition to
suit all sorts of guns, rifles, and breechloaders, wire cartridges
and all the necessaries of a sportsman, fishing tackle and flies
specially made for use in Gippsland waters, fishing rods and
every requisite, can be had at Messrs. Little and Treloar’s (The
Hardware Co.), opposite the Criterion Hotel, or at Messrs. L.
Jensen and Co.’s, in York-street, Sale, so that sportsmen and
anglers need not encumber themselves with an unnecessary load
during the journey from Melbourne to Sale. In addition to
many industrial pursuits we must not omit to mention that there
are three tanneries, besides fellmongering and candle and soap
works in full operation in Sale and the immediate neighbour-
hood. There is also an aerated water and cordial factory,
established many years ago. Another industry has yet to be
noted. Mr. J. 6. Pettit’s brewery is in York-street, opposite
the Bank of Victoria, and is one of the most complete estab-
lishments of its kind. His ales are made with "water from the
Artesian Well. Bottled ale is a feature of the products of the
brewery. The ale from this brewery has acquired well merited
reputation, not only in Sale and in the surrounding districts, but


also in Melbourne, where a glass of “ Sale Artesian-water Ale”
can be had in several hotels. Besides the attractions in Sale
there are many
DRIVES
To interesting places in the vicinity. One fine excursion is from.
Sale to the Aboriginal Mission Station at Ramahyuck, by way
of Stratford, a township situated on the bank of the Avon
River. Stratford is the seat of the municipal district of the
Avon Shire, and contains a population of about 300 persons. It
is beautifully situated, has four churches, shire hall, and three
hotels. The good people of Stratford will direct tourists
to interesting spots. Redbank, lower down the river, is a very
pretty spot for a picnic, and commands some fine views.
Ramahyuck is a little distance below Redbank. The Mission
Station there is presided over by the Rev. F. A. Hagenauer, who
will give a genial welcome to visitors and gladly show them
over the establishment and grounds, where arrowroot, hops, &c.,
are grown by his black friends, under his immediate supervision.
Sale can be easily reached for the usual 6 o’clock dinner.
Ramahyuck can also be visited by way of The Heart and
Clydebank, through the rich agricultural lands of these well-
known localities. In passing, we may take the opportunity of
informing visitors that cheese manufacturing is carried on to a
very large extent at The Heart and Clydebank, at Sale, at
Briagolong, at ISTewry, and other localities in Gippsland, where
factories have been established. Samples from the Ac wry
Factory have secured first prizes at the National Agricultural
Society’s Show. Chiafcry is also cultivated to a considerable
extent at Clydebank. A drive through the land already men-
tioned, over well-made roads, brings visitors to the Avon River,
at a point opposite the Mission Station. Hailing the opposite
shore by the well-known prolonged “ coo-e-e,” the blacks’ boat
would cross the river and convey visitors to the Station. By
this route it would be necessary to obtain the services of a driver
well acquainted with the road to Clydebank. Another capital


drive is to Maffra, in the municipal district of the Maffra Shire.
Good fishing and many nice nooks are to be found on the banks
of the Macalister River, a fine, clear stream. The return
journey to Sale will terminate a pleasant day’s outing and give
excursionists time for a good night’s rest before commencing
their trip to the Lakes, by way of the
PUNT-LANE.
Coaches and cabs leave the various hotels at hours fixed to
suit the departure of the Company’s steamers. After passing
the Sale Municipal Gasworks already mentioned, the route is
over a capital road along the banks of the Thomson to its
junction with the Latrobe River, a distance of about three
miles. In the earlier days of Gippsland this road was a perfect
quagmire, and a terror to travellers. The Thomson River
has lately been snagged to within about a mile of Sale,
with the idea of bringing the shipping as near the town as
possible; but it is contemplated, at some future date not far
distant, to convey the shipping to a basin to be formed at one of
the lagoons in the town. The Latrobe River, before it joins the
Thomson, is more popularly known as the Glengarry, and affords
capital sport for the knights of the rod. At the continence of
the rivers is the Latrobe Wharf, whence the Lakes’ steamers
depart. The Victorian Hotel and the Swan Hotel, situated near
the Wharf, arc favourite resorts of tourists and have been built
with the view of affording every comfort and convenience to
those who desire to spend a day or two in shooting or fishing in
the vicinity. The landladies, Mrs. Thomas and Miss Bourke,
will do all in their power to make their visitors comfortable.
Boats can be obtained to take fishing or picnic parties either
below the Wharf on the Latrobe River, as it is then called, or
up the Glengarry, where there are plenty of cosy nooks for
enjoying alfresco repasts. Numbers of creeks can be found
flowing into both rivers, where the angler can get plenty of fish
with fly or bait. At the junction of the rivers a drawbridge is
in course of construction, and when it is finished the old bridge


now ill use. will be taken clown and the prime obstacle to the
extension of shipping up the Thomson River will thus be
removed. This drawbridge was promised some 20 years ago,
and although repeated assurances of the fulfilment of that
promise were received from time to time, it was not commenced
until very lately. The main road to South Gippsland crosses
the bridge, and it is also the outlet to the Ninety-mile Beach, on
which a recreation reserve, much used by the people of Sale,
Rosedale, and other towns, is situated. On the road to the
Beach, and close to the reserve, capital kangaroo shooting and
hunting can be obtained.
TO TIHLE LAKES.
The Company’s steamers leave the Latrobe Wharf as
arranged according to the time-table advertised in Argus and
local papers for the various trips on the Lakes. Sailing down
the Latrobe River, a fine broad stream, the eye is delighted with
the varying scenes on the banks. The vegetation is luxuriant
in many places, and on both banks the pastures maintain large
numbers of cattle. On the left hand bank are the well known
Heart pastures and the selected portions, with their homesteads
dotted here and there. On the right hand side is Glencoe, with
its fine uplands and woods. A sail of some 11 miles, during
which lagoons may be seen literally alive with wild fowl, brings
us to Lake Wellington, which is the largest of the Gippsland
Lakes, being 12 miles long by 10 miles broad, but it is decidedly
the most uninteresting, although it is a magnificent sheet of
water. On the left is Marley Point, the scene of successful
regattas, and further on is the mouth of the Avon River, already
alluded to. A tributary of the Avon, the Perry River, joins it
about half-a-mile from the Lake. About a mile up this river
there are six hop gardens, while at Swell Point on the Lake
there are eight similar plantations. Swell Point was at one time


better known as “ Hop Garden Point.” There arc also several
selectors’ houses dotting the shore in the parish of Meerlieu.
"The homesteads of Strathiieldsaye and Roseneath are further on,
■and are the more conspicuous, as the background is higher land
than is the character of the shores of the Lake generally. Far
-away in the distance the magnificent Australian Alps, as the long
range of mountains has been fitly named, are seen. Mount
Baw Baw is the most prominent, but there are others also which
will be noticed. Mount Wellington, on whoso slopes many
sheep are depastured, Mount Useful, so called because of a
natural spring of water on its summit, Castlehill, and Castleburn.
On the same side is Mount Cunningham, overlooking a sandy,
;shingly beach, which stretches to the southern end of the Lake,
where it is joined by M‘Lellan’s Straits. The right-hand shore
■of the Lake is for the most part low-lying, the only point of
interest being Tucker Point, where, as its name indicates, fish
sind wild fowl abound. safely voyaged through Lake
Wellington the visitor may probably imagine that he is near his
journey’s end, as no opening appears until a sudden turn dis-
closes the channel known as M‘Lellan’s Straits. During a sail
•of over six miles through the Straits the traveller is favoured
with a view of the most luxuriant foliage. The thick shrubs
■and trees, which clothe the banks to the water’s edge, are
beautifully variegated and in the rays of a mid-summer sun
present an ever-changing display of various shades of colours.
The channel of the Straits is of an even width and depth all the
way, and is certainly a feature of the Lakes’ trip. Having
passed through the Straits the steamer enters Lake Victoria,
which is about 20 miles long by a width varying from three to
four miles. On the left are the South Backwaters, Jones’ Bay,
into which Tom’s Creek flows, and Breakfast Point. Turning
to the right is the Red Bluff. Along the shore several substan-
tial residences and fishermen’s huts may be seen. The scenery
•on both banks of the Lake is varied and picturesque, and cannot
'but be admired. Still steaming on we reach Deadman’s Point


on the left, and Sperm Whale Head on the right, round which is.
the entrance to the Back Lakes, of which more hereafter.
Rounding Bluff Head the steamer enters M‘Millan’s Straits,
leaving New land’s Backwater, which extends inland fen- a con-
siderable distance, on the left. These Straits are between the-
main-land and Raymond Island, anil are, from their natural
appearance, well worthy the attention of visitors. On the
main-land is the township of Paynesville, which has a history of
its own. Not so very long ago it was but a cluster of fishermen’s-
huts, but the fish trade of the Lakes becoming of considerable
importance, it has gradually increased until now it has arrived at
the dignity of a prosperous township. The original native name
of Paynesville was “Toonallook,” signifying “plenty of fish.”
Hotel accommodation is supplied by Mr. L. N. Day, at his new
establishment opposite the pier. Mr. A. Murray also has a
residence, the Traveller’s Retreat, where tourists can be
accommodated, and at both establishments, visitors—whether
seeking for excursions only, or for fishing or shooting—can be
supplied with the necessary means of conveyance either by land
or water. Paynesville is a convenient place from which to reach
the Back Lakes. Those who have watched the progress which
the township has made assert that there are bright days in store
for it, as from its natural situation and the advantages it possesses-
for anglers and sportsmen, it must become a favourite stopping
place for tourists on the Lakes. Leaving Paynesville after a short
journey, still through M‘Millan’s Straits, the steamer enters Lake
King, the smallest but the most beautiful of all the Lakes. The-
banks of this Lake are bolder than those of the others, and high
ridges, which could almost be termed ranges, spring from its.
shores. These ridges are well wooded and have a most imposing
appearance. Sailing on a northerly course for the mouth of the
Mitchell River we have on our left Eagle Point Bay, with Eagle
Point itself majestically overlooking it, and on the right the
Tambo Bluff with' its dense timber, and the entrance to the
Tambo River. To the north are the Fainting Ranges over


which Angus M'Millan passe 1 on his second trip after his
■discovery of Gippsland, Mount Taylor, <a point of observation
for the geodetic surveyors, and Mount Look-Out. The entrance
■to the Mitchell River is scarcely visible until the steamer is close
to it, and then it will be observed that both banks stretch far
into the Lake, a peculiarity of the Lakes rivers, having Eagle
Point Bay on the left, and Jones’ Bay and the mouth of the
Nicholson River on the right. There was a project on foot to
make a cutting across the bank dividing the river from Eagle
Point Bay to lessen the distance to Bairnsdale, but thus far no
active steps have been taken. Passing up the river after a sail
of a few miles the magnificent hop gardens on both banks must
strike the visitor as an evidence of prosperity. During the
months of October and November these hop fields have a peculiar
appearance. Then the eye is greeted with considerable areas of
ground well tilled, bristling with long, bare ti-tree poles, and no
one looking at them, unless he was versed in the mysteries of
hop growing, would imagine that but a short time would elapse
ere the vines would gradually alter the whole aspect of the
picture, and change its barren appearance into a wondrous
expanse of avenues of green foliage and the fragrant flower of
the hop. February, or early in March, sees the plantations at
their best, and it is specially interesting to witness the busy
scenes when hop picking is in full swing. This occupation gives
employment to large numbers of men, women and children, and
is looked forward to with no small degree of pleasure. The
hop gardens extend up the river for some distance above
Bairnsdale, and are pointed to with a just pride by its inhabitants.
-One hundred and sixty acres have been planted with hops for the
harvest of February or March 1882. Tobacco plantations also
flourish on the banks of the river, and the visitor cannot but be
-struck with the comfortable homes, with their orchards and
.gardens, which are to be found at regular intervals. After a
voyage of nearly 70 miles from Sale, occupying about six hours,
-the wharf is reached and the passengers are safely landed at


IB^IIE^ZSrSID.A.LIE].
Comfortable vehicles running in connection with the prin-
cipal hotels are always in readiness to convey passengers to their
temporary abodes during their stay in that town. The glimpse
of the town as seen from the vicinity of the wharf must not be
allowed to convey to the minds of the visitors any idea of its
extent or importance as will be evident when they reach their
respective hostelries. Bairnsdale is the centre of a mining,
agricultural, and pastoral district of considerable extent, and is
the seat of the local government of the shire of that name. It
is beautifully situated on high land with steep banks to the
Mitchell River. Its population is estimated at 1350. The prin-
cipal public buildings are those usual to Government business,
Post and Telegraph Offices, Shire Hall, State School, Masonic
and Oddfellows’ Halls. There are four banking establishments,,
the Colonial, National, Victoria, and Australasia, all of which
are handsome buildings. The Churches are four in number—-
Church of England, Presbyterian, Wesleyan, and Roman
Catholic. A Mechanics’ Institute and Free Library is another
of the institutions of the town, and is well supplied with all the
principal newspapers and periodicals, as well as with a library of
about 1000 volumes. There are two newspapers, The. Advertiser
published three times a week, and The Liberal News twice a
week. The principal business of the town is mainly dependent
on farming, mining, and pastoral pursuits, and, as we have
already noticed, hop growing, which is carried on with consider-
able profit. Maize and tobadco also form items of importance
in the products of the district. Tanning and fellmongering are-
like wise among the local pursuits. Settlement in the neigh-
bourhood has been steadily progressing, and a large area of land
has been taken up by selectors, leaving, however, a considerable
area still available. The hotel accommodation in Bairnsdale is
excellent. Mr Petersen’s Club Hotel, which has recently
received considerable additions, is a comfortable abode, and in


connection with it, the landlord mentions in his advertisement
all the requisites for tourists, sportsmen, and anglers. He will
also furnish all necessary information to those who may desire to
visit the various interesting places in the locality. Bairnsdale
Club Hotel is a handsome two-storey building situated on a high
bank, and from the upper storey capital views can be obtained of
the river and the flats. Mr. Duggan notifies in another place in
this pamphlet the inducements he holds out to his patrons.
Mr. Roberts’ Commercial Hotel is situated in the centre of the
town, and is near the Post and Telegraph Office. He also offers
to afford every information to tourists and other inducements to
visitors as set forth in his advertisement elsewhere. Mr. Robert
O’Reilly’s livery and bait stables are commodious, and are also
well situated. His cabs meet the steamers, and he offers to
provide vehicles of all descriptions, and saddle horses for tourists
who wish to visit the places of interest in the neighbourhood.
Experienced drivers and guides can be obtained to accompany
tourists and sportsmen. Telegrams addressed to Mr. O’Reilly
will receive prompt attention. Anglers who are not acquainted
with the peculiarities of the rivers in the vicinity, may, by the
very simple error of using the wrong kind of fly, be not only
disappointed themselves, but may convey wrong impressions to
their friends at a distance, and thus deprive them of some of the
finest trips in the colonies. To make as certain as possible of
success, anglers could not do better than purchase the necessary
apparatus, rods, tackle, and especially flies from locally
experienced makers. Visitors will notice by referring to the
advertising sheets that in additions to many other lines, Mr. W.
H. Rayner, of Main-street, Bairnsdale, informs anglers that at
his “Fishing Emporium” he makes all the flies suitable to the
season and the district. Within easy distances of Bairnsdale,
there are some very nice
DRIVES.
Eagle Point, already mentioned, commands a beautiful view of
the bay, Lake King, and the surrounding country, and is of more


than ordinary interest from the fact that it was the residence of
George Stewart, Esq., the first stipendiary magistrate appointed
hy the New South Wales Government for Gippsland. The site
was chosen for its commanding situation, and as a point of
vantage during the time when the blacks were so troublesome.
The road to the Point is along the bank of the river, and is a
very pretty drive. Mount Taylor is about 11 miles north of
Bairnsdale, and from its summit splendid views of the Lakes,
Jones’ Bay and the ocean can be obtained. The mouths of the
Avon, Latrobe, Nicholson, and Tambo Rivers can also be seen,
as well as Reeves River and the Lakes’ Entrance. Granite Rock
eight miles N.E. of the town is also another pretty spot, over-
looking the river, Lakes, and ocean. It is credited with being a
capital place for a picnic, besides having the reputation of pos-
sessing considerable attractions for sportsmen who desire to shoot
kangaroo, wallaby, or game. Picnic Point is situated some two
miles up the river, and is a convenient place to spend a few
hours. There are other places of interest round Bairnsdale,
Lindenow Flat for instance, through which the Mitchell flows,
and which is within easy distance, but for further information
regarding the ways and means of “ doing” the Bairnsdale portion
of the trip according to the wishes of visitors, we must refer
tourists to the landlords of the hotels and the owner of the
livery stables. We would offer the same advice to sportsmen and
anglers when they desire a day’s outing.
TO THE IE LAKE S 7
EITTRA¥CE.
Having described one of the trips on the Lakes, we may
now take a point in Lake King about opposite Tambo Bluff, and
as near as possible to the track of the steamers as shown on the
map, from which to commence a description of a trip to the
Entrance and Lake Tyers. Leaving the Bluff to the left, and
Raymond Island to the right, the steamer proceeds towards a


mm IiAND ISAK B'S -
forthe Cl PPS land Lakes Company.


i.
i H
< H
i v
\ £
! P
i H
I p.
<
(
<
<
<
<
<
<
<
<
<
(
<
(
<
(
<
<
(
I
I y -
■ i
I
■ a) I
Hi h i
I > \
■ I
I I
111 ® I
ill!
19
H CD I
1 > :
■ P i
I N I
ill )
10 \
■I j


narrower part of the Lake, and as it approaches Tyers Point,
which is on the right of the track, the changed appearance of the
water to a greenish colour indicates that the passengers are being
taken nearer to the ocean. The air becomes more bracing, and
.suggests a snack of something to keep the cravings of hunger
away until the dinner hour arrives. The shores of the Lake
gradually close in, and Shaving Point is seen right ahead.
Rounding this Point the steamer enters Bancroft Bay, a really
beautiful spot almost surrounded by well-wooded slopes and high
uplands. The Rosherville Hotel is well placed under the shelter
of the slopes, with a magnificent outlook over the bay. The
house itself, which was specially built for tourists to the Lakes,
is well constructed and convenient in every respect for the recep-
tion of visitors. Besides, there is in the vicinity plenty of
shooting and fishing, and the landlord, Mr. Hill, will accommo-
date his guests with boats for marine excursions or fishing expe-
ditions. There is also good bathing, and enclosed baths for
ladies. The scenery around Rosherville-—or as the postal
authorities call the locality, Metung —is really fine, but of this
visitors will be best able to judge from personal observation. On
the opposite shore is Mr. Stow’s Sportsman’s Home and Sana-
torium, situated on a point known as Point Normanby, and is
credited with being one of the most charming views on the Lakes.
The homestead comprises a number of lofty, well ventilated and
comfortable rooms for visitors, particularly for families. Mr.
Stow has given much attention to the garden, which is one of
the finest on the Lakes. The house will be recognised after
nightfall by a coloured light, erected for the benefit of masters,
who can easily “ make” the place during the night. A green
light shows north and south, red to the west, and white to the
■eastward. Passing through Bancroft Bay, with its arms and
backwaters, the visitor is carried through some of the most
majestic scenery of the Lakes. Having passed Smyth’s Point,
the course is between a long narrow island on the right, known
as Flannigan’s Island, and bold cliffs on the left shore; then.


continuing onwards for some distance, the high ridges become-
even bolder, while the islands passed maintain their refreshing*
green appearance, contrasting with the rugged banks on the-
opposite side, until a bold headland is reached, the veritable
Jemmy’s Point, so well known in connection with Sir John
Goode’s scheme for making a permanent entrance to the Lakes.
The name, Jemmy’s Point, is a corruption of the original
“ Jumbuck Point,” by which it was known in the early days.
Crossing from Jemmy’s Point and leaving the North Arm on the
left, the works at the proposed Entrance are reached, and some
idea may be formed, from the appearance of the sand hummocks
between the piers, of the difficulties of forming a permanent
entrance. Some years ago these works were undertaken accord-
ing to designs prepared by Mr Warded, Government Engineer,
and a large sum of money was spent in the endeavour to effect
an entrance from Peeves Piver to the sea. The amount, some
£20,000, was utterly inadequate for the accomplishment of the
scheme, and any further attempts were abandoned. The visit of
Sir John Goode must be so fresh in the recollection of everyone,
that it is needless to enter into particulars of his inspection and
ultimate report ; suffice it to say that he has recommended that
the works erected be utilised by the Government, and that a sum
of £60,000 is to be made available to make a permanent
Entrance. The money already expended has not, therefore,
been thrown away. Passing between the sand hummocks, which
separate Peeves River from the ocean and the mainland, the
steamer arrives at the Lakes’ Entrance. A view of the great
expanse of sand hummocks and beach against which the long,
heavy rollers of the ocean are continually breaking, will be
sufficient to bear witness to the difficulties and dangers of
“ crossing the bar.” To-day the Entrance may be where it was-
yesterday, and to-morrow, with a heavier force from the ocean,
a new Entrance may be opened higher up or further down,
according to the direction whence the influence comes. But the
points where entrances have been alternately opened or silted.


up, and where vessels have gone ashore, together with the
various influences of wind and tide, will he better explained by
residents of the locality than could be done in these pages.
Cuninghame, as the township at the Entrance is called, is a post
and telegraph station. Until a few years ago there were three or
four cottages on the mainland erected at some distance from high-
water mark, and “The House on the Hill,” to which we will
presently refer ; but the cottages have disappeared, one by one,
as the sea gradually encroached on the land and washed their
foundations away. Now, on the Hat at a short distance from the
jetty, there is a commodious hotel, with a balcony overlooking
the Entrance, and from which a capital view can be obtained.
Mr. Laughton, the landlord, has very fairly described it in his
notification which appears elsewhere. There are some very
pretty spots about the locality, including ferntree gullies, and
shady walks, while to sportsmen and anglers plenty of shooting
and fishing must be an attraction. The North Arm, which
stretches inland for a considerable distance, and the back channel
can be easily reached by land, and Mr. Laughton will gladly give
every information and furnish guides to these localities. A trip
to Jemmy’s Point will well repay the exertion of climbing to its
summit. From there one of the grandest views of the Lakes,
river, and ocean can be obtained. Another attraction at the
Entrance, and perhaps the most novel is the spearing of fish by
torchlight. Anyone who has not witnessed such a scene should
not leave the Entrance unenlightened. Leaving the flat at the
jetty, a short walk by a gradually rising path, brings us to the
foot of the hill, on the top of which is Mr. Roadknight’s estab-
lishment, curiously named Merrangbaur House. It is the oldest
establishment at the Entrance, and commands one of the finest
views of the ocean and the Ninety-mile Beach, a continuation of
the same shore w r e alluded to in a previous part of this Guide,
The house will be found to be a very comfortable residence. A
large garden, originally planted twenty-three years ago, furnishes
fruit in abundance for the use of visitors. Mr. Roadknight also-


•offers to drive ladies and children to the beach in ten minutes.
Among the other places of interest, Lake Tyers holds a prominent
position, and can be reached either overland by coach from
Laughton’s Hotel, or by way of the beach and round the Red
Bluff', a headland about half-way to the Lake. At a short dis-
tance from the shore of Lake Tyers, on a beautifully wooded
eminence, is the Aboriginal Mission Station, which is well worth
a visit. A signal by “ making a smoke ”or by waving a handker-
chief is generally successful in procuring a boat from the Station
to convey visitors over, when they will be courteously received
by Mr. Buhner, the gentleman in charge of the establishment.
The Lake swarms Avith fish, and although not permanently con-
nected with the sea is a saltwater basin of considerable extent.
If we have omitted to notice any points of interest, the great
extent and variety of the places where pleasure or knowledge
-could be obtained must be our apology. For the steamers’
arrangements for the return journey, we must again refer tourists
to the time-table advertised in Ary us and local papers.
TO THE TAMBO.
Having already pointed out the locality of the mouth of the
'Tambo River, it will not be necessary to go over the same
ground again. The steamer enters a broad stream Avhose banks
■for some miles present an evenly-wooded appearance, but after
three or four miles they increase in height until they rise in
gradual slopes from the Avater’s edge. They are Avell-ti inhered,
with here and there selectors’ houses on the higher ridges. A
large area, extending from the river banks, has been selected,
and a considerable quantity of maize and other cereals is grown.
Some distance up the river the saw mills are situated, and the
river and its woodland scenery furnish evidence of the truth
of the assertion that the Tambo is one of the finest m r ers in
Victoria. Passing further up the stream high bluffs, clothed
with timber, scrub, and other vegetation, rise perpendicularly


from the water’s edge on both banks to a height of some 200*
feet. As the steamer turns point after point, fresh views meet
the gaze, and one feels as if he would never weary of the
constant change of scenery. Some 12 or 13 miles from the
mouth of the river we arrive at a magnificent bluff and a most
inviting valley, evidently a favourite resort of kangaroos,
wallaby, and wild fowl. This has lately been christened
“ Guilfoyle’s Bluff,” in honour of the visit of the well-known
botanist of that name. No better spot could be selected for a
picnic by those who are inclined to land and await the return
of the steamer, which has yet a distance of nearly eight miles to
go, through ever charming scenery, until Mossiface is reached.
For some distance before arriving at that point, the stream gets-
gradually narrower, but does not diminish in interest. At
Mossiface, and indeed all along the banks, the vegetation is
varied and beautiful, creeping plants and wildflowers of different
hues meeting the eye at nearly every turn. Mossiface itself is-
an interesting spot, and were it not for the anticipated pleasure-
of the return voyage one would almost regret that this is the
termination of the journey up stream. The tourist visiting the
Tambo for the first time must be surprised at the size and, from
a commercial point of view, the importance of this magnificent
river, which, with the facilities offered by the Company’s
steamers, is rapidly developing the valuable country through
which it flows. No one, after having visited the Tambo River,
will ever regret either the time, trouble, or expense of the trip.
BBUTHEIT
Is a post and telegraph town 15 miles from Bairnsdale, and
within three miles of Mossiface on the Tambo River. It is-
charmingly situated, and has some very pretty scenery in its-
vicinity. It is in the centre of a pastoral, mining, and agricul-
tural district, and has a population of 200, which is rapidly
increasing owing to the numbers of selectors who are gradually


■settling in the neighbourhood. The hotel accommodation is good,
and every facility is offered by Mr Black, coach proprietor and mail
contractor, for tourists to visit many places of interest. Buchan,
some miles above Brut-hen, is a pretty place, and close to the
homestead on the station are the Lead Mines, and the curiously
formed Caves. The manager of the station will doubtless furnish
information to visitors as to the best means of exploring these
romantic localities. Bruthen is connected by road with Rosher-
ville and the Lakes’ Entrance, as well as with Mossiface, and
according to Mr Black’s notification he can meet the Company’s
steamers at any of these places. On a journey from the Entrance
to Bruthen, Lake Tyers could be visited, and by making proper
arrangements Mossiface could be reached from Bruthen, and the
visitor conveyed by steamer down the Tambo in accordance with
the Company’s time table. Visitors from Rosherville could also
return by the Tambo, or by way of Lake Tyers, the Entrance,
and thence by steamer. Arrangements for these trips could be
made by telegraphing to Mr. Black at Bruthen.
TLLIE BACK LAKES.
We now propose to offer tourists a trip which is a novelty in
itself. The Back Lakes, as shown on the map, are comparatively
unknown to any except those whose occupation necessitates their
residence in the vicinity, and yet there are not prettier spots on
the Gippsland Lakes than can be found among their winding
channels. Passing Potatoe Point, and skirting the shore of the
Peninsula of Sperm Whale Head, a group of islands is seen
dotting the channel between Boole Boole and Rotumah Island.
Steaming between these islands and rounding the southern point
of Boole Boole, we are directly opposite the spot where, at one
time, it was proposed to make an entrance to the ocean. Taking
another course, the steamer passes along the shore of Rotumah
Island with its many attractions to sportsmen. The varied nature
-of the group of islands, their exquisite position for shooting or


fishing, perhaps the most excellent on the Lakes, must bring this
trip into great favour with all who make the tour. Passengers
will have every opportunity to examine the many points from
which good views may be had, to wander along the ridge of the
ocean beach and the inner shore, and to admire the enchanting
scenery to be met with on every hand. To attempt to describe
\the Back Lakes and their surroundings, so as to convey any idea
of their beauty would be useless, for any word-painting would
fall far short of the reality. To sportsmen and anglers the place
is invaluable, while for the purposes of the artist no better trip
•could be chosen.
The telephonic communication between Sale and the
Latrobe Bridge has been working most satisfactorily, and is
found to be of very great convenience to passengers and others
•connected with the shipping.
In conclusion, the Lakes’ Navigation Company wish to
point out to excursionists that, having a lleet of three steamers
Tunning—the “Tanjil,” commanded by Captain Larsen, so long
sind favourably known in Hobson’s Bay, while on the “Golden
Crown”; “Bairnsdale,” commanded by Captain Neilson, whose
obliging manner for upwards of three years in the Lakes’ trade
has made him a general favourite; and “Sarah,” commanded
by Captain Macartney, formerly chief officer of the “Tanjil,”—
■they are in a position to offer greater facilities for making a
complete tour of the Lakes, with comfort and rapidity, than any
other company ; and would again call the attention of tourists
to the time-table in Argus and local papers, so that they can
be thoroughly conversant with the movements of the various
steamers, and thus be in a position to make arrangements to
suit their own convenience.


FOSTER-STREET, SALE
(Under the Patronage of His Excellency Sir George Ih
Bowen, G.C.M.G. and Lady Bowen and His Grace
the Duke of Manchester.)
Visitors will find every accommodation at this well known
Hotel, which is situated in the immediate vicinity of the Post
and Telegraph Offices, the Court House and Public Offices.
,
PRIVATE ROOMS FOR FAMILIES.
GOOD SAMPLE ROOMS FOR COMMERCIAL GENTLEMEN.
HOT AND COLD BATHS.
BILLIARDS.
Conveyances to anil from the Hotel to the trains and Lakes
steamers.
;u»I Aiuih'ni
Will find the Club Hotel the most convenient house
in Sale to receive every information they may
require during their stay in the district.
Hampers for Excursion Parties. Picnics and Shooting and
Pishing Parties provided with every requisite at
tiie shortest notice.
SPORTING DOCS AT THE SERVICE OF SHOOTING PARTIES.
All passengers for Port Albert hooked at the Club Hotel.
Mrs. L. BRYANT,
Proprietress.


BAIRNSDALE CLUB HOTEL,
BAIRNSDALE,
GIPPSLAND.
Pleasantly situated, and affords tlie best accom-
modation for Tourists, Families, and Commercial
Travellers.
LARGE AND AIRY BEDROOMS.
COMFORTABLE & WELL-FURNISHED PARLOURS.
COMMODIOUS SAMPLE ROOMS.
None but tlie best brands of
ALES, WliiS, a SPOUTS
Kept in stock.
Sportsmen can obtain Boats and the best Shooting
Dogs and all information respecting the Fishing
and Shooting Grounds in the district.
LAE&E MB COMFORTABLE BILLIARD ROOM,
Fitted up with one of Alcock’s best tables and complete
apparatus.
HOT, COLD, AND SHOWER BATHS.
T. DUGGAN, Proprietor,
(Late of Criterion Hotel, Sale.)
CORE AMD CO.’S HOOKING- OFFICE.


ii>ntrL
It. 1. DAY.
Visitors, Tourists, Sportsmen, &c., visiting the
far-famed Gippsland Lakes will find every
accommodation and the
BEST mw WKHES A SPXBXTS
At the above Hotel, opposite the Pier.
PRIVATE ROOMS FOR FAMILIES.
Steamer Daily for Bairnsdale, Sale, and
all parts of the Lakes.
To be had in the immediate vicinity.
Within easy distance of the Back lakes and
linety-Mile Beach.


ROADKNIGHT’S
Mmaiijkur Junior,
Best sea view of any House on the Lakes or on
the Ninety-Mile Beach.
THERE IS A LARGE
GARDEN OF 23 YEARS’ STANDING
Adjoining the house, so that Visitors
can be supplied with an unlimited
quantity of Fruit.
pvERY for J^amilies.
Ladies and Children driven to the Beach in
10 minutes.
IMZOZDZEIR^TIEL


W. H. RAYNER
Fancy Goods and Berlin Wool Repository,
Stationer ani) Cokcronkt,
CIRCULATING LIBRARY AND
REGISTRY OFFICE FOR SERVANTS,
FISHIIGr & CEICKETIIG EMPORIUM,
Mmi§ian
®lie tamest Stoch of ikns and Jfaiini (Boocls
In the district.
TOBACCOS, CIGARS, AND SNUFFS
Of finest quality.
THE
ENOLiSH PERIODICALS & PAPERS
BY EVERY MAIL,
London Journal, Young Ladies Journal, Family Reader,
Family Herald, Bow Bells, Home News,
Lloyd’s Newspaper.
JEWELLEBT.
A large and varied assortment of Jewellery always in stock
comprising English and Geneva Watches, gold and silver
American Waltham Watches, from £3 10s. ; Ladies’ Gold
Wedding, Keeper, and Dress Rings ; Ladies’ and Gents’ Silver
Rings ; Gold and Silver Lockets, Chains, Brooches, Earrings,
Bracelets, Scarfpins, etc., etc.
FISHING RODS AND TACKLE ON HIRE.
W.H.R. makes all the Flies suitable to season and district.


ROBERTS'
GOiiliCiiL HOTEL,
Is conveniently situated in the centre of the town, and has been
specially fitted up to accommodate
TOURISTS & COMMERCIAL TRAYEILERS.
PRIVATE ROOMS FOR FAMILIES.
Excursionists and Picnic Parties can obtain every
information at this Hotel.
PICNIC HAMPERS PROVIDED ON THE SHORTEST NOTICE.
MELBOURUTE ALES,
WINES AND SPIRITS of the best brands.
Howland and Lewis’ Mineral Waters and Cordials,
BILI.IA.FtDS
A Livery Stable adjoins the Hotel.
Saddle horses, buggies, and covered family conveyances for hire.
Experienced drivers.
The Charges throughout the whole Establishment
are on the most moderate scale.
Traps meet the Steamers on arrival and convey passengers and’
their luggage to and from the Wharf.


O' i]mil Lhnpriftnr
MAIL CONTRACTOR,
■!0 qo tt cp *fr t?
Jj; !«v tjj Ar sk» yS ■ ®
Telegraph Address - BRUTHEN.
Tourists can obtain, at the sliortest notice,
(i*o;u*lu\'b luggies, & paddle horses
To convey them to any place in the vicinity—
To Buchan and the celebrated Buchan Caves;
the Lead Mines, near Buchan; the Lakes’
Entrance; Lake Tyers; Mossiface, on the Tamho
River; or Rosherville.
Telegrams ordering Coaches to meet the Lakes’ Navigation
Company’s Steamers at Rosherville, Lakes’ Entrance, or
Mossiface (Tambo River), will meet with attention. Parties
leaving Melbourne could not do better than secure some of the
best trips in the Lakes’ Country by telegraphing direct to
W. M. BLACK,
/fp JX /TP fPTP /rh ft} ft ftp m /fN fn>
v lull wir m & 2ii it \y/
BRUTHEN.


TO TOURISTS, SPORTSMEN, & ANGLERS.
THE
JjarMoarc Compani),
S .A. L IE ,
Have always in stock all classes of
GUMS, BBEE'OHLOABEBS, RIFLES,
POWDER FLASKS, SHOT POUCHES,
And all articles required by Sportsmen generally. They also
have in stock
Cartridges loaded with all sizes of
jSHOT ;
Also, RIFLE CARTRIDGES and POWDER of the
Best Brands.
Anglers can be provided with
VIBSIS4 T&Mmm & mss.
Expressly made for use in Gippsland Waters.
FISHING RODS OF EVERY DESCRIPTION.
GENERAL IRONMONGERS.
Iron and Timber Merchants.
iiTTii i THiiMlj,
PROPRIETORS,
MACA LISTEB-STKEET, SALE.


L. JENSEN & CO.,
|rmi anJ timber Hlmknte,
&6b&sBsbb&ss §mt
Have always on hand —
AMMUIITIOI TO SUIT EYEEY KIND OE GOT
OE PJELE,
WIRE CARTRIDGES,
POWDER OP THE MOST APPROVED BRANDS,,
SHOT, SHOT POUCHES,
GUNS, RIFLES, & BREECHLOADERS.
FISHXM6 m&ms*
A special line of Bamboo Rods, expressly imported
for fishing parties visiting Gippsland.
FLIES for Anglers specially adapted for the Gippsland Rivers -
Sportsmen and Anglers need not encumber themselves
with Ammunition or Fishing Tackle, as they can get all
they require at
&. Agasis ©
YORK-STREET, SALE,
A-GHGISTTS JPOli
Singer’s and Davis’ Exhibition Prize Sewing Machines,
and London and Lancashire Eire Insurance Co.


GIPPSLANI) LAKES.
(Liiai'ell([r!i’ llcireat.
TO EXCURSIONISTS.
A. MURRAY
Begs to inform Pleasure-seekers that they can be supplied with
every accommodation at the abovenamed place.
FIEST-CLASS
BOATS, HETi, H©RBES 9 ¥£H!®LEi
ALWAYS READY.
A. Murray has had the abovenamed building erected
expressly to suit Excursionists and others, so tint they can rely
on first-class accommodation.
Conveyances to BAIRISDALE every. Tuesday,
Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday, returning
same day.
EVERY ACCOMMODATION FOR TOURISTS, TRAVELLERS, AND FAMILIES.
A. MURRAY,
Proprietor.


LATROBE BRIDGE, SALE,
(The First Hotel on Arrival at the Bridge,)
Has every accommodation for
SPORTSMEN, ANGLERS,
and TOURISTS.
FISH3K TACKLE TO BE OBTAINED.
Guides available for Sportsmen and Anglers.
The charges are strictly moderate, and eyery attention is paid
to the comfort of visitors.
steamers )‘or theSahes arrive and depart dailir, and
|tlel bourne steamers lueehln.
Arrangements for Jravellers,
F3O-A.TS FOR HIRE.
J3UG-G-lEB fiLWfiYB FO l? Yl^/IVELLE^S.
A. SOWSmi,
PROPRIETRESS.


cm cm an, c'c'lviaM, & (To.,
oliiivlxtieid,)
wsmmms.
Forwarding and General Carriers,
(fwumissioit, & Agents.
CAPITAL, £lOO,OOO.
ISMiI (H’l K j;:
120 COLLINS-STREBT WEST, MELBOURNE.
As wo have the largest number of Branches of any
Carrying Firm in the Southern Hemisphere, we can, with
the utmost confidence, solicit the support of the Public.
Wo are prepared to transact, with accuracy and
dispatch, every description of Customs and Shipping Busi-
ness, at rates much lower than those generally charged.
SALE OFFICE :
RAILWAY STATION, SALE,


BLUB HOTEL,
fn> A ft fo> l\‘'f <3 fn\ ft' fffi
c.D it 4f(i © iu/ && &} 2£o 9
Offers superior accommodation for Visitors to
Bairnsdale and the Lakes.
Private Families can always be provided with Apartments at a
reasonable cost, while every convenience is offered to
Tourists and Commercial Gentlemen.
THE HOUSE HAS BEEN GREATLY ENLARGED TO MEET THE REQUIREMENTS
OF TOURISTS, AND SPECIAL ATTENTION IS PAID TO THE COMFORT
AND CONVENIENCE OF VISITORS.
The STABLE ACCOMMODATION is COMPLETE,
And Tourists can at any time obtain conveyances to the
many places of interest in the district.
Picnic Hampers provided with every requisite. Every information
afforded to Excursionists hy land or water.
Conveyances meet the Steamers at the Wharf on arrival and
departure, free of charge.
PLUNGE AND SHOWER BATHS.
BOATS. I FiSHIW. I SHo©Tif3S o
Fishing Tackle provided. Guns and Ammunition to be
obtained at the shortest notice.
EXPERIENCED DRIVERS AND GUIDES
C. PETERHEN,
Proprietor.


jm GIPPSLAND LAKES.
rite lloohmillc Hotel
"MIETTJIsrGK
Splendid Scenery. Fishing, Shooting, and Boating.
ENCLOSED LADIES’ BATHS.
TABLE PLENTIFULLY SUPPLIED WITH FRESH FISH.
TEEMS MODERATE.
LIQUORS OF THE BEST BRANDS.
Steamers Daily from Bairnsdale and Sale.
EDWARD HILL,
Proprietor,


HORACE RICH,
AGENT FOR
Wm. P‘(fullorh k (fo* t
RAILWAY CARRIERS,
SHIPPIIG AID POEWARDIIGr AGEITS,
E;AILW-A_"Y" ST-ATIOISr,
SALE.
ADVANCES MADE ON PRODUCE OF ALL KINDS.
All Commissions, by letter or otherwise, care-
fully and promptly attended to, at
Lowest Current Rates.
AGENCIES I
GIPPSLAND STEAM NAVIGATION COMPANY.
COLONIAL MUTUAL LIFE ASSURANCE COMPANY.
NEW ZEALAND FIRE AND MARINE INSURANCE
COMPANY.
HOBACE BICH
Railway Station, Satr.


BAIRKSDALE
Kitunij anb Kdting Stables,
R. ffREILLT
Has on hire
WAGGONETTES, BUGGIES,
DRAGS, COACHES,
AND SADDLE HORSES.
CABS MEET ALL THE STEAMERS.
Experienced Drivers and Guides to accompany
Tourists and Sportsmen
DAILY COACH TO BRUTHEN.
Travellers can be conveyed to Omeo or Buchan,
either by coach or on horseback.
TELEGRAMS WILL RECEIVE PROMPT ATTENTION.
ROBERT O'REILLY,


JAfp
Bi6 r uo
GEO. A. STOWS
IprtsiMii’j Inmr
AND
SANATORIUM.
Mk. STOW begs to intimate to his Friends and the Public that
he has built a
COMMODIOUS HOMESTEAD
on the
Opposite ROSHERVILLE,
And that he is now ready to receive Visitors and Sportsmen.
Those desirous of a Quiet and Comfortable Home may rely on the
endeavour of the Proprietor to give satisfaction.
DIRECTIONS FOR INTENDING VISITORS.
Take train from Melbourne to Sale ; cab—about three miles—
to Latrobe River, where they meet the steamers. Any of the
Captains will either leave passengers on my jetty or give infor-
mation how to proceed. Boats at all times in attendance.
dm. STOW, Proprietor.
r r ERMS 11 KAS O NAB J. E .
ADDRESS—
HUif itsiiiif. mm.


Stcrcli nub Station ignite,
3IJE2SF® S&lSTgt
GOVERNMENT AUCTIONEERS,
HORSE, CATTLE, AND SHEEP SALESMEN,
SALE, MAFFRA, & BAIRHBOALE*
-A-GKEHUTTS FOE
THE LAND MORTGAGE BANK,
PENINSULAR & ORIENTAL STEAM NAVIGATION CO.,
THE CURATOR OE THE ESTATES OF DECEASED
PERSONS,
MESSRS. GOLDSBROUGH & CO., WOOLBROKERS,
THE LIVERPOOL AND LONDON AND GLOBE
INSURANCE CO.
Auction Sales conducted and Valuations made in
any part of Gippsland.
Money to Lend in Large and Small Sums on
Freehold Estates.


AUSTRAL! AN
Mutual Provident
SOCIETY,
1840, for
Life Assurance on the Mutual Principle.
New Policies Issued in 1880 ... 6,551
Annual Revenue i from Premiums - -£540,969
(from Interest ... £218,798
£218,798
Surplus for the year (Receipts over Dis-
bursements) £445,713
Extract from “ Post Miisa/iiw ” ( fond on) »f Um-nilicr O,
X£?o, on tli." Si\(li <Xuimillennia I Ilcpoi-t of the
Society ;
“ It is, as a whole, the most complete statement ever issued
by a Life Company, and affords an incontestable proof that the
tale of singular success it tells is the result, not of chance, but
of practical and theoretical ability, governed by sound judgment
and prudence.”
The “Commercial World” (Condon) of Er hr nary i. I *>«o,
Mayo
“ No British company of any age can vie with the Australian
Mutual, which during the 30 years of its existence has received
in interest a larger amount than it has been caUed upon to pay
in claims. ”
THREE AND A-HALE MILLIOIS STERLING
SAEELY INVESTED.
CASH PROFIT ALREADY DIVIDED, NEARLY ONE MILLION STERLING.
Prospectuses, &c., may be had from the Country Agents,
or from the Melbourne District Agent, J. G. TURNER, Metro-
politan Chambers, Collins-street East, or from
Ji f.ES. jSEC.
Collins-street West, Melbourne.
PRINTED AT “THE GII'rSLAND MERCURY” OFFICE; SALE.
