

The Classlflcatory System o( Relationship.
FORMER FISON.
LONDON:
HARRISON AND SONS, ST. MARTIN’S LANE,
Printers in Ordinary to Her Majesty.
1895.




17.3.
The Classifioatory System of Eelationship.
By Lorimer Bison.
Mr. Basil H. Thomson, formerly in charge of one of the
Government departments in Fiji, when examining the particulars
requiied by the Government as to natives who contemplate
matrimony, observed that in most cases the parties had a certain
relationship to one another. They were returned as veindavo-
lani, a word the meaning of which is unmistakable. It means
that the parties are marriageable.
Thomson saw that the area covered by this word was so
wide as to indicate an organised system, and he applied to it
the term “ Orthogamous Marriage.” Some time afterwards he
wrote to me about it, and I sent him a diagram which showed
who the veindavolani are, and how they came into that relation-
ship. He replied that the particulars shown by my diagram
“ coincided exactly ” with those revealed by the replies to* the
printed questions on the Government schedules, and that there
was absolutely no discrepancy whatever.
The following diagrams will explain the matter:
Diagram No. I. —First Generation.
4. Mj Sister. 3. My Sister. 1. Ego (male). 2. My Brother.
This diagram shows two men, who are brothers, with two
women who are their sisters ; and the relationships between
these four persons, according to the Fijian system, are as
follows:
1 and 2 are veitathini.
3 and 4 „ „
1 and 2 are veinganeni with 3 and 4.
These terms are made up of the collective and reciprocal
particle vei, and the root word—in the one case tathi, and in
the other ngane. The final syllable is a mere verbal termin-
ation.
Tathi is the term of relationship between brother and brother,
or between sister and sister. The veitathini are of the same
sex.
Isgane is the term of relationship between brother and sister.
It means one who shuns the other,” and the veinganeni are the
non-marriageable persons.
Let us now extend the diagram to the next generation.


Diagram No. 2. —Second Generation.
4. My Sister. 3. My Sister. 1. Ego (male). 2. My brother.
Husband. Husband. Wife. Wife.
5. Son 6. Dan. 7. Son 8. Dau. 9. Son 10. Dan. 11. Son 12. Dan.
The Yextathini.
sis veitatbini with 7 1 Maleg I 6is veitatbini with 81 Females
9 „ „ „ 11J '| 10 „ „ „ 12 J
The Yeingaheni.
5 and 7 are veinganeni with 6 and 8.
9 „ 11 „ „ ~ 10 „ 12.
The Veindavolani.
5 and 7 are veindavolani with 10 and 12.
9 ~ 11 ~ » » 6 „ 8.
Hence we see that the children of sisters are looked upon as
brothers and sisters to one another, and not as first cousins, as
with us ;so also in the case of the children of brothers. They
are either veitatbini or veinganeni. If of the same sex, they are
veitatbini; if of different sexes they are veinganeni, and there-
fore non-marriageable. Special attention is called to this ; for it
is the key to the classificatory system of relationship.
We also see that a man’s children are marriageable with
those of his sister. In other words, the children of veinganeni,
and none other are veindavolani.
There is in many tribes an inner regulation, forbidding
marriage between a man’s children and those of his own sister.
The Australians, for instance say that, though these persons
belong to marriageable groups, they are “ too near,” and they are
not permitted to marry. This inner regulation is not the
general rule in Fiji.
We may now extend the diagram to the third generation,
omitting, for the sake of simplification one of the sisters, No. 4,
her children, Nos. 5 and 6, and we shall see that the same
rules apply


S 3
oS
r
04'
rH
M
o
rd
■g O
u ft*
s
N G
o
W |
s, 1
a
0
’■£ 3 ’
g g
1 « ■
<*>
05 2 !
■g S'
«* o 3
g a £_
I. o
” w
6
* M
a £ •
S 0 5 f
<5
<3
M
ft
d ’
c 5
ft -
od c
Qj —<
.2 3
a .§ —
*i3
CO
d
2 **
w §
* 3
o
so
TJ rs
a s
03 N
-O
M g
oo
3
d
fi
o 6
rH
a s
cS
P
CO
I §
00
HP
,® rH
a
o
00
j.
ao
is
_o
1
§
®
ao
a
£
2
03
fc
o
w
H
•“t
3
3
fc
M
Cts
fi
3
rH
w
H
bu
33
.5
R
w
fi
H
PH
o
_d 05
- , 05 r*
•5 5 05 •> 05
•Th C 5 05 00 „
'2 £ . „ rH O
2 ► O oo - oj
p » „ 05 rH CD
f£> § = . „ -I T}t
CO rt f -1
03 rH rH -+3 rj
I I
oop .-a .-a p
05 rH jj £ 0 .r*
- - _ os a
3 « 'S 3 -3 J
M M ® a> >■ o
d d os 2
03 cj rg 5
W bp d
• .S .3 ’53 a
d££ ► £
*3 ©
~ <d a> ;-. «d
1 - S & 53 §
*® CO i-l 25 rH
k 05 05 W 05
® 5 Oi l> 2 l>
03 rH rH rH
,• 23 «T US' eo wo
§ WO5 r-l rH rH iH
"g ®k
H| "11
CO lO
rH rH
CO rH rH CO CO H CO CO H t
(M (M (M H (M (M (M (M (M (M (M Cv| (M 03 CM f
a 0
O as
u PH
® a
p, w
® S Hp 04 04 'P' 00 O CO H rH CO r-i CO rHCOCOrHCOrH
rd O u 1 PI N N N H N Ol 04 04 04 04 04 04 04 04 04 04 04
-H» M ftj „ .V r. r, rn
- H 1^
P-» <1 <J (M H H H H H H H H H H H rH H H R H H
3 rrrrrr r r r „ .. „
■n 2h pq >—h -CO iO tO CO iO CO tO CO CO iO CO tO
p h a tp P s s : : ; hhfihhh . hhhhhh
2 W fe _ M
R .^r-rr-^^rr^r,
,3 2 'JDOOONHI M.d
® r HHHNS4N g |S JH p
u g S p
iT P- H"»®OC4Hi
O * H hHHNNN < H H rH Ol C 4 O)
c 4 3 p
2 HCOrHrHCO4>OSr3 C
a H OS 04 04 04 HrH fi -. S «— V
® . os'lCd'oa'd'co' K. iM 04 54 K.o4'<?-^o4'i'O4
•Hi O4 04 04 04 04 04
a rd ”o' 00" oo" o' oo* cT «aocT o' ao' o' 00“
:p, 04 H H 04 H N HO4OIHOIH
? . HT CO 1 CD" HjT CfiT t?~ • CC~ rp" rp CD -hT o'
<D CO *0 Gi pH CO <NrHrHrlr*rHH W H H H H H H
,Jh pi r-i H H (N (M
-H H . rH
.-s = = “ .-a s * s s s
-5 ts £
IP M lO J> C 5 >-l CO M 1(5 l> ffi H M
•rH ri H H H (M (N rHrHHrHOJ(N
T 3
6
o
o
o
**l


If the diagram was extended to cover an entire community
descended from Nos. 1,2, 3, and 4, it would show precisely the
same results to the remotest generation.
Tables No. 1 and 2 show that the males are ranged in two
distinct groups of brothers, each of which has a group of sisters,
thus forming two distinct classes —using this term for want of
a better. One class consists of the males 13, 19, 23, with their
sisters 14, 20, 24. The other class consists of the males, 15,17,
21, with their sisters 16, 18, 22.
Table No. 3 shows that one class intermarries with the other,
hut has no marriage within itself. In such- class the males are
veinganevi (non-marriageable) with its females; but they are
veindavolani (marriageable) with the females of the other
class; that is to say, the two classes are exogamous and
intermarrying.
We see further that the relationships are those of group to
group, and that this group-relationship is binding upon every
member of the respective groups. Thus, in Fiji, my sister’s
son’s son, No. 13, looks upon my daughter’s daughter, No. 20,
or my brother’s daughter’s daughter, No. 24, as his sister (ngane)
quite as much as if she were his own sister, No. 14. He will
nganena (avoid) her as carefully as if she were the daughter of
his own mother. If she enter a house in which he is sitting
with his legs extended, he will draw up his feet and look away
from her. If he meet her in the path he will ignore her
existence. It would he indecent for him to be alone with her,
to touch her, or even to speak to her. If he must speak of her,
he will not use the term of relationship between them ; he will
not say “my ngane” (my sister)—he will refer.,to her as “ one
of my kinsfolk.” In short, he makes no distinction between
her and his own sister, the daughter of his own father and
mother. It will, however, be convenient for our own purposes
to make a verbal distinction, and we may call such relationships
as these “ tribal,” to distinguish them from those which agree
with our own system. But we must bear in mind that the
Fijian makes no such distinction. He regards all women who
are veinganeni with him as his sisters, whether they be “ own or
“ tribal.”
Hitherto we have had under view only the relationships
betweep individuals of the same generation—or, if we must be
more precise, on the same level in a generation —but the group-
law applies to all the relationships between one generation and
another. Thus, No. 17 calls, not No. 9 only, but No. 11 also,
“father.' I call my brother’s son (No. 11) “my son,” and he
calls me “father,” just as if he were my own son. But it is not
necessary for our present purpose to take these relationships into
consideration


Let us now examine the system of an Australian tribe, or
cluster of tribes such as that of the Kamilaroi (or more properly
Kamilrai) of New South Wales.
These, like most of the other Australian tribe clusters, are
divided into two exogamous intermarrying sections, or “ Classes,”
and have descent through the mother. They are further sub-
divided into minor sections, but we need not take these into
consideration as far as our present subject is concerned.
Let us call these two Classes A and B, denoting the males by
capitals, and the females by small letters.
Let ego be of the A Class. Then my brothers and sisters
also are of that class (see diagram No. 4, p. 365).
This diagram shows the marriages and descents of a Kamilaroi
tribe to the third generation.
The Classes being exogamous and intermarrying, Nos. 1,2, 3,
being of the A Class, must marry into the B Class.
Descent being through the mother, Nos. 7 and 8, whose
mother is a, are A and a respectively ; but 9, 10, 11, 12, who
are the children of b women are B and b respectively. So also
with the persons of the third generation.
Examining these, we find precisely what we found in the
Fijian system—a group of men, 13, 19, 23, who are non-
marriageable to a group of women 14, 20, 24, because they are
all of the B Class, and the Classes are exogamous; and another
group of males, 15, 17, 21, who are non-marriageable to another
group of women, 16, 18, 22, because they are all of the A Class
We also find, as in the Fijian case, that each of these groups
of males is marriageable to the females of the other group. Nos.
13, 19, 23, who are all B are marriageable to Nos. 16, 18, 20,
who are all a ; and Nos. 15, 17, 21, who are all A, are marriage-
able to Nos. 14, 20, 24, who are all b.
If the diagram be continued to the remotest generation, it
will give precisely the same results ; and the proof seems to be
absolutely conclusive that the Fijian system of relationship—
which is exactly the Classificatory System, first observed by Dr.
Lewis H. Morgan among the Iroquois and other North American
Indian tribes, is the outcome of the division of a community
into two exogamous intermarrying sections, such as those found
in Australia and elsewhere.
It must be remembered that Mr. Thomson’s observation of the
veindavolani marriages in Fiji is of special value as evidence in
this matter, because his mind was unbiassed by any theory, and
he worked out his system of Orthogamous Marriage solely from
the facts presented by the returns on the Government printed
forms. From those returns he found, as a matter of fact, that in
most cases “ persons about to marry ” in Fiji are veindavolani,


3. My
Husb
(A) 7. Son
Diageam No. 4.
The Kamilaeoi System.
•Sister (a) 1* Ego (A) 2. My I
1
and (B) Wife (b) Wif
I
8. Dan. (a) (B) 9. Son j 10. Dan. (b) (B) 11. Son
tr 1
o
w
g
to
rotber (A)
w
4- o
1 ?
e(b) j
12. Dau. (b)
Wi
(B)
13 Son
Mb)
00
14. Dan.
Husba
(A)
15. Son
nd (B) Wi
(a) (A)
16. Dan. 17. Son
£e (a) j Husbf
(a) (B)
18. Dau. 19. Son
nd (A) Wif
00 (A)
20. Dau. 21. Son
e (a)
(a)
22. Dau.
Hus
(B)
23. Son
>and (A) §
« f
24. Dau.
d


and the explanation of the fact is given by the classificatory
system of relationship, which is the evident outcome of the
division of a community into two exogamous intermarrying
sections.
We are compelled to use our own terms of relationship in
explaining this system, but none of them have precisely the
meaning which they bear in our own system, and some of them
should not be employed at all.
For instance, Ego being male, “my brother ” may be either
my own brother, or any one of a number of men who are my
“ tribal brothers ”; and “my sister,” may be either my own
sister, or any one of a group of women who are my “tribal
sisters,” “My sister,” in fact is any woman of my own
generation who belongs to a group which is not marriageable to
my own.
So also with the terms for “ husband ” and “ wife.” “My
wife ” may be either my own wife, or any woman who belongs to
a group that is marriageable to my own. She may be my own
wife, or my possible wife. This extended meaning, which has to
be given to all the terms of consanguinity and affinity, must be
borne in mind.
The terms which ought never to be employed are Uncle,
Aunt, and Cousin, for the use of them causes endless confusion.
In our own system, for instance, my father’s brother, and my
mother’s brother are my uncles ; but in the classificatory system
my father’s brother is called “ my father,” and he and I in the
Fijian system, are veitamani, tama being the word for “ father,”
but my mother’s brother is veivungoni with me, and, I being
male, my male vungo is either the father, own or tribal, of a
woman who is veindavolani with me—u. who is marriageable to
me—my possible father-in-law in fact; or a man who is marriage-
able to my daughter, own or tribal —my possible son-in-law.
Thus, while Nos. 1 and 11 are veitamani (father and son) Nos. 1
and 7 are veivungoni; each calls the other vungonggu—nggu being
the possessive suffix.
Again, in our own system, my mother’s sister and my father’s
sister are my aunts; but in the classificatory system my
mother’s sister is “ my mother,” she is veitinani with me, tina
being the word for “ mother ”; but my father’s sister is veivun-
goni with me, and, I being male, my female vungo is the mother,
own or tribal, of a girl who is marriageable to me—my possible
mother-in-law, or a girl who is veindavolani with my son —my
possible daughter-in-law.
I would suggest the abandonment of the terms Uncle and
Aunt in dealing with the classificatory system, and the use of


the terms father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law and daughter-
in-law for these veivungoni relationships, with the understanding
that they are used in the extended sense which has to be given
to all the other terms.
With regard to the term Cousin:—according to our own
system, my father’s brother’s children and my mother’s sister’s
children are my first cousins ; hut, according to the classificatory
system, they are my brothers and sisters. The term “ Cousin,”
therefore, is misleading, and should never be employed.
It is evident that the classificatory relationships are conceived,
not as between individual and individual, but as between group
and group ; but this group relationship comes upon every member
of the various groups, and holds him fast. The relationship
which his group bears to another is his relationship to every
member of that group. For instance, a man can no more marry a
woman who is veinganeni with him though, according to our
own system, sbe may not be akin to him at all, than any one of
us can marry his own sister. Furthermore, though he may not
be able to get any particular woman on whom he may set his
affections from a group that is marriageable to his own, there is
the clearest distinction between the objection to his taking any
one, or all, of the women who are veindavolani with him, and
that which lies against his taking one of a group which is vein-
ganeni with his own.
The term veindavolani expresses something more than is con-
veyed by our own word “ marriageable.” It expresses a right,
and an obligation, as well as a qualification ; a right which asserts
itself clearly enough, even in settled agricultural tribes such as
the Fijian, on certain ceremonial occasions. Under ordinary
circumstances it is over-ridden by the later proprietary right
conferred by actual marriage or betrothal, but it is still strong
enough to assert itself on those occasions when the people deem
it necessary to revert for a time, as they say, to the customs of
their ancestors.
Actual marriage, or betrothal, gives a man a special right to a
certain woman, or to certain women ; but this right is intrinsic-
ally different from the group right which is his by birth. To
offend against the former is an offence against property ; to offend
against the latter is an offence against morality which brings
pollution upon the whole tribe. Thus, if a young Fijian, as is
not unfrequently the case, elopes with a girl who is veindavolani
with him, but is betrothed to someone else, the man to whom
she was betrothed is wronged, and his friends will help him to
seek his remedy. But it is his affair; the gods, that is the
ancestors, are not concerned, for there has been no breach of


ancient custom. But if he were to run off with a girl who is
veinganeni with him, the whole tribe would be up in arms, for
he has brought pollution upon them all, and all are in danger.
“Ye rebel to-day,” said Phinehas, the priest, to the Reubenites,
“Ye rebel to-day against the Lord, and to-morrow He will be
wroth with the whole congregation of Israel.” The difference
between these two offences, as 1 have pointed out elsewhere, is
that which, according to our own notions, exists between
running off with a ward in Chancery, and taking one’s own
sister to wife.
The veindavolani right involves an obligation also which can
be strictly enforced. The veindavolani must marry when the
elders agree that it is time for them so to do; and in more than
one instance when a girl’s friends have agreed to give her to a
Mission teacher, who was a member of another tribe, her
ndavola has asserted against the alien the obligation she was
under to himself, and his claim has been allowed.
It must, I think, be allowed that the classificatory terms point
to group-marriage as well as to group-relationship, to a time
when the veindavolani groups were, so to speak, married to one
another. Bastian in his latest work, positively denies the exist-
ence of anything like group-marriage in Australia, “ whether
regulated, or not ” : but the fact remains that it does exist. We
find it unmistakably in the Pirauru custom of the Dieri,
(Cooper’s Creek) on which 1 read a short paper at the meeting
in Hobart of the Australasian branch of the Association for the
Advancement of Science.
Every woman of that tribe has a man who is her noa, or
special husband ; she is noa to him, and he is noa to her. But
she has also other men who are her pirauru, or “ accessory
husbands,” she is pirauru to them and they are pirauru to her.
Representing the females by E, and the males by M, the
unbroken lines connecting the noa, and the dotted lines the
pirauru, this custom is explained by the following diagrams :
p x is a woman whose noa is M 1? and her pirauru are M 2 and
M,
This, as far as it goes, looks like an evident case of polyandry.
But each of these males has a noa of his own, and these women


have their pirauru. We may now complete the diagram as
follows: °
r^-i F2
/M 3 “Tax.
! /M 3
/
I /
I /
■ /
! /
F3\
\
\
F x is noa to M t ; her pirauru are M 2 and M .
1 2 „ „ M 2; „ „ „M 1 and M 3.
» » M 3; „ „ „ and M 2.
The old men of the tribe allot the pirauru in what may be
called the Council ot the Elders, and in every case the women
must belong to a group which is marriageable to that of the
men to whom they are given. If the noa be present in the
camp together with his wife’s pirauru, his right takes
precedence of theirs; but if he be absent, or waive his right for
the time, any one of them may take her.
I cannot affirm that the diagram represents the actual
combinations in any given case—F 2 for instance, mav have
pirauru other than M 1 or M 3; but if we could give an exact
representation of the particular individuals, the diagram would
only _be enlarged and complicated; the result° would be
practically the same ; and it is evident that the pirauru custom
is a carefully regulated system of group marriage. It may be
noted here that it is precisely the custom of the Nairn, which
has been so confidently quoted as an undoubted instance of
polyandry.
It has been asserted that the Classificatory System of
Itelationship is a mere “ system of addresses,” the ground for
this assertion being that the members of certain tribes use the
terms in addressing one another; but this explanation of the
system appears to me to be directly contradicted by the facts.
In the first place there are many tribes who never so employ
the terms; in the second place, if they are not terms of
relationship, the millions of people who use them have no terms
of relationship at all, for they have none other than these; and
finally, it is impossible to suppose that the obligations and
prohibitions conveyed by the terms could be conveyed by a
mere system of addresses. Take for instance the tabu between
the I ijian vemganeni. Any woman whom a Fijian calls his
ngane is as strictly forbidden to him as our own sisters are to
us ; her very touch brings pollution upon him, and if he took


her to wife he would be regarded with abhorrence by all his
tribe. Is it possible to believe that a mere term of address
could bring a prohibition such as this ? No theories are needed
to account for these classificatory terms; they account for
themselves, for they are the necessary outcome of the exogamous
intermarrying divisions found in Australia and elsewhere; and
the fair inference is that, wherever we find the terras, these
divisions are, or have been in the past.
The question as to how those divisions arose is a very large
and difficult one, for it is the much disputed question as to the
origin of exogamy. The Australian natives say that the object
of °them was to prevent marriage between persons who are
“ too near ” in blood, and they have a legend which expressly
declares that the division of a community into exogamous
intermarrying sections was a reformatory movement made in
obedience to the direct injunction of the deified ancestors.
Their statement may be taken for what it is worth. I have no
theory of my own on the subject, nor can I regard any of the
theories which have been advanced by others as satisfactory.
The practice of polyandry most certainly does not account
for exogamy, because polyandry never was the system of
marriage among any people on the face of the earth. Cases of
the practice occur frequently enough, but it could never have
been a marriage system, for the simple reason that, at the lowest
possible estimate, it would require the men to be twice as
numerous as the women.
Marriage by capture is equally unsatisfactory as the cause of
exogamy, because capture in tribes organised like the Australian,
does not give the captor a right to his captive unless she be of
a totem which is marriageable to his own. The facts connected
with this custom appear to me not to_ have anything whatever
to do with exogamy. They fall in with those connected with
what Sir John Lubbock has so happily called Expiation for
Marriage, and to point to a recognition of the fact that
individual marriage was an invasion of a common right.
Mr. Edward Westermarck’s contention that exogamy arose
out of a reluctance on the part of young men to marry girls
with whom they have been brought up, does not seem to me to
be in accordance with the facts. That reluctance is certainly to
be found among settled agricultural tribes between the marriage-
able young people who have lived in close neighbourhood, and
the reason of it is not far to seek; but we have to search tor
the cause of exogamy among tribes who are in a stage earlier
than that of agricultural settlement. We must go to the
nomad hunters to look for it, for they have the exogamous
divisions, and among them the young people are not brought up


Former Fison.— The Classijicatory System, &c.
lAfp
BM6LIO
TO C M
I I
together. The occasions on which the whole tribe assembles
are comparatively rare, for the game has to be sought in all
directions over the common hunting-ground, and the tribe is
usually split up into small parties wandering hither or thither
in search of sustenance. Nor are the conditions of a nomad
tribe which has settled down to agriculture more favourable to
Mr. Westermarck’s theory, for then it becomes a necessity to
keep the marriages within the tribe, in order to prevent the
dower-land given with the bride from passing out of the tribal
estate, and the elders compel the young people to have regard
to the tribal interests. The chief may "go outside his tribe for
a wife, but the commoners marry within the tribe, though not
within that particular section of it to which they belong. My
own conviction is that we shall never be able to arrive at
certainty as to the origin of exogamy, and that our best plan
is to accept the fact, confessing our inability to account for it.
[Reprinted from the Journal of the Anthropological Institute, Mag, 1895.]
Harrison and Sons, Printers in Ordinary to tier Majesty, Sc. Martin’s Ijane.




■
