

MANUAL
ON
THE DUTIES OF A
CONSTABLE.


THE DUTIES OF A
CONSTABLE;
SET OUT IN A CONCISE FORM,
WfTH
REFERENCES TO ACTS OF PARLIAMENT
AND REGULATIONS.
Chiefly designed for the Guidance of Young Members
of the Force.
BY CORNELIUS CROWE,
Constable.
PRICE - ONE SHILLING.
Fitzroy.
Robert Bake, Printer, 110 Brunswick Strbbt.
1891.


PREFACE .
The object I had in view when compiling this
Manual, was to place in the hands of recruits a
concise synopsis of the duties which they are
chiefly called upon to perform when they
become active members of the force. It will be
noticed that I have refrained from touching
upon any matter where advice could be sought
from superior officers before taking action.
During the sixteen years I have been a mem-
ber of the Police Force—eleven of which have
been spent by me in performing street duty in
the Metropolitan District —I have at times
been called upon to take immediate action
when seeing breaches of the law committed,
and on several occasions have hesitated before
doing so, through not having a knowledge of
the manner in which I should carry my duty
into effect.
These experiences impressed upon me the
necessity of having a book of instructions
handed to recruits to enable them to discharge
their duties without hesitation and with con-
fidence.
I trust this Manual, in which I have en-
deavoured to satisfy a long-felt requirement,
will be favourably received by my Department,
to whose hands I now commend it.
CORNELIUS CROWE,
Constable.
Fitzroy, 1/11/93.


A Manul on the Duties of a Constable.
1. State the conditions on which you are ad-
mitted into the police force ?
Ist.—On being sworn in I shall have entered
into an agreement to serve Her Majesty
the Queen, as a member of the force in
whatever capacity 1 may be required to
serve at the current rate of pay, and shall
then be subject to all the duties and
regulations of the force.
2nd. —I shall be required to devote the whole
of my time to Police Service and obey all
orders from persons in authority. And I
must discharge ray duties with forbearance
aid perfect civility towards all classes.
3rd. —I am principally to direct my attention
to the prevention of crime, such as the pre-
servation of the public peace, and the
security of person and property. By so
doing the objects of the Police Force will
be better effected than by the detection


and punishment of offenders after they
have succeeded in committing a crime.
4th.—lf after, a few weeks service I am
found deficient in general intelligence and
inclination for Police Duties, I may be
discharged as unsuitable for the service,
or the Chief Commissioner may discharge
me without assigning a reason.
2. What is required of you when you intend
leaving the Police Force 7
To give three months notice in writing to
the Chief Commissioner.
3. Can you follow any other trade or calling
while in the Police Force 7
No, neither can a man do so through his
wife or any other person ; or have any
interest in a house for the sale of wine, beer
or other spirituous liquors.
4. If you resign or are dismissed what have
you to deliver up 7
Every article of dress and appointment
supplied to me ; and if any are missing or
damaged a deduction will be made from
the pay coming to me.
5. When would you proceed against a per-
son for being in possession of any arms or
articles of clothing or appointments supplied to
a.Member of the Force or assuming the name
or character of a constable 7
When he does so for the purpose of doing


any act which he would not be entitled to
do of his own authority or for some other
unlawful purpose or for obtaining any
privilege or advantage.
6. Under what circumstance may a con-
stable expect to be promoted 7
Through sobriety, activity, intelligence and
good conduct. He should endeavor to
bring himself under notice by a diligent
discharge of his duties and strict obedience
to the commands of his superiors.
7. What are you responsible for when on
duty ?
The prevention of crime, the protection of
person and property and the maintenance
of good order. I must give prompt atten-
tion to complaints from the public and re-
port every circumstance of an unusual
character that may occur. I should also
pay particular attention to suspicious per-
sons loitering about, so that in the event
of an offence being committed in the
locality, I may be able to describe or
identify the offenders. I must not conceal
myself to watch persons committing an
offence,but should interfere immediate!,’and
prevent them from carrying their inten-
tions into operation.
8. With what should you make yourself
acquainted when on duty 7


The streets, thoroughfares and all public
buildings. I should also have a knowledge
of the inhabitants, and be acquainted with
the personal appearance and haunts of
suspicious characters, so as to be able to
find them in the event of their being
charged with committing a crime.
9. When on night duty in what manner
would you ascertain that the doors and windows
are properly secured 7
By frequently examining the doors and
bolts, and also seeing that cellar-doors and
fan-lights and places through which a thief
might enter are not left open.
10. If you find any door not secured how
are you to act 7
I should immediately inform the inmates.
If the house is unoccupied and valuable
property exposed, I should take charge of
the premises until the arrival of another
constable, and if possible communicate with
the owner.
11. At what rate are you to walk on your
beat ?
About two miles an hour, and to do so
regularly, so that any person requiring
assistance by remaining in the same place
may meet me. But this regularity must
not prevent me from remaining where ffly
attendance is required until the matter re-


quiring attention is settled, when I should
at once report the cause of my delay.
12. What are you to do if you observe any-
thing likely to cause danger, inconvenience or
annoyance to the public traffic 7
I should as far as lies in my power remove
the obstruction. I should also remove
orange and banana peel from the footpath,
and if wilfully thrown with the evident
design of causing annoyance and exposing
the public to danger, the offender should be
i prosecuted for throwing rubbish on a
thoroughfare. I should also deface obscene
figures or writing on walls, &c.
13. If you should observe the bursting of a
waterpipe or the dead body of an animal lying
on your beat what are you to do 7
Report it immediately at my station so that
the proper authorities may be informed.
The same course should be followed when
there is a hole in the carriage or footway
likely to cause danger to the public.
14. When you arrest a prisoner what is re-
quired of you 1
Oonvey him to the nearest watch-house and
use only such restraint as is necessary for
his safe custody. I should not allow a
prisoner to put his hands in his pockets,
as he may throw away stolen property
or papers which may be required as


evidence against him, or perhaps draw
a knife or other weapon for the purpose
of resistance.
.>l5. How are you to treat a prisoner who
refuses or is unable to go to the watch-house 1
I am on no account to pull or drag him
along the street, but should send for assist-
ance or hire a cab.
16. Under what circumstances are you to
use your baton 1
When my life is in danger or to prevent the
escape of a prisoner.
17. Can a constable call for the assistance
of a bystander to arrest an offender or to pre-
serve the public peace ?
Yes, and any person refusing to assist him
in the lawful execution of his duty shall
be deemed guilty of an indictable mis-
demeanor at Common Law.
18. At what time are you to search a
prisoner ?
When ordered by the watch-house keeper,
and in his presence, I should take from
the prisoner anything that may be im-
proper for him to have and hand it to the
watch-house keeper for safe keeping. I
should distinctly mark stolen property so
as to be able to identify it on any future
occasion. Females are usually searched
by a woman paid for the purpose.


19. While on duty are you restricted from
holding unnecessary conversations 1
Yes, even with other constables except on
matters of duty.
20. Name some of the principal offences for
which you may be punished.
Drunkenness, drinking when on duty, in-
subordination, disobedience of orders, in-
fringement of the Police Regulations
(which every constable should know
thoroughly), disrespect to superior officers,
unnecessarily interfering with the public,
using unnecessary violence to prisoners,
giving departmental information to any
person not entitled to the same, leaving
fixed point or beat improperly, not
properly working a beat, slovenly in
dress and appearance, loitering, smok-
ing, gossiping or walking with hands in
pockets while on duty.
21. For what offences may a constable be
charged before Justices!
Taking any bribe to forego his duty, or in
any manner aiding or conniving at the
escape of a prisoner, assaulting his
superior in rank, neglecting or refusing
to execute any process, refusing or
wilfully neglecting to take an offender
into custody, or failing to use his
best endeavours to apprehend an offender,


22. If tendered a reward how are you to
act 1 3
Bequest the person to enclose it to the
Superintendent, if he declines to do so
I should report the circumstances of the
case in which my exertions entitled me to
the reward and ask for permission to
receive it, but under no pretence am I
to solicit a reward from any one.
23. Are you to afford information to persons
making enquiries ?
Yes, I should give all the information
required as fully and accurately as possible,
and when asked my name and number on
any reasonable occasion should give them.
24. In case a house becomes on fire how are
you to act 1
If by night, I am first to alarm the inmates,
then give notice to the nearest Fire Brigade
Station, and on the arrival of the firemen
I must keep a space clear for them and
prevent the crowd from obstructing, and
use every effort for the preservation of life
and property. Should the fire take place
in a store, &c., where there is no one
residing, the police should not allow the
premises to be broken open until the
arrival of the firemen, as the break.ng
open would give vent to the. fire and
spread it,


25. What is your duty in the case, of persons
whom you find in the street insensible, ill, or
suffering'from injury or accident 1
After rendering the best aid I can give to
the sufferer, I should convey him to the
nearest hospital, obtain his name and
address, and the name of the person who
caused the accident, and as far as possible
the names and addresses of persons
who witnessed it, and report the matter.
Should a doctor or friends be in attendance
I should give such assistance as they may
require.
26. If a violent or sudden death occur, how
should you act 1
Report it immediately to my superior officer,
so that information may be sent to the
Coroner. I should take possession of any
weapons or any vessel containing poison, or
likely to have contained poison, which may
have caused death, and carefully note
every circumstance that may afterwards
"be required as evidence. If I suspect that
death was caused by foul play, I should
send for some experienced member of the
force, and allow no person to touch the
body.
27. In what manner should your testimony
on oath be given before Judges and Magis-
trates 1


I should stand at attention, hold the Bible
in my right hand and kiss it after the oath
is administered. My evidence should be
given in a clear, loud tone of voice, without
caring about the effects of it, and remain
at attention while in the witness box.
When under cross-examination I should
answer promptly, and should at all times
refrain from giving impertinent replies.
28. What rules are to be observed with,
regard to the service of summonses 1
(a.) After comparing the copy with the
original, and seeing that they are signed
by a J.P. or C.P.S., and that the proper fee
stamps are attached to the original, I
should serve the copy, either personally on
the defendant, or by leaving it with some
other person, apparently of the age of
sixteen years or upwards, for the defendant
at his last or most usual place of abode or
business.
(b.) A summons must be served atleast seventy
two hours before the hearing thereof, and
maybe served either by day or night (Sunday s
excepted), but if possible this duty should 1
be performed between sunrise and sunset,
(c.) When the complainant and the defendant
reside in the same premises, care should be
taken that the service is made on some
person other than the complainant,'


(d.) The service of a summons is not good if
given to another person outside of the
defendant’s abode or place of business, nor
should it be served if it is known that the
defendant has left the colony or is in gaol.
(e.) When more than one name is included
in the summons, and all parties cannot be
served on the same day, it will be necessary
to specify in the affidavit the name of each
person served.
(p.) Summonses issued under the Imprison-
ment of Fraudulent Debtors’ Act must
be served personally and conduct money
paid at the time of service.
29. What rules are to be observed with
respect to the execution of a distress warrant 1
(a.) Read the warrant carefully over and see
that it is signed and dated. Demand the
amount before levying, and give reasonable
time to obtain the money. In the mean-
time see that the property is not removed.
The constable must produce the warrant
if required, but on no occasion is he to
allow it out of his possession.
(b.) The wearing apparel and bedding of the
defendant and his family, and to the
value of ten pounds, the tools and
implements of his trade should not be
seized. Money, bank-notes, cheques,
bills of exchange, .promissory notes.


bonds, specialities or securities for money
may be seized.
(c.) Household goods should not, except with
the consent in writing from the defendant,
be removed from the house until the day of
sale. Sufficient should be seized to satisfy
the warrant. A conspicuous mark should
be affixed so as not to injure the articles,
and the defendant should be furnished
with an inventory of the goods seized,
stating that they will be sold on a certain
date unless the amount and costs be sooner
paid.
(d.) A constable should not under any cir-
cumstances use force to gain admission
into a house, but having once entered, he
may break open all inner doors and boxes
in search of property; he will be at liberty
to leave the house after seizure, and re-enter
at any reasonable time.
(e.) The wife's goods cannot be seized on a
warrant for the husband’s debts, nor can
the husband’s goods be seized on a warrant
for a wife’s debts. When a warrant is
issued against two defendants the whole
amount may be levied on the goods of
either party.
(f.) If a claim should be made for goods
seized, the constable should obtain sum-
monsed for the complainant and the
Ib.
e. 103
Ib.
S. IUo
Ib.
8. 71
Ib.
8. 98


claimant to appear before a Court of Petty
Sessions, where evidence will be heard to
determine the claim.
(».) Where nothing can be found to satisfy a
warrant for a civil debt, the complainant
should be Communicated with before
returning the warrant, nulla bona. Where
the goods seized by the cbnstable are
only sufficient to partially satisfy the
warrant, he should make a certificate on
the back of the warrant,
i 30. May persons shake carpets or mats, or
throw glass, filth or other rubbish in the
streets !
Any person found so offending should be
summoned.
31. May persons fly kites, use bows and
arrows, set off fireworks, wilfully break or
i extinguish lamps, throw stones or other missiles,
or play at any game in a public place to the
annoyance of the public ?
Any person found so offending should be
arrested or summoned.
32. What is your duty in case you observe
any person riding a horse or other animal or
drawing or driving any cart, carriage or sledg£,
or any heavy material along any foot-
path, or allowing any horse to remain across
such footpath!
I am empowered to arrest such offenders,


but if they are known I would proceed by
summons.
33. During what time is night soil to be
removed 1 and is it necessary to have a license
to do so 1
It must be removed in a duly authorised
night cart between the hours of eleven
(11) p.m. and five (5) a.m. A license must
be obtained and the required security
given.
34. What is your duty on discovering night
soil or other offensive matter spilt on a public ‘
thoroughfare ?
To obtain the name and address of the
offender and summon him.
35. What are your powers with regard to
bill posting or writing on, or otherwise defacing
walls, &c. 1
I should arrest on the complaint of the
owner or occupier 1
36. The law provides a penalty lor persons
discharging fire-arms, or carrying any fire-arms,
sword, or any other offensive weapon without
permission from the local authority. Who are
exempt from the provisions of this law 1
Any Justice, or person in the Military, Naval
or Police Service, or any person actually in
pursuit of a felon or offender.
37. What restrictions are there on builders
and contractors erecting scaffolding, or placing


building material, or opening any drain or
*ewer in any thoroughfare or public place ?
They should first obtain permission from the
local authority, and securely fence in and
keep a light burning upon such enclosure
from sunset to sunrise. Failing to comply
with these conditions they should be
summoned.
38. What are you to do when persons expose
articles for sale so as to obstruct the public
thoroughfare ?
To caution persons so offending, and if the
practice be not discontinued summon them
39. What ac'ion would you take against
offenders placing obstructions, or leaving any
hole or excavation in or near any public thorough-
fare, thereby endangering life and limb 1
I am empowered to arrest, but as a rule it is
better to proceed by summons.
40. What proceedings would you take against
persons throwing any offensive matter, or live
animal with the intention of drowning it into
any river or watercourse whence the supply of
water for the use of the inhabitants is
obtained 1
I can arrest either with or without a warrant,
or proceed by summons.
41. Specify the principal offences with horses
and vehicles and what act : on you should take
against offenders 1
lb.
«. S
lb.
•. S
lb.
«i, 9
lb.
*. IS
lb.
». IS


Hiding or driving along any footpath.
Breaking in any horse.
Furiously or negligently riding or driving
through any public place.
Driving any cart, waggon, or dray without
the name and residence of the owner
thereof being painted on the right or off
side.
Having timber, iron, or boards projecting
over two feet beyond the wheels or sides
of a vehicle.
Driving on the wrong side of the road without
justifiable cause, or injuring any person or .
property by negligence in driving.
A driver being away from his horse or cattle
so as to be unable to have full control of
them, unless one of the wheels is securely
fastened.
I am empowered to arrest, but these offences
generally occur through carelessness and
may be met by summons.
42. W ould you arrest or proceed by summons
against a person leaving a plough, harrow, or ;
vehicle oti any public thoroughfare without
a horse or other animal being attached thereto 1
Except in case of accident, lam empowered
to arrest a person so offending, but pro-
ceedings by summons are preferable.
43. When you find a valuable animal straying,
how are you to act t


Convey it to the station, and if directed,
place it at livery.
44. Would you arrest a person for setting on
- or urging any dog to attack or worry any person,
horse or other animal ?
Yes, or I would proceed by summons against
the offender.
45. Would you take a person in charge
who accidentally broke or damaged any
property 1
No. The law says the act must be wilful.
I would give the offender’s name and
address to the complaining party so that
he might take civil proceedings.
46. If a person peacefully enters the house
or premises of another, what would you do 1
I would assist in removing such person after
he had been warned by the owner to leave.
Any person refusing to leave after being
duly warned, is guilty of wilful trespass
and may be arrested. Lodgers, servants,
or apprentices are not deemed trespassers.
47. What would you do with persons who
use any threatening, abusive or insulting words
or behaviour in a public place with intent to
provoke a breach of the peace 1
I would arrest or summons parsons found so
offending.
48. What are your powers in regard to
persons who sing any obscene song, or write or


draw any indecent or obscene word, figure, or
representation, or use any profane, indecent,
or obscene language in any public street, or
within view or hearing of any person passing
therein 1
If the offence be committed in a public place
I should arrest, or proceed by summons.
But if the offender be in a house I should
obtain a warrant or summons.
49. Name the acts contrary to public
decency for which you are to take action when
committed in a public place or within view
thereof 1
Permitting a horse to serve a mare. J
Wilful exposure of person. X
Behaving in an indecent manner ; such as
persons having sexual intercourse, or using >
the street as a urinal or privy.
Allowing a slut to be at large whilst she is ‘
in heat.
50. What are you to do with prostitutes
found loitering on your beat, and importun-j
ing men for the purpose of soliciting pros-
titution ?
If they offend after being cautioned I should
arrest them.
51. Name the places defined by law as public.
places where arrests can be made for offences t
under Act 1241, and sections 25, 26 and 47 of
Act 1126?


Any park, garden, reserve, or other place of
public recreation or resort;
or any railway station, platform or carriage ;
or any wharf, pier or jetty ;
or any passenger ship or boat plying for hire;
or any licensed public vehicle plying for hire ;
or any church, chapel, or other building
where divine service is being publicly held ;
or any public hall, theatre, or room in
which any public concert, theatrical repre-
sentation or other public entertainment is
being held or performed, or is taking place;
or any market;
or any auction room, or mart, or place,
while a sale by auction is there proceeding ;
or any open bar in the premises of any
licensed victualler, whether under an
annual or temporary licence; or any
licensed billiard room ;
or any racecourse, cricket ground, football
ground, or other such place to which the
public have access free, or on payment of
any gate money ;
or any state school, and the land and
premises in connexion therewith ;
or any public place within the meaning of the
wordsin such sections, although not herein-
before specified.
52. What places are defined as public places
#9 far as relates to Part 1 of Act 11251


Evety road, street, footway, court, alley and
thoroughfare within any city, town,
borough or shire, notwithstanding that
such roads, streets, footways, courts, alleys
and thoroughfares may be formed on
private property.
53. How does the law provide for the due
observance of Sunday ?
Tt provides a penalty for any person who
keeps open (for the purpose of trading or
dealing) any house, shop, store or other
place. Chemists may trade at all hours of
the day. Butchers, bakers, pastrycooks
and confectioners, may trade until
uine (9) a.m., and between the hours of
one (1) and six (6) p.m..
It also provides a penalty for any person
found shooting for sport or profit on
Sunday, or carrying firearms on that day,
except travellers bona fide carrying fire-
arms for the protection of their lives and
property, or constables or other persons
carrying firearms for a lawful purpose.
54. Should it come to your knowledge that
a place is kept for causing animals to fight for j
gaming purposes, what would you do ?
Report it immediately to my officers.
55. What offences with animals are declared
by law to be cruel? And what action would
you take against the offenders ?


Over-riding, over-driving, or over working,
or working when unfit for use, ill-treating,
or in any way causing unnecessary pain.
Not supplying sufficient food, water and
shelter. I may arrest, or proceed by
summons.
56. How should you act with regard to an
animal found abandoned, diseased, injured or
disabled 1
Obtain the authority of two Justices to
destroy such animal.
57. What is an assault ?
One person striking or attempting to strike
another with or without a weapon.
58. What is a constable’s duty in the case of
a common assault 1
i To arrest if he should see the offence com-
mitted. If not, give the name and address
of the offender to the complaining party
that he may proceed by summons, but if
the offender refuse to give his name and
address he should be arrested.
59. What is a constable’s duty in a case
'where grievous bodily harm has been
inflicted 1
The offender should be arrested, and the
injured person conveyed to the hospital to
have his injuries attended to. If possible,
any weapon used in committing the offence
should be secured,


60. What is a constable’s duty if two or
more persons are fighting in a public place 1
To arrest the principals, if the offence is
committed within the constable’s view,
and he should do all in his power to
restore order.
61. How are you to act if required to settle
disputes between landlords and tenants ?
Not to give assistance to either party, nor
interfere unless a breach of the peace is
committed, and then only to take the
offender into custody. I must also be
careful in interfering in family quarrels,
and should not arrest for trivial assaults.
62. Are you to be cautious in taking persons
into custody when asked to do so ?
Yes, but if the offender has been appre-
hended, I am bound to take him into
custody, and if possible to obtain the
names and addresses of both parties.
Should the complainant afterwards refuse
or neglect to accompany me to the watch-
house, I may release the prisoner.
63. May you arrest a person carrying goods
which are supposed to be stolen ?
I may stop and question any person carrying
bundles under suspicious circumstances,
and arrest if he fails to give a satisfactory
account as to how he became in possession
of the articles.


A constable has authority to stop any person
carrying bundles by night, but should not
Arrest unless under justifiable circum-
stances. If the constable addresses the
party in a courteous and civil manner he
will seldom have any difficulty in arriving
at a determination, as respectable persons
will generally reply satisfactorily.
64. if a prisoner in your custody charged
with felony makes his escape, may you follow
him into a house 1
Yes, and may break open the doors after
being refused admission, provided the
pursuit has not been given up from the
time of the escape.
65. Is there any other case in which you
may and ought to break into a house after
being refused admission ?
Yes, when persons are fighting furiously,
and I hear cries of murder, and a serious
offence is likely to be committed unless I
interfere, but the breaking open of outer
doors is such a dangerous proceeding that
it should never be resorted to except in
extreme cases.
66. Can you enter a house in search of
stolen property 1
I should have a warrant for that purpose,
except where a person is arrested for
larceny ; his house may be searched in


his presence without a warrant, but force
cannot be used to secure an entrance,
although the owner is present in custody.
67. May you break open a house under a
search warrant 1
Yes, after demanding entrance and being
refused, A warrant in search of a person
may be acted upon at any time, but to
search for stolen property cannot lie
legally executed at night unless it is so
specified in the warrant.
68. Are you to show your warrant in
executing it 1
I must if required, but I am not to allow it
out of my possession.
69. In what manner should an arrest be
made ?
By laying hold of the accused, saying; “ I
arrest you on this warrant, or charge.”
Unless the constable touches the accused
he is not in legal custody. The prisoner
should not be needlessly exposed to the
public gaze.
70. Is it necessary to caution a prisoner
against making a confession ?
No, but simply abstain from asking him
questions • but if he volunteers any state-
ment it is the duty of the police to hear it.
They should warn him that it may be
given in evidence, either for or against


him, upon his trial, and then commit it to
writing, and allow him to sign it i£ he be
willing to do so. If there be any state-
ment in reply to a question, the question
should be written down as well as the
reply. A constable may question a person
in reference to a crime before arresting
him, but after arrest no question should
be asked respecting the offence without a
strict caution. On no account should any
threat or inducement be made by the
constable.
71. Should a constable arrest a defendant on
a commitment warrant without having it in
his possession ?
No. If the money were tendered to him he
would not know the amount; nor should
he force his way into a house to apprehend
a defendant, even though he had the
warrant in his possession.
72. Can a constable arrest a person charged
on warrant without having the warrant in his
possession 1
He may arrest for a felony, but an arrest for
a misdemeanour should never be made
without the warrant.
73. If any person imposes upon a person by
1 any false representation, either verbally or in
writing with a view to obtain money or goods
or other benefit, how would you actl


Arrest the offender either with or without a
warrant.
74. When can you arrest a person for having
in his possession housebreaking implements 1
When I find him in possession of any pick-
lock key, crow-jack, bit, or other imple-
ments ot housebreaking without lawful
excuse, the proof of which excuse shall be
on such person.
75. Give an instance in which you should
arrest a person whom you find disguised.
When found by night having his face
blackened, or wearing felt, or other slippers
or otherwise disguised with a felonious
intent.
76. In case you suspect a felony is about to
be committed how are you to act 1
I may arrest any suspected person or reputed
thief, whom I find frequenting any quay,
wharf or warehouse, or any street or high-
way leading thereto, and whom I have
good reason to suspect is about to commit
a felony.
77. If you find any person by night without
lawful excuse in or upon any dwelling house,
or outhouse, or in any enclosed yard, or garden,
or on board of any ship or vessel lying in port
or harbor, what would you do ?
I would arrest him and charge him with
being a rogue and vagabond.


78. Is gaming with instruments illegal?
Yes. Any person found playing or betting in
any public place, or in any open place to
which the public have access on payment
or otherwise, with any table or other
instrument of gaming should be prosecuted.
79. Is cheating at play with cards or dice
illegal ?
Yes. Any person who by fraud or ill-practice
in playing, or betting on the sides or hands
of those who do play, and win from any
other person any money or valuable thing,
shall be deemed guilty of obtaining it by
false pretences.
80. When would you charge a person found
gaming with being a rogue and a vagabond?
i When I find him in a public place or within
view or hearing of any person passing
therein, or in or near any house, licensed
for the sale of liquor, playing or betting
or soliciting or encouraging any other
person to play or bet with any table
or instrument of gaming at any game or
pretended game of chance or trick of
sleight of hand or any means of cheating.
81. Who would you charge with being a
rogue and a vagabond though you do not find
him gaming ?
Any known or reputed cheat loitering in or
near any public thoroughfare, or in Qr


near premises licensed for the sale of
liquor, and having in his possession any
instrument of gaming used as a means of
cheating.
82. Is a constable bound to aid and assist a
Returning Officer or deputy in the peformance
of his duty at an election for the Legislative
Council or Assembly 7
Yes, and to arrest any person who may be
given in charge by such officer.
83. What would you do if a person who is
deemed to be a lunatic is wandering at large ?
If such person appeared to me to be unsound
in mind, and unsafe at large, I would
apprehend him either with or without a
magistrate’s order. But an order is
necessary to apprehend a lunatic not
wandering at large.
84. State the hours during which licensed
public houses are permitted to be open.
From six (6) a.m. to eleven thirty (11.30)
p.m., and the hours of temporary license at
places of public amusement, &c., from ten
(10) a.ra. to seven (7) p.m.
85. Are publicans liable for permitting any
unlawful game to be played, or permitting
drunken or disorderly persons, thieves or
prostitutes on their premises ?
Yes. They are also liable to a penalty for
supplying liquor to intoxicated persons.


86. May liquor be sold to children to be
consumed on the premises ?
No, if they are apparently under sixteen
years of age.
87. Are publicans liable for refusing lodgings
and meals to persons demanding the same?
Yes, unless there is some valid reason for
doing so.
88. To whom may intoxicating liquors be
sold on Sundays?
To bona-fide travellers and lodgers in the
house.
89. What is a bona-fide traveller ?
A person who resides at least ten miles dis-
tant from the place where he demands
the liquor. The publican is not compelled
to serve such traveller or lodger.
90. Are constables bound pn demand to
assist in expelling drunken and disorderly
persons from licensed premises ?
Yes, and may use such force as may be
required for the purpose.
91. When are you to arrest a person for
being drunk ?
When I find him in any public place or in
any licensed victualler’s premises; how-
ever, if he is in sufficient charge and caus-
ing no disturbance I am not to interfere.
, 92. Under what other circumstances may
you arrest for drunkenness 1


When drunk in a public place and guilty of
riotous or disorderly behaviour, or drunk
while in charge of any horse, cattle, steam
engine, or when found in possession of
loaded firearms.
93. State the offences for which a licensed
victualler may be convicted in regard to his
relations with a constable ?
(a.) Knowingly harbouring or suffering to
remain on his licensed premises a constable
during his time of duty.
(b.) Supplying a constable on duty with
liquor either by way of gift or sale, unless
by the authority of his superior officer.
(c.) Permitting a constable to become
intoxicated on licensed premises.
fn.) Bribing or attempting to bribe a con-
stable. ' 1
94. When a young and inexperienced con-
stable observes what he considers irregularities
with respect to licensed premises, or illicit
traffic in drink, what is the best course for him
to pursue 1 !
To report the matter as soon as possible to
his Sergeant or Inspector.
95. What is a marine store dealer ?
A person licensed to deal in special wares
such as anchors, cables, sails, rags, bones,
bottles, old metals, &c.


66. Must collectors of these special wares
he licensed 1
Yes, and must produce their licence on
demand by a constable or other person.
97. Who are prohibited from obtaining a
licence 1
Females and boys under thirteen years of
age, except they have obtained a certificate
as required by the Education Act 1890 ;
or any person convicted of felony.
98. Are collectors liable for lending or
borrowing licences 1
Yes, and are also liable for collecting undent
false^fiame.
99. How many collectors may accompany
one truck ?
Two, and both must be licensed.
100. May collectors use any truck they like 1
No, they must have their own, or obtain one
from a licensed dealer, which must have a
number and the owner’s name and address
painted on it,
101. During what Lours are they licensed to
collect 1
Between eight (8) a m. and five (5) p.m.
102. May collectors enter upon private
premises without the owner’s or occupier’s
consent ?
No, and if they refuse to leave they should be
arrested.


103. What are your powers in case any
breach of this Act 1
I am empowered to arrest offenders either
with or without a warrant.
104. Must hawkers and pedlars have a,
licence when offering goods for sale 1
Yes, except vendors of newspapers, fish,
fruit, water, fuel, milk, vegetables,
victuals, or any agricultural produce.
The actual makers of goods or their child-
ren or servants do not require a licence.
105. How many kinds of hawker’s licences
are there ?
Two, one for hawkers trading on foot, and
one for hawkers trading with pack horses
or other animals.
106. If a person uses a vehicle in the
business of a carrier without having obtained a
licence, what power have you 1
I may apprehend and detain him until he can
be brought before a Court of Petty Sessions.


Municipal By-Laws and Regulations.
107. What constituted body is empoweied
to make By-laws 1
Any corporation or body authorised by Act
of Parliament such as Councils of Cities,
Towns, Boroughs and Shires.
108. Are the police to enforce the Municipal
By-laws 1
Yes, and should make themselves acquainted
with them, and know what By-laws are
in existence, where they are stationed.
109. What By-laws are they to pay par-
ticular attention to whilst on duty ?
The following are the principal By-laws re-
quiring police attention in the City of
Melbourne, some of which are in force in
other Municipalities, viz.:—
Allowing a chimney to be on fire.
Regulating the driving of cattle into
or through the city between the
hours of 6 a.m. and 12 midnight.


Bathing in certain places -within pro-
hibited hours.
Regulation and government of carters
and porters within the city.
Driving vehicles at night without
lights.
Depositing offensive substances upon
the streets or lanes.
Regulating the carriage of meat
through the streets.
Regulation and government of drivers
of bicycles and other velocipedes.
Obstruction to streets and other
places by cattle.
Covering over butchers’ meat in
course of carriage shall be clean.
Distributing of hand-bills, placards,
etc., in the streets.
To prevent one person acting as
driver at the same time of more
than one vehicle, or any person
under fifteen years old driving a
vehicle for business purposes.
Carrying fruit, vegetables, or other
articles of food in any vehicle con-
taining manure or other offensive
matter in such a manner as to be
in contact and become contamin-
ated therefrom.
tb. 46
Ib. S 3
Ih. 66
Ib. 73
Ib. 75
Ib. 80
Ib. 82
Ib. 93
Ib. 94
Ib. 96
Ib. 99


Regulations made by the Council of the
City of Melbourne, in pursuance of the power
conferred by Section 6 of Act No. 1126 ;—■
Carting any material or thing exceed-
ing twenty-five feet in length upon
a vehicle having less than four
wheels ; and no material or thing
over forty feet in length is to be
carried only under certain pro-
visions.
Riding or driving, and not stopping
when called upon by the police
stationed for the direction of traffic.
Processions of persons or vehicles
other than for funeral purposes,
without permission from the local
authority.
The driver of any vehicle shall give
way if he conveniently can to any
other vehicle during the taking up
or setting down of any person into
or from such other vehicle.
The driver of any hackney carriage
or omnibus shall not stop the same
for the purpose of taking up or
setting down any passenger at any
part of the street except as near as
may be to the left or near side
thereof.


No person shall swing or hoist goods
across or over the footway of any
street by means of any lift, hoist
or tackle projecting over any such
footway.
Between 8 a.m. and 6 p.m. of any
day no person shall cause interrup-
tion or annoyance to passengers by
raising or discharging dust across the
roadways or footways.
Any street musician or vocalist shall,
when required by any house-holder
or his servant, or by any member
of the police force, depart from the
neighborhood of the premises of such
house-holder.
All persons standing or loitering upon
any of the carriage-ways, footways
or other public places of the city
shall discontinue to do so on re-
quirement by any member of the
police force.
110. Are you empowered to arrest persons
who refuse to move on when requested to do
so 1
Yes, but proceedings by summons are pre-
ferable except where the oflender refuses to
give his name and address or persists in
offending.


111. Are you to be cautious in ordering
persons to move on 1
Yes, I am not to interfere except they are
assembled in such numbers as to cause
obstruction, but when required to act, I
must do so with decision and firmness.
112. Are you to be cautious not to shoulder or
inconvenience passengers ?
Yes, particularly in crowded thoroughfares,
giving way to the public when necessary,
and the utmost respect and civility must
■always be shewn.
Hackney carriage Regulations.
BY-LAW 78.
113. What are the objects of the Hackney
Carriage Regulations ?
To preserve order and regularity and to
prevent danger and inconvenience to the
public.
114. What carriages are required to be
licensed ?
All vehicles used for carrying passengers for
hire within the City of Melbourne, and
within the distance of eight miles from the
corporate limits of the said city.
115. What drivers are required to be licensed ?
The drivers of the above named carriages.


116. If an owner change his dwelling what
is required ?
To give notice to the Town Clerk within two
days
117. If you find a hackney carriage driven
by an unlicensed person what would you do 1
Obtain his name and address and summon j
him, and also summon the owner for per-
mitting it, but if there were reason to
believe that he was illegally using it, I
would arrest him and place the horse at
livery.
118. Are licensed carriages to be numbered?
Yes, both inside and outside in a conspicuous,
legible manner ; the number must also be
painted on the lamp glasses.
119. Must licensed carriages carry lights at
night ?
Every lamp, both inside and outside, shall
be properly lighted while plying for hire
between sunset and sunrise.
120. Can a driver refuse to take a passenger
and a reasonable amount of luggage when
asked to do so ?
No, it tendered his legal fare, which must be
paid in advance if required.
121. How many miles an hour is a driver
bound to travel ?
Six, except in case of obstruction or accident,
or otherwise ordered by the hirer.


122. What is a driver bound to produce on
demand ?
His license, which must bear the signature
of the Town Clerk, also a copy of the By-
law and a card showing table of fares and
the number of passengers he is allowed to
carry.
123. How are drivers to wait on the stand
for hire 1
In an orderly manner, and to be constantly
attendant on their horses ; they must not
suffer their carriages to stand across the
street or alongside of another carriage.
124. May a driver feed his horse on the
stand ?
Yes, but must use a nose-bag to contain
the forage, and shall not remove such
horses 1 winkers during the time of feeding.
Yicious horses must be muzzled while on
the stand.
125. Can a driver prevent a person employ-
ing any cab he wishes ?
He should neither prevent or endeavour to
do so, as any driver can engage if applied to.
126. May drivers stand needlessly on the
street?
Only for such time as to take up or set down
passengers, which must be done as con-
venient as practicable to the side of the
street,


127. What rules are to be observed by
drivers whilst driving 1
To keep on the proper driving seat, and to 1
drive on the left or near side of the road
except in case of actual necessity. They
must not wilfully annoy any other driver
or person, and when intending to stop,
should give notice to a driver of a vehicle
following by waving their hand or whip.
128. When are licensed carriages to go at a
walking pace past places of public worship 1
On Sundays, Christmas Day and Good
Friday, during the hours of Divine
Worship.
129. Are drivers liable for carrying intoxi-
cated, violent or noisy persons 1
Xes, except to the watch-house. Nor is
smoking permitted if any passenger
objects.
130. How is order to be maintained at
places of public amusement or entertainment 1
The drivers of every licensed vehicle at such
places must obey the directions of the
Hackney Carriage Inspector or the police
on duty, as to the taking up or setting
down or waiting for passengers, and as
to the order and the place in which they
shall stand.
131. To whom should drivers give property
forgotten in their carriages 1


To the Town Clerk within eighteen hours.
132. When cannot a driver demand his
legal fare ?
When he has agreed to take less, which
agreement is binding, but an agreement
for more than the legal fare is not binding
on the hirer.
133. How are children to be charged for?
Ho child under three years carried on the
lap of a passenger shall be charged for, but,
not more than one child with any one
passenger shall be so exempt. Children
between three and seven years may be
charged half fare.
134. In case of a disputed fare what is a
constable’s duty ?
To advise them to seek redress by summons,
giving the name and address as usual to
the complainant.
135. What is a constable’s duty on wit-
nessing a breach of these regulations ?
To obtain the number of the carriage, and
summon the owner, (whose name and
address can be ascertained at the Town
Hall) who will produce the driver.
136. What notice are you to give a driver
against whom you are about to proceed ?
I am, if possible, to inform him that I will
apply for a summons, stating what I
intend summoning him for.


By the Day, i.e, for any twelve con-
secutive hours, between 5 o’clock a.m.
and midnight
£1
10
0
For Halt-an-Hoob
0
2
0
For One Hour
0
3
0
For every subsequent space of Fifteen
Minutes completed or commenced dur-
ing the hiring
0
0
9
Per Mile
0
I
0
Every mile beyond two miles if the hiring
party do not return in the vehicle, 3d. per
mile additional as Back Fake, equalling
for the portion of the outward journey
beyond two miles ... ... Per Mile
0
1
3
And if the hiring party do return in the
vehicle 6d. per mile additional as Back
Fare, equalling for the portion of the out-
ward journey beyond two,miles Per Mile
0
1
6
TABLE OF RATES AND FARES.
To be charged for the hiring of any Hackney Carriage plying for
hire at any place within the City of Melbourne, and within
eight miles from the Corporate limits of the said City.
WHEN HIRED BY ONE PERSON OK PARTY
AND NOT AS AN OMNIBUS.
FARE BY TIME.
Which (unless by agreement) is only to be for driving within a
radius of two miles from the place of hiring; if that radius be
exceeded, and there be no agreement to the contrary, the fare
to be computed and paid for by distance.
FARE BY DISTANCE.
To be computed from the place of hiring to the most distant
point of the journey therefrom,
I—For Hiring Party not exceeding Three
Persons.
Any distance not exceeding two miles


Any distance not exceeding one mile
For two or any greater number of miles
0
2
0
Per Mile
No back fare to be charged unless the hiring
party return in the vehicle.
If the outward journey be two or more miles
and the hiring party return in the vehicle
6d. per mile of the outward journey
additional as Back Fare, equalling
0
1
6
Per Mile
Half miles commenced surplus to the last
completed mile to be in each case charged
for proportionately.
Any person calling or sending for any
Carriage or Cab, and not further employ-
0
2
0
ing the same, shall pay
Or, at the' option of the Driver, the fare
from the stand or place where the Carriage
or Cab may be engaged.
0
1
0
2.—Fob Hiring Party exceeding Three
Persons.
FARE FOR DETENTION.
Five minutes’ detention to be allowed
without charge.
For every subsequent fifteen minutes’, or
part thereof, detention ... ... 0 0 6
No extra charge to be made for luggage not exceed-
ing 501bs. in weight, or when the carriage is occupied
by fewer than the number of persons for which the
fare is prescribed lOOlbs. in weight; for every oOlbs.
or part thereof surplus in each case a charge of Is.
may be made.
An addition of one-half to the above fares maybe
charged between midnight and five o’clock in the
morning.


Regulations made by the Board of Land tmd
Works and the Council of the City of
Melbourne for the care, protection, and
management of Tarra t Princes, Flinders,
and Fawkner Parks.
1. —No person shall interfere with trees,
shrubs, flowers, birds, fish or any property in
any of the Parks, or throw stones, or any other
missiles, or commit any nuisance therein, or
leave therein any bottles, orange peel, paper,
cast-off clothing or litter.
2. —No person shall climb on or jump over
seats or fences, in or around any of the Parks,
or stick bills on fences or gates, or cut names,
letters or marks on the trees, seats, gates, posts
or fences or otherwise deface the same or write
thereon.
3. —Any person found in a state of intoxi-
cation or behaving in a disorderly manner, or
creating or taking part in any disturbance, or
committing in any of the Parks any act of
indecency, shall be liable to be forthwith
removed by the curator or other authorised
officer or servant of the trustees or by a con-
stable, and shall be liable to prosecution for an
offence against these Regulations.
k—No person except those in the employ of,
or authorised by the trustees, shall bring into
any of , the Parks any horse or vehicle, or enter


plots of ground therein enclosed for plantations
or. for other purposes.
5-. : —No person shall bring into any of the
Parks, any dogs for coursing or other purposes
of sport, and all dogs so brought in, and all
goats and poultry found within any of the
Parks shall be liable to be destroyed.
6. —No person shall hawk or offer for sale in
any of the Parks, any goods or articles of any
description, without having previously obtained
written permission from the trustees.
7. —No person shall light any fire within any
of the Parks.
8. Cricket, football or other athletic sports
shall not be played or take place in any of the
Parks, except in such portions thereof as may
be set apart for the purpose, and under such
conditions as the trustees may direct.
Every person offending against these Regu-
lations, shall in accordance with Section II 3 of
■the Land Act, 1884, (now Section 186 of the
Land Act, 1890) on conviction before any
Justice, forfeit and pay a penalty not exceeding
Five Pounds for each offence, and every person
who knowingly and wilfully offends against
any such Regulations, and who after he has
been warned by the curator or other authorised
officer or servant of the trustees, or any con-
stable, and does not desist from so offenc ing,
may be forthwith apprehended by the curator


or other authorised officer or servant of the
trustees or constable, and taken before some
Justice of the Peace, and shall on conviction,
forfeit and pay a penalty not exceeding Ten
Pounds.
Regulations mode hy the Board of Land and
Works and the Council of the City of Mel-
bourne, for the care, protection and manage-
ment of the Fitzroy, Carlton and Flagstaff
Gardens, and Lincoln, Argyle, Curtain,
Macarthur, Murchison, Darling and
University Squares.
1. No person shall interfere with trees,
shrubs, grass, flowers, statuary, fountains, fish,
or any property in any of the Gardens or
Squares, or throw stones or any missile, beat
carpets, dry clothes, or commit any nuisance or
light fires therein, or leave therein any bottles,
paper, orange peel, cast-off clothing or litter.
2. —No person shall climb on or jump over
the seats or fences in or around any of the
Gardens or Squares, or lie on the seats, or stick
bills on the fences, gates or trees, or cut names,
letters or marks on the trees, seats, gates, posts
or fences, or otherwise deface the same or write
thereon,
3. —No person except those in the employ of


4>r authorised by the trustees, shall bring into
any of the Gardens or Squares any horse or
vehicle, or enter plots of ground therein
enclosed for plantations or other purposes.
4. —No person shall bring into any of the
Gardens or Squares any dog unless the same be
■ held by chain or cord.
5. —No children under five (5) years of age
shall be allowed in any of the Gardens or
Squares, unless in charge of adult friends or
nurses.
6. Preaching in any of the Gardens or
Squares, or public harangues whereby a crowd
is collected, shall not be permitted.
7 —Any person found in a state of intoxi-
cation or behaving in a disorderly or objection-
able manner or creating or taking part in any
disturbance, or committing in any of the
Gardens or Squares any act of indecency, shall
be liable to be forthwith removed by the
curator or other authorised officer or servant of
the trustees, or by a constable, and shall be
liable to prosecution for an offence against these
Regulations.
8. —All goats and poultry found within any of
the Gardens or Squares shall be liable to be
destroyed.
9. —Cricket, football, or other athletic sports
shall not be played or take place in any of the
Gardens or Squares.


Every person offending against these Regu-
lations, shall in accordance with Section 133
of the Land Act. 1884, (now Section 136 of the
Land Act, 1890) on conviction before any
J ustice, forfeit and pay a penalty not exceeding
Five Pounds for each offence, and every person
who knowingly and wilfully offends against
any such Regulations, and who after he has,
been warned by the curator or other authorised
officer or servant of the trustees, or any con-
stable, and does not desist from so offending*
may be forthwith apprehended by the curator or
other authorised officer or servant of the trustees
or a constable, and taken before some Justice
of the Peace, and shall on conviction, forfeit,
and pay a penalty not exceeding Ten Pounds.
