

»
iyoY**
/ v A/*/y '
r v \sr\ A,
f ®
V /&//// *
//»/£& „V
/Jhr/$ O'
/° c £
// // ®) P co o
/mw/y ° c °
/ cv o'
L
IT 1-ZTJ




THE
AIASIII
PHOTOGRAPHER.
LICHTNER & Co
llljotograpljic ||todi Iphnportcrs,
24 O’CONNELL STREET
WMT.
37 COLLINS STREET EAST.
m.mtiMOT&mMm*


1 c<s,
><*s€>^
*■ <Vv ve^’
«gs^.
* c V -'"


INDEX.
Sizes of Plates 5
A pparati and Prices for Complete Outfit ... 6 —13
Dark Room 17
Solutions 18
Subjects 19
Portraits and Groups 20 —25
Exposing 20
Developing 27
Fixing 28
Things to be remembered ... 29
Paper-Printing 31
Cloud Negatives 35
Formulae for Experimentalists 36
Instantenous Work 39
Cyclists Clips 42
Bags, &c 43
Enlarging 45
Sensit, Paper 4S
Chemicals
Dry-plates .a
r) o^?v
Sundries 50
U < - NOV 10<n v>
* - NOV 1992


THE
AMATEUR PHOTOGRAPHER,
'THE Amateur Photographer is now, in many
Y instances, able to run very closely to the
X ablest Professional. He has placed in his
hands Lenses and Apparatus equal to the highest
class money can purchase, at most moderate prices,
but one thing he cannot purchase and without it
he will never succeed, and that is Hethod, with-
out method he will be a novice, a neophyte, a
tyro; with method and cleanliness he will rise
to the true meaning of “Amateur,“ one well
skilled in the art he has studied. It is not our
intention to devote any space to the history of
Photography, nor to the reason why such and
such an effect should be due to such and such a
cause; our whole idea is to lay this most fascin-
ating art within the reach of the humblest student,
and our words will be strictly to the point and


entirely divested of any literary padding. Now
then, follow us and shortly we shall have fulfilled
our title without the usual poring through an im-
mense amount of literary matter, after all of but
little value. The first question we must decide is
what size apparatus we would wish to use. and
perhaps it would be as well to learn the sizes of
the various plates, then we can select our appara-
tus more easily.
The following ara the SIZES of PLATES;
3 1 / 4 x 3’/4 ... For Lantern Transparencies.
474 x 374 ... Quarter Plate for Cartes.
5x4 ... A size used more in America than here.
6V2 x 4 3 /4 ... Half Plate for Cabinets.
BV2 x 6V2 ••• Full Plate for large Views, Groups, &c.
10 x 8, 12 x 10, 15 x 12, 18 x 22, 30 x 24, &c.
Having carefully gone through this list, and
remembering that with each of the larger sizes
we can use carriers for any or all of the smaller
sizes, we will examine each of the different
kinds of apparatus presented to us before making
a final decision, it is well not to be too hasty in
deciding which apparatus we intend having, the
lower priced ones may not be cheaper than the
higher priced ones, but if our means are limited
we shall then have to select among a few only,
and while the only safe course is to rigidly keep
our expenditure within our income, still where a
pound or so makes no material difference to
us the better way is to spend it, not on a lot
of accessories, but on a better apparatus, with
which we shall be able to do work of a higher
class than with the lower pri ed sets.


The First Apparatus we will examine is
LICHTNER & Co.’ 8
No. 1
CAMERA
THIS is a
good work. The Camera is made of mahogany,
well framed together, the front part being joined
to back by a bellows body which makes the Ca-
mera very portable. The Focussing Slide is hinged
and folds over on to the top of Camera when dark
slide is in the Camera The Camera is attached
in a moment to its Tail Board by means of screws.
The screws give a swing motion to the front ot
Camera. The Lens is a meniscus achromatic one.
giving excellent depth, and covering the plate all
ovm - from corner to corner. With this apparatus
there is a portable Camera Stand, and when the
price is considered, it is without exaggeration, the
most marvellous Camera ever made.
capital Camera
for an ama-
teur who has
no desire to
spend much .
money, and \
wishes to do .-V"
nf rnaViAfronv '




No. 2 f
CAMERA.
WHAT has
been said about
No. 1 Camera
applies here
also, with this
difference,that
the Lens is a selected one, and instead of beeing
focussed by a simple sliding tube it is mounted
in Hackwork. The Camera also has a r swingback.
The back of Camera hinge* on to back of tail
board and a brass strip gives plenty of swing in
either direction; beside this, the Camera has double
moving fronts, one moving in an hojizontal direc-
tion, the other moving in a vertical direction.
The Stand belonging to No. 2 Camera lias a brass
top, and the whole apparatus is superior to No. 1
Camera.
The Swing Back is most essential when the
Camera is required for Architectural work, and
also the Rising Fronts are indispensible for the
same kind of work, in fact, it is impossible to get
true architectural lines unless we have both the
Swing Back and Rising Front.


LICHTNER & Co.’ 8
No. 2 CAMERA.
This Camera is supplied hy us, complete, as described on page 6.
V-j-Piate Size
l /2-PI. Size Vi
\ £s. d
With Lens, 1 double dark
Slide and Stand ... 2 5 0
i-PI. Size,
£ s. d.
£ s. d
4 10 0
Extr. doub. dark Slide 7 6
6 10 0
1 5 0
1 doz. Dry Plates ... 20
1 Ruby Lantern ... 40
2 Porcelain Dishes... 20
6
1 dish 10 x 8 2 6
1 Ebonite Dish ... 16
1 oz. Pyrogallic Acid 2 0
i /i lb. Liquid Ammo-
nia <t Bottle ... 16
1 oz. Bromide Potash 0 6
1 lb. Hyposulphite
3d. Jar 6d ... 0 9
2 oz. Glass Measure 1 3
1 Printing Erame... 0 9
1 Sheet Sensitiz. Pap. 1 0
15 grains Chlor. Gold 2 0
1 oz. Acetate Soda 0 3
60 Photo Mounts .. 10
1 ouly-Outtng Shape 1 0
1 Dust Brush ... 13
1 Focussing Cloth ... 36
1 Developer Tube ... 2 0
Scales and Weights 6 0
Costofcompl.Outfit £4: 6 9
3 £ 10
£7 10
WithSD’bl. darkSld £414 3


The Third and higiy popular Apparatus is
LICHTNER & Co.’ 8
No. 8
CAMERA.
THIS Appara-
tus is useful for
all kinds of work,
Instantaneous
pictures of moving
objects, Portraits.
Groups, Land-
scapesArchitectu-
ral and Engineering Subjects, etc., etc. The Lens
is of the most rapid type and has an instantaneous
shutter working with the greatest lapidity; besides
the shutter a set of 4 rotating diaphragms go
with each apparatus, the relative exposures being
large stop 1 second, the others, 2,3, and 7 seconds.
The Swing back works independently of the front
of the Camera, and the tail board moves by means
of a screw adjustment, giving a perfectly even
fine adjustment for focussing. The bellows in
No. 3 Camera are made of Leather, and the whole
apparatus, of which a very large number have
been sold, is pronounced the sine qua non of the
Amateur Photographer.
For cost of this outfit complete refer to page 11.


LICHTNER & Co.’ s
No. 8 CAMERA.
This Camera is supplied by us us described on page 10.
V4-Plate Size
VrPi.Size \
£ s. d.
With Lens, 1 double dark
Slide and Stand ...3 0 0
Extra dark Slide ... 10 0
1 doz. dry Plates ... 2 0
1 Ruby Lantern ... 4 0
£ s. (1.
..600
2 Porcelain Dishes ... 20
dish % 16
„ 10x82 6
1 Ebonite Dish ... 16
1 oz. Pyrogaliic Acid 2 0
V 4 lb. Liquid Ammo-
nia and Bottle ... 10
1 oz. Bromide Potash 0 6
1 lb. Hypo. Soda 3d.
Jar, 6d. ... 0 9
2 oz. Glass Measure 1 3
1 Printing Frame ... 0 9
1 Sheet Sensitiz. Pap. 1 0
15 grains Chlor. Gold 2 0
1 oz. Acetate Soda 0 3
50Photo. Mounts. ... 1 0
1 only-Cutting Shape 1 0
1 Dust Brush ... 13
1 Focussing Cloth ... 36
1 Developer Tube ... 20
Scales and Weights 6 0
Cost of coinpl.Outfit £s_3_9
With3dhl.darkSld.£s 13 9
£9 2 3
£9 19 9
Pi. Size.
£ s. d.
9 0 0
1 7 6
£l3 0 6
£l4 8 0


LICHTNER & Co.’ 8
SPECIAL SUPERIOR BRASS-ROUNI) CAMERA.
THIS
is a
splen-'
didly
made
Ca-
mera,
fit for
highest
class of
work.
The Camera is of the best mahogany, is brass
bound, has leather bellows and a new form of
extending tail board, enabling the Amateur to use
Lenses of varying foci between one-third the greatest
length of the plate, or from the shortest possible to
the longest focus lens that can be used with a Camera.
Each Camera can be fitted with either single
or double Swing. The latter leally giving the
amateur the power of getting any swing he may
require: Vertical, Horizontal or Diagonal. The
cost of this edition is so small, and the advantages
so great, that it would be a pity to neglect having
them- The sides are brass-bound and have brass
clips. Patent Reversing Frame and Slide Holders
are fitted to each Camera making altogether as com-
plete a Camera as the most advanced Amateur would
desire to be the possessor of. For cost of this outfit
complete, refer to page 13.


LICHTNER
SPECIAL SUPERIOR BRASS
This Camera is supplied by us as a
74-Plate Size
£s.d.
With 3 dbl. dark Slid. 4 12 6
Lens: Ross’ Rapid
Symmetrical ... 3 15 0
Folding Tripod Stand 15 0
1 doz. dry Plates ... 2 0
1 Ruby Lantern ... 40
2 Porcelain Dishes ... 20
1 Ebonite Dish ... 16
1 oz. Pyrogallic Acid 2 0
1 lb. Liquid Ammo-
nia and Bottle ... 10
1 oz. Bromide Potash 0 6
1 lb. Hypo. Soda, 3d;
jar 6d ... 0 9
2 oz. Glass Measure 1 3
1 Printing Frame ... 09
1 Sheet Sensitiz. Pap. 1 0
ISgrainsChlor.ofGld. 2 0
1 oz. Acetate Soda ... 03
50 Photo. Mounts ... I 0
1 only-Cutting Shape 1 0
1 Dust Brush ... 13
1 Focussing Cloth ... 36
1 Developer Tube ... 2 0
Scales and Weights 6 0
Cost of compl.Outit £ 10 16 3
& Co. 8
ABOUND CAMERA.
described on page IS.
Va-PI. Size Vi-PI. Size.
£s. d. £s. d.
.8 10 0 12 15 0
650 8 0 0
15 0 1 15 0
40 7 6
40 4 0
dish K 16 2 0
10x82 6 3 0
29 3 6
20 2 0
10 10
06 0 6
[ £25 3 0


SPECIAL NOTICE,
We beg to draw your attention to our
having only quoted for amateur outfits,
in V 4 > V 2 and V 1 plates.
We keep a large selection of better
class Cameras, Lenses, &c., in all sizes,
and should any amateur wisli to indulge
in a high-class outfit, we shall be pleased
to quote cost of same upon application.
UCHTHBt&Co.
24 O’CONNELL STREET,
SYDNEY.
87 COLLINS STREET east
MELBOURNE.


Necessary Extras.
T_rAYING decided upon the Camera we must
L~L nex t provide ourselves with the necessary
Cyj apparatus to enable us to make good use ot
our Camera, &c. Well, we must have one or
two Dishes; those for developing should he of the
ebonite kind, they do also very well tor toning and
tixing, but for toning a porcelain dish is nicer to
use. For the dark room we shall require a Ruby
Lamp.
This either holds a candle or a small oil lamp,
the candle is much the cleaner of the two, the
holder carrying candle is drawn down with a bay-
onet joint and forms a stand raising the Lamp.
For travelling purposes we can have a Folding
Ruby Lamp. This Lamp is made of metal and
folds into 3-4ths of an inch, and burns a candle, it
is opened and closed in a few seconds and cannot
get out of order.
Another useful thing is a Light-Tight-Plate
Box into which the plates are transferred from
their packing.
These Boxes are made of Metal and hold 1-doz.
plates each, they are light and portable and may
be used for carrying either exposed or unexposed
plates of negatives.


Compound Focusser
TT is of great value to those who are shortsighted
rn and also as a substitute for the dark cloth used
f when focussing. It is a double lens Focusser
mounted in brass with adjustments to suit
anyone. Boxes of Scales and Weights and Glass
measures are also very useful.
The most important extra is the Dry Plates,
and it matters not what kind we get so that we
are determined to be successful. There are ama-
teurs and psuedo amateurs; the first are successful,
the others a failure, the secret being trying every
sort of plate and every kind of developer in the
last case, and in the first, taking any one plate
and any one developer and a determination to
succeed. “Always go on to success” shall be our
motto in the future as in the past.
Well, having looked over everybody’s
and listened to the suggestions of our friends we
invest in the Plates we are told will work well,
and to the tyro it is sometimes a puzzle to know
whose plates to use, one friend lauds one plate,
another magnifies another make, while another one
of the second class above is prepared to swear that
none of them are worth a rap, blaming the man
who works, may be, almost day and night, to pro-
vide him with pleasure, when the real cause is his
own want of application in well studying the for-
mula sent out with plates, and mastering the details
before attempting to use them.


Dark Rooms.
HThANKS to Dry Plates we are now in a posi-
rri tion to do without a Dark Room of the old
Y kind, and as a consequent we no longer smear
our fingers and hands with silver stains; now we
can develops our plates in the bedroom, the pantry,
the bathroom, or anywhere we may decide upon;
still it is better to use a small closet, pantry, or
any other room we can look up and keep the key,
if we can find a room with a window facing the
north or east, then we may glaze one or two panes
with deep ruby glass, and paint all the others
black, or make a wooden frame to cover the whole
of the windows (light-tight), and put in it a pane
of dark ruby glass about 24-in. x 18-in. If there
is a water supply so much the better, if not, a
wooden tub with a pipe aud pinch-cock would be
very useful, or, in the absence of both, a bucket
of water and a jug will answer every purpose.
If we decide to develops only at night, then the
Ruby Lamp will be all that we shall require in
the form of light The plates and chemicals may
he carried to a washing stand or a sink, and when
ihe developing is finished the whole of the things
may be stowed away tidily (do all things neatly)
ready for the next occassion without the delays of
carelessness.


Solutions.
AAAE will now make up the Solutions that we
shall require, and we must be careful in ad-
hering to exact quantities, any haste here
simply means waste of time and failure afterwards,
let us first make the developer and we shall find
lots of different formula, hut at present we care
not for experiment but desire to obtain a good
Photo in the shortest possible time. We will weigh
24 grains of Pyrogallic Acid and dissolve it in
10-oz. of Distilled Water, and label this A Solu-
tions; now we will take 40 grains of Bromide of
Potassium and dissolve it in V 2 ' 055 °f Distilled
Water in a 1-oz. bottle, then fill up with strong
Ammonia, we will label this B Solution, both these
are for developing. For the Fixing Solution we
weigh 2-oz. of Hyposulphite of Soda and dissolve
it in 10-oz. of Distilled Water. To be quite safe
let us repeat our formulae:
A Solution ... Pyrogallic Acid ...24grains
Distilled Water 10 ounces
B Solution' ... Bromide of Potassium. ..40 grains
Distilled Water ... V* ounce
Ammonnia ... l /i ounce
Fixing Solution .. Hyposulphite ofSoda .. 2 ounces
Distilled Water ...10 ounces


Subject to be Taken.
]\TOW we come to one of the most important
features in the whole process. We must
X have a Subject, and oh, we won’t “sub-
ject” anyone we care a straw for, to the trying
ordeal of being converted from a Christian into a
murky brown savage, no, we don’t intend asking
Adelina, Augusta, Eleanor, or Teresa to be our
model, we will search for some statuette or bust
that will not grumble at us if we do convert a
blonde into a brunnette. or perhaps better, we will
go at a landscape and when fairly successful we
will then make an attempt at a portrait, but even
a landscape will teach us some lessons we ought
never to forget; a landscape to take an impressive
picture, wants careful study and when once we
have hit upon the right spot we will put some form
of life, boy, girl, cow, sheep, or dog into the centre,
or a little off the centre, of foreground, and take
a picture worth giving away. It will well repay
us to examine all the best pictures of the great
masters and to note how the least bit of life gives
beauty to the picture Cover over the small portion
containing may be the fisherman, sportsman, dog,
or what not, and the picture becomes cold and dull;
in our work we shall find some of the roughest
nooks will give the most charming results, and a
collection of such pretty little spots with memories
called back, will produce joy and pleasure on what
otherwise might be dark days. A novel may charm
one and lead one over lands whose dim memories
take much refreshing to form shape, but the results


of one’s own fixed images upon paper of lovely
little bits, of the dashing wave, or the rushing
train, charm, not for the moment, but to the end
of one's life; the charm growing with age and
infirmities.
Portraits.
A SSUMINGr that we have earned our title as
-O' to Landscape Photography, now let us try
Y to take a portrait, and first we will wander
through the garden and find some shady
corner facing north, north-east, or north-west with
an overhanging willow, laburnum, or a fruit tree,
under whose shadow we intend getting lasting im-
pressions of friends who may be here to-day, but
to-morrow we know not where. Having found
our corner and taken possession we will add to it
a rough garden gate covered witli virgin cork, or
a field stile with a shrub on either side or a
bit of imitation rockery, or a wire table with
drooping ivy, and a few flowers not mathematically
arranged but better in a careless manner, and when
we are satisfied, then our next and most important
work is to find the sitter. Let it be a lady,
and if our own sister we will be as gracious
as we should be to anyone else’s sister for
whom we may have something more than
simple brotherly love, we will remember that
our sisters are to others as equally interesting as
their sisters are to us, and it will repay us to be
gentle, patient, and kind in our little suggestions
about moving your head, no laughing, keep your mouth


shut, don’t blink your eyes, and all this sort of
thing. We shall get on ever so much quicker by
going through our work slow. It is far better to
spend ten minutes in getting one good negative,
than to take three pictures in twenty minutes, and
not have one worth looking at Well, we ask our
fair sitter to kindly take the chair, or lean over
the gate, or sit upon the stile, or reclfne on the
rockery; the position of the face we arrange accor-
ding to mutual desire; remembering that full face
is never nice in a picture, and we will so arrange
our subject that one side of the face shall have a
little more light upon it than the other side. All
this gives roundness and beauty to the portrait.
We expose the plate, giving at least twice to three
times the exposure we gave for our best landscapes.
We develope and our first picture is simply char-
ming. We don’t intend to have it spoiled, so we
give it a thorough good washing before we let
anyone see it.
If we are not the happy possessors of a garden,
but have simply a small yard, then we will find a
corner with same aspect, and with a little trellis
work we shall be able to make a pretty small ar-
bour, or, if we cannot do this, then a blanket hung
about 4 or 5 feet behind the sifter will make a
fair background. Backgrounds ready painted are
very useful where our space is limited, and we shall
find that a shade over the sitter to keep off too
much top light will be very useful and can hardly
he dispensed with.


Portraits in the House.
TF we have not even a yard, or outside corridor,
y or a conservatory, then for Portraits we may
I do fairly well in a room with a large bay
window facing same direction as the nook in the
garden Ave have just been through, and we shall
require a’ little arrangement of light before Ave
shall be able to get a good Portrait; assuming
that the window is on our left hand, then Ave will
put onr camera behind the left hand side of window,
as close to the wall as we can possibly get it.
The sitter we will place about tAvo feet away from
the further side of window, and on the right side
of sitter we must so arrange a looking-glass as to
get a good amount of light reflected on to the
shady side of face, another mirror suspended so as
to reflect light on to the forehead will be very use-
ful, all helping to give a good modelled face. If
we cannot get mirrors, then a clothes-horse with a
Avhite sheet overhanging it will work well. This
will require a little patient study, but will repay
us a hundredfold in the quality of the pictures Ave
shall obtain; what we want to obtain is a beautiful
portrait appearing, as it were, in relief, Avith just
the schading requisite to make it a speaking likeness.
REMEMBER a blue or Avhite dress avIII spoil
the features, the dresses coming out white, and the
face darker than it looks to the amateur. All
light blues come out white, and the beautiful flesh
tint of the healthy cheek always comes out slightly
darker than it looks to the eye, the reasons of all
these changes demand a sudy of spectrum ana-


lysis, and we have no intention of studying them
to-day.
BLUE EYES are very difficult to take, such
eyes should be screened as much as possible so
that they may get a less exposure than the other
parts of the face. Dark eyes and eyes well sunk
into the orbits should have plenty of light, and a
little blinking will not hurt the picture.
THE NOSE is generally crooked, only we won't
tell our fair sitter so, but let us find out for our-
selves which way it is bent, then if bent to the
right let the sitter look to the left until we get
the nose apparently straight, and vice versa. If
the nose is long we won’t try a profile, but try
to get nearly a full face, if the nose is turned up,
we must get our camera well above the head and
tilt the camera downwards.
THE MOUTH gives expression to the whole
portrait, before the cap is taken oft, close the lips
slowly, then whisper “prest” and leave your lips
just as they are when finishing the word
And lastly whatever we do, we won’t make a
pair of delicate 6 1 /4 hands into BV2, we will keep
them close to the body, not arranged automatically,
but gracefully holding a flower, locket chain, book,
fan, or what-not, remembering that the nearer the
hands are to the camera the larger do they appear
upon the plate, and we have no desire to spoil a
beautiful portrait by making the hands the centre
of the picture. Let us lose everything but the
face, this is the centre of the picture, the key to
the whole, the index to the mind being the face,
we won’t either place a bull-dog on the lap of


the fair sitter to take away beauty from the most
beautiful work of nature. How many pictures are
spoiled by the introduction of a dog or cat to a
lovely woman’s portrait, let us take both, but one
on one plate, one on another. “Love me love my
dog,” so we will, but we will love one at a time,
and the dog we will take in every attitude we can
get him to arrange himself in, but won’t group the
dog with our fair cousin.


Groups.
U'' ROUPS we can manage very easily when we
have succeeded with portraits, hut in taking
A a group we will look out for a spot hacked
hy rhododendrons, laurestinus, laurels, or an
ivy wall, and then with a piece of string tied to
front leg of camera, and a piece of chalk at the
other end, we will mark out an arc upon the
grass and ask our groupists to arrange themselves
parallel to such an arc, some standing, others
sitting and reclining, we won’t be too particular
in placing everything perfectly straight, rather
drop down into the seat or lean on the shoulder
of one in front, and we won’t all of us stare at
the amateur, nor laugh at him or chaff him, to
get a good group requires not only the skill of
the amateur but the kind forbearance of the group-
ists themselves. Having obtained this, the pro-
bability is, we shall obtain a group worth keeping.
If we have not any garden, then we can take a
group in the yard keeping as far away from the
wall as possible, or we will cover the wall with
a large piece of brown paper obtained from any
Carpet Factor, the kind of paper one lays on the
floor underneath the carpet, with such a background
we can do excellent work.


Exposing the Plate.
LEAVING decided upon our subject we will
take out our Camera and now comes the
FOCUSSING, this is a matter of conside-
rable importance, we shall find the Compound
Focusser of much value in getting an accurately
defined image. The Camera having been put on
its stand, and in the position in which we wish to
use it, then we hold the bottom of Compound
Focusser against the ground glass, and adjust the
top by unscrewing it out of the body of Focusser
until we can clearly see the surface of the ground
glass, then we focus by means of the rack on lens,
or screw adjustment of Camera until the image is
quite sharp. Let us now go back into the dark
room and take out of our plate box two plates, one
we place face downward in the deeper side of dark
slide, then one or two pieces of thin black cardboard,
and a second plate, prepared side upwards, close the
slide down, fasten the clips, go back to Camera and,
now for the time of.
Exposing in the Camera.
'"THIS will depend upon the light, and no hard and
4: fast line can be drawn here, experentia docet,
and we must be methodical in our work if we
wish to succeed. The simplest method is to
draw the shutter out to its limit, expose one second
without shaking the Camera, then push slide in one


inch, expose another second, and so on, until shutter
is closed, we shall have a plate in sections 1,2, 3, 4
seconds exposure, and we will go back into the dark
room, and having everything ready, proceed to the
Developing of the Plate
IDEFORE we remove a plate from the slide we
must put into the developing dish for aV 4
plate. J-oz. of A Solution and 10 drops of B
Solution, now we will open the slide and re-
move one of the exposed plates, closing slide again
until ready for the other plate, then we must put
it at once into the developing dish face upwards.
Now we must watch every change and make a
mental note of everything we see. The part of
plate exposed four seconds flashes up in an instant,
and perhaps we are eager to fix and wash it, but
“more haste less speed,” we will let four seconds
part spoil and turn our attention to three seconds
portion, this comes up quickly and then begins to go,
and the two seconds portion is a longer time in
coming up but gives a bolder picture. We will
continue to oscillate the Solution for a few seconds,
and now let us turn the plate upside down, and by
reflected light examine the back of film through the
back of the plate; there now, 4 and 3 seconds are
black as pitch. 2 is just through, we can see all
the detail. No. 1 shows nothing; we put back
into the dish, and see! how beautiful No. 1 looks!
perfectly charming!! every bit of detail visible on
the surface, while No. 2 is obscured. Let us take


the plate out and wash it gently for a few seconds
then put it into the
Fixing Solution.
r T v HLS we have made of the strenght of 2-oz.
, Hypo, to 10-oz. water, we put the plate
into it and leave it until the whole of the
bromide is dissolved. We shall find that
plates containing chloride will require a longer
time in the Fixing Solution. However, we will
curb our haste and wait uutil the plate appears
perfectly clear, then we will remove it and let it
have a good washing. The simplest way is to
leave the plate in water all night, or at any rate
4 or 6 hours, until the Hypo, is thoroughly elimi-
nated, then we will remove the plate and place
it in a rack or leaning against a shelf, with the
bottom corner on a piece of blotting paper, to dry
spontaneously, remembering that we must never
attempt to dry a plate by heat. Now let ns
examine the result: 4 seconds, quite opaque;
3 seconds, limage can be seen but detail is
obscured; 2 seconds, beautiful light and shadow,
and all detail splendidly brought out; 1 second,
that charmed us on the surface has sickened
and become very pale; conclusions. 4 and 3
much over exposed; 2. exactly right, 1 only
half exposed. We shall be able now to go to
work at once and take a good Negative. We
have gained an experience that as a rule twelve
wasted plates give, we have not wasted one plate.
We now know that an over-exposed plate flashes


up and goes black in a remarkably short time,
that a correctly exposed plate takes time to deve-
lop, ond that an under exposed plate takes a long
time to appear and in spite of all our nursing goes
into a decline forthwith and is only fit for the
waste box.
Things to be Remembered.
QVER EXPOSURE may be corrected to a cer-
.... tain extent, by adding at once, more A so-
t lution. and an extra drop of B solution to
the developer
UNDER EXPOSURE hardly worth the trial,
but add A in drops, and if at hand, an equal
quantity of distilled water to the developer,
FRILLING may be partly cured by immersing
the plate in a solution of Chrome Alum before
developing, and washing between, or by coating the
plate with a plain collodion before developing, then
wash the plate until water flows evenly all
over the plate, when it may be put into the
developer.
BLISTERS may be arrested by Hooding the
plate with methylated spirit, then leave it to
dry.
GREEN FOG, caused as a rule either by bad
gelatine in the plate, or bad pyro. in the developer.
Moral. —Always use fresh pyro.
IMAGE too dense, then flow over the plate a
solution of ferric chloride 80 grains, water 2 oz.,
wash and put into fixing solution. A little ex-


perience will soon teach the amateur the proper
strength &c., of solutions.
TRANSPARENT spots generally due to dust
on the film, plates should be brushed gently with
a large camel hair brush before being put into
dark slides.
RAPID P LATES are much more difficult to
develope than slow plates. — Moral. —Begin with
slow plates, go on with slow plates until you have
been thoroughly successful, then try rapid plates,
use the developing solution once only, fixing solu-
tion over aud over again.
DON’T hold the plate up to the light when
developing, keep it as far away as possible from
tbe source of light.
DON’T let the developing solution with plate
in rest a minute, but keep oscillating the disli all
the while you are developing, a speck of dust may
settle, and if it does settle it will be just on the
spot where we don’t want it.
DON’T let the sun shine into the front of lens,
or on to the dark slide, shade the former with
your hand, and the latter with a cloth.
DON’T attempt to remove a speck of dust with
your finger nail, rather swill the plate well until
it is dislodged, or let the plate get dry and then
remove it if necessary.
DON’T try to rub the stain off a paper print
when in toning solution, and keep your fingers
clean, and pick up prints with a pair of ebonite
tweezers.


DON’T use one dish for everything, but have
separate dishes for each solution.
LASTLY —make haste slowly.
Paper Printing
IS A VERY easy process, and one much simpler
m than formerly. The paper is already sensitised,
Y and our first work is to cut the sheet up into
the sizes we require, and the better way is first to
get a piece of brown paper exactly the same size
as sensitised paper, and fold it in every way our
imagination can conceive, until we get the greatest
possible number of pieces size required, then cut
up the sheet of sensitised paper in like manner,
and take one piece and put into our
PRINTING FRAME, with the sensitised sur-
face of paper resting upon the gelatine surface of
negative, behind the paper we will put one or two
pieces of folded blotting paper, making a nice pad
to keep the sensitised paper quite close to negative
in every part, now we close the back of frame and
expose to a bright sky. but not in the direct rays
of the sun, and we must every now and again exa-
mine the print. First we shall find a dim outline
of the picture, by and by it will be very much deeper,
but we must not remove the print until we find
the dark shadows beginning to bronze, and the
light parts getting discoloured, then we may re-
move the print, and if we don’t want to tone them
until we have printed a lot, we will simply put


the prints into a dark box and before we tone
them we must.
WASH the prints in several lots of water, un-
til the water in last washing is quite clear, then
we must put them into the
TONING- SOLUTION, and this we may make
in several ways. No. 1 is about the best, and we
leave the print in the toning solution until the co-
lour goes beyond our taste, the longer the print is
in the solution the darker will its colour be, but
the hypo, will bring back some of the colour, we
must however be careful not to handle the paper
in anv way, or let one print rest upon another,
better have a pair of ebonite clips or tweezers, to
move them about, as every finger mark leaves a
stain. Either of the other toning solutions below
will give good tones, the colour of tone we shall
find below the formulae.
1 —Chloride of Gold 1 gr. Acetate of Soda 30 grs., Water 5 oz.
2 „ „ 1 gr.PhosphateofSoda2ogrs., „ 6 oz.
3 „ „ 1 gr. Bicarbonate of Soda 4 grs, „ 6 oz.
No. 1 should be made the day before it is wanted,
and will keep a long time, this gives warm tones.
No. 2 must be made up just before it is required,
and gives purple to black tones.
No. 3 should be made an hour or two before
use, and will not keep, this gives brown to sepia
tints. No. 1 is by far the best for an Amateur.
Having toned our prints, then we wash them tor
a moment and put them into the
FIXING SOLUTION of the same strength as


we used for the plates. The prints we will leave
in the solution for ten or fifteen minutes, then we
must give them a good washing, better leave them
under the tap all night, or make a washing trough
containing wooden rails with canvas stretched
across, and the prints upon the canvas held down
with tapes, over which the water flows, and in the
morning we will take them out, pin them to a shelf
or rail and leave them to dry.
When dry we may cut the prints to the size
of a cutting glass and mount them on cards. A
very good paste is made as follows: dissolve 4
table spoonfuls of dextrine in a mixture of Methy-
lated Spirit 4—oz., Water 2-oz, stir continually
until the dextrine is dissolved. It is well to moisten
prints with water before mounting, putting them
between damp sheets of blotting paper is about
the best method we can adopt.
Whep mounted, then their appearence will be
much improved by rolling them, or if a burnished
surface is wanted, we must use a burnisher. The
burnishing we may probably get a professional pho-
tographer to do for us at a small cost per dozen
prints, as a burnisher will cost 455.
In Printing, as in developing, every finger
mark is recorded as a black mark against us, and
we must be extremely careful in moving the prints
about otherwise a good picture may be spoiled.
Again, when Toning, we must see that no air
bubble remains on the paper, or that one print rests
upon another. What is worth doing should be


done well, and a little care, method, and clean-
liness, will repay us one hundredfold.
VIGNETTES we can easily print by putting
over the negative a Vignette glass, or we can
make a vignetting card by cutting an oval out of a
black card and glueing a border of cottonwool all
round the margin, then pull the cottonwool up all
round like an oval cloud, this will give a beautiful
Vignette, then by using masks and discs we can
have either a white or black background at will.
A white background is obtained by putting the
mask with oval cut out over the vignette glass,
then if we want a black background we can print
as above and afterwards put the oval piece over
the print in centre and print the outside as deep
as we wish.


Cloud Negatives.
TsTOTHING adds more to the beauty of a land-
-Yv scape than a pretty cloud effect. Now we can
Y make an artificial cloud on our prints by
painting - on hack of negative, this is never
a success, and is really not worth the time it takes.
We will await our opportunity, and on some fine
day when cumulus or cirrus clouds are floating
about in mid-air, then we will have a few shots
at them with our Instantograph. The shutter will
have to be worked at its full speed, and when we
have got the cloud we want, then we will carefully
develope and put away, until it is required for use.
We will howewer make the most of the opportunity,
and get at least half a dozen good cloud effects.
Having secured them, let us now make use of one of
them. ”We will print our landscape, but will take
care to so cover the sky that it will come out perfectly
white on print, then in another printing frame we
have our cloud negative, and with a piece of paper,
cloth, or cotton wool, we cover over the landscape
and print in the clouds to the depth we require them.
We shall find the process exceedingly simple, espe-
cially after the second or third attempt, and having
succeeded, we schall never turn out a production of
ours without a charming bit of cloud effect.


FORMULA for EXPERIMENTALISTS.
Developers
FERROUS OXALATE DEVELOPER.
Make the following Solutions:
A—Saturated Solution, Oxalate of Potash
about 1-oz. to 4-oz. Water.
B— Saturated Solution, Protosulphate of Iron
about 1-oz. to 3-oz. Water.
Add 1 drop Sulphuric Acid to each Ounce.
To Develop mix as follows:
Slow Plates IB to 6A.
Rapid IB to 4A.
Instantaneous ... IB to 3A.
Pyro Developers.
(1) A—Pyrogallic Acid 10-grains.
Distilled Water 5-ounces.
B— Ammonia - 880 2-drams.
Bromide of Ammonium 4-scr’ples.
Water 20-ounces.
To Develop mix 1 A to 18.
(2) A- Pyrogallic Acid Va-dram.
Distilled Water 10-oz.
B— Ammonia 'BBO 4-oz.
Bromide of Potassium 5-drams.
Distilled Water 10-oz.
To Deyelope soak the plate in water for a
few seconds, then flood with a small quantity of
A. After it has flowed backwards and forwards
put into a dish a little more A and 5 drops B,
then put plate in and oscillate gently adding


more drops B as required, generally 18 to 20
drops in all .of B will bring out a good negative.
(3) A— Pyrogallic Acid Vz-oz.
“ •/ o— - -.
Glycerine 72-oz.
Alcohol 3-oz.
B— Bromide of Potassium V 2 ‘drni.
Ammonia V 2 " OZ -
Glycerin 1 /-s-oz.
Water 3-oz.
To prepare for developing get two 16-oz.
bottles, label them A and B, then pat 1-oz. of A
into the first bottle and fill up with Distilled
Water, and into the second bottle pat 1-oz. B and
fill up with Water.
To develope take equal parts of A and B.
Toughening Solutions.
In addition to the plain Alum Solution, we may
use the following;
Finely Powdered Alum 4-oz.
Common Salt ... 2-oz.
Water 40-oz.
This can be made and kept as a stock Solution.
Another Solution can be made as follows:
Finely Powdered Alum 2-oz.
Citric Acid 1 oz.
Distilled Water 20-oz.
A third Solution, very useful to harden the film
and remove stains after Pyro. developement is
as follows:
Finely Powdered Alum 1-oz.
Oxalic Acid 1-dram
Distilled Water 10-oz.
This must be used before the plate is fixed,


Toning Solutions.
Iu addition to the three Solutions mentioned
before, we may make up the following stock so-
lutions. The Chloride of Gold may be obtained in
772 and 15-grain tubes, and we will make up
which ever suits us best. The first is using 772-
grains.
A Solution:
Chloride of Gold 772-grs.
Distilled Water 2-oz.
Keep this in stoppered bottle
B Solution:
Phosphate of Soda 1 /*-oz.
Acetate of Soda 72-oz.
Distilled Water 40-oz.
To Tone, mix 1-drm. of A to 4-oz. B
Another Solution is made up as follows:
Chloride of Gold 1-grain.
Carbonate of Soda 3-grains
Acetate of Soda 1-drm,
Distilled. Water ... ... ... G-oz.


Now a word or two about
Instantaneous Work.
"THIS is more difficult than slow plate work,
••r but we can he successful if we like, and
here we must make an experiment similar
to the first one. We will put the india-rubber
band on the peg, then focus some point in the
view nearest to the object we want to take, and
move the stop round until the spring goes into a
small click in shutter and is ready for exposing,
we put in the slice, open it all the way and
expose, then close the shutter of dark slide, re-set
Instantaneous shutter open slide half way and
expose again. If the half with one exposure is
done well, then the exposure will do, but if the
double exposure is right, then the arc carrying
band must be pulled out one click only; again, if
in a brilliant ligh pulled five or six clicks or
more according to trials. With this Patent Shutter
almost any exposure may be given as bands ot all
strengths may be used, and two or three may be
used at the same time: an exposure of 150th. ot
a second can be obtained with it, and down to
almost anything.
For Slow Exposures each Lens with the No.
3 Camera has a set of 4 rotating diaphragms,
and these are to be used with all Portraits,
Groups, Landscapes and interiors requiring a
longer exposure than can be obtained with the
shutter. Now we may commit to memory the
following number indicating the ratio of expo-


sure from each stop, from the largest tho the
smallest. The Figures are 1,2, 4,6, that is, if
the exposure with the large stop is 1 second, then
the other will be 2 seconds, 4 seconds, and
6 seconds respectively; we shall find this very
simple to learn and very useful when in the field.
The large stop we shall invariably use for Port-
raits and small Groups, the second stop for large
Groups and Landscapes without much distance
in them, and the two smaller stops we shall
occasionally use for Landscapes having great
depth, for copying Photographs or Prints, and
for a long row of Buildings where one point
comes close up to Camera and the other may be
some dictance away. It is not wise to attempt
to get the whole of the picture sharp, we will
fix our minds upon one spot and get this quite
sharp, using a large stop lather than a small one
and then we shall obtain a real picture.
Architectural Work.
r T'HE Instantaneous Lens belonging to No.
Jh 3 Camera works remarkably well for Archi-
es tectural Studies, but we shall occasionally
find ourselves unable to get the necessary distance
to enable us to use the Instantaneous Lens and
for these confined situations we must have a
Wide Angle Lens. This Lens has a focus the
same length as longest dimensions of plate; thus
x /4, 4‘/4-in.; 'A (P/a-in.; 10 xB, 10-in. The W.
A. Lenses are very useful for Architectural and


Engineering Subjects, where distance is unobtain-
able. They are also excellent copying Lenses,
as in an ordinary Camera they will copy an article
full size.
Adapters can be had for any size wide angle
to screw into any size Instantaneous Lens or
Rectigraph Lens.
The Rectigraph Lenses.
are a series of lenses just introduced
x and are the result of long and tedious
T experiments. With them we can obtain
beautifully modelled portraits, excellent groups
and landscapes, and for Architectural work cannot
be excelled The Lenses being both perfectly
symmetrical will work full aperture for portraits
and groups, and when stopped down a little will
produce landscapes and architectural photos, that
it would be impossible to surpass, we can also
use one lens alone, this will enable us to get either
a narrow angle on a small plate, or in another
camera we can get a landscape twice the size
which the complete lens gives us on the smaller
plate. We can also have a Shutter enabling us
to get the most rapid photos, of animals in
motion, trains, boats, &c., taking it altogether it
is the best lens made for all-round work, and
although it costs a little more than the Instantane-
ous Lens, yet it is money well spent, the possessor
knowing that he has the best lens money can
purchase.


For Portraits.
IT is well to have Head Rest, this we shall find
j of value in taking Portraits indoors in perhaps
T a dull light when S, long exposure may he
given. The larger one has universal motions and
is well worth its extra cost.
For Cycling.
'WE can have a clip to attach to our driving
-jg wheel, and in a few seconds can put the
if? Camera into position, take the picture and
pack up again.
The Cycle Clip.
JS ATTACHED either to the top of the wheel,
? the handle of the machine or to the backbone.
T We have with it every possible motion and
rigidity. We can have a clip to any size machine.


Knapsacks, Bags, &c.
'VAT’E SHALL find a knapsack to sling oyer our
shoulders a wonderful help in a day’s work
vfaU' in the country, assuming that our kit con-
sists of camera, lens, 3 double dark slides, and a
case to contain the whole, we shall have quite suf-
ficient for a day’s work. We shall not be in a
hurry to expose our plates on the first thing we see,
it is better to look well at the subject before we
unpack our camera, &c., and having made up our
mind, then in a few seconds our camera is ready,
plate is exposed, and before packing up again, we
will take out our note book and put down, sub-
ject, size of top, exposure, approximate amount of
light, we can make a table of our own say 1 to 10,
the latter being brilliant sunshine, and the former
a dull afternoon, with a very little experience we
shall be able to determine the necessary exposure
to a nicety on any future occasion. This little


note book we will keep in our case so that we shall
never be without it.
The knapsacks or cases are made in different
materials, all of them are waterproof and nicely
lined, so that our camera, slides, &c., need not get
nibbed daring the hardest day’s work. There are
three kinds of cases, the first is a waterproof one
made like bicycle knapsacks, strong and cheap.
These are not so strong as the second class made
of American leather, with real leather bindings,
straps. &c. The third class are very beautifully
made, and if we can afford the extra cost, we will
have one, because the whole case puts such a finish
upon the apparatus that we are really obliged to
take more care of our apparatus by keeping it free
from dust &c., making it last much longer than we
otherwise should do.
We can also have a case of our camera stand,
these are very nice when travelling, the stand being
put into the case in a few seconds, and as their
cost is very small, it is an indulgence worth having.
If our companion in photography is a member
of the fair sex, whose numbers are increasing daily,
for there is nothing more charming for a lady's
occupation during her spare hours than Amateur
Photography; she can have a stand so small as to
temove the idea altogether of her being an Amateur
Photographer, she can carry the whole apparatus
in an ordinary lady’s satchel, and the stand can be
carried in a short case, or she can have a stand which
no one could distinguish, from an ordinary umbrella.
With such an apparatus, of the highest quality,
and of the least possible bulk, our lady companion


can obtain charming little studies of nature’s choi-
cest bits: she can expose plate after plate, and
after the tour is ended she may develope them at
her leisure, or may be some amateur of the sterner
sex will he only too pleased to have the honor of
developing them for her. Ladies are so full of
artistic taste and have so much patience in their
work, that a picture of some fairy dell from their
hands would in our work too often appear more
like a used up gravel-pit. An album tilled by a
lady would offer matter for conversation evening
after evening among her friends, and the little
suggestions of others made a mental note of at
the time, would spur her on to higher ambitions,
and her friends would follow her in her work and
no doubt a pleasant rivalry would start into exis-
tence and drive awax ennui, dyspepsia, and the
thousand and one ailments of the fair sex. The
lady amateur is ever on the look out for some new
spot, to her, no longer is time a bore, but passes
away far too quickly; to her. nature becomes far
more beautiful and interesting, and the world a
much happier place to live in.
Enlarging.
AS WE become perfect in our work so shall we
m be looking for something of a higher class,
y and we shall find no work more satisfactoiy
and pleasing than enlarging some of our prettiest
little bits, and bye and bye perhaps adding a little
colour to them, (although better without), and
hanging them round our walls as specimens of our
successful work. Enlarging is not difficult but we


must have an apparatus especially made for the
work, otherwise we cannot succeed. We can en-
large either by sunlight or artificial light, for the
former we shall require a solar enlarging lantern,
and for the latter an enlarging lantern similar to
the one in woodcut. An ordinary Magic Lantern
will answer well, if it has an achromatic object
Jens, and the condensers are large enough to cover
all that we require of our negative. We cannot
make a good enlargement from a l /i- plate nega-
tive with condensers under 5-inches in diameter.
A special enlarging lantern with 5-inch condensers
and a double combination achromatic objective,
will enable us to enlarge up to any size we desire.
The negative is put into a carrier into lantern,
and the image is focussed on to a piece of white
cardboard suspended on a board in front of object
lens, and at such a distance in front as we may
place it to obtain the enlargement we require, it
is better to begin with small sizes first, and then
to go to larger sizes when we have been fairly
successful with the smaller ones.
The enlarging paper is sold ready prepared
for our use, and after the exposure we have to
develope it according to the instructions sent
out with it, the Ferrous Oxalate developer giving
the best pictures. The whole process resembling
the developement of a negative, after developing,
the enlargements are fixed in the hypo, solution
and then washed rvell for at least three hours,
and hung up outside the dark room to dry.


LICHTNER & C 2.
jStock importers,
24 O’CONNELL STREET,
SYDNEY.
37 COLLINS STREET EAST.
MELBOURNE.
& -i »




£ s. d.
Acid-Citric pr. oz.
Nitric per lb. 1
Pyrogallic pr. oz. 1
„ Sulphuric per. lb. 1
Alcoh.-Abolute,, pint 5
Alum Chrome ~ lb 1
~ Pulvd. „ „06
Ammon. Liq. (880) „ 1
Ammon.Bromide,, ~ 3
Borax 10
Bichloride Mercury
per. oz. 0
Calcium Chlor. ~ lb. 2
Ether Snip ~ lb. 3
Fish Glue „ lb. 2
GoldChlorid.pr.lsgr. 2
~ ~ doz. £1.1.0
~ ~ 1 dram 7 G
Gelatine for Enamel-
ling per. lb. . . 3
List of Chemicals
£s.d.
Iron. Protosulp. pr. Ih'O 8
„ perch lor. „ 2 0
Kaolin ~,,10
Lime Chloride „ ~ 1 0
Litmus Books Red &
Blue 0 3
Magnes. Wire per. oz.lo 6
Potash Neue Oxalate
per lb. 1 0
~ Bromide ~ oz. 0 G
Nitrate ~ lb. 1 0
Cyanide ~ ~3 0
SodaHyposulp „ 0 3
Acetate ~10
Silver Nitrate ~ oz. 8 G
Spirits of Wine ~ pint 3 G
„ „ „ Meth y» 1 0
Sodo Sulphate ~ lb. 1 G
„ Sulphite „ „ 1 G
Jalc per sheet 0 G


Dry Plates.
Bakers Sp. Rapid . . per Doz
do. Instantaneous .
Britannia ordinary . . ~
do. (Beeruaerts) ~
Thomas’ Rapid
Anstralian Dry Plate Co.’s
Wratten & W ainwrights
ordinary . . . . „ „
Fry's Lantern Plates 3'A X 3 1 /-* 1/9
Sundries
Morgan & Kidds.
Argentic Bromide Paper
12V2X10V2 8/- doz.
1572X12 'h 10/- „
23 XlB 15/- „
25 X2l 25/- „
Camel Hair Brushes,
1/3, 1/6, 2/-, 3/-, each
Blotting Paper 4/3 quire
Cutting Shapes,
C. d. Y. 1/-, Cab. 2/-,
1/1 plate 4/-
Ebonite Dishes,
1/4, 1/-, 1/2, 2/-, 1/1,
3/-, 10 X 8, 4/6
V-. | Vi jioxs
G/6,12/- 187-
5/6,10/6 14/-
4/- 7/6 11/6
4/6 9/- 13/-
5/6 10/6 14/-
4/6 9/- 13/-
10/6 147-
Dropping Bottles 1/6 each
Ebonite Forceps 1/6 each
Glass Ruby \
„ Yellow I 2/0
for dark rooms )
Mounts Cabinet
3/6, 4/6,6/-, &9/-pr. 100
Mounts C. d. N.
1/6, 2/-, 2/6, 4/- per 100
Ruby paper 1/6 per sheet
do. Liquid 1/6 bottle
Bates’ Black Varnish
1/6 per bottle
