

PAMPHLET No. 29.
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Council for Scientific and industrial Research
The Possibility of the Entomological
Control of St. John’s Wortin Australia
-Progress Report
By
G. A. CURRIE, B.Sc., B.Agr.Sc
AND
S GARTHSIDE M.Sc.
E B URN » 19
•0.6257..
Registered at the General Post Office, Melbourne, for transmission through the post as a book.
. ■:< WhoUy set.mp. and-printed in Australia
By Authority : H. J. Green, Government Printer, Melbourne


Council for Scientific and Industrial Research
MEMBERS
Sir George A. Julius, Kt., D.Sc., B.E.
{Chairman),
A. C. Rivett, Esq., M.A., D.Sc.
(Deputy Chairman and Chief Executive Officer),
Professor A. E. V* Richardson, ALA., D.Sc.
Cfraivmeu of Committees :
Professor R. D, Watt, M.A., B.Sc.
(New South Wales),
Sir Davit! 0. Masson, K.8.E., F.R.S., &c.
(Victoria),
Professor H. C. Richards, D.Sc.
(Queensland),
Sir Walter J. Young, K.B.E.
(South Australia),
B. Perry, Esq.
(Western Australia),
P. E. Keain, Esq.
(Tasmania),
Co-opteb :
Professor E, J. Goddard, 8.A., D.Sc.,
Professor H. A. Woodruff, M.R.C.V.S., &c.
Secretary:
G. Ughtfoot, M.A.
314 Albert Street,
East Melbourne,
Victoria


PAMPHLET No. 29.
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Council for Scientific and Industrial Research
The Possibility of the Entomological
Control of St. John’s Wort in Australia
—Progress Report
By
G. A. CURRIE, B.Sc., B.Agr.Sc.
AND
S. GARTHSIDE M.Sc.
MELBOURNE. 1932
C.5i.';7.
Registered at the General Post Office, Melbourne, for transmission through the post as a book.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia.
By Authority : H. J. Green. Government Printer, Melbourne




CONTENTS.
FAQ 8
Foreword .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5
Summary .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 6
I. Statement of the Problem—
1. Historical Risumk .. .. .. ~ .. 7
2. Plan of Campaign—
(i) Theory .. .. .. .. .. .. 8
(ii) Organization of research .. .. .. .. 10
3. Other Methods of Control—
(i) Chemical .. .. .. .. .. .. 10
(ii) Mechanical .. .. .. .. .. 10
(iii) Competition with other plants .. .. .. 'll
11. Insect Fauna of St. John’s Wort—
1. In Australia .. .. .. .. .. .. 11
2. In Europe .. .. .. .. .. .. 12
111. Researches in England—
1. General .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 15
2. Insects associated—
(a) Introductory .. .. .. .. .. 16
(b) Coleoptera—
Chryaomda hyperici .. .. .. .. 16
Chryaomda variant .. .. .. .. 18
Chryaomda brunavicenais .. .. .. .. 18
(c) Lepidoptera—
Lothronympha hypericana .. .. .. 18
Depreaaaria hypericeUa .. .. .. .. 19
(d) Other Insects Studied —
Cecidomyiid gall midges .. .. .. 19
Aphids .. .. .. .. .. .. 19
3. Conclusion .. .. .. .. .. • • 19
IV. Researches in Australia—
1. Preparation of Insectaries .. .. .. .. .. 20
2. Co-operation with Commonwealth Department of Health .. 20
3. Shipping Insects to Australia and Behaviour in Insectaries —
Chryaomda hyperici .. .. .. .. 22
Chryaomda variant .. .. .. .. 22
Chryaomda brunavicensia .. .. .. .. 22
lothronympha hypericana .. .. .. .. 22
4. Testing Insects on Economic Plants .. .. .. 23
5. Liberation in the Field .. .. .. .. .. 23
V. Acknowledgments .. .. .. .. .. .. 24
VI. Bibliography .. .. '.. .. .. 24


FOREWORD.
The extent of the infestations of St. John’s wort and the rate at
■which the weed has been spreading have been matters of concern in
Australia for some time past.
The pest can, of course, be controlled by chemical poisons,
mechanical means, &c., but unfortunately these are rather costly, to
which fact the continued spread of the pest is no doubt largely due.
As long ago as 1917, one of the forerunners of the Council (the
Advisory Council of Science and Industry) made some inquiries into
the possibilities of controlling the pest by means of insects—a method
which, if effective at all, is extremely economical, as has recently been
made apparent in the case of prickly pear in Queensland.
It is'only within the last two or three years, however, that facilities
have been available to carry out any actual research work along these
lines. A commencement has, however, now been made by the Council’s
Division of Economic Entomology, and as the matter is of interest to
a wide circle in the southern States, it has been considered desirable to
publish the progress report that follows.


SUMMARY.
St. John’s wort ( Hypericum 'perforatum. Linn. var. augustifolium )
was introduced into Victoria near the town of Bright in about the
year 1880. Its spread over the surrounding hills, into the Dargo
district and into New South Wales, ultimately caused so much concern
that its suppression came to be considered a matter of national impor-
tance. It was brought to the notice of the Advisory Council for Science
and Industry (the forerunner of the present Council) in the year 1917.
As a result of the consideration given to the problem by various
authorities in the past, methods of control depending on mechanical
eradication, poisoning, &c., have been evolved, but unfortunately all
these are relatively costly and the spread of the weed continues in
some places at least. Attention has accordingly been given to the
possibilities of entomological control. The present report deals with
that work.
The theory on which the control of weed pests by insects is based,
is outlined, and the procedure adopted in the present case reviewed.
The present investigation started in England late in 1928 and in
Australia in the middle of 1929. An analysis of the insect fauna of
St. John’s wort in Europe showed that over sixty insects feed on it,
while a number are wholly restricted to it. In Australia only a few
general feeding insects had taken to it as a host plant.
The functions of the investigator in England are to discover the
varieties of insects which feed on the plant, work out their life
histories, and test them on a selected list of economic plants to see
that they cannot feed on any but their own food plant. Having satis-
fied himself that an insect is specific in its feeding, he then breeds it
in numbers and ships it in a suitable stage to Australia.
The Australian investigator receives the insects in qdai
insectaries, rears them and tests them again on plants of economic
importance in Australia, and when he has satisfied the quarantine
authorities that an insect is safe for liberation and of probable economic
value, places it in numbers in the field in suitable areas.
The following beetles have passed all tests in England and Australia
and have been released in St. John’s wort areas:— Chrysomela varians
Schall., Chrysomela hyperici Forst., and Chrysomela hrunsvicensis
Grav.
The moths Lathronympha hypericana Hubn., Eucestia ( Anaitis )
plagiata Linn., and Eucestia ( Anaitis ) efformata Guen. have satis-
factorily passed all tests in England, and small trial shipments have
been sent to Australia. Various gall midges which cause considerable
destruction to St. John’s wort in Europe are also now under study.


The Possibility of the Entomological Control
of St. John's Wort in Australia.
PROGRESS REPORT.
I. STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM.
1. Historical Résumé.
St. John’s wort, Hypericum perforatum Linn, var augustifolium,
was introduced into Victoria in about 1880 by a German woman, who
obtained the seeds from her native country and planted them in her
garden near Bright. The plant spread from the garden into the adjacent
racecourse, where il flourished, and thence spread rapidly in all
directions. (See Fig. 1.)
By 1902 it had covered some 8,000 acres, by 1905 over 10,000 acres,
and by 1916 the infested area in Victoria was estimated at 184,000 acres.
To-day the infested area in Victoria alone is estimated variously at
250,000 to 400,000 acres, while smaller areas in New South Wales and
South Australia are taken possession of by this weed pest.
So greatly concerned were the people of Bright and the districts
adjoining that, in 1917, the member for Ovens brought the matter before
the Federal Government as a problem of national importance. The
latter body referred it in turn to the then Advisory Council of Science
and Industry.
The control of weeds by means of insect enemies had been brought
into prominence by the Hawaiian experiment, initiated in 1902, for
the control of lantana, and by the report of the Australian Prickly Pear
Travelling Commission issued in 1914. Accordingly, the Advisory
Council decided to look into the possibility of using insects for the
control of St. John’s wort.
In March, 1917, letters were forwarded to Mr. Fryer, Entomologist
to the English Board of Agriculture and Fisheries, and to Professor
Edward Poulton, of Oxford University, asking them for information
about insects known to attack plants of the genus Hypericum in Britain,
and in November of the same year a list of such insects was duly received
from them.
While Professor H. Maxwell Lefroy was visiting Australia in 1917,
the question of entomological control of St. John’s wort was discussed
with him, and his collaboration was invited. On his return to England,
he succeeded in getting the Imperial Bureau of Entomology! interested,
and in 1919, a worker, Mr. A. H. Hamm, was employed by the Bureau
to investigate the insect fauna of St. John’s wort in England. In
November, 1920, a report was sent forward by this investigator.
At the time the Advisory Council was looking into the problem, the
principle of weed control by means of phytophagous insects was a much-
debated question. It was accordingly decided that the respective views
of some of the world’s leading entomologists should be sought on this
C. 6287.—1
• Typescipt received for publication 2nd March, 1932.
t Now the Imperial Institute of Entomology.


vexed question, and to that end, early in 1919, letters were sent out asking
for expressions of opinion. The views that were thus obtained were
somewhat at variance, some authorities being apprehensive of the possible
dangers involved in the introduction of insects, but others were strongly
of the view that, provided adequate care were taken, no harmful results
would accrue. In England, a special sub-committee of the managing
body of the Imperial Bureau of Entomology was formed to consider
the question. The finding of this body was, substantially, that in the
case of noxious weeds which had defied other means of control, and
which were of national importance, the experiment of introducing
insects to attempt their control was justified under stringent conditions
of controlled safeguards.
Subsequently, in 1926, Dr. R. J. Tillyard, while in England on
behalf of the New Zealand Government, was commissioned by the newly-
formed Council for' Scientific and Industrial Research to report on insect
enemies of St. John’s wort. He recommended the introduction into
Australia of insect enemies of the weed under controlled conditions,
after safeguarding tests had proved both their value as destroyers of the
plant in question and their harmlessness to plants of economic value.
2. Plan of Campaign.
(i) Theory. —lt may be well at this point to touch on the theory
on which the entomological control of noxious weeds is based. According
to plant ecologists, the distribution and relative abundance of plants in
nature have’ been determined chiefly by climatic, edaphic, and topographic
factors, and competition with other plants for space, light, food, air, and
water. Biotic factors, such as the grazing of the larger mammals, the
effect of man’s agricultural and sylvicultural activities, the effect of
commerce in the distribution of plants from one country to another,
and the periodic destruction of plants by huge hordes of army worms
or locusts, have received attention. Little consideration appears to have
been given, however, to the effect on the relative abundance of certain
plants produced by the continuous feeding of their associated insect
fauna.
It is certainly true that in nature insects exert a profound influence
on • the density of many plants. This may be in the direction of
favouring the plants, as in the cases of insect pollination, or in the
reverse direction by the weakening or destroying of plants by the insect
attack.
When a weed pest runs riot in a new country into which it has
been introduced, and it is found that in its country of origin it had
associated with it a destructive insect fauna not present in the new
country, then that fauna, when established on the weed in the new
country, may materially reduce the density of the weed. Attempts at
entomological control of noxious weeds are based on the assumption
that this result will probably follow.
There are two sides to the question of entomological control of
St. John’s wort which require consideration:—
(i) The probable effectiveness of the method.
(ii) The safety of the method.


Effectiveness. —It is impossible to foretell how effective the method
may be; but there are many indications that entomological control of
noxious weeds is based on scientific grounds as reputable as the biological
control of insect pests.
Insects specific to certain plants, introduced into a new country
without their parasitic enemies, on finding suitable environmental
conditions, may increase in numbers in the presence of unlimited food.
This increase should go on until the food environment had been com-
pletely filled, when a great decrease in the latter would take place. The
plant concerned would then be reduced to such a low level of density
as the continued attacks of the insect could produce. Owing to our
limited knowledge of the ecology of plants and insects, the work has
to be empirical, but we venture to suggest that the success of the method
so far [e.g., on prickly pear in Australia (Dodd, 1926) ; and on lantana
in Hawaii (Perkins and Swezey, 1924] has been at least as great, in
proportion to the money spent, as the control of insects by biological
means, and that in no case has any great damage to economic plants
resulted. The development of insect pest control has been in the order
mechanical, chemical, biological, and quite logically it follows that weed
control should develop in the same order.
The further reason for adopting this method is that, under certain
conditions, already outlined, all other methods are inadequate.
Safety. —ln the case of St. John’s wort, the safety of the method
depends on many considerations, among which are the following:—
(a) The plant is fairly isolated botanically from any economic
plants. Its chemical make-up, containing, as it does_
strong-smelling essential oils and the substance hypericin,
makes it unlikely that insects specialized to feed on such
a plant could become adapted to feed on any others.
( b ) The, insects chosen for introduction are monophagous, or
nearly so, in their habits, and the more specialized an
insect becomes in its feeding, the less trophic plasticity it
possesses (Wardle 1929).
(c) The insects chosen have been known over a long period in
Europe, and, although during that time they have been
exposed to most forms of economic plants, they have not
at any time become pests, nor have they even been recorded
on any economic plant.
( d ) Most economic crops grown in temperate climates of any
part of the world where the St. John’s wort grows are of
European origin, as are also the insects which it is proposed
to introduce. As they have been associated for so long in
Europe, there appears to be no reason to suppose that
their association in Australia will entail any change of
habit.
( e ) The insects concerned have specialized life-histories delicately
attuned to the plant on which they live. No other
economic plant, in its habit of growth or seasonal varia-
tion, provides the same environment as does the true host.
(/) Exhaustive tests are carried out, both in the country of origin
of the insects and in the new country, before liberation
of the injects. These tests are carried out with a full
knowledge of the life-history of the insect concerned, and


are designed in each ease to find out if, under any circum-
stances, the insect in any stage could be induced to feed
on, or lay eggs on, any plant of economic value. Only
varieties of insects which give negative results in these-
tests are liberated.
(ii) Organization of Research. —The activities at either end of the
research can be tabulated as follows: —
In Europe. In Australia.
(1) Finding insects feeding on St. (1) Bearing shipments of insects
John’s wort. in quarantine insectary, and
(2) Selecting those most suitable. acclimatizing to change of
(3) Determining life-history. hemisphere.
(4) Breeding, and testing on (2) Freeing from possible para-
economic plants. sites.
(5) Shipping to Australia in f 3) Breeding and testing again
stage most suitable for on economic plants, and on
transport. native Australian plants.
(4) Placing out and establishing
in the field on St. John’s
wort.
(5) Distributing to new locali-
ties.
3. Other Methods of Control.
These can be divided up into three groups
(1) Chemical.
(2) Mechanical.
(3) Competition with other plants.
(i) Chemical. —Of the many chemicals tried out in Victoria and
New South Wales by officers of the Lands Departments and the Depart-
ments of Agriculture, the general finding is that common salt is the
most generally effective and most easily obtainable eradicator for
St. John’s wort. Sodium chlorate has recently come into prominence
and appears to be effective, but it is less easily obtainable than common
salt, and much more costly.
(ii) Mechanical. —By the most intensive use of mechanical methods,
it is possible to eradicate any weed in accessible areas, but the crop
grown must be such a valuable one that it will justify the expenditure
involved. With St. John’s wort, in the case of very valuable land,
mechanical eradication is possible; few areas, however, are of such high
value that hand picking could be sedulously practised, or that smothering
by an impenetrable covering could be maintained over a long period.
Cultivation. —A crop of wheat can be grown and harvested in
infested country, but extra cost is entailed in farming operations, and
the sale of wheat from such laud may present difficulties. Ordinary
cultivation methods will not effect eradication.
Cutting. —Cutting the weed before seeding weakens the plant and
stops the spread by means of seeds for that year, but, the plant being
a perennial, it would require many close cuttings finally to kill it out.
Burning. —ln autumn, when the seeds are ripe and the stems and
leaves are dead and withering, there is a possibility of running a fire
through the area. After the fire, the green winter growth seems to
come up with greater vigour and luxuriance than it does normallv.


(iii) Competition with Other Plants. —There are three forms of
competition which have been advocated, all of which have been seen in
operation: —
Competition with Grasses and Clovers. —Experiments were con-
ducted in the Ovens Valley by the Victorian authorities in the
attempt to find grasses or clovers which would be able to smother
out St. John’s wort. Some of these grasses and subterranean
clover were able to establish themselves in ground which had been
prepared for them, and to compete successfully with the weed.
None of them was able to spread into the unprepared infested
land and there to eliminate St. John’s wort. The lesson to be
learnt from the experiments would appear to be that, with cultiva-
tion and sowing to certain grasses or clovers, land which could
be so cultivated could be cleared of its infestation.
Afforestation. —Large areas of heavily-infested land in the
Ovens Valley had been taken over by the Forests Commission of
Victoria and planted with Finns radiata. The forests are laid
out and managed in the most scientific manner, and in many areas
splendid growth is to be seen. On the closing of the canopy of
pine, the St. John’s wort disappears from the forest floor, and
this appears to solve the problem of eradication for these areas.
In fire-breaks, and in spots of inferior shallow soils, where the
canopy is not close, the weed may still be able to survive.
Parasitic Plants. —Dodder ( Guscuta australis ) is present in
small patches near Bright living on St. John’s wort, and in many
cases smothering it. Although dodder is present amongst the
St. John’s wort, and has been so for many years, it is only on
certain localized areas that it has appreciably affected the
infestation.
General. —To sum up, each form of control has its own use in certain
areas, but no form of control has yet been evolved which can economically
destroy the huge reservoir of St. John’s wort in its inaccessible mountain
fastnesses.
II. THE INSECT FAUNA OF ST. JOHN’S WORT.
1. In Australia.
A general survey of the insect fauna of St. John’s wort in Australia
has shown that certain general feeding insects have adopted the plant as a
new host. Only leaf-eating and sap-sucking insects have as yet been
discovered.
Leaf-eaters.
(1) Tortrix divulsana Walk. —This tortricid moth became a pest
in the Canberra insectaries of the Division of Economic Entomology
when introduced with plants of St. John’s wort. In the field, it was
found in the larval stage webbing the leaves of the young shoots together,
but the total result was negligible.
(2) Heliothis obsoleta Fab. —In the field plot at Canberra, a
caterpillar of the noctuid genus Heliothis was found occasionally feeding
on the plant. A few adults were bred through on the green shoots and


submitted for identification, when they proved to be Heliothis obsoleta
Fab., which is a widely distributed and notorious pest of many economic
crops.
(3) A few case-forming caterpillars have been found on the leaves,
but none has been bred through for identification.
(4) Aoplocnemis aHoguttafus Chev. —On the growing tips of the
plants near Bright, weevils of this species were occasionally found
feeding. They were localized in distribution, and not common; but
occasional plants could be seen with the growing tip severed by the
feeding of the adults of these insects.
Sap-feeders.
(1) Bathylus albicincla Erich. —This cercopid or spittle insect is
probably the most common insect to be found on the plants in the field.
In early summer, before the flowers appear, the masses of froth contain-
ing the nymphs are very common throughout the areas. About
December, the adults appear in great numbers, but neither the nymphs
nor the adults appear seriously to affect the vigour of the plants.
(2) I eery a hyperici Frogg. —This mealy bug was discovered by
Froggatt on the roots and basal stems of St. John’s wort plants obtained
from Mudgee, Kew South Wales. It was described by him in 1917.
(3) Pseudococcus sp. —A mealy bug, which has not yet been identified
specifically, but which belongs to the genus Pseudococcus,' according to
Morrison, was found on the roots near Bright. It seemed to favour the
drier parts of the habitat.
(4) Nysius vinitor (Berg) (Rutherglen bug).—This cosmopolitan
insect was found on the plants at Tumbarumba during the flowering
period of the weed.
(5) Macrosiphum yei Koch, and Myzus persicae Sulz.—These two
aphids were found to feed and breed freely on plants in the insectary,
although they have not yet been recorded from the field.
(6) Typhlocyha sp. —A species of Typhlocyba has become a pest of
the plants in the insectaries. The species has not yet been determined.
General. —The total effect of the feeding of these sap-feeding insects
on the weed in the field can be regarded as negligible in influencing its
spread or density. None of the insects appears to be specific to the
plant, and all are general feeders.
2. In Europe.
When the junior author started work in England, one of the first
things he took in hand was a review of available literature in order to
obtain a full knowledge of the recorded insect enemies of St. John’s
wort.
The following is a list of most of the insects which have been reported
to use plants of the genus Hypericum as hosts in Europe. For many
of the insects, a number of host plants has been recorded; for some, only
plants of the genus Hypericum.


LEPIDOPTERA:
Tineoidea—
Fam. Tineidae—
Cemiostoma lustratella H. Sch., Adela violella Scop.(?),
Nemotois cupriacella Hb., Kernatois dumeriliella Sign.,
Nepticula septemhrella Stn.
Fam. Gracilariidae —
Gracilaria avroguttella Steph.
Fam. Oecophoridae—
Depressaria hypericella Hb., Depressaria litureUa Schiff.
Fam. Gelechiidae—
Aristotelia atrella Haw.
Fam. Eucosmidae—
Lathronympha hypericana Hubn., Eucosma cana Haw.
Fam. Tortricidae—
Peronea hypericana Ely.
Psychoidea—
Fam. Zygaenidae—
Zygaena filipendulae Linn.
Hoctuoidea —
Fam. Noctuidae —
Actinotia polyodon Clerck., Actinotia hyperici Scbiff,
Actinotia radiosa Say.
H otodontoidea —
Fam. Boarmiidae—
Boarmia consortaria Fabr.
Fam. Geometridae—
Thalera fimbrialis Scop.
Fam. Larentiidae (Hydriomenidae)
Eucestia (Anaitis) plagiata Linn., Eucestia ( Anaitis )
efformata Guen., Eucestia ( Anaitis) simpliciata Tr., Eupi-
thecia scaboisafa Borkh. Eupithecia distinct aria H. Sch.,
Eupithecia satyrata Hb., Eupithecia castigata Hb., Chlorocystis
coronata Hb., Aspitrates gilvaria Fabr., Scoria lineata Scop.
COLEOPTERA:
Elateroidea—
Fam. Buprestidae—
Agrilus hyperici Cranz.


Cerambycoidea —
Fam. Chrysomelidae—
Chrysomela hyperici Forst., Chrysomela hrunsvicensis Gray.,
Chrysomela didymata Scriba., Chrysomela varians Sehall.,
Chrysomela geminata Payk., Chrysomela quadrigemmina Suffr.,
Chrysomela duplicata Germ., Galerucella sagittarii GylL,
Ochrosis salicariae Payk., Cryptocephalus moraei Lmn.,
Cryptocephahis decem-piaculatus Linn., Cassida thoracica
Panz. i
Curculionoidea —
Fam. Curculionidae —
Apion si mum Germ., Apion brevirostre Herbst.
DIPTEEA;
Cecidomyioi dea—
Fam. Cecidomyiidae—
Geocrypta hraueri Hanl., Dasyneura hyperici Bremi.,
Dasyneura serotina Winn., Zeuxidoplosis giardiana Kieffer.,
Macrolabis marteli Kieffer.
HEMIPTERA:
Pentatomoidea—
Fam. Coreidae —
Corizus capitatus Fab.
Fam. Pentatomidae—
Sciocoris cursitans Fab., Schivus luctuosus M. and E.,
Eurygaster maura Linn.
Tingoidea—
Fam. Tingidae—-
Tingis fabrieii Stal.
Miroidea—
Fam. Miridae—
Megacoelum infuswrn LL Sch., Amblytylus a/finis Fieb.,
Stenotus binotatus Fabr., Heterotoma merioptera Scop.
Cicadoidea—
Fam. Jassidae—
Zygina hyperica H. Sch.
Psylloidea—
Fam. Aphididae—■
Aphis chi oris Koch., Aphis rumicis Linn., Macrociphum
scabiosae Schrank., Gallipterus hyperici Monell., Myzocallis
hyperici Thomas., Myzus persicae Sulz.
Coccoidea—
Fam. Coccidae —
Asterolecanium, fimhriatum Fonsc., Aspidiotus rapax Comst.,
Aspidiotus labiatarum Marchal.


HYMEN OPTEEA:
T enthredinoidea —
Fam. Tenthredinidae—
Tenthredo sp.
This lengthy list shows what a variety of insects may feed on a
single kind of plant, and lends force to the idea that insects must play
an important role in the general ecology ,s>f plants.
III. RESEARCHES IN ENGLAND.
1. General.
Work in England on the insect fauna of St, John’s wort was com-
menced in August, 1928, at Farnham House Laboratory, under an
agreement between the Council for Scientific and Industrial Eesearch
and Sir Guy A. K. Marshall, Director of the Imperial Bureau of Ento-
mology. Dr. W. E. Thomson, Superintendent of the Farnham House
Laboratory, supervised the work.
Having obtained a general idea of the distribution of St. John’s wort
in England and of its associated fauna, a visit to the Continent was
made to see to what extent the position there corresponded with that in
Southern England.
The principal finding after the areas of St. John’s wort in France
had been visited was that England provided equal facilities with France
for getting supplies of the w r eed and associated insects. Farnham
Eoyal is, therefore, as good a centre for work as any French centre could
be, except perhaps in the case of an insect like the buprestid Agrilus
hyperici, which may occur only on the Continent.
2. Insects Associated.
A. INTRODUCTORY.
Chrysomelid Beetles.
A close search of St. John’s wort plants near Burnham, Bucks.,
revealed some small pinkish larvae which were bred through to adult
beetles, and proved to be Chrysomela varians. In late November, at
Watlington, eggs were found on the young tips of the undergrowth of
St. John’s wort, and the larvae from these, on hatching, proved to be
Chrysomela hyperici. Later, another species of beetle, Chrysomela
brunsvicensis, was discovered. This species laid eggs as in the case of
C. hyperici.
Cecidomyiid Galls.
A shoot gall found on the plant proved to be of the species Dasyneura
( Perrisia ) serotina, while the root gall was Geocrypta hraueri. In the
case of the shoot gall, the terminal leaves of the shoot remain folded
together, and inside this the larvae live gregariously. The larvae fall
to the ground when ready to pupate, and the shoot withers up. This
form of gall is found on Hypericum perforatum, H. pulchrum,
H. hirsutum, and H. quadrangularium. The root galls are found just
at the base of the stems under the surface of the ground, and appear to
be stem rather than root structures. They resemble buds, the larvae


being found between the scales in the centre of the gall. A considerable
weakening of the plant seems to result from their presence. Two other
galls, Zeuxidiplosis giardiana and Macrolahis marteli, are recorded from
Hypericum in England, but both appear to be rare.
Geometrid Larvae.
A number of these were met in the work, but only one appeared
promising. This larva had the habit of chewing through the stamens
of the flowers, and so destroying them.
Leaf-rollers.
The two leaf-rollers, Gracillaria aurogutiedla and Ljath.ronympha
hypericana, were found to be plentiful in many districts, and in some,
appeared to be a considerable factor in the control of the plants.
B. COLEOPTERA.
Chrysomelidae. (See Fig. 2.)
There proved to be three species of Chrysomela in England, namely,
Chrysomela hyperici, C. variant, and 0. brunsvicensis. The separation
of the adult species proved easy, using the puncturation on the elytra.
(See Fig. 3.)
C. hyperici.
The eggs of this species were collected at Burnham, Bucks., in early
January from the young shoots of St. John’s wort. At temperatures
varying from about 84° F. maximum day temperature to 50° F.
minimum night temperature, with an average over the period of about
64° F., the length of each instar was as follows ;
Stage. Minimum Time. Maximum Time. Average.
Ist instar larvae . . . . 3 days . . 5 days . . 4 days
2nd in star larvae . . . . 3 „ . . 6 „ . . 4 „
3rd instar larvae .. .. 3 „ .. 5 „ .. 4 „
4th instar larvae .. . . 12 „ .. 21 „ .. 14 „ to
15 „
Prepupal .. . . .. 7 „ . . 17 „ . . 10 „ to
11
Pupal .. .. .. 8 „ .. 18 „ .. 12 „
In order to discover whether the egg stage would be suitable for
shipment to Australia in cold storage, many eggs were placed in the
refrigerator, and left for periods as follows;
Length of Time in Refrigerator. Percentage Hatched.
(Weeks.)
1 . . 100
2 . . 100
3 . . 100
4 100
5 , . 100
6 . . 100
7 . . 100
8 .. 100
9 . . 80
10 .. 75
Thus, even after ten weeks’ refrigeration, the hatch was good, so that the
probability was that this stage would prove a good one at which to send
the insects to Australia.


Egos Laid by Females of C. hyper id.
Date of Commencement.
Total Eggs laid
to June 30th.
1931.
Fate of Beetle.
September 30th
1,839
Still alive June 30th
September 30th
1,872
Died April 13th
September 30th
3,752
Still alive June 30th
September 30th
3,317
Died May 20th
October 4th ..
2,226
Died June 2nd
October 4th ..
2,967
Died May 11th
Work on the biology of these insects had to be done spasmodically
as occasion offered during the routine of collect: ng eggs and testing the
different stages on economic plants before shipping to Australia. It
appears that in Tngland the species produces but one brood each year.
The eggs are laid from September to Tebruary on the young under-shoots
of St. John’s wort. They hatch during the spring, go through the larval
and pupal stages in spring and early summer, and the adults appear
about July. These adults feed ravenously for a month or two, mate,
and the females begin laying eggs in September, October, or November.
It was found that, when the development of the eggs and larvae was
hurried by placing them in a hot room, the females so produced would
lay eggs, but the latter were all infertile.
In order to ascertain how many eggs the females were capable of
laying, a number were isolated and their daily totals recorded. The
results for the six longest-lived females were as follows; —
A general idea of the life history of the insect having been obtained,
the beetles were tested on economic plants to determine if they would,
or could, feed on anything except their host plant. To this end, the
beetles were enclosed by a celluloid cylinder with a gauze top on the
plant to be tested, and were allowed to starve to death on the plant, or
feed on it, as the case might he. The plants selected were as follow
(giving common names only) : —Onion, barley, oats, wheat, maize,
carnation, larkspur, poppy, cabbage, cauliflower, stock, pansy, violet,
geranium, vine, strawberry, plum, cherry, peach, apple, rose, pear,
bean, lucerne, lupin, white clover, pea, Trench bean, sweet pea, carrot,
celery, phlox, dead nettle, salvia, tomato, potato, begonia, snapdragon,
marrow, pumpkin, aster, chrysanthemum, sunflower, lettuce, marigold,
and dahlia,
The time taken for the adult beetles to starve to death ranged from
three weeks to two and a half months. The testing of the larval stages
was carried out with two instars only, the first and the last. Tor
testing the first instar larvae, newly-hatched individuals were put out
in batches of 25 to each plant and allowed to starve to death. The
young larvae usually survived for about a week only, hut the older
larvae, also placed out in batches of 25, survived for considerably longer
periods, while some which had been nearly full fed before being placed
on the test plant, were able to pupate and emerge as undersized adults.


In no case did any insect feed on any plant except the control
Hypericum perforatum. Several shipments of Chrysomela hyperici,
the first in January, 1930, have now been sent to Australia.
Chrysomela varians.
This species was found to be viviparous; the first larvae were seen
in England in 1929 towards the end of May. While larvae were being
found on the plants, no adults were to be seen during the day, but
investigation showed that the beetles hid at the base of the plants during
the day and came up to feed after dark.
Having secured a stock of this species, some starvation tests were
conducted in the same way as those recorded for C. hyperici. These
being satisfactory, shipments of the insect to Australia were begun in
September, 1929.
Chrysomela brunsvicensis.
This was the last of the three species to be discovered, and presented
no great difficulty in handling. It is, like C. hyperici, an egg-laying
species, and its life history seems to be much the same. The over-winter-
ing stages appear to be the egg and the adult. The overwintering eggs
hatch in spring, and adults from these appear in early summer. It
seems probable that another brood appears during the summer, and
eggs are laid freely again in [November, these passing the winter before
hatching. Starvation tests with this species were carried out as for
the other two species of the genus Chrysomela. These being satisfactory,
shipments of the insect to Australia were begun in September, 1929.
General. —The St. John’s wort Chrysomelas have been known for
many years. The first to be described was Chrysomela hyperici Forst.,
in 1771; then came 0. didymata Scriba, in 1791; and C. varians Schall,
in 1783. C. hyperici , then, has been known for 159 years, and the others
well over a century, and in no case has any of them been found damaging
economic plants.
C. LEPIDOPTERA.
Toriricid Moth, Lathronympha hypericana.
This species proved to be quite common in areas visited both on the
Continent and in England. The difficulty in the first instance was to
find the place where the eggs were laid and the stage in which the insect
passed the winter.
Plants were collected in the field in winter and washed free from
soil adhering to the roots. An examination was then made for eggs, hut
none were discovered. In spite of the washing of the plants before they
were planted in the insectary, larvae appeared as soon as the warm
weather came. It was not until October, 1930, that the mystery of the
over-wintering stage of this species was solved. Larvae in the second,
third, and fourth instars were then discovered in small chambers hollowed
out of the roots under the ground. Apparently, larvae hatching from
eggs laid in summer feed for a short time in autumn, and then descend
under the ground to the roots. There they tunnel in the outside of the
roots, boring under the grass, which is to be found webbed into a loose
cover. A small chamber is then hollowed out at a fork in the root, and
there the larvae pass the winter. In spring, the larvae move above
ground and feed on the leaves until full fed. They then descend again,
to pupate at ground level, and later emerge as adult moths. There
appear to be three generations of this species each year, the larvae
feeding on the leaves, which they web together, the flower buds, and
flowers.


The testing of this insect on economic plants was carried out, using
the same test list of 49 plants as was used in the case of the Chrysomelid
beetles, and in no ease was any feeding done except on the control plant
Hypericum perforatum. Shipments to Australia were begun in
August, 1930.
Depressaria hypericella Hb. (Oecophoridae).
The larvae of this species web the shoots together, feeding on leaves,
flower buds, and flowers in much the same way as those of Lathrowympha,
and the larvae of the two species are often found associated in the field.
D. OTHER INSECTS STUDIED.
The three Chrysomelids, and the Tortricid moth first mentioned, are
the only insects which, before the end of 1931, have completed the tests
and been shipped to Australia, but considerable work has been done
with the Cecidomyiid gall formers and an aphis {Aphis chloris), as
well as the moths Depressaria hypericella, Anaitis efformata, and
Anaitis plagiata.
Gecidomyiids.
Geocrypta braueri (Root Gall). —Considerable quantities of St.
John’s wort roots affected by this gall were collected in November and
December, 1928, and emergence of the adult flies started in April, 1929.
The emerging adults were placed on fresh plants of St. John’s wort,
but no gall developed, so that a new technique will have to be adopted.
Dasyneura sp. (Shoot Gall). —From a collection of shoot gall
material, three insect species emerged;—
Dasyneura sp. probably hyperici.
Zeuxidiplosis giardiana.
Macrolabis marteli.
Alacrolabis marteli appears to be an inquiline in the gall.
Zeuxidiplosis giardiana. —Judging from the form of the galls it
produced, this insect was at first considered of little importance in the
work. The galls in which it was first found were formed on the lower
leaves. Later, in England, during August, many flowers were observed
to have remained closed instead of opening normally. These were
found to be inhabited by small pink larvae wdiich, on emergence as
adults, were identified as the species under discussion. In view of this
discovery, and the fact that the seeding of the affected flowers is entirely
prevented by the presence of this insect, it has been decided to go further
with the species, and to prepare it for export to Australia after the
usual tests have been conducted to determine its harmlessness to
economic crops.
In the case of the Cecidomyiids, the testing must also take the form
of oviposition tests.
Aphis chloris. —This aphis was previously not known to occur in
England, although it was known to occur on the Continent, but in the
course of the present "work it was found in England. So far, it has
failed to feed on anything except Hypericum, but further experiments
are in progress.
3. Conclusion.
It will thus be seen that already four insect species, namely,
Chrysomela hyperici, C. varians, C. brunsvicensis, and Lathronympha
hypericana have, after considerable testing, been sent to Australia, that


many more are under study, and that the insect fauna of St. John’s
wort is so extensive that a reasonable hope exists that at least some of
the insects concerned will prove of value in controlling the pest weed in
Australia.
IV. RESEARCHES IN AUSTRALIA.
When work on the insect fauna of St. John’s wort was well begun in
England, it was necessary to commence preparing in Australia for the
reception of any insect that might be sent. The important items were: —
(1) The building of insectaries to deal with the insects.
(2) The laying down of a definite routine procedure in conjunc-
tion with the Commonwealth Department of Health
(which is responsible for quarantine matters) for the
introduction of insects into Australia, and for their
liberation in the field after testing.
1. Preparation of the Insectaries.
Two insectaries were built, to the design of Dr. Tillyard, each 40 feet
square, and divided into two large and eight small compartments. The
floor of the insectaries is of good soil, underlain by agricultural drains
to give good aeration and drainage. The outer walls are of mesh
wire netting, which serves to protect the inner walls of phosphor-bronze
gauze having 60 meshes to the inch. These inner walls, with the ceiling,
which is of the same gauze, and which is 7 feet from the floor of the
insectary, form a closed quarantine area to which double doors with a
baffle chamber give access. The roof is of reinforced glass, and is carried
high above the ceiling to give plenty of ventilation so as to avoid high
temperatures in summer. A small laboratory for opening up material
and freeing shipments of possible parasites before admitting to the main
insectary, is connected with the baffle chamber.
2. Co-operation with Commonwealth Department of Health.
Before importation of any insect into Australia, permission for such
introduction has to be obtained from the Commonwealth Department of
Health, which is responsible for matters of quarantine. The informa-
tion required by this Department before it will give permission to intro-
duce includes the name, life history, hosts, parasites and hyper-parasites
(if any), and the economic value of the insect to be introduced, as well
as the experiments to be conducted, the places in which they are to be
conducted, the precautions to be taken, the period of experiment, and
the names of persons having access to the insects.
The premises to which the insect is admitted then becomes a quaran-
tine area under the Act, and no release from this area is permitted
until authorization is given by the Department. For this, proof by
experiment is required of the usefulness of the insect for the purpose
for which it has been introduced, and its harmlessness from an economic
stand-point. Two months’ notice of intention to liberate is required.
3. Shipping Insects to Australia and Behaviour in Insectaries.
As a general rule, the hibernating stage of each insect was chosen for
despatch to Australia. The insects were transported in damp sphagnum
moss in the case of adults or larvae, or stuck on cards with shellac in
the case of eggs. They were securely packed in boxes, and placed in the
ship’s cool room at temperatures ranging from 40° F. to 50° F.
The following table shows the succession of broods of the first five
shipments in Canberra.


Succession of Chrysomela Bkoodk in Insectaries, Canberra.
—
October.
November.
December.
January,
1930.
February.
Ma~ch.
April.
May.
June.
July,
August.
Ghrysomela hrunsvi-
censis
Eggs — >
from
England
arrived
16.10.29
- Larvae
I
t
Pupae
Adults —
>- Adults
i
Eggs
Larvae
I
Pupae
Adults —
Adults —
>-Adults —
>■ Eggs — >
Larvae —
>- Larvae
Chrysomela didymaia
Adults —
from
England
16.10.29
> Eggs
1
Larvae
Larvae
!
Pupae
Adults —
> Eggs
i
Larvae
Larvae
i
'V
Pupae
Adults
Adults
Eggs — >
- Larvae — ■
>- Larvae
Chrysomela varians . .
Adults -—--
from
England
16.10.29
>■ Adults —
>■ Adults
i
t
Larvae
Pupae —
- Adults —
>- Larvae
Pupae
Adults
Adults
Adults
Adults
Adults
Chrysomela hyperici ..
* ‘
Eggs — >
from
England
19.2.30
- Larvae —
Pupae
i
Adults
Adults —
>-AduIts —
A few
Eggs
>• Adults —
-> Adults
Chrysomela hyperici ,.
..
i !
Eggs —
from
England
15.3.30
>- Larvae
i
Pupae
Adults
Adults [ Adults
Adults


The experience of the first and subsequent shipments has shown that
the adult stage of any of the Chrysomela species will carry well in cool
storage, that the egg stage also can he successfully shipped, but that the
pupal stage is a less satisfactory one to deal with. Further, it has been
found that adults which were shipped within a few days of emerging
from the pupal stage were subject to very heavy losses in transit, hut
that adults which had been allowed to feed for a few weeks before ship-
ment, suffered less than 10 per cent. loss. The following results illus-
trate this well; —
C. varians. —Adults placed in cold store within a few days of
emerging from pupation. Of 1,362 adults despatched from Farn-
ham Royal, only 140 were alive when opened up in Canberra.
This result should be contrasted with the following:—
C. varians. —Adults fed for a month after emergence from
pupation before being placed in cold store. Of 400 adults
despatched from Farnham Royal, 384 were alive when opened up
in Canberra.
In all shipments of eggs, it has been found that, when cold conditions
have been constantly maintained between laying and arrival in Aus-
tralia, there is a successful hatch of 75 per cent, to 90 per cent, of the
consignment.
In the summer of 1929-30, both G. varians and C. brumvicensis were
readily established in the insectaries at Canberra.
C. hyperici presented a more difficult problem. In England, it
would appear that this species has only one brood each year. The
eggs are laid in late autumn or early winter on the winter 1 shoots of
St. John’s wort, and remain unhatched until spring. Eggs sent from
England in December hatched readily in the heat of the Australian
summer, the larvae fed rapidly and pupated, to appear as adults in
late April. A few eggs were laid in June; no larvae hatched from them,
and most of the females did not lay at all. Many of the adults over-
wintered, some activity being seen throughout the winter months. In
spring, the females were seen to be swollen with eggs, but in spite of
this, no ovipositions took place, and the females slowly died off without
producing offspring.
C. varians passed the first Australian winter in the adult stage
hidden in crevices and in the soil under the plants. When the weather
warmed up late in August, 1930, they emerged from hibernation, and
were to be seen feeding freely on the plants. By the end of September,
larvae were being deposited in large numbers, so that the plants in the
insectary were soon stripped of their leaves, and ultimately completely
killed by continuous defoliation.
C. brumvicensis. —Adults of this species did not hibernate, but con-
tinued to feed and to oviposit slowly throughout the winter. Eggs took
a long time to hatch, and the larvae grew very slowly. The result was
that in the spring there were very few individuals of this species present
in the insectary as compared with C. varians.
Lathronympha hypericana.
Before the true hibernating stage of this moth had been discovered,
a small shipment of pupae and eggs was received in Australia in Sep-
tember, 1930. The eggs failed to hatch, and no adults emerged from
the pupae. Shortly afterwards, when the junior author had discovered


that the young larvae hibernated in the roots, a shipment of root
material containing hibernating larvae was sent to arrive in Canberra
in January, 1931. These larvae gave rise to moths, which were allowed
to mate and lay eggs on St. John’s wort in the insectary, the larvae
resulting then going into hibernation on the roots.
4. Testing Insects on Economic Plants.
When the insects had been successfully established in the Canberra
in sectary, there remained the work of testing them on economic plants.
A list of test plants was made, including: (i) economic crops grown
in the vicinity of the St. John’s wort areas; (ii) economic plants repre-
sentative of the different botanical orders, and including the most valuable
plants of each order; and (iii) representatives of the eucalypts and
acacias native to Australia.
Testing was carried out in the same manner as described for starva-
tion tests in England. The test plants on which starvation tests were
conducted were as follows (giving common names only) : —Common
wheat, maize, perennial rye, banana, walnut, black mulberry, hops,
rhubarb, sugar beet, ornamental salt-bush, cabbage, red currant, black
currant, loganberry, strawberry, apple, plum, cherry, peach, apricot,
pear, quince, wattle, lucerne, common flax, lemon, mandarin, orange,
wine grape, upland cotton, mango, paw paw, eucalyptus, guava, carrot,
parsley, potato, tomato, pumpkin, and lettuce.
All tests so far have proved that the three beetles concerned feed on
St. John’s wort in all stages of growth, and that they can feed on no
plants other than those of the genus Hypericum. Fig. 3 illustrates
photographically that the larvae are quite specific in their feeding.
During the testing period, the Chief Entomologists of the States
concerned (Victoria and New South Wales) were asked to criticize
the methods used, and the list of plants to be tested; and to make any
other suggestions which would assure them of the thoroughness of the
testing. Their suggestions were then incorporated in the scheme, on the
satisfactory completion of which permission to liberate was given, and
the first beetles were placed out in the field in October, 1930.
5. Liberation in the Field
Sites for the first liberation were selected in co-operation with State
authorities, on whose land the experiments were to be conducted. It
was desirable to place the first lots in areas protected from bush fires, so
permission was obtained from the Forestry Commission of New South
Wales to use a forestry reserve at Mannus, near Tumbarumba, and from
the Forests Commission of Victoria to use their reserves near Bright
and Myrtleford, in the Ovens Valley.
In establishing an insect in a new country, there are few principles
to guide the investigator. Whether the insects become established or not
will be a matter of balance between the forces of the environment
operating against them, and the innate qualities of the beetles tending
to survival, and neither is capable of being measured. Trial and error
is the only method applicable. In the case of a rapidly moving insect,
such as a strong flying Tachinid, it is generally thought that more
individuals must be liberated at one time than in the case of an insect
which tends to remain sluggishly in one small area. In general, it was
decided that different localities differing as widely as possible in altitude,


•climate, and aspect, should be chosen for the attempts to establish the
Chrysomelid beetles, and that numbers varying from 200 to .10,000
adults should be liberated on one spot in dense St. John’s wort.
The first liberations were made in the Bright Valley, Victoria, in
October, 1930, and since then liberations have been made near Dargo,
Victoria, and Tumbarumba, Vew South Wales. When the sites of the
October liberations were visited in December of the same year, and in
February of the following year, survivors of this first liberation could still
be found. It is much too early to say wdiether the beetles will be able
to become firmly established in the field, however, and whether they will
be able to breed up to numbers large enough to effect some control of
the weed.
V. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS.
Dr. E. J. Tillyard, Chief of the Division, initiated the work on
St. John’s wort when the Division was formed, and collected a con-
siderable body of information both in Europe and Australia before the
writers had been appointed. Accordingly, thanks are due to him for
much information included in the paper, and also for many suggestions
in the actual writing up of the material. Miss W. Kent Hughes
executed the effective drawings of beetles, larvae, and eggs in Figure 3,
and we gratefully acknowledge our indebtedness to her. Thanks are also
due to the Noxious Weeds and Vermin Branch of the Victorian Lands
Department, the officers of which have been most considerate and help-
ful, and without whose co-operation effective work in the field would
have been almost impossible; to the Forestry Commissions of Victoria
and of New South Wales for permission to use areas under their con-
trol; and to the officers of the New South Wales Department of Agri-
culture, who have been most helpful when approached.
VI. BIBLIOGRAPHY.
Adcock, G. H. (1014). —Survey of the commoner weeds. Jour. Dept. Agr. Viet.:
12: 337-346.
Brues, C. T. (1930). —The food of insects reviewed from the biological and human
stand-point. Psyche: 37: 1-14.
Calvert, J. (1030). —St. John’s wort. Botanical classification. Jour. Conn.
Set. Ind. Res., Aust.: 3: 180.
Davev, H. W. (1917). —Weeds, St. John’s wort. Jour. Dept. Agr. Viet.: 15:
" 427-434.
(1919). —Experiments in the control of St. John’s wort. Jour.
Dept. Agr. Viet.: 17: 378-380.
• : (1922). —Weeds and their eradication. Jour. Dept. Ayr. Viet.:
20: 10-18.
Dodd. A. P. (1927). —The biological control of prickly pear in Australia. Conn.
Sci. Ind. Res., Aust., Bulletin 34, 1-44. Pis. 1-9.
(19291. —The progress of biological control of prickly pear in
Australia. Commonwealth Prickly Pear Board, Brisbane. 1-44. Pis. 1-12.
Dodd, Sydney (1920). —St. John’s wort and its effects on livestock. Agr. Gaz.,
N~B.W'.: 31: 265-272.
Ewart, Alfred J, (1910). —'1 he Ovens River Valley. Report on St. John's wort,
dredging, and the forest flora of the district. Jour. Dept. Agr. Viet.: 8:
503-508.
Ewart, A. J., and Tovey, J. R. —The weeds, poison plants, and naturalized aliens
of Victoria. Melbourne, 1909.


French. C. (1903). —An injurious weed. St. John’s wort. Jour. Dept. Agr. Viet.:
2: 65-67.
(1905). —St. John’s wort. Hypericum perforatum Linne. Jour.
Dept. Agr. Viet.: 3: 624-630.
Froggatt, W. W. (1919). — Icerya hyper id, parasite on roots and basal stems
of ST. John’s wort. Agr. (Jaz. X.SAV.: 30: 470.-472.
Hamm, A. H. (1921). —Eradication of St. John’s wort by means of introduced
insects. Report on Hypericum perforatum L. Jour. Dept. Agr. Viet.: 19•
187-188.
Henry, Max (1922). —Feeding and contact experiments with St. John’s wort.
~ Agr. Gaz. N.S.W.: 33: 205-207.
Imms, A. D. (1929). —Remarks on the problem of the biological control of noxious
weeds. Trans. 4th Int. Cong. Ent. Ithaca, 1928. Vol. 2, 10-17.
Johnston, T. H., and Tryon, H.—Report of the Prickly Pear Travelling Commis-
sion, Ist November, 1912-30th April, 1914. Brisbane, 1914, 131 pp., 66 figs.
Maiden, J. H. (1900). —Some notes of a trip to the Victorian Alps. Viet.
Xat.: 17: 44.
(1901). — (Some additional weeds.) Agr. Gaz. X.8.W. ; 12: 1202.
(1904) .—Weeds of New South Wales. St. John’s wort. Agr. Gaz.
X.8.W.: 15: 843-844.
(1917). —Weeds of New South Wales. (St. John’s wort.) Agr.
Gaz. X.8.W.: 28: 413-414.
(1920). —The weeds of New South Wales. Part I. Sydney, 1920.
Mueller, F. von (1893). —Record of plants naturalized in the Colony of Victoria
since 1889. (52 species.) Viet. Xat.: 10; 144-147.
Munns, E. N., and Coville, P. (1929). —Sylvicultural practice in the control of
forest insects. Trans. 4th Int. Cong. Ent. Ithaca, 1928. Vol. 2, 333-341.
Perkins, R. C. L., and Swezey, O. H. (1924). —The introduction into Hawaii of
insects that attack lantaria. Bull. Exp, Stn., Hawaiian Sugar Planters’
Assoc. Ent. Series, Bull. 16.
Sampson, Arthur W., and Parker, Kenneth W. (1930). —St. John’s wort on range
sands of California. Univ. of Calif. Ag. Exp. Stn., Berkeley, California.
Bull. 503.
Seddon, H. R., and Belschner, H. G. (1929).—The effect of immature St. John’s
wort (Hypericum perforatum) on sheep. Jour. Court. Sci. Did. Res. Anal.:
2: 229-231.
Summers, W. L. (1904). — Hypericum perforatum. Jour. Dept. Agr. Bth. Aust.:
7: 354-355.
(1911). —St. John’s wort. Jour. Dept. Agr. Bth. Aust.: 14: 1171.
(1911). —St. John’s wort, Hypericum perforatum. Proclaimed a
noxious weed. Jour. Dept. Agr. Bih. Aust.: 15: 144-145.
Tillyard, R. J. (1927). —Biological control of St. John’s wort. XJour. Agric.:
35: 42-45.
(1928). —Entomological research; a general scheme. Jour. Coun.
Sci. Ind. Res.: 1; 193-201.
(1929). —The work of the Division of Economic Entomology for
the year 1928-29. Coun. Sci. Ind. Res. Aust., Pamphlet 15, pp. 11-13.
(1929). —The biological control of noxious weeds. Proc. Roy. Soc.
Tasmania, 1929, pp. 51-86, Pis. 11-18.
(1930). —Entomological control of St. John’s wort —First libera-
tions of Chrysomela beetles. Jour. Bci. Ind. Res. Aust.: 3; 231-232.
Tryon, H. (1919). —The St. John’s wort pest. Proposal to utilize insect enemies
for its eradication. Q’land Agric. Jour.: 11: 122-123.


FIG. 1.— St. John’s wort in lower in summer. Mannas, near Tumbarumba,
New South Wales.


FIG. 2.
Top (left).-Chrgsomela varians Schall X 5.
Top (right). —Chrgsomela hyperici Forst X 5.
Centre (left)-Chrysomela brunsvicensis Grav. X 5.
Centre (right).4th instar larvae of C. varians X 10.
Bottom (left).
Right elytron of Chrgsomela hgperici,
" varians,
" brunsvicensis,
showing difference in Puncturation in the three species.
Bottom (right),—Eggs of C. hyperici X 30.


The same as on the left, taken 24 hours afterwards, showing the
midrib only of the St. John’s wort leaves (H), but all other
leaves still untouched, thus demonstrating how specific the
larvae are in their feeding. (The larvae ultimately died
without touching the other leaves.)
FIG. 3.
Photograph (natural size) of petri dish, in which are pieces of
fresh leaves of many plants, and at intervals leaves of St.
John’s wort (H). Many larvae of Chrysomela hyperici newly
hatched are seen dispersing from the centre, where they had
been placed a few minutes previously.
5. J. Green, Govt. Printer , Melb.
