

THE
PICKLED PASQUINADE
BY
Henry Ffrench Gillman.
“Brevity is the soul of wit.”—Shakespeare.
COPYRIGHT.
MORAL:
Never wrong a man by word or deed, for then
He’ll bide his time, and pay you back again.


THE
PICKLED PASQUINADE.
BY
Henry Ffrench Cullman.
“ Brevity is the soul of wit.”-Shakespeare.
COPYRIGHT.
Printed at the World Office, 301 Pitt Street, Sydney, New South Wales.
1899.
MORAL:
Never wrong a man by word or deed, for then
He’ll bide his time, and pay you back again.




NOTES
1. This ajlegory portrays the squatter system personified as a Vampire.
2. The bias of the Queenquean magistrates is notorious, —a few Bayards
excepted.
3. The sobriquet of Satanites I have coined for this Order is rather
severe -on the devil. Pope Clement the XIV. denounced and
attempted to suppress those Papal Janissaries with fatal result—
he died of “cholic.”
H. Ff. G.




THE VAMPIRE.
I do not hate this man, I say from all such feeling I’m exempt,
Being far beneath my anger, on him I hurl the darts of contempt.
Contempt ! he’s far too low for that ; it is the utter loathing scorn
I feel for hideous dastard fiendish deeds his record now adorn.
If Hell could vomit forth the vilest thing that e’er into its pit was sent
It ne’er could match the Vampire fiend, malignant, loathsome, miscreant !
His hatred is an honour, and his friendship ignominious shame.
No fiend within the Pit would sloop such fellowship to claim.
So like the deadly tiger-snake he crawls around a settler’s home,
His foot-fall traced by ruined hearths, loathsome slime, and reptile foam.
I hate to see the poor man wronged, by Vampires driven forth from home ;
So forced with wife and family along the savage wilds to roam.
Thus like the simoom’s blighting blast he’s swept o’er Austral land
And many a free selector’s home is grasped by his greedy hand.
Cursed be the laws that aid this demon in such deeds of Hell !
A homestead law like Yankees have would bar the tyrant well.
Now evil spirits walk with him to urge him on to hateful deeds of guile,
His name will pale the bushman’s ruddy cheek and hush the baby’s budding smile,
For he has got a mortgage on the land, and counts the hours until he can foreclose ;
Then sorrow, sickness, wet and cold, perchance fierce hunger’s deadly throes.
Alas ! that bovine jaws should rend the vine the maidens loved to twine
Through the rafters strip’d of bark, the moon’s pale beams will shine,


The 'possums play along the ridge, the owl hoot o’er the hearth,
Thus time will soon efface each trace of honest toilsome worth.
The law upholds such guilty deeds, they increase more and more,
Those ruined homes will add some pelf unto the Vampire’s bloated store.
By subtle crafty tricks he tries to tempt selectors into debt,
A mortgage follows in due course, which those poor men regret;
There are no buyers for their land, the Vampire gets it cheap,
For cash is scarce at present time, luck’s tide is on the neap
A stale old game that’s often played, yet always sure to win ;
’Tis strange how men are caught by it, to me it seems so thin !
He'll raise a fire of malprepense to burn a selector out,
Swear ’twas done by adverse side, and prove it too by rabble rout.
You cannot trust his plighted word, far less in value than a tinker’s curse,
He’ll trick you o’er a written deed, some paltry dodge to save his purse ;
So as the Vampire rides, his trail is fouled by blood and slime,
While bitter curses dog his steps —I’ve heard them many a time !
False his oaths as Punic faith, or those that perjured dicers swear ;
He battens on a victim’s blood like to a wild beast in his lair.
He will not baulk at foulest murder —by tools—so he can ’scape Scot free,
He bribes the Bench and jury too—by gold—those things we all can see.
He lays a plot to trap a man, then smash him by a suit at law ;
Perjured evidence, prove the case, in it you cannot pick one flaw.
He has a cunning plan of perjury—take a fact admitted by the other side,
Then pack a pile of lies upon its back with lawyer’s legal wit as guide.
He never swears to more than half a lie, the other side admits the half is true ;
So hoodwinked justice thinks the rest seems so, and honesty must rue.
The magistrates are bribed, and they expect to finger trifles of his wealth.
There are some Bayards on the Bench, but their presence is scarce felt;
P.M.’s have been influenced, and decisions are considered queer
When murderous attempts are winked at to win the Vampire’s cunning leer.
‘Tho’ born in a humble humpy this man assumes to be a “ real toff,’’


Some folks quoting adage 'bout a silken purse derisively will scoff.
“ The grand old name of gentleman ” was never dragg’d so deep in filth
Until the Vampire claimed it as his style, so on a dagger fixed it for a hilt.
He ought to charge a devil fish upon his black and bloody shield,
He’s won that blazon I’ll admit, upon dishonour’s loathsome field ;
His crest, a tiger snake, ioe venom’d fangs an emblem of his petty mind,
The tiger in his heart responds, proclaims the Vampire s breed and kind.
His mother was a cyprian, her brat begotten by the Fiend one night,
As lurid lightning lit the Austral sky, destruction dealing in its flight.
A truthful pedigree is this, and more exact than seen on herald’s roll
When Norman blood is coined for Mammon marching to a titled goal.
Foresworn are his dummys who sell their soul for present meed,
Pardon for those men, kind Heaven ! for ’tis the Vampire’s felon deed.
Yet he affects to be an honest man, his talk is plausible and fair,
And he will part small change for drinks, so with the public be keeps square;
He goes to Church decorously and poses with a sanctimonious air,
Subscribes to charities, tho’ ruined by the land-tax he’ll declare ;
Sometimes service’s held by parson in his house, the audience quothing in their sleeves
“ My house is called the house of God, but ye have made it (in) a den of thieves.”
He’ll dismiss a man who tells a lie—to him—at which the stockmen grin
All hinting re some long-forgotten lore of Satan's self reproving sin,
So he flings dust in public eye, they wink at deeds because ’tis gold;
But why pursue the theme ? those stale old tricks, how often told !
The Vampire rails to Sydney to see how auctioneers his wool have sold,
With lewd and drunken hand he spends the poor man’s plundered gold.
A grinding miser on the station, he apes the spendthrift in the town,
But he will hedge upon the ration-tea ’tho’ now he parts the ready down.
He’ll block you in the Lands Department where he has got a spy
Who shuffles, dodges, circumvents, and other Fabian tactics try—
A jack-in-office squared by him, and a tool on the Land Board too.
Surveyors are his servitors. Nepotism, n’importe you have the clue.


He buys each sergeant of police, planks the retaining flimsy down,
And whisky is pruduced to bribe when the trooper visits from the town.
So every neighbour round about— bar one - now hold this Evil Thing in fear,
But the dauntless pen is a Paladin, and hydras tight both far and near.
The press is fearful of his wrath, they know his demon deeds so well,
And Mammon awes the country round, the presence makes a hell.
“ Queenquean justice ” is dealt out to every man who settles on his run,
And there the sky is dark and gloomy despite our Austral’s sun.
When foregathered are a few they tell a story that seems very strange,
How a damsel lost her reason and in the bush did wildly range ;
She died by accident ’twas said — on dit —or was it guilt and shame ?
“ Hush it up ! hush it up ! Take a drink sergeant; 'tis but the same old game.”
A drunken super’ said to him one eve—on this the record’s clear,
“ I’ll lag you! I’ll lag you ! I’ll lag you /” The Yampire’s face grew green with fear.
His gold now shields him from the sword the blind-fold goddess wears,
Her fiat fitly forth, “ This plundered land shall ne’er descend unto his heirs,
“ Like the impious Greek of old vultures soon will tear an ever-growing heart,
“ He’s wrung so many on this earth a fitting doom I’ll now impart.’'
The hangman swore he’d be defrauded of his lawful fee
If the Vampire died in other way than a drop from the gallows tree ;
The Shade of Judas caveat lodged “ ’twould be disgrace ” quoth he,
“ To foul a gallows with such filth ; fling the carrion in the rolling sea !”
The fish cried out ’twould poison them, and e’en to this the sharks agree ;
So Neptune got a rule of Court—above I state exact precis.
The Lord Chief Justice, Supreme Court, Australian Federation
Will try the case in future time, when colonies become a Nation,
For I rank amongst the prophets, a Seer am I as well as Saul.
Justice’ wheel will soon o’ertake the wretch, crushing into pieces small —
This wild eerie life favours second-sight, now I foretell the squatter's doom,
The broad estate will be cleft up when he is rotting ’neath the tomb,
Poisoned worms from his corse will turn away as far too vile for cheer,


While Charon with his soul on board across the Styx will steer
His name submerged in Lethe's stream, or but remembered as a ghoul.
Happy homes and humble competence would fall before his with’ring scowl.
The men who eat his salt are viler far than abject things in Hell—
For weekly wage they sell their souls and swear whate’er is ordered, well;
And yet he is not gen’rous to those slaves —the pay is small and mean ;
The rations are the vilest sort I’ve e’er upon a station seen.
He wont employ an upright man who keeps a conscience free from dirt,
So his myrmidons are known to be the vilest scum on earth ;
He’s beaten every man who tried a fall—fearlessly on him I lay the thong.
Down with the Vampire, war to the knife, with satire and with song !
The Vampire’s victims are delighted to see him flouted without fear,
All chuckling round their humble hearths “ have we not Hiren here ?”
And many a malison lies on his head from ruined hopes and wild hearts crushed by care,
Who execrate the Vampire’s natal hour, the fiend who fouls Monaro’s Mountain air.
QUEENQUEAN JUSTICE A BY-WORD.
“ Queenquean justice ” is a by-word for bias, fraud, and wrong, and guile,
For ’twill convict an honest man to win a perjured squatter's smile.
The blind-fold goddess groaned aloud as ,Ts.P. prostitute her name,
To vent their purchased vengeance, the servile dogs so impotent and lame !
The man who shows his teeth to those with name too foul to write
Will not be awed by petty fine, or their flunkey’s bootless spite.
I never used a threat, oh ! no ; and spoke like Parson or Salvation Lass,"
His worship winked the other eye and let the lying story pass,
Truckling to those wealthy clowns who packed the bench with guile ;
Contempt is all I feel for them—the public say “ champagne” and smile.
Foresworn to the oaths they took to mete-out justice even unto all
Nemesis waits for them, ’tis clear, in Ebbs’ dark infernal Hall.
Yes, there are magistrates in plenty, both J’s.P. and police


Who pervert the ends of justice, and in her name the poor man fleece;
But they grovel to the squatter, for a glass will kiss his after-part
Queenquean’s bench is packed with them ’tie known in every mart.
To liberty’s palladium I’ll appeal upon another faked-up case.
Here Mammon sits enthroned in power in pandemonium’s pride of place—
How I despise the crawling curs who crouch unto those squatter knaves !
Oh ! Satan, you will never think it worth your while to damn those paltry slaves !
I can respect a squatter for his worth , or any man with “ honour ” on his crest ;
But ere I d give my hand unto those perjured liars I’d clasp a viper to my breast !
Suborned Judge, the vilest filth that e’er the shrine of justice fouled,
Baser far than evil fiends who oft in Tophet’s pit have howled ;
They will guzzle on the vilest garbage a squatter flings unto a rat,
Noblesse oblige is Greek to them, heredity betrays the chain gang aristocrat.
True patriots were their sires of old who crossed the ocean for their country’s weal—
Adorned by many a gov’ment brand, with chains and bracelets made of steel,
Now on the judgment seat those Jeffries hold the scales Stygian justice pour,
Awarding chains their fathers wore to sons of honesty who paid the passage o’er.
The flashing sword has turned within their grasp into assassin’s blade,
Hard-up loafers hired sub-rose by squatter’s gold, the bravo’s abject trade ;
Their prototype presiding at their council, Democles sword hangs by a hair,
The fetters oft bestowed by them ’tis clear those magistrates must wear.
With wooden spoons on skilly at Berrima those Solons soon will sup,
And justice’ voice be heard once more the rascal squatters' ring burst up.
They ought to form a Corporation with Black Maria for a coach of state,
And banquet oft on bread and water, their fare within the prison gate ;
The hangman has the push upon his roll—the Devil has the dogs all booked for hell,
I had a yarn with him near Killemkillie, so I can vouch for this right well.
Amongst them three just men cannot be found although the Lot is Right,
A paradox on which I shall abstain from throwing any light ;
Now honest men are outlaws here, the common talk of town and fell
Shrieking justice fled from gold and bade Queenquean’s Bench farewell.


THE DEATH OF BLAZER.
Oh ! once I had a trusty steed, no Arab loved his better—
A faithful friend who came to call and kept to heel like setter.
The boycott could not operate ; they tried it on 1 say, sir,
For distance was of no account onto my gallant Blazer.
“ I’ll clip his wings,” said some one; “ that chestnut horse must die,”
“ A ten-pound-note will do the trick, I know a tool who’ll try.
The felon fiend death’s compound mixed amid some fancy feed,
Then sought the hapless, trustful horse, who grazed upon the mead.
A bell was on his glossy neck to guide the poisoner to his prey;
The demon deed was done by night: it would not stand the light of day.
The tracks were found, and poison, too, in spite of Sergeant Hushit-up
And every crawling sycophant who tried to best the truth by bluff ’,
So then i swore a solemn oath, as for my steed I gave a sigh,
“ If e’er I track the poisoner down, that man will surely die.*
'Tis said the tool has lost his horses —poetic justice which is meet
Yet why should nobler quadrupeds expire and baser biped justice cheat
“ Queenquean justice,” you have got my foully-murdered steed !
Full many a mile we two have roamed o’er Austral mounts and mead.
This demon gloats on human blood, and reeks of equine gore,
But Til he even with the tiger yet, long e’er life’s dream is o’er.
A gallant spirit ’neath thy chestnut hide, far nobler than his petty soul.
If to hell a curse could sink the fiend, ’twould quickly through the welkin roll.
No rasper fence or five-bar gate could daunt thy spirit high,
No yawning chasm bar thy course, o’er it thy hoofs could fly.
To happy hunting grounds you’ve gone, where thy poisoner cannot go ;
I ne’er can find a courser true like one that felon-fiend laid low.
I miss thee sore, my trusty steed, when e’er abroad I ride,
And long I’ll rue the dreary day when gallant Blazer died,


MURDER WILL OUT! £lOO REWARD.
(Appeared in the Queenquean Observer.)
A deed of hell was done that night when Blazer fell upon the mead;
His only crime, poor fellow, was he served me in the hour of need.
By lies and bluff they’ve tried to ’scape the odium of this deed.
I’ve found the poison and the tracks where died my murdered steed.
They have tools beneath their thumb, crawling snakes in human mould,
Who will sell their souls to Satan for a slice of ill-got gold.
Their name is now a by-word for cowardly tricks and vile;
Weil known along the river their deeds of hate and guile;
I’ll bide my time with powder dry and justice on my side,
If e’er I get a chance at them, the Black Horse they will ride !
The murderous wire now having failed to kill and win the day, sir,
Their poisoner tool was set to work, so died my gallant Blazer.
And Hushitup was squared, ’tis said, by influence and wealth,
For mammon has great power on earth—in hell their gold will melt.
No man do I accuse of dastard crime—“ now mark well what I say ”
But those ’twill fit must don the cap, there is no get away.
I’ll never rest until I see the lifeless poisoners on the sward,
And to the man who’ll lay me on— One hundred pounds reward !
THE MURDER TRAP.
“ The trap will work,” quoth Kitchen-cur, “ when me he will attack,
My wife will be well-planted to shoot him in the back;
When crippled by her shot I’ll send a bullet through his heart
And swear ’twas done in self-defence—for other parts I’ll start,
’Twill feather-up my nest, by jove ! the tune is fifty pound,
Clearing off the score of old and plant him ’neath the ground.”


But I “ smoked ” the murder trap, and shun’d the fatal snare,
I saw my foeman’s felon-hand, the squatter’s tool was there.
You are a paltry cur, quoth I, to shoot me for one tanner,
I would not soil my hands or I would twist you like a spanner,
You are not clean enough to spit upon, I will not dirt my boot ;
Your voice like to a jackass bray or evil night-owl’s hoot,
I do not care a finger snap for you or your Daisy gun
And in Queenquean Court House o’er this I’ll have some fun.
It was a dastard devil’s plot, on this all hands agree,
“ The best laid plans of mice and men how oft they gang agee.”
ON NIL DESPERANDUM
Hail Australia ! freedom’s home ! there’s room for you and me,
And every man who flies from wrong across the surging sea.
Room for men with hands to work, heads to plan, hearts to do and dare
To win a living in the lonely bush or trade in city ware.
There’s hope for “ Legionaries of the Lost Ones,” as Rudyer Kipling sung,
Who, life and honour blasted, are dropping downward rung by rung.
Then fill a bumper high and pledge, without one drop of loss,
To future empires cradle ground the Land of the Southern Cross
Untrammelled by Conventions’ Chains, how gloriously I roam
The woodlands wild on every side, and freedom in my home !
There’s magic in the trackless wild, there’s glamour on the mountain brown,
Which lift our thoughts to things above we ne’er can feel in town.
Some pleasure take in crowded marts —I love the mountain side,
Where health and nature reign supreme—a pleasant place to bide.
’Tho’ many cities I have seen, now I dwell 'neath the blue-gum tree,
Nor change would I for palace walls my home in the forest free,
Nil desperandum is its motto—always mine in days that’s past
I’ve graved it on my homestead flag, and nailed it to the mast.


“THE SORROWS OF SATAN.”
The Devil inspecting his empire came to the nethermost damnable pit;
“ Qaeenquean magistrates, 1 see,” quoth he, and then his pipe he lit.
“I've got a few at last—rouse up the brimstone fire—the rest will come in time;
The vilest dogs I’ve ever lag’d from any planet, comet, sun or clime,
For in that squatter-ridden town justice is a by word and a scorn,
This goddess sends me all my slaves, so for her wrongs I mourn,"
THE IRISH LANDLORD.
Give me the men of ancient days, with gallant hearts and true !
They well could win and keep their land, despite the Celtic crew.
De Oogane once with thirty knights made thirty thousand Kerenes run—
A lawyer’s clerk could beat him now, so earth rolls round the sun !
Loyalty to throne and flag a virtue ever yet has been,
Now, treason is the paying game, and “ wearin’ o’ the green
By force and fraud our rents are fixed, while justice stares aghast,
For England plunders now, strikes honour’s flag upon her mast.
“ Qaeenquean justice," imported from outlandish hamlet o’er the Line,
Where people live on gum-tree bark and Sol’s fierce blazes shine.
Our votes cannot win place and power as could our father’s swords,
For now the land is ruled by those who wield the power of words,
And we must sink by slow degrees each decade, rung by rung,
Plundered of our home and land as if Boyne Water ne’er was won.
Not only have they seized our land, they’ve smirched our honour, too :
A crime it was to say “pay up," tho’ six years’ rent was due,
And some of us in distant lands must eat our hearts away
While purse-proud traders rule the Halls where Norman blood held sway.
And many an ancient castle tower before the Sheriff's writ will fall —
In other days ’twas bloody swords that forced a passage o’er the wall.


Tho 1 foreign grafts upon the sod, we love our Green Isle home,
And often in the nightly watch our thoughts to her will roam.
Provincial patriots we are not, we love the Empire too,
And Irishmen have ruled the roast from Indian skies to Waterloo.
Our fathers bled for England’s right on many a bloody field,
By fraud and wrong we re now repaid, ’gainst it we have no shield,
For Gerald Balfour turned his coat to win the suffrage of a snake.
“ ’Twill make it easier for my rule ” —the glutted reptile will soon wake.
The meanest curs that crawl the ground together 'gainst a foe will stand,
But Balfour sells a friend to bribe a foe—such practice always lost a land,
And robbery is guilt by Holy Writ, no matter where or how or time.
A million voters at its back will never •* consecrate a crime.”
So England rules within our land, she robs the weak to bribe the strong—
'Twas always so in days of old ; now tenant-right spells landlord wrong.
Nemesis waits within her gates, and she may rue it when
Our grandsons, sunk in social rank, lead on the Irishmen ;
The Norman blood within their veins is always in the van,
And as they cannot rule by force they’ll lead men as they can.
Deserted by their kindred blood, and all their land and honours fled,
They draw the sword for native land—“ What recks it how our father’s bled ?”
The Celts have said, “ Come join and lead us on to face the cannon’s roar,
And with your help we’re sure to win and drive the foeman from our shore ;
Then we will own you for our lords who led us in the hour of need
And you will keep your lands and rank, for such will be your meed.”
The tempting bribe could not seduce ; we knew that honour’s flag is blue,
And our allegiance never waved to it, and we are ever true.
When Parnell of the Norman blood once drew the hostile sword
The Grand Old Man, ’tis often said, would tremble at his word ;
Ofttimes the Cecil did assert, “ the Empire is in danger,”
The “garrison” then man'd the walls, ne’er from the post did ranger,
Now to the wolves a sop we’re flung, to buy some years of peace,


Our plundered gold will only serve Rebellion’s wheels to grease ;
Another land-war soon will rise, with outrage blood and slaughter—
“ Give ! give ! ” (Vide Holy Writ) “ saith the horse-leech to her daughter.’’
Proletariat plundering grows—their leaders harp upon this text ;
English landlords soon will sadly rue —their turn will come next.
Still unshaken is our loyalty, to Union Jack we all are true —
Whate’er we lose in rank or wealth our hearts will wear the blue,
THE SIREN’S CHAIN.
When the Irish Chieftian went a wooing, a Circe’s victim he,
Twas the Captain’s wife he wanted, charming famous Kitty O’Shea :
He vowed to win the lady, for what cared he for deeds of wrong ?
A gay Lothario in love and guile, he came the blarney strong:
“ I long for thee, my darling! adored one ! a cushla machree !
I sigh for thee, my angel! Mavourneen !’’ quoth Parnell on his knee,
“ Never heed the Captain, darling; his love convention in the main,
Mine is earthquake’s foaming fire, it rends my heart in twain ;
And when the crown of Erin’s Isle will circle round my brow
Thou shalt be my queen, I swear ! say, wilt thou love me now?
Those accursed bonds can be dissolved that bar thee from my side,
Then I shall roam in dreams of bliss with Kitty for my guide!
The moral laws were never made to bind free hearts and mind;
An uncrowned king and dictator can fling them to the wind.
My daily thoughts are thine, my love, of thee I dream and sigh,
The sweetest kiss of all, my love, is that we steal upon the sly !
No gem e'er ravished from Golconda can sparkle like thine eyes;
Their burning glances rend my heart, with deep impassioned sighs.
With maids my feelings roamed in fancy, they never were my goal,
I swear I I never loved but thee, for thou hast chained my soul.
There’s magic in thy kiss, my darling, there’s glamour in thine eye ;


To win thee for my own, my darling ! I would risk my hope on High !
My heart is thine, my own love, throughout all time and tide,
And death itself less cruel than absence from thy side.
The matchless magic of thy beauty enthrals my soul to thine ;
I dream of thee all night, love, and I think that thou art mine.
The blue-black glory of the raven’s wing shows pale ’longside thy hair,
To win thee for my own sweet love the gates of Hell I’d dare!
My love is like the typhoon’s blast that seethes the stormy sea,
I’d sell my soul to Evil One to win one kiss from thee!
Now, if I cannot win thee, darling, all joy on earth is passed,
For, by my hope of Heaven, you are my first love and my last,
And dismal, dark and dreary to me life’s fitful tide
If I must sue in vain, alas ! nor win thee for my bride.
You keep the keys of Edin’s Fairy Land, where I fondly hope to dwell—
Say, wilt thou lift me to ethereal heights, or plunge my soul in Hell ?
Mavourneen ! Mavourneen ! Allanah, Acushla Machree !
“ There is no joy or hope on earth except to bide with thee.
Now Avon is a pleasant place for true love to abide,
And wealth and glory I can pour upon my bonny bride.
I swear to thee, adored one ! you are the earth and heaven I see,
Now pledge thy troth, my own one, say wilt thou bide with me ? ’’
So Kitty crossed the rubicon. enlisting in the siren’s fatal train
Delilah, Hellen, Cleopatra, Florinda, false fled o’er the main ;
Deborgail’s treason to her lord then fetched fierce Strongbow o'er ;
They all brought woe upon their knights, and there are many more.
Oressida’s light and lawless love has coined the verb “ to pander ”
Why in woman’s wily ways the wayward wight will wander ?
Two things that Solomon the Wise could never comprehend—
“ The way a ship goes in the sea ’tis solved, mystery is at end—
“ The way a man goes with a maid ” is just as dark as ever—
A poser for wise men to day, and they will solve it never !
3


Chrysostom of “ the golden tongue ” has written ‘ woman is the gate of Hell ’ —
If e’er he got a kiss from one I’ll swear another tale he’d tell !
“ Yir ” a man, and “ gin ” a trap, from those derived we’ve “ virgin,”
For whom we break our necks and hearts, this obviously s the origin.
The cuckoo haunts the shady groves, its note rings loud and clear,
As Shakespeare has observed before “ unpleasing to the married ear.”
Bonny Annie Laurie disloyal was unto “ her promise true ?
Tasso ’mured in dungeon-vault his love for Beatrice did rue,
And “ Amy shallow-hearted ” broke her troth to wed a wealthy clown—
She better loved all evil’s root than genius and renown ;
The gory gallows grey now claims its hapless Hugo’s head —
Parisina doubly false to lover and her husband’s bed :
The Turks have got a ready way—they drown the false ones by the score !
And many a tale of love and sin the Bosphorous rolls o er !
The false and fickle Guinevere broke up the Table Round—
I question ask, if ever woman’s love was true and sound ?
Since Eve betrayed the human race to eat on apple-pie,
Forbidden fruit they always want ; for it they long and sigh.
BREECHES O’BRIEN.
Breeches O’Brien had no trowsers to wear
And ladies were blushing to the roots of their hair ;
He went for Home Rule as the member for Whine
To get him the garments, “ they’re illigant fine,
And they fit me entirely,” said Breeches O’Brien.
Breeches O’Brien got some rhyme on a card,
Strange was the writing, unknown was the bard ;
His curse burst the breeches, tho’ sewn with hank twine,


And the tail of his shirt floated forth to sun-shine—
“’Tis the flag of Home Rule,” said bold Breeches O’Brien,
Breeches O’Brien made a speech in the House,
The members were not all as quiet as a mouse:
“ For the wrongs of me counthry I groan and I pine,
Shurel did it right well, and I cut a big shine,
And I larruped the landlords,” said Breeches O'Brien.
Breeches O’Brien then he wanted a wife;
“ Bejabbers ! Mavourneen, you’re the joy of me life,
Oh ! Acushla I love thee I say wilt thou be mine ?
I’ve gold in galore, love, and for thee I pine,
I claim thee Asthore, Mrs. Breeches O’Brien."
Breeches O’Brien,” quoth the colleen most fair,
“ Shure I never did likes your vile carroty hair,
But you’ll trate me dacent—not yet twenty-nine,
To wed you asthore, now my heart doth incline—
Oh! don’t squeeze me so hard, Mr. Breeches O’Brien.”
Breeches O’Brien gave an “ illigant spree ”
Father Clancey was there, and the curate McGee ;
The praties and bacon, the fighting and baccy divine,
The blood and the whisky, shure ’twas illigant fine
A great day for Quid Ireland—and Breeches O’Brien.
THE DISTRESSFUL MEMBERS—(A Parody).
Oh Clancy dear, now did you hear the news that’s going round ?
Home rule has not one leg to stand upon Old Ireland’s ground !


No more we’ll speech in Parliament, or job three hundred pounds a year—
If there’s a split, the game is up, am shure the fact is clear !
Chorus.
Oh ! we’re the most distressful numbers, am shure the fact is clear !
We have not fourpence for a whisky or tuppence for a beer.
Oh ! we're the most distressful mimbers that ever yet was seen!
We cannot rise the baccy, shure, for fillin’ our doodeen.
I met with G.S. Parnell as 1 was walking down the Strand
“ How is my darling Kitty, and how now does she stand?”
“ Oh ! she’s the most distressful colleen that ever yet was seen !”
Faix, ’tis all U P with parliament on Dublin’s College Green !
Chorus —
Oh ! we’re the most distressful mimbers, &c.
Oh ! Charlie, you gave yourself away to play the bloomin’ fool.
Gammoned by a woman, just like a boy from school !
Shure, colleens are the divils for getting men in scrapes!
Philandering with Prescots and with Foxes, lanes and fire-escapes.
Chorus —
Oh ! we’re the most distressful mimbers, &c.
Then take the shamrock from your hat, and sport the orange lily !
Our little game is up the spout, signs on this love tale silly
Shure wearin’ o’ the green is o’er—all lost for Kitty’s kiss !
I wish he’d wooed a maiden fair—the honest road to bliss.
Chorus—
Oh ! we’re the most distressful mimbers, &c.


When Balfour’s laws can stop the pigs from growing as they grow,
Or Tim Healey’s speeches fail his gutter-breed to show,
Then we will change the Leader too, who filled our pockets fine,
And kept those things upon our legs that trouble Bill O’Brien.
Chorus—
Oh ! we’re the most distressful mimbere, &c.
THE SATANITES.
The Satanites! the Satanites ! Loyola’s damned and demon crew !
The grass has withered where they trod, and there the upas grew.
“ The end will justify the means”—this Order’s hellish creed !
It covers every crime on earth—murder, lust and greed.
Expelled from France some years ago, and other States, ’tis true,
The Devil bar’d the crew from Hell, their presence he did rue.
You cannot hope to shun them, you’ll find them everywhere,
Go up and down where’er you will the Jesuit is there!
You'll find them on Equator’s Line, where rolls the torrid tide,
You’ll find them at the frozen poles arrayed in walrus hide,
You’ll find them in the Orange Lodge, and in the Mason’s, too —
No secrets e’er were uttered there but the Jesuits soon knew ;
You’ll find them in the forest wild, and on the mountain side;
The surplice of Reformed Church a Jesuit may hide!
You’ll find them in the desert drear and in the city vast,
A lordling in a royal court and Jack before the mast,
The very men who eat your bread are their fell agents too,
The wife you love, the friend you trust, and think so very true !
You’ll find them in the depths of Hell, all howling in despair;
And hopeless at the gates of Heaven —for none can enter there!
Their General is a potentate, who rivals with the Holy See,


And always has his own sweet will when those two cannot agree.
They’ll kill a Pope or Cardinal and a damsel in her teens
To aggrandise their Order for the end will justify the means!
Both Catholic and Protestant they will sweep from off their way,
The youth with virile vigour ’bounding, and his sire with locks of grey.
“ Kill them all! the Lord will know his own,” the orders when Count. Raymond died
Butchered by de Montfort’s sword, he worshipped at another altar side ;
Then outraged women shrieking sank into a bloody grave—
Their kinsmen falling sword in hand could not their loved ones save.
How can men such demons be ! defenceless beauty wrong and slay !
Full many a joy we owe to her existence on our natal day !
Now when I read such hideous acts, those pit’less deeds of shame,
Christ’s name invoked to bless atrocious guilt, brutal e’en to name,
The furious wrath oft makes me long for supreme power and wilt !
Those fiends incarnate, I would rend, aye e’en their souls I'd kill!
“ Vengeance mine ! I’ll repay, saith the Lord,” so humbly bide his time.
Full well we know wrath’s day will come for hateful deeds of crime !
Obedience most implicit they must yield unto their chief ;
Ne'er a question ask or think —l state their rules in brief,
When ordered, murder, plunder, persecute ; of demons they re the gem !
The destroying angels of the Mormons are merciful to them !
“ A le Jesuit ” is a by-word for every cunning trick that’s vile,
Well known upon the Continent their deeds of guilt and guile !
So well exposed to infamy by the Frenchman Eugene Sue,
Pascal, Saint Priest, and others (vide the “ Wandering Jew ’j.
The lovely Adrienne de Car’ville, with locks of red-gold hair,
Destroyed herself for love, in all the anguish of despair.
A dastard plot ! 'twas ably plan’d to prey upon the mind!
’Twas safe to work and win, you see, and left no crack behind.
The other heirs (save one) ne’er lived to grasp this fatal legacy—
They all lie murdered in a bloody grave or 'whelm’d ’neath the sea.


The end did justify the means ! it gave the Order wealth—*
The survivor was a Jesuit ! they cleared the road by stealth.
Adroit murder looks like accident, or perhaps a suicide ;
Their tool manoeuvres in the jury box those honest men to guide,
The forg-ed will looks quite correct, their tool will swear ’tis so ;
A five-pound-note will buy an oath, Queen Ann is dead you know !
They play upon the human passions to kill the adverse heir,
The cash falls to a shallow weakling the Jesuits ensnare.
They wield our noblest passion, yes love itself, ’tis said,
To clear the path before them and strike their victim dead.
They set the husband ’gainst the wife, and sister against the brother,
And with consummate priestcraft skill all human friendship smother.
And hapless is the maid or wife on whom they cast an evil eye !
’Twere better far if on the spot she were to droop and die.
And if she is obdurate they say she is not comme il faut —
The slander’s source unknown, so many think it may be so.
They undermine the outworks to force their victim to surrender;
To virtue do we homage pay, a woman’s fame her best defender;
And once upon the fatal trail they seldom miss their mark,
The quarry falls, we cannot see the fell hand in the dark!
Such blind bats are the public, those men can lead them by the nose,
They never let their hand appear, but stab beneath the rose.
Those dastard fiends, too base for Hell! ’tis thus they plot and prey I
The devils in the pit all shrink from them as deeper damned than they.
They’ll secure the rising generation if they get education in their hand—
Open, public, and unsectarian, is the only baulk on which to stand!
Subventioned is the daily press, with some reviews and magazines,
To influence the readers, this to their ends a very obvious means.
Lay-Satanites are on the staff of leading papers in the land ;
Their influence is marvellous ! few before their machinations stand.
Emperors and princes, sovereign rulers, politicians by the score


Have sunk before Loyola's men to raise their abject heads no more.
Now I will lay you on a secret, tho’ ’tis a risky thing for me to tell—
It was the Jesuits who undermined and smashed 0. b. Fame •
The trap was laid with artful skill, and Madam Ivitty was the bait.
The siren caught him on the hop right soon, they had not long to wait.
The Jesuits worked Parnell into power, but when he got out of hand (
They wiped him from the path away ; no Protestant should rule this land .
The Spider of Fiesole has many webs in which to catch unwary fly,
Their meshes oircumfuse the earth unseen by every vulgar eye.
Victoria rules in England, William sways in Germany, and Isabel in bpam,
While many another potentate holds kingly power in vastly wide domain ;
Republics falsely brag of equal rights, then add their quota to the roll;
But Father Martin rules the world from Florentine fastness dept biesoie .
Now if you think this story strange, go read and learn, you 11 see
Full many things that hap on earth “ not dreamed of in phiolsophy.
Jesuits are sapping the foundations, with them flows a traitor tide
Of that Glorious Faith in Jesus for which our fathers ofttimes died
On the scaffold, at the stake, on the ocean and the battlefield.
Now shall we to a puppet-show surrender our hard won freedom yield
Put our necks beneath the yoke re this doubtful “ laying on of hands .
No man of sense now cares one rap how e’er this dogma stands ;
Will it dry a single tear or ope the gates of Heaven to you or me
An Irish jig is just as sacred as this priestcraft mummery.
While the parsons fight o’er dogma, dress like nursery dolls at play,
Atheism ’s rampant and respect is fleeting fast and far away,
Our father’s faith, the martyr’s creed, for which they died long years ago,
Degraded now by mountebanks to “ turn about, wheel about, jump Jimcrow.
The vilest filth that soils the earth are those who wear the parson’s gown,
Receive the Church’s pay and true allegiance swear to creed and crown,
Then debauch her daughters’ minds, beguile her sons afar to roam
From the narrow path their fathers trod, oft swept by bloody toam.


“ If a rotten branch offend thee ’’-you know the verse as well as I—
“ Cut it off and cast it from thee.” ’Twill be accomplished by and bye .
Kick those charlatans out the Church, or let us have the raeZ thing again,
With gibbet, thumbscrew, rack and stake, salvation for all men.
Then I’ll fly to the land of the free where men think and they act as they p-ease.
And the banner of stars and of bars flaunts gaily aloft on the breeze.
I hold a good and upright man will enter Heaven, whate er his faith may be .
I may be damned for this belief, but at least my creed is Christian charity .
I voice the man who walks the street, the way the vulgar ta k ,
Such thoughts may not be lofty, but they’ll make re-action walk the chalk.
No more the fires of Smithfield will consume their victims marked for slaughter-
They all were quenched one glorious day by Boyne s Immortal Water
When gallant Derry closed her gates while bravely shouting No surrender .
“ Our conscience is our own, King James; to God alone we 11 worship rend
The Jesuits disdain those vulgar means to work their wicked will;
They act upon the human mind, thus the soul and body ki 1.
You cannot mesh them in the law, for you ne er cou prove a case,
And if there was a chance of it a tool would give the coup e grace.
They very seldom fail to win, tho’ sometimes meet their mated,
But you must know their plan of work, be ever on the watch,
Suspect the kindly friend’s advice something 'twere well to trj ,
Their tool suggested it to him, so have no speculation in your eye.
Calumny, assiduously asserted, venom’d tongues poison m the dark,
Friends fall off, look strangely cold, ’gainst this no buckler and no ark ,
Misrepresented, dark hints, ’tis said, thus they spread the specious lie—
Suspected, shun’d, misled, and then facilis descensus averm.
Nothing is too great or small for them, they 11 tackle any job on earth
To crush a petty tradesman ; and Prince Yon Bismarck did assert
They plan’d to smash the German Empire, but he saw their game,
So sent them to the right about, and “ walker” was their name.
“ The Prince ” is villanous, whate’er Macaulay may write otherwise.


Machiavelli was but a Jesuit in plain unvarnished guise,
Their modus operandi almost sure to win : You’ve a foe to crush,
The plan lies ready to your hand, provided wit and guile and cash,
is but the simplest thing on earth I—find out a weak spot in your foe,
ihen shower your missiles on the place, and you will work him woe.
On dit, everyone has got a skeleton somewhere in a cupboard hid,
bo you must scheme and spy, by self or tools, to raise the cover-lid !
bhape your plan to fit the man, if needy tempt him on to crime ;
btnke him through his wife or child, successful many a time ;
ft he has got a thirst for drink, ply him with the Devil in solution,
lie never can resist the fiend so falls and gets no absolution ;
And if he s fond of kissing, you throw temptation in his way,
A passion for the lovely sex the shortest road to Hell they say !
mu 16 * s ond y° u ead him on to speculate and plunge—
fhe road to ruin sure enough, he falls before this deadly lunge.
It he has wealth and influence, hard-headed, not easy to ensnare
Ihen egg him on into a fatal fight to get a bullet unaware ;
And if you fail to trap him by those tricks from wisdom’s path to sever,
A h< f-/ e A- la^® r8 ’ hands > and they will skin him clean and clever;
And if Minerva s owl still guides his path in this and every other wav,
blander s venom’d dart lies to your hand, be sure to quote “ they say:”
On dit is a har, a Gallic adage old—(now this translation’s true
hor ‘‘ shure I larned to spaake the Frinch in school at Kiialloo)
Iwill blast him like the Gorgon’s head Athene’s tegis bore
Basilisk's eye or upas’ shade less fatal than its blighting lore •
1 hough Pallas parry with her shield, the dart will wing its way
io rankle in the human heart ; the jackass cry “ they say,”
A goose, a donkey, and a cat —come ! take your pen and sketch,
Public opinion you have drawn—l hope the hit will fetch ;
Its ears are long for it to catch what e’er tis said ‘ they say,”
And then it gives it out again with a hideous asinine bray—


Vide Carlyle, from memory I quoth (long since I left the schools)
The British Empire holds a varied race, and they are “ mostly fools.”
’Tis thus you'll use the public as a tool; 'twill crush a man, however high.
'Tis too intangible for him to fight, he knows not anywhere to fly.
And when disaster or disgrace doth lower, assume to be the friend,
Worming into confidence you’ll find how his opinions trend ;
You ne’er appeared upon the scene, but worked through trusty spy,
The bloodhound tools work in the dark, and gloat o’er victim’s sigh.
You won’t succeed inside a week, the game may last for years,
But if the victim don’t suspect ’twill surely close in tears ;
You must not let the quarry think that foemen track his trail,
Or he will block your every move and beat you in detail.
I can palm the cards, you see, ’though I’d scorn to play the game,
'Tis patent to the Fiend himself “ a le Jesuit ” is the name.
Wealth, wickedness, with wit, will wonders work, when wily wights will wield
The maxim of that Order Dark, who blazon upas on their shield.
Black Pope and leaders meet at Fiesole oft upon a midnight drear,
Lucifer himself is in the chair, adviser king and seer ;
A human skull is on the board from which each brother fills his can,
The fearful draught is quickly drained—’tis the blood of an Orangeman ;
Then they hatch their hellish plots to aggrandise their order,
Old Nick advises on each case and acts as their recorder.
Such is the influence of the Fiend upon Loyola’s Crew !
Darwinian theory seems correct, at least it gives a clue.
A short time ranked amid the Band, the cloven hoof begins to show,
And after lapse of three short years a fork-ed tail is sure to grow.
I know this tale to be a fact, and have it from their tailor,
Who turned his coat, was done to death by Abraham Brown, a sailor.
The deed was done within a house where spirits are retailed,
So Brown was hanged—the Nancy Lee without her bo’s’in sailed-
I give these full particulars for you to try and twist and test—


’Tis better to detail, of course, or else you’d say I jest.
Now if you think my story strange, for you I’ll breathe a sigh;
You’ll see by Shakespeare’s Tempest Tale “ traveller’s ne’er did lie,”
’Though Rougemont came it strong at times, his yarn was spun with tact,
And well-bred people never say, “ Sir, I don't believe your fact.”
I’ve numerous authorities—a Count, a Saint and Priest, by name ’tis true,
Pascal, Dupin, Quinet, Genin Michelet, with others, also Eugene Sue—
All Catholics most orthrodox, and liegemen to the Holy See,
Their works were published in the Yankees’ heaven La Ville de Paris.
A Roland for an Oliver is very fair, in reason and in rhyme,
I fling the Satanites their coin back, and guess I’ve scored this time.
’Tho’ I’ve dip’d my pen in gall when 1 composed this pasquinade
Inspired it was at Truth’s own fount, no Jesuitical camisade.
THE GATE WAR.
Killem-Killie station was once a pleasant place to dwell,
Environed by the forest wild and many a rocky dell,
’Till Blazer cantered on the scene with Gillman on his back,
And now old Mother Carey’s chickens are roosting round, alack !
“ I’ll have no bossing here,” quoth he, “ no squatter lord I’ll own !”
“ Oh ! hear them words,” said Bacchus, with many a muttered groan.
“ Those roads are free to you and me, no gates must bar the way,
I’ll make things lively now Eve come, and I have come to stay!
Now all this land that squatters stole will be re-taken by the nation.
And so will Try-on Hungerhong and Killem-Killie station;
Now rouse ye up, ye men of Austral ! rouse up to freedom’s call,
Re-take your birth right from those men who rob us of our all.
With rifles true in trusty hands come tell the squatter knaves
‘ Now yield us up our plundered homes, or else we’ll dig your graves ’!
‘ Ye are many, they are few ’ once rhymed the immortal Shelley,


They pile a bloated bank account and starve the poor man’s belly.”
“ Now, by the Devil’s tail,” quoth Trapley, and then he donned his hat of straw,
Hied him off to Spider Slyboots, a legal light learned in the law.
“ The simplest thing in life, sir, you know well how such things are done ;
I think you said the fire he lit extended o’er your run ? ’
Then Go-it-Hard gave evidence, and so did sly old Gosh,
Who said that sparks were flying ’gainst the wind— Yankee doodle bosh.
“ This evidence is false,’ 1 swore Gillman upon the cross-exam.
And sotto voce “ I’ll lose the case, but I don’t care one damn;
I’ll make it hot for him and his upon the mountain side,
And tearing off his lion’s skin expose the jackass hide ;
I mistook him for a gentleman, and thought he d fight a battle fair
He strikes below the belt, base cur ! La Vendetta I’ll declare.”
By day and night the fight went on, the gates and rails were flying,
And so was Bacchus after stock, as up the hills they’re hieing-
He rode all day to muster stock, then placed them in e- penn,
But Gillman comes along by night and lets them out again
The gates were off their hinges, and in the bush well planted,
The slip-rails were not found about, they seem to have levanted.
The dingoes had a jolly time, the yelping, yeowling, yellow crew.
They passed a vote of thanks to Gillman which Trapley s sheep did rue,
And then he yoked a horse unto a sled and loaded up with gates
A rousing life he led awhile the Super, and his mates !
“ Damn my soul 1” said Shindy, “ a squatter flouted by a cockatoo !
I’ll fix that fellow finely!” then called the station Jackaroo—
“ Go, summon Cooley Juggins, Tyke Tenbob and his mate,
We’ll plant to-night for Gillman at the Jarwa double gate.”
He rode alone on Blazer, it was a darksome night,
There met the gang of rowdies half-drunk and full of fight.
“ I’ll do for you !” said Shindy, “you’ll never see your home alive !
I’ve gangs of men at every gate (no matter how you strive. )


But Gillman heeded not those threats, his bearing showed no fear,
Tho’ murder seemed to bar the road and death was hov’ring near.
“ Four to one, a lonesome road, upon this dreary, darksome night—
“ You squatter cur ! speak up ! and say, is this the way you fight ?’’
Then Shindy swore and foamed in fury at being thus defied,
Upon the ground he held his own, close by fair Try-on’s side;
He shouted to his myrmidons, “Come, kill this fellow on the spot!’’
But Gillman said, “ I have a pistol, and I think you’d better not/’
The road was quickly clear of Shindy and his crew,
The only feather for their caps will be of snow-white hue.
A prosecution followed duly, the Chairman was P.M.,
Who said ’twas shocking, truly, his duty to condemn.
Then Shindy got a wigging from the Bench, they sat upon him, too !
And Spider was refused his costs —ah ! thereby pinched the shoe;
The greed of gold, the vilest vice, degrading as it grew,
It nearly broke mean Trapley’s heart to part that one pound two.
The recording angel, pen in hand, ’gainst Shindy ’graved a score—
’Twas not the only item there ! the roll showed many more.
I’d rather be a swagsman, sir, upon the crack of doom
Than be that squatcer Shindy or his shallow-pated groom.
But what we could not understand upon that year of grace
As Shindy was condemned with costs, why Gillman failed to win the case!
“ Not guilty, but don’t do it again ” —Queenquean justice you can see
When defendant is a plutocrat and sports the magical J,P.
So thus the fight rolls fiercely on, all threats are treated with derision,
For Gillman has the law upon his side and a weapon of precision.
“ I’ll have to give him best ! ” sighed Trapley, “ I ne’er can catch him in a nap ;
He's like a blooming dingoe who had his front paw in a trap.
When I won that case against him I thought he was our martyr,
But, like my cursed blooming luck ! I’ve surely caught a Tartar.
I really don’t know what to do, my plots have all miscarried,


I never had such cursed luck, not since the day I married.
If I had known he’d fight like this, by jingo ! I’d have left him well alone,
But now I’ve got the Devil by the tail, Oh ! wirras throu ! oh hone ! ”
THE SQUATTER’S VERSION.
He wore a pistol in his belt when at the Jarwa gate I planted,
And rode upon a chestnut horse, since to the Hades levanted :
I did not fear his blooming pistol, for I could feel secure
Backed up by Cooley Juggins and Tyke Tenbob too, I’m sure.
“ Go back and shut that gate, sir ! ” so bravely I did shout ;
“ Whoa ! Shindy,” said the cockey, “ does your mother know you’re out ?
She ought to crop your ears, my boy, for they’re rather long,
And spank you on a certain place with a rattan cane or thong.”
“ I’ll lay you on your back, quoth I, within this creek of water.”
“ Faith if you try,” said he, “ there’ll be a scene of slaughter.”
Then he fiercely drew a pistol and gave his horse a wink,
And I felt so flabbergasted I scarce knew what to think.
“ I’m a magistrate,” quoth I, Queenquean justice now to you I’ll deal !”
Then Gillman spoke in double Dutch and turned on his heel.
He pulled me up before the Court, Beefsande District P.M. ;
Quoth he "you are a donkey, Shindy, your conduct I condemn.”
Bread Jamwell sat upon the bench, and Dr- Coalfall too,
And ’tho’ he did not win the case they saw the tale was true,
Eight was dead against me, sure enough, for I was in the wrong—
He always stands for his own name, regardless of the strong.
Gillman smashes all my gates and plants them everywhere
And Bacchus Fencing Wire is in a funk to me he did declare
I’ll not be shot by Gillman for you or for your petty pelf
And if you want to bounce him, why, try the game yourself.”
But things are looking up agairi! now I’ve got a champion true,


The ramping, roaring Hilly Hack, Killem Killie Jackaroo ! t
He does not fear the blooming pistol, and stands for squatter s right,
He challenged the invader to get off his horse and fight.
“ Sleeter slaughter ! boiling water !blood-and-thunder hell-i bulloo .
I’ll knock you into fifty pieces!” said the Killem-Killie Jackaroo.
“ You foolish boy!” quoth Gillman, “ now for those tricks you might bewail,
Death stands close Tongside you to drop some salt upon your tail;
’Tis not my cue to fight with you or any in this land,
But if lam assaulted, you’ll die by my right hand !” _
He gave a threatening scowl at Bill dismounting from his horse,
“ That man would kill and eat you too without the least remorse,
But I am safe in Try-on’s Hall, the fight I leave to Hilly Hack
And all ten-bob-and-tucker donkeys, their skulls let Gillman crack.
KILLEM=KILLIE TEA,
Now Bacchus damns it in his sleeve this Killem-Killie tea ;
It takes one pound to make a cup, on this we all agree;
It never cheers his spirits up, but makes his “ inside quail—
A new chum sort of drink, on which to hunt for gates and rail.
He got the price from Kill & Co., Blow Jehu brought it by the mail-
It is the cheapest dirt that’s sold, well known as “ Post and Bail.
A traveller came along one day, “ I like your Ki lem-Kilhe tea !
Now is it made of wattle bark or imported o’er the sea ?
Snake-iuice I have drank in every pub, from Geelong to Brisbane,
But poison like to this I ne’er did see nor never will again.
Bacchus, tongue in cheek, replied—he tried to look demure—^
“ Boss Trapley caters; I can’t say where ’tis made, I m sure.’’
Bacchus could not catch the dingoes with powder or with salt,
Tho’ he’s often watched for them, braced up with rum and malt.
He’s done the trick at last, but keep it dark ’twixt you and me;


He asked them to the Station to drink some Killem-Killie tea.
The fatal day arrived, the cheques of Station-push were then called in,
And now they all must answer at the bar for darksome deeds of sin.
Old Nick was there with all his power, a list was in his hand,
And when he spoke an earthquake shook, and gloom o’erspread the land.
“ Come Trapley! rouse ye up, my man ! and Shindy, march ye too !
And sly old Gosh, and Go it-Hard, I’ve made a double hell for you !
The ovens are all heated up, and stokers feed a roaring fire.
Come ! rouse ye up, my bully boys ! come, rouse ye ! Bacchus Fencing Wire.”
But Trapley was a cunning card to lay a plot or work a tricky trap:
For Satan and his myrmidons the squatter did not care one rap !
With hat in hand and savoir faire he spoke the Black One civil
And as he did he laid a trap by which to kill the Devil—
A thing no mortal e’er could do, but ’twas a trifling trick for Trapley C
“ I pray your Sable Majesty accept one cup of Killem-Killie tea !”
THE SPREE.
Yule rolled round once more to men for peace and all good will,
It brought no peace to Killem-Killie or the new house on the bill,
For Bacchus gave a whisky-spree to drown his sorrows in the bowl
And to his mates and cronies dear to pour the anguish of his soul.
I cannot write the words housed, for they would make a parson groan,
I’ll modify, suppress, and euphemise, then write some in my own.
“I’ll kill that blanker Gillman,” then drank a glass of malt;
“We’ll eat him, too,” quoth Micky, “ without one pinch of salt.”
“Come on with me, brave boys !” said Bacchus, “ we’ll have his bloody skin I"
“ ’Tis safer here a lot,” quoth Micky, “ Come, pass your jar of gin.
I’ll give a tenner for his scalp, now who will bring it here ?”
But none were game to bell the cat, that fact was very clear.
“ Come on with me, my heroes bold ! we’ll knock the house about his ears !”
3


The boys refused to stir an inch, for of bullets they had fears.
“ Now how is this, my hearties ? you’re in a blooming fright ?”
“ We took on as stockmen, Bacchus, not a soldiering to fight.
We don’t mind to stain our conscience, or a bloody nose or eye,
But when it comes to pistol-shooting, to Hell is rather far a cry ;
Ten-bob a week-and-tucker won’t stand one bloody shot,”
Quoth Micky, “ and bejabbers ! shure ’tis all damnation rot
To think spalpeens like us will risk our lives, be gar !
While Trapley sits at home at ease with his whisky and cigar.
The bloody dingoes and the sheep can fight it out pell-mell
Better chuck the job at Killem-Killie than roast below in Hell. _
We'll go there, sure enough some day, and from that fate I shrink ;
’Twill be a horrid hole for blokes like us as likes our drop of drink !
A gang of us could plant for him like Shindy did one night;
Four to one, you know the way, that Try-on heroes fight!
We’d smash him to a jelly and grind his liver ’till he’d yell,
But the wild cat’s claws are fearsome things, he’d send us all to Hell.
He mutters darkly of revenge, ’tis said, and keeps a loaded pistol handy,
Don’t care a curse about us blokes or the ring-tailed roarer Shindy.”
“ I’m weary of this life, brave boys,” quoth Bacchus, “ and cannot take my rest,
I dreamed last night that Hillman’s horse was cantering on my chest;
I cannot stand the racket longer and something must be done,
I’ll send to Sydney for the Lancers and the hundred tonner gun.
What a devil of a racket he has kicked up since he came !
We have tried to wear him out, but for fight he’s always game.
If e’er I say my prayers again my chiefest. text shall be
‘ From the terror of Ffrench Gillman, good Lord, deliver me !’
Now let us curse this blanking blanker since we must give him best.^
“ Curses are like chickens, Bacchus, for they oft come home to nest,
Quoth Mrs. F, “ stop this talk, or else for you I’ll mourn !
Many a man rode out for wool to tramp it home well-shorn


keep clear of Gillman ! when on the war-path he will ride.
You know the fate befell the man who sold the living lion’s hide I'*
Those blades of Killem-Killie would not have wassailed loud and high
If they knew Ffrench Gillman kept watch and ward close by;
Mounted on his gallant steed was he well armed to the teeth,
Now if they had beset bis house a bloody end they'd meet.
A RIDE TO KILLEIT=KILLIE.
Now Dimmy Daine, come rouse ye up ! and saddle up old Blazer,
For there'll be ructions on the road before the dawn of day, sir ;
Tho’ Hooley’s is a happy house to have a high old time
I must ride to smash the gates ! ’tis four o’clock by chime,
“ I’ve got no time to stay, I’ve got no time to tarry,”
Killem Killie’s far away, it is, by Hell and Harry!
I'll smash your gates and slip rails too, I will, by Hell and Harry !
I'm on the move to my mountain home and have no time to tarry,
So mount your steeds and ride with me, you’ll see me on the job,
And mind your P’s and Q’s, old man, or else I’ll smash your foxy nob !
Chorus—l’ve got no time to stay, &c.
I’ll pull your fences down, old man, I will, by Hell and Harry !
I’ve a pistol in my belt full sixty yards ’twill carry,
So faugh a ballaugh Shindy, and clear the way for me—
Now you go home and take a cup of Killem-Killie tea.
Chorus—l’ve got no time to stay, &c.


THE BOSS OP HUNQER-HONQ.
I’ll hang the Boss of Hunger-hong upon the gallows tree,
I’ll ride him on a rail, boys, just wait and you will see !
John Gilpin’s ride to Edmonton was said to be a spree
But Trapley’s ride upon a rail will be a sight to see!
Glory, glory, Hallelujah ! when he swings from a high gallows tree!
I’ll hang the squatter high, boys, where Judas swings you’ll see.
Glory, glory, Hallelujah ! for ’tis the tyrant’s destiny,
I'll ride him on a rail, boys, the Boss of Hunger hong,
I'll ride him on a rail, boys, from Rase to Jog-along,
I'll ride him on a rail, boys, strike up the comic song,
I’ll ride him on a rail, boys, the Boss of Hunger-hong !
Then poor crawlers can work without doffing the tile
As Boss Trapley rides by with a heart full of guile,
A shilling straw hat on his top-knot a fix
A Jack-anapes, hop-o’-my-thumb, five-foot-six.
Chorus—Glory, glory, &c.
Then Gillman will smoke his doodeen quiet at home
And cease all the night on the war-path to roam ;
The gates will be shut and the fence left alone
And the dingoes must sigh for a fat mutton-bone.
Chorus—Glory, glory, &c.
Then we’ll rest without fear of the sneak or the plot,
And Bacchus can ride without risk being shot;
There’ll be peace from Wonglorra to the Murrumbidgee
When I hang squatter Trapley on a high gallows tree !
Chorus —Glory, glory, &c.


BEHIND THE SCENES.
‘ Is tucker ready, mates ? back in time, I returned on the run,
‘The Squatter’s case was on to-day, so I stopp’d to hear the fun.
Half the town was in the Court, the bankers and the other toffs;
When the verdict was pronounced you should have heard the scoffs !
Paddy Whack was fined, the trial was a farce, of course !
'Twill be a crowner’s quest right soon upon the squatter’s corse.
Sergeant Hush it-up was there, you know the man in blue,
He’ll run a poor chap in like me, to squatter rogues he’s true.
That Jackaroo can go it hard, he swears like any Crafty Cram,
But it don’t amount to truth, for it I wouldn’t give a damn.
He said he never used a threat, and spoke like lassie of sixteen !
We blokes won’t swallow that there rot, for chaps like us a’n’t green.
The flimseys were flying yesterday, they cashed them at the bank,
There was a rousing spree last night, the town of whisky stank.
“ We’ll give defendant hell,” quoth they, as they drained the snake-juice down—
There’s scarce a drop of poison left, ’tis said, in any pub. in town !
Cock Robin on a billiard-table kicked the can-can step in style—
No ballet belle could held a glim to him ! My word he made us smile !
His Worship kicked so high one time he broke a gasalier
And then refused to pay the cost: he’ll have to fine himself, I fear.
You’d never think such things to see the sinner on the Bench to-day,
With a sort of judge and parson style, and hair all streaked with grey,
Or that he ever shook a wicked leg upon a blank house floor,
Or kissed the pretty bar-maid on the sly behind the kitchen door !
One J.P. gave a rousing stave, the air, “ ’Tis naughty, but ’tis nice
Another then chimed in and sang, “ Julia, you’re my daisy ”in a trice ;
Cock-Robin kissed the landlord’s wife and told her spouse to “ put it in the
Another of them chaps was twigged a-loafing round the money-till;
gome ribald storied, mostly chestnuts, then were freely told,


And drunken asinine laughter around the bar room rolled.
My word ! them magistrates are downey coves to have a high old time!
They kept the racket up ’till three o’clock —I heard the ticker chime.
Sings—(Air, “ The Minstrel Boy.”)
The magistrate to the Station gone, at the Grub and Swill you’ll find him,
A brand-new paper collar on, left honour on the shelf behind him;
Back he’ll drive by the light of eve, now if good luck betide him,
Full to the neck with whisky punch and a brand-new cheque beside him.
CATCHING MONKEYS.
I have seen the niggers monkeys catch in lands far o’er the main—
A hole is made in cocoanut, within is placed some grain,
In greedy Jacko pops a paw to grasp a flowing measure
And cannot get it out again, or part a grain of treasure;
The hunter catches him quite easy and makes a nice ragout,
My moral is most evident and my story nothing new —
There is a squatter who can don the cap, then doff it and be civil,
For Trapley is the monkey and the nigger is the Devil.
ON A SQUATTER.
“ The Campbells are coming !” sure enough, I’ve many thousands here,
And Sawney soon will join his clan, leave Yarro’s pleasant sphere.
On earth with side and swagger haut he blooms a howling swell,
But when I lag him here below he’ll howl another tune in Hell.
ON A JACKAROO.
The Devil sat on Killem Killie mount with his tail cocked up,
“ I spy the Jackaroo,” quoth he, “ in Hell that boy shall be locked up ;


I’ve sent Gillman on the job, but he draws it very mild,
And is not on the shoot, like when he roamed the Texas wild.
I’ll bide my time and watch, for he’s sure to come to me
If he lives at Killem-Killie and swills that famous tea !
Experience of the colony he will learn sure and well
And the facile downward road that slopes the way to Hell.
ON A STATION SUPER.
The Devil sat in his arm-chair, scowling and toasting his hoofs by the fire—
As he conn’d o’er his ledger he Spotted a name, ’twas Bacchus Fencing-wire—
“ I thought that man was damn'd before, his cable-tow is clean run out;
The Fates have overlooked his thread, and what has Gillman been about
And then he cursed and foamed in fury and shouted in his ire,
“ Go ! heat the ovens ten times hot, to roast this Bacchus Fencing-wire!
I’ll grind him in my mill each day within the hottest pit in Hell—
That doubly-damned infernal place where squatters’ men must dwell.
Laying down the law in glades of sylvan Killem-Killie,
Biding round the run—a jolly spree until he’s drunk or silly
Bossing the selectors,—rouse up ! now all those joyful days are o’er !
In Charon’s craft he’ll cross the Styx for dark Plutonian shore."
ON A MAILMAN.
The Devil conn’d o’er his ledger, picking his teeth with the fork on his tail—
“ I see the name Blow Jehu here, the man who drives the mail ;
His time upon the road will not be long, for soon I'll haul his cable in,
And then I’ll lag him here below, as punishment for sin.
He s just the man I want in Hell, to take my buggy for a spin,
And now and then when fares are slack to break the little Devils in.
And oft he’ll long to ride the mail to wilds of Killem-Killie,


To quench his thirst in Paddy’s stream, although the track is hilly.
I’ll put him on the Hell Fire Road as second charioteer,
For I am often pushed for help to lag damned spirits here.”
ON A STATION CRAWLER.
The Devil saw in his ledger a name that looked like Kitchen-cur—
Tis hard to spell those foreign names, of course my pen might err ;
“ I’d lag that fellow long e’er this, but he has no soul to damn."
And then he shut the ponderous tome with a hearty curse and slam.
LETTERS TO A SOLICITOR IN REPLY.
Sir, —Your poem I’ve received by post, the rhyme is very good,
But has not got one jot of reason —I hope I’m understood.
’Tis nought but special pleading, without one grain of fact,
Though written in a learned style, and with consummate tact.
I did not post those diatribes to do my neighbours good,
They can ne’er attain to that —I cloak my reason ’neath a hood.
“ Physician, heal thyself,” I mark, but do not feel the point;
There is no stain upon my shield, my armour has no joint.
I do not think all men are rogues, I know an honest lawyer too,
A man that I can safely trust, 'tho’ they are scarce 'tis true.
I cannot follow when you say, “ I’ve mistaken friends for foes,”
I think I know them very well—“ the cause of half my woes.”
'Twas surely not a friendly act to sue me o’er that fire,
Or waylay me on the road—in Court you heard the facts transpire.
“ Nil desperandum ” is a gallant motto, as you justly hold,
With it I bracket “No Surrender,” so famed in days of old ;
But if your rhyme has been inspired “they are ready to be friends,”
Then let them plank the ready down —the only way to make amends.


There is an ancient proverb, the truth of which I feel,
“ Soft solder will not butter parsnips,” or broken boots conceal !
“ They are ready to be friends ” of your poem seems the aim—
The friendship of the wicket is a thing I would not claim ;
And as for the employees I hold them hardly worth a thought,
Rather less than cows and horses that are sold and bought;
This is not “ rampant prejudice and blindness of the eyes,”
But a scorn of all baseness and deeds of low emprise.
But if they give me back my own, I’ll let vendetta cease,
For it would suit me better far to smoke the pipe of peace ;
And since you quoth an adage I will cap it good and true —
Civility pays lest —pass it on, I meant it not for you.
This quarrel has been forced on me, for it I did not seek—
You know the classic proverb, “When the Greek meets the Greek ”
I’ll have mine own again, or else I shall sustain the fight—
Truly yours, tho’ adverse side, the Killem Killie Anchorite.
LETTER 2.
Sir, —Your second poem received by me at Jarwa yesterday—
A different sort of note to that I got some years ago in May !
I fear you think me but a silly child to be amused by pretty prattle.
And being bested o’er the gates ’tis thus you think to win the battle!
Your soft-soap will never wash ; the style betrays the amateur ;
You’re not a tradesman like Butterwell, whose hand is always sure.
My own they won't give back, I’ll loose the dogs of war once more,
And never give vendetta up until my mortal life gives o’er,
And then my ghost will walk by night, on phantom Blazer ride,
And play the Devil round the run so long as rolls the tide !
“ The worse the fight the more the law, the better for the Devil’s few,”
But you must catch a hare, you know, before you make a stew 1


No doubt the “ Devil’s Own ” is on their side, thus gold and wit combing
But I have gone one better, for I’ve briefed Old Nick himself on mine I
I’ve got his counsel and advice, to-day it came by special wire from Hell.
As you might like to know your master’s mind, I’ll here transcribe it well.
“ It is no libel to write what’s true in circumstance and fact:
You must not satirize severely, but you may joke with tact,
And you may write about a class things known throughout the land,
E’en if the cap may fit some man an action will not stand.
The gates are at your mercy, sir, and if you are attacked
You are justified in shooting, but with circumspection act.
My liegeman, Slyboots, is an able man, knows every point of law,
But you have got them on your side, for him don't care one straw ;
And of all plots and pitfall traps I caution you beware,
But they’ll seldom get a chance if you act upon the square.
Say nothing 'gainst their character, or injure them in trade,
Or you will give yourself away : my bill enclosed drawn out and made—
I can’t advise for nothing, so send along your pound of pelf,
Yours sincerely, Satan Devil.”—Yes, Old Nick himself.
“ P.S.—Address to the GKP.O. in the well-known town of Sydney.”
‘‘That’s just my style,” quoth Slyboots, “ ’tis exactly of my own kidney.”
Glancing o’er your rhyme—” it was a snake that struck that blow,
For ne’er a man would kill your horse or act a part so low.”
Your tale of horse and snake is very good, o’er other yarns this has the pull,
It reminds me of the one of olden time about a cock and bull.
Poor Blazer died by felon hand—the tracks and poison give the clue—
I’ve never seen a snake as yet who wore a hob-nailed shoe I
If e’er I find the reptile on my land that carries poison in a bottle
I’ll take him by the throat, I swear ! and straightway him will throttle.
This species is not classified, “the whole discovery now found out,”
Darwinian theory has been proved—there are human snakes about.
I never hate the legal foe who draws on adverse side,


For ’tis big duty to contest and client’s cause to guide ;
I thank you for the kindly feeling that you hint at in your rhyme,
But Kismet ruled we must be foes throughout all tide and time.
“The noblest part of man,’’ you write, “is that feeling—generosity,’’
But to your clients I must hold the baser animosity.
I never care to kick a paltry foe—your client Kitchen-Cur, to wit,
But when I meet a man I think my match I give him hit for hit.
Non cantu sed actu my ancestral motto blazoned thus of old
Whene’er 'tis worth I always strike, once I grip I never loose my hold.
Generosity is a noble feeling, its pangs I too have felt,
When fighting with a foeman fair , who strikes above the belt,
And when a woman is my foe I’ll keep my kid gloves on>
For ne’er a man half worth the name such gentle foe would wrong.
I will not head the hunted fox, I give the hare fair start,
The partridge I must shoot on wing—the law of sporting art.
For crawling snakes there’s no such rule, and those I soon wipe out
With any stick or jaggy stone that lies to hand about.
Then not unknown to “Anchoritic heart this noblest part of man,’
But I hold those foes as vermin and strike them how 1 can.
I don’t profess to be a saint, but act like other mortals formed of day,
Drink a glass, kiss a lass, give blow for blow, just like yourself, I dare say.
Why I should tamely turn the other cheek and not return blow for blow
Is past my comprehension, and a thing I ne’er shall know.
“Physician, heal thyself,’’ a homely maxim, you once did quote to me,
Now I shall quote it back to you, which makes us square, you see ?
I could not post this note before, as work on me had piled,
Finishing improvements round my humble cabin in the wild,
And then I have to weigh each word to you, or else I might bewail, —
To write to you is fun like twisting knots upon the Devil’s tail.
For you in person I disclaim all anger, malice, hate, or spite,
And sign myself, sincerely yours, the Killem-Killie Anchorite,


ON A SQUATTER.
The Devil took some coals in hand, and made a roaring fire ;
“I’ll lag that fellow here,” said he ; “ his time will soon expire.”
He took the hottest brimstone that e’er was made in Hell,
And all the tortures of the damned to make the squatter yell.
Around he raised a massy wall, built up of stone well braced by steel—
'Twill keep the rascal safe below, the heat will make him squeal—
A tablet then was quickly made with many a curse and damn,
On this was 'graved the tenant’s name —Trapley Craftycram.
ON JEZEBEL.
Some ladies have most killing ways, I can’t describe, but understand,
Now Mrs Henview does it practically with a pistol in her hand.
A STRANGE ADVENTURE.
As I rode around one night I met a man near Killem-Killie ;
A traveller or a shearer was he not, I saw no swag or billy;
I thought he was a squatter, when ahead this evil thing i saw,
He rode upon a station horse, it seemed, and wore a hat of straw;
No horns on his head, no tail, no hoofs, no claws upon his hand—
A Chinaman-like jackanapes, commonplace as any in the land.
I saw him in the gloaming once before, his shape I strangely lost,
Now I recall to mind my bridle-rein by accident had cross’d
Then thunder rolled o’er Killem-Killie ranges where Sol had sunk to rest,
The Mopoke hushed her monotone and trembling fled unto her nest.
Quoth I, “ Are you a squatter or a lawyer, or an angel unaware ? "
“ I’m the devil, sir,” quoth he, “ so drop your banter, have a care! ”
“ Glad to meet you, Mr. Smith,” quoth I, thinking him a squatter’s tool,


ISfou don’t look like your pictures in my story-books at school.
“ You cannot see my spirit shape,” quoth he, “ for you are mortal man;
I always look like mortal enemy, so the squatter now you scan.”
Old Blazer gave a snort of fear, the awful presence he could see,
Volcano’s reek the tainted air than breeze of Felix Araby.
The Sable fiend with brow of gloom prophetic tales did tell
“ Queenquean’s Bench will roast,” quoth he, “in lurid vault of hell;
Deeper down, deemed doubly-damned, the squatters have their meed
With awful howls of agony to expiate their grasping greed
And the sin unpardonable, the lie against the Holy Ghost,
For perjury’s the crime those dumm’ing squatters practice most ;
Tho’ many a maiden frail and fair her honour to the satyr sold,
Parting with a jewel rare to touch this foully earned gold ;
The lurcher lures with lawless light of lust lurking in his leecher eye,
The Recording Angel scores upon his roll and saints all sadly sigh,
But we laugh ha! ha! below, to see those squatters work for evil,
For scratch one where you will you’ll find him less a saint than devil ;
And if despair should wake within the trusting gentle breast betrayed
Death is the only way for her who’s steps from Virtue’s path have strayed ;
He packs the jury with his tools, the doctor is his humble slave,
Enceinte is ne’er hinted at, so thus escapes the subtle knave ;
He little cares for female honour, a royal quarry to hunt down,
He plays the saint about the station and old Harry in the town.
A faux pas a joke to him, ‘ She’s none the worse for it,’ quoth he,
Then ordering, Moet laced with brandy, he quaffs it down with glee ;
My empire’s ‘paved with good intentions,’ the bad ones rumble in pell-mell,
‘ The Squatter’s Rest ’ is the latest style for the damn’dest pit in Hell.
With sword and lance and gallant heart broad acres won the Norman band
By perjured oaths and fraud and guile the squatter steals the Austral land;
Duke Rollo plundered much of yore, backed up by Knights in coat of mail,
Many a fine estate changed hands, the title, Cromwell’s iron hail,


For conquest gives a right to hold, tho’ sad for those who lose the dasf,
A right divine in Palestine still proved within Manilla’s bay;
For skulking thief no power or title deed in equity to show,
Then take your land from him again, he well deserves the blow ;
They broke each law as it was passed, no leg have they on which to stand
Suborned dummies, bribed surveyors, inspectors, agents of crown land.
The public’s right—to have their own again—in equity and law,
The Courts hold fraud invalidates a deed per se a fatal flaw ;
You should not let them starve, but give them work at dirtyjobs about,
They’ve had much practice in that line at picnics and Sydney rout.”
“They only steal like other folks,” quoth I, “ what recks it, gold or lance,
I practice in that way—a kiss or two—whene’er I get the chance ;
They do not steal one’s cash—bar one—for that’s more in the banking line,
A roaring trade was done some years ago, ’twas then I lost my twine;
They cannot steal your character, Sir Fiend, their own is worse by far,
I’ll no say the breeks off He! and mon,” —’twas thus I gave old Scratch ajar.
“ The squatter is no friend of mine, yet for him a word I’ll say,
Tho’ I know some perjured scoundrels, yet others give fair play.
Their cards were very difficult, and gold the only trumps in hand,
Combined with skill it won the game, per se ’twould buy much land;
And as for fraud and guile and perjury, it very ill beseems
The Prince of Darkness to comment on those—his personnel—in themes.
A most censorious satirist are you, severe upon those toffs,
They are no worse than other arrant rogues for all your gibing scoffs.
I will not join you ’gainst this man or help to lag him to his doom.
I strike above the belt, no dirty tricks like Shindy and his groom.”
“ You argue like a woman,’’ quoth Lucifer, “ I know the sex right well,
They give me lots of trouble down below, beguile the imps in Hell.
Now Cynthia rolls her orb behind Mount John I greet the dawn of day,
My work is cut for hours to come to guide a squatter at foul play;
Farewell, old puritan, I knew your foresire in iron Cromwell’s time,


A sturdy blade was he iconoclast and foeman of my clime.
The golden calf is worshipped here all steeped in filth with crown of straw,
You bow no servile knee to Baal ’tis clear, nor own his demon law;
You’ll lose that horse you ride to night, and that will surely rouse your ire,
I’ll plan it with—no use to draw that pistol ’gainst the King of Fire.”*
His protean steed became a shooting star, I watched the trail of light
Till it extinguished over Try-on and vanished from my sight.
Old Blazer died within a week and I have cast a ball of gold—
A bullet that will kill Old Nick and never yet a marksman sold.
TENNYSON TRAVERSED.
“ Lives of great men all remind us we can make our lives sublime,”
Yet how often we will find men grovelling basely in the slime !
’Tho’ we cannot leave our land-marks and our names efface to time,
A noble field lies still before us, whate’er our rank or clime.
Men can ne’er command success to score upon the rolls of time,
But we can lead a Christian life, this the noblest, true sublime.
BUSH GOSSIP.
I’ve never met such abject crowd as those who dwell in hinterland,
You’d think that fetters on them were and they before the ganger stand ;
They dare not to the tyrant squatter say, “ I’m a man as well as you,
What recks it all your ill-got gold, we know how mammon basely grew.”
Squatter Shylock ’s always on the make, he’ll yard and brand a mouse,
Preserves the ’possums, steals selector’s grass, will skin and eat a louse.
When I meet them on the road they say, “ Now this might be a point for you,
But don’t get me into it you know, or lay the squatter on the clue.”
And if a stockman shows in sight, I’m shun’d, ’twould never do, you see,
For servile slaves if seen in friendly chat with squatter’s enemy;


But they brag they’re not afraid, “ don’t care a damn about the knaves.”
They cringe, then curse behind his back, characteristic of all slaves.
When I queried re those squatters, to get some facts to state in rhyme,
I’ve noted shuffling cowering air, “ I was shearing at that time.”
Some would sell me to the squatter, who looks down on them as dirt;
I will not write my thoughts of those, for their feelings I would hart !
Some dare not call their souls their own, a death grip’s on their land,
The squatter owns the coat upon their backs, the dirt upon their hand.
They cannot comprehend an honest man who’d scorn a deed of guile,
And think all men are like the squatter rogue at which I often smile.
They'll trick you o’er a petty job themselves, and think they’re very smart
Taking honest cash for jerried work is but thieving of a sort.
I pity, not condemn—environment has made them what they are,
The malign influence of squatters’ gold can spread its venom far.
The squatter well may quoth, “ Who durst smile when Warwick bends his brow ?”
I’ve roused him up from time to time ; he’ll meet his Barnet in a row.
The men whom I despise are magistrates and servants of the Crown,
Who betray the trust reposed in them, servile to the wealthy clown;
Every one of them from a trooper to a minister of State
Will sell the public interests for a slice of tucker from his plate.
Selectors bought or terrorized, officials bribed by cash or cheer,
There’s more dirty work about the bush than ever greets the public ear.
Surveyors and inspectors put up and lushed at every Station,
Public interests sold for squatter gold, champion knaves of the nation!
They’ll pass the perjured dummy’s land, the squatter squares them with a fiver.
Improvements valued at six hundred pounds, tho’ hardly worth a stiver.
Ido not judge those serfs, hard fortune forced them from the truth to stray,
And hope the blood once shed on Calvary will wash their guilt away.
No savant learning is required inspectors’ horoscope to cast!
The Devil always gives his tools long rope, but hauls it taut at last.
Some satyr sends his wife to summer on lone Kusiosco’sAlount, - --


Then regales himself on stolen kisses too numerous to count!
’Tis ever thus in every land beguiled by woman’s witching smile,
While listening to the serpent’s wile she caught the glamor of his guile.
’Tho’ Keven was severe upon the text, so was inspired Saint Paul,
When Circe whistled any saint of them would kiss her at the call I
Savants proved Saint Keven ne er flung Kathleen o er that beetling cliff,
A holy homicide about those parts would soon be changed to “ stiff; ”
The lady with the saint remained and changed his solitude to bliss,
Kathleen got what she was after—the Holy Father's saintly kiss.
Erratic rhymes are those —I scribble as I think my philippic,
Whene’er I see a snake about I’m not o’er choice about the stick,
For righteous wrath inspires my pen and bids me write satiric lay,
To rend aside Mokana’s veil and drag those skeletons to day.
The Honourable Chisel Public tours to England with view in end,
To feather up his nest, crown contracts, sub-rose for bribes he’ll vend,
He plays the patriotic role, is feled, lushed, P.C’d or Knighted.
“ The last refuge of a scoundrel,” blatant rogues succeed, worth is slighted.
Cincinnatus, Garibaldi. saved their country, shunn’d the proffer’d gold,
Bayard-like their names are held synonym for honour, loyalty untold.
Macquarie Muckworms reck not of such men or of their deeds sublime ; _
To raise the wind they sell their souls and foul their hands with filthy slime.
A minister passes in the House a bill for closer settlement of Ciown land,
His subordinates are helping squatters to make selection ’most too hot to stand !
In good repair like apple-pie the lonely road that leads unto the station,
Neglected, dangerous, the highway to homes of farming, backbone of the nation.
Bribed surveyors block, divert the public way o er swamps and gully and o er cuff,
To bluff intended settlers off the run—l’ve smoked the dodge, give you a whiff-
ed if you write and say, “ Sir, I’ve got no road of access,” or any this or that,
Bribed officials will reply “ ’Tis not for public interests’’—they’ve got the lesson pat.
Hankey-pankey tricks are played to block the settlement of the favoured run,
Special area at three-pouuda-ten an acre for land that would be dear at one ;


Backstairs influence and bribery is the vogue, amongst those Jacks in office,
Nepotism is rampant, at perjury and fraud ’tis known, they are no novice.
I've marked one honest man who refused to be the squatter’s tool,
A Queenslander is he and bred ajar in freedom’s loyal school;
“ Will you swear that Gillmap said he’d shoot the super’ of the station ?”
And then the squatter winked the eye, looking devil and damnation ;
I will not swear such garbled lie," quoth he, “ I’ll keep my conscience white. ’
Shooting ’possums then was stopp’d—the paltry squatter’s petty spite.
THE SQUATTER’S LAMENT.
Old Ondeersun was a tough old blade when he went to the Land o’ the Leal ;
Hurra ! thought I, my sorrows have an end, and all my woes will heal;
But Gillman comes, on his chestnut steed, and buys Gas Blowhard’s land,
Then bounces all the station push, for against me is his hand.
Old Ondeersun was a tough old blade, he’s gone to the Land o’ the Leal.
But Gillman flings his mantle on, so my woes will never heal.
Old Ondeersun was a tough old blade — when I wished to be M.P.
“The cheeky little brat, is that his game ?—the puppy dog !” quoth he.
*« Kind sir,” said I, “ I hope you’ll change, and you will vote for me
“ Vote for you !” cried the Orangeman, “ will I vote for the Pope ?” quoth he.
Old Ondeersun was a tough old blade, he’s gone to the Land o the Leal,
But Gillman flings his mantle on, so my woes will never heal.
Old Ondeersun was a tough old blade, he fought me 'long the line,
I lost the battlp sure enough, now an M.P. ne’er to shine;
O’Sullyville lipk’d me ten to one, he topp’d the poll, you see,
They’d sooner vote fpr a tiger-snake than they would vote for me.
Old Ondeersun w&S. a tough old blade, he’s gone to the Land o’ the Leal,
But Gillman flings his mantle on, so my woes will never heal.


I tour’d to England on a time, ruffling with the upper ten so
Thought I was au fait at the etiquette of le lean socielie,
Till 1 overheard Nora Jeu d’Esprit, the terrible has bleu,
“My dear, where on earth did you catch that ill-bred kangaroo !”
Old Ondeersun was a tough old blade, he’s gone to the Land o’ the Leal.
But Gillman flings his mantle on, so my woes will never heal.
“ Your Mr. Squatter is such fun,” warbled lovely Nora Jeu d’Esprit,
He asked the name botanic of some finny swimmer of the sea,
And looked stupid and conceited as he hopped along the grass ;
I quoth instead—“couldn’t help it, dear, —the Latin for an ass.”
0:d Ondeersun was a tough old blade, he's gone to the Land o’ the Leal,
But Gillman flings his mantle on, so my woes will never heal.
“ The thing proposed to me, ’twas such assurance from parvenu I
I gave it no encouragement, nor did I think he’d ever sue—
Eagles do not mate with crows, quoth I, or else they always ever rue;
The squatter said I broke his faithful heart, and I suggested glue. ’
Old Ondeersun was a tough old blade, he’s gone to the Land o’ the Leal,
But Gillman flings his mantle on, so my woes will never heal.
Oh 1 my lovely, charming, witching lost love, Nora Jeu d’Esprit!
Your disdainful, heartless wit was one time near the death o’ me !
“Manners make the man,” —the English ladies all on this agree
I’d give away one half my wealth to have a decent pedigree !
Old Ondeersun was a tough old blade, he’s gone to the Land o’ the Leal,
But Gillman flings his mantle on, so my woes will never heal.
Back I sailed for Sydney, now station hands must doff the hat to me !
For I'm a slap-up toff, you know, all the style in the Old Oountree.
‘‘ The upstart snob,’’ quoth Trueman Hint, “ now I’ll be damned if I do


Doff my tile to that Jackanapes! I’ll doff it first to a Jackaroo.”
Old Ondeersun was a tough old blade, he’s gone to the Land o’ the Leal,
But Gillman flings his mantle on, so my woes will never heal.
To quiz I called on Ondeersun, cap’d he “ You’re a thund’ring toff, be gorra !
But 'twas hard graft in the two roomed hut in the wilds of lone Wonglorra !”
But Gillman's worse a thousand times, for he prints his jokes in rhyme,
And all the folks now laugh ha! ha ! at.me, and have a high old time.
Old Ondeersun was a tough old blade, he’s gone to the Land o’ the Leal,
But Gillman flings his mantle on, so my woes will never heal.
FEDERATION.
Federation is but an imposition to coin new billets for the hungry politician crew,
Those foul harpies have so long preyed upon the public purse, now like the typic horse-
leech have they grew;
Union ought to be the standard, no petty Parliaments submissive to the squatters' bribing
rag,
Give Local Government to each county, one-nation-parliament-people policy, one Viceroy
and one flag.
THE J.P. AND THE SWAQQIE.
A swaggie tramp'd by light of eve, but having made a •' rise ” he called at road-side pub.
Then queried re a bed ; quoth Boniface, “ there's one vacant in a double-room, here’s the
rub!
A Queenquean Magistrate engaged one and he may object unto the likes of you
A sleeping in the vacant one, though like the most of them he’s no great shakes ’tis true.”
The J.P. was a drunken, loafing squatters’ tyke, not over-nice at this or that,_
With many a sanguinary oath he swore, no objection, he’d share the room with Pat;
Quoth he, “Shure Pat, you don’t look very bright, but this point I know you’ll clearly see


You’d be a long time in the Old Country e’er you would sleep with Worshipful J.P.”
“ Them words is true your Worship speaks,” quoth Pat, “ shure, bedad, on them we two
a^ree,
And your Honor would be a long time in Old Ireland before you'd ever be J.P.
I’ve seen the likes of you scavenging the streets of Cork and scrapin’ out a jail-yard
But, hang me, if I ever seed afore, spalpeen swipes like you disgracin’ o’ the Bench!”
WHISPERS.
From Homer’s time unto the present day have poets held the keys of fame.
Now with this dark mysterious crime I’ll brand this man I will not name,
Nor will I whisper style or place, or e’en his race, or rank or sphere;
’Tis whispered all about the land, ’tis whispered justice will not hear . _
’Tis whispered ’neath the roof of bark, ’tis whispered round the station-hall
'Tis whispered ’neaththe shady gum, for vengeance must Nemesis call,
’Tis whispered by the squatter’s wife, ’tis whispered by the delving clown,
’Tis whispered all about the bush, ’tis whispered up and down the town,
’Tis whispered in the miner’s tent, ’tis whispered in the swagman s camp,
’Tis whispered by the larrikins, “ Ha ! ha ! for lust is on the ramp. ’
’Tis whispered at the hotel bar, they whisper stable help and groom,
’Tis whispered by the gibb’ring ghosts that nightly haunt her humble tomb,
*Tis whispered on the railway line, ’tis whispered on the stock-horse’s back,
■Tis whispered by the female coterie-you know there tongues will clack,
’Tis whispered at the counter-side, ’tis whispered by the office clerk
Accessory before the fact, ’tis whispered, hushed up in the dark,
’Tis whispered on the cabbage board, they gibe where Crispin plys the awl,
“ 'Tis very strange,” the barber hints, whene’er a client gives a call,
’Tis scarcely whispered by the “ toffs,” ’tis shun’d, for danger mingles there—
“ A fellow feeling makes us wondrous kind ” —this Shakesphere I declare,
’Tis whispered round the bilking house, ’tis whispered darkly in the bank,


“ The easy virtue of a canaille maid, fit sport for man of rank.”
The bounder dog ! one honest maid worth more than shoals of Devil’s filth
’Clept Plutocrats ! in fraud and felony they’re steeped unto the hilt.
“ A duced shame it is,” cite Tubal Cain, while clanging hammers ring,
“ I would not call myself a man if e’er I stooped to such base thing.”
'Twas murmured through Elysian vaults, ’tis said, and made the angels weep,
’Twas howled around the depths of Hell, and roused the Devil from a sleep.
The magistrates, police, and devil’s own are far too fly to talk—
They know the side on which the butter lies, ” why satyr’s foible baulk ?”
Tis whispered on the poet’s page,by trappers round the dingoe’s lair,
,Go up and down where e’er you list, you’ll find ’tis whispered everywhere.
,Tis whispered she could ne’er sustain her life wandering in the bush,
f Tis whispered she was snugly in a house put up by purchased push,
’Tis whispered Bluecoat drank “ respects,” ye gods ! ’twas fifty in the bank,
’Tis whispered Galen pouched a handsome fee, as suits profession rank,
’Tis whispered Hushit-up is clean played out, they’ll reap the crop they’ve sow i.
Her blood for vengeance loudly calls till guilty blood for crime atone,
’Tis whispered perjury will fail, they’ll make a false step by-and by,
’Tis whispered Evil Genius tracks their trail to “ meet at Philippi.”
CAMPBELL TRAVERSED.
The world was glad—the garden beautous smiled
’Till woman man to sin beguiled.
LOYOLA’S HAND.
When the Times once filled the battered breach the Empire’s flag to save
From those traitor Radical o in league with Gladstone—time-serving knave !
Who commenced a Tory true and blue, then downward falling rung by rung,
To sell his country for a lust qf power, upheld by glamour of false tongue,


Consort with a felon crew, who marched through murder, outrage and rapine
Rend Saint Patrick’s blazon from the Jack and blast the trio crosses twine.
The Dark Hand was in the field once more to aid all deeds that make for Hell,
They worked on Piggott’s fears—the Order’s plan—l know their guile right well—
To forswear the truth ho told —battle justice and Walters of the Times,
Let the crew of criminals escape the doom of their Satanic crimes.
The weak-backed Bench who tried the case would not record decided find,
The charges proved unto the hilt —bar one —so said the judge or whined.
The public could not see it thus, for the asinine ears would only hear
Parnell did not a letter write, although the other charges were all clear;
The Times was beaten by the Unseen Hand—Walters fought the battle well!
His name is worthy of a place with Palo, Wallace, Bruce and Tell.
CURSORY REMARKS.
'Tho’ I speak against the squatter, some are honest, good and true,
Perhaps you’d like to know one, so I'll lay you on the clue
You can tell an honest squatter as you travel through the land,
By the bunch of hair that’s growing on the palm of his right hand.
There are honest lawyers, if you’ve patience, faith and hope
You may chance to find one with a powerful microscope.
There are ladies fair whose troth is true as any other lie,
Their fickle hearts not worth a thought and surely not a sigh !
There are parsons who speak the truth —once a week in chufch
And banks that never smash and leave their clients in the lui?ch;
There are trusty tradesmen who never slum a job or lie,
But ’tis better watch them closely or you’ll rue it by-and-by;
There are bushmen also who never duff the squatters - beef,
A venal crime in Austral land, to steal a fiver I’d as lief!
Who build a fence as specified to gauge his every post,
When I meet such with my gun I’ll serve him up on toast I


The Orangemen and Masons must swear a brother ne’er to wrong,
But I find them just as bad as “ Mote,” or “ Cowan” in the other throng.
I have ordered goods from Sydney, glory of our Austral clime !
But with one exception only they always had me every time !
There are men who sell by auction sheep that bear the fleece like down,
If you have land ’twill be on tick, pay up before you leave the town ;
They are agents for the squatter who keeps an eye upon your lan c?
And if you fail to come to time they’ll crush you out of hand!
’Tho’ I condemn abuse of wealth, I own a useful thing is mammon,
Rightly used the source of good—’tis obvious spite of parson’s gammon;
When money is all gone, alas ! and then our credit surely flown,
Kindly smiles will change to frowns and hearts to adamantine stone !
’Twill purchase pleasant things, a mansion, racing stud, head-groom,
Keep the larder stock’d with gen’rous cheer, dispel all care and gloom ;
'Twill keep a steam-yacht anchored in the bay, a shooting box on Scottish moor,
And find withal for courier whene’er you feel inclined to tour;
’Twill help to win a wife no doubt, and keep her when you have her won,
Despite all poets plead in. vain cottage-love seems sad and sorry fun;
’Twill buy her diamonds, pearls, lace, and such fallals all ladies love,
And with common-sense it seems she’ll coo like any turtle dove
’Twill purchase justice—of a sort —the Queenqvean Irand ’tis true —
The sort that’s sold in certain parts o’er bossed by squatter parvenu;
’Twill give the entree to the upper ten, and to a pedigree it gives eclat
Lineage is oft ignored by Royalty, if you will lose at baccarat!
’Twill smooth the rugged path of life into a gentle gliding stream,
For by this magic wand it flows like an idyllic dream.
’Twill free one from all sordid care, leave time to cultivate the mind,
Or travel through those strange countries far scattered o’er terrestrial rind ;
A sword to slay your enemy, and send him to the destined dust,
A buckler in the danger hour to ward the vengeful adverse thrust
No wonder 'tis a god ! ’twill buy you every joy (sorrow it will leaven)


On Earth, hut useless all ’twill be within the gates of Hell or Heaven !
I can’t conceive how men can stoop to win a petty point swear lies,
Commanding wealth for deeds of worth and gen’rous high emprise.
“ A man’s a man for a’ that,” no doubt explains this thing, we oft will find
A banker’s book is not an index fair of character or mind;
Fine feathers often make fine birds, but ne’er can make a gentleman,
You’ll tell one ’neath a ragged coat tho’ wasted, weary, worn and tan.
Gold can purchase power, but for respect ’tis vain for it to sigh,
It ne’er can win the gates of Heaven, or wake the love-light in a lady’s eye ;
Tho’ many grovel to the wealthy clown and woman sell her soul,
’Tis but a semblance he has grasped, he ne’er can win the goal.
Now you may take a mongrel draught, groom and train it as you will,
You ne’er can make a blood of it, ’twill show the scrubber still;
And you can take a well-bred horse, degrade him to the plough,
The desert blood rolls in his veins, he'll show it even now !
’Tis thus the mean and petty scrubber mind betrays the wealthy parvenu;
Man’s breed shows in his deeds, his heart and mind, this rule is ever true.
Now have you ever seen a grape to grow upon a wattle or a thorn,
Or plucked a fig from off a briar at any hour of eve or morn ?
And Holy Writ doth teach that by its fruit a tree you’ll test,
Useless good seed sown in barren ground, the harvest is unblessed;
And those who stoop to lies or guile to win a point, an acre or a pound,
Are viler far than venom’d things that wriggle o’er the ground.
The man of unheroic mind by bards was always held in scorn,
To ’scape this fate at Eoncesvaux brave Eoland would not sound his horn,
The paladin chose death than honour stain or from the foe to fly,
Troubadours have sung his praise and still his name is blazoned high ;
What recks the money-grubber of such things, the earth worm's shallow brain
Can never contemplate a deed sublime, and honour’s clarion is in vain.
Some of us will live to see the sheen of ill-got gold can ne’er illume
The dark plutonian nothingness that wraps unwept, unhonoured tomb.


The chivalry of long descent is absent from this land, I fear,
“ My word of honour ” is a phrase I never yet did hear.
’Twould be absurd as by the white skin of a man from Niger
Or gentle loving-kindness of the ruthless Bengal tiger.
The squatter sets the tone and style, a grasping, duffing, dummy crew,
And lesser men all ape those lords and fill their pockets too.
Some politicians have their price, e’en those who rule the land,
For honour did not emigrate to shores beyond the British strand. _
There are many things I’ve noticed here and there from time to time,
But I would blow blue blazes up if I’d put them in this rhyme.
Now if you want a smoke or drink, or to your lady fair to wend,
"Why shut this book and walk your way, for here you see
THE END.


Notes
The Satanite casuists excuse and justify robbery, arson, murder, slander,
adultery, perjury, forgery, and regicide, by the Order, for “the end will justify
the means.”
The Satanite confessional text-book is too shameless, horrible and infamous
to even hint at the contents. This to debauch and enslave the minds of the
penitents, for “the end will justify the means.’’
The Satanite system of espionage is superior to that of any secret r police.
None can escape from them ; when once marked down, a victim is followed
to the ends of the earth ; every act and word recorded, secretly influenced, or
persecuted, slandered and destroyed, by working on human nature and passions,
blind tools and secret lay associates being used as cats’ paws—an ass headed
squatter to wit—for “ the end will justify the means.”
The Satanite system prohibits family affection, friendship and mercy ;
engenders suspicion, hate and malice ; sets the Order's interests above all law.
divine or human ; ignores and rules the “ Infallible (?) Authority, “ their creed
of hell, of hate and crime like the worshippers of Bowanee, they are
Stranglers, for “ the end will justify the means,”
H. Ff. G.


PRINTED AT THE WORLD OFFICE,
301 PITT ST., SYDNEY.










