





Canc elle d




THE
ITS CULTURE
Iff f I©ff 11 |
SPECIALLY ADAPTED TO QUEENSLAND.
Hu E. E* (Smiufc.
=39l 3£QQQ(3&3ss*-———
BRISBANE:
AVATSON, FEROXTSONT SZ CO.,
1 8 8 3,
(All rights reserved.)
P. L., M„ & A. G. oi S. r,
CANCELLED
8/1/1931-
G«BCfal^Secretaty .


Watson, Ferguson & Co., Paragon Steam Printing Offices, Brisbane.
IL . * ■ f


•n &55 Fl*
f X6^-rr
To Sugar Planters, Manufacturers, and all interested
in the developement of the Sugar Industry in
Queensland.
Gentlemen,
I have the pleasure to submit, for your careful
investigation , and experiment, this■ short treatise,
trusting that the information furnished will be found
useful. I solicit, principally, the suffrages of prac-
tical men, observers, and thinkers, numerous in this
Colony; and whatever may be its value I take the
liberty of stating that the knowledge it contains, is
essentially the outcome of long study and practical
experience.
I am,
Your most obedient servant,
A. A. GIRAUD.
" V ®




•ten
THE SUGAR CANE:
ITS CULTURE AND MANUFACTURE.
HISTORIC.
According to v. Humboldt, the German naturalist, sugar is
derived from the word sacchara , meaning stone, in allusion to the
crystallised substance extracted from the sugar cane.
Vulgar Name. —Sugar cane.
Botanic Style. —Saccharum ojjicinarum.
The sugar cane was known to the Arabians and Chinese
from time immemorial.
It was imported into Europe after the conquests of Alexander
the Great. The word saccharum is found in the works of Pliny,
and Dioscorides calls it the reed-honey. It was introduced into
Arabia by traders, following in the footsteps of Marco Polo, who
called there for the purchase and exchange of Oriental products.
It passed successively into Egypt, Nubia, and Ethiopia. After the
Crusades it was brought by the Venetians into Syria, Cyprus, and
Sicily, in 1500. Towards the year 1420, Don Henry of Portugal
brought it to Madeira, and it reached thence the Canary Islands.
These islands monopolised the sugar-growing industry until
1767, when cane culture was supplanted by the vine. The
Portuguese then established it at St. Thomas. It was culti-
vated in Provence, and in Spain, and after the discovery of the
New World it was known in St. Domingo, through Peter-de-
Etienneza. It was imported into the Mauritius and Bourbon
islands in 1750, but sugar was only manufactured there in 1787.
Michael Belestros was the first to extract the juice from the
cane and Gonzalves de Veloza to convert it into sugar.


The sugar cane originated from India and China, and passed
thence into Europe, America, and the parts of the world where
it is now cultivated.
BOTANIC-
The cane belongs to the family of the gramineous tribe of the
endropogenous, genus holcus (sorghum and millet). Its fibrous
lateral roots strike into the ground about ten inches deep, and
spread within a radius of ten inches. It has a cylindrical stalk,
from nine to fifteen feet high, and is furnished with knuckles,
varying from 20 to 50, several inches distant from each other. The
basis of each knuckle is provided with a shoot and crown of
small tubercules, which, later on, constitutes the young plant and
its roots.
The leaves are alternate, sheathy, large at the bottom, about two
or three feet long, and terminating in a point. The flowers, con-
sisting of a great number of small ears, biflorous and hairy at the
bottom, are supported by a peduncle, called an arrow, which pro-
jects from the superior leaves. The interior is neuter and has
only one shell ; the superior flower, hermaphrodite. The three
stamens are inserted under the ovary, which is sessile, without
hair, unfruitful; and surmounted with two extreme styles and two
feathery stigmas.
The flowers being unfruitful, the sugar cane produces no
seed. Some botanists and travellers, however, think differently.
If cane be cut lengthwise, its anatomical structure will disclose
a great number of longitudinal and parallel fibres, separated by
cellular tissues. The rind is variously coloured and covered with a
white dust called cane-wax. It is formed by the epidermis and
fibrous vessels. The external portion is composed of fibro-vascular
tissue and polygonal cells, styled saccharigem , separated from
each other by thin, permeable tissues.


VARIETIES OF CANE
The cane may be divided into three groups:— 1. White,
Yellow, or Green, 2. Striped. 3. Red.
Ist Group, —White, Yellow, or Green cane may be subdivided
into six classes :
1. Tahitian, from Tahiti, blooms in tropical country in May,
and can stand frost.
2, Bengal cane, from Calcutta, possesses the disadvantage
of attracting the borer.
3, Singapore cane, from Singapore, called in Northern
Queensland Striped Singapore, gives a greenish juice, and
contains a fair amount of sugar.
4. Creole cane, originating from America, requires much
care. It neither blooms nor grows very high, but stands
the frost well, and is rich in sugar.
5. Diard cane, so called in the Mauritius, does not bloom, and
is suitable to dry country.
6. Rose Bamboo, or Rapoe, known as such in Northern
Queensland, supplies a clear juice, easy to work.
2nd Group. —Striped cane, which may be subdivided into two
classes :
1. Guingant, originating from Tahiti, blooms in June, is of
vigorous growth and gives a fair amount of sugar.
2. Striped Diard, so called in the Mauritius, is a small cane of
purple colour, very sweet, and would be particularly adapted
to Queensland.
3rd Group. —Red cane may be subdivided into two classes :
1. Red cane, originating from Tahiti, is very tender, rich in
sugar, does not bloom, and demands much care.
2. Black Java, originating from Java, is short, grows in any
soil, does not bloom, and is rich in sugar.


The most suitable canes for Queensland are : —Meera, (bluish
colour) ; Rose Bamboo, or Rapoe ; Black Java ; Striped Singapore,
and generally speaking the various varieties of Ribbon ; Creole cane,
which has proved itself to be so successful at St. Helena (Brisbane);
Guingant, in its several varieties, and Red cane.
These canes can be cultivated with advantage here, and are
specially adapted to the climate


The successful growth of cane requires a damp and warm climate,
with intervals of dry heat; the sea breeze being favourable to its
vegetation.
It is cultivated in Spain; India; South America, up to 25° of
latitude ; Africa, and Oceanica. The plant cane takes from twelve
to eighteen months to ripen, according to the locality.
The sugar cane can be cultivated on any soil, provided it is rich,
and well watered by rainfalls. If these indispensable conditions do
not exist, irrigation and manuring would be necessary.
In soil containing an extra quantity of clay the cane is aqueous ;
holding a small proportion of sugar.
In sandy soil, the juice is very sweet, but the cane meagre.
In calcareous soil, the cane grows luxuriantly; the juice being
rich and easily converted into sugar.
Alluvial, volcanic, and red soils are generally suitable for sugar
growing. Saline ground should be avoided.
Cane of lightly-coloured rind thrives on heavy soil, and that of a
deep colour succeeds best on light soils.
Soil well adapted for sugar-growing should be composed as
follows: —Clay, 51 ; sand, 15; lime, 8; mould, water, and salts,
26; total, 100.
Preparation op the Soil. —In dry country, the first essential
requisite should be a well-devised system of irrigation; otherwise
cane culture would be unfruitful. The soil may be prepared, either
by manual labour or the use of labour-saving agricultural appliances,
such as horse or steam ploughs, harrows, &c. The preparation of
the soil by hand labour consists in making rectangular holes of the
following dimensions ; —Length, 1 foot 8 inches to 2 feet; width,


from 10 to 12 inches, and depth, from Bto 10 inches. The tools
used for hand labour are the hoe and crowbar ; the holes are dug
in straight lines, 5 feet apart, and of the specified size. In stony
ground, it will be necessary to place the stones in heaps between
each row of cane ; the heaps running always in a line, parallel with
the sea or river, in order to prevent the arable soil being washed
away by rainfall.
Ploughing.— When the plough is used for the first time on
virgin soil, it is necessary to plough and cross plough the ground,
and let it lay for a year or two without planting cane, in order to
allow atmospheric agency to penetrate freely and render it favour-
able to culture. In this preparatory state, the soil might be used
for the growth of maize or sweet potatoes.
Planting. The best time for planting in Queensland would
be during the months of June, July, and August. The plants are
made either from the body or top part of the cane itself. They
should be selected out of good and healthy cane, and the ordinary
length should be from 12 to 15 inches. The plants made out of the
top part are considered the best, being at the same time a saving.
The furrows are made in straight lines, five feet apart; the plants
five feet distant from each other. Two tops are put flat in
each hole, the eyes or buds facing its sides, and placed a few
inches apart. This having been done, the cuttings are covered with a
small portion of earth ; a layer of thrash being advisable when the
planting is carried out in dry weather. The hole should not be alto-
gether filled up with earth, as it would smother the young plant.
Manure. —Several kinds of manure are used. Stable manure,
applied at the proportion of about 15 lbs. per plant. Guano, from
4to 5 ounces per hole. Dry night soil, and composts made of me-
gass, ashes, scums and organic matters of every description, in the
proportion of 15 lbs. per hole. Of the manures mentioned, compost
is the cheapest and most preferable. (See Appendix.) The guano
being deficient in potash and nitrogen, it is advisable that it


should he mixed before application, either with dung or chemical
manures. The ground is manured once or twice, either before or
after planting, in accordance with the requirements of the soil; if
after, it should take place immediately following the first weeding.
In doing so, two trenches should he dug, one on each side of the
plant, and the quantity already stated placed therein, and covered.
The plant cane is fit to he cut after 12 or 18 months, according
to the locality. After the cutting is finished, the field should be
cleared, and all thrash burnt within fifteen days.
It is a great mistake to leave the thrash on the field for three weeks
or a month, as it prevents the action of the atmosphere on the young
plant, causing thereby serious obstruction to the shooting. Should
the burning be interfered with by rain, the thrash ought to be
cleared from the ratoon, and placed in heaps between each row.
Ssmall trenches are then made, 5 or 6 inches in depth, around the
stump, in which the manure is placed. Drilling between the rows
must be carefully done, in order to distribute the earth on both
sides without damaging or interfering with the stump itself.
Weeding.—This is carried out with the plough or hoe; the
plough being preferable, both for expedition and execution. The
weeds, instead of being buried, as is usually the case, should be
gathered and placed in heaps. Couch grass, to be effectually erad-
icated, must be taken right out of the field and burned. Burying
this description of weed is simply cultivating it. When weeding is
done by the hoe, the grass or weed should be dug, and not scraped
out, as unfortunately is too often the case. The most advantageous
time for this style of work is immediately after the rainy season.
It is indispensable that the field should be always kept clean. A
month after the planting all dead plants must be replaced.
Thrashing.-—The cane should be kept as free as possible from
thrash, and the work should be done by hand in preference to the
Use of a hook, as the latter is liable to destroy the buds and render


the cane unfit for plants. The object of thrashing is to allow a free
circulation of air and light through the field ; the sugar being prin-
cipally generated in the cane through the agency of the sun. The
carbon is absorbed by the leaves, which contribute as much towards
supplying the plant with food as the roots ; for this reason great
care should be taken not to destroy the green leaves when thrashing.
This operation must be carried out after wet weather and especially
four or six weeks before cutting, so as to permit the sun’s rays to
ripen the stalks.
Fire should never, under any consideration, be used in the field
for getting rid of the thrash ; because in the state of actual growth
then existing the sudden heat would have the effect of converting a
notable portion of the crystallized sugar in the cane into glucose.
Cutting. —When the cane is ripe, which is generally speaking
the case between the August and December months, cutters with
sharp knives are distributed through the field, cutting the tops first,
and then the stalks, level with the ground or rather half an inch
below its surface. More of the top should be taken off than is cus-
tomary, as it contains only water, which involves extra expenses in
fuel and labour in its evaporation. The additional portion recom-
mended to be taken off, may be used for plants, or even left on the
field in preference to being carted to the mill. The stalks are re-
moved to the mill, the tops used as plants, and the green leaves cut
into chaff for horses or cattle.
Hints and Remarks. —On any large and well regulated estate
there should be
1. A general manager, invested with the full charge and respon-
sibility of the whole concern, and during the crushing season,
superintending, personally, the manufacture.
2. A field manager, entirely and exclusively attached to the
culture of the sugar cane in the field.
These two distinctions are necessary, and great care should be


taken in entrusting the field work to competent men only; for,
technically speaking, the sugar is formed in the field and not in
the mill. A good many people know how to plant and cultivate
cane, in a rough sense, but do not possess the slightest knowledge
of the composition and nature of the plant they attempt to grow,
being perfectly ignorant of the reasons why some fields give
better returns than others. Above all, they do not understand
how to take advantage of the good opportunities offered them by
nature through the heat of the sun and the rainfall, both elements
being indispensable to the proper growth of any vegetable, more
particularly the sugar cane, which is formed principally by heat
(carbon), and water (oxygen and hydrogen).
The attention of the manager being wholly directed to the
manufacture during the crushing season, the field overseer should
be entirely entrusted with the field work. By giving effect to this
arrangement, much trouble and money would be saved. The
custom which at present prevails of entrusting the field work to
inexperienced overseers and ploughmen—men having no idea of
the importance of the duties with which they are charged, results
in discreditable work being done and loss of money to employers.
Because, should the cane be improperly cut, the field not properly
cleared, and the ploughing which follows between the cane rows
be unsatisfactorily done, the ensuing season’s crop will be greatly
affected.
Let it be understood that the field manager should be a sound
and practical agriculturist, with a sufficient knowledge of chemistry
to enable him, by an analysis of the soil, to discover •which is the
most suitable for each variety of cane ; to supply by irrigation or
manures what has been denied by nature ; to restore in fact to the soil
those ingredients which are taken from it by successive cropping.
The author was personally acquainted with a gentleman down
South who acted in the several capacities of manager of a sugar


estate, overseer, cane inspector, sugar manufacturer, book-keeper,
and occasionally fireman. The reader will readily understand the
embarrassed situation of any person labouring under such con-
flicting responsibilities, and may be inclined to conclude that a
repetition of such management would be highly injudicious.
Diseases and Insects.— The cane is subject to different diseases,
caused without doubt by the degeneration of the species; or some-
times due to cryptogamic fungus which infest the leaves.
When the cane is attacked with any disease, it presents a slow
vegetation, the leaves become pale, the stalk stunted, and gives
little sugar.
The disease which has done most harm in che Mauritius is that
known under the name of the “ white disease.” It has entirely dis-
appeared since the introduction of fresh species. Another disease
existing in Australia known under the name of “rust,” is attri-
butable to degeneration of species, through the use, originally, of
inferior plants.
Insects, injurious to sugar cane, are numerous. A few might
be mentioned. The white ant, of Western Australia, is very
damaging. The only, and very imperfect, mode of getting rid of
it consists in ploughing the ground loosely round the plant.
The white louse (cocus saccharis ) sucks the leaves and kills the
young plant.
The borer ( proceras , or tortrix saccharifagus ; also named diatrea
tacchara ), whose name amply describes its damaging powers. It
is difficult to destroy ; still, a very simple and effective appilance
has lately been in use in the Bourbon Island for its destruction.
The contrivance consists of a hogshead half filled with water, coated
inside and outside with thick molasses. A small lamp, fixed on a
piece of cork, is so placed as to float in the centre of the cask.


—r ---
Three or four of these hogsheads, filled up as described, are placed
in different parts of the field and lighted at night. The butterfly,
whose eggs are laid at night, and contain the borer, is attracted by
the lights, and ultimately either falls into the water or sticks to
the molasses.


CHEMICAL COMPOSITION OF THE SUGAR CANE.
The sugar cane, considered as a whole—leaves and stalk —30
per cent, of the former and 70 per cent, of the latter, contains,
according to Payen, a celebrated French chemist, the following
ingredients :
Water •• ••• ••• ••• ...75
::: ;;;
Organic Matter 04457 )
Nitrogen (Azote)... ... .. ... ... 00900
Potash ••• ••• ... ... ... ... 0-0865
Phosphoric Acid. ... ... ... ... 0-0312
Lime ••• ... ... ... ... ... 0-0417
Magnesia ... ... ... ... ... 0-0434
Silica 0-2615
Without the leaves, the analysis of the stalk alone, by the same
author, would be
Water... ... ... ... ...71-04 )
Sugar.... ... ... ...18-02 j juice 89.06
Megass ... ... ... ... ... ... 9-56
Albumen, &c. ... ... ... ... ... ... 0-55
Eesinous and Oily Matters ... ... ... ... 0-35
Mineral Salts ... ... ... ... ... ... 0-48
The proportion of sugar in the cane varies according to locality.
At Bourbon Island it ranges from 17 to 21 per cent; giving an


average of 19 per cent. At Martinique, the average is 18, and at
Cuba, 16 per cent, A fair average composition of the Mauritius
cane would be ; —Water, 69’70; sugar, 19.80; megass, 10-60;
total, 100.
If we consider the cane at different stages of its growth, say from
six to eighteen months, it will be discovered that the quantity of
sugar therein varies from 6to 20 per cent. As a consequence the
largest and best yield is obtainable from cane, properly ripened ;
being more abundant in the central part of the stalk than in the
cortical portions. The percentages of sugar would be:—Central,
18*4; cortical, 17 - 9; nodular, 17-1.
On soil which has been previously cultivated, the first crop is sup-
posed to contain more sugar than the second, and the second more
than the third.
On the contrary, on scrub land, virgin soil, the first crop looks
luxuriant,, but the cane is deficient in sugar; hence the recommend-
ation already made of ploughing and cross ploughing new soil, and
allowing it to lie idle and exposed to the action of the atmosphere
for some time.
The juice of the cane, called in French, vesou, when extracted by
middling pressure, is clear and yellow in appearance ; of an
agreeable smell, sweet to the taste, and slightly acid. Its density,
or specific gravity, varies from 5 to 14 degrees Beaume. This
density, as ascertained by one of Beaume’s aerometers, well
graduated, determines almost exactly the amount of sugar con-
tained in the liquid extract.
The following table will furnish a fair idea of the quantity of
sugar contained in a certain volume of juice at various densities •


W ater
81-
Sugar
.. 18*36
Mineral salts
.. 0-29
Organic matters ..
.. 0-35
Aerometer (Beaume.) i Weight of Sugar in lbs.
Weight of Water in lbs.
14,696
16,533
18,370
20,207
22,044
The juice is composed of the
following elements
85,304
83,467
81,630
79,793
77,956
The quantity of sugar contained in the juice varies from 13 to
per cent. The 0-35 percentage of organic matters comprises three
different ingredients. Ist. A granulous substance floating on the
surface of the liquid, and only visible through the aid of a
microscope. It is the principal agent of alcoholic and acid fer-
mentation, and represents about 0-01 per cent. 2nd. An albumi-
nous matter, coagulable by the heat, representing 0-027 per
cent. 3rd. Another albuminous matter, not coagulable by heat,
but by alcohol representing 0-0223 per cent. The two last-
mentioned substances cause the viscous fermentation.
When the juice is expressed by the rollers, it presents a dirty
aspect, from its containing particles of megass ; but after standing
for a few moments it gets clearer. Left to itself for several hours
it ferments, on account of the chemical action of the substances
already referred to, on the saccharine matter. If passed through a
filter, it could be preserved from fermentation for about twenty-
four hours, as the granulous ingredients would thereby be


Potash
. . 17-30
Phosphoric acid
.. 6-24
Principal elements.
Lime
8-34
Soda
2-98
Magnesia
8-68
Secondary elements.
Silica
. . 56-46
arrested. When the juice is boiled and filtered, the deleterious
agents are eliminated, and the liquid can be kept for two days
without the least danger of fermentation. In fact, if the liquid is
boiled, filtered, and treated with alcohol, it could be kept free from
taint for an almost indefinite period.
It is not, advisable to allow the cane to remain on the plat •
form of the mill from eight to ten days, because, for the reasons
mentioned, a considerable loss of sugar takes place, through the
deleterious action of the agents in question. Although the well-
ripened cane does not contain any inverted sugar (glucose),
the juice, however, always holds a small portion ; equivalent
on an average to 033 per cent. This is due to the crushed
cane not being properly matured, or to its being affected by frost
or the borer ; either of which produces fermentation.
The sugar cane produces from 0-48 to 0-50 per cent, of mineral
salts. The following is an analysis of 100 lbs. of cane ashes :
PoT the elements taken from the soil by each cTop of cane, see
Appendix .


MANUFACTURE OF SUGAR CANE
The manufacture of sugar cane may be divided into six operations:—
1. Crushing. 2. Defecating. 3. Decanting and Filtering. 4.
Evaporating. 5. Concentrating. 6. Drying and Packing.
Crushixg.— This process consists in crushing the cane stalk
between very powerful iron rollers, the dimensions of which vary
according to the size of the plant. The crushing apparatus com-
prises three large horizontal iron cylinders, set in motion by steam;
two at the bottom revolving in the same, and the third or top cylin-
der, in an opposite direction. The cane is introduced between the
top and bottom rollers, and definitely crushed between the third and
the other.
For a mill to press or crush well, the rollers should be as near
each other as possible; it should not be over fed; and the rollers
should turn round, slowly, so that the cane may be kept longer
under pressure.
Theoretically speaking, the cane contains 89 per cent of juice ;
practically, it is impossible to extract that amount. The most
powerful mills do not obtain more than 75 per cent, so that about
14 per cent is left in the megass. Admitting that the juice contains
18 per cent of sugar, there still remains a loss of 2-52 per cent.
All the latest mills are provided with a double set of rollers. As
the pressure however is increased, the difficulty of working the juice
becomes greater.
It would be specially advantageous, if the juice escaping from the
Second set of rollers, or second pressure, could be worked and boiled
separately. This course applies only to large mills, where a great
quantity of juice is extracted from the megass by the second pres-*
sure.


Great care should be exercised in defecating the juice arising
from the second pressure, as it contains an extra quantity of or-
ganic matter and dirt.
In some establishments, the megass, after escaping from the
first set of rollers, is watered before it is submitted to the second
pressure ; but, it is undoubtedly better to use steam instead of
water. The steam penetrates the pulp, dissolves the sugar much
quicker and better than water ; and being used in smaller propor-
tions, less fuel and labour will be required in evaporating the
juice.
Dry megass is generally used as fuel; labour, however, being so
dear in the Australian Colonies, and wood and coal so plentiful, a
greater advantage accrues in burning the megass as it leaves the
mill, mixed with either wood or coal.
Defecating. —This process is the most important of all. It is
in reality a chemical operation, which cannot be understood, with-
out a knowledge of the composition of the juice.
The object of defecating is to render the juice free from any
strange matter which might be unfavourable to crystallization.
Defecating is done, either with lime only, or with lime and sul-
phurous acid, otherwise called monosulphite, patented by Doctor
leery, of the Mauritius. There are other processes, such as
magnesia and superphosphate, one of which, Mr. Despessis, special
agent for the patentees, is now trying to introduce into the
Australian Colonies.
The monosulphite process, comprises the application of sulphurous
acid to the cold juice, either in a state of gas, or liquid. The whole
operation consists in burning the sulphur itself, evolving thereby
the sulphurous acid, which is conveyed to the juice through a pipe.
The juice, when coming from the rollers, falls into big square or
round coppers, or cast-iron tanks, called defecators or clarifiers;
each having a double set of steam coils, and containing from seven


to twelve hundred gallons, according to the size of the mill. There
are generally three clarifiers, and on the outside of each a valve is
attached to the steam coil, so that steam may he only used when it
it is required to heat the juice.
The object of the sugar manufacturer should be to clarify the
juice as well as possible, and to transform it into sugar without
delay.
In making a good defecation, the use of the litmus paper is
advisable. Neither method, nor practice, can give as true an
indication as that little strip of paper.
As a matter of fact, everyone knows that the juice proceeding
from the cane, being more or less affected by frosts or the borer,
contains acid. This shows a commencement of fermentation,
which at first transforms some sugar into glucose, the glucose into
carbonic acid, thence into alcohol, and finally the last spirit into
acetic acid, commonly called vinegar.
Glucose is consequently, the first phase of a molecular modi-
fication, of which acetic acid is the last expression. The acidity of
the juice is principally owing to the presence of acetic acid, which
turns the litmus paper red; hence the addition of such a strong base
as lime for its neutralization. If the liquid has been properly
treated or saturated, the litmus paper, when soaked therein, will
resume its former blue colour.
Lime combines equally with other organic acids, likewise
existing in the juice, but not in as large a proportion as with acetic
acid.
It will therefore be seen that the addition of lime is simply to
neutralize the acids, which, if left in the juice, would reduce the
proportion of crystallizable sugar by increasing in equal ratio the
quantity of glucose naturally existing in the juice.
The use of too much lime should be carefully avoided, for the


very obvious reason, that a superabundance of it will combine
partly with the crystallizable sugar to form saccharate of lime,
which is soluble, and partly with the glucose to produce some
noxious black matter, which interferes with the crystallization of
sugar.
Filtration on animal charcoal, or the process of double car-
bonization, would take away the excess of lime in the juice; but it
is by far preferable to use only the exact quantity of lime required
for defecating the juice, without the introduction of charcoal or any
other process.
The operation may be explained as follows :
When a clarifier is filled with juice, the liquid must be heated,
immediately, with steam, so as to coagulate the albumen. After-
wards, the quantity of lime required according to the nature of
the juice, must be properly and cleanly mixed with water, so that
it may weigh 14° by Beaume’s aerometer. This mixture is then
poured into the clarifier, and well stirred with the juice; after
which the whole mass is brought to ebullition by steam. When a
good boiling has taken place, the juice is left standing for a few
minutes, then filtered through blankets or filters, and sent, quickly,
to the triple-effets, battery, or concretor, or whatever apparatus
may be used in evaporating.
Another great mistake, it may be remarked, is the mixing of
juice extracted from the scums with the clarified liquor. The juice
in question is generally acid, and, the mixture of it with a
quantity of clarified juice, is bound, by its acidity, to bring the
purified liquor back again to its former state : consequently trans-
forming a considerable portion of sugar into glucose.
It would be better to treat the scums separately; extract the juice
left in them, neutralise it, and boil in the scum panto a certain
degree of concentration, say, 30° Beaume. Then to mix the liquor


so clarified and concentrated with syrup, fit for making second
sugar. This course would improve the second sugar, when in
the other case it would give a darker shade to the first.
M. Plicque, French chemist, attached to the Laboratory of
Cultures, of the Museum of Paris, proposes to substitute for the
lime clarifying operation a more simple process, It can be adapted
while the juice is cold, and is calculated to purify and discolour
the liquid in a complete manner.
He calls the lime process an empirical system of clarifying ; pro-
ducing a defecation more in appearance than reality.
As a matter of fact, he is not far from the truth, for should the
juice, clarified, well, by the lime process, be treated by sub-acetate
of lead, the large quantity of foreign matter it still contains would
be apparent.
M. Plicque proposes the use of aluminate of baryte instead of
lime, in order to avoid the formation of brown products, arising
from the reaction of lime and the alkalies on the glucose, at a
certain temperature.; being thereby in a position to dispense
altogether with animal charcoal.
The aluminate of baryte is obtained by heating strongly a
mixture of alumen and carbonate of baryte; the salt so formed
taking ten times its weight of water to dissolve.
As soon as a solution of this salt is poured on cold juice the
defecation is immediately done ; the precipitate being similar to
that obtained in treating juice with subacetate of lead. After being
so operated upon, the juice is filtered through blankets, or filters
and the excess of aluminate, if any be left, is precipitated by the
application of sulphate of alumina; after which the liquor is
evaporated and turned into crystallized sugar.
The residues of defecation, if calcinated, regenerate the alum-
inate of baryte.


Such is the process, simple in its way, and also practicable.
Decanting and Filtering. —Notwithstanding the defecation,
there are always some organic matters left in the juice.
These can be got rid of by leaving the clarified liquor, standing
for about half an hour, in large tanks called subsiders.
From the subsiders the juice is filtered through blankets, or
filters; and comes out clear and ready for the operations which are
to follow.
Evaporating. —The juice, before it be transformed into sugar,
must be submitted to a certain elaboration which brings it down to
a concentration of 25° and 30° Beaume. In that state it is fit for
the granulating apparatus.
The juice can be evaporated in two different ways. Either with
fire in the battery pans, or with steam in the triple-effets.
To understand these different machines well, and the modifications
which have been made in them, a little explanation may be
seasonable.
It is well understood, in our days, that heat helps to darken
sugar, and transform a notable quantity of it into glucose, espe-
cially when the heat is high, and the masse cuite exposed to the
action of the air.
It results, from an experiment made by a well known English-
man, of the name of Fryer, that at a temperature higher than 66°
centigrade(lso° Fahrenheit), sugar is transformed into glucose.
To remove this serious defect, the problem to be solved consisted
in finding an apparatus which could evaporate the juice quickly,
in non-contact with the air, and at a very low temperature. A
capital discovery has been made. It is called the triple-effets.
We will first speak of the battery and concrete processes.
There are two different kinds of battery. One is called the


Labake ; the other the Gruimare battery. Both acting on the
same principle, are composed of four or five cast iron, and copper
pans, heated directly by fire.
The defecation is done in the batttery, where the juice is brought
to a concentration of 25° and 30° Beaume.
When concentrated to 25° or 30° Beaume, the liquor is directed
into an apparatus called Wetzell, which reduces it into crystallized
sugar.
The Wetzell machine was invented in 1839, by the French engin-
eer, Wetzell; sent to the Bourbon island to study the different
processes of manufacturing sugar cane.
This invention consists of three copper pans, half cylindric, to
each of which is attached a set of cylindric revolving steam coils •
the apparatus has, still, the inconvenience of exposing the masse
cuite to the air.
The next improvement on the battery was Fryer’s concretor;
specially adapted for making concrete sugar. It is composed of
cast and wrought iron trays, for evaporating the juice, and a revol-
ving cylinder for concentrating the syrup; but, it also possesses the
disadvantage of evaporating the juice at high temperature, ex-
posed to the air.
The juice when well clarified passes through a gauze vessel and
flows on trays, laid on a slight incline ; being five in number (three
cast and two wrought iron). Each tray is divided into channels,
for the circulation of the juice backward and forward, and heated
on a naked fire, regulated by a damper.
The syrup leaves the lowest and last tray at 30° Beaume, and
enters a small tank, from which h is drawn off through a second
gauge vessel to the cylinder.
The cylinder has a circular opening at each end, the interior
being occupied by a number of spiral blades from one end to


another. A small engine attached to the cylinder keeps it
revolving.
The concretor cylinder is furnished by the heater with an ample
supply of heated air, drawn through the cylinder containing the
syrup by a revolving fan fixed to the lower end of the apparatus.
The damper should not be opened too widely. The crust should
be removed from the under surface of the trays, and the upper
surface washed every evening after work is done. The fan and
cylinder should be maintained at a sufficient speed. A fire as even
as possible should be kept under the trays, and the sugar ought to
be properly cooked when it leaves the last tray. Wfien the con-
cretor is worked in a proper manner, the juice has no occasion to
be returned to the trays by the pump. The cylinder should be
thoroughly cleaned out, and, if possible, a jet of steam should be
blown through it all night. The heater tubes should be brushed
every two or three days. Ashes should be removed from flues and
from under the heater.
Fryer’s concretor, specially adapted for making concrete, can
also be used in making granulated sugar, by working the juice
loosely ; the grain being worked principally in the coolers.
Evaporation in the Vacuum —Tbxple-eifbts. The triple- effets
is a great improvement on the above described apparatus, and is
very much after the vacuum pan 5 it is used for the evaporation of
the juice when leaving the press-filters.
It is composed of three large, vertical cylindric pans, furnished in
the interior with steam coils, heated only by the exhausted steam 5 as
Ho direct supply is needed, a great saving is effected. All three pans
are connected together, each being furnished with an air-pump and
condenser for diminishing the air pressure and regulating the
temperature. The machines are called “ triple-effets” (triple-
effects), because the same steam produces in reality three different


effects. The first pan is heated with the exhausted steam ; the
second by the steam which has passed through the first, and that
arising from the evaporation of the juice; and the third receives
the steam arising from the second; so that, as stated, the same
steam keeps the three pans going. The juice can be seen boiling
in the pan through glasses.
The advantages of such an apparatus consist in a great saving of
fuel and labour; the juice is evaporated in non-contact with the
air, at a very low temperature, not exceeding 148° Fahrenheit;
and, finally, the sugar is not liable to any alteration caused
in other pans, by extra heat, which changes the sugar into
glucose, giving it a dark colour. The apparatus, once well
regulated, can be kept going by a youth, having some experience
of such work.
Concentrating.— The vacuum pan, as described by A. Code,
is formed of a steam boiler surmounted with a dome, into which
is fixed the tube of an air-pump. Three coils, one above another,
each having separate means of steam supply, and the return
of condensed water, allow of the heating of the syrup, so far and
in proportion to its level in the pan*
There are two steam gauges—one to indicate the pressure of the
steam as it comes from the boiler, a second to show the pressure on
the apparatus itself. The first is called the boiler gauge; the
second, the vacuum gauge. Four lunettes cased in bronze allow
the liquor to be seen boiling in the pan. Lastly, a plunger, made
to slip easily into a long narrow barrel, draws from thence, when
pulled out, a sample of the masse cmte.
With this description of the apparatus in use, the operation
itself may be divided into four distinct parts. 1. Concentration
of the syrup. 2. Formation of the crystals. 3. Increasing the
size of the crystals. 4. Formation of the largest possible quantity
of crystals.


Concentration of the Syrup. —After having formed a vacuum
in the apparatus, by means of the air-pump, the tap is opened;
the syrup flowing immediately into the pan, through the agency
of atmospheric pressure.
The flow is generally stopped when the syrup has reached the
level of the second eye-glass. Then the principal steam tap is
opened about one-fourth, and those of the lower coils fully. Great
care must be taken in order to prevent a rupture of the metal by
sudden and unequal expansion. The syrup does not take long to
boil; the temperature at this point depending on the pressure on
its surface. As the operation is carried on in a vacuum, the boiling
point may be lowered from 110° to 60° centigrade (230° to 140°
Fahrenheit).
The reduction of the temperature, owing to this diminution of
pressure, renders the transformation of crystallizable sugar into
glucose less easy, and diminishes the duration of boiling, which
results in a considerable increase of sugar.
In proportion as the syrup gets concentrated, the index of the
vacuum gauge will at first descend and then ascend; and at the
end of about one hour will have reached No. 19 on the dial. The
index on the boiler steam gauge will, after having marked two or
three atmospheres, at this instant mark four atmospheres.
It may be here mentioned that these steam-gauge indications are
of great importance, because they show the concentration of the
syrup. Further, great attention, habit, and experience are needed
in judging of the state of the syrup, by proof; the indications
named will serve as a means of control.
In effect, the vacuum gauge indicates the expansion of the steam
disengaged from the syrup; the other the pressure of steam
from the boiler. If the steam tap is not altered, then, the expan-
sion of steam is due to the degree of concentration of the juice.
If this be very thin, it will absorb more steam ; consequently the
Steam gauge indications will increase.


This being admitted, after nearly an hour’s boiling the principal
steam-tap, which has only been opened one-fourth, should be now
opened to its full extent. The sudden change of temperature will fa-
vour the formation of grain, which commences in about ten minutes,
when the vacuum steam gauge will mark nearly twenty-four, and
the boiler steam gauge, five atmospheres.
Formation of the Grain. —lt is necessary to determine whether
large or small grain is required. In the first case, the grain must
be formed when the index of the vacuum gauge is at 19, and that
of temperature shows four atmospheres, because the higher the
proof syrup is, at the moment when the grain forms, the fewer
the number of crystals. These crystals being few, it will be very
easy, as will shortly be seen, the boiling being conducted slowly,
to obtain large, bright crystals.
In forming the grain, when syrup has been boiled to light
proof for the large, or heavy proof for small crystals, the first
change is made by adding the quantity of syrup necessary, say,
two per cent, of the total quantity. In practice, however, it has
been observed that, in order to obtain good results, it is better to
open the charge tap fully at each charge, leaving it open ten or
fifteen seconds, only allowing an interval of two or three minutes
to elapse between the charges. It is, however, difficult to prescribe
an invariable rule, but the intelligent boiler will vary the operation
according to the quality of the syrup.
For the rest, after each addition of liquid, the same point of
concentration which was reached previously must be waited for,
before a fresh quantity of syrup is added. This should be continued
until the grain commences to show, which occurs in about the fifth
or sixth charge.
The grain will appear in the form of fine powder, liable to be
jflistaken for minute bubbles of scum, but the practised eye cannot be


deceived. There is no fear of crystallization not continuing as
it was, as it will go on spontaneously after further additions of
juice or syrup are carefully made. It is, however, most important
never to wait till the proof becomes too heavy, because such accident
or neglect would be prejudicial to the sugar in modifying its faculty
of crystallization.
Enlargement of the Grain. —When the addition of the juice
has been repeated about twenty times, the grain will have assumed
a size large enough to be seen in the syrup which runs down the
lunettes. Starting from this point, the boiling may be conducted
at lower pressure, and to this end the number of charges may be
reduced, but the quantity of each increased.
The feeding-tap may, without danger, be left open for 25 seconds,
and, having observed the indications of the steam gauges, an
endeavour should be made to keep about 20 of vacuum expansion,
and four atmospheres of the boiler.
Nevertheless, in forming large grains, the vacuum gauge may be
allowed to fall to 18.
The pan will not then require feeding so often, care being taken
that the charges are larger ; the crystals thus securing all the time
requisite for their formation.
To obtain a fine grain, it will, on the contrary, be necessary to add
the juice more frequently, and in smaller quantities ; so as to dis-
turb the crystallization more regularly. The principle, which is
obvious, is founded on the different characters of the two modes of
crystallization.
This apparently simple operation is, however, of great import-
ance to the manufacturer ; as, without wishing to do so, without
even a knowledge of it, the workman may occasion a loss to his em-
ployer of large sums of money.
The manager should be able, occasionally, to observe the movement


of the index of the steam gauge ] which will rise or fall very
slowly, if the operation is well conducted, without ever taking these
sudden starts, which sufficiently denote the boiler’s incapacity.
After two hours of feeding, the juice will, in the usual way,
cover the coils, and the steam may then be admitted to the third
coil. It will now be judicious to feed continuously, should it be so
desired. The operation at this becomes easier; the crystallization
being more vigorous and regular.
Formation of the greatest possible amount of Grain. —After
another hour’s feeding of the boiler, in all three hours, a higher
temperature may be commenced ; the index of the vacuum steam
gauge being allowed to mount from 20° to 25°.
The object of this concentration is to form the largest quantity
of grains possible. It will render the process of crystallization more
active and rapid ; the influence of greater heat giving the
crystals more solidity and dryness. Most boilers, to obtain this
result, shut off one fourth of the supply of water to the air-pump.
The vacuum of the apparatus being thus diminished, the boiling
point of the liquid is raised. After five or six hours the last proof
should be taken, which ought to be strong. The sample taken,
should, if held between the index finger and thumb, fall back
on the latter, very slowly, forming, what the boilers call, the tassel.
This tassel is generally terminated by a thread of very clear
syrup, called the string. Under these conditions, a fine hard sugar
will be produced.
Having made this last trial, it would be well, if it be the object
to obtain a very white sugar, to lower the temperature to 55° cen-
tigrade (131° Fahrenheit), by opening fully the water supply of the
vacuum apparatus, and closing, about one-fifth, the principal steam
supply tap.
These remarks cannot close without protesting, unhesitatingly,
against the deplorable practice which finds favour, in the obtaining of


large grain, by only partially emptying the first boiling, and re-corn-
monoing a second by feeding the crystals already formed, Those
who act thus, must know that a considerable part of the crystallized
sugar is by this means changed into glucose products,
Coolers. —After the sugar is crystallized, the product so obtained
is flown, or carried by rails into large, square, wood or iron coolers;
where it is left cooling for 24 hours, The pernicious practice of
drying the hot sugar should bo condemned ; because the crystal-
lization proceeds in the coolers until the masse cuite becomes quite
cold.
Drying and Packing. —The drying consists in separating the
granular or crystallized sugar from the syrup by means of cent-
rifugal machines,
Some centrifugals are under-driven ; and some over-driven, the
latter being considered the best, their velocity varying from 1,200
to 1,600 revolutions a minute.
The mass is broken up in the coolers, mixed with either water or
liquor, and sent in to the centrifugals. There the grain is separated
from the syrup by centrifugal force, the liquid being forced through a
fine wire-gauze which covers the inside of the basket, and the grains,
not finding any means of escape, stick on the gauze. A jet of steam
or half a pint of water is sometimes used to brighten the sugar, by
washing out the syrup which adheres to the crystals.
The syrup arising from the first sugar is boiled over again into
second, third, and fourth sugar. Machines, called iarhoteurs, are
employed to clarify the syrups which act on the same principle as
clarifiers. The syrup is treated by superphosphate which gives to the
second jet sugar, nearly as good a colour as the first.
There are a great variety of centrifugals, and notwithstanding the
extensive improvements recently manifested in their construction,
there is plenty of room for more,


In passing, Hepworth’s Patent Suspended Centrifugals, manu-
factured by Messrs. Manlove, Alliott, Fryer and Co., may be
recommended, and are, indeed, extensively used.
These machines are self-balancing and self-controlling, requiring
little or no skill on the part of the operator. Their erection does
not involve an expensive foundation, and may be worked from
1200 to IGOO revolutions per minute, without causing any noticeable
vibration.
The sugar, when purged by these centrifugals, is discharged
through bottom openings, arranged in a very convenient and
ingenious manner.
The break, which is horizontal, does not press upon the spindle,
and acts with great celerity. Running at a velocity of about 1200
revolutions per minute, they will each purge from three to five boxes
(425 lbs. per box) of sugar per hour, or, working on refined sugar,
with expert operators, will purge from ten to fifteen barrels (200 lbs.
per barrel) of A sugar per hour.
With these machines it is impossible for accidents to happen,
through the revolving baskets striking the inside casing, both the
baskets and casings being suspended from the same centre, and the
lower end of the spindle carried in a bearing on the casing.
The same firm make also superior under-driven centrifugals with
bottom discharge, and several types of machine driven by engine
working direct on to the spindle. The baskets are lined with
Lieberman’s patent gauze, which, when in place, leaves no point to
catch the scraper. This in itself is a material consideration, and
saves great expense in repairs.
The usual way of loading centrifugals is by hand, but the over-
head railway system is the most economic and expeditious. Un-
loading the centrifugal through the bottom by means of a moveable
bottom effects a great saving.


tTS CULTURE AND MANUFACTURE. B 5
Molasses.— lts density or specific gravity varies from 35° to 40°
Beaume. It contains 45 per cent, of sugar, 22 per cent, of glucose,
and 33 per cent, of water and salt.
100 parts of molasses will produce by fermentation 48 parts of
alcohol at 93°.—50 gallons of molasses will give from 15 to 25
gallons of rum.
In the manufacture of rum, the molasses must be reduced by the
addition of water, until the liquid stands at 10° Beaume. The
whole is then left to ferment from three to ten days, after which it
is distilled through ordinary alembics. The different shades are given
by caramel (burnt sugar). Rum is generally sold at 19°, which cor-
responds with 50° of Guy Lussac’s alcohometer.
When coming out of the centrifugals, the sugar is fit for market,
and, after a few hours’ exposure to the air, is packed in bags or
mats.
Ihe shade of colonial sugar varies greatly, and prices are regu-
lated according to quality.
Until recently sugar was judged according to its shade, but the
method has been found to be uncertain, and subject to serious
mistakes.
To ascertain the real value of any sugar—that is, what such sugar
would give when once refined—it is necessary to analyse it.
Crystallized sugar is tested with instruments, called saccharometers
and polariscopes. The presence of glucose is detected by the
application of a blue liquor termed fehlilig, which contains tartrate
of potash.
The ashes are discovered by calcinating 65 grs. of sugar in 20
drops of sulphuric acid; and, the humidity is found by drying 66
gra. in a atove*


Humidity . .
... 1-
Orystallizable sugar
... 96-
Uncry stallizable sugar (glucose) ...
... 1-50
Ashes
... 0-70
Foreign matters ...
... 0-80
EXAMPLE —ANALYSIS OF SUGAR.
In ascertaining the quantity of refined, that an unrefined sugar
would give, twice the weight of glucose, and five times that of ashes,
should be deducted from the weight representing the crystallized
sugar. The balance should be the weight of the refined sugar
only.
Sugar is used in medicine, pharmacy, and domestic economy. It
is considered to be a respiratory aliment, and, as such, its use cannot
have a deleterious effect on the system. It is reported of George
Washington that he was accustomed to consume two pounds of
sugar daily.
The countries using the greatest amount of sugar are—America,
Great Britain, and France.


i CELLED




Organic
( Water (H.O.)
71-00
elements
J Sugar (H.O.C.)
18-00
99-45
( Megass and azoted matters
10.45
PAH CELLE
APPENDIX.
VEGETABLE LIFE AND MANURES.
(Published in the “ Sugar Planter ” by A. A. Giraud.)
Three conditions are necessary to vegetable life, and the regulation at
the same time of its products. Ist. The heat and light combined, help
to form the climate. 2nd. The mechanical way of preparing the soil,
facilitates the absorption of water, and the growth of the roots.
3rd. The fertilising agents which the soil is supposed to contain,
supplemented, when necessary, by different forms of manure.
Plants are composed of fourteen elements, which may be divided
into two classes. Ist. The organic elements ; resulting from the
combination of four gases, hydrogen, oxygen, carbon, and azote,
which constitute the sugar, fecul, oil, &c. These four gases are
called atmospheric, because the plant has the property of ab-
sorbing them from the atmosphere to form its tissue. 2nd. The
mineral elements, ten in number, are divided into indispensable
elements, such as potash, phosphoric acid, iron, lime ; and secondary
elements such as magnesia, silicum, manganese, soda, chlorine, and
sulphuric acid. When a plant or a tree is burning it is the organic
elements that burn away; the mineral remaining in the ashes.
The plant is almost formed of organic elements; their proportion
often exceeds 99 per cent. Take as an instance the composition
of the sugar cane:—
Mineral i Potash, soda, lime, manganese, iron,
elements < magnesia, silicum, sulphuric and
0 - 55 ( phosphoric acid ... 0 - 55
100-00


From the small portion of organic elements contained in plants
it would not be reasonable to conclude that they are not essential to
its growth ; contrarily, the plants could neither grow nor develope
without them The gases, hydrogen and oxygen, are „ also absorbed
by the vegetables or plants in the form of water. The carbon
originates from the carbonic acid, naturally existing in the
atmosphere. Under the influence of the sunlight the leaves of
plants decompose the carbonic acid, which is a combination of
carbon and oxygen (0,0. 2), solidifying the carbon and setting
free the oxygen. At night, on the contrary, the plants exhale the
carbon. Hydrogen, carbon, and oxygen, can be absorbed by
plants from the atmosphere as well as from the soil. When taken
from the soil they are absorbed from the mould or humus, which
results in a long and slow decomposition of plants and leaves. The
mould contains carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen (0. 12, H. 9, 0. 9.),
and is absorbed by the roots to form the sugar, fecules, &c. The
azote is rarely taken from the atmosphere, being generally absorbed
by the plants under the form of ammoniacal salts or saltpetre.
The thunder rains, the nitrate and decomposition of organic matters
furnish the soil with azote. In regard to the mineral elements, they
are always found in the soil in greater or smaller proportion. The
arable soil, that is to say a soil proper to the culture and development
of plants, is the result of a slow decomposition of stones and accumu-
lation of plant remains. As long as the soil is not worked by man
all plants grow luxuriously and so far from exhausting it, these same
plants, growing to their own fancy, ameliorate the soil; but as soon
as man, unacquainted with the laws of agriculture, starts to cultivate
that same soil without returning to it in the shape of manures what the
crop takes from it, the soil gets poor, and after some time becomes
exhausted. The elements taken from the soil soonest are potash,
soda, lime, phosphates, and mould. It has been estimated that
the Mauritius soil lost, from the year 1820 to 1867, 46,000,000


ft of potash, and 4,000,000 ft of phosphates. Besides the chemical
elements which constitute the soil, there are also its physical com-
ponents, being either favourable or unfavourable to plants. An
arable soil must contain sand, clay, and lime in certain proportions.
The superabundance or absence of these substances modifies con-
siderably the fertility of a soil by rendering it more or less permeable
to air and dampness. The best arable soils are those containing the
following materials in the proportion of ;
Sand ... ... ... ... .. ... ... 32
Clay 32
Lime ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 32
Organic matters (mould &c.) ... ... ... .. 4
Total 100
This simple explanation of vegetable life will enable the reader to
understand more easily the use of manures. What is the meaning of
the word manure 1 A manure is some mineral, vegetable or animal
substances, destined to render to the soil the mineral and organic
elements taken from it by each crop. The composition of manures
vary greatly. They are, however, constituted of definite principles
from which the planter should not deviate. In general to make a
manure for a plant, it should be necessary to know what quantity or
proportion of organic and inorganic elements that plant takes from
the soil. Taking as an instance one acre of standing cane; it
might be decomposed as follows :
Canes to be crushed ... ... ... 80'000ft
Heads which could be used as plants 11 "000 ft >
Green leaves 30'000 ft) in minimum.
Dead flan ... ... ... ... 12’000 ft 1
Roots left in the ground ... • ... 15 - 000 ft '
Roots left in the ground
Total ... ... .. .. 148’000 ft
The following is an analysis of cane
Yille, of Paris
ashes made by Professor George


Carbonic acid .... 0"5811
Sulphuric acid .. ... ... 15'790 1
Phosphoric acid ... ... ... 6'666 )
Chlorine ... ... ... ... 1 ‘534
Potash ... 9-653
Soda 9-000 1 for 100 parts of ashes.
Lime ... ... ... ... 6"444
Magnesia 7’774
Oxide of iron ... ... ... 0"550
Silicum (soluble ... . . ... 18"888
Silicum (insoluble) 23’120
In remembering that 100 parts of cane gave 0-50 of ashes, the
80,0001 b. would consequently give 400 lb. of mineral matters repre-
sented by ashes. Otherwise in consulting the analysis of ashes above
mentioned and keeping account in our calculations of the azote,
potash, phosphoric acid and lime, which may be called the active
elements, we will arrive at the following result. Elements taken
from the soil by 80,000 lb. of cane fit to be crushed, viz. :
n ■ (Carbon... ... ... ... ... 9 "512 lb.
Organic matters Azote
124
Potash 96 ~
Mineral matters and ashes < Phosphoric acid ... ... 26 ~
Lime ... 27 ~
From these it can be concluded that a crop of 80,000 lb. of cane takes
from the ground ; Ist, 149 lb. of mineral matters ; 2nd, 9,636 lb. of
organic matters, taken either from the soil or from the atmosphere.
From which it is evident that the same amount of mineral as well
as organic matters taken by the crop should be returned to the soil.
The means of making manures in Australia are very numerous. In a
few words, the different substances may be mentioned which
could be turned into manures. Ist. The potash and alkaline
salts could be supplied by the megass, wood ashes, molasses, and
residue of the distillery. The humus could be supplied by any
vegetable remains in decomposition, the lime by the corals and
madrepores of the seashore, the phosphoric acid by the sheep or
ox bones; the azote, only, perhaps would have to be imported
under the name of saltpetre or ammoniacal salts. The plan now


recommended for the study and preparation of manures, is
grounded on the disposition of the soil. The cane is generally
cultivated in many regions of low, high, or middling land. Tor
instance, common dung, which is a very good manure, should not
be used except for low lands, because a large quantity of it is
required for each plant, and the expense of carting it to high
grounds would be unreasonable. For that reason the manure may
be divided into three classes :—lst. Manures for low land and first
crop cane, dung only. 2nd. Manures for high land, guano and
superphosphates. 3rd. Manures for middling land, dried night-soil.
The dung is made of solid and liquid excrements of animals, and
all sorts of organic matter, such as blood, dead plants and leases,
&c. The dung is generally prepared on platforms ; water close by
the platform being indispensable for watering the heaps j a well would
answer the purpose. The platform should have a certain inclination
—about 5 per cent., so as to allow the carts and horses to reach the
top for the loading and unloading. The general plan for a dung
platform should be 90 feet by 54 feet, with a liquid gutter, 6 feet
broad dividing the floor into two distinct surface heaps, 22g feet by
90 feet, The bed of the two surface heaps should be level, with
outside gutters leading into the main gutter, conveying the liquid
manure to the pit or underground cemented brick tank, which
should be 30 feet broad by 4.y feet deep at the sides, and 6 feet in
the middle, The dung platform might be made of stones, with
small wall to form the two surface heaps. In construction the
liquid manure pit would have to be cemented. A pump must be
erected in the middle of the pit to water the heaps every morning j
with the liquid filtering through the heaps.
A chalf-cutting machine would almost be necessary to cut the
Vegetable remains and mix them with scums, or whatever fer-
tilising matters could be found. This being done, the mixture is
placed in heaps, and watered constantly for a few days. The


Water
68-00
Organic matters
15'68
Alkaline soluble salts ...
0-64
Lime and magnesia salts ...
2-78
Phosphates
1-62
Silica
11-28
Total
... 100-00
heaps should not be higher than 6 feet, and watered some time
with the liquid manure. To prevent the evaporation of azote
under the form of ammonia, it would be advisable to add some
sulphate of lime (plaster), say, 1 lb. per cubic feet of dung, laid
in superimposed beds. Some sulphate should also be put in the
pit from time to time under the form of sulphate of ammonia.
When dead animals are buried in the heaps, it is necessary to
sprinkle them with lime to prevent putrid exhalations. Gene-
rally the dung is available for use after a few months. It would
not be advisable to let it get quite black, because the dung then
loses half its soluble principles and three-quarters of its azote 1
Dung is ready for use when the fermentation gives to the vegetables
a brown colour. The heaps should be covered in the day time with
thrash.
COMPOSITION OP MAURITIUS DUNG,
Azote, I*3o per cent. Quantity necessary per plant, 15 to 16 lbs.
Stable manure and all decomposing animal and vegetable substances
have a tendency to promote the decay of stubborn organic remains
in the soil, on the principle that putrescent substances hasten the
process of putrefaction in other bodies with which they come in
contact.
Manures for middling lanes. The name “ composts ”is
given to a mixture of mineral and organic matter of all sorts,
containing in a smaller volume the elements existing in the dung,
or farm-yard manure. Composition : Everything can be


utilised in the making of compost : the rotten wood, saw-dust,
grass, thrash, green leaves of cane, scums, residue of all sorts,
ashes, animal remains, blood, old paper, cloth, hairs, feathers,
dirty water, soap water, excrements, &c. In a practical point
of view, the compost should be divided into three classes,
i.e. :
Compost prepared from animal remains, blood, &c. ; and, 3rd.
Special compost used in certain localities. First—compost made
of human dejection. Human dejections contain substances very
precious to agriculture, which all civilized nations have known
how to use. It can be said that they are the ashes of digestion ;
containing all the elements necessary to the nutrition of plants,
such as azote, phosphates, and alkaline salts. It will be easy to
understand the importance of these matters after the following
calculations, applicable to any country. According to M. Barral,
a French chemist, homo sapiens reject on an average every 24
hours a Jib. solid and 21b. of liquid matter, represented by 11
grains of azote in the liquid and J grain in the solid matter; or,
supposing 8001 b. of mixed excrements per man per year, a township
containing 40,000 inhabitants would produce yearly, 32,000,000
lbs. of excrements, which quantity would be sufficient to manure
about 7,000 acres of ground. It is astonishing that Australian
farmers do not utilise this fertilising substance, known in Europe
under the name of “ liquid gold.” Dried night-soil is the result of
the preparation of excrements, solid and liquid, by processes which
disinfect and solidify them with a view to their appropriation to
agriculture. Preparation :—The disinfection is operated upon by
sulphate of iron, plaster, or charcoal, about 40 or 45 lb. per cubic
foot of excrement. The charcoal can condense about 90 per cent,
of its weight of ammonia, and for that reason is most suitable for
the purpose. The solidification is done with thrash, vegetable
remains, and calcined ground. The excrement so treated is put


in heaps and mixed with ashes, sulphate of lime, and black bone
dust, which help to enrich the product. During the fermentation
the heaps must be frequently watered with urine, which penetrates
the mass and promotes the decomposition of all parts of the heap.
After a few months, the dried night-soil is in a condition suitable
for manure. Composition of the dried night-soil as manufactured
at Port Louis, Mauritius:—
Humidity 17'00
Organic matter azoted... ... ... ... 16'10
Alkaline soluble salts ... ... ... ... I - 69
Phosphate of lime ) ~
Alumina and oxide of iron ( ’" " ’
Salt of lime and magnesia ... ... ... 316
Silicious residue and loss 50’59
100-00
Azote, 1 '75 per cent. ; dose, about If or 2 tons per acre ; cost of manu-
facture, about £1 per ton.
Compost prepared of animal remains : —The animal remains here
alluded to, are blood, flesh, hair, &c. Blood :—Each bullock is
supposed to give from 30 to 40 lbs. of blood, which, if saved instead
of being thrown away, as is generally done at the slaughtering yard,
could be treated with lime, dried, and crushed, and would be fit
for use. Or, it could be mixed as follows, and would form an
excellent compost;—
Blood 200 lb
Urine 100 lb
Dried night-soil ... 500 ft
Plaster or lime ... ... ... ~ 50 lb
Molasses ... 50 lb
Mould 100 lb
100 lb
1,000 ft
100 lb of blood contains—water, 80 lb; animal matter (fibrinealbumen)
19; and of oily and salty matter 1 ; total 1001 b, Azote 2-9 per
cent, when fresh, and 16-0 per cent, when dried. The dried blood
should never be used by itself; it should be mixed with 50 per cent,
of soil so as not to burn the plants. Caution.—Damaged fish


should never be used as a manure for sugar canes, as it contain
too much salt. 100 ft), of damaged salt fish contain 15 lb. of salt,
or 336 lb. of salt per ton of fish; and as it is known that one
part of salt prevents 6 parts of sugar crystallizing, consequently,
1 ton (2240 lb) of manure made of salt fish would prevent 2016 lb. of
sugar from crystallizing. Special composts used in certain localities.—
The composts alluded to are made only of scums, molasses, ashes,
megass, and horse and cattle dung, and are prepared in the same way
as the farm yard manure previously explained.
Manures for high land (guano). The guano is used in the
Mauritius at the rate of 6oz- per plant. The guano should always
be used with other manures, or six or seven times its weight of
ashes, should be well crushed, reduced into powder, and put in the
ground in damp weather. The use of composts are recommended
in preference to guano which sometimes does more harm than good
to the cane.






