

ONE PENNY.
Patriotic Pamphlets.
No. 29.
THE ENEMY
WITHIN
OUR GATES
- I
the
Rev. T. E. RUTH,
Melbourne Auditorium Address, Sunday Evening,
March 31, 1918.
Published by Critchley Parker.
Obtainable at
M. L. HUTCHINSON,
305 LITTLE COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE. .


THE ENEMY
WITHIN OUR GATES.
Last month I read in a Sydney Roman Catholic paper,
•curiously called “The Freeman’s Journal,” an interesting
editorial, entitled “The Enemy Within the Gates.” The
enemy was Freemasonry. The writer saw “Masonic
Leads bobbing up in every portion of the Labour Move-
ment,” found “trade unions in which the whole of the
executive officials wore the square and compasses and
■exchanged the ‘grip/ ” and complained that “the Catholic
Church has reason to recognise in Masonry its inveterate
enemy,” and appealed to all well-wishers of the Labour
Movement “to actively organise and combat this menace
of Freemasonry.” And the article closes with: “It would
not be too much to suggest that the Labour Party
should insert in Rule No. 2 of its Constitution, among
disqualifications from entry into the movement, member-
ship of the Masonic Society.”
Now the principles of Freemasonry are quite openly
published and expounded in the various Encyclopaedias,
and I am informed that not only is there nothing in
Freemasonry incompatible with civil, moral and religious
duties, but that there is every incentive to practise every
moral and social virtue and to deal with every man
on the common level in the presence of the great Archi-
tect of the Universe.
But Roman Catholics conceive Freemasonry to be
the enemy of Roman Catholic control of the Labour


Movement. In that sense, I hope they are right. The
enemies of Roman Catholic control are the friends of all
free men.
My “ universe of discourse,” as we say in logic, is
much more catholic than that of the Roman Catholic
Freeman’s Journal. I am not concerned with the
enemies within sectarian gates. The more enemies sec-
tarianism has the better for the race. Men are sick
and tired of sectarianism, Roman and Protestant.
Spiritually denominationalism is dead, and there ought to
be enough real religion in the world to embalm or cre-
mate or bury it, or “all three, to make sure” that it will
never rise again to curse Christianity and civilisation.
I am concerned with the enemy within the gates of our
common life, the enemy of the Labour Movement, the
enemy of the Commonwealth, the enemy not only of
the British nation but of every other nation.
At that singularly spontaneous meeting at the Town
Hall last Thursday week, when, in the middle of a busi-
ness morning, a representative deputation became an
enormous demonstration, the Lord Mayor read a com-
munication from representatives of the Sailors’ and Sol-
diers’ Fathers’ Association, saying, on behalf of their
boys who were fighting the enemy outside our gates,
that the fathers were ready to fight the enemy within
our gates. / <
Now. who is the enemy within our gates —the enemy
of the cause for which are boys are fighting? Do not
ask the Freemasons. Do not ask the Sailors’ and Sol-
diers' Fathers’ Association. Do not ask the Orange
Lodge nor the Protestant Federation. Do not ask what
the Roman Catholic “Tribune” calls “men of the Leeper-
Cabena-Palmer type.” Do not ask “the two recruits to
the sectarian brotherhood, in the persons of Benjamin
Hoare and Herbert Brookes”—to quote again from the
“Tribune.”' Do not ask any of these “sectarian mongers,”
these “busybodies and bigots,” described by the “Advo-
cate” as having a “ ‘Mannix maggot’ on the brain.”


Let us ask men who are accustomed to sift evidence.
Let us ask our judges, our Australian judges, and so
that there shall be no Protestant prejudice, no “sec-
tarian” bias, let them be members of the Roman Catholic
Church.
Here is Mr. Justice Heydon—it is true that his father,
poor man, was not an Irishman, but an Englishman—
but he himself is an Australian, a Roman Catholic
churchman, and senior judge of the Industrial Court of
New South Wales. He sums up the teaching of Dr.
Mannix thus: —
“The final issue of such teaching is that a man
may put himself before his country, and such a
man we call a traitor,”
And Mr. Justice Duffy, another Roman Catholic judge,
says Dr. Mannix
“cannot complain if his fellow citizens regard him
as an enemy within the gates.”
And this has been said by so many other Roman Catho-
lic citizens of the British Empire, that Dr, Mannix com-
plained, in Sydney, that
they had to look long and search almost in vain
for a Catholic man of standing who had got Univer-
sity education and who had come to the front in
politics or public life who had not denied the faith
in which he was brought up and the country to
h
which he or his father belonged.
The moral of such an admission, of course, is that the
Church should offer a more intelligent creed and a
more ethical code of conduct. Then perhaps the Church
could retain Catholic men of standing and education.
But whatever be the explanation of that curious com-
plaint, the fact remains that by one Roman Catholic


judge, Dr. Mannix is publicly proclaimed a “traitor/''
and by another Roman Catholic judge “ an enemy within
the gates,” and though we have a War Precautions Act,
and proceedings are taken against grocers’ assistants
and others for mere incidental gossip, this ecclesiastic,
declared by judges belonging to his own communion, to
be a traitor and an enemy, has not only been allowed
to organise an alien army within our gates, but has
actually been granted Government and civic facilities,
and he has been able to describe —and the description
has been accurate —the protests of loyal leagues and
the platform rhetorics of professional politicians as so
much “ hot wind.” If there had been no distinction
from the beginning between a grocer’s assistant and an
archbishop, if there had been ordinary public equity,
if our politicians had not been so weak-kneed, the evil,
the proportions of w T hich we probably have not measured,
had not been.
We have to face the facts as they are. Speaking at
the Town Hall on the eve of the disloyal procession of
St. Patrick’s Day, Dr. Mannix said;—
“ I hope the Apostolic Delegate, when sending a
message to the Holy Father, will tell him that there
is no part of the Christian world where he can look
for more loyal support than Australia, and there is
no part of Australia where he can lean with greater
confidence than on Melbourne.”


Now, that is not a Mannixism —it is true. There is
no part of the world, not excepting Austria, with which,
for certain purposes, Australia has been bracketted, not
excepting Ireland, with which Dr. Mannix has succeeded
in associating Australia, there is no part of the world
where in so short a time the temporal power of the
Papacy has so established itself as in the Commonwealth,
and no city on which this utterly alien power may more
confidently lean than on Melbourne.
I do not wonder that Dr. Cattaneo, the Papal Delegate,
expresses his delighted surprise at the sort of demon-
stration that obtains, the civic and political concessions
that the Church can command in the Commonwealth.
To a man coming from Italy, where the Papacy is known,
where it has freedom to exercise its spiritual ministry,
but where it has no opportunity to pursue its politi-
cal machinations, it must seem that Australia offers a
sort of Papal Paradise, and certainly Dr. Cattaneo can
assure his holiness that in Australia the Pope takes pre-
cedence of the King, that though representative and
learned members of the Roman Catholic Church cer-
tainly call Australia’s greatest archbishop and the Pope’s
ablest apostle, a traitor and an enemy within the gates,
and though Australia’s most prominent politicians pro-
claim him from every political platform, a rebel, the fact
remains that he is the idol of democracy and the dictator
of the public policy of the State and the Commonwealth.
Dr. Cattaneo, having come from a country where com-
paratively the temporal power does not exist —for, poli-
tically speaking, Italy is Protestant compared with Aus-
tralia —Dr. Cattaneo may perhaps wonder what will
happen when Australia wakes up, when the democracy
wakes up to the fact that its idol, its accepted demagogue,
who can commandeer the State-car on the railway, hold
up the traffic in the streets, control the educational policy
of the State, and dictate the attitude of the Common-
wealth to the Empire, I say Dr. Cattaneo may wonder
what will happen when the men of this free land wake
up to the fact that they have been led by
7


A CONSCRIPT CHURCHMAN, with
A CONSCRIPT CREED,
A CONSCRIPT CONFESSIONAL,
A CONSCRIPT COMMUNION, and
A CONSCRIPT PURGATORY;
when they wake up to the fact that their homes,
their libraries, their social and political institu-
tions have become mere adjuncts of Papal dominion;
when their marriage, apart from the priest, is declared
null and void, when their most illuminating literature
is put upon the index, and their Government is merely
an agency of temporal power—but at the moment Dr.
Cattaneo can pass on the message of Dr. Mannix to
the Pope, and vouch for its truth—
There is no part of the Christian world where he
can look for more loyal support than Australia, and
there is no part of Australia where he can lean
with greater confidence than on Melbourne.
And that will remain true, until Australia wakes up, and
the men of Melbourne prove themselves made of better
stuff than our professional politicians.
The procession on St. Patrick’s Day contained nothing
that was new —it only exhibited a disloyalty to the Em-
pire of which every intelligent person has been aware
for years. Now, let it be understood that there is no
objection on the part of anybody to Irishmen honouring
St. Patrick. There is not the slightest objection to the
wearing of the; green—it is quite a pretty and appro-
priate colour, and generally not necessary for purposes
of identification. I wish Irish and Scottish, Welsh and
English would unite to honour St. Patrick and St. An-
drew, St. David and St. George, in a sort of All Saints’
Day, just as I wish Roman Catholics and Protes-
tants would unite in the name of the common Christ to
fight the foes of our common faith, and let brotherly
love take the place of sectarian strife—but however much
one pleads for these things, and however earnestly, noth-
-8


ing comes of it. One is like a broody hen sitting on
a china egg.
The Roman Catholic-Church is the most uncatholic
and the most sectarian Church in the world, and the
procession on St. Patrick’s Day is not a national but a
bitterly sectarian display at all times, but this year
emboldened by their enormously increasing political
power, the Roman Catholics paraded their intense hatred
of England and their disloyalty to the Empire, and
thought to ride roughshod over the sentiments of men
who hold the late Archbishop Carr’s conviction of the
crime of the Dublin Rebellion. He said:—
“When the secret history of this movement
comes to be written, it will be found to be the
result of German intrigue, of support from some
Irish Americans, of hostility to the Irish Nationalist
Parliamentary Party, and of the role assumed by
a small knot of desperate irreconcilables.”
And now, in order to fan the flames of racial hatred,
and to incense the loyalists of this city, men described
by Dr. Carr as “a small knot of desperate irreconcilables”
—men guilty in Dr. Carr’s words of “criminal insanity”
—have been elevated by his successor to the rank of
martyrs, and banners to their memory have been borne
through our streets. Little wonder Mr. Benjamin Hoare
accuses his Archbishop of “undiluted treason.”
An official pamphlet, published in Dublin, and entitled
“The Sinn Fein Policy,” says:—
The Irishman who joins the British army, the
British) navy, or the Royal Irish constabulary be-
comes from that moment the active enemy of his
country. He has taken up arms against Ireland. . .
In Ireland we cannot reduce England to impotence


by cessation of labour, but we can seriously reduce
her strength by strikes of another kind—strikes
against using her goods and against filling the ranks
of her armed forces. In the latter direction the
anti-enlistment movement has done good, but a great
deal remains to be done.
That is the policy Dr. Mannix publicly blesses. “Let
Ireland bide her time,” he says; “let Ireland watch her
opportunity, and take it.” Now, if Ireland has a griev-
ance, it is the kind of grievance Irish Catholics have
in Australia, the grievance of being politically pam-
pered and indulged until they havc*waxed fat and kicked.
Ireland is the spoilt child of the British Empire, always
crying for something she has not got, and complaining
bitterly when she gets it. Dr. Mannix is a typical Irish-
man with a grievance. He is for all the world like a
man, very late at night, arguing violently with a cab-
man who isn’t there. Roman Catholics in this country
have political powers and privileges absolutely denied
other religious bodies, and Irishmen in Ireland have
political powers and privileges absolutely denied Scot-
tish, Welsh and English.
Ireland is so overrepresented in the House of Com-
mons that an Irish member representing a remote fishing
village of fifteen hundred voters can neutralise the vote
of a Scottish, Welsh or English M.P., representing 40
or 50 thousand. As a matter of fact, the British Govern-


ment has paid the piper for every tune called by the
priest and peasant. From the burdens fastened by Im-
perial necessity on the shoulders of Scottish, Welsh
and English citizens, the Irish have claimed exemption.
The Home Rule Act of 1914, providing for the estab-
lishment of a Parliament in Dublin, provided that Ire-
land should be exempt from Imperial taxation. England,.
Scotland and Wales were to keep up the Army and
the Navy, and, in addition, make an annual gift of
about seven pounds to Ireland, Awhile forty
Irish members were to be retained in the House of
Commons. But, even so, Ireland would not agree. And
now, if they can agree among themselves as to anything
they want, England has promised they shall have it—
that is the purpose of the Irish Convention.
There has been no end to English generosity. The
Wyndham Land Purchase Act provided that the English
taxpayer should enable Irish tenants to buy their farms
from their landlords. The tenant stated the sum he
could afford to pay, the landlord the sum he was pre-
pared to accept —the British Government bridged the
gulf to the tune of over a hundred million pounds.
Why, for many years Maynooth College received from
the Imperial Parliament the sum of £26,360 per annum,
and when that yearly grant was withdrawn, the sum
of £372,331 was paid to the priests as a sort of solatium.
And Dr. Mannix claims that British-endowed college as
his Alma Mater. In his bitter anti-British campaign
in this British country, he forgets his indebtedness to
Great Britain for his daily bread and his very ecclesias-
tical position.
But I am not accusing Dr. Mannix of inconsistency.
He is playing the Papal game. What Dr. Carr con-
demned as “an outburst of madness, an anachronism,
and a crime,” Dr. Mannix glorifies as martyrdom. The
policy of Roger Casement is the policy of Dr. Mannix..
The policy of Dr. Mannix is the policy of the Papacy,
England is the enemy. Five years before the war Dr..
Robertson, of Venice, wrote; —


“The Vatican looks to the Government of Austria,
its bond-servant, to' restore the Temporal Power,
but England blocks the way. The Pope and the
Church must find a power that will dare to make
war upon England. The Pope and the Church have
found such a power in Germany, and in the person
of the Kaiser the very man to inspire and lead the
nation in this enterprise.”
And in the “National Review” Mr. Joseph McCabe,
writing on the True Inwardness of the Vatican Policy,
warns the British public not to add to its lamentable
series of disillusions by neglecting to see the perfect
identity of interest of the Vatican and the Central
Powers. Mr. McCabe says:—
“Pacifists who acclaim the Pope’s messages as
beautiful utterances know as little about the Vati-
can as they do about Berlin. The Pope’s policy
is inevitably and conscientiously, Boloism.”
Dr.' Mannix does not want peace between Ireland
and England. Sinn Feinism suits the Papal policy better.
And last Thursday Sinn Fein was declared an illegal
association in the Commowealth.
Now what will happen? Will this declaration prove
of a piece with the platform denunciations in which our
politicians have indulged? Will it apply to grocers’
assistants, but not to ecclesiastical dignitaries? Will
•our weak-kneed politicians surrender, as usual, to the


behests of Rome? For even our Protestant politicians,,
with very few exceptions, have got into the habit of
falling in line with the Papal policy. There are very
few Protestant members of Parliament who are prepared
to run the risk of coming into collision with the Roman
Catholic vote. So they let the Papal sword flash over
the Commonwealth and State Governments. They let
the Papal party run some of the departments of civil
service in some of which “No Protestants need apply ”
—Holy Mother Church must be considered. They per-
mit Roman Catholics to parade the public streets in
their sectarian regalia, and prevent the same privilege
being granted to the Loyal Orange Institution. They
allow the Papal party to prohibit the importation in
Australia of certain non-Catholic books, which are circu-
lated in all other countries, and of an Italian Protestant
paper which is circulated in all other countries save
Austria. They allow Australian marriage laws to be
declared null' and void and the children born in legal
■wedlock to be declared illegitimate by the Church. That
Archbishop Kelly, in his latest Lenten Pastoral, should
declare of the non-catholic mother that—
In a religious sense, her breasts are without milk.
and her bosom without warmth.
is bad enough, but for politicians to permit any Church
to declare legally married people to be living in adultery
is unpardonable.
The Prime Minister will presently be going from this
greatest country in the world to teach England the
art of government. He is eminently qualified for the
platform task—but the discrepancy between platform
heroics and practical politics was well illustrated by an
old lady in Sydney Town Hall, when he, as Australia’s
leading statesman, described a certain person as a rebel,
she shook her umbrella and cried: “Then why don’t
you put him in prison?”
There is one prayer Australia ought to offer con-
stantly :


God give us men.
A time like this demands
High minds, great hearts, true faith and ready hands;
Men whom the lust of office does not fill,
Men whom the spoils of office cannot buy,
Men who possess opinions and a will,
Men who have honour, men who will not lie.
Over the public life of the Commonwealth it has been
written for the people to read, “Put not your trust in
pqliticians.” And this crisis in the affairs of the Empire
and chaos in the, politics of the Commonwealth affords
precisely the opportunity for the Papal party. And they
are taking it. If we had strong men they would meet
the Sinn Fein policy with the logic of its own demands,
“Ourselves alone!” with “Very well, get alone.” British
Parliamentary positions should not be open to anti-
Britishers. British public service is for British public ser-
vants. We want union, comprehension, brotherhood,
common struggle. If th£y want Sinn Feinism, let them
pay its proper price, and clear out of British employment,
public and private.
And why am I speaking in this fashion on a Sunday
■evening, on Easter Sunday evening? Not merely be-
cause the disloyal banners made martyrs of the rebels of
Easter week, but because I am profoundly convinced that
we are called to fight again for the “Crown Rights of
the Redeemer,” because He Who is risen from the dead
is concerned with all our life, because we are called


Uy the supreme realities of our faith in the Fatherhood
of God, the Brotherhood of Man, and the Saviourhood
and Sovereignty of Christ to come to close grips with the
■evil that is fastening on the life of the Commonwealth.
Our politicians have failed us. And I am sure there
is no hope in a merely militant and political Protes-
tantism. I have seen too many men who have put their
hands to the plough and looked back—and left the work
of the Kingdom. There is no hope but in real religion.
Now, your Protestant Churches are being tested. Now
we shall see how much of real religion they have, and
how much of sectarianism. Real religion is regal and
whole. Sectarianism is suicide. Selfishness always is.
It would be part of the mission of a positive and united
Protestantism to “strengthen the feeble knees.” Austra-
lian papacy has been biding its time, watching its oppor-
tunity, and is now taking it. Protestant divisions are
giving it its chance. Once again, Protestantism is be-
ing tested.
And every man of us is being tested —the reality of
our faith in God, in the Cross of Christ, in His govern-
ment and reign, and in spiritual churchmanship. Every
man is being tried now.
Once to every man and nation
Comes the moment to decide,
In the strife of truth with falsehood,
For the good or evil side;
Some great cause, God’s new Messiah,
Offering each the bloom or blight,
Parts the goats upon the left hand,
And the sheep upon the right—
And the choice goes by for ever
’Twixt that darkness and that light.
Have ye chosen, O my people?
Wholly Set up and Printed in Australia by
Varleys Pty. Ltd., Prince’s Bridge, Melbourne.


The series of SEVENTEEN ADDRESSES
delivered by the REV. T. E. RUTH at the
Auditorium, Melbourne, are now available
in one volume —paper cover, by post i/i;
cloth 2/7.
OTHER PAMPHLETS dealing with dif-
ferent phases of the DISLOYAL MOVE-
MENT IN AUSTRALIA are obtainable
from —
M. L. HUTCHINSON,
Little Collins Street,
Melbourne.
